+++
title = "Homosexuality,Gender activism,and thexa0rest"
date = "2020-07-22"

+++
This post has been prompted by the recent viral spate of news on gender
ideological activism,which I will distinguish from homosexual men  
  
<https://www.opindia.com/2020/07/gender-identity-politics-harish-iyer-non-conforming-binary-lgbt-community/>  
  
<https://www.opindia.com/2020/07/tagore-international-school-nazariya-gender-identity-politics-brainwashing-children/>  
  
<https://www.opindia.com/2020/07/nazariya-qfrg-tagore-international-school-gender-identity-politics-queer/>  
  
  
The final trigger for this was this tweet  
  
<https://twitter.com/zeneraalstuff/status/1285417685090631683>

\>Define what is the objectionable positions in LGBTQI ideology. Blog
post or tweet series, please.  
  
  
My remark on this is that the very premise of queer activism and the
question of LGBT liberation in India has completely imported and copied
the trends of the Western world:Some of them are (I am summarizing them
under the label of queer and gender ideology activism,as opposed to
people who only believe homosexuality should be decriminalized):  
  
1. A trend towards rebellion against the mainstream of society rather
than wishing for any acceptance(this is [signalled by political valences
that tend to be
anti-national](https://www.opindia.com/2020/02/sharjeel-imam-pro-azaadi-anti-caa-slogans-mumbai-queer-parade/)).
This tendency is glorified in Anglo academia by the American theorist
Jasbir Puar(one of the fountainheads of such theories),who made her
career lambasting gay men who remain satisified with the rest of the
society after marriage or partnership rights have been granted to them.
According to them: [\>**Queer is … whatever is at odds with the normal,
the legitimate, the
dominant.**](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/homosexuality/#QueTheSocConSex)
In the view of this type influenced by this fount:It is not enough to
have a particular sexuality to be in the movement and want to live a
sane life with a loyal,single faithful man,but one must ever militate
against the normative religion and traditions of the society to have
cred in the ‘movement’. This example can be found in this article which
takes a [sympathetic view to having sex in public in
parades](http://web.archive.org/web/20200721181434/https://www.dailydot.com/irl/public-sex-lgbtq/),demanding
that maximum freakishness and ‘nanga naach’ type of displays are good by
the very virtue of them being an oppressed class and dragging in the
topic of socio-economic backgrounds to get a figleaf of legitimacy for
their theorizing. It is this view of celebrating all that should is
intended to hurt and shock and rub in the faces of mainstream Hindu
society that that group could include the case of Hadiya under the Queer
ideology.  
  
  
2. A trend of activism that has arisen in trans circles(related to the
above),who have gained power in the Western LGBT movements and pushes
out anyone else who speak against them as a transphobe,and as
pathologizing transgenderism or related identities. While the various
identities that don’t fit into male/female identity would be fitting
into the broad ‘third gender’ category in traditional Indian views with
their own communities,this particular strain of activism that has taken
over insists that anyone can be anything they insist to be if they feel
like it,violating all the conventions of it just out of pure narcissism.
They take over the cases of effeminate boys,etc who do face genuine
problems and bullying at school and use that to give a solution that is
worse than the problem(this ideology). In the Western idiom,the only
logically consistent position that does not do harm to trans people is
one that is called *transmedicalism*,which notes that people who do not
have dysphoria do not deserve to be called trans(which is dismissed by
current crop of trans activists that say that dysphoria. They also have
taken to [unnecessary advocacy towards
children](https://4thwavenow.com/2017/04/13/insurance-requirements-are-a-ridiculous-speed-bump-on-childrens-gender-journeys/),who
are better served by supportive therapy which would include a wait and
watch approach towards their condition(and these trend of activists have
made even the topic of eventual desistance of initially dysphoric
children taboo) and have slandered every other person who has been
contrary to them as being transphobes. This transgenderism is a cult
that listens to no reason and simply looks like it wants to recruit as
many people into it,and they proceed to get super offended when people
are not into them,to even [academically complaining that normal people
do not like
them](https://twitter.com/zeneraalstuff/status/1278948185013014528).
Their cultic influence has gone to the extent of
[transwashing](https://web.archive.org/web/20200604004114/https://twitter.com/KProtein19/status/1268302143666024448)
LGBT activism in the US.  
  
Most ordinary gay men do not know about the above sort of views of the
activists and in my experience,it takes quite a bit to wrap their head
around the sort of views these people hold:They may or may not attend
pride because for them it is a venue to meet other gay people and hang
out. Unfortunately what happens as a consequence is brainwashing in the
above set of ideologues because they for the first time find a set of
people who are more accepting of their proclivities towards sex and
relationships than the normal mainstream society and they get stuck
there in those circles.  
  
  
As to the views of this author on the views on the activisms and
theories:  
  
1. These Queer ideology theories are thinly veiled homophobia and slave
morality at its core:These people are essentially slandering ordinary
gay men and women and people who are effeminate etc that the more
freakish and perverse one becomes,the better it is. (My quote on Queer
Theory from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy *by their own
theorists* sums it up perfectly well).  
2. People who are effeminate,etc in school should be taught to stand up
to those who bully them and should be supported by parents and should go
through a ‘wait and watch’ approach,rather than be transed by ideologues
who seem to want only a cult of them(by puberty blockers,etc).
Traditional gendernoncofirming communities like kinnars,hijdas,etc
should be protected as well. This post was not meant to attack them. As
for the various ones in trans ideologies in the West,the unfashionable
‘transmedicalism’ or ‘trutrans’ is the only logically consistent and
correct one.  
3. Children should not be sexualized.  
4. Consent alone should not be the sole morality of sex. It is necessary
but not a sufficient condition of sex between two people. As this
section from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy notes,going from an
article by Seriol Morgan *Dark Desires*,some sexual acts which would
fall under the purview of consent would be still immoral.

![](https://padmavajrablog.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/screenshot-at-2020-07-22-00-40-24.png?w=704)

So cases like Armin Meiwes would not pass muster merely because his
victim contested.

4\. Gay people,Lesbian,genuinely trans people,hijras,etc should be left
alone with each other and not harassed merely due to their sexuality or
whom they interact with *as romantic partners/sexual
partners/companions.* At the current stage,I do not have further views
as such.
