---
title: UNITY, THE GOAL OF RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](../../volume_2/reports_in_american_newspapers/some_customs_of_the_hindus.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_free_soul.htm)

  

## UNITY, THE GOAL OF RELIGION

(*Delivered in New York, 1896*)

This universe of ours, the universe of the senses, the rational, the
intellectual, is bounded on both sides by the illimitable, the
unknowable, the ever unknown. Herein is the search, herein are the
inquiries, here are the facts; from this comes the light which is known
to the world as religion. Essentially, however, religion belongs to the
supersensuous and not to the sense plane. It is beyond all reasoning and
is not on the plane of intellect. It is a vision, an inspiration, a
plunge into the unknown and unknowable, making the unknowable more than
known for it can never be "known". This search has been in the human
mind, as I believe, from the very beginning of humanity. There cannot
have been human reasoning and intellect in any period of the world's
history without this struggle, this search beyond. In our little
universe, this human mind, we see a thought arise. Whence it arises we
do not know; and when it disappears, where it goes, we know not either.
The macrocosm and the microcosm are, as it were, in the same groove,
passing through the same stages, vibrating in the same key.

I shall try to bring before you the Hindu theory that religions do not
come from without, but from within. It is my belief that religious
thought is in man's very constitution, so much so that it is impossible
for him to give, up religion until he can give up his mind and body,
until he can give up thought and life. As long as a man thinks, this
struggle must go on, and so long man must have some form of religion.
Thus we see various forms of religion in the world. It is a bewildering
study; but it is not, as many of us think, a vain speculation. Amidst
this chaos there is harmony, throughout these discordant sounds there is
a note of concord; and he who is prepared to listen to it will catch the
tone.

The great question of all questions at the present time is this: Taking
for granted that the known and the knowable are bounded on both sides by
the unknowable and the infinitely unknown, why struggle for that
infinite unknown? Why shall we not be content with the known? Why shall
we not rest satisfied with eating, drinking, and doing a little good to
society? This idea is in the air. From the most learned professor to the
prattling baby, we are told that to do good to the world is all of
religion, and that it is useless to trouble ourselves about questions of
the beyond. So much is this the case that it has become a truism.

But fortunately we *must* inquire into the beyond. This present, this
expressed, is only one part of that unexpressed. The sense universe is,
as it were, only one portion, one bit of that infinite spiritual
universe projected into the plane of sense consciousness. How can this
little bit of projection be explained, be understood, without. knowing
that which is beyond? It is said of Socrates that one day while
lecturing at Athens, he met a Brahmin who had travelled into Greece, and
Socrates told the Brahmin that the greatest study for mankind is man.
The Brahmin sharply retorted: "How can you know man until you know Gods"
This God, this eternally Unknowable, or Absolute, or Infinite, or
without name — you may call Him by what name you like — is the
rationale, the only explanation, the *raison d'être* of that which is
known and knowable, this present life. Take anything before you, the
most material thing — take one of the most material sciences, as
chemistry or physics, astronomy or biology — study it, push the study
forward and forward, and the gross forms will begin to melt and become
finer and finer, until they come to a point where you are bound to make
a tremendous leap from these material things into the immaterial. The
gross melts into the fine, physics into metaphysics, in every department
of knowledge.

Thus man finds himself driven to a study of the beyond. Life will be a
desert, human life will be vain, if we cannot know the beyond. It is
very well to say: Be contented with the things of the present. The cows
and the dogs are, and so are all animals; and that is what makes them
animals. So if man rests content with the present and gives up all
search into the beyond, mankind will have to go back to the animal plane
again. It is religion, the inquiry into the beyond, that makes the
difference between man and an animal. Well has it been said that man is
the only animal that naturally looks upwards; every other animal
naturally looks down. That looking upward and going upward and seeking
perfection are what is called salvation; and the sooner a man begins to
go higher, the sooner he raises himself towards this idea of truth as
salvation. It does not consist in the amount of money in your pocket, or
the dress you wear, or the house you live in, but in the wealth of
spiritual thought in your brain. That is what makes for human progress,
that is the source of all material and intellectual progress, the motive
power behind, the enthusiasm that pushes mankind forward.

Religion does not live on bread, does not dwell in a house. Again and
again you hear this objection advanced: "What good can religion do? Can
it take away the poverty of the poor?" Supposing it cannot, would that
prove the untruth of religion? Suppose a baby stands up among you when
you are trying to demonstrate an astronomical theorem, and says, "Does
it bring gingerbread?" "No, it does not", you answer. "Then," says the
baby, "it is useless." Babies judge the whole universe from their own
standpoint, that of producing gingerbread, and so do the babies of the
world. We must not judge of higher things from a low standpoint.
Everything must be judged by its own standard and the infinite must be
judged by the standard of infinity. Religion permeates the whole of
man's life, not only the present, but the past, present, and future. It
is, therefore, the eternal relation between the eternal soul and the
eternal God. Is it logical to measure its value by its action upon five
minutes of human life? Certainly not. These are all negative arguments.

Now comes the question: Can religion really accomplish anything? It can.
It brings to man eternal life. It has made man what he is, and will make
of this human animal a god. That is what religion can do. Take religion
from human society and what will remain? Nothing but a forest of brutes.
Sense-happiness is not the goal of humanity. Wisdom (Jnâna) is the goal
of all life. We find that man enjoys his intellect more than an animal
enjoys its senses; and we see that man enjoys his spiritual nature even
more than his rational nature. So the highest wisdom must be this
spiritual knowledge. With this knowledge will come bliss. All these
things of this world are but the shadows, the manifestations in the
third or fourth degree of the real Knowledge and Bliss.

One question more: What is the goal? Nowadays it is asserted that man is
infinitely progressing, forward and forward, and there is no goal of
perfection to attain to. Ever approaching, never attaining, whatever
that may mean and however wonderful it may be, it is absurd on the face
of it. Is there any motion in a straight line? A straight line
infinitely projected becomes a circle, it returns to the starting point.
You must end where you begin; and as you began in God, you must go back
to God. What remains? Detail work. Through eternity you have to do the
detail work.

Yet another question: Are we to discover new truths of religion as we go
on? Yea and nay. In the first place, we cannot know anything more of
religion, it has all been known. In all religions of the world you will
find it claimed that there is a unity within us. Being one with
divinity, there cannot be any further progress in that sense. Knowledge
means finding this unity. I see you as men and women, and this is
variety. It becomes scientific knowledge when I group you together and
call you human beings. Take the science of chemistry, for instance.
Chemists are seeking to resolve all known substances into their original
elements, and if possible, to find the one element from which all these
are derived. The time may come when they will find one element that is
the source of all other elements. Reaching that, they can go no further;
the science of chemistry will have become perfect. So it is with the
science of religion. If we can discover this perfect unity, there cannot
be any further progress.

The next question is: Can such a unity be found? In India the attempt
has been made from the earliest times to reach a science of religion and
philosophy, for the Hindus do not separate these as is customary in
Western countries. We regard religion and philosophy as but two aspects
of one thing which must equally be grounded in reason and scientific
truth.

The system of the Sânkhya philosophy is one of the most ancient in
India, or in fact in the world. Its great exponent Kapila is the father
of all Hindu psychology; and the ancient system that he taught is still
the foundation of all accepted systems of philosophy in India today
which are known as the Darshanas. They all adopt his psychology, however
widely they differ in other respects.

The Vedanta, as the logical outcome of the Sankhya, pushes its
conclusions yet further. While its cosmology agrees with that taught by
Kapila, the Vedanta is not satisfied to end in dualism, but continues
its search for the final unity which is alike the goal of science and
religion.

</div>
