---
title: JNANA YOGA - I

---
<div>

[←](../../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/53_alberta.htm)
[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Discourses on
Jnana-Yoga](discourses_on_jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](jnana-yoga_ii.htm)

  

## JNANA YOGA - I

(These were originally recorded by a prominent American disciple of the
Swami, Miss S. E. Waldo. Swami Saradananda, while he was in America
(1896), copied them out from her notebook — *Ed*.)

Om Tat Sat! To know the Om is to know the secret of the universe. The
object of Jnâna-Yoga is the same as that of Bhakti and Râja Yogas, but
the method is different. This is the Yoga for the strong, for those who
are neither mystical nor devotional, but rational. As the Bhakti-Yogi
works his way to complete oneness with the Supreme through love and
devotion, so the Jnâna-Yogi forces his way to the realisation of God by
the power of pure reason. He must be prepared to throw away all old
idols, all old beliefs and superstitions, all desire for this world or
another, and be determined only to find freedom. Without Jnana
(knowledge) liberation cannot be ours. It consists in knowing what we
really are, that we are beyond fear, beyond birth, beyond death. The
highest good is the realisation of the Self. It is beyond sense, beyond
thought. The *real* "I" cannot be grasped. It is the eternal subject and
can never become the object of knowledge, because knowledge is only of
the related, not of the Absolute. All sense-knowledge is limitation, it
is an endless chain of cause and effect. This world is a relative world,
a shadow of the real; still, being the plane of equipoise where
happiness and misery are about evenly balanced, it is the only plane
where man can realise his true Self and know that he is Brahman.

This world is "the evolution of nature and the manifestation of God". It
is our interpretation of Brahman or the Absolute, seen through the veil
of Mâyâ or appearance. The world is not zero, it has a certain reality;
it only *appears* because Brahman *is*.

How shall we know the knower? The Vedanta says, "We are It, but can
never know It, because It can never become the object of knowledge."
Modern science also says that It cannot be known. We can, however, have
glimpses of It from time to time. When the delusion of this world is
once broken, it will come back to us, but no longer will it hold any
reality for us. We shall know it as a mirage. To reach behind the mirage
is the aim of all religions. That man and God are one is the constant
teaching of the Vedas, but only few are able to penetrate behind the
veil and reach the realisation of this truth.

The first thing to be got rid of by him who would be a Jnâni is fear.
Fear is one of our worst enemies. Next, believe in nothing until you
*know* it. Constantly tell yourself, "I am not the body, I am not the
mind, I am not thought, I am not even consciousness; I am the Atman."
When you can throw away *all*, only the true Self will remain. The
Jnani's meditation is of two sorts: (1) to deny and think away
everything we are *not*; (2) to insist upon what we really are — the
Atman, the One Self — Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss. The true
rationalist must go on and fearlessly follow his reason to its farthest
limits. It will not answer to stop anywhere on the road. When we begin
to deny, *all* must go until we reach what cannot be thrown away or
denied, which is the real "I". That "I" is the witness of the universe,
it is unchangeable, eternal, infinite. Now, layer after layer of
ignorance covers it from our eyes, but it remains ever the same.

Two birds sat on one tree. The bird at the top was calm, majestic,
beautiful, perfect. The lower bird was always hopping from twig to twig,
now eating sweet fruits and being happy, now eating bitter fruits and
being miserable. One day, when he had eaten a fruit more bitter than
usual, he glanced up at the calm majestic upper bird and thought, "How I
would like to be like him!" and he hopped up a little way towards him.
Soon he forgot all about his desire to be like the upper bird, and went
on as before, eating sweet and bitter fruits and being happy and
miserable. Again he looked up, again he went up a little nearer to the
calm and majestic upper bird. Many times was this repeated until at last
he drew very near the upper bird; the brilliancy of his plumage dazzled
him, seemed to absorb him, and finally, to his wonder and surprise, he
found there was only one bird — he was the upper bird all the time and
had but just found it out. Man is like that lower bird, but if he
perseveres in his efforts to rise to the highest ideal he can conceive
of, he too will find that he was the Self all the time and the other was
but a dream. To separate ourselves utterly from matter and all belief in
its reality is true Jnana. The Jnani must keep ever in his mind the "Om
Tat Sat", that is, Om the only real existence. Abstract unity is the
foundation of Jnana-Yoga. This is called Advaitism ("without dualism or
dvaitism"). This is the corner-stone of the Vedanta philosophy, the
Alpha and the Omega. "Brahman alone is true, all else is false and I am
Brahman." Only by telling ourselves this until we make it a part of our
very being, can we rise beyond all duality, beyond both good and evil,
pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, and know ourselves as the One,
eternal, unchanging, infinite — the "One without a second".

The Jnana-Yogi must be as intense as the narrowest sectarian, yet as
broad as the heavens. He must absolutely control his mind, be able to be
a Buddhist or a Christian, to have the power to consciously divide
himself into all these different ideas and yet hold fast to the eternal
harmony. Constant drill alone can enable us to get this control. All
variations are in the One, but we must learn not to identify ourselves
with what we do, and to hear nothing, see nothing, talk of nothing but
the thing in hand. We must put in our whole soul and be intense. Day and
night tell yourself, "I am He, I am He."

</div>
