---
title: JNANA YOGA - IX

---
<div>

[←](jnana-yoga_viii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Discourses on
Jnana-Yoga](discourses_on_jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](../six_lessons_on_raja-yoga/raja-yoga_i.htm)

  

## JNANA YOGA - IX

(These were originally recorded by a prominent American disciple of the
Swami, Miss S. E. Waldo. Swami Saradananda, while he was in America
(1896), copied them out from her notebook — *Ed*.)

Expression is necessarily degeneration, because spirit can only be
expressed by the "letter", and as St. Paul said, "the letter killeth".
Life cannot be in the "letter" which is only a reflection. Yet,
principle must be clothed in matter to be "known". We lose sight of the
Real in the covering and come to consider that as the Real, instead of
as the symbol. This is an almost universal mistake. Every great Teacher
knows this and tries to guard against it; but humanity, in general, is
prone to worship the *seen* rather than the unseen. This is why a
succession of prophets have come to the world to point again and again
to the principle behind the personality and to give it a new covering
suited to the times. Truth remains ever unchanged, but it can only be
presented in a "form"; so from time to time a new "form" or expression
is given to Truth, as the progress of mankind makes them ready to
receive it. When we free ourselves from name and form, especially when
we no longer need a body of any kind, good or bad, coarse or fine, then
only do we escape from bondage. "Eternal progression" would be eternal
bondage. We must get beyond all differentiation and reach eternal
"sameness" or homogeneity or Brahman. The Atman is the unity of all
personalities and is unchangeable, the "One without a second". It is not
life, but it is coined into life. It is beyond life and death and good
and bad. It is the Absolute Unity. Dare to seek Truth even through hell.
Freedom can never be true of name and form, of the related. No form can
say, "I am free as a form." Not until all idea of form is lost, does
freedom come. If our freedom hurts others, we are not free there. We
must not hurt others. While real perception is only one, relative
perceptions must be many. The fountain of all knowledge is in every one
of us — in the ant as in the highest angel. Real religion is one; all
quarrel is with the forms, the symbols, the "illustrations". The
millennium exists already for those who find it. The truth is, we have
lost ourselves and think the world to be lost. "Fool! Hearest not thou?
In thine own heart, day and night, is singing that Eternal Music —
Sachchidânanda, Soham, Soham, (Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss, I am He,
I am He)!"

To try to think without a phantasm is to try to make the impossible
possible. Each thought has two parts — the thinking and the word, and we
must have both. Neither idealists nor materialists are able to explain
the world; to do that, we must take both idea and expression. All
knowledge is of the reflected as we can only see our own faces reflected
in a mirror. So no one can know his Self or Brahman; but each is that
Self and must see it reflected in order to make it an object of
knowledge. This seeing the illustrations of the unseen Principle is what
leads to idolatry — so-called. The range of idols is wider than is
usually supposed. They range from wood and stone to great personalities
as Jesus or Buddha. The introduction of idols into India was the result
of Buddha's constantly inveighing against a Personal God. The Vedas knew
them not, but the reaction against the loss of God as Creator and Friend
led to making idols of the great teachers, and Buddha himself became an
idol and is worshipped as such by millions of people. Violent attempts
at reform always end in retarding true reform. To worship is inherent in
every man's nature; only the highest philosophy can rise to pure
abstraction. So man will ever personify his God in order to worship Him.
This is very good, as long as the symbol, be it what it may, is
worshipped as a symbol of the Divinity behind and not in and for itself.
Above all, we need to free ourselves from the superstition of believing
because "it is in the books". To try to make everything — science,
religion, philosophy, and all — conform to what any book says, is a most
horrible tyranny. Book-worship is the worst form of idolatry. There was
once a stag, proud and free, and he talked in a lordly fashion to his
child, "Look at me, see my powerful horns! With one thrust I can kill a
man; it is a fine thing to be a stag!" Just then the sound of the
huntsman's bugle was heard in the distance, and the stag precipitately
fled, followed by his wondering child. When they had reached a place of
safety, he inquired, "Why do you fly before man, O my father, when you
are so strong and brave?" The stag answered, "My child, I know I am
strong and powerful, but when I hear that sound, something seizes me and
makes me fly whether I will or no." So with us. We hear the "bugle
sound" of the laws laid down in the books, habits and old superstitions
lay hold of us; and before we know it, we are fast bound and forget our
real nature which is freedom.

Knowledge exists eternally. The man who discovers a spiritual truth is
what we call "inspired", and what he brings to the world is revelation.
But revelation too is eternal and is not to be crystallised as final and
then blindly followed. Revelation may come to any man who has fitted
himself to receive it. Perfect purity is the most essential thing, for
only "the pure in heart shall see God". Man is the highest being that
exists and this is the greatest world, for here can man realise freedom.
The highest concept we can have of God is man. Every attribute we give
Him belongs also to man, only in a lesser degree. When we rise higher
and want to get out of this concept of God, we have to get out of the
body, out of mind and imagination, and leave this world out of sight.
When we rise to be the absolute, we are no longer in the world — all is
Subject, without object. Man is the apex of the only "world" we can ever
know. Those who have attained "sameness" or perfection, are said to be
"living in God". All hatred is "killing the self by the self";
therefore, love is the law of life. To rise to this is to be perfect;
but the more "perfect" we are, the less work can we do. The Sattvika see
and know that all this world is mere child's play and do not trouble
themselves about that. We are not much disturbed when we see two puppies
fighting and biting each other. We know it is not a serious matter. The
perfect one knows that this world is Mâyâ. Life is called Samsâra — it
is the result of the conflicting forces acting upon us. Materialism
says, "The voice of freedom is a delusion." Idealism says, "The voice
that tells of bondage is but a dream." Vedanta says, "We are free and
not free at the same time." That means that we are never free on the
earthly plane, but ever free on the spiritual side. The Self is beyond
both freedom and bondage. We *are* Brahman, we *are* immortal knowledge
beyond the senses, we *are* Bliss Absolute.

</div>
