---
title: III

---
<div>

[←](002_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /  [→](004_balaram_babu.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/022_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/023_akhandananda.htm)  
[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/04_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](004_balaram_babu.htm)

## III

(Translated from [Bengali](b6032ae9003.pdf) )

*To Balaram Bose*  
*Salutation to Bhagavan Shri Ramakrishna*

GHAZIPUR

*February 1890*

RESPECTED SIR,

I have received an anonymous letter which I have been unable to trace
back to the gigantic soul who wrote it. Indeed, one should pay homage to
such a man. He who considers a great soul like Pavhari Baba to be no
more than water in a hoof print, he who has nothing to learn in this
world and who feels it a disgrace to be taught by any other man — truly,
such a new incarnation must be visited. I hope that if the government
should discover the identity of this person, he will be handled with
special care and be placed in the Alipore garden \[zoo\]. If you happen
to know this man, please ask him to bless me, so that even a dog or a
jackal may be my Guru — not to speak of a great soul like Pavhari Baba.

I have many things to learn. My master used to say: "As long as I live,
so long do I learn". Also please tell this fellow that unfortunately I
do not have the time to "cross the seven seas and thirteen rivers" or to
go to Sri Lanka in order to sleep after having put oil in the
nostrils.[1](#fn1)

Your servant,  
NARENDRA

P.S. Please have the rose-water brought from Ishan Babu's \[Ishan
Chandra Mukherjee's\] residence if there is delay \[in their sending it
to the Baranagore Math\]. The roses are still not in bloom. The
rose-water has just been sent to the residence of Ishan Babu.

1.  [^](#txt1)Here the Swami is referring to Kumbhakarna, the brother of
    the villain Râvana of the Râmâyana. He was of such a lethargic and
    evil nature that Brahmâ granted the boon that he should sleep for
    six months at a stretch. Putting mustard oil in the nostrils is
    considered an aid to sleeping soundly.  
    "Crossing seven seas and thirteen rivers" is a Bengali phrase
    meaning to travel a great distance. Sri Lanka is the ancient name
    for the island of Sri Lanka and was the capital of Ravana's kingdom.

</div>
