---
title: VI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](005_tulsiram.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/034_sharat.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/034_sharat.htm)

## VI

*To Swami Saradananda*

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna*

CALCUTTA  
32 ASHADHA \[JULY 15, 1890\]

MY DEAR SHARAT

I am sorry to learn that \[Vaikunthanath\] Sanyal's habits are as yet
not Pucca \[firm\]; and what about Brahmacharya? I don't understand you.
If so, the best thing for you both is to come down and live here. The
widow of Mohindra Mukherjee is trying head and heart to erect a Math for
you, and Surendranath Mitra has left another thousand so that you are
very likely soon to get a beautiful place on the river. As for all the
hardships up there, I reserve my own opinions.

It was not at all my intention to come down, only the death of Balaram
Bose had made me have a peep here and go back. If the mountains be so
bad, there is more than enough place for me; only I leave Bengal. If one
does not suit, another will. So that is my determination. Everyone here
will be so glad at your return here, and from your letter I see it would
be downright injurious to you if you didn't come down. So come down at
your earliest opportunity. I will leave this place before this letter
reaches you; only I won't go to Almora. I have my own plans for the
future and they shall be a secret.

As for Sanyal, I do not see how I can benefit him. Of course, you are at
liberty to hold your own opinion about the Sanga \[holy company\] here.
That I can find places Sudrishya \[having scenic beauty\] and Subhiksha
\[where alms are available\] is enough. Sanga is not much, or, I think,
not at all necessary for me.

Yours, etc.,  
NARENDRA.

[→](007_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/009_sharat.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/035_govinda_sahay.htm)

</div>
