---
title: XIX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](018_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](018_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](017_mother.htm)

## XIX

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

HOTEL BELLEVUE, EUROPEAN PLAN  
BEACON STREET, BOSTON

*11 May, 1894*

DEAR MOTHER,

I have been since the 7th, lecturing here every afternoon or evening. At
Mrs. Fairchild's I met the niece of Mrs. Howe. She was here today to
invite me to dinner with her today. I have not seen Mr. Volkinen as yet.
Of course, the pay for lecture is here the poorest, and everybody has an
axe to grind. I got a long letter full of the prattles of the
babies.[1](#fn1) Your city, i.e. New York, pays far better than Boston,
so I am trying to go back there. But here one can get work almost every
day.

I think I want some rest. I feel as if I am very much tired, and these
constant journeyings to and fro have shaken my nerves a little, but hope
to recoup soon. Last few days I have been suffering from cold and slight
fever and lecturing for all that; hope to get rid of it in a day or two.

I have got a very nice gown at $30. The colour is not exactly that of
the old one, but cardinal, with more of yellow — could not get the exact
old colour even in New York.

I have not much to write, for it is the repetition of the old story:
talking, talking, talking. I long to fly to Chicago and shut up my mouth
and give a long rest to mouth and lungs and mind. If I am not called for
in New York, I am coming soon to Chicago.

Yours obediently,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](020_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](020_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](020_mother.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Mary and Harriet Hale and Isabelle and Harriet McKindley.
