---
title: XXI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](020_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/010_alasinga.htm)  
[←Addressee](020_mother.htm)

## XXI

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

541 DEARBORN AVENUE  
CHICAGO

*9 June 1894*

DEAR MOTHER,

We are all doing very well here. Last night the sisters (The daughters
of Mrs. Hale: Mary and Harriet.) invited me and Mrs. Norton and Miss
Howe and Mr. Frank Howe. We had a grand dinner and softshell crab and
many other things, and a very nice time. Miss Howe left this morning.

The sisters and Mother Temple (Mrs. James Matthews, Mr. Hale’s sister.)
are taking very good care of me. Just now I am going to see my
"oh-my-dear" Gandhi.[1](#fn1) Narasimha was here yesterday; he wanted to
go to Cincinnati where he says he has more chances of success than
anywhere else in the world. I gave him the passage, and so I hope I have
got the white elephant out of my hands for the time being. How is Father
Pope doing now? Hope he has been much benefited by the mudfish
business.[2](#fn2)

I had a very beautiful letter from Miss Guernsey of New York, giving you
her regards. I am going downtown to buy a new pair of shoes as well as
to get some money, my purse having been made empty by Narasimha.

Nothing more to write. Yes, we went to see the "Charley's
Aunt".[3](#fn3) I nearly killed myself with laughing. Father Pope will
enjoy it extremely. I had never seen anything so funny.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](022_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](022_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/22_adhyapakji.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Probably Mr. Virchand Gandhi, who represented Jainism at
    the Chicago World's Parliament of Religions, in 1893.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)Mr. and Mrs. Hale were staying at the mineral-springs
    resort in Indiana. "Mud baths" were supposed cures for all ailments.
3.  [^](#fn3_1)Charley's Aunt was a highly popular comedy of the era.
