---
title: XXIV

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](023_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/011_alasinga.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/022_mother.htm)

## XXIV

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

C/O DR. E. GUERNSEY  
CEDAR LAWN, FISHKILL ON THE HUDSON

*19 July 1894*

DEAR MOTHER,

Your kind note reached me here yesterday evening. I am so glad to hear
the babies are enjoying. I got the *Interior* and am very glad to see my
friend Mazoomdar’s (Pratap Chandra Mazumdar.) book spoken of so highly.
Mazoomdar is a great and a good man and has done much for his fellow
beings.

It is a lovely summer place, this Cedar Lawn of the Guernseys. Miss
Guernsey has gone on a visit to Swampscott. I had also an invitation
there, but I thought \[it\] better to stay here in the calm and silent
place full of trees and with the beautiful Hudson flowing by and
mountain in the background.

I am very thankful for Miss Howe’s suggestion, and I am also thinking of
it. Most probably I will go to England very soon. But between you and
me, I am a sort of mystic and cannot move without *orders*, and that has
not come yet. Mr. \[Charles M.\] Higgins, a rich young lawyer and
inventor of Brooklyn, is arranging some lectures for me. I have not
settled whether I will stop for them or not.

My eternal thanks to you for your kindness. My whole life cannot repay
my debt to you. (Original letter: your debt.) You may see from the
letter from Madras that there is not a word about Narasimha. What can I
do more? I did not get the cheque cashed yet, for there was no
necessity. Miss Phillips was very kind to me. She is an old lady, about
50 or more. You need not feel any worry about my being taken care of.
The Lord always takes care of His servants; and so long as I am really
His servant and not the world’s, I am very confident of getting
everything that would be good for me. The Guernseys love me very much,
and there are many families in New York and Brooklyn who would take the
best care of me.

I had a beautiful letter from Mr. Snell,[1](#fn1) saying that a sudden
change for the better has taken place in his fortunes and offering me
thrice the money I lent him as a contribution to my work. And he also
has beautiful letters from Dharmapala and others from India. But, of
course, I politely refused his repayment.

So far so good. I have seen Mr. \[Walter Hines\] Page, the editor of the
*Forum* here. He was so sorry not to get the article on missionaries.
But I have promised to write on other interesting subjects. Hope I will
have patience to do so.

I had a letter yesterday from Miss Harriet, (Mrs. Hale’s daughter.) from
which I learn that they are enjoying Kenosha (A port in Southeast
Wisconsin, on Lake Michigan.) very much. Lord bless you and yours,
Mother Church, for ever and ever. I cannot even express my gratitude to
you.

As for me, you need not be troubled in the least. My whole life is that
of a *vagabond* — homeless, roving tramp; any fare, good or bad, in any
country, is good enough for me.

Yours ever in love and obedience,

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA

[→](025_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](025_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](025_mother.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Mr. Merwin-Marie Snell, who had been the President of the
    Scientific Section of the Chicago World's Parliament of Religions.
