---
title: XXVII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](026_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](026_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](026_mother.htm)

## XXVII

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

GREENACRE INN  
ELIOT, MAINE

*8 August 1894*

DEAR MOTHER

I have received the letter you sent over to me coming from India.

I am going to leave this place on Monday next for Plymouth
\[Massachusetts\], where the Free Religious Association[1](#fn1) is
holding its session. They will defray my expenses, of course.

I am all right, enjoying nice health, and the people here are very kind
and nice to me. Up to date I had no occasion to cash any cheque as
everything is going on smoothly. I have not heard anything from the
Babies. Hope they are doing well. You also had nothing to write;
however, I feel that you are doing well.

I would have gone over to another place, but Mr. Higginson's[2](#fn2)
invitation ought to be attended to. And Plymouth is the place where the
fathers of your country first landed. I want, therefore, to see it.

I am all right. It is useless reiterating my love and gratitude to you
and yours — you know it all. May the Lord shower His choicest blessings
on you and yours.

This meeting is composed of the best professors of your country and
other people, so I must attend it; and then they would pay me. I have
not yet determined all my plans, only I am going to lecture in New York
this coming fall; every arrangement is complete for that. They have
printed advertisements at their own expense for that and made everything
ready.

Give my best love to the Babies, to Father Pope, and believe me ever in
gratitude and love,

Your Son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

P.S. I am very much obliged to the sisters for asking me to tell them if
I want anything. I have no want anyway — I have everything I require and
more to spare.

"He never gives up His servants."

My thanks and gratitude eternal to the sisters for their kindness in
asking about my wants.

V.

[→](028_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](028_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/025_sisters.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)The Free Religious Association, founded in 1867, was a
    liberal offshoot of the then conservative Unitarian Church. Among
    its members were some of the best thinkers of America.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)Colonel Thomas Wentworth Storrow Higginson (1823 – 1911),
    President of the Free Religious Association, was a well-known writer
    and liberal reformer. He had made Swami Vivekananda's acquaintance
    at the Chicago World's Parliament of Religions.
