---
title: XXXI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](030_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/026_sister.htm)  
[←Addressee](030_mother.htm)

## XXXI

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

\[GLOUCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS\]

*4 September 1894*

DEAR MOTHER

The bundle was the report of the meeting. Hope you will succeed in
publishing some in the Chicago papers.

Here is a letter from Dewanji[1](#fn1) to you which will explain his
sending a pamphlet to Mr. Hale.[2](#fn2) The rugs are coming. When they
come, take them in, even paying the duty if any. I will pay it to you
afterwards. I have plenty of money, more than $150 in pocket. Will get
more tonight. Here are some newspaper clippings, and an *Indian Mirror*
I will send later on. Some have been sent to Mr. Barrows;[3](#fn3) don't
hope he will give them publicity. Now for your Mrs. Bartlett.

I am in haste. \[Will\] write more with the clippings. Write to me
always, kind Mother — I become very anxious when I do not hear from you.
Write, whether I reply sharp or not.

Your son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](032_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](032_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/23_mr_bhattacharya.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai, or Haridasbhai, the Dewan
    of Junagadh.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)Enclosed in the above letter was a letter from the Dewan
    of Junagadh, Haridas Viharidas Desai, addressed to Mr. Hale and
    dated August 2, 1894. In view of the slander being heaped upon Swami
    Vivekananda at that time, the Dewan vouched for his sincerity and
    probity. The pamphlet referred to gave the Dewan's references.
3.  [^](#fn3_1)Dr. John Henry Barrows, who had served as Chairman of the
    General Committee for the World's Parliament of Religions in
    Chicago, 1893.
