---
title: XXXIV

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](033_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/028_sister.htm)  
[←Addressee](033_mother.htm)

## XXXIV

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

HOTEL BELLEVUE

BEACON STREET, BOSTON

*13 September 1894*

DEAR MOTHER

Your very kind note came just now. I was suffering for the last few days
from cold and fever. I am all right now. I am glad all the papers
reached you safe. The newspaper clippings are with Mrs. Bagley; only a
copy has been sent over to you. By the by, Mrs. Bagley becomes jealous
if I send away everything to you. That is between you and me. The
*Indian Mirror* is with Prof. Wright,[1](#fn1) and he will send it over
to you. There is yet no news of the phonograph. Wait one week more and
then we will enquire. If you see a letter with the Khetri stamp, then
surely the news is coming. I do not smoke one third as much as I used to
when Father Pope's eternal box was ready and open day and night.
Haridasbhai is to be addressed as Shri only. On the envelope, Dewan
Bahadoor ought to be written, as that is a title. Perhaps the note from
the Maharaja of Mysore has reached you by this time.

I will remain a few days yet in Boston and the vicinity. The bank book
is in the bank. We did not take it out, but the cheque book is with me.
I am going to write out my thoughts on religion; in that, no
missionaries have any place. I am going to lecture in New York in
autumn, but I like teaching small circles better, and there will be
enough of that in Boston.

The rugs I wanted to be sent from India; and they will come from Punjab,
where the best rugs are made.

I had a beautiful letter from Sister Mary. (Mary Hale.)

Narasimha must have got money or passage by this time, and his people
have taken care to send him Thomas Cook's passage from place to place. I
think he is gone now.

I do not think the Lord will allow his servant to be inflated with
vanity at the appreciation of his countrymen. I am glad that they
appreciate me — not for my sake, but that I am firmly persuaded that a
man is never improved by abuse but by praise, and so with nations. Think
how much of abuse has been quite unnecessarily hurled at the head of my
devoted, poor country, and for what? They never injured the Christians
or their religion or their preachers. They have always been friendly to
all. So you see, Mother, every *good word* a foreign nation says to them
has such an amount of power for good in India. The American appreciation
of my humble work here has really done a good deal of benefit to them.
Send a good word, a good thought — at least to the down-trodden,
vilified, poor millions of India instead of abusing them day and night.
That is what I beg of every nation. Help them if you can; if you cannot,
at least cease from abusing them.

I did not see any impropriety in the bathing places at the seashore, but
only *vanity* in some: in those that went into water with their corsets
on, that was all.

I have not got any copy of the *Inter-Ocean* yet. (A leading Chicago
newspaper.)

With my love to Father Pope, babies, and to you, I remain

Your obedient son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](035_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](035_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/029_diwanji_saheb.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Dr. John Henry Wright, a professor of Greek classics at
    Harvard University.
