---
title: XXXIX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](038_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/018_alasinga.htm)  
[←Addressee](038_mother.htm)

## XXXIX

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

C/O MRS. OLE BULL  
RIVERVIEW, 168 BRATTLE STREET  
CAMBRIDGE, MASS.  
\[*Postmarked: Oct. 10, 1894, 4:30 a.m.\]*

DEAR MOTHER,

Received two letters from you and a large number from India but none
from Khetri.

I am sorry the sisters have got bad colds and more sorry for your
getting worried over it. Nothing can make a Christian worry. I hope
Narasimha will be a good boy this time forth. Sister Mary is coming to
Boston — good. I am going off from here tomorrow to Baltimore. I had
enough to pay all my expenses here; and since I am living with Mrs.
Bull, there is no expense. She is a rich and highly cultured lady. She
has given me $500 for my work or anything I like. As I am not going west
very soon, I will have a bank account here in Boston. From Philadelphia
I go to Washington, and then I will run between New York and Boston. So
I do not think I will be able to see you, except perhaps Sister Mary. I
want so very much that Mary will see Mrs. Bull and others of my friends
here. I have the fat of the land as usual, and my dinner is cooking very
well both here and in India. Do not make it public, Mother — that is
between you and me and the babies — and do not worry yourself about
anything. All things come to him that waits. I am going to send the
greater part of the money I have got to India and then money will come
faster. I have always found that the faster I spend, the faster it
comes. Nature abhors a vacuum. I am in very good spirits, only you must
not stop keeping me informed about yourself, Babies and Father Pope from
time to time.

Perhaps you remember the two letters that came from Mysore — I want one
of those envelopes with the Mysore King's seal on the outside to be sent
to Miss Phillips, 19 West 38th Street, New York.

I cannot go to New York now nor to Chicago, although I had a number of
invitations and offers from both the places. I must see now the capital
and the other cities. I am in His Hands. If Miss Mary be in Boston,
sometime I may hope to see her.

I am glad that Narasimha was never fast — hope he will never be.

From India they always write me to come, come, come. They do not know
the secret. I am acting more from here than I will ever do from there.

Kindly send my letters to this address and they will reach me safe
wherever I be. This will be one of my homes when I am in Boston.

Lord bless you all, dear Mother.

Yours ever affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](040_mrs_bull.htm)  
[Addressee→](042_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](040_mrs_bull.htm)

</div>
