---
title: XL

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](039_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](039_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/048_mrs_bull.htm)

## XL

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

1123 SAINT PAUL STREET, BALTIMORE,

*17 October 1894*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

I could not find time earlier to write you — I was so incessantly
knocking about. We had a nice meeting last Sunday at Baltimore and
\[are\] going to have one more next Sunday. Of course, they do not
financially help me a bit; but as I promised to help them and like the
idea, I speak for them.[1](#fn1)

In the letters you sent over from India was an address sent over to me
from Calcutta by my fellow citizens for my work here and a number of
newspaper cuttings. I will send them on to you later.

Yesterday I went to see Washington and met Mrs. Colville and Miss Young,
who were very kind to me.

I am going to speak at Washington again and then will go over to
Philadelphia and from there to New York.

Your affectionate Son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](041_miss_thursby.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/050_mrs_bull.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/049_swami_ramakrishnananda.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)During his first visit to America, Swami Vivekananda
    occasionally spoke for other organizations, both American and
    Indian. This time he had come to Baltimore at the invitation of the
    Vrooman brothers, who had a project to establish an International
    University of Religions, which the Swami endorsed by speaking on the
    brothers' behalf. Readers should, however, note that the
    International University project of the Vrooman brothers of
    Baltimore and Swami Vivekananda's "Temple Universal" proposed in New
    York were two entirely different projects.
