---
title: XLIX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](048_adhyapakji.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/060_mrs_bull.htm)  
[←Addressee](046_mother.htm)

## XLIX

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

54 W. 33., NEW YORK

*18 March* \[*February*\] *1895*

DEAR MOTHER,

I am sure you are all right by this time. The babies write from time to
time and so I get your news regularly. Miss Mary is in a lecturing mood
now — good for her. Hope she will not let her energies fritter away now
— a penny saved is a penny gained. Sister Isabel\[le\] has sent me the
French Books and the Calcutta pamphlets have arrived, but the big
Sanskrit books ought to come. I want them badly. Make them payable here,
if possible, or I will send you the postage.

I am doing very well. Only some of these big dinners kept me late, and I
returned home at 2 o'clock in the morning several days. Tonight I am
going to one of these. This will be the last of its kind. So much
keeping up the night is not good for me. Every day from 11 to 1 o'clock
I have classes in my rooms and I talk \[to\] them till they \[grow\]
tired. The Brooklyn course ended yesterday. Another lecture I have there
next Monday.

Bean soup and rice or barley is now my general diet. I am faring well.
Financially I am making the ends meet and nothing more because I do not
charge anything for the classes I have in my rooms. And the public
lectures have to go through so many hands.

I have a good many lectures planned ahead in New York, which I hope to
deliver by and by. Sister Isabel wrote to me a beautiful letter and she
does so much for me. My eternal gratitude to her.

Baby[1](#fn1) has stopped writing; I do not know why.

Kindly tell Baby to send me a little Sanskrit book which came from
India. I forgot to bring it over. I want to translate some passages from
it.

Mr. \[Charles M.\] Higgins is full of joy. It was he who planned all
this for me, and he is so glad that everything succeeded so well.

Mrs. Guernsey is going to give up this house and going to some other
house. Miss \[Florence\] Guernsey wants to marry but her father and
mother do not like it at all. I am very sorry for her, poor "Sister
Jenny"[2](#fn2)   — and so many men are after her. Here is a very rich
railway gentleman called Mr. \[Austin\] Corbin; his only daughter, Miss
\[Anna\] Corbin, is very much interested in me. And though she is one of
the leaders of the 400,[3](#fn3) she is very intellectual and spiritual
too, in a way. Their house is always chock full of swells and foreign
aristocracy. Princes and Barons and whatnot from all over the world.
Some of these foreigners are very bright. I am sorry your
home-manufactured aristocracy is not very interesting. Behind her parlor
she has a long arbour with all sorts of palms and seats and electric
light. There I will have a little class next week of a score of
long-pockets. The Fun is not bad. "This world is a great humbug after
all", Mother. "God alone is real; everything else is a dream only."
Mother Temple[4](#fn4) says she does not like to be bossed by you and
that is why she does not come to Chicago. She is very happy nearby.
Between swells and Delmonico and Waldorf dinners, my health was going to
be injured. So I quickly turned a thorough vegetarian to avoid all
invitations. The rich are really the salt of this world — they are
neither food nor drink. Goodbye for the present.

Your ever affectionate Son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](050_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](050_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/034_sister.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Harriet McKindley, youngest of the "sisters".
2.  [^](#fn2_1)Perhaps in likening Miss Florence Guernsey to "Sister
    Jenny", the Swami was referring to the old nursery rhyme, which the
    Hale sisters may have taught him. Robin Redbreast promised Jenny
    Wren that if she would be his wife he would dress her "like a
    goldfish or any peacock gay". She replied that that is all very
    nice, but "I must wear my plain brown gown and never go so fine".
3.  [^](#fn3_1)"The Four Hundred" — a then current term for New York's
    most exclusive social set.
4.  [^](#fn4_1)Mrs. James Matthews, a married sister of Mr. Hale.
