---
title: LIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](052_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](052_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](052_mother.htm)

## LIII

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

54 W. 33.  
NEW YORK  
\[*April 26, 1895*\]

DEAR MOTHER,

Perhaps you did not receive my letter asking you to send the Calcutta
pamphlets about the Paramahamsa Ramakrishna. Kindly send them to me at
54 W. 33, and also the pamphlets about the Calcutta meeting if you have
any. Also the summer coat to the care of Miss Phillips, 19 W. 38.

As I do not see any probability of my going soon to Chicago, I am
thinking of drawing all my money from the Chicago bank to New York. Will
you kindly ascertain the exact total amount I have in Chicago so that I
may draw it out at once and deposit it in some New York bank?

Kindly do these and I will bother you no more. I have written to India
long ago about the rugs. I do not know whether Dewanji[1](#fn1) is alive
or dead. I have no information.

I am all right and will be more than a month yet in New York. After that
I am going to the Thousand Islands — wherever that place may be — for a
little summer quiet and rest. Mrs. Bagley has been down here to see me
and attended several of my classes.

The classes are going on with a boom; almost every day I have one, and
they are packed full. But no "*money*" — except they maintain
themselves. I charge no fees, except as the members contribute to the
rent etc. voluntarily.

It is mostly probable that I will go away this summer.

With my love to all,

Ever gratefully yours,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](054_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](054_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_4/writings_prose/reply_to_the_maharaja_of_khetri.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai, Dewan of Junagadh.
