---
title: LXI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](060_doctor.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/043_alasinga.htm)  
[←Addressee](056_mother.htm)

## LXI

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

C/O MISS DUTCHER'S  
THOUSAND ISLAND PARK  
N. Y.

*2nd July 1895*

DEAR MOTHER —

You did not write to me a single line for a long time. Neither did
Sister Mary write about the duty paid on the rugs \[from the Dewan of
Junagadh\]. I am afraid the rugs are small.

Here is another consignment from Raja Ajit Singh \[the Maharaja of
Khetri\] consisting of carpets, shawls, etc., etc., for which the bill
of lading you sent me the other day. This consignment has no *duty* to
pay because it was all prepaid in India, and the bill of lading says so
expressly. I will send you the bill of lading and the receipt for the
*duty*. Kindly take one more trouble for me and get it out of the
express company. And keep it with you till I come. The goods have
arrived in New York and I had a notice of that. They are on their way to
Chicago.

In two or three days I will send the bill of lading and the receipt for
duty paid, to you. I foolishly asked Miss Phillips, as soon as I got the
Company's (Original letter: Companies'.) notice, to get them out before
I got the bill of lading. Now the bill of lading shows that it is bound
for Chicago. So I am bound to give you this trouble. I am so sorry.
Again with my usual business instincts — I forgot to note down the name
of the express company. So I have written to New York for the letters of
the Company. As soon as that comes I will send over to you.

I am going to Europe by the end of August or a little later.

I will come to see you by the end of August.

Lord bless you and yours for ever and ever.

Your ever affectionate Son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](062_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](062_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](062_mother.htm)

</div>
