---
title: LXVI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](065_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/048_friend.htm)  
[←Addressee](065_mother.htm)

## LXVI

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

C/O MISS DUTCHER  
THOUSAND ISLAND PARK  
N. Y.  
\[*July 31, 1895*\]

DEAR MOTHER —

I am afraid I can not come to see you and neither will you advise me. I
am going with a friend (Mr. Francis Leggett.) to Europe, at his expense.
We go first to Paris and from there to London. My friend will go to
Italy and I to London. I will, however, come back to New York in
*September*. So I am not going away for good.

I start on the 17th. So you see, it is impossible to come and go that
way for 3 or 4 days.

The package from India ought to have reached by this time. If they come,
(The goods mentioned in Swami Vivekananda's letter dated [July 2,
1895](061_mother.htm).) kindly take the delivery and send it back to New
York to Miss Mary Phillips, 19 W. 38. If the package does not come to
Chicago before you go away, then kindly send the bill of lading etc. to
Miss Mary Phillips, 19. W. 38. The babies \[the Hale daughters\] did not
write me a line, nor did they intimate where they are. I absolutely do
not know anything about them. As they do not want it, it seems I ought
not to disturb them with my letters. But you kindly convey them my love
and eternal, undying blessings. So to you, Mother and Father Pope. I
will pen a longer epistle in a few days. We will see each other next
spring in Chicago, Mother, if we all live.

Ever gratefully your Son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](067_friend.htm)  
[Addressee→](068_mrs_hale.htm)  
[Chronology→](067_friend.htm)

</div>
