---
title: LXXII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](071_sister_christine.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/053_alasinga.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/036_sister.htm)

## LXXII

*To Miss Isabelle McKindley*

80 OAKLEY STREET  
CHELSEA, S.W.  
LONDON.

*24th October '95*

We meet and part. This is the law  
      and ever ever be.  
I sadly ask O gentle ones  
      Do you remember me?

I haven't had any news from Chicago, nor did I write as I did not want
to bother you — also I did not know where to.

Accompanying is a newspaper notice of a lecture I delivered in London.
It is not bad. The London audiences are very learned and critical, and
the English nature is far from being effusive. I have some friends here
— made some more — so I am going on.

My bed is in the foaming deep  
What care I, friend, the dew!

It is a queer life, mine — always travelling, no rest. Rest will be my
death — such is the force of habit. Little success here, little there —
and a good deal of bumping. Saw Paris a good \[deal\]. Miss Josephine
M'cLeod \[MacLeod\], a New York friend, showed it all over to me for a
month. Even there, the kind American girl! Here in England they know us
more. Those that do not like the Hindus, they hate them; those that
like, they worship them.

It is slow work here, but sure. Not frothy, not superficial. English
women as a rule are not as highly educated as the American women, nor
are so beautiful. They are quite submissive wives or hidden-away
daughters or church-going mothers — the embodiments of crystallized
conventionality. I am going to have some classes at the above address.

Sometimes — and generally when I score a success — I feel a despondence;
I feel as if everything is vain — as if this life has no meaning, as if
it is a waking dream. Love, friendship, religion, virtue, kindness —
everything, a momentary state of mind. I seem to long to go; in spite of
myself I say, how far — O how far! Yet the body-and-mind will have to
work its *Karma* out. I hope it will not be bad.

How are you all going on? Where is Mother Church? Is she interviewing
the ghosts of the Thotmeses and Rameses[1](#fn1) in the Pyramids — or
calmly going her round of duties at home?

Yet the life seems to grow deep and at the same time lose its hold on
itself.

Not disgust, nor joy for life, but a sort of indifference — things will
take their course; who can resist — only stand by and look on. Well, I
will not talk about myself so much. Egregious egotist! I always was
that, you know. How about you all? Great fun this life, isn't it? Don't
go to the extremes. A calm, restful, settled married life is good for
the majority of mankind. Mr. \[Edward T.\] Sturdy, the friend with whom
I am living now, was in India several times. He mixed with our monks and
is very ascetic in his habits, but he is married at last and has settled
down. And \[he\] has got a beautiful little baby. Their life is very
nice. The wife, of course, doesn't much care about metaphysics or
Sanskrit, but her whole life is in her husband — and husband's soul is
in Sanskrit metaphysics! Yet it is a good combination of theory and
practice, I think. Write me all about yourselves if you have time and
inclination, and give Mother Church my eternal gratitude.

My movements are so, so uncertain. Yet I will be a month more in London.

With never-ending gratitude and love,

VIVEKANANDA

[→](073_christina.htm)  
[Addressee→](144_isabel.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/056_joe_joe.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)"Thotmeses" refers to the four Egyptian pharaohs of the
    18th dynasty (Thutmose I, II, III and IV), who reigned from 1504
    B.C. till 1391 B.C. The Rameses were pharaohs of the 19th dynasty.
    Neither of these families built pyramids but were all buried in the
    Valley of the Kings.
