---
title: XCII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](091_christina.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/34_shashi.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/096_mrs_bull.htm)

## XCII

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

63 ST GEORGE'S ROAD  
LONDON. S.W.

*May 8, 1896*

DEAR MRS. BULL —

Your last letter to Sturdy at hand. They, I am sorry to say, leave us
nowhere. I could not make anything out of them.

What are we to do? Is the book going to be published or not? Prof.
\[William\] James's introduction (Preface to Swami Vivekananda's
*Râja-Yoga*.) is of no use in England. So why wait so long for that; and
what use are those long explanations about him?

Our hands are tied down. Why do you not write something plain and
decisive? Life is short and time is flying. I am so sorry you are losing
sight of that. Your letters are full of explanations \[and\] directions,
but not one word *about what is to be done*!!! So much red tape about
printing a little book!! Empires are managed with less manipulation than
that, I am sure!! So kindly write at your earliest something precise
about the book and whether it is going to be printed or not, and pray
make the writing a little legible.

Poor Sturdy is out of his wits as to what to do; he has gone through the
Mss. long ago.

Joking apart, I am very sorry you are not coming over this year. We are
in Lady Isabel's house. (The house was rented from Lady Isabel
Margesson.) Miss \[Henrietta\] Müller has taken some rooms in it too.
Goodwin is here with us. We have not yet made any big stir here. The
classes have begun; they are not yet what we expected. We \[have\] had
only two yet.

We will work on steadily the next 4 or 5 months. Sturdy is as patient
and persevering and hopeful as ever.

It is cool enough here yet to have a fire in the grate.

Give my love to Mrs. Adams, Miss Thursby and all other friends. My love
to Mr. Fox and blessings.

Yours with love and blessings,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](093_sir.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/098_mrs_bull.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/35_adhyapakji.htm)

</div>
