---
title: CVI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](105_christina.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/38_sharat_chandra.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/122_mrs_bull.htm)

## CVI

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

ALAMBAZAR MATH  
CALCUTTA  
\[DARJEELING\]

*26th March 1897*

DEAR MRS. BULL —

The demonstrations and national jubilations over me are over — at least
I had to cut them short, as my health broke completely down. The result
of this steady work in the West and the tremendous work of a month in
India upon the Bengalee constitution is "diabetes". It is a hereditary
foe and is destined to carry me off, at best, in a few years' time.
Eating only meat and drinking no water seems to be the only way to
prolong life — and, above all, perfect rest for the brain. I am giving
my brain the needed rest in Darjeeling, from where I am writing you now.

I am so glad to hear about Saradananda's success. Give him my best love
and do not allow him \[to\] do too *much work*. The Bengalee body is not
the same as the American.

Mr. Chatterjy (Mohini) came to see me in Calcutta, and he was very
friendly. I gave him your message. He is quite willing to work with me.
Nothing more to write, only I am bent upon seeing my monastery started;
and as soon as that is done, I come to America once more.

By the by, I will send to you a young lady from England — one Gertrude
Orchard. She has been a governess, but she has talent in art etc., and I
wished her to try her chance in America. I will give her a letter to you
and Mrs. \[Florence\] Adams.

With my love to Mrs. Adams, Miss Thursby, Miss Farmer (the noble sister)
and all the rest of our friends.

With eternal love and gratitude,

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](107_ram_ram.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/39_mrs_bull.htm)  
[Chronology→](107_ram_ram.htm)

</div>
