---
title: CXVIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](117_miss_noble.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/123_mary.htm)  
[←Addressee](116_sister_christine.htm)

## CXVIII

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, BELOOR, HOWRAH DIST.,  
BENGAL, INDIA,

*11th March 1898*.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

I simply wonder what has become of you. It is an age \[that\] I did not
hear from you, and I expected so much after Sturdy's visit to Detroit.
How did you like the man? What about Baby and the Devendorfs? How is
Mrs. Funkey \[Funke\]? What are you going to do this summer? Take rest,
dear Christina; I am sure you require it badly.

Mrs. Bull of Boston and Miss MacLeod of New York are now in India. We
have changed our Math from the old, nasty house to a house on the banks
of the Ganges. This is much more healthy and beautiful. We have also got
a good piece of land very near on the same side where Mrs. Bull and Miss
MacLeod are putting up now. It is wonderful how they accommodate
themselves to our Indian life of privation and hardship! My, these Yanks
can do anything! After the luxuries of Boston and New York, to be quite
content and happy in this wretched little house!! We intend to travel a
bit together in Kashmir, and *then* I come to America with them and am
sure to get a hearty welcome from my friends. What do you think? Is it
welcome news to you? Of course, I cannot undergo the same amount of work
as before; that, dear Christina, I am sorry, I will no more be able to
do. I will do a little work and \[take\] a good deal of rest. No more
getting crowds and making noise, but quiet, silent, personal work will
be all I intend to do.

This time I will quietly come and quietly go away, seeing only my old
friends, and no noise.

Write soon, as I am so anxious.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

"There are two sorts of persons — one sort has the heart of water, the
other of stone. The one easily takes an impression, and as easily throws
it off; the other seldom takes an impression, but once it takes, it is
there for ever. Nay, the more they struggle to cast it off, the more it
cuts deep into the stone soul." — R. K. \[Ramakrishna\] Paramahamsa

[→](119_margaret.htm)  
[Addressee→](127_christina.htm)  
[Chronology→](119_margaret.htm)

</div>
