---
title: CXXXII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](131_nivedita.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/089_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](127_christina.htm)

## CXXXII

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, BELUR,  
DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL, INDIA,

*26th January 1899*.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

Excuse this long delay in replying to your very beautiful note. The fact
is, I was once more in the vale of death. The old diabetes has now
disappeared. In its place has come what some doctors call asthma, others
dyspepsia, owing to nervous prostration. However, it is a most worrying
disease, giving one the sensation of suffocation — sometimes for days. I
am best only in Calcutta; so I am here for rest and quiet and low diet.
If I get well by March, I am going to start for Europe. Mrs. Bull and
others are gone; sorry I could not accompany them owing to this disease.

I have carefully weighed your plans for coming over. I will be ever so
glad to see you, you know it well; but, my dear, the Indian summer will
not suit you, and if you start now it will be midsummer when you reach
India. Then, you must not hope of making any living here. It is
impossible for me to make a living most times in my own country. Then
all the surroundings are so, so wretched and different from what you see
around you, e.g. you will find me going about in loin-cloth — will that
shock you? Three-fourths of the population only wearing a strip of white
cloth about their loins — can you bear that?

I must stop here; I am so weak. If I do not get well by March, I will
write you to come, for I wish it ever so much to see you once before I
pass away.

Do not be the least anxious, dear. Things must be as "Mother" wishes.
Ours is only to obey and work.

Ever yours in the Lord,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Mrs. Bull will reach Cambridge, Mass., soon. You may write to her
there on the particulars.

Yours,  
V.

PPS. I have again lost your address. Please give the correct one in your
next.

V.

[→](133_raja.htm)  
[Addressee→](138_christina.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/090_joe.htm)

</div>
