---
title: CLI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](150_christina.htm)  
[←Chronology](150_christina.htm)  
[←Addressee](150_christina.htm)

## CLI

*To Sister Christine*

21 WEST 34TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,

*10th November 1899*.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

I received your letter just now. I am now in New York. Dr. \[Egbert\]
Guernsey analysed my urine yesterday, and there was no sugar or albumen
in it. So my kidneys are all right, at least at present. The heart is
only nervous, requires calming! — some cheerful company and good, loving
friends and quiet. The only difficulty is the *dyspepsia*, and that is
the evil. For instance, I am all right in the morning and can walk
miles, but in the evening it is impossible to walk after a meal — the
gas — that depends entirely up on food, does it not? I ought to try the
Battle Creek food. If I come to Detroit, there will be quiet and Battle
Creek food for me.

But if you come to Cambridge with all the instructions of the Battle
Creek food, I will have it prepared there; or, between you and me, we
will cook it. I am a good hand at that. You don't know a thing about
cooking. Well, you may help in cleaning the plates etc. I always get
money when I need it badly. "Mother" always sees to that. So, no danger
on that head. I am not in the least danger of life, the Doctors agree —
only if this dyspepsia goes away. And that is "food", "food", "food",
and no worry. Oh, what a worry I have had! Say we go somewhere else and
make a little party and keep house ourselves. In Cambridge, Mrs. Bull
has a quiet separate place — her studio house. You can have rooms there.
I wish you to know Mrs. Bull. She is a saint, a real saint, if ever
there was one. Wait for my next letter. I will write today again, or
tomorrow after seeing Mrs. Bull.

Ever yours in the Lord,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](152_christina.htm)  
[Addressee→](152_christina.htm)  
[Chronology→](152_christina.htm)

</div>
