---
title: CLXI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](160_brahmananda.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/153_mary.htm)  
[←Addressee](159_christina.htm)

## CLXI

*To Sister Christine*

921 WEST 21ST STREET,  
LOS ANGELES,

*27th December 1899*.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

So you are awake and can't go to sleep any more. Good! Keep awake, wide
awake. It was good I came here. For, in the first place, I am cured.
What do you think of this — able to walk, and every day walk three miles
after a heavy dinner! Good! Isn't it?

I am making money fast — twenty-five dollars a day now. Soon I will work
more and get fifty dollars a day. In San Francisco I hope to do still
better — where I go in two or three weeks. Good again — better, say I —
as I am going to keep the money all to myself and not squander it any
more. And then I will buy a little place in the Himalayas — a whole hill
— about say, six thousand feet high with a grand view of the eternal
snows. There must be springs and a tiny lake. Cedars — the Himalayan
cedar forests — and flowers, flowers everywhere. I will have a little
cottage; in the middle, my vegetable gardens, which I will work myself —
and — and — and — my books — and see the face of man only once in a
great while. And the world may go to ruin round about my ears, I would
not care. I will have done with all my work — secular or spiritual — and
retire. My! how restless I have been all my life! Born nomad. I don't
know; this is the present vision. The future is to come yet. Curious
—all my dreams about my own happiness are, as it were, bound to come to
nothing; but about others' well-being — they as a rule prove true.

I am so glad you are happy and peaceful under Mrs. Bull's hospitable
roof. She is a great, great woman — one whom to see is a pilgrimage.

No snow here — exactly like northern India in winter. Some days, even
warmer — cool in the morning and evening, in the middle of the day,
warm, in the sun, hot. The roses are about us, gardens everywhere, and
the beautiful palms. But I like the snow: crisp, crackling under the
feet, white, white, white — all round white!

I don't think I have anything with the kidneys or the heart. The whole
thing was about indigestion and it is now nearly cured. A month more,
and I will be strong like a lion and hardy like a mule. The poor English
are getting it hot from the Boers. Mourning in every home in England and
still the war goes on. Such is human folly. How long will it take for
man to become civilized! Will wars ever cease? Mother knows! The New
Year is sure to bring about a great change. Pray some good may come to
India. I send you all joy, all love, all success for the New Year and
many, many more to come.

So you did well, you think, by coming to Mrs. Bull. I am glad. I wanted
you to know Mrs. Bull thoroughly. Remain there as long as you can. It
will do you good, I am sure. Take heart and be of cheer, for next year
is sure to bring many joys and a hundred blessings.

Yours truly,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](162_margo.htm)  
[Addressee→](164_christina.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/154_dhira_mata.htm)

</div>
