---
title: CLXXI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](170_abhedananda.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/180_nivedita.htm)  
[←Addressee](169_christina.htm)

## CLXXI

*To Sister Christine*

VEDANTA SOCIETY,  
102 EAST 58TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,

*9th June 1900*.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

I could not write more, as the last few weeks of my stay in California
was one more relapse and great suffering. However, I got one great
benefit out of it inasmuch as I came to know I have really no disease,
except worry and fear. My kidneys are as sound as any other healthy
man's. All the symptoms of Bright's disease etc., are only brought on by
nerves.

I wrote you one, however, from 770 Oak Street, San Francisco, to which I
did not get any reply. Of course, I was bedridden then and my address
book was not in the place I was in. There was a mistake in number. I
cannot believe you did not reply willingly.

As you see, now I am in New York, and will be here a few days. I have an
invitation from Mrs. Walton of Cleveland, Ohio. I have accepted it. She
writes me you are also invited and have accepted her invitation. Well,
we will meet in Cleveland then. I am sure to see you before I go to
Europe — either there or anywhere you wish. If you don't think it would
be possible for you to come to Ohio, I will come to any other place you
want me to come to say goodbye.

When is your school going to close? Write me all about your plans — do!

Miss Noble wants me very much to go to Cleveland. I would be very, very
glad to get a few weeks' seclusion and rest before I start with friends
who do not disturb me at all. I know I will find rest and peace that
way, and you can help me any amount in that. In Cleveland, of course,
there will be a few friends always and much talkee-talkee as a matter of
course. So if you think I will have real peace and rest elsewhere, just
write all about it.

My reply to the Cleveland lady depends on your letter.

How I wish I were in Detroit or elsewhere just now, among friends who I
know are good and true always. This is weakness; but when the physical
vitality is lowered and the nerves all unstrung, I feel so, so much to
depend upon somebody. You will be glad to learn I made a little money in
the West. So I will be quite able to pay my expenses.

Write soon.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](172_christina.htm)  
[Addressee→](172_christina.htm)  
[Chronology→](172_christina.htm)

</div>
