---
title: CLXXIV

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](173_christina.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/182_mary.htm)  
[←Addressee](173_christina.htm)

## CLXXIV

*To Sister Christine*

VEDANTA SOCIETY,  
102 EAST 58TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,

*27th June 1900*.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

This is my plan just now. I will have to remain in New York a few days
yet to see my books through. I am going to publish another edition of
*Karma-Yoga* and the London lectures in a book form. Miss Waldo is
editing them, and Mr. Leggett will publish.

Then, I think, if I am to remain in this country a few weeks more, it is
better that you get a rest and change. Newport[1](#fn1) is a celebrated
seaside place — four hours from New York. I am invited there. I will go
there this week and, as promised, I \[will\] find quiet and retirement
and freedom. I will try to find a place for you and wire you as soon as
found.

I am sure in Detroit you cannot have rest. A little change of place and
quiet from time to time is a great factor in renewing one's vigour.

Well, if you think that you would have better rest and quiet in Detroit,
drop a line and I come. It is only seventeen hours from New York to
Detroit, and I am quite strong to undertake it. I am free to go already;
only I really want you to take a good, long rest for some weeks at
least.

Don't be afraid of expenses. Mother has amply provided that and will
provide, so long I am unselfish.

Think \[over\] all the pros and cons, and write at your earliest
convenience.

I am going to Newport anyway, just to see what it looks like. I will
write you all about \[it\] as soon as I am there.

Ever yours in the Lord,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](175_mrs_hansbrough.htm)  
[Addressee→](176_sister_christine.htm)  
[Chronology→](175_mrs_hansbrough.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Newport is a fashionable seaside resort on the
    Narrangansett River, in Rhode Island. Dr. Kate Stanton
    (Brahmacharini Shantikama), a disciple of Swami Abhedananda, lived
    there and probably invited the Swami to visit the town in order to
    take rest.
