---
title: CXCI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](190_your_highness.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/100_joe.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/098_mother.htm)

## CXCI

*To Mrs. Ole Bull (in London)*

DACCA,

*20 March 1901*.

MY DEAR MOTHER,

At last I am in Eastern Bengal. This is the first time I am here, and
never before knew Bengal was so beautiful. You ought to have seen the
rivers here — regular rolling oceans of fresh water, and everything so
green — continual production. The villages are the cleanest and
prettiest in all India.

Joe \[Miss Josephine MacLeod\] is perhaps by this time in Japan. I
received a long and beautiful letter from Margot. Tell Margot that there
has been of late a regular fall of fortune on the Kashmir Raja; things
are all changing to his benefit. Mr. Mookherjey is now Governor of
Kashmir. Saradananda had a bad fever. He is well now, but weak. He
possibly goes to Darjeeling for a change. Mrs. \[M. N.\] Banerjey, who
is at Calcutta, is very anxious to take him to the hills. Mohin
\[Mahendranath Datta\], my brother, is in India, in Karachi near Bombay,
and he corresponds with Saradananda. He writes to say he is going to
Burma, China, etc. The traders who lure him have shops in all those
places. I am not at all anxious about him. He is a very selfish man.

I have no news from Detroit. I received one letter from Christina nine
months ago, but I did not reply. Perhaps that may have vexed her.

I am peaceful and calm — and am finding every day the old begging and
trudging life is the best for me after all.

Mrs. Sevier I left at Belur. She is the guest of Mrs. Banerjey, who has
rented Nilambar Mookherjey's house on the river (the old Math). She goes
very soon to Europe.

Things are going on, as is in the nature of things. To me has come
resignation.

With all love,

Ever your Son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS — All blessings on Margot's work. Mother is leading, I am sure.

V.

[→](192_sir.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/101_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/101_mother.htm)

</div>
