---
title: CXCIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](192_sir.htm)  
[←Chronology](192_sir.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/166_nivedita.htm)

## CXCIII

*To Sister Nivedita*

THE MATH, BELUR,  
HOWRAH DISTRICT, BENGAL,

*4 April 1901*.

DEAR MARGOT,

A letter came just now from Mr. R. Dutt \[Ramesh Dutta\] praising you
and your work in England very much and asking me to wish you to stop
longer in England.

It requires no imagination to learn that I am overjoyed at all the news
about you Mr. Dutt so kindly sends.

Of course, you stay as long as you think you are working well. Yum
\[Miss Josephine MacLeod\] had some talk about you with Mother \[Holy
Mother, Sarada Devi\], and she desired you to come over. Of course, it
was only her love and anxiety to see you — that was all; but poor Yum
has been much too serious for once, and hence all these letters.
However, I am glad it should happen, as I learnt so much about your work
from Mr. Dutt, who can't be accused of a relative's blind love.

I have written to Mrs. Bull already about this matter. I am now at last
in Dacca and had some lectures here. I depart for Chandranath tomorrow,
near Chittagong, the farthest eastern extremity of Bengal. My Mother,
aunt, cousin, another cousin's widow, and nine boys are with me. They
all send you love.

I had just now a few lines from Mrs. Bull, also a letter from Mr.
Sturdy. As it would be almost impossible for me to write for some days
now, I ask you to thank Mrs. Bull for me for her letter, and tell her
kindly that I have just now a long letter from Miss \[Christina\]
Greenstidel of Detroit. She mentions a beautiful letter from Mrs. Bull.
Sturdy writes about the publication of any further edition of
*Raja-Yoga* by Longmans. I leave that consideration with Mrs. Bull. She
may talk over the matter with Sturdy and do what she thinks proper.

Please give Sturdy my best love, and tell him I am on the march and will
take time to reply to his letter; in the meanwhile the business will be
looked after by Mrs. Bull.

With everlasting love and blessings,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](194_christine.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/168_nivedita.htm)  
[Chronology→](194_christine.htm)

</div>
