---
title: CC

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](199_friend.htm)  
[←Chronology](199_friend.htm)  
[←Addressee](196_christina.htm)

## CC

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, BELUR  
DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL, INDIA,  
\[*End of June 1901*\]

DEAR CHRISTINA,

Your very welcome letter just reached. A few days ago a precious little
bit of poem also reached. I wish it ever so much you were the writer
thereof. Anyhow, most of us feel, though unable to express; and then,
"There are thoughts that lie too deep for tears". Regularity in anything
is not in my line of life, but that need not make you irregular. I pray
you to drop a few lines every now and then. Of course, when I am not in
this body, I am sure the news will reach you, and then you will have to
stop writing.

Miss MacLeod wishes me to join her in Japan, but I am not sure. Most
probably I am not going, especially as I expect both her and Mrs. Ole
Bull in India, in November. Two whole months consumed in coming and
going; only one month's stay in Japan — that does not pay, I am afraid.

Say, I am getting enormously fat about the middle — alas!

Mrs. \[Charlotte\] Sevier, who is now in England, returns in a few
months to India. She has invited Mrs. Bull etc. to be her guests in the
Himalayas. I wish they could be there during summer.

I have manfully borne the terrific heat of my country in the plains, and
now I am facing the deluging rains of my country. Do you know how I am
taking rest? I have got a few goats and sheep and cows and dogs and
cranes! And I am taking care of them the whole day! It is not trying to
be happy; what for? Why should one not be unhappy as well — both being
nonsense? — but just to kill time.

Do you correspond with Mrs. Bull or Nivedita?

Don't worry, don't be anxious; for me the "Mother" is my protection and
refuge; and everything must come round soon, better than my fondest
dreams can paint.

With all love,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](201_sister_christine.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/109_christine.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/107_joe.htm)

</div>
