---
title: CCIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](202_christine.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/111_blessed_and_beloved.htm)  
[←Addressee](202_christine.htm)

## CCIII

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, BELUR,  
DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL,

*2nd September 1901.*

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

I have been looking at one of your old photos — the only one you sent
four or five years ago; and then I remember how changed and reduced you
looked last summer; and it came to me that you must be awfully thin now,
as it seems very hard for you to get rid of anxieties. This is simply
foolish. Things will, of course, take their shape. We only make
ourselves miserable by moping. It is very hard to manipulate one's
philosophy to contribute to one's daily need. So it is with you, as with
me. But it is easiest to take the teacher's chair and read a lecture.
And that has been my life's business!! Indeed, that is the reason why
there are more disciples up to the mark than teachers. The upshot of all
this is that you must create a huge appetite, then gorge, then sleep and
grow fat, fat, fat. Plump is the English word, is it not?

As for me, I am very happy. Of course, Bengal brings the asthma now and
then, but it is getting tame, and the terrible things — Bright's disease
and diabetes — have disappeared altogether. Life in any dry climate will
stop the asthma completely, I am sure. I get reduced, of course, during
a fit, but then it takes me no time to lay on a few layers of fat. I
have a lot of cows, goats, a few sheep, dogs, geese, ducks, one tame
gazelle, and very soon I am going to have some milk buffaloes. These are
not your American bison, but huge things — hairless, half-aquatic in
habits, and \[that\] give an enormous quantity of very rich milk.

Within the last few months, I got two fits \[of asthma\] by going to two
of the dampest hill stations in Bengal — Shillong and Darjeeling. I am
not going to try the Bengalee mountains any more.

Mrs. Bull and Nivedita are in Norway. I don't know when they \[will\]
come over to India. Miss MacLeod is in Japan. I have not heard from her
\[for\] a long while. They all are expected here in November, and will
have a "hot time in this old town"[1](#fn1) etc. I pray you can come,
and the Mother will open the door for it. I cannot but say my prayers
mostly have been heard, up to date.

Well now, Christina, send me one of your latest photos next mail, will
you? I want to see how much of fat you have accumulated in one year.

Anyhow, I will have to go to America with Mrs. Bull, I am sure.
\[Excision\][2](#fn2)  By the by, *excusez-moi*,[3](#fn3) our Calcutta
is never so hot as your Detroit or New York, with its added advantage —
we are not required by our society to wear many things. The old Greeks
used to think that wearing too many clothes and \[feeling\] shame to
show any part of the body a peculiarity of barbarians! So the Hindus
think, down to the present day. We are the most scantily clothed people
in the whole world. Bless the Lord! How one would live otherwise in our
climate!

3rd September —

I left the letter unfinished last night. The foreign English mail starts
day after tomorrow. So begin again. The moon is not up yet, but there is
a sunless glow upon the river. Our mighty Ganges (She is indeed mighty
now, during the rains) is splashing against the walls of the house.
Numerous tiny boats are flitting up and down in the dark; they have come
to fish for our shads, which come up the river this season.

How I wish you were here to taste our shads — one of the most delicate
fish in the world. It is raining outside — pouring. But the moment this
downpour ceases, I rain through every pore — it is so hot yet. My whole
body is covered by big patches of prickly heat. Thank goodness there are
no ladies about! If I had to cover myself in this state of things, I
surely would go crazy.

I have also my theme, but I am not despondent. I am sure very soon to
pan it out into a beautiful ecstasy \[excision\]. I am half crazy by
nature; then my overtaxed nerves make me outrageous now and then. As a
result I don't find anybody who would patiently bear with me! I am
trying my best to make myself gentle as a lamb. I hope I shall succeed
in some birth. You are so gentle. Sometimes I did frighten you very
much, did I not, Christina? I wish I were as gentle as you are. Mother
knows which is best.

I would not take any supper tonight, as I ate rather heartily of the
aforesaid shad! Then I have to think, think, think on my theme; and some
subjects I think best in bed because the whole is made clear to me in
dream. Therefore, I am going to bed, and *gute Nacht*, *bon
soir*,[4](#fn4) etc., etc. No, no, it is now about 10 a.m. in Detroit.
Therefore, a very happy day to you. May all good realities reach you
today while I am expecting dreams.

Ever yours with love and blessings,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](204_christine.htm)  
[Addressee→](204_christine.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/112_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)The quotation is from a song entitled "Camptown Races" by
    the American composer Stephen Foster.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)The paper of the original letter is so old and brittle
    that some portions have disintegrated.
3.  [^](#fn3_1)A French expression which means "excuse me".
4.  [^](#fn4_1)German and French expressions which mean "good night" and
    "good evening" respectively.
