---
title: CCVII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](206_christina.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/113_joe.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/168_nivedita.htm)

## CCVII

*To Sister Nivedita*

THE MATH,  
P.O. BELUR, HOWRAH,

*12th November 1901*.

MY DEAR MARGO \[MARGOT\],

Since the Durgâ Pujâ I have been very ill, and so could not reply to
your letter earlier.

We had a grand Puja here of Durga, lasting nearly four days; but, alas,
I was down with fever all the time.

We had a grand image, and a huge Puja it was. Then we had the Lakshmi
Puja following close, and then night before yesterday, we had the *Kali
Puja*. It is always after midnight — this Puja. I am better now, and we
will find a house for you as soon as you come.

I am so glad you are accompanying Mrs. \[Ole\] Bull. She requires all
care; and she always thinks of herself the last. Joe \[Miss Josephine
MacLeod\] is coming to India shortly — at Christmas time with some
Japanese friends. I am expected to meet her in Madras.

I am going off to the N.W.P. \[North-Western Provinces\] etc. soon, as
Bengal is malarious — now that the rains are over.

Mrs. Bull has been a mother to us all, and any time and service spent
for her is as nothing to what she has been doing for us all. Remain with
her as long as she wants you — the work can wait well; "Mother" sees to
her work. We needn't be anxious.

By the by, Miss \[Henrietta\] Müller is here in Calcutta. She wrote a
letter to Akhandananda, with whom she has been in regular correspondence
— care of the Math. So I sent some flowers and fruits and a letter of
welcome to her hotel. I have not had a reply yet.

Mrs. \[Charlotte\] Sevier, I expect, has already started. Swarupananda
had his heart weakened by the constant uphill and downhill. He is here
and improving.

Things are going on well with us, slowly but surely. The boys of late
have been very active, and it is work only that tells and nothing else.

Yours with all love and blessings,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](208_christina.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/116_sister_nivedita.htm)  
[Chronology→](208_christina.htm)

</div>
