---
title: CCVIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](207_margo.htm)  
[←Chronology](207_margo.htm)  
[←Addressee](206_christina.htm)

## CCVIII

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, P.O. BELUR, HOWRAH,

*12th November 1901*.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

The morning's mail brought me a photograph from Detroit. I thank the
sender very much for promptness. Well, I liked it much. But the old one
is the profile view; this, the front. Then again, the phenomenal fat
seems to be only imaginary on somebody's part. In a way, I am more used
to the old one, and, as such, I cannot slight an old friend. So let me
say both are good. The one is an evolution of the other — for the
better. I expected a line but it has not arrived yet; \[it\] may
tomorrow. We have a proverb here: "One river is equal to forty miles".
There is only a river between Calcutta and our Math, and yet such a
round — about way for the mail. Sometimes it comes dribbling for days.

Mrs. \[Ole\] Bull and Nivedita must have started for the U.S. by this
time. Nivedita is sure to see you in Detroit. Mrs. Bull is anxious to
induce you to join her Indian party via Japan. If you can take leave for
some months, do come. Mother will arrange anyhow; I need not trouble
myself.

Mrs. Sevier has started already, it seems — alone.

We had grand Pujas (worships) here in our Math this year. The biggest of
our Pujas is the Mother worship, lasting nearly four days and nights. We
brought a clay image of Mother with ten hands, standing with one foot on
a lion, the other on a demon. Her two daughters — the Goddess of Wealth
and the Goddess of Learning and Music — on either side on lotuses;
beneath, her two sons — the God of War and that of Wisdom.

Thousands of people were entertained, but I could not see the Puja,
alas! I was down with high fever all the time. Day before yesterday,
however, came the Puja of Kali. We had an image, too, and sacrificed a
goat and burned a lot of fireworks. This night every Hindu home is
illuminated, and the boys go crazy over fireworks. There are, of course,
several cases of severe burns in the hospitals. We had less fireworks
but more Puja, recitation of Mantras, offering of flowers, food and
songs. It lasted only one night.

I am expected to leave Calcutta and Bengal in a few days, as this
country becomes very malarious this month, after the rains. It is
pleasant and cool now, and the north Himalayan wind is blowing.

We have fenced in a lot of our grounds to protect our vegetables from
our cows and goats and sheep. The other day one of my \[a portion
excised\] . . . but the mother was either so wicked or \[a portion
excised\] . . . that she would not look at her young. I tried to keep
them alive on cow's milk, but the poor things died in the night! Two of
my ducks are sitting on their eggs. As this is their first time, and the
male does not help them a bit, I am trying my best to keep up their
strength by good feeding. We cannot keep chickens here — they are
*forbidden* to us.

With all love,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](209_christine.htm)  
[Addressee→](209_christine.htm)  
[Chronology→](209_christine.htm)

</div>
