---
title: CCIX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](208_christina.htm)  
[←Chronology](208_christina.htm)  
[←Addressee](208_christina.htm)

## CCIX

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, P.O. BELUR, HOWRAH,

*25th November 1901*.

DEAR CHRISTINE,

It seems your bottle of nerve tonic did not do you much good, your
assurances to the contrary. It must have been a curious error. I must
have been down with fever or asthma or something else at that time.
Still a thousand, thousand pardons. This was my first, and it will be my
last, offence. Your letter that went to Miss \[Josephine\] MacLeod has
not come back yet. Perhaps Miss MacLeod is bringing the letter with her,
as she is coming over to India from Japan herself, accompanied by her
Japanese converts (male, of course, as she is a lady missionary).

Well, well, I so wish things would so arrange themselves that I could
see you once more. Mother knows. By the by, my right eye is failing me
badly. I see very little with that one. It will be hard for me for some
time either to read or write; and as it is getting worse every day, my
people are urging me to go to Calcutta and consult a doctor. I will go
soon, as soon as I recover from a bad cold I have on.

I am so glad you were so taken by Abhedananda; only I thought one Hindu
was good for a lifetime.

Poor Miss Joe \[Miss Josephine MacLeod\] — so she remains ignorant as to
the real cause of my not going over to Japan! You need not be the least
anxious — there is no harm done; and if there were, Joe and especially
Mrs. \[Ole\] Bull make it their life's duty to befriend those I love.

I will try your tonic when it arrives; and the gift, I pray, will even
be followed by the giver, for surely a \[words excised\] . . . is more
stimulating and healing than dead drugs.

With all love,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](210_christine.htm)  
[Addressee→](210_christine.htm)  
[Chronology→](210_christine.htm)

</div>
