---
title: CCXII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](211_christine.htm)  
[←Chronology](211_christine.htm)  
[←Addressee](211_christine.htm)

## CCXII

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, BELUR,  
DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL, INDIA,

*18th December 1901*.

DEAR CHRISTINE,

I am much better, and the rest is doing me good. I have found out that
lying in bed all the time gives me as much sleep as wanted and good
digestion too. Albumen and sugar vanish immediately \[when\] I begin
taking rest.

Mrs. Bull and Nivedita start for India from Marseilles today, and unless
they change their plan, \[they\] must be in India before this reaches
you — two weeks before.

Herewith I send you four hundred and eighty dollars by cheque drawn on
Thomas Cook & Son, Broadway, New York. They have no branch office in
Detroit. On receipt of this, you write to Thomas Cook & Son, Broadway,
New York, that you have got a cheque from India — mentioning the amount
and number — drawn by Thomas Cook & Son on the firm of Thomas Cook &
Son, and want to be advised as to how to cash it. Don't send the cheque
ahead. (Excuse all these details. I feel you are a baby in business,
though I am worse.) This is to pay your "passage to India"[1](#fn1) if
you think fit to accept Mrs. Sevier's invitation. If you get leave and
come, I am sure you will find somebody who is coming to England, at
least. Then from there, again, somebody who is coming to Egypt. You come
with them as far as Italy, thence direct on a boat to India.

Second-class passage across the Atlantic is all right, but the second
class from Italy to Bombay is rather bad. There are always a few rough
men and fast women. There is money enough for travelling first class all
through, if you so like.

The Mother will see to it, even as \[She did when\] this money came.
Drop me a line as soon as you engage your passage —better a week ahead;
otherwise I don't see how the letter can reach me. The vessel to India
you get from London; and possibly a letter may reach me with the name of
the vessel, etc. In any case, however, you wire me as soon as you land
and get into a *good* hotel. You will find many persons to receive you —
and me too, most probably.

In case, however, things take another turn and you cannot come, no
matter. Do with the money just as it pleases you.

It is very probable that after Miss \[Josephine\] MacLeod and Mrs.
\[Ole\] Bull have been through India, they are going home via Japan;
and, of course, I am going with them. In that case I will be in
California next fall.

It will be a nice trip, and would it not be a fine tour round the world
if you get leave and come?

Do just as the Mother opens the way for you, and do not worry.

Yours with all love and blessings,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](213_christine.htm)  
[Addressee→](213_christine.htm)  
[Chronology→](213_christine.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Probably the Swami placed this phrase in quotation marks
    because it is the title of a poem in Walt Whitman's Leaves of Grass.
