---
title: CCXX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](219_christine.htm)  
[←Chronology](219_christine.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/115_mrs_ole_bull.htm)

## CCXX

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

\[THE MATH, P.O. BELUR, DIST. HOWRAH,

*March* (?) *1902*\]

DEAR MOTHER,[1](#fn1)

I am glad Chinnu has arrived. Any hour you like will suit \[me\] for
your coming tomorrow. But it is ferocious heat here from 11 a.m. to 5
p.m.

I would, therefore, suggest that you start after breakfast and remain
the day here and have some Bengalee fish lunch, and go back in the
evening.

I insist on your taking a cab here and back. A cab to come and go costs
quite as much or less than a boat, and there is no change \[of
transportation\]. If the cabby does not understand Belur, tell him to go
to a place two miles south of Bally. He must know Bally, and then let
him ask his way to the Math.

One such drenching and capsizing experience as Mr. Okakura \[Kakuzo\]
had the other day will unsettle your nerves for days; and we expect such
rough weather every evening this month. The land route is nearer,
easier, and cheaper from where you are. I have also instructed your
servant, the bearer of the letter.

Ever your Son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](221_joe.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/123_dhira_mata.htm)  
[Chronology→](221_joe.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)At the time of this letter, Mrs. Ole Bull was staying
    with Sister Nivedita, Mr. Okakura Kakuzo and Miss Josephine MacLeod
    at the American Consulate in Calcutta. Mrs. Bull had come to India
    with Sister Nivedita in the second week of February, and she left
    Calcutta on April 17, 1902.
