---
title: CCXXV

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](224_christine.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/123_dhira_mata.htm)  
[←Addressee](224_christine.htm)

## CCXXV

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, BELUR, DIST. HOWRAH,

*14th June 1902*.

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

Your letters had to wait a few days, as I was out of town in a
village.[1](#fn1) Well, many thanks for all the information I got. Mr.
Okakura \[Kakuzo\] has been to the Math, but I was away. He will be in
Calcutta a few weeks more and then goes to Bombay. He intends taking a
house near the city to learn intimately the customs of Bengalees. I am
so glad to learn Margo's \[Sister Nivedita's\] intention to stop at
Mayavati longer. She really requires good rest, and she had none in
Europe, I am sure of that. If she were amenable to my advice as of old,
I would take away every book and every scrap of paper from her, make her
walk some, eat a lot and sleep a lot more. As to talking, I would have
the merriest conversation all the while.

I have a beautiful letter from Mrs. Sevier, and \[am\] so happy to learn
that she loves you more and more. But plumpness is the criterion, *mon
amie* \[my friend\], for a' \[all\] that.

So there was a great flutter in our dovecote owing to my letters, but
things must have assumed their old form by this time. The boy, my
nephew, is going to be sometime yet in the Ashrama; make him talk
English with a good accent — do. No foreign language can be learnt
properly unless you talk in it from childhood.

Mr. Bose[2](#fn2) is still there, I hope; and you must have liked him
immensely. He is a *man*, a brick. Tender him my best regards, will you?

Have you any water in the lakes now? Do you get the snows clearer? It
has been raining all through this summer here. We had very few burning
days, only a number of stuffy ones. Our rains also have nearly set in.
In a week the deluge will commence in earnest.

As for me, I am much stronger than before; and when seven miles of
jolting in a bullock-cart and railway travel of thirty-four miles did
not bring back the dropsy to the feet, I am sure it is not going to
return.

But anyway, it is the Math that suits me best just now.

With all love,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](226_christine.htm)  
[Addressee→](226_christine.htm)  
[Chronology→](226_christine.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)According to Swami Brahmananda's diary, Swami Vivekananda
    left for Boro Jagulia on June 6. First he travelled by train from
    Sealdah to Kanchrapara, a distance of about thirty-four miles. From
    there the Swami went about seven miles by bullock-cart to Boro
    Jagulia village at the request of his disciple Shrimati Mrinalini
    Basu, at whose home he stayed.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)Mr. A. M. Bose, President of the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj,
    had come to Mayavati on May 23.
