+++
title = "rAvaNa tantra-s"

+++
I had the opportunity to examine a series of related manuscripts which
were called rAvaNa tantra-s or graha tantra-s with shrI Ravlekar’s
contact, the remarkable GK. Unfortunately, I could only examine them and
do nothing more. I only have in my possession a single the fragment of
an obscure early kaumAra tantra that we shall discuss at some later
point in time. They point to the a remarkable class of literature that
lies at the boundary between the early kaumAra tantra-s and
bhUta-tantra-s, keeping in line with our thesis that the early kaumAra
tantra-s in addition to covering topics related to the worship of skanda
and his mAtR^i-s and gaNa-s was directly linked to pediatric issues.  
1\) la\~NkAdhipati-kR^ita-trayodasha yoginI vidyA: This fragment
attributed to the rAkShasa king of la\~NkA has invocations of 13
yoginI-s for pediatric relief. A parallel set of yoginI-s are seen in
uDDIsha tantra also attributed to rAvaNa. The number of yoginI-s (13)
and their names suggest that they are linked to the 13 mAtR^i-s in the
kaumAra kula-vidyA. The yoginI-s are: mAtR^ikA, stanadA, pUtanA,
mukhamaNDikA, biDAlI, nAkulI, jambhalA, ajitA, DAkiNI, patinI,
bhadrakAlI, ShaShTikA and revatI.  
2)rAvaNa-tantra: Has mantra-s to 11 mAtR^ikA-s and skanda: mAtR^inandA,
sunandA, revatI, mukhamaNDikA, biDAlI, shakunI, pUtanA, shuShkA, AryakA,
jambhakA, pilipichChikA and skanda. I saw a book by PC Bagchi
translating a Nepali text named dvAdasha-graha-shAnti which is related
to this text. A nAstika scholar dharmadeva from Nalanda journeyed to
China around the 800-900 of CE and translated the rAvaNa tantra into
chIna-bhASha. The Chinese text still survives. Unfortunately, I was
never able to obtain Bagchi’s book ever again to do a more detailed
comparison.  
3\) dashagrIva tantra: This text describes attacks by 12 mAtR^ikA-s of
the kaumAra type that can cause bAla-roga-s. They are all countered
interestingly by a series of mantra-s to rAvaNa. The much later medical
authority trimalla-bhaTTa states that viShNu should be invoked along
with rAvaNa for the same roga-s.
