+++
title = "Turtle shells"

+++
Though they are one of the most recognizable animals of the present, the
evolutionary history of turtles has confounded us for long. Until the
late 1990s their anapsid skull was taken as an indicator of the
primitive condition for amniotes. Thus the anatomists like Gauthier saw
turtles as a sister group of captorhinomorphs, while Laurin et al saw
them as a sister group of procolophonids and Lee saw them as a being
derived within pareiasaurs. However, Rieppel, a notable falsifier of
Lee’s theories, recovered turtles as diapsids, and as a sister group
of the sauropterygians. The sauropterygian clade contains a great
radiation of aquatic or semi-aquatic extinct reptiles: 1) the basal
placodonts; 2) then the pachypleurosaurs; 3) then the nothosaurs; 4)
then several paraphyletic lineages of the pistosaur grade, like
Corosaurus, then Cyamtosaurus and then Pistosaurus; 5) a crown group of
plesiosaurs. The turtles and placodonts show superficial similarities in
anatomy and this revived in a sense an old hypothesis of Broom that
turtles and placodonts were related. In Rieppel’s theory the
turtle+sauropterygian clade was a sister clade of the lepidosaurs (i.e.
lizards+tuataras). Finally, the molecular phylogenies established,
beyond any doubt, that the turtles are indeed diapsids but are closer to
archosaurs than lepidosaurs. Of course, the sauropterygians being
extinct, the molecular phylogenies do not directly answer this
relationship. However, current phylogenetic models based on anatomy
(though notoriously weak) do not show any suggestion for sauropterygians
being within archosauromorpha. The molecular trees suggest that turtles
are outside of two great modern archosaur lineages, namely the dinosaurs
and crocodiles.

Hence, it might be worthwhile to search for turtle precursors amongst
the archosauriforms outside of the archosaurs comprised of the two great
lineages: 1) crurotarsans (crocodiles, phytosaurs, aetosaurs,
“rauisuchians” and ornithosuchids) 2) ornithodirans (pterosaurs and
dinosauromorphs). Now, the main successive clades of archosauriforms
outside of these crown archosaurs are: 1) the primitive proterosuchids;
2) erythrosuchids; 3) Euparkeria 4) proterochampsids. A study of these
forms by several workers has suggested that body armor in the form of
bony plates flanking the vertebra along either side of the midline of
the back was a synapomorphy shared by Euparkeria, proterochampsids and
crown archosaurs. The paired dorsal carapace bones of the turtles are
likely to be highly elaborated derivatives of this ancestral dorsal body
armor. Hence, the search for turtle origins might be further constrained
within this clade of Euparkeria, proterochampsids and crown archosaurs –
i.e. they are likely to be just outside the crown. There is one
enigmatic archosauriform, Doswellia, which was described by Weems in
1980 based on partial skeletons but has been hardly studied since. Its
exact phylogenetic position remains unclear too, but as noted by Weems
it has extensive body armor in the form of several longitudinal plates
covering the dorsal surface, with a nuchal plate similar to that seen in
turtles. The possibility of a genuine evolutionary connection to turtles
cannot be ruled for this form. There are several good crocodile-line
archosaurs that are also good candidates for armored precursors of
turtles – the aetosaurs and the enigmatic Euscolosuchus. However, this
would require that in future more extensive molecular phylogenies
turtles move as a sister group of crocodiles or in morphological
phylogenies the crurotarsan monophyly breaks down.

In this light the discovery a scrappy new turtle from the late Triassic
of New Mexico, *Chinlechelys*, by Joyce et al is of some value. It
reinforces earlier work by Joyce and Gauthier that turtles ultimately
had their origins in terrestrial environments. While, highly scrappy,
the fossil shows one key feature—the ribs are only lightly associated
with the overlying dermal bone of the carapace. Thus, this supports the
idea that the turtle dermal armor probably emerged independently of the
ribs and only subsequently ensnared the ribs and integrated them into
armor development. Taken together with the molecular phylogeny,
*Chinlechelys* adds weight to theory for emergence of turtles from the
dorsal body-armored archosauriformes just outside of the archosaur crown
group.

One of the best-known oddities of the turtles is that their pectoral
girdle lies inside of the rib-cage, whereas in all other tetrapodomorphs
it is outside. In trying to establish the developmental basis for this
oddity, one of the most notable educators of developmental biology,
Scott Gilbert, performed a series of studies on turtle development. Some
of his team’s key findings were: 1) a structure called carapacial ridge
that superficial resembles the limb bud precursor forms along the dorsal
margin of the developing embryo. The mesenchyme of this ridge secretes
FGF10, which acts as a signal to attract the ribs towards the ridge.
Thus, the ribs start growing dorsally outwards and get associated with
the dorsal dermis. The ribs then appear to secrete Bmps that cause
dermal ossification to occur. 2) Trunk neural crest cells migrate first
above the neural tube and vertebral precursors and then move to the
ventral region along the lateral surfaces of the embryo and give rise to
the plastron skeleton.

Based on these developmental peculiarities the Gilbert team proposed a
rib-centric theory: The ribs are responsible for the ossification of the
dermal bones and once the ribs enter the dermis it is not a big deal to
create dorsal armor. So they proposed that the emergence of turtles
might have not had a pronounced series of intermediates, especially
those with increasing dermal armor. Instead they proposed that there was
rapid transition with the ribs first entering the dermis and
subsequently driving ossification of the dermis and also placing the
pectoral girdle in an internal position. But their results show that for
the ribs to get into the dermis you first need a signal from the
specialized carapacial ridge mesenchyme. Moustakas’ and Nagashima et
al’s study of this mesenchyme shows that this structure emerges from
dermomyotomal segment of the somite and converts from expressing the
transcription factor Pax3 (driving towards muscle development) to Pax1
(driving towards bone development) before forming the dermal bone of the
shell. Thus, it could be interpreted that the precursor of the dermal
ossification emerges first and then coordinates its development with
that of the ribs via the FGF10 signal to allow the fusion process. What
we see in extant turtles is a state of extensive interlock between the
mesenchymal development and rib development, which can potentially
mistakenly be seen as the ribs being the root cause for ossification.
The weaker association of the ribs and dermal armor in *Chinlechelys*
could mean that the strong interlock in the development of the two only
gradually developed, thus being less consistent with the Gilbert model
of intermediate-less transition. Of course better molecular
understanding of osteoderm formation and the skeletogenic properties of
the dermis in other reptiles might be of some value in further
clarifying this issue.
