+++
title = "Some talks at the Indic Todayxa0portal"
date = "2021-06-26"

+++
We had a chat with with C Surendranath, Contributing Editor and (in part
with) Yogini Deshpande, Editor in Chief of Indic Today. It is divided
into four parts:  
1)
<https://www.indictoday.com/videos/manasataramgini-civilization-counter-religion-continuity-collapse-i/>  
A few clarifications for this part: 1) We do not as personally identify
“trad”, “alt-right” or whatever. However, Hindu, brāhmaṇa, Vaidika
smārta (with a degree of parallel adoption of tāntrika practice) are
part of our identity. 2) The name of the German philosopher Schopenhauer
was mysteriously blanked out twice! 3) We did say gulag but it sounds
like kulak. 4) The first German Jewish professor we were thinking about
was Moritz Stern, who succeeded Carl Gauss. Moritz Cantor also Jewish
was Stern’s student. Related to this part is our essay on [the
Lithuanian (Baltic) heathen
tradition](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2016/03/13/some-notes-on-the-heathen-lithuania-and-its-demise/).

2\)
<https://www.indictoday.com/conversations/manasataramgini-civilization-counter-religion-continuity-collapse-ii/>  
This part covers issues which we have presented in the writing here:
e.g. 1) Early “free-thinkers” in the
[Abrahamosphere](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/04/01/5030/)
(especially see second part). 2) Further details on the extra-military
aspects of the [Islamo-Hindu
confrontation](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/02/04/some-notes-on-the-extra-military-aspects-of-the-islamo-hindu-confrontation/).
3) More focused discussion of aspects of [counter-religions and their
interactions](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2016/03/11/unmada-carca/).
4) Military labor entrepreneurship and related issues in the [last days
of the last Hindu
empire](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/10/09/yuddha-vyuha-s-mlechcha-s-and-vanija-niti-in-the-last-hindu-empire/).
5) Some Hindu polemics [against the
preta-mata](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/04/30/a-hindu-polemic-against-the-pretamata/).

3\)
<https://www.indictoday.com/conversations/manasataramgini-civilization-counter-religion-continuity-collapse-iii/>  
This part covers: 1) A basic introduction to legalism (fajia) & its
manifestations in old & recent Cīna thought. 2) Comparisons between the
imperial political frame in fajia and the arthaśāstra. 3) “Fads for
people” as a mechanism in legalism. 4) About half of Cīna history Hans
were ruled foreign powers: the consequences and responses. 5)
Counter-religions and Cīna responses: some comparisons with India. 6)
Hui and Cīna little brother of the preta and their suppression  
Overall you can take it prolegomenon for a H analysis of one of our
civilizational rivals. In the oral medium some little points can slip
through the cracks: We should have explicitly mentioned that eunuch
Zheng He was a Hui descending from those brought to Cīna by the Mongols.

4\)
<https://www.indictoday.com/conversations/manasataramgini-civilization-counter-religion-continuity-collapse-iv/>  
The final part of this chat covers the Rus. It meanders along touching
on: 1) the pagan Rus and their Christianization to the Orthodox church;
2) The Mongol conquest of the Rus. 3) The Rus fight back with Dimitri.
4) The see-saw struggle with Khan Toktamish burning Moscow. 5) Closer to
our age the attempt by the Rus to present themselves as the chief of the
preta world. 6) Exploration of the East – Siberia. 7) Conflicts with the
Western powers and Japan. 8) Marxian subversion of Russia. 9) WW2 and
the attack on Japan. 10) Rus as a Superpower. 11) Decline and
demographics. It is peppered with some other excursions and a discussion
on the movie on Alexander prince of Novgorod who fought the Germanic
invaders by Surendranath. We should have explicitly stated that he was a
feudatory of the Mongols and aided by Khan Sartaq of the Golden horde.

In our opinion the oral medium is best suited for a discursive
exploration of “big themes” along with interesting trivia as as raisins
in the pudding. It is not the best for “technical” or detail-oriented
presentations especially when not accompanied by other aids, like
figures and maps. This could compromise accuracy to a degree and also
the sequence in which events are treated. Hence, these should be heard
with those caveats in mind.

