+++
title = "The cicadas return"
date = "2021-06-23"

+++
Seventeen years after [we first saw them
emerge](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/05/22/on-cicadas-and-their-kin/),
like a great horde of Cīna-s invading Tibet, the cicadas of Brood X
reemerged. 17 years is a good amount of time, making one pause to
reflect on what has passed by life, in addition to the cicada-s
themselves. This coming of Brood X was not very successful in our area.
We first started noticing them around May 17 and surveyed them in a 2 sq
km region that that we walk through by foot. They emerged alright after
their 17 year underground larval development at night from holes in the
ground. The 17- and 13-year cicadas seem to emerge after their fifth
instar molts.

[![Cicada_hole](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_hole.jpg?w=496&h=382)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_hole.jpg)

Then the crawl up to reach trees or posts.

[![cicada_crawling1](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_crawling1.jpg?w=490&h=378)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_crawling1.jpg)

Most of them then proceeded to molt. However, right at this stage about
1/5-1/4 seemed die even as they are emerging from the molt. In the first
image below one can see a specimen that has died while molting. In the
second picture one see another such being scavenged by ants.

[![Cicada3](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada3.jpg?w=498&h=361)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada3.jpg)

![Cicada_ants](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_ants.jpg?w=495&h=354)

After that, several underwent proper melanization but failed to properly
inflate their wings and died.

[![Cicada_wings](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_wings.jpg?w=509&h=538)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_wings.jpg)

Those that did survive started their famed song.

![cicada_final](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_final.jpg?w=557&h=471)

This emergence was already a bit shaky relative to 17 years ago. From my
records they were already going well by May 22 of 2004. I examined about
100 or so and did not see any obvious signs of Massospora mycosis. It
was relatively cold for several days from May 17 onward (low \<15 C).
However, by May 21 the temperature was pretty good (low \>15) but they
still struggled and hardly any of their noise was heard as of May 23.
While our friend reported a similar situation in his site about 15 km
away from mine, others further away reported high densities at this
time. The cause their poor performance in our regions remains unclear.
Was it just the temperature or some other unknown pathogen or the
insecticide use by residents? We saw a couple moles scurrying around in
the twilight in one wooded area as also their predator a fast-running
fox. Moles are known predators of their larvae but we doubt they are
numerous enough to make a difference. In any case, much of the death
which we saw was post-emergence. The cicadas finally hit their stride
around June 2 and the wooded paths were reverberating with their
tymbals. All the noises — the choruses, females clicking the wings, the
coupling noises and the distress screeches as birds attacked them —
could be heard. On June 18 a precipitous decline in their calls was
noticed and they were gone by June 20. However, their final act was
registered in the wilting of tree shoots as the females slit the
terminal branches to lay their eggs.

[![cicada_eggs
(2)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_eggs-2.jpg?w=332&h=438)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/cicada_eggs-2.jpg)

Thus, it was just about a month of activity with a weak start and even
the peak afflicted by several days of heavy rains. How exactly this
would affect their prospects 17 years down the line remains unknown.
This brings us to hypotheses regarding the long periods of these
cicadas. Cicadas are unique among insects in having long lifespans, most
of which is spent in larval stages. A study in Ohio where there was an
unusually warm January followed by a freeze resulted in maple trees
producing two sets of new leaves in the same year; during that event the
17 year cicadas came out one year earlier once the late spring soil
temperatures stabilized at around 18 C (their preferred emergence
temperature). This suggests that they have a mechanism to track the
cycles of leafing in the trees whose sap they suck deep underground and
thus count the years. In this regard we propose a dendrochronological
exploration wherein tree ring records are examined to see if a
periodicity relating to cicada emergence can be discerned in them.

More broadly, several cicadas come out every year. However, there are
those, such as *Okanagana* in North America, which can have lifespans in
the range of 9 to 19 years. At least the 9-year ones exhibit a 9 year
“proto-periodic” cycle, where they are abundant in 4 of these years and
relatively rare or absent in 5 of them. This indicates a degree of
synchronization among the broods of the 9-year Okanaganas. One of the
Okanaganas from Canada, *Okanagana synodica*, and *Tettigades
“chilensis”* from Central Chile have 19-year life cycles and could very
well represent transition to the next highest prime number cycle beyond
17. The Japanese cicada, *Oncotympana coreana*, might have converged to
a shorter prime cycle of 7 years; there are several other Japanese
cicadas with even shorter 3-year cycles. There are also cicadas with 4-
or 8-year cycles from India, Japan, Fiji and Australia, most of which
are likely proto-periodicals with abundant years and rare years.
However, of these, the so-called “World Cup Cicada”, *Chremistica
ribhoi* from the Ri Bhoi District, Meghalaya, India, with a 4 year
cycle, and *Raiateana knowlesi* from Fiji with an 8 year cycle, appear
to be truly periodic with non-prime cycles.

One argument was that the relatively long prime cycles were selected to
evade predators and parasites that might take advantage of their
periodic emergences to coordinate their own generations to divisors of
the cicada cycle. But long primes could throw this off. However, the
alternative hypothesis has been that the long cycles are to evade
prolonged periods of harsh climate and that the prime cycles are likely
to throw off mating with cicadas with shorter periods that may be
divisors of the longer cycle. Thus, prolonged harsh climate would
segregate broods which do not mate with each other favor long prime
periods. However, the discovery of the even-period cicadas from India
and Fiji raise questions about these prime periodicity proposals and
suggests that prime periodicity is not hard and fast in cicadas.

Whatever the case, there is support for predation being a potential
selective pressure for synchronicity once a period longer than a couple
of years is established. It has been proposed that a mass, synchronous
emergence overwhelms the predators with satiation. There is some
evidence for this from field observations. We have ourselves noted that
while the initial emergents are eaten by dinosaurian and mammalian
predators, they are quickly overwhelmed by the huge numbers in the case
of the prime periodic cicadas. More recent observations, that need
further study, indicate that once they establish a high intensity
chorus, they inhibit birds by driving them away from the areas with high
levels of noise. This has been observed with both tropical cicadas in
Central America and 17-year periodic cicadas in the USA. Very loud
cicadas are seen all over the world and their noise can be damaging to
mammalian ears, like those of humans, at close range. Hence, the
synchronous emergence with a chorus likely to be adaptive against
predators irrespective of the period.

However, for this strategy to evolve first a relatively long life has to
be in place. Most insects have annual cycles and several cicadas are no
different. Hence, this was likely the ancestral condition from which
early on a long-lived version emerged. The origin of such a long-lived
version could have been selected by harsh climate because by skipping an
year or two before emergence they could tide over period of drought or
cold. It is conceivable that it first arose close to the tropics in
response to drought and it allowed colonization of higher latitudes as
it provide a means of tiding over cold. Per say, climatically driven
selection for long life is unlikely to favor synchronicity because by
hedging bets and distributing the emergence one is more likely to get a
good year eventually. We see the longer periods to be more common in
higher latitudes like Japan, New Zealand and North America suggesting
that cold weather might have been a selective pressure for increasing
the length of life cycle. Once long life was selected, it is likely that
a degree of synchronicity was selected next by predator pressure. It is
possible that this happened several times independently in different
parts of the world giving rise to the several proto-periodic cicadas and
that the transition to long periodic cycles was likely via
synchronization of the proto-periodic intermediates. Yet, it seems to us
that we don’t still have the strongest or cleanest hypothesis for the
emergence of prime periods.

A cycle of 17 years is a big span even in human reckoning. Hence, we
could not avoid looking back at the ebb and flow of life in the 17 years
since the last emergence. One thing has ironically remained the same
both at this emergence and that last. However, when we looked at that
thing during the last emergence, we were still quite hopeful. Having
seen a lot of life, we are inherently pessimistic about things that need
near miracles, but at that time we were still hopeful of victory in the
battle of the blind-spots — one where we had to shoot the target without
being able to see it. That conquest remains as elusive now as 17 years
back. In those 17 years, we did see some glimmer of the hiding foe but
whatever we saw inspired no confidence whatsoever that we could beat it.
A strange thing happened somewhere roughly midway in those 17 years
though. Tied down by the lassos of Varuṇa and the darts of Rudra, we
knew not at some point how long we may trudge on. It looked like the
climb of Himalayan slope while being low on supplies. At that point,
like at few other points in our life, we took a big but carefully
calculated gamble. There are some such junctures when the probabilities
can be relatively precisely computed, and you can make an “informed”
bet. However, this bet was rather different from the rest in that we
made it in a niṣkāmya manner — one where we had properly steeled
ourselves for the negative outcome. There we were in a three-front war
but only two of them mattered at all. The gods aided this time, unlike
at the time shortly after the last emergence, and we scored several
outright victories on both those fronts — like the Aśvin-s and Indra
aiding emperor Trasadasyu in the demolition of forts. But that third
front was a mysterious experience. We neither won nor lost. However, we
got a fairly clear glimpse, late one evening, of what true victory in
that front would look like. We had started doubting if there was even
such possibility — maybe it was just a figment of our imagination — the
quest for something that did not exist in real life. That glimpse showed
that it was real; we were not chasing a gandharva-nagara — we could
almost get there — but the chance that we would rule over that city was
perhaps not going to come. Such are the ways of the gods — they
sometimes show you after a long trial that something you thought should
exist really exists, but it might indeed be out of reach, like a man
yearning to reach a planet going around another star.

In the 17 years that have gone by the gods took us to many deserved
victories against powerful foes — indeed, the wielder of the thunderbolt
raises the Ārya yajamāna against the dasyu. At some point in the last
third of those years we made another calculated gamble. We were in a
position of relative power and we knew that if we did not make it our
enemies would gain a complete advantage. A lot more depended on our
allies than on us in that samarya. Our allies tried their best, fighting
to the utmost of their abilities, but they lost, and our enemies made
away with all their riches. We ourselves won most individual battles,
barring one where we were betrayed by expectedly flaky fellow travelers.
But the advantage our foes had gained and the flagging morale of our
pakṣa placed us at the foot of yet another mountain fortress that seems
formidable as that of emperor Jarāsaṃdha of Magadha. Time will tell if
we might be able raise an army that will accompany us in new campaigns
at a time when the physical virus from China and the mental one with
ultimate roots in West Asia has widened the gulf between winners and
losers.

