---
title: CXLVIII

---
<div>

[←](147_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](149_mary.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/149_margot.htm) Chronology
[»](149_mary.htm)  
[«](140_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](150_brahmananda.htm)

## CXLVIII

(*Translated from Bengali* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

U.S.A.,  
*20th November, 1899*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

Got some news from Sharat's letter. . . . Get experience while still
there is a chance; I am not concerned whether you win or lose. . . . I
have no disease now. Again. . . . I am going to tour from place to
place. There is no reason for anxiety, be fearless. Everything will fly
away before you; only don't be disobedient, and all success will be
yours. . . . Victory to Kâli! Victory to the Mother! Victory to Kali!
Wâh Guru, Wah Guru ki Fateh (Victory unto the Guru)!

. . . Really, there is no greater sin than cowardice; cowards are never
saved — that is sure. I can stand everything else but not that. Can I
have any dealings with one who will not give that up? . . . If one gets
one blow, on must return ten with redoubled fury. . . . Then only one is
a *man*. . . . The coward is an object to be pitied.

I bless you all; today, on this day sacred to the Divine Mother, on this
night, may the Mother dance in your hearts, and bring infinite strength
to your arms. Victory to Kali! Victory to Kali! Mother will certainly
come down — and with great strength will bring all victory, world
victory. Mother is coming, what dear? Whom to fear? Victory to Kali! At
the tread of each one of you the earth will tremble. . . . Victory to
Kali! Again onward, forward! Wah Guru! Victory to the Mother! Kali!
Kali! Kali! Disease, sorrow, danger, weakness — all these have departed
from you all. All victory, all good fortune, all prosperity yours. Fear
not! Fear not! The threat of calamity is vanishing, fear not! Victory to
Kali! Victory to Kali!

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. I am the servant of the Mother, you are all servants of the Mother —
what destruction, what fear is there for us? Don't allow egoism to enter
your minds, and let love never depart from your hearts. What destruction
can touch you? Fear not. Victory to Kali! Victory to Kali!

V.

</div>
