---
title: CLI

---
<div>

[←](150_brahmananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](152_dhira_mata.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/160_brahmananda.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/151_margot.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/150_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee
[»](152_dhira_mata.htm)

## CLI

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

*22nd December, 1899*.

MY DEAR DHIRA MATA,

I have a letter from Calcutta today, from which I learn your cheques
have arrived; a great many thanks and grateful words also came.

Miss Souter of London sends me a printed New Year's greetings. I think
she must have got the accounts you sent her by this time.

Kindly send Saradananda's letters that have come to your care.

As for me, I had a slight relapse of late, for which the healer has
rubbed several inches of my skin off.

Just now I am feeling it, the smart. I had a very hopeful note from
Margo. I am grinding on in Pasadena; hope some result will come out of
my work here. Some people here are very enthusiastic; the Raja-Yoga book
did indeed great services on this coast. I am mentally very well; indeed
I never really was so calm as of late. The lectures for one thing do not
disturb my sleep, that is some gain. I am doing some writing too. The
lectures here were taken down by a stenographer, the people here want to
print them.

I learn they are well and doing good work at the Math — from Swami
Saradananda's letter to Joe. Slowly as usual plans are working; but
Mother knows, as I say. May She give me release and find other workers
for Her plans. By the by, I have made a discovery as to the mental
method of really practising what the Gita teaches, of working without an
eye to results. I have seen much light on concentration and attention
and control of concentration, which if practised will take us out of all
anxiety and worry. It is really the science of bottling up our minds
whenever we like. Now what about yourself, poor Dhira Mata! This is the
result of motherhood and its penalties; we all think of ourselves, and
never of the Mother. How are you? How are things going on with you? What
about your daughter? about Mrs. Briggs?

I hope Turiyananda is completely recovered now and working. Poor man,
suffering is the lot! Never mind; there is a pleasure in suffering even,
when it is for others, is there not? Mrs. Leggett is doing well; so is
Joe; I — they say — I too am. May be they are right. I work anyway and
want to die in harness; if that be what Mother wants, I am quite
content.

Ever your son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
