---
title: CLIV

---
<div>

[←](153_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](155_dhira_mata.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/161_christina.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/152_margot.htm)  
[«](152_dhira_mata.htm) Addressee [»](155_dhira_mata.htm)

## CLIV

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

*17th January, 1900*.

MY DEAR DHIRA MATA,

I received yours with the enclosures for Saradananda; and there was some
good news. I hope to get some more news this week. You did not write
anything about your plans. I had a letter from Miss Greenstidel
expressing her deep gratitude for your kindness — and who does not?
Turiyananda is getting well by this time, I hope.

I have been able to remit Rs. 2,000 to Saradananda, with the help of
Miss MacLeod and Mrs. Leggett. Of course they contributed the best part.
The rest was got by lectures. I do not expect anything much here or
anywhere by lecturing. I can scarcely make expenses. No, not even that;
whenever it comes to paying, the people are nowhere. The field of
lecturing in this country has been overworked; the people have outgrown
that.

I am decidedly better in health. The healer thinks I am now at liberty
to go anywhere I choose, the process will go on, and I shall completely
recover in a few months. She insists on this, that I am cured already;
only nature will have to work out the rest.

Well, I came here principally for health. I have got it; in addition I
got Rs. 2,000, to defray the law expenses. Good.

Now it occurs to me that my mission from the platform is finished, and I
need not break my health again by that sort of work.

It is becoming clearer to me that I lay down all the concerns of the
Math and for a time go back to my mother. She has suffered much through
me. I must try to smooth her last days. Do you know, this was just
exactly what the great Shankarâchârya himself had to do! He had to go
back to his mother in the last few days of her life! I accept it, I am
resigned. I am calmer than ever. The only difficulty is the financial
part. Well, the Indian people owe something. I will try Madras and a few
other friends in India. Anyhow, I must try, as I have forebodings that
my mother has not very many years to live. Then again, this is coming to
me as the greatest of all sacrifices to make, the sacrifice of ambition,
of leadership, of fame. I am resigned and must do the penance. The one
thousand dollars with Mr. Leggett and if a little more is collected,
will be enough to fall back upon in case of need. Will you send me back
to India? I am ready any time. Don't go to France without seeing me. I
have become practical at least compared to the visionary dreams of Joe
and Margot. Let them work their dreams out for me — they are not more
than dreams. I want to make out a trust-deed of the Math in the names of
Saradananda, Brahmananda, and yourself. I will do it as soon as I get
the papers from Saradananda. Then I am quits. I want rest, a meal, a few
books, and I want to do some scholarly work. Mother shows this light
vividly now. Of course you were the one to whom She showed it first. I
would not believe it then. But then, it is now shown that — leaving my
mother was a great renunciation in 1884 — it is *a greater renunciation
to go back to my mother now*. Probably Mother wants me to undergo the
same that She made the great Âchârya undergo in old days. Is it? I am
surer of your guidance than of my own. Joe and Margot are great souls,
but to you Mother is now sending the light for my guidance. Do you see
light? What do you advise? At least do not go out of this country
without sending me home.

I am but a child; what work have I to do? My powers I passed over to
you. I see it. I cannot any more *tell* from the platform. Don't tell it
to anyone — not even to Joe. I am glad. I want rest; not that I am
tired, but the next phase will be the *miraculous touch and not the
tongue* — like Ramakrishna's. The *word* has gone to you and the voice
to Margo. No more it is in me. I am glad. I am resigned. Only get me out
to India, won't you? Mother will make you do it. I am sure.

Ever your son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
