---
title: CLVI

---
<div>

[←](155_dhira_mata.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](157_mary.htm)

  

[«](155_dhira_mata.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/154_akhandananda.htm)  
[«](153_mary.htm) Addressee [»](157_mary.htm)

## CLVI

*To Miss Mary Hale*

PASADENA,  
*20th February, 1900*.

MY DEAR MARY,

Your letter bearing the sad news of Mr. Hale's passing away reached me
yesterday. I am sorry, because in spite of monastic training, the heart
lives on; and then Mr. Hale was one of the best souls I met in life. Of
course you are sorry, miserable, and so are Mother Church and Harriet
and the rest, especially as this is the first grief of its kind you have
met, is it not? I have lost many, suffered much, and the most curious
cause of suffering when somebody goes off is the feeling that I was not
good enough to that person. When my father died, it was a pang for
months, and I had been so disobedient. You have been very dutiful; if
you feel anything like that, it is only a form of sorrow.

Just now I am afraid life begins for you, Mary, in earnest. We may read
books, hear lectures, and talk miles, but experience is the one teacher,
the one eye-opener. It is best as it is. We learn, through smiles and
tears we learn. We don't know why, but we see it is so; and that is
enough. Of course Mother Church has the solace of her religion. I wish
we could all dream undisturbed good dreams.

You have had shelter all your life. I was in the glare, burning and
panting all the time. Now for a moment you have caught a glimpse of the
other side. My life is made up of continuous blows like that, and
hundred times worse, because of poverty, treachery, and my own
foolishness! Pessimism! You will understand it, how it comes. Well,
well, what shall I say to you, Mary? You know all the talks; only I say
this and it is true — if it were possible to exchange grief, and had I a
cheerful mind, I would exchange mine for your grief ever and always.
Mother knows best.

Your ever faithful brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
