---
title: CLIX

---
<div>

[←](158_dhira_mata.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](160_joe.htm)

  

[«](158_dhira_mata.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/160_joe.htm)  
[«](158_dhira_mata.htm) Addressee [»](163_dhira_mata.htm)

## CLIX

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

1502 JONES STREET,  
SAN FRANCISCO,  
*7th March, 1900*.

DEAR DHIRA MATA,

Your letter, enclosing one from Saradananda only and the accounts, came.
I am very much reassured by all the news I since received from India. As
for the accounts and the disposal of the Rs. 30,000, do just what you
please. I have given over the management to you, the Master will show
you what is best to do. The money is Rs. 35,000; the Rs. 5,000, for
building the cottage on the Ganga, I wrote to Saradananda not to use
just now. I have already taken Rs. 5,000 of that money. I am not going
to take more. I had paid back Rs. 2,000 or more of that Rs. 5,000 in
India. But it seems, Brahmananda, wanting to show as much of the Rs.
35,000 intact as he could, drew upon my Rs. 2,000; so I owe them Rs.
5,000 still on that score.

Anyway, I thought I could make money here in California and pay them up
quietly. Now I have entirely failed in California financially. It is
worse here than in Los Angeles. They come in crowds when there is a free
lecture and very few when there is something to pay.

I have some hopes yet in England. It is necessary for me to reach
England in May. There is not the least use in breaking my health in San
Francisco for nothing. Moreover, with all Joe's enthusiasm, I have not
yet found any real benefit from the magnetic healer, except a few red
patches on my chest from scratching! Platform work is nigh gone for me,
and forcing it is only hastening the end. I leave here very soon, as
soon as I can make money for a passage. I have 300 dollars in hand, made
in Los Angeles. I will lecture here next week and then I stop. As for
the Math and the money, the sooner I am released of that burden the
better.

I am ready to do whatever you advise me to do. You have been a real
mother to me. You have taken up one of my great burdens on yourself — I
mean my poor cousin. I feel quite satisfied. As for my mother, I am
going back to her — for my last days and hers. The thousand dollars I
have in New York will bring Rs. 9 a month; then I bought for her a bit
of land which will bring about Rs. 6; and her old house — that will
bring, say, Rs. 6. I leave the house under litigation out of
consideration, as I have not got it. Myself, my mother, my grandmother,
and my brother will live on Rs. 20 a month easy. I would start just now,
if I could make money for a passage to India, without touching the 1,000
dollars in New York.

Anyhow I will scrape three or four hundred dollars — 400 dollars will be
enough for a second class passage and for a few weeks' stay in London. I
do not ask you to do anything more for me; I do not want it. What you
have done is more, ever so much more than I deserve. I have given my
place solemnly to you in Shri Ramakrishna's work. I am out of it. All my
life I have been a torture to my poor mother. Her whole life has been
one of continuous misery. If it be possible, my last attempt should be
to make her a little happy. I have planned it all out. I have served the
*Mother* all my life. It is done; I refuse now to grind Her axe. Let Her
find other workers — I strike.

You have been one friend with whom Shri Ramakrishna has become the goal
of life — that is the secret of my trust in you. Others love me
personally. But they little dream that what they love me for is
Ramakrishna; leaving Him, I am only a mass of foolish selfish emotions.
Anyway this stress is terrible, thinking of what may come next, wishing
what ought to come next. I am unequal to the responsibility; I am found
wanting. I must give up this work. If the work has not life in it, let
it die; if it has, it need not wait for poor workers like myself.

Now the money, Rs. 30,000, is in my name, in Government Securities. If
they are sold now, we shall lose fearfully, on account of the war; then,
how can they be sent over here without being sold there? To sell them
there I must sign them. I do not know how all this is going to be
straightened out. Do what you think best about it all. In the meanwhile,
it is absolutely necessary that I execute a will in your favour for
everything, in case I suddenly die. Send me a draft will as soon as
possible and I shall register it in San Francisco or Chicago; then my
conscience will be safe. I don't know any lawyer here, else I would have
got it drawn up; neither have I the money. The will must be done
immediately; the trust and things have time enough for them.

Ever your son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
