---
title: CLXXIII

---
<div>

[←](172_american_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](174_joe.htm)

  

[«](172_american_friend.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/165_sister_christine.htm)  
[«](170_dhira_mata.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/168_mother.htm)

## CLXXIII

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

1719 TURK STREET,  
SAN FRANCISCO,  
*8th April, 1900*.

DEAR DHIRA MATA,

Here is a long letter from A\_\_. He seems to be entirely upset. I am
sure a little kindness will completely win him over. He thinks that you
want to drive him out of New York, etc. He awaits my orders. I have told
him to trust you in everything and remain in New York till I come.

I think, as things stand in New York, they require my presence. Do you?
In that case I shall come over soon.

I have been making enough money to pay my passage. I will stop on my way
at Chicago and Detroit.

Of course by that time you will be off. A\_\_ has done good work so far;
and, of course, you know I do not meddle with my workers at all.

The man who can work has an individuality of his own and resists any
pressure there. That is my reason in leaving workers entirely free. Of
course you are on the spot and know best. Advise me what to do.

The remittance to Calcutta has duly reached. I got news of it by this
mail. My cousin sends her respects and thanks, but she is sorry she
cannot write English.

I am getting better every day, and even walking uphill. There are falls
now and then, but the duration is decreasing constantly. My thanks to
Mrs. Milton.

I had a little note from Siri Gryanander. Poor girl, she is so thankful
to be trusted. That is just like Mrs. Leggett — good, good, good. Money
is not evil after all — in good hands. I hope fervently Siri will
completely recover, poor child.

I will leave here in about two weeks. I go to a place called Star Klon
and then start for the East. It may be I may go to Denver also. With all
love to Joe,

Ever your son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. I do not any more doubt my ultimate cure; you ought to see me
working like a steam engine cooking, eating anything and everything,
and, all the same, sleeping well and keeping well!

I have not done any writing — no time. I am so glad Mrs. Leggett is much
better and walking about naturally. I expect her complete recovery soon
and pray for it.

V.

PS. I had a nice letter from Mrs. Sevier; they are going on splendidly
with the work. Plague has broken out severely at Calcutta, but no
hullabaloo over it this time.

V.

PS. Did you reveal to A\_\_ that I have given over to you the charge of
the entire work? Well, you know best how to do things; but he seems to
be hurt at that.

V.

</div>
