---
title: CLXXXI

---
<div>

[←](180_nivedita.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](182_mary.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/173_christina.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/159_nivedita.htm)  
[«](178_mary.htm) Addressee [»](182_mary.htm)

## CLXXXI

*To Miss Mary Hale*

1921 W. 21 STREET,  
LOS ANGELES,  
*17th June, 1900*.

MY DEAR MARY,

It is true I am much better, but not yet completely recovered; anyway,
the complexion of the mind is one belonging to everyone that suffers. It
is neither gas nor anything else.

Kâli worship is not a necessary step in any religion. The Upanishads
teach us all there is of religion. Kali worship is my special *fad*; you
never heard me preach it, or read of my preaching it in India. I only
preach what is good for universal humanity. If there is any curious
method which applies entirely to me, I keep it a secret and there it
ends. I must not explain to you what Kali worship is, as I never taught
it to anybody.

You are entirely mistaken if you think the Boses are rejected by the
Hindu people. The English rulers want to push him into a corner. They
don't of course like that sort of development in the Indian race. They
make it hot for him, that is why he seeks to go elsewhere.

By the "anglicised" are meant people who by their manners and conduct
show that they are ashamed of us poor, old type Hindus. I am not ashamed
of my race or my birth or nationality. That such people are not liked by
the Hindus, I cannot wonder.

Ceremonials and symbols etc. have no place in our religion which is the
doctrine of the Upanishads, pure and simple. Many people think the
ceremonial etc. help them in realising religion. I have no objection.

Religion is that which does not depend upon books or teachers or
prophets or saviours, and that which does not make us dependent in this
or in any other lives upon others. In this sense Advaitism of the
Upanishads is the only religion. But saviours, books, prophets,
ceremonials, etc. have their places. They may help many as Kali worship
helps me in my *secular work*. They are welcome.

The Guru, however, is a different idea. It is the relation between the
transmitter and the receiver of force — psychic power and knowledge.
Each nation is a type, physically and mentally. Each is constantly
receiving ideas from others only to work them out *into* its type, that
is, along the national line. The time has not come for the destruction
of types. All education from any source is compatible with the ideals in
every country; only they must be nationalised, i.e. fall in line with
the rest of the type manifestation.

Renunciation is always the ideal of every race; only other races do not
know what they are made to do by nature unconsciously. Through the ages
one purpose runs sure. And that will be finished with the destruction of
this earth and the sun! And worlds are always in progress indeed! And
nobody as yet developed enough in any one of the infinite worlds to
communicate with us! Bosh! They are born, show the same phenomena, and
die the same death! Increasing purpose! Babies! Live in the land of
dreams, you babies!

Well, now about me. You must persuade Harriet to give me a few dollars
every month, and I will have some other friends do the same. If I
succeed, I fly off to India. I am dead tired of the platform work for a
living. It does not please me any more. I retire and do some writing if
I can do some scholarly work.

I am coming soon to Chicago, hope to be there in a few days. Say, would
not Mrs. Adams be able to get up a class for me to pay my passage back?

Of course I shall try different places. So much of optimism has come to
me, Mary, that I should fly off to the Himalayas if I had wings.

I have worked for this world, Mary, all my life, and it does not give me
a piece of bread without taking a pound of flesh.

If I can get a piece of bread a day, I retire entirely; but this is
impossible — this is the increasing purpose that is unfolding all the
devilish inwardness, as I am getting older!

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. If ever a man found the vanity of things, I have it now. This is the
world, hideous, beastly corpse. Who thinks of helping it is a fool! But
we have to work out our slavery by doing good or evil; I have worked it
out, I hope. May the Lord take me to the other shore! Amen! I have given
up all thoughts about India or any land. I am now selfish, want to save
myself!

"He who revealed unto Brahmâ (the first of the gods) the Vedas, who is
manifest in every heart, unto Him I take refuge, hoping deliverance from
bondage."

V.

</div>
