---
title: CLXXXVIII

---
<div>

[←](187_turiyananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](189_hari.htm)

  

[«](187_turiyananda.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/179_christina.htm)

## CLXXXVIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8501e8188.pdf)* )

*To a Brahmacharin* (Brahmachari Harendra Nath) *of the Advaita Ashrama,
Mayavati*

NEW YORK,  
*August, 1900*.

DEAR \_\_,

I had a letter from you several days ago, but I could not reply earlier.
Mr. Sevier speaks well of you in his letter. I am very pleased at this.

Write to me in minute detail who all are there, and what each one is
doing. Why don't you write letters to your mother? What is this?
Devotion to the mother is the root of all welfare. How is your brother
getting on with his studies at Calcutta? The Sannyasin-names of those
there escape my memory — how to address each? Give my love to all
conjointly. I got the news that Khagen has now fully recovered. This is
happy news. Write to me whether the Seviers are attending to your
comforts and other details. I am glad to know that Dinu's health is all
right. The boy Kali has a tendency to become fat; but this will all
surely go away by constantly climbing up and down the hills there. Tell
Swarup that I am very much pleased with his conducting of the paper. He
is doing splendid work. Give to all others also my love and blessings.
Tell everybody that my health is now all right. From here I shall go to
England and from there to India very shortly.

With all blessings,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
