---
title: CXCV

---
<div>

[←](194_mademoiselle.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](196_joe.htm)

  

[«](194_mademoiselle.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/185_mother.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/184_christina.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/187_christina.htm)

## CXCV

(*Translated from the original in French*)

*To Sister Christine*

6 PLACE DES ETATS UNIS,  
PARIS,  
*14th October, 1900*.

God bless you at each step, my dear Christine, such is my constant
prayer!

Your letter, so beautiful and so calm, has given me that fresh energy
which I am often losing.

I am happy, yes, I am happy, but the cloud has not left me entirely. It
sometimes comes back, unfortunately, but it no longer has the morbidity
it used to have.

I am staying with a famous French writer, M. Jules Bois. I am his guest.
As he is a man making his living with his pen, he is not rich; but we
have many great ideas in common and feel happy together.

He discovered me a few years ago and has already translated some of my
pamphlets into French. We shall in the end find what we are looking for,
isn't it?

Thus, I shall travel with Madame Calve, Miss MacLeod, and M. Jules Bois.
I shall be the guest of Madame Calve, the famous singer. We shall go to
Constantinople, the Near East, Greece, and Egypt. On our way back, we
shall visit Venice.

It may be that I shall give a few lectures in Paris after my return, but
they will be in English with an interpreter. I have no time any more,
nor the power to study a new language at my age. I am an old man, isn't
it?

Mrs. Funke is ill. I think she works too hard. She already had some
nervous trouble. I hope she will soon be well.

I am sending all the money I earned in America to India. Now I am free,
the begging-monk as before. I have also resigned from the Presidentship
of the Monastery. Thank God, I am free! It is no more for me to carry
such a responsibility. I am so nervous and so weak.

"As the birds which have slept in the branches of a tree wake up,
singing when the dawn comes, and soar up into the deep blue sky, so is
the end of my life."

I have had many difficulties, and also some very great successes. But
all my difficulties and suffering count for nothing, as I have
succeeded. I have attained my aim. I have found the pearl for which I
dived into the ocean of life. I have been rewarded. I am pleased.

Thus it seems to me that a new chapter of my life is opening. It seems
to me that Mother will now lead me slowly and softly. No more effort on
roads full of obstacles, now it is the bed prepared with birds' down. Do
you understand that? Believe me, I feel quite sure.

The experience of all my life, up to now, has taught me, thank God, that
I always find what I am looking for with eagerness. Sometimes it is
after much suffering, but it does not matter! All is forgotten in the
softness of the reward. You are also going through troubles, my friend,
but you shall have your reward. Alas! What you now find is not a reward
but an additional affliction.

As to myself, I see the cloud lifting, vanishing, the cloud of my bad
Karma. And the sun of my good Karma rises — shining, beautiful, and
powerful. This will also be the case for you, my friend. My knowledge of
this language has not the power to express my emotion. But which
language can really do so?

So I drop it, leaving it to your heart to clothe my thought with a soft,
loving, and shining language. Good night, *gute Nacht*!

Your devoted friend,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. We shall leave Paris for Vienna on October 29th. Mr. Leggett is
leaving for the United States by next week. We shall notify the Post
Office to forward our letters to our further destinations.

V.

</div>
