---
title: IX

---
<div>

[←](008_diwanji_saheb.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](010_haripada.htm)

  

[«](008_diwanji_saheb.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/002_panditji_maharaj.htm)  
[«](008_diwanji_saheb.htm) Addressee [»](012_diwanji_saheb.htm)

## IX

BOMBAY,  
*22nd August, 1892*.

DEAR DIWANJI SAHEB, (Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai)

I am very much gratified on receiving your letter, especially as that is
the proof that you have the same kindness towards me.

About the kindness and gentlemanliness of your friend Mr. Bederkar of
Indore and of the Dakshinis in general, the less said the better; but of
course there are Dakshinis and Dakshinis, and I would only quote to you
what Shankar Pandurang wrote me at Mahabaleshwar on my informing him
that I had found shelter with the Limdi Thakore:

"I am so glad to learn that you have found Limdi Thakore there, else you
would have been in serious troubles, our Maratha people not being so
kind as the Gujaratis." So kind? heaven and hell!

I am very glad that your joint has now been nearly perfectly cured.
Kindly tell your noble brother to excuse my promise-breaking as I have
got here some Sanskrit books and help, too, to read, which I do not hope
to get elsewhere, and am anxious to finish them. Yesterday I saw your
friend Mr. Manahsukharam who has lodged a Sannyâsin friend with him. He
is very kind to me and so is his son.

After remaining here for 15 to 20 days I would proceed toward
Rameshwaram, and on my return would surely come to you.

The world really is enriched by men, high-souled, noble-minded, and
kind, like you; the rest are "only as axes which cut at the tree of
youth of their mothers ", as the Sanskrit poet puts it.

It is impossible that I should ever forget your fatherly kindness and
care of me, and what else can a poor fakir like me do in return to a
mighty minister but pray that the Giver of all gifts may give you all
that is desirable on earth and in the end — which may He postpone to a
day long, long ahead — may take you in His shelter of bliss and
happiness and purity infinite. 

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. One thing that I am very sorry to notice in these parts is the
thorough want of Sanskrit and other learning. The people of this part of
the country have for their religion a certain bundle of local
superstitions about eating, drinking, and bathing, and that is about the
whole of their religion.

Poor fellows! Whatever the rascally and wily priests teach them — all
sorts of mummery and tomfoolery as the very gist of the Vedas and
Hinduism (mind you, neither these rascals of priests nor their
forefathers have so much as *seen* a volume of the Vedas for the last
400 generations) — they follow and degrade themselves. Lord help them
from the Râkshasas in the shape of the Brahmins of the Kaliyuga.

I have sent a Bengali boy to you. Hope he would be treated kindly.

</div>
