---
title: XIII

---
<div>

[←](012_diwanji_saheb.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](014_diwanji_saheb.htm)

  

[«](012_diwanji_saheb.htm) Chronology [»](014_diwanji_saheb.htm)  
[«](012_diwanji_saheb.htm) Addressee [»](014_diwanji_saheb.htm)

## XIII

*To Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai*

KHETRI  
*May, 1893*.

DEAR DIWANJI SAHEB,

Surely my letter had not reached you before you wrote to me. The perusal
of your letter gave me both pleasure and pain simultaneously: pleasure,
to see that I have the good fortune to be loved by a man of your heart,
power, and position; and pain, to see that my motive has been
misinterpreted throughout. Believe me, that I love you and respect you
like a father and that my gratitude towards you and your family is
surely unbounded. The fact is this. You may remember that I had from
before a desire to go to Chicago. When at Madras, the people there, of
their own accord, in conjunction with H.H. of Mysore and Ramnad made
every arrangement to send me up. And you may also remember that between
H.H. of Khetri and myself there are the closest ties of love. Well, I,
as a matter of course, wrote to him that I was going to America. Now the
Raja of Khetri thought in his love that I was bound to see him once
before I departed, especially as the Lord has given him an heir to the
throne and great rejoicings were going on here; and to make sure of my
coming he sent his Private Secretary all the way to Madras to fetch me,
and of course I was bound to come. In the meanwhile I telegraphed to
your brother at Nadiad to know whether you were there, and,
unfortunately, the answer I could not get; therefore, the Secretary who,
poor fellow, had suffered terribly for his master in going to and from
Madras and with his eye wholly on the fact that his master would be
unhappy if we could not reach Khetri within the Jalsa (festival), bought
tickets at once for Jaipur. On our way we met Mr. Ratilal who informed
me that my wire was received and duly answered and that Mr. Viharidas
was expecting me. Now it is for you to judge, whose duty it has been so
long to deal even justice. What would or could I do in this connection?
If I would have got down, I could not have reached in time for the
Khetri rejoicings; on the other hand, my motives might be
misinterpreted. But I know you and your brother's love for me, and I
knew also that I would have to go back to Bombay in a few days on my way
to Chicago. I thought that the best solution was to postpone my visit
till my return. As for my feeling affronted at not being attended by
your brothers, it is a new discovery of yours which I never even dreamt
of; or, God knows, perhaps, you have become a thought-reader. Jokes
apart, my dear Diwanji Saheb, I am the same frolicsome, mischievous but,
I assure you, innocent boy you found me at Junagad, and my love for your
noble self is the same or increased a hundredfold, because I have had a
mental comparison between yourself and the Diwans of nearly all the
states in Dakshin, and the Lord be my witness how my tongue was fluent
in your praise (although I know that my powers are quite inadequate to
estimate your noble qualities) in every Southern court. If this be not a
sufficient explanation, I implore you to pardon me as a father pardons a
son, and let me not be haunted with the impression that I was ever
ungrateful to one who was so good to me.

Yours,  
VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. I depend on you to remove any misconception in the mind of your
brother about my not getting down and that, even had I been the very
devil, I could not forget their kindness and good offices for me.

As to the other two Swamis, they were my Gurubhais, who went to you last
at Junagad; of them one is our leader. I met them after three years, and
we came together as far as Abu and then I left them. If you wish, I can
take them back to Nadiad on my way to Bombay. May the Lord shower His
blessings on you and yours.

Yours,  

V.

</div>
