---
title: XIV

---
<div>

[←](013_diwanji_saheb.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](015_diwanji_saheb.htm)

  

[«](013_diwanji_saheb.htm) Chronology
[»](../../unpublished/ii_your_highness.htm)  
[«](013_diwanji_saheb.htm) Addressee [»](015_diwanji_saheb.htm)

## XIV

*To Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai*

BOMBAY,  
*22nd May, 1893*.

DEAR DIWANJI SAHEB,

Reached Bombay a few days ago and would start off in a few days. Your
friend, the Banya gentleman to whom you wrote for the house
accommodation, writes to say that his house is already full of guests
and some of them are ill and that he is very sorry he cannot accommodate
me. After all we have got a nice, airy place.

. . . The Private Secretary of H. H. of Khetri and I are now residing
together. I cannot express my gratitude to him for his love and kindness
to me. He is what they call a Tazimi Sardar in Rajputana, i.e. one of
those whom the Rajas receive by rising from their seats. Still he is so
simple, and sometimes his service for me makes me almost ashamed.

. . . Often and often, we see that the very best of men even are
troubled and visited with tribulations in this world; it may be
inexplicable; but it is also the experience of my life that the heart
and core of everything here is good, that whatever may be the surface
waves, deep down and underlying everything, there is an infinite basis
of goodness and love; and so long as we do not reach that basis, we are
troubled; but having once reached that zone of calmness, let winds howl
and tempests rage. The house which is built on a rock of ages cannot
shake. I thoroughly believe that a good, unselfish and holy man like
you, whose whole life has been devoted to doing good to others, has
already reached this basis of firmness which the Lord Himself has styled
as "rest upon Brahman" in the Gita.

May the blows you have received draw you closer to that Being who is the
only one to be loved here and hereafter, so that you may realise Him in
everything past, present, and future, and find everything present or
lost in Him and Him alone. Amen!

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
