---
title: XV

---
<div>

[←](014_diwanji_saheb.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](016_sisters.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/007_friends.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/009_mother.htm)  
[«](014_diwanji_saheb.htm) Addressee [»](020_diwanji_saheb.htm)

## XV

*To Shri Haridas Viharidas Desai*

CHICAGO,  
*29th January, 1894*.

DEAR DIWANJI SAHEB,

Your last letter reached me a few days ago. You had been to see my poor
mother and brothers. I am glad you did. But you have touched the only
soft place in my heart. You ought to know, Diwanji, that I am no
hard-hearted brute. If there is any being I love in the whole world, it
is my mother. Yet I believed and still believe that without my giving up
the world, the great mission which Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, my great
Master came to preach would not see the light, and where would those
young men be who have stood as bulwarks against the surging waves of
materialism and luxury of the day? These have done a great amount of
good to India, especially to Bengal, and this is only the beginning.
With the Lord's help they will do things for which the whole world will
bless them for ages. So on the one hand, my vision of the future of
Indian religion and that of the whole world, my love for the millions of
beings sinking down and down for ages with nobody to help them, nay,
nobody with even a thought for them; on the other hand, making those who
are nearest and dearest to me miserable; I choose the former. "Lord will
do the rest." He is with me, I am sure of that if of anything. So long
as I am sincere, nothing can resist me, because He will be my help. Many
and many in India could not understand me; and how could they, poor men?
Their thoughts never strayed beyond the everyday routine business of
eating and drinking. I know only a few noble souls like yourself
appreciate me. Lord bless your noble self. But appreciation or no
appreciation, I am born to organise these young men; nay, hundreds more
in every city are ready to join me; and I want to send them rolling like
irresistible waves over India, bringing comfort, morality, religion,
education to the doors of the meanest and the most downtrodden. And this
I will do or die.

Our people have no idea, no appreciation. On the other hand, that
horrible jealousy and suspicious nature which is the natural outcome of
a thousand years of slavery make them stand as enemies to every new
idea. Still the Lord is great.

About the Ârati as well as other things you speak of, it is the form in
every one of the monasteries in all parts of India, and the worshipping
of Guru is the first duty inculcated in the Vedas. It has its bad and
good sides. But you must remember we are a unique company, nobody
amongst us has a right to force his faith upon the others. Many of us do
not believe in any form of idolatry; but they have no right to object
when others do it, because that would break the first principle of our
religion. Again, God can only be known in and through man. Vibrations of
light are everywhere, even in the darkest corners; but it is only in the
lamp that it becomes visible to man. Similarly God, though everywhere,
we can only conceive Him as a big man. All ideas of God such as merciful
preserver, helper, protector — all these are human ideas,
anthropomorphic; and again these must cling to a man, call him a Guru or
a Prophet or an Incarnation. Man cannot go beyond his nature, no more
than you can jump out of your body. What harm is there in some people
worshipping their Guru when that Guru was a hundred times more holy than
even your historical prophets all taken together? If there is no harm in
worshipping Christ, Krishna, or Buddha, why should there be any in
worshipping this man who never did or thought anything unholy, whose
intellect only through intuition stands head and shoulders above all the
other prophets, because they were all one-sided? It was he that brought
first to the world this idea of truth, not in but of every religion,
which is gaining ground all over the world, and that without the help of
science or philosophy or any other acquirement.

But even this is not compulsory, none of the brethren has told you that
all must worship his Guru. No, no, no. But again none of us has a right
to object when another worships. Why? Because that would overthrow this
most unique society the world has ever seen, ten men of ten different
notions and ideas living in perfect harmony. Wait, Diwanji, the Lord is
great and merciful, you will see more.

We do not only tolerate but accept every religion, and with the Lord's
help I am trying to preach it to the whole world.

Three things are necessary to make every man great, every nation great:

1\. Conviction of the powers of goodness.  
2. Absence of jealousy and suspicion.  
3. Helping all who are trying to be and do good.

Why should the Hindu nation with all its wonderful intelligence and
other things have gone to pieces? I would answer you, *jealousy*. Never
were there people more wretchedly jealous of one another, more envious
of one another's fame and name than this wretched Hindu race. And if you
ever come out in the West, the absence of this is the first feeling
which you will see in the Western nations.

Three men cannot act in concert together in India for five minutes. Each
one struggles for power, and in the long run the whole organisation
comes to grief. Lord! Lord! When will we learn not to be jealous! In
such a nation, and especially in Bengal, to create a band of men who are
tied and bound together with a most undying love in spite of difference
— is it not wonderful? This band will increase. This idea of wonderful
liberality joined with eternal energy and progress must spread over
India. It must electrify the whole nation and must enter the very pores
of society in spite of the horrible ignorance, spite, caste-feeling, old
boobyism, and jealousy which are the heritage of this nation of slaves.

You are one of the few noble natures who stand as rocks out of water in
this sea of universal stagnation. Lord bless you for ever and ever!

Yours ever faithfully,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
