---
title: XVII

---
<div>

[←](016_sisters.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](018_sister_mary.htm)

  

[«](016_sisters.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/013_mother.htm)  
[«](016_sisters.htm) Both Sisters
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm)  
[«](016_sisters.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](018_sister_mary.htm)  
[«](016_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm)  
[«](016_sisters.htm) Mary Hale [»](018_sister_mary.htm)

## XVII

*To the Hale Sisters*

DETROIT,  
*15th March, 1894*.

DEAR BABIES,

I am pulling on well with old Palmer. He is a very jolly, good old man.
I got only 127 dollars by my last lecture. I am going to speak again in
Detroit on Monday. Your mother asked me to write to a lady in Lynn. I
have never seen her. Is it etiquette to write without any introduction?
Please post me a little letter about this lady. Where is Lynn? The
funniest thing said about me here was in one of the papers which said,
"The cyclonic Hindu has come and is a guest with Mr. Palmer. Mr. Palmer
has become a Hindu and is going to India; only he insists that two
reforms should be carried out: firstly that the Car of Jagannath should
be drawn by Percherons raised in Mr. Palmer's Loghouse Farm, and
secondly that the Jersey cow be admitted into the pantheon of Hindu
sacred cows." Mr. Palmer is passionately fond of both Percheron horse
and Jersey cow and has a great stock of both in his Loghouse Farm.

The first lecture was not properly managed, the cost of the hall being
150 dollars. I have given up Holden. Here is another fellow cropped up;
let me see if he does better. Mr. Palmer makes me laugh the whole day.
Tomorrow there is going to be another dinner party. So far all is well;
but I do not know — I have become very sad in my heart since I am here —
do not know why.

I am wearied of lecturing and all that nonsense. This mixing with
hundreds of varieties of the human animal has disturbed me. I will tell
you what is to my taste; I cannot write, and I cannot speak, but I can
think deeply, and when I am heated, can speak fire. It should be,
however, to a select, a very select — few. Let them, if they will, carry
and scatter my ideas broadcast — not I. This is only a just division of
labour. The same man never succeeded both in thinking and in scattering
his thoughts. A man should be free to think, especially spiritual
thoughts.

Just because this assertion of independence, this proving that man is
*not a machine*, is the essence of all religious thought, it is
impossible to think it in the routine mechanical way. It is this
tendency to bring everything down to the level of a machine that has
given the West its wonderful prosperity. And it is this which has driven
away all religion from its doors. Even the little that is left, the West
has reduced to a systematic drill.

I am really not "cyclonic" at all. Far from it. What I want is not here,
nor can I longer bear this "cyclonic" atmosphere. This is the way to
perfection, to strive to be perfect, and to strive to make perfect a few
men and women. My idea of doing good is this: to evolve out a few
giants, and not to strew pearls before swine, and so lose time, health,
and energy.

Just now I got a letter from Flagg. He cannot help me in lecturing. He
says, "First go to Boston." Well, I do not care for lecturing any more.
It is too disgusting, this attempt to bring me to suit anybody's or any
audience's fads. However, I shall come back to Chicago for a day or two
at least before I go out of this country. Lord bless you all.

Ever gratefully your brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
