---
title: XXIII

---
<div>

[←](022_mother.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](024_babies.htm)

  

[«](022_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/011_alasinga.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm) Both Sisters
[»](024_babies.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm) Mary or
Harriet Hale [»](024_babies.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](024_babies.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/043_sisters.htm) Mary Hale
[»](024_babies.htm)

## XXIII

*To the Hale Sisters* (*about the Calcutta meeting of 5th Sept., 1894*)

NEW YORK  
*9th July (Sept.?)*, *1894*.

O MY SISTERS,

Glory unto Jagadambâ (Mother of the Universe)! I have gained beyond
expectations. The prophet has been honoured and with a *vengeance*. I am
weeping like a child at His mercy — He never leaves His servant,
sisters. The letter I send you will explain all, and the printed things
are coming to the American people. The names there are the very flower
of our country. The President was the chief *nobleman* of Calcutta, and
the other man Mahesh Chandra Nyâyaratna is the principal of the Sanskrit
College and the chief Brahmin in all India and recognised by the
Government as such. The letter will tell you all. O sisters! What a
rogue am I that in the face of such mercies sometimes the faith totters
— seeing every moment that I am in His hands. Still the mind sometimes
gets despondent. Sister, there is a God — a Father — a *Mother* who
never leaves His Children, never, never, never. Put uncanny theories
aside and becoming children take refuge in Him. I cannot write more — I
am weeping like a woman.

Blessed, blessed art Thou, Lord God of my soul! 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
