---
title: XXIV

---
<div>

[←](023_sisters.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](025_sisters.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/025_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/044_sisters.htm)  
[«](023_sisters.htm) Both Sisters
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/044_sisters.htm)  
[«](023_sisters.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/044_sisters.htm)  
[«](023_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/044_sisters.htm)  
[«](023_sisters.htm) Mary Hale
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/044_sisters.htm)

## XXIV

*To the Hale Sisters*

SWAMPSCOTT,  
*26th July, 1894*.

DEAR BABIES,

Now don't let my letters stray beyond the circle, please. I had a
beautiful letter from sister Mary. See how I am getting the dash, sister
Jeany teaches me all that. She can jump and run and play and swear like
a devil and talk slang at the rate of 500 a minute; only she does not
much care for religion, only a little. She is gone today home, and I am
going to Greenacre. I had been to see Mrs. Breed. Mrs. Stone was there,
with whom is residing Mrs. Pullman and all the golden bugs, my old
friends hereabouts. They are kind as usual. On my way back from
Greenacre I am going to Annisquam to see Mrs. Bagley for a few days.

Darn it, forget everything. I had duckings in the sea like a fish. I am
enjoying every bit of it. What nonsense was the song Harriet taught me
"dans la plaine" the deuce take it. I told it to a French scholar and he
laughed and laughed till the fellow was well-nigh burst at my wonderful
translation. That is the way you would have taught me French! You are a
pack of fools and heathens, I tell you. Now are you gasping for breath
like a huge fish stranded? I am glad that you are sizzling. Oh! how nice
and cool it is here, and it is increased a hundred-fold when I think
about the gasping, sizzling, boiling, frying four old maids, and how
cool and nice I am here. Whoooooo!

Miss Phillips has a beautiful place somewhere in N.Y. State — mountain,
lake, river, forest altogether — what more? I am going to make a
Himalayas there and start a monastery as sure as I am living — I am not
going to leave this country without throwing one more apple of discord
into this already roaring, fighting, kicking, mad whirlpool of American
religion. Well, dear old maids, you sometimes have a glimpse of the lake
and on every hot noon, think of going down to the bottom of the lake,
down, down, down, until it is cool and nice, and then to lie down on the
bottom, with that coolness above and around, and lie there still,
silent, and just doze — not sleep, but dreamy dozing half unconscious
sort of bliss — very much like that which opium brings; that is
delicious; and drinking lots of iced water. Lord bless my soul — I had
such cramps several times as would have killed an elephant. So I hope to
keep myself away from the cold water.

May you be all happy, dear *fin de siècle* young ladies, is the constant
prayer of VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
