---
title: XXV

---
<div>

[←](024_babies.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](026_sister.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/027_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/012_sister.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/044_sisters.htm) Both Sisters
[»](042_babies.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/044_sisters.htm) Mary or
Harriet Hale [»](026_sister.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/044_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](042_babies.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/044_sisters.htm) Mary Hale
[»](026_sister.htm)

## XXV

*To the Hale Sisters*

GREENACRE,  
*11th August, 1894*.

DEAR SISTERS,

I have been all this time in Greenacre. I enjoyed this place very much.
They have been all very kind to me. One Chicago lady, Mrs. Pratt of
Kenilworth, wanted to give me $500; she became so much interested in me;
but I refused. She has made me promise that I would send word to her
whenever I need money, which I hope the Lord will never put me in. His
help alone is sufficient for me. I have not heard anything from you nor
from Mother. Neither have I any news from India as to the arrival of the
phonograph.

If there was anything in my letter to you which was offensive, I hope
you all know that I meant everything in love. It is useless to express
my gratitude to you for your kindness. Lord bless you and shower His
choicest blessings on you and those you love. To your family I am ever,
ever beholden. You know it. You feel it. I cannot express it. On Sunday
I am going to lecture at Plymouth at the "Sympathy of Religions"
meetings of Col. Higginson. Herewith I send a photograph Cora Stockham
took of the group under the tree. It is only a proof and will fade away
under exposure, but I cannot get anything better at present. Kindly
tender my heartfelt love and gratitude to Miss Howe. She has been so, so
kind to me. I do not need anything at present. I shall be very glad to
let you know if I need anything. I think I am going to Fishkill from
Plymouth, where I will be only a couple of days. I will write you again
from Fishkill. Hope you are all happy, or rather I know you are. Pure
and good souls can never be unhappy. I shall have a very nice time the
few weeks I am here. I will be in New York next fall. New York is a
grand and good place. The New York people have a tenacity of purpose
unknown in any other city. I had a letter from Mrs. Potter Palmer asking
me to see her in August. She is a very gracious and kind lady, etc. I
have not much to say. There is my friend Dr. Janes of New York,
President of the Ethical Culture Society, who has begun his lectures. I
must go to hear him. He and I agree so much. May you be always happy!

Ever your well-wishing brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
