---
title: XXVIII

---
<div>

[←](027_leon.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](029_diwanji_saheb.htm)

  

[«](027_leon.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/034_mother.htm)  
[«](025_sisters.htm) Both Sisters [»](042_babies.htm)  
[«](026_sister.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](032_sister.htm)  
[«](025_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale [»](042_babies.htm)  
[«](026_sister.htm) Mary Hale [»](032_sister.htm)

## XXVIII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

HOTEL BELLEVUE,  
BEACON ST., BOSTON,  
*13th September, 1894*.

DEAR SISTER,

Your kind note reached me this morning. I have been in this hotel for
about a week. I will remain in Boston some time yet. I have plenty of
gowns already, in fact, more than I can carry with ease. When I had that
drenching in Annisquam, I had on that beautiful black suit you
appreciate so much, and I do not think it can be damaged any way; it
also has been penetrated with my deep meditations on the Absolute. I am
very glad that you enjoyed the summer so well. As for me, I am
vagabondising. I was very much amused the other day at reading Abe Hue's
description of the vagabond lamas of Tibet — a true picture of our
fraternity. He says they are queer people. They come when they will, sit
at everybody's table, invitation or no invitation, live where they will,
and go where they will. There is not a mountain they have not climbed,
not a river they have not crossed, not a nation they do not know, not a
language they do not talk. He thinks that God must have put into them a
part of that energy which makes the planets go round and round
eternally. Today this vagabond lama was seized with a desire of going
right along scribbling, and so I walked down and entering a store bought
all sorts of writing material and a beautiful portfolio which shuts with
a clasp and has even a little wooden inkstand. So far it promises well.
Hope it will continue. Last month I had mail enough from India and am
greatly delighted with my countrymen at their generous appreciation of
my work. Good enough for them. I cannot find anything more to write.
Prof. Wright, his wife, and children were as good as ever. Words cannot
express my gratitude to them.

Everything so far is not going bad with me except that I had a bad cold.
Now I think the fellow is gone. This time I tried Christian Science for
insomnia and really found it worked very well. Wishing you all
happiness, I remain, ever your affectionate brother, 

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Kindly tell Mother that I do not want any coat now.

</div>
