---
title: XLIV

---
<div>

[←](043_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](045_sister.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/069_shashi.htm) Chronology
[»](045_sister.htm)  
Addressee [»](052_joe_joe.htm)

## XLIV

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

21 W. 34TH ST.,  
NEW YORK,  
*June, 1895*.

DEAR JOE,

Experiences are gathering a bit thick round you. I am sure they will
lift many a veil more.

Mr. Leggett told me of your phonograph. I told him to get a few
cylinders — I talk in them through somebody's phonograph and send them
to Joe — to which he replied that he could buy one, because "I always do
what Joe asks me to do." I am glad there is so much of hidden poetry in
his nature.

I am going today to live with the Guernseys as the doctor wants to watch
me and cure me. . . . Doctor Guernsey, after examining other things, was
feeling my pulse, when suddenly Landsberg (whom they had forbidden the
house) got in and retreated immediately after seeing me. Dr. Guernsey
burst out laughing and declared he would have paid that man for coming
just then, for he was then sure of his diagnosis of my case. The pulse
before was so regular, but just at the sight of Landsberg it almost
stopped from emotion. It is sure only a case of nervousness. He also
advises me strongly to go on with Doctor Helmer's treatment. He thinks
Helmer will do me a world of good, and that is what I need now. Is not
he broad?

I expect to see "the sacred cow" today in town. I will be in New York a
few days more. Helmer wants me to take three treatments a week for four
weeks, then two a week for four more, and I will be all right. In case I
go to Boston, he recommends me to a very good *ostad* (expert) there
whom he would advise on the matter.

I said a few kind words to Landsberg and went upstairs to Mother
Guernsey to save poor Landsberg from embarrassment.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
