---
title: LIII

---
<div>

[←](052_joe_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](054_joe_joe.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/084_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](054_joe_joe.htm)  
[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/24_kali.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/170_abhedananda.htm)

## LIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7214e8053.pdf)* )

*To Swami Abhedananda*

C/O E. T. STURDY, ESQ.,  
HIGH VIEW, CAVERSHAM,  
READING, ENGLAND,  
*October, 1895*.

DEAR KALI,

You may have got my earlier letter. At present send all letters to me at
the above address. Mr. Sturdy is known to Târakdâ. He has brought me to
his place, and we are both trying to create a stir in England. I shall
this year leave again in November for America. So I require a man
well-up in Sanskrit and English, particularly the latter language —
either Shashi or you or Sâradâ. Now, if you have completely recovered,
very well, you come; otherwise send Sharat. The work is to teach the
devotees I shall be leaving here, to make them study the Vedanta, to do
a little translation work into English, and to deliver occasional
lectures. "Work is apt to cloud spiritual vision." X\_\_ is very eager
to come, but unless the foundation is strongly laid, there is every
likelihood of everything toppling down. I am sending you a cheque along
with this letter. Buy clothes and other necessary things — whoever
comes. I am sending the cheque in the name of Master Mahashay Mahendra
Babu. Gangâdhar's Tibetan *choga* is in the Math; get the tailor to make
a similar *choga* of gerua colour. See that the collar is a little high,
that is, the throat and neck should be covered. . . . Above all, you
must have a woolen overcoat, for it is very cold. If you do not put on
an overcoat on the ship, you will suffer much. . . . I am sending a
second class ticket, as there is not much difference between a first
class and a second class berth. . . . If it is decided to send Shashi
then inform the purser of the ship beforehand to provide him with
vegetarian diet.

Go to Bombay and see Messrs. King, King & Co., Fort, Bombay, and tell
them that you are Mr. Sturdy's man. They will then give you a ticket to
England. A letter is being sent from here to the Company with
instructions. I am writing to the Maharaja of Khetri to instruct his
Bombay agent to look after the booking of your passage. If this sum of
Rs. 150/- is not sufficient for your outfit, get the remainder from
Rakhal. I shall send him the amount afterwards. Keep another Rs. 50/-
for pocket expenses — take it from Rakhal; I shall pay back later. I
have not up to now got any acknowledgement of the amount I sent to Chuni
Babu. Start as quickly as possible. Inform Mahendra Babu that he is my
Calcutta agent. Tell him to send a letter to Mr. Sturdy by next mail
informing him that he is ready to look after all business transactions
in Calcutta on your behalf. In effect, Mr. Sturdy is my secretary in
England, Mahendra Babu in Calcutta, and Alasinga in Madras. Send this
information to Madras also. Can any work be done unless all of us gird
up our loins? And be up and doing! "Fortune favours the brave and
energetic." Don't look back — forward, infinite energy, infinite
enthusiasm, infinite daring, and infinite patience — then alone can
great deeds be accomplished. We must set the whole world afire.

Now on the day the steamer is due to start, write a letter to Mr. Sturdy
informing him by which steamer you are leaving for England. Otherwise
there is some likelihood of your having difficulties when you reach
London. Take the ship that comes directly to London, for even if it
takes a few days longer on the voyage, the fares are less. At the moment
our purse is lean. In time we shall send preachers in large numbers to
all the quarters of the globe.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Write at once to the Maharaja of Khetri, that you are going to
Bombay and that you will be glad if his agent attends to the booking of
your passage and sees you off the board.

Keep my address with you written in a pocket-book, lest there should be
difficulties afterwards.

</div>
