---
title: LXIII

---
<div>

[←](062_joe_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](064_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/073_christina.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/089_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](061_friend.htm) Addressee [»](064_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

## LXIII

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

NEW YORK,  
*1895*.

The work here is going on splendidly. I have been working incessantly at
two classes a day since my arrival. Tomorrow I go out of town with Mr.
Leggett for a week's holiday. Did you know Madame Antoinette Sterling,
one of your greatest singers? She is very much interested in the work.

I have made over all the secular part of the work to a committee and am
free from all that botheration. I have no aptitude for organising. It
nearly breaks me to pieces.

. . . What about the *Nârada-Sutra*? There will be a good sale of the
book here, I am sure. I have now taken up the *Yoga-Sutras* and take
them up one by one and go through all the commentators along with them.
These talks are all taken down, and when completed will form the fullest
annotated translation of Patanjali in English. Of course it will be
rather a big work.

At Trübner's I think there is an edition of *Kurma Purâna*. The
commentator, Vijnâna Bhikshu, is continually quoting from that book. I
have never seen the book myself. Will you kindly find time to go and see
if in it there are some chapters on Yoga? If so, will you kindly send me
a copy? Also of the *Hatha-Yoga-Pradipikâ*, *Shiva-Samhitâ*, and any
other book on Yoga? The originals of course. I shall send you the money
for them as soon as they arrive. Also a copy of *Sânkhya-Kârikâ* of
Ishwara Krishna by John Davies. Just now your letter reached along with
Indian letters. The one man who is ready is ill. The others say that
they cannot come over on the spur of the moment. So far it seems
unlucky. I am sorry they could not come. What can be done? Things go
slow in India!

Ramanuja's theory is that the bound soul or Jiva has its perfections
involved, entered, into itself. When this perfection again evolves, it
becomes free. The Advaitin declares both these to take place only in
show; there was neither involution nor evolution. Both processes were
Maya, or *apparent* only.

In the first place, the soul is not *essentially a knowing* being.
*Sachchidânanda* is only an approximate definition, and *Neti Neti* is
the essential definition. Schopenhauer caught this idea of willing from
the Buddhists. We have it also in *Vâsanâ* or *Trishnâ*, Pali *tanhâ*.
We also admit that it is the *cause* of all manifestation which are, in
their turn, its effects. But, being a cause, it must be a combination of
the *Absolute* and *Maya*. Even knowledge, being a compound, cannot be
the Absolute itself, but it is the nearest approach to it, and higher
than *Vasana*, conscious or unconscious. The Absolute first becomes the
mixture of knowledge, then, in the second degree, that of will. If it be
said that plants have no consciousness, that they are at best only
unconscious wills, the answer is that even the *unconscious plant-will*
is a manifestation of the consciousness, not of the plant, but of the
cosmos, the Mahat of the Sankhya Philosophy. The Buddhist analysis of
everything into will is imperfect, firstly, because will is itself a
compound, and secondly, because consciousness or knowledge which is a
compound of the first degree, precedes it. *Knowledge is action*. *First
action, then reaction*. When the mind perceives, then, as the reaction,
it *wills*. The will is in the mind. So it is absurd to say that will is
the last analysis. Deussen is playing into the hands of the Darwinists.

But evolution must be brought in accordance with the more exact science
of Physics, which can demonstrate that every evolution must be preceded
by an involution. This being so, the evolution of the *Vasana* or will
must be preceded by the involution of the *Mahat* or cosmic
consciousness. (See also Vol VIII [Sayings and
Utterances](../sayings_and_utterances.htm#v5_epi_057) & Vol V [Letter to
Mr.
Sturdy](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/057_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
.)  
![](063_sturdy_diagram.jpg)  
There is no willing without knowing. How can we desire unless we know
the object of desire?

The apparent difficulty vanishes as soon as you divide knowledge also
into subconscious and conscious. And why not? If will can be so treated,
why not its father? 

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
