---
title: LXIV

---
<div>

[←](063_sturdy.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](065_sharat.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/077_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/055_alasinga.htm)  
[«](063_sturdy.htm) Addressee [»](066_friend.htm)

## LXIV

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

228 WEST 39TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,  
*16th December, 1895*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED,

All your letters reached by one mail today. Miss Müller also writes me
one. She has read in the *Indian Mirror* that Swami Krishnananda is
coming over to England. If that is so, he is the strongest man that I
can get.

The classes I had here were six in the week, besides a question class.
The general attendance varies between 70 to 120. Besides every Sunday I
have a public lecture. The last month my lectures were in a small hall
holding about 600. But 900 will come as a rule, 300 standing, and about
300 going off, not finding room. This week therefore I have a bigger
hall, with a capacity of holding 1200 people.

There is no admission charged in these lectures, but a collection covers
the rent. The newspapers have taken me up this week, and altogether I
have stirred up New York considerably this year. If I could have
remained here this summer and organised a summer place, the work would
be going on sure foundations here. But as I intended to come over in May
to England, I shall have to leave it unfinished. If, however,
Krishnananda comes to England, and you find him strong and able, and if
you find the work in London will not be hurt by my absence this summer,
I would rather be here this summer.

Again, I am afraid my health is breaking down under constant work. I
want some rest. We are so unused to these Western methods, especially
the keeping to time. I will leave you to decide all these. The
*Brahmavâdin* is going on here very satisfactorily. I have begun to
write articles on Bhakti; also send them a monthly account of the work.
Miss Müller wants to come to America. I do not know whether she will or
not. Some friends here are publishing my Sunday lectures. I have sent
you a few copies of the first one. I shall send you next mail a few of
the next two lectures, and if you like them I shall ask them to send you
a number. Can you manage to get a few hundred copies sold in England?
That will encourage them in publishing the subsequent ones.

Next month I go to Detroit, then to Boston, and Harvard University. Then
I shall have a rest, and then I come to England, unless you think that
things go on without me and with Krishnananda.

Ever yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
