---
title: LXV

---
<div>

[←](064_blessed_and_beloved.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](066_friend.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/055_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/078_christina.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/009_sharat.htm) Addressee

## LXV

*To Swami Saradananda*

228 WEST 39TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,  
*23rd December, 1895*.

DEAR SHARAT,

Your letter only made me sad. I see you have lost all enthusiasm. I know
all of you, your powers and your limitations. I would not have called
you to any task which you are incompetent to do. The only task I would
have given you was to teach elementary Sanskrit, and with the help of
dictionaries and other things assist S. in his translations and
teachings. I would have moulded you to it. Anyone could have done as
well — only a little smattering of Sanskrit was absolutely necessary.
Well, everything is for the best. If it is the Lord's work the right man
for the right place will be forthcoming in the right time. None of you
need feel disturbed. As for Sanyal, I don't care who takes money or not,
but I have a strong hatred for child-marriage. I have suffered terribly
from it, and it is the great sin for which our nation has to suffer. As
such, I would hate myself if I help such a diabolical custom directly or
indirectly. I wrote to you pretty plain about it, and Sanyal had no
right to play a hoax upon me about his "law-suit" and his attempts to
become free. I am sorry for his playing tricks on me who have never done
him any harm. This is the world. What good you do goes for nothing, but
if you stop doing it, then, Lord help you, you are counted as a rogue.
Isn't it? Emotional natures like mine are always preyed upon by
relatives and friends. This world is merciless. This world is our friend
when we are its slaves and no more. This world is broad enough for me.
There will always be a corner found for me somewhere. If the people of
India do not like me, there will be others who do. I must set my foot to
the best of my ability upon this devilish custom of child-marriage. No
blame will entail on you. You keep at a safe distance if you are afraid.
I am sorry, very sorry, I cannot have any partnership with such doings
as getting husbands for babies. Lord help me, I never had and never will
have. Think of the case of M\_\_ Babu! Did you ever meet a more cowardly
or brutal one than that? I can kill the man who gets a husband for a
baby. The upshot of the whole thing is — I want bold, daring,
adventurous spirits to help me. Else I will work alone. I have a mission
to fulfil. I will work it out alone. I do not care who comes or who
goes. Sanyal is already done for by Samsâra. Beware, boy! That was all
the advice I thought it my duty to give you. Of course, you are great
folks now — my words will have no value with you. But I hope the time
will come when you will see clearer, know better, and think other
thoughts than you are now doing.

Good-bye! I would not bother you any more, and all blessings go with you
all. I am very glad I have been of some service to you sometimes if you
think so. At least I am pleased with myself for having tried my best to
discharge the duties laid on me by my Guru, and well done or ill, I am
glad that I tried. So good-bye. Tell Sanyal that I am not at all angry
with him, but I am sorry, very sorry. It is not the money — that counts
nothing — but the violation of a principle that pained me, and the trick
he played on me. Good-bye to him also, and to you all. One chapter of my
life is closed. Let others come in their due order. They will find me
ready. You need not disturb yourselves at all about me. I want no help
from any human being in any country. So good-bye! May the Lord bless you
all for ever and ever!

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
