---
title: LXVIII

---
<div>

[←](067_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](069_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/083_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](069_alasinga.htm)  
[«](066_friend.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/057_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

## LXVIII

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

228 WEST 39TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,  
*16th January, 1896*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED,

Many many thanks for the books. The *Sankhya Karika* is a very good
book, and the *Kurma Purana*, though I do not find in it all expected,
has a few verses on Yoga. The words dropped in my last letter were
*Yoga-Sutra*, which I am translating with notes from various
authorities. I want to incorporate the chapter in *Kurma Purana* in my
notes. I have very enthusiastic accounts of your classes from Miss
MacLeod. Mr. Galsworthy seems to be very much interested now.

I have begun my Sunday lectures here and also the classes. Both are very
enthusiastically received. I make them all free and take up a collection
to pay the hall etc. Last Sunday's lecture was very much appreciated and
is in the press. I shall send you a few copies next week. It was the
outline of our work.

As my friends have engaged a stenographer (Goodwin), all these class
lessons and public lectures are taken down. I intend to send you a copy
of each. They may suggest you some ideas.

My great want here is a strong man like you, possessing intellect, and
ability, and love. In this nation of universal education, all seem to
melt down into a mediocrity, and the few able are weighed down by the
eternal money-making.

I have a chance of getting a piece of land in the country, and some
buildings on it, plenty of trees and a river, to serve as a summer
meditation resort. That, of course, requires a committee to look after
it in my absence, as also the handling of money and printing and other
matters.

I have separated myself entirely from money questions, yet without it
the movement cannot go on. So necessarily I have to make over everything
executive to a committee, which will look after these things in my
absence. Steady work is not in the line of the Americans. The only way
they work, is in a herd. So let them have it. As to the teaching part,
my friends will go over this country from place to place, each one
independent, and let them form independent circles. That is the easiest
way to spread. Then, when there will be sufficient strength, we shall
have yearly gatherings to concentrate our energies.

The committee is entirely executive and it is confined to New York
alone. . . .

Ever yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
