---
title: LXIX

---
<div>

[←](068_blessed_and_beloved.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](070_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](068_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/091_sarada.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/055_alasinga.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/058_alasinga.htm)

## LXIX

*23rd January, 1896*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

By this time you must have got enough of matter on Bhakti from me. The
last copy, dated 21st December, of *Brahmavadin* is in. I have been
smelling something since the last few issues of the *Brahmavadin*. Are
you going to join the Theosophists? This time you simply gave yourselves
up. Why, you get in a notice of the Theosophists' lectures in the body
of your notes! Any suspicion of my connection with the Theosophists will
spoil my work both in America and England, and well it may. They are
thought by all people of sound mind to be wrong, and true it is that
they are held so, and you know it full well. I am afraid you want to
overreach me. You think you can get more subscribers in England by
advertising Annie Besant? Fool that you are.

I do not want to quarrel with the Theosophists, but my position is
entirely ignoring them. Had they paid for the advertisement? Why should
you go forward to advertise them? I shall get more than enough
subscribers in England when I go next.

Now, I would have no traitors, I tell you plainly, I would not be played
upon by any rogue. No hypocrisy with me. Hoist your flag and give public
notice in your paper that you have given up all connections with me, and
join the . . . camp of the Theosophists or cease to have anything
whatsoever to do with them. I give you very plain words indeed. I shall
have one man only to follow me, but he must be true and faithful unto
death. I do not care for success or no success. I am tired of this
nonsense of preaching all over the world. Did any of Annie Besant's
people come to my help when I was in England? Fudge! I must keep my
movement *pure* or I will have none. 

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Reply sharp your decision. I am very decided on this point. You
ought to have told me so before, had your intentions been such from the
very beginning. The *Brahmavadin* is for preaching Vedanta and not
Theosophy. I almost lose my patience when I see these underhand
dealings. This is the world — those whom you love best and help most try
to cheat you. — V.

</div>
