---
title: LXX

---
<div>

[←](069_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](071_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/086_miss_thursby.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/094_sarada.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/057_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Addressee [»](071_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

## LXX

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

228 WEST 39TH STREET,  
NEW YORK,  
*29th February, 1896*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED,

I am coming before May if possible. You need not worry about that. The
pamphlet was beautiful. The newspaper cuttings from here will be
forwarded if we can get them.

The books and pamphlets here have been got up this way. A committee was
formed in New York. They paid all the expenses of stenographing and
printing on condition the books will belong to them. So these pamphlets
and books are theirs. One book, the *Karma-Yoga* has been already
published; the *Raja-Yoga*, a much bigger one, is in the course of
publication; the *Jnana-Yoga* may be published later on. These will be
popular books, the language being that of talk, as you have seen
already. I have purged everything that is objectionable, and they help
me in getting up the books.

The books are the property of this Committee, of which Mrs. Ole Bull is
the principal backer, also Mrs. Leggett.

It is only just that they should have the books as they paid all the
expenses. There is no fear of the publishers meddling with them, as they
are the publishers themselves.

If any books come from India please keep them.

The stenographer, who is an Englishman named Goodwin, has become so
interested in the work that I have now made him a Brahmachârin, and he
is going round with me, and we shall come over together to England. He
will be very helpful as he has been always. 

Yours with all blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
