---
title: LXXI

---
<div>

[←](070_blessed_and_beloved.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](072_sister.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/087_friend.htm) Chronology
[»](072_sister.htm)  
[«](070_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Addressee [»](074_sturdy.htm)

## LXXI

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

NEW YORK,  
*17th March, 1896*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED,

I received your last just now and it frightened me immensely.

The lectures were delivered under the auspices of certain friends who
paid for the stenography and all other expenses on condition they alone
will have the right to publish them. As such, they have already
published the Sunday lectures as well as three books on "Karma-Yoga",
"Raja-Yoga", and "Jnana-Yoga". The *Raja-Yoga* especially has been much
altered and re-arranged along with the translation of "Yoga-Sutras of
Patanjali". The *Raja-Yoga* is in the hands of Longmans. The friends
here are furious at the idea of these books being published in England;
and as they have been made over to them by me legally, I am at a loss
what to do. The publication of the pamphlets was not so serious, but the
books have been so much re-arranged and changed that the American
edition will not recognise the English one. Now pray don't publish these
books, as they will place me in a very false position and create endless
quarrel and destroy my American work.

By last mail from India I learn that a Sannyasin has started from India.
I had a beautiful letter from Miss Müller, also one from Miss MacLeod;
the Leggett family has become very attached to me.

I do not know anything about Mr. Chatterji. I hear from other sources
that his trouble is money, which the Theosophists cannot supply him
with. Moreover the help he will be able to give me is very rudimentary
and useless in the face of the fact of a much stronger man coming from
India. So far with him. We need not be in a hurry.

I pray you again to think about this publishing business and write some
letters to Mrs. Ole Bull and through her ask the opinion of the American
friends of the Vedanta, remembering "ours is the Gospel of oneness of
all beings", and all national feelings are but wicked superstitions.
Moreover I am sure that the person who is always ready to give way to
other's opinions finds at last that his opinion has triumphed. Yielding
always conquers at last. With love to all our friends, 

Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. I am coming sure in March as early as possible. 

V.

</div>
