---
title: LXXVI

---
<div>

[←](075_sisters.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](077_babies.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/098_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/100_shashi.htm)  
[«](075_sisters.htm) Both Sisters [»](077_babies.htm)  
[«](075_sisters.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](077_babies.htm)  
[«](075_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale [»](077_babies.htm)  
[«](075_sisters.htm) Mary Hale [»](077_babies.htm)

## LXXVI

*To Miss Mary Hale*

63 ST. GEORGE'S ROAD,  
LONDON, S.W.,  
*30th May, 1896*.

DEAR MARY,

Your letter reached just now. Of course, you were not jealous but all of
a sudden were inspired with sympathy for poor India. Well, you need not
be frightened. Wrote a letter to Mother Church weeks ago, but have not
been able to get a line from her yet. I am afraid the whole party have
taken orders and entered a Catholic convent — four old maids are enough
to drive any mother to a convent. I had a beautiful visit with Prof. Max
Müller. He is a saint — a Vedantist through and through. What think you?
He has been a devoted admirer of my old Master for years. He has written
an article on my Master in *The Nineteenth Century*, which will soon
come out. We had long talk on Indian things. I wish I had half his love
for India. We are going to start another little magazine here. What
about The *Brahmavadin*? Are you pushing it? If four pushful old maids
cannot push a journal, I am blowed. You will hear from me now and then.
I am not a pin to be lost under a bushel. I am having classes here just
now. I begin Sunday lectures from next week. The classes are very big
and are in the house. We have rented it for the season. Last night I
made a dish. It was such a delicious mixture of saffron, lavender, mace,
nutmeg, cubebs, cinnamon, cloves, cardamom, cream, limejuice, onions,
raisins, almonds, pepper, and rice, that I myself could not eat it.
There was no asafoetida, though that would have made it smoother to
swallow.

Yesterday I went to a marriage *à la mode*. Miss Müller, a rich lady, a
friend who has adopted a Hindu boy and to help my work has taken rooms
in this house, took us to see it. One of her nieces was married to
somebody's nephew I suppose. What tiring nonsense! I am glad you do not
marry. Good-bye, love to all. No more time as I am going to lunch with
Miss MacLeod. 

Yours ever affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
