---
title: LXXIX

---
<div>

[←](078_blessed_and_beloved.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](080_dear.htm)

  

[«](078_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Chronology [»](080_dear.htm)  
[«](078_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Addressee
[»](082_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

## LXXIX

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

SWITZERLAND,  
*5th August, 1896*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED,

A letter came this morning from Prof. Max Müller telling me that the
article of Shri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa has been published in *The XIX
Century* August number. Have you read it? He asked my opinion about it.
Not having seen it yet, I can't write anything to him. If you have it,
kindly send it to me. Also *The Brahmavadin*, if any have arrived. Max
Müller wants to know about our plans . . . and again about the magazine.
He promises a good deal of help and is ready to write a book on Shri
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa.

I think it is better that you should directly correspond with him about
the magazine etc. You will see from his letter which I shall send you as
soon as I have replied (after reading *The XIX Century*) that he is very
much pleased with our movement and is ready to help it as much as he
can. . . . 

Yours with blessings and love,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. I hope you will consider well the plan for the big magazine. Some
money can be raised in America, and we can keep the magazine all to
ourselves at the same time. I intend to write to America on hearing
about the plan you and Prof. Max Muller decide upon. "A great tree is to
be taken refuge in, when it has both fruits and shade. If, however, we
do not get the fruit, who prevents our enjoyment of the shade?" So ought
great attempts to be made, is the moral.

</div>
