---
title: LXXXI

---
<div>

[←](080_dear.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](082_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/064_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](082_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

## LXXXI

*To Mr. J. J. Goodwin*

SWITZERLAND,  
*8th August, 1896*.

DEAR GOODWIN,

I am now taking rest. I read from different letters a lot about
Kripananda. I am sorry for him. There must be something wrong in his
head. Let him alone. None of you need bother about him.

As for hurting me, that is not in the power of gods or devils. So be at
rest. It is unswerving love and perfect unselfishness that conquer
everything. We Vedantists in every difficulty ought to ask the
subjective question, "Why do I see that?" "Why can I not conquer this
with love?"

I am very glad at the reception the Swami has met with, also at the good
work he is doing. Great work requires great and persistent effort for a
long time. Neither need we trouble ourselves if a few fail. It is in the
nature of things that many should fall, that troubles should come, that
tremendous difficulties should arise, that selfishness and all the other
devils in the human heart should struggle hard when they are about to be
driven out by the fire of spirituality. The road to the Good is the
roughest and steepest in the universe. It is a wonder that so many
succeed, no wonder that so many fall. Character has to be established
through a thousand stumbles.

I am much refreshed now. I look out of the window and see the huge
glaciers just before me and feel that I am in the Himalayas. I am quite
calm. My nerves have regained their accustomed strength; and little
vexations, like those you write of, do not touch me at all. How shall I
be disturbed by this child's play? The whole world is a mere child's
play — preaching, teaching, and all included. "Know him to be the
Sannyasin who neither hates not desires" (Gita, V.3). And what is there
to be desired in this little mud-puddle of a world, with its
ever-recurring misery, disease, and death? "He who has given up all
desires, he alone is happy."

This rest, eternal, peaceful rest, I am catching a glimpse of now in
this beautiful spot. "Having once known that the Atman alone, and
nothing else, exists, desiring what, or for whose desire, shall you
suffer misery about the body?" (Brihadâranyaka, IV. iv. 12.)

I feel as if I had my share of experience in what they call "work". I am
finished, I am longing now to get out. "Out of thousands, but one
strives to attain the Goal. And even of those who struggle hard, but few
attain" (Gita, VII. 3); for the senses are powerful, they drag men down.

"A good world", "a happy world", and "social progress", are all terms
equally intelligible with "hot ice" or "dark light". If it were good, it
would not be the world. The soul foolishly thinks of manifesting the
Infinite in finite matter, Intelligence through gross particles; but at
last it finds out its error and tries to escape. This going-back is the
beginning of religion, and its method, destruction of self, that is,
love. Not love for wife or child or anybody else, but love for
everything else except this little self. Never be deluded by the tall
talk, of which you will hear so much in America, about "human progress"
and such stuff. There is *no progress* without corresponding digression.
In one society there is one set of evils; in another, another. So with
periods of history. In the Middle Ages, there were more robbers, now
more cheats. At one period there is less idea of married life; at
another, more prostitution. In one, more physical agony; in another, a
thousandfold more mental. So with knowledge. Did not gravitation already
exist in nature before it was observed and named? Then what difference
does it make to know that it exists? Are you happier than the Red
Indians?

The only knowledge that is of any value is to know that all this is
humbug. But few, very few, will ever know this. "Know the Atman alone,
and give up all other vain words." This is the only knowledge we gain
from all this knocking about the universe. This is the only work, to
call upon mankind to "Awake, arise, and stop not till the goal is
reached". It is renunciation, Tyâga, that is meant by religion, and
nothing else.

Ishwara is the sum total of individuals; yet He Himself also is an
individual in the same way as the human body is a unit, of which each
cell is an individual. Samashti or the Collective is God. Vyashti or the
component is the soul of Jiva. The existence of Ishwara, therefore,
depends on that of Jiva, as the body on the cell, and vice versa. Jiva,
and Ishwara are co-existent beings. As long as the one exists, the other
also must. Again, since in all the higher spheres, except on our earth,
the amount of good is vastly in excess of the amount of bad, the sum
total or Ishwara may be said to be All-good, Almighty, and Omniscient.
These are obvious qualities, and need no argument to prove, from the
very fact of totality.

Brahman is beyond both of these, and is not a state. It is the only unit
not composed of many units. It is the principle which runs through all,
from a cell to God, and without which nothing can exist. Whatever is
real is that principle or Brahman. When I think "I am Brahman", then I
alone exist. It is so also when *you* so think, and so on. Each one is
the whole of that principle. . . .

A few days ago, I felt a sudden irresistible desire to write to
Kripananda. Perhaps he was unhappy and thinking of me. So I wrote him a
warm letter. Today from the American news, I see why it was so. I sent
him flowers gathered near the glaciers. Ask Miss Waldo to send him some
money and plenty of love. Love never dies. The love of the father never
dies, whatever the children may do or be. He is my child. He has the
same or more share in my love and help, now that he is in misery. 

Yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
