---
title: LXXXII

---
<div>

[←](081_goodwin.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](083_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](081_goodwin.htm) Chronology [»](083_blessed_and_beloved.htm)  
[«](079_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Addressee
[»](083_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

## LXXXII

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

GRAND HOTEL, SAAS FEE,  
VALAIS, SWITZERLAND,  
*8th August, 1896*

BLESSED AND BELOVED,

A large packet of letters came along with yours. Herewith I send you the
letter written to me by Max Müller. It is very kind and good of him.

Miss Müller thinks that she will go away very soon to England. In that
case I will not be able to go to Berne for that Purity Congress I have
promised. Only if the Seviers consent to take me along, I will go to
Kiel and write to you before. The Seviers are good and kind, but I have
no right to take advantage of their generosity. Nor can I take the same
of Miss Müller, as the expenses there are frightful. As such, I think it
best to give up the Berne Congress, as it will come in the middle of
September, a long way off.

I am thinking, therefore, of going towards Germany, ending in Kiel, and
thence back to England.

Bala Gangadhara Tilak (Mr. Tilak) is the name and *Orion* that of the
book. 

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. There is also one by Jacobi — perhaps translated on the same lines
and with the same conclusions.

PS. I hope you will ask Miss Müller's opinion about the lodgings and the
Hall, as I am afraid she will be very displeased if she and others are
not consulted. 

V.

  
Miss Müller telegraphed to Prof. Deussen last night; the reply came this
morning, 9th August, welcoming me; I am to be in Kiel at Deussen's on
the 10th September. So where will you meet me? At Kiel? Miss Müller goes
to England from Switzerland. I am going with the Seviers to Kiel. I will
be there on the 10th September.

V.

  
PS. I have not fixed yet anything about the lecture. I have no time to
read. The Salem Society most probably is a Hindu community and no
faddists. 

V.

</div>
