---
title: LXXXIII

---
<div>

[←](082_blessed_and_beloved.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](084_friend.htm)

  

[«](082_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/065_blessed_and_beloved.htm)  
[«](082_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/065_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

## LXXXIII

*To Mr. E. T. Sturdy*

SWITZERLAND,  
*12th August, 1896*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED,

Today I received a letter from America, which I send to you. I have
written them that my idea of course is concentration, at least for the
present beginning. I have also suggested them that instead of having too
many papers, they may start by putting in a few sheets in *The
Brahmavadin* — written in America — and raise the subscription a little
which will cover the American expenses. Do not know what they will do.

We will start from here towards Germany next week. Miss Müller goes to
England as soon as we have crossed over to Germany.

Capt. and Mrs. Sevier and myself will expect you at Kiel.

I haven't yet written anything nor read anything. I am indeed taking a
good rest. Do not be anxious, you will have the article ready. I had a
letter from the Math stating that the other Swami is ready to start. He
will, I am sure, be just the man you want. He is one of the best
Sanskrit scholars we have . . . and as I hear, he has improved his
English much. I had a number of newspaper cuttings from America about
Saradananda — I hear from them that he has done very well there. America
is a good training ground to bring out all that is in a man. There is
such a sympathy in the air. I had letters from Goodwin and Saradananda.
S. sends his love to you and Mrs. Sturdy and the baby.

With everlasting love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
