---
title: LXXXVII

---
<div>

[←](086_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](088_mary.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/120_alberta.htm) Chronology
[»](088_mary.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/083_rakhal.htm) Addressee
[»](089_rakhal.htm)

## LXXXVII

*To Swami Brahmananda*

HOTEL MINERVA, FLORENCE,  
*20th December, 1896*.

DEAR RAKHAL,

As you see, by this time I am on my way. Before leaving London, I got
your letter and the pamphlet. Take no heed of Mazoomdar's madness. He
surely has gone crazy with jealousy. Such foul language as he has used
would only make people laugh at him in a civilised country. He has
defeated his purpose by the use of such vulgar words.

All the same, we ought not to allow Hara Mohan or any one else to go and
fight Brahmos and others in our name. The public must know that we have
no quarrel with any sect, and if anybody provokes a quarrel, he is doing
it on his own responsibility. Quarrelling and abusing each other are our
national traits. Lazy, useless, vulgar, jealous, cowardly, and
quarrelsome, that is what we are, Bengalis. Anyone who wants to be my
friend must give up these. Neither do you allow Hara Mohan to print any
book, because such printing as he does is only cheating the public.

If there are oranges in Calcutta, send a hundred to Madras care of
Alasinga, so that I may have them when I reach Madras.

Mazoomdar writes that the Sayings of Shri Ramakrishna published in *The
Brahmavadin* are not genuine and are lies! In that case ask Suresh Dutt
and Ram Babu to give him the lie in *The Indian Mirror*. As I did not do
anything about the collection of the Uktis (Sayings), I cannot say
anything. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Don't mind these fools; "No fool like an old fool" is the proverb.
Let them bark a little. Their occupation is gone. Poor souls! Let them
have a little satisfaction in barking.

</div>
