---
title: LXXXVIII

---
<div>

[←](087_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](089_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](087_rakhal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/102_christina.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/116_sisters.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/121_mary.htm)

## LXXXVIII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

DAMPFER, "PRINZ-REGENT LEOPOLD"  
*3rd January, 1897*.

DEAR MARY,

I received your letter forwarded from London in Rome. It was very very
kind of you to write such a beautiful letter, and I enjoyed every bit of
it. I do not know anything about the evolution of the orchestra in
Europe. We are nearing Port Said after four days of frightfully bad
sailing from Naples. The ship is rolling as hard as she can, and you
must pardon my scrawls under such circumstances.

From Suez begins Asia. Once more Asia. What am I? Asiatic, European, or
American? I feel a curious medley of personalities in me. You didn't
write anything about Dharmapala, his goings and doings. I am much more
interested in him than in Gandhi.

I land in a few days at Colombo and mean to "do" Ceylon a bit. There was
a time when Ceylon had more than 20 million inhabitants and a huge
capital of which the ruins cover nearly a hundred square miles!

The Ceylonese are not Dravidians but pure Aryans. It was colonised from
Bengal about 800 B.C., and they have kept a very clear history of their
country from that time. It was the greatest trade centre of the ancient
world, and Anuradhapuram was the London of the ancients.

I enjoyed Rome more than anything in the West, and after seeing Pompeii
I have lost all regard for the so-called "Modern Civilisation". With the
exception of steam and electricity they had everything else and
infinitely more art conceptions and executions than the Moderns.

Please tell Miss Locke that I was mistaken when I told her that
sculpturing of the human figure was not developed in India as among the
Greeks. I am reading in Fergusson and other authorities that in Orissa
or Jagannath, which I did not visit, there are among the ruins human
figures which for beauty and anatomical skill would compare with any
production of the Greeks. There is a colossal figure of Death, a huge
female skeleton covered with a shrivelled skin — the awful fidelity to
anatomical details are frightening and disgusting. Says my author, one
of the female figures in the niche is exactly like the Venus de Medici
and so on. But you must remember that everything almost has been
destroyed by the iconoclastic Mohammedan, yet the remnants are more than
all European debris put together! I have travelled eight years and not
seen many of the masterpieces.

Tell sister Locke also that there is a ruined temple in a forest in
India which and the Parthenon of Greece Fergusson considers as the
climax of architectural art — each of its type — the one of conception,
the other of conception and detail. The later Mogul buildings etc., the
Indo-Saracenic architecture, does not compare a bit with the best types
of the ancients. . . .

With all my love,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Just by chance saw Mother Church and Father Pope at Florence. You
know of it already.

V.

</div>
