---
title: XC

---
<div>

[←](089_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](091_miss_noble.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/109_lalajee.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_4/translation_prose/the_education_that_india_needs.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/106_shashi.htm) Addressee
[»](100_shashi.htm)

## XC

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7330e8090.pdf)* )

*To Swami Ramakrishnananda*

DARJEELING,  
*20th April, 1897*.

DEAR SHASHI,

All of you have doubtless reached Madras by this time. I should think
Biligiri is certainly taking great care of you, and that Sadananda
serves you as your attendant. In Madras the worship should be done in a
completely Sattvic manner, without a trace of Rajas in it. I hope
Alasinga has by now returned to Madras. Don't enter into wrangles with
anybody — always maintain a calm attitude. For the present let the
worship of Shri Ramakrishna be established and continued in the house of
Biligiri. But see that the worship does not become very elaborate and
long. Time thus saved should be utilised in holding classes and doing
some preaching. It is good to initiate as many as you can. Supervise the
work of the two papers, and help in whatever way you can. Biligiri has
two widowed daughters. Kindly educate them and make special efforts that
through them more such widowed women get a thorough grounding in their
own religion and learn a little English and Sanskrit. But all this work
should be done from a distance. One has to be exceedingly careful before
young women. Once you fall, there is no way out, and the sin is
unpardonable.

I am very sorry to hear that Gupta was bitten by a dog; but I hear that
the dog was not a mad one, so there is no cause for alarm. In any case,
see that he takes the medicine sent by Gangadhar.

Early morning, finish daily your worship and other duties briefly, and
calling together Biligiri with his family, read before them the Gita and
other sacred books. There is not the least necessity for teaching the
divine Love of Râdhâ and Krishna. Teach them pure devotion to Sitâ-Râm
and Hara-Pârvati. See that no mistake is made in this respect. Remember
that the episodes of the divine relationship between Radha and Krishna
are quite unsuitable for young minds. Specially Biligiri and other
followers of Râmânujâchârya are worshippers of Rama; so see to it that
their innate attitude of pure devotion is never disturbed.

In the evenings give some spiritual teaching like that to the general
public. Thus gradually "even the mountain is crossed".

See that an atmosphere of perfect purity is always maintained, and that
there enters not the slightest trace of Vâmâchâra. For the rest, the
Lord Himself will guide you, there is no fear. Give to Biligiri my
respectful salutations and loving greetings, and convey my salutations
to similar devotees.

My illness is now much less — it may even be cured completely, if the
Lord wills. My love, blessings, and greetings to you.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Please tender my specially affectionate greetings and blessings to
Dr. Nanjunda Rao and help him as much as you can. Try your best to
particularly encourage the study of Sanskrit among the non-Brahmins.

V.

</div>
