---
title: XCII

---
<div>

[←](091_miss_noble.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](093_sudhir.htm)

  

[«](091_miss_noble.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/093_sudhir.htm)  
[«](089_rakhal.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/127_rakhal.htm)

## XCII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7337e8092.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

ALMORA,  
*20th May, 1897*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

From your letter I got all the important news. I got a letter from
Sudhir also and also one from Master Mahashay. I have also got two
letters from Nityananda (Yogen Chatterjee) from the famine areas.

Even now money is floating on the waters, as it were, . . . but it will
surely come. When it comes, buildings, land, and a permanent fund —
everything will come all right. But one can never rest assured until the
chickens are hatched; and I am not now going down to the hot plains
within two or three months. After that I shall make a tour and shall
certainly secure some money. This being so, if you think that the \[land
with a\] frontage of eight Kâthâs cannot be acquired . . ., there is no
harm in paying the earnest money to the middle-man vendor as though you
were losing it for nothing. In all these matters use your own
discretion; I cannot give any further advice. There is particularly a
chance of making mistake through hurry. . . . Tell Master Mahashay that
I quite approve of what he had said.

Write to Gangadhar that if he finds it difficult to get alms etc. there,
he should feed himself by spending from his own pocket, and that he
should publish a weekly letter in Upen's paper (*The Basumati*). In that
case others also may help.

I understand from a letter of Shashi . . . he wants Nirbhayananda. If
you think this course to be the best, then send Nirbhayananda and bring
back Gupta. . . . Send Sashi a copy of the Bengali Rules and Regulations
of the Math or an English version of it, and write to him to see that
the work there is done in accordance with the Rules and Regulations.

I am glad to learn that the Association in Calcutta is going on nicely.
It does not matter if one or two keep out. Gradually everyone will come.
Be friendly and sympathetic with everybody. Sweet words are heard afar;
it is particularly necessary to try and make new people come. We want
more and more new members.

Yogen is doing well. On account of the great heat in Almora, I am now in
an excellent garden twenty miles from there. This place is comparatively
cool, but still warm. The heat does not seem to be particularly less
than that of Calcutta. . . .

The feverishness is all gone. I am trying to go to a still cooler place.
Heat or the fatigue of walking, I find, at once produces trouble of the
liver. The air here is so dry that there is a burning sensation in the
nose all the time, and the tongue becomes, as it were, a chip of wood.
You have stopped criticising; otherwise I would have gone to a colder
place by this time just for the fun of it. "He constantly neglects diet
restrictions" — what rot do you talk? Do you really listen to the words
of these fools? It is just like your not allowing me to take Kalâi-dâl
(black pulses), because it contains starch! And what is more — there
will be no starch if rice and Roti (bread) are eaten after frying them!
What wonderful knowledge, my dear. The fact of the matter is my old
nature is coming back — this I am seeing clearly. In this part of the
country now, an illness takes on the colour and fashion of this
locality; and in that part of the country, it takes on the colour and
fashion of the illnesses in that locality. I am thinking of making my
meals at night very light; I shall eat to the full in the morning and at
noon; at night milk, fruits, etc. That is why I am staying in this
orchard, "in expectation of fruits"! Don't you see?

Now don't be alarmed. Does a companion of Shiva die so quickly? Just now
the evening lamp has been lighted, and singing has to be done throughout
the whole night. Nowadays my temper also is not very irritable, and
feverishness is all due to the liver — I see this clearly. Well, I shall
make that also come under control — what fear? . . . Bravely brace
yourself up and do work; let us create a mighty commotion.

Tender my love to all at the Math. At the next meeting of the
Association give my greetings to everybody and tell them that though I
am not physically present there, yet my spirit is where the name of our
Lord is sung — "यावत्तव कथा राम सञ्चरिष्यति मेदिनीम्", that is, "O Rama,
so long as the story of your life goes the round on the earth" —
because, you see, the Atman is omnipresent.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
