---
title: XCV

---
<div>

[←](094_marie.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](096_miss_noble.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/129_rakhal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/110_badri_sah.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/126_miss_noble.htm) Addressee
[»](096_miss_noble.htm)

## XCV

*To Sister Nivedita*

ALMORA,  
*20th June, 1897*.

MY DEAR MISS NOBLE,

. . . Let me tell you plainly. Every word you write I value, and every
letter is welcome a hundred times. Write whenever you have a mind and
opportunity, and whatever you like, knowing that nothing will be
misinterpreted, nothing unappreciated. I have not had any news of the
work for so long. Can you tell me anything? I do not expect any help
from India, in spite of all the jubilating over me. They are so poor!

But I have started work in the fashion in which I myself was trained —
that is to say, under the trees, and keeping body and soul together
anyhow. The plan has also changed a little. I have sent some of my boys
to work in the famine districts. It has acted like a miracle. I find, as
I always thought, that it is through the heart, and that alone, that the
world can be reached. The present plan is, therefore, to train up
numbers of young men (from the highest classes, not the lowest. For the
latter I shall have to wait a little), and the first attack will be made
by sending a number of them over a district. When these sappers and
miners of religion have cleared the way, there will then be time enough
to put in theory and philosophy.

A number of boys are already in training, but the recent earthquake has
destroyed the poor shelter we had to work in, which was only rented,
anyway. Never mind. The work must be done without shelter and under
difficulties. . . . As yet it is shaven heads, rags, and casual meals.
This must change, however, and will, for are we not working for it, head
and heart? . . .

It is true in one way that the people here have so little to give up —
yet renunciation is in our blood. One of my boys in training has been an
executive engineer, in charge of a district. That means a very big
position here. He gave it up like straw! . . .

With all love,

Yours in the Truth,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
