---
title: CI

---
<div>

[←](100_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](102_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/133_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](102_rakhal.htm)  
[«](100_shashi.htm) Addressee [»](108_shashi.htm)

## CI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7364e8101.pdf)* )

*To Swami Ramakrishnananda*

AMBALA,  
*19th August, 1897*.

DEAR SHASHI,

I am very much pained to hear that the work in Madras is not prospering
for want of funds. I am glad to learn that the amount borrowed by
Alasinga's brother-in-law (sister's husband) has been received back in
Almora. Goodwin has written to me to inform the Reception Committee to
take some money for expenses from the amount that is left as a result of
the lecture. It is a very mean thing to spend the money received on the
occasion of that lecture for the purpose of the Reception — and I do not
like to tell anybody anything about this matter. I have understood quite
well what the people of our country are when it comes to money-matters.
. . . On my behalf, you personally talk with the friends there and
politely make them understand that it is all right if they can find ways
and means to bear the expenses; but if they cannot do so, all of you
come back to the Math at Calcutta or go to Ramnad and establish the Math
there.

I am now going to the hills at Dharamsala. Niranjan, Dinu, Krishnalal,
Latu, and Achyut will stay at Amritsar. Why did you not, all these days,
send Sadananda to the Math? If he is still there, then send him to the
Punjab on receipt of a letter from Niranjan from Amritsar. I intend to
start work in the Punjab after a few days' more rest in the Punjab
hills. The Punjab and Rajputana are indeed fields for work. I shall
write to you again soon after starting work. . . .

My health was very bad recently. Now I am very slowly recovering. It
will be all right, if I stay in the hills for some more days. My love to
you and to Alasinga, G. G., R. A., Goodwin, Gupta, Sukul, and all
others.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
