---
title: CVII

---
<div>

[←](106_miss_macleod.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](108_shashi.htm)

  

[«](106_miss_macleod.htm) Chronology [»](108_shashi.htm)  
[«](103_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](109_rakhal.htm)

## CVII

*To Swami Brahmananda*

SRINAGAR, KASHMIR,  
*30th September, 1897*

DEAR RAKHAL,

I received your affectionate letter and also the letter from the Math. I
am leaving for the Punjab in two or three days. I have received the
foreign mail. The following are my answers to Miss Noble's questions in
her letter:

1\. Nearly all the branches have been started, but the movement is only
just beginning.

2\. Most of the monks are educated. Those that are not are also having
secular education. But above all, to do good, perfect unselfishness is
absolutely necessary. To ensure that, more attention is given to
spiritual exercises than to anything else.

3\. Secular educators: We get mostly those who have already educated
themselves. What is needed is training them into our method and building
up of character. The training is to make them obedient and fearless; and
the method is to help the poor physically first and then work up to
higher regions of mentality.

Arts and Industries: This part of the programme alone cannot be begun
for want of funds. The simplest method to be worked upon at present is
to induce Indians to use their own produce and get markets for Indian
artware etc. in other countries. This should be done by persons who are
not only not middlemen themselves, but will devote the entire proceeds
of this branch to the benefit of the workmen.

4\. Wandering from place to place will be necessary till "people come to
education". The religious character of the wandering monks will carry
with it a much greater weight than otherwise.

5\. All castes are open to our influence. So long the highest only have
been worked upon. But since the work department is in full operation in
different famine-centres, we are influencing the lower classes more and
more.

6\. Nearly all the Hindus approve our work, only they are not used to
practical co-operation in such works.

7\. Yes, from the very start we are making no distinction in our
charities or other good works between the different religions of India.
(Written so far in English. Remainder translated from
[Bengali.](b7373e8107.pdf) )

Reply to Miss N. according to these hints.

See that there is no remissness whatever in the medical treatment of
Yogen — if necessary spend money by drawing on the capital. Did you go
and meet Bhavanath's wife?

If Brahmachari Hariprasanna can come, it will be very helpful. Mr.
Sevier has become very impatient about acquiring a house somewhere; it
will be good if something is done quickly about it! Hariprasanna is an
engineer; so he will be able to do something quickly about it. Also he
understands better about the suitability of places. They (the Seviers)
like to have a place somewhere near about Dehra Dun or Mussoorie; that
is to say, the place must not be too cold and must be habitable
throughout the year. So send Hariprasanna at once straight to Sj.
Shyamapada Mukherjee, Medical Hall, Ambala Cantonment. As soon as I go
down to the Punjab, I shall send Mr. Sevier along with him. I am
returning (to the Math) in a trice after a tour of the Punjab, Karachi,
and then via Rajputana, not via Kathiawar and Gujarat — to Nepal. Tulsi
has gone to Madhya Bharat — is it for the famine-relief work? . . .

My blessings and love to all. I have got the news that Kali has reached
New York; but he has not written any letter. Sturdy writes that his work
had increased so much that people were amazed — and a few persons have
also written me praising him highly. However, there is not so much
difficulty in America; the work will go on somehow or other. Send
Shuddhananda and his brother along with Hariprasanna. Of the party only
Gupta and Achyut will accompany me. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
