---
title: CX

---
<div>

[←](109_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](111_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](109_rakhal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/134_mother.htm)  
[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/42_miss_noble.htm) Addressee
[»](113_miss_noble.htm)

## CX

*To Sister Nivedita*

SRINAGAR, KASHMIR,  
*1st October, 1897*.

DEAR MARGO,

Some people do the best work when *led*. Not every one is born to
*lead*. The best leader, however, is one who "leads like the baby". The
baby, though apparently depending on everyone, is the king of the
household. At least, to my thinking, that is the secret. . . . Many
feel, but only a few can express. It is the power of expressing one's
love and appreciation and sympathy for others, that enables one person
to succeed better in spreading the idea than others. . . .

I shall not try to describe Kashmir to you. Suffice it to say, I never
felt sorry to leave any country except this Paradise on earth; and I am
trying my best, if I can, to influence the Raja in starting a centre. So
much to do here, and the material so hopeful! . . .

The great difficulty is this: I see persons giving me almost the whole
of their love. But I must not give anyone the whole of mine in return,
for that day the work would be ruined. Yet there are some who will look
for such a return, not having the breadth of the impersonal view. It is
absolutely necessary to the work that I should have the enthusiastic
love of as many as possible, while I myself remain entirely impersonal.
Otherwise jealousy and quarrels would break up everything. A leader must
be impersonal. I am sure you understand this. I do not mean that one
should be a brute, making use of the devotion of others for his own
ends, and laughing in his sleeve meanwhile. What I mean is what I am,
intensely personal in my love, but having the power to pluck out my own
heart with my own hand, if it becomes necessary, "for the good of many,
for the welfare of many", as Buddha said. Madness of love, and yet in it
no bondage. Matter changed into spirit by the force of love. Nay, that
is the gist of our Vedanta. There is but One, seen by the ignorant as
matter, by the wise as God. And the history of civilisation is the
progressive reading of spirit into matter. The ignorant see the person
in the non-person. The sage sees the non-person in the person. Through
pain and pleasure, joy and sorrow, this is the one lesson we are
learning. . . . 

Yours ever with love and truth,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
