---
title: CXII

---
<div>

[←](111_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](113_miss_noble.htm)

  

[«](111_rakhal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/138_m.htm)  
[«](111_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](114_rakhal.htm)

## CXII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8381e8112.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

MURREE,  
*12th October, 1897*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

I wrote at length in yesterday's letter. I think it desirable to give
you special directions about certain matters. . . . (1) To all those who
collect money and send it to the Math . . . the acknowledgment of the
amounts will be issued from the Math. (2) The acknowledgment must be in
duplicate, one for the sender, and one for filing in the Math. (3) There
must be a big register in which all the names and addresses of the
donors will be entered. (4) Accounts, accurate to the last pie, must be
kept of the amounts that are donated to the Math Fund, and fully
accurate accounts should be obtained from Sarada and others to whom
money is given. For lack of accurate account-keeping . . . see that I am
not accused as a cheat. These accounts should afterwards be published.
(5) Immediately go and register a will under lawyer's advice to the
effect that in case you and I die then Hari and Sharat will succeed to
all that there is in our Math.

I have not yet got any news from Ambala, whether Hariprasanna and others
have reached there or not. Give the other half-sheet of this letter to
Master Mahashay.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
