---
title: CXV

---
<div>

[←](114_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](116_baburam.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/139_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/082_m.htm)  
[«](114_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](117_rakhal.htm)

## CXV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8386e8115.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

LAHORE,  
*15th November, 1897*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

I hope you and Hari are now in good health. The work in Lahore went off
with great éclat. Now I go to Dehra Dun. The Sind tour is postponed. I
have yet no news whether Dinu, Latu, and Krishnalal have reached Jaipur.
Babu Nagendranath Gupta will collect subscriptions and donations from
here and send them to the Math to meet expenses. Send him regular
receipts. Let me know if you have received anything from Murree,
Rawalpindi, and Sialkot.

Reply to me C/o Post Master, Dehra Dun. Other letters you may send me
after hearing from me from Dehra Dun. My health is good; only I have to
get up at night once or twice. I am having sound sleep; sleep is not
spoiled even after exhausting lectures; and I am doing exercise every
day. . . . There is no trouble at all. Now, come on, work with redoubled
energy. Keep an eye on that big piece of land — in all secrecy. We are
making regular efforts so that big Utsava (Celebration — of Shri
Ramakrishna's birthday) can be held there. My love to all.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS. It will be a very good thing if Master Mahashay will write now and
then about us in *The Tribune*, so that Lahore will not become cold
again — now it is quite warmed up. Spend money a little economically;
pilgrimage expenses should be borne by you personally; preaching and
propaganda expenses should be charged to the Math.

V.

</div>
