---
title: CXVIII

---
<div>

[←](117_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](119_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](117_rakhal.htm) Chronology [»](..next_chronology.htm)  
[«](117_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](119_rakhal.htm)

## CXVIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8391e8118.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

DELHI,  
*8th December, 1897*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

We shall start for Khetri tomorrow. Gradually the luggage has greatly
increased. After Khetri I intend to send everybody to the Math. I could
get done through them none of the work which I had hoped. That is to
say, it is quite certain that none of them can do anything if he always
remains with me. Unless each goes about independently, he will not be
able to do anything. The fact is, who will care for them if they are in
my company? Only waste of time. So I am sending them to the Math.

Keep as a fund for some permanent work the balance of the money left
after the famine relief. Do not spend that money for any other purpose,
and after giving the full accounts of the famine work, note down thus,
"So much balance is left for some other good work". . . .

Work I want — I don't want any humbug. To those who have no desire to
work I say, "My dear fellow, now go and follow your own way." As soon as
I reach Khetri, I will send you the power of attorney with my signature
if the document has reached there meanwhile. Open only those letters
from America which bear the Boston postmark, not the others. Send all my
letters to Khetri. I shall get money in Rajputana itself; no cause for
anxiety on that score. Try energetically for the piece of land; we must
have the celebration on our own ground this time.

Is the money in the Bengal Bank, or have you kept it elsewhere? Be very
careful about money matters; keep detailed accounts, and regarding money
know for certain that one cannot rely even on one's own father.

Give my love to all. Write to me how Hari is doing. Recently I met at
Dehra Dun the Udâsi Sâdhu, Kalyân Dev, and a few others. I hear the
people at Hrishikesh are very eager to see me and are asking again and
again about me.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
