---
title: CXXII

---
<div>

[←](121_rajaji.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](123_mary.htm)

  

[«](121_rajaji.htm) Chronology [»](123_mary.htm)  
[«](108_shashi.htm) Addressee [»](124_shashi.htm)

## CXXII

*To Swami Ramakrishnananda*

MATH, BELUR,  
HOWRAH P.O.,  
*25th February, 1898*.

MY DEAR SHASHI,

Our congratulations for the successful carrying out of the Mahotsava
(Big celebration of Shri Ramakrishna's birthday.)  in Madras. Hope you
had a good gathering and plenty of spiritual food. We are all so glad
that you have girded yourself to teach more of spirituality to the
Madras people than those finger twistings and *kling phat* (Cryptic
Mantras or sound formulae.) you are so fond of. Really your lecture on
*Shriji* (Shri Ramakrishna.) was splendid. I could only catch a report
in the *Madras Mail* in Khandwa, and the Math people have not had any.
Why don't you send us over a copy?

I learn that you complain about my silence, is it? I have written you
more letters, however, than you ever wrote me, from Europe and America
even. You ought to give me all the news you can from Madras every week.
Simplest way is to put down a few lines and a few items of news every
day on a sheet.

My health has not been all right of late; at present it is much better.
Calcutta is unusually cool just now, and the American friends who are
here are enjoying it ever so much. Today we take possession of the land
we have bought, and though it is not practicable to have the Mahotsava
on it just now, I must have something on it on Sunday. Anyhow,
*Shriji's* relics must be taken to our place for the day and worshipped.
Gangadhar is here and asks me to write to you that though he has
succeeded in getting some subscriptions for the *Brahmavadin*, the
delivery being very irregular, he is afraid of losing them also soon. I
received your letter of recommendation for the young man with the old
story of "having nothing to eat, Your Honour"; only added in the Madras
edition: "got a number of children too", for generating whom no
recommendation was needed! I would be very glad to help him, but the
fact is, I have no money; every cent I had I have made over to Raja,
(Rakhal or Swami Brahmananda.) as they all say I am a spendthrift and
are afraid of keeping money with me. I have, however, sent the letter to
Rakhal if he can find the way to help your friend, the young man, in
having some more children. He writes that the Christians will help him
out if he becomes a convert, but he won't. Perhaps he is afraid that his
conversion will make Hindu India lose one of her brightest jewels and
Hindu society the benefit of his propagating power to eternal misery!

The boys here are rather seedy owing to the unusual amount of pure and
cool air they are made to breathe in and live on the bank of the Ganga
in the new Math. Sarada has his malaria brought over from Dinajpur. I
made him eat a dose of opium the other day without much benefit to him
except his brain which progressed for some hours towards its natural
direction, namely, idiocy. Hari also has a touch; I hope it will take
off a good bit of their avoirdupois. By the by, we have once more
started the dancing business here, and it would make your heart glad to
see Hari and Sarada and my own good self in a waltz. How we keep balance
at all is a wonder to me.

Sharat has come and is hard at work as usual. We have got some good
furniture now, and a big jump from the old Châtâi (mat) in the old Math
to nice tables and chairs and three Khâts (cots), mind you. We have
curtailed the Pujâ (worship) work a good deal, and the amount of pruning
your *klings* and *phats* and *svâhâs* have undergone would make you
faint. The puja occupied only the day, and they slept soundly all night.
How are Tulsi and Khoka? Are they more tractable with you than under
Rakhal? You may run in to Calcutta for a few days giving charge to
Tulsi, but it is so expensive, and then you must go back, as Madras has
to be *thoroughly worked up*. I am going to America again with Mrs. Bull
in a few months.

Give my love to Goodwin and tell him that we are going to see him at any
rate on our way to Japan. Shivananda is here, and I have toned down a
bit his *great desire* to go to the Himalayas *for food*! Is Tulsi
contemplating the same? The *bandicoot-hole* will be a sufficient cave
for him, I suppose.

So the Math here is a *fait accompli*, and I am going over to get more
help. . . . Work on with energy. India is a rotten corpse inside and
outside. We shall revive it by the blessings of Shri Maharaj. With all
love, 

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
