---
title: CXXIV

---
<div>

[←](123_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](125_joe_joe.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/119_margaret.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/120_dhira_mata.htm)  
[«](122_shashi.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/093_shashi.htm)

## CXXIV

*To Swami Ramakrishnananda*

MATH, BELUR,  
(Howrah),  
*March, 1898.*

MY DEAR SHASHI,

I forgot to write you about two things. 1. That Tulsi ought to learn
shorthand from Goodwin, at least the beginning. 2. I had to write a
letter almost every mail to Madras while I was out of India. I have in
vain written for a copy of those letters. Send me all those letters. I
want to write out my travels. Do not fail, and I shall send them back as
soon as they have been used up. The *Dawn* can manage with 200
subscribers to come out regularly on Rs. 40/- an issue expenditure. This
is a great fact to know. The P.B. (*Prabuddha Bhârata*) seems to be very
disorganised; try best to organise it. Poor Alasinga, I am sorry for
him. Only thing I can do is to make him entirely free for a year so that
he may devote all his energy to the *Brahmavadin* work. Tell him not to
worry; I have him always in mind, poor child; his devotion I can never
repay.

I am thinking of going to Kashmir again with Mrs. Bull and Miss MacLeod.
(I) return to Calcutta and start for America from here.

Miss Noble is really an acquisition. She will soon surpass Mrs. Besant
as a speaker, I am sure.

Do look after Alasinga. I have an idea that he is breaking himself with
work. Tell him, the best work is only done by alternate repose and work.
Give him all my love. We had two public lectures in Calcutta, one from
Miss Noble and the other from our Sharat. Both of them did very well
indeed; there was great enthusiasm, which shows that the Calcutta public
has not forgotten us. Some of the members of the Math had a touch of
influenza. They are all right now. The thing is working nicely. Shri
(Holy) Mother is here, and the European and American ladies went the
other day to see her, and what do you think, *Mother ate with them even
there*! Is not that grand? The Lord is watching over us; there is no
fear; do not lose your nerves, keep your health and take things easy. It
is always good to give a few strong strokes and rest on your oars.
Rakhal is living with the new land and buildings. I was not satisfied
with the Mahotsava this year. What it should be is a grand mixture of
all the different phases here. We shall try it next year — I shall send
instructions. With love to all of you there and blessings.

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
