---
title: CXXVI

---
<div>

[←](125_joe_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](127_joe_joe.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/123_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](127_joe_joe.htm)  
[«](119_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](128_rakhal.htm)

## CXXVI

(*Translated from Bengali*)

*To Swami Brahmananda*

DARJEELING,  
*23rd April, 1898*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

My health was excellent on my return from Sandukphu (11,924 ft.) and
other places; but after returning to Darjeeling, I had first an attack
of fever, and after recovering from that, I am now suffering from cough
and cold. I try to escape from this place every day; but they have been
constantly putting it off for a long time. However, tomorrow, Sunday, I
am leaving; after halting at Kharsana for a day I start again for
Calcutta on Monday. I shall send you a wire after starting. We should
hold an annual meeting of the Ramakrishna Mission, and also one for the
Math. In both the meetings the accounts of famine relief must be
submitted, and the report of the famine relief must be published. Keep
all this ready.

Nityagopal says, managing an English magazine will not cost much. So let
us first get this one out, and we shall see to the Bengali magazine
afterwards. All these points will have to be discussed. Is Yogen willing
to shoulder the responsibility of running the paper? Shashi writes that
if Sharat goes some time to Madras, they may make a lecture tour
jointly. Oh, how hot it is now! Ask Sharat if G. G., Sarada, Shashi
Babu, and others have got their articles ready. Give my love and
blessing to Mrs. Bull, Miss MacLeod, and Nivedita.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
