---
title: CXXVIII

---
<div>

[←](127_joe_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](129_sturdy.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/141_margot.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/083_your_highness.htm)  
[«](126_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](130_rakhal.htm)

## CXXVIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8403e8128.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

ALMORA,  
*20th May, 1898*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

I have got all the news from your letter and have replied to your wire
already. Niranjan and Govindalal Shah will wait at Kathgodam for
Yogen-Ma. After I reached Naini Tal, Baburam went from here to Naini Tal
on horseback against everybody's advice, and while returning, he also
accompanied us on horseback. I was far behind as I was in a Dandi. When
I reached the dak bungalow at night, I heard that Baburam had again
fallen from the horse and had hurt one of his arms — though he had no
fractures. Lest I should rebuke him, he stayed in a private lodging
house. Because of his fall, Miss MacLeod gave him her Dandi and herself
came on the horse. He did not meet me that night. Next day I was making
arrangements for a Dandi for him, when I heard that he had already left
on foot. Since then I have not heard of him. I have wired to one or two
places, but no news. Perhaps he is putting up at some village. Very
well! They are experts in increasing one's worries.

There will be a Dandi for Yogen-Ma; but all the rest will have to go on
foot.

My health is much better, but the dyspepsia has not gone, and again
insomnia has set in. It will be very helpful if you can soon send some
good Ayurvedic medicine for dyspepsia.

Since only one or two sporadic cases of plague have occurred there,
there is plenty of accommodation in the Government plague hospital, and
there is a talk of having hospitals in every Ward. Taking all this into
consideration, do what the situation demands. But remember that
something said by somebody in Baghbazar does not constitute public
opinion. . . . Take care that funds do not run short in times of need
and that there is no waste of money. For the present buy a plot of
ground for Ramlal in the name of Raghuvir (The family deity of Shri
Ramakrishna's birthplace, Kamarpukur, Ramlal being his nephew.) after
careful consideration. . . . Holy Mother will be the Sebâit
(worshipper-in-charge); after her will come Ramlal, and Shibu will
succeed them as Sebait; or make any other arrangement that seems best.
You can, if you think it right, begin the construction of the building
even now. For it is not good to live in a new house for the first one or
two months, as it will be damp. . . . The anti-erosion wall can be
completed afterwards. I am trying to raise money for the magazine. See
that the sum of Rs. 1,200 which I gave for the magazine is kept only for
that account.

All the others are well here. Sadananda sprained his foot yesterday. He
says he will be all right by the evening. The climate at Almora is
excellent at this time. Moreover the bungalow rented by Sevier is the
best in Almora. On the opposite side Annie Besant is staying in a small
bungalow with Chakravarty. Chakravarty is now the son-in-law of Gagan
(of Ghazipur). One day I went to see him. Annie Besant told me
entreatingly that there should be friendship between her organisation
and mine all over the world, etc., etc. Today Besant will come here for
tea. Our ladies are in a small bungalow near by and are quite happy.
Only Miss MacLeod is a little unwell today. Harry Sevier is becoming
more and more a Sadhu as the days pass by. . . . Brother Hari sends you
his greetings and Sadananda, Ajoy, and Suren send you their respectful
salutations. My love to you and all the others. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Give my love to Sushil and Kanai and all the others.

V.

</div>
