---
title: CXXXII

---
<div>

[←](131_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](133_haripada.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/143_margot.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/084_your_highness.htm)  
[«](123_mary.htm) Addressee [»](136_mary.htm)

## CXXXII

*To Miss Mary Hale*

SRINAGAR, KASHMIR,  
*28th August, 1898*.

MY DEAR MARY,

I could not make an earlier opportunity of writing you, and knowing that
you were in no hurry for a letter, I will not make apologies. You are
learning all about Kashmir and ourselves from Miss MacLeod's letter to
Mrs. Leggett, I hear — therefore needless going into long rigmaroles
about it.

The search for Heinsholdt's Mahatmas in Kashmir will be entirely
fruitless; and as the whole thing has first to be established as coming
from a creditable source, the attempt will also be a little too early.
How are Mother Church and Father Pope and where? How are you ladies,
young and old? Going on with the old game with more zest now that one
has fallen off the ranks? How is the lady that looks like a certain
statue in Florence? (I have forgotten the name) I always bless her arms
when I think of the comparison.

I have been away a few days. Now I am going to join the ladies. The
party then goes to a nice quiet spot behind a hill, in a forest, through
which a murmuring stream flows, to have meditation deep and long under
the deodars (trees of God) cross-legged *à la Buddha*.

This will be for a month or so, when by that time our good work will
have spent its powers and we shall fall from this Paradise to earth
again; then work out our Karma a few months and then will have to go to
hell for bad Karma in China, and our evil deeds will make us sink in bad
odours with the world in Canton and other cities. Thence Purgatory in
Japan? And regain Paradise once more in the U.S. of America. This is
what Pumpkin Swami, brother of the Coomra Swami, foretells (in Bengali
Coomra means squash). He is very clever with his hands. In fact his
cleverness with his hands has several times brought him into great
dangers.

I wished to send you so many nice things, but alas! the thought of the
tariff makes my desires vanish "like youth in women and beggars'
dreams".

By the by, I am glad now that I am growing grey every day. My head will
be a full-blown white lotus by the time you see me next.

Ah! Mary, if you could see Kashmir — only Kashmir; the marvellous lakes
full of lotuses and swans (there are no swans but geese — poetic
licence) and the big black bee trying to settle on the wind-shaken lotus
(I mean the lotus nods him off refusing a kiss — poetry), then you could
have a good conscience on your death-bed. As this is earthly paradise
and as logic says one bird in the hand is equal to two in the bush, a
glimpse of this is wiser, but economically the other better; no trouble,
no labour, no expense, a little namby-pamby dolly life and later, that
is all.

My letter is becoming a bore . . . so I stop. (It is sheer idleness).
Good night. 

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

My address always is:  
Math, Belur,  
Howrah Dist., Bengal, India.

</div>
