---
title: CXXXIII

---
<div>

[←](132_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](134_haripada.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/084_your_highness.htm)
Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/085_your_highness.htm)  
[«](105_haripada.htm) Addressee [»](134_haripada.htm)

## CXXXIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8411e8133.pdf)* )

*To Shri Haripada Mitra*

SRINAGAR, KASHMIR,  
*17th September, 1898*.

DEAR HARIPADA,

I got all news from your letter and wire. That you may easily pass your
examination in Sindhi is my prayer to the Lord.

Recently my health was very bad, and so I have been delayed, otherwise I
had intended to leave for the Punjab this week. The doctor had advised
me not to go to the plains at the present time, as it is very hot there.
Perhaps I may reach Karachi by about the last week of October. Now I am
doing somewhat well. There is nobody else with me now excepting two
American friends — ladies. Probably I shall part from them at Lahore.
They will wait for me in Calcutta or in Rajputana. I shall probably
visit Cutch, Bhuj, Junagad, Bhavnagar, Limbdi, and Baroda and then
proceed to Calcutta. My present plan is to go to America via China and
Japan in November or December, but it is all in the hands of the Lord.
The above-mentioned American friends bear all my expenses, and I shall
take from them all my expenses including railway fare up to Karachi. But
if it is convenient to you, send me Rs. 50/- by wire C/o Rishibar
Mukhopadhyaya, Chief Justice, Kashmir State, Srinagar. It will be a
great help to me, for I have incurred much extra expense of late owing
to illness, and I feel a little ashamed to have to depend always on my
foreign devotees. With best wishes,

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
