---
title: CXXXVI

---
<div>

[←](135_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](137_sturdy.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/136_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/146_dear.htm)  
[«](132_mary.htm) Addressee [»](143_mary.htm)

## CXXXVI

*To Miss Mary Hale*

MATH, BELUR,  
HOWRAH DISTRICT,  
*16th March, 1899*.

MY DEAR MARY,

Thanks to Mrs. Adams; she roused you naughty girls to a letter at last.
"Out of sight out of mind" — as true in India as in America. And the
other young lady, who just left her love as she flitted by, deserves a
ducking I suppose.

Well, I have been in a sort of merry-go-round with my body which has
been trying to convince me for months that it too much exists.

However, no fear, with four mental-healing sisters as I have, no sinking
just now. Give me a strong pull and a long pull, will you, all together,
and then I am up!

Why do you talk so much about me in your one-letter-a-year and so little
about the four witches mumbling Mantras over the boiling pot in a corner
of Chicago?

Did you come across Max Müller's new book, *Ramakrishna*: *His Life and
Sayings*?

If you have not, do, and let Mother see it. How is Mother? Growing grey?
And Father Pope? Who have been our last visitors from America do you
suppose? "Brother, love is a drawing card" and "Misses Meel"; they have
been doing splendid in Australia and elsewhere; the same old "fellies",
little changed if any. I wish you could come to visit India — that will
be some day in the future. By the by, Mary, I heard a few months ago,
when I was rather worrying over your long silence, that you were just
hooking a "Willy", and so busy with your dances and parties; that
explained of course your inability to write. But "Willy" or no "Willy",
I must have my money, don't forget. Harriet is discreetly silent since
she got her boy; but where is my money, please? Remind her and her
husband of it. If she is Woolley, I am greasy Bengali, as the English
call us here — Lord, where is my money?

I have got a monastery on the Ganga now, after all, thanks to American
and English friends. Tell Mother to look sharp. I am going to deluge
your Yankee land with idolatrous missionaries.

Tell Mr. Woolley he got the sister but has not paid the brother yet.
Moreover, it was the fat black queerly dressed apparition smoking in the
parlour that frightened many a temptation away, and that was one of the
causes which secured Harriet to Mr. Woolley; therefore, I want to be
paid for my great share in the work etc., etc. Plead strong, will you?

I do so wish I could come over to America with Joe for this summer; but
man proposes and who disposes? Not God surely always. Well, let things
slide as they will. Here is Abhayananda, Marie Louse you know, and she
has been very well received in Bombay and Madras. She will be in
Calcutta tomorrow, and we are going to give her a good reception too.

My love to Miss Howe, Mrs. Adams, to Mother Church, and Father Pope and
all the rest of my friends across the seven oceans. We believe in seven
oceans — one of milk, one of honey, one of curd, one wine, one
sugar-cane juice, one salt, one I forget what. To you four sisters I
waft my love across the ocean of honey. . . . 

Ever sincerely, your brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Write when you find time between dances.

V.

</div>
