---
title: CXL

---
<div>

[←](139_marie.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Fourth
Series](epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm) / [→](141_mother.htm)

  

[«](139_marie.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/144_isabel.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/133_raja.htm) Addressee
[»](148_rakhal.htm)

## CXL

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8430e8140.pdf)* )

*To Swami Brahmananda*

LONDON,  
*10th August, 1899*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

I got a lot of news from your letter. My health was much better on the
ship, but, after landing, owing to flatulence it is rather bad now. . .
. There is a lot of difficulty here — all friends have gone out of town
for the summer. In addition my health is not so good, and there is a lot
of inconvenience regarding food etc. So in a few days I leave for
America. Send an account to Mrs. Bull as to how much was spent on
purchase of land, how much on buildings, how much on maintenance etc.

Sarada writes that the magazine is not going well. . . . Let him publish
the account of my travels, and thoroughly advertise it beforehand — he
will have subscribers rushing in. Do people like a magazine if
three-fourths of it are filled with pious stuff? Anyway pay special
attention to the magazine. Mentally take it as though I were not. Act
independently on this basis. "We depend on the elder brother for money,
learning, everything" — such an attitude is the road to ruin. If all the
money even for the magazine is to be collected by me and all the
articles too are from my pen — what will you all do? What are our Sahibs
then doing? I have finished my part. You do what remains to be done.
Nobody is there to collect a single penny, nobody to do any preaching,
none has brains enough to take proper care of his own affairs, none has
the capacity to write one line, and all are saints for nothing! . . . If
this be your condition, then for six months give everything into the
hands of the boys — magazine, money, preaching work, etc. If they are
also not able to do anything, then sell off everything, and returning
the proceeds to the donors go about as mendicants. I get no news at all
from the Math. What is Sharat doing? I want to see work done. Before
dying, I want to see that what I have established as a result of my
lifelong struggle is put in a more or less running condition. Consult
the Committee in every detail regarding money matters. Get the
signatures of the Committee for every item of expenditure. Otherwise you
also will be in for a bad name. This much is customary that people want
some time or other an account of their donations. It is very wrong not
to have it ready at every turn. . . . By such lethargy in the beginning,
people finally become cheats. Make a committee of all those who are in
the Math, and no expenditure will be made which is not countersigned by
them — none at all! I want work, I want vigour — no matter who lives or
dies. What are death and life to a Sannyasin?

If Sharat cannot rouse up Calcutta, . . . if you are not able to
construct the embankment this year, then you will see the fun! I want
work — no humbug about it. My respectful salutations to Holy Mother.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
