+++
title = "gandharva nagara"

+++
ST said that she had returned from South America. She had gone there in
the quest of Ananda even as ekanetra had found his own Ananda right in
his own kShetra. We began by reminiscing how in the year before us both
left the shores of bhAratavarSha we had spent a riotous mirthful night
in the stinky city near some of the spots where the turuShka-s had
recently rampaged. Both ST and me having seen the buffalo-rider from
close quarters wondered how “sahasraM ayutaM pAshA mR^ityo martyAya
hantave”. Feeling the presence of the pAsha that drags one, even as the
sArameyau are harshly barking, I used the word buffalo-rider. ST told me
how in her peregrinations in Peru of all places she was repeatedly
listening to a Hindi song that had a visual of a buffalo-rider. She
played it on the phone and it sounded positively vulgar. But for pretty
obvious reasons it triggered memories of my friend across the pond in
kAmasetu. I made some remark. ST said verily you may take the journey
into the gandharva nagara: “First locate the paNDita. Then find my image
in the mirror. Follow my image. You will find the drAviDA named
“impropriety”. Follow that one. You travel deep into the gandharva
nagara as though it were real. Then having gone down endless paths in
the gandharva nagara you will seek the real thing. You will glimpse
unbelievable objects of pleasure but your attempts to enjoy them will be
tempered by the fear of death. The drive for the experience will
overcome your fear. But you will know not at the end whether you have
been seized by chitragupta or not.”

We reached out to the object of pleasure as prajApati had done in the
days of yore. But the sight of audumbara sent a shiver down our spine.
We retreated backwards and found ourselves trapped in the gandharva
nagara — in the world between the living and the dead not knowing which
way we may come out.

ST said while we live we could talk anyhow. She asked if the truffle and
the morel were abhojya. On this matter we adopt the principle of strict
interpretation. I have seen citation in a smArta compendium from the
brahma purANa (never located it actually) which said that the fungi like
the globular kukunda, the chaityAkara and the ChatrAkara were born of
the daitya. Now manu has stated that the chatraka is prohibited and
medhAtithi expands that the kavaka is included but implies that the
kukunda is not included in this. The other texts also leave out the
chaityAkara fungi. Thus, the morel which is the chaityAkara and the
truffle which is the kukunda escape the ban and so I suggest that they
are bhojya.
