+++
title = "pAkashAstra: Hindu and Hinduized alien food"

+++
The field of pAkashAstra is well worthy of study as it is dying along
with many other shAstra-s. Unfortunately, I no longer have access to
some remarkable pAka texts that I examined in the city of my youth.
Towards the very end of the last decade in bhArata, ekanetra inspired by
ST induced me to take up the issue. ST, who is the living tradition of
pAkashAstra, reminded me of those texts again and I only put down some
notes relating to the discussion. Not having most manuscripts with me I
cannot give the precise indices for the same.

There is a text called the pAkashAstra that I examined. The manuscript
transcribed in shaka 1598 (1677 CE) is in legible nAgarI form and to my
knowledge has never been published. Comparing it with the mAnasollAsa
suggests that it is a late text. The language is late saMskR^ita. It has
3 sections: 1) bhaktAdi-prakaraNa; 2) phala-shAkAdi prakaraNa 3)
bhojana-prakaraNa. The 2nd and much of 3rd were stained by some liquid
and not easily readable at all. The first section gives vidhi-s for
preparation of the following dishes that my mAtAshrI was able to
identify and has full knowledge of:  
pAyasa (milk-lentil variety); polikA; laDDuka; bindu-modaka;
dugdha-kara\~njikA (actually it was made very rarely, and only in my
maternal lineage); jalebI; pUrikA; vaTaka (the one with the hole in the
middle); sUpa; pApara (the rice variety which is fried and sprinkled
with pepper. I cannot forget the immense resistance we would face from
our elders when we would want to eat this in the famous fair in the
karnATa country).

ST was able identify the lApAsI and kasAra as godhUma dishes that are
still extant in the lATa country. But ST mentions that the wheat
precipitate (which my maternal clansmen mentioned as requiring a few
hours in the old days to generate), which was in the originally, is not
used in the modern form. ST as a proper molecular biologist said that
precipitating the material with ammonium chloride works, but the
prospect of having ammonium chloride remaining, even after washes is
less appetizing (?). ST has also identified and successfully reproduced
phenikA, koharI, bahurI and kasAra. These last ones, along with the
jalebi, are actually of turuShka origin. These things entered the
shAstra and since then have become a part of Hindu existence. Keeping
with the Hinduization of the turuShka-bhojana we actually heard
vAtavyAdhi indignantly declare that we were discrediting Vedic cooking
:-).

Are there older, pre-mAnasollAsa pAka texts surviving? There were two
dateless manuscripts that I examined which might be pre-mAnasollAsa
texts. However, the condition of the manuscript as well as the writing
precluded me from making a very detailed study. The first of them is the
sUdashAstra. The sUdashAstra is cited by the chakrapANidatta, the great
physician from Meghalaya, who wrote his medical works around 1070-1080
CE. The sUdashAstra manuscript had a description of the preparation of
some quintessential dishes that define a Hindu: “dAl”, modaka and
laDDuka. Additionally, I noticed that this text had a cake known as
shaShkulI made from a large white rice and sesame and the well-known
apUpa that survives in classical form only in the drAviDa country. The
citation of chakrapANidatta relates to the modaka supporting that this
sUdashAstra indeed (at least in part) is the one from before his times.
In support of this at least the parts of the manuscript I could examine
had no alien foods typical of the later texts. The other manuscript was
samIraNa-sUnu’s sUpa-tantra (i.e. bhImasena’s work on cooking). This
also appears pretty archaic because it has no mention of the alien foods
or substances and has certain preparations that are not known today.
Something recipes that could be easily identified as being still extant
were: lime and tamarind rices, dal-s of different types, pAyasa-s and
pAnaka-s. He also mentions some weird curries, such as one from the neem
tree berries prepared in a special way to counter its innate bitterness.
This was supposed to have remarkable curative properties.
