+++
title = "The sub-continental stirrings"

+++
We had earlier commented how the Trojan horse, whom we used to call
Chappal (slipper) in our days of youth was working his wonders with the
Indian army. We had speculated that he was specifically an agent of the
roguish pirate chief Ponting to do away with his main dangers before the
invasion of the subcontinent. We have now got some intelligence as to
how the Indian ants invited the parasitoid wasp Greg “Chappal” into
their nest. The lazy king of Vanga, seeing his Kiwi mercenary returning
to his own country, decided to get Chappal thinking he was an ally of
his. A little did he know of the mission Ponting had primed Chappal for.
In the mean time with the actual battle performance of the Vanga
champion being less than desirable, and the veteran Prince of Bombay
being side-lined due to the blows he had received from cannon shards in
the thick of battle, the prince of the Karnata country decided to stage
a coup de tat with his supporters. Pulling around him a bunch of
adventurers such as the Bundela, the Mohammedan Kaif, the viShama
Gambhira and others he got over the Trojan plant Chappal to his side.
Then he used Chappal to seize the throne by ousting the Vanga warrior
and also trying to threaten the Vanga’s supporters like the Sikh
turbanator and the Andhra chieftain from Vangipura. As result the whole
Indian army has been stirred and the atmosphere of fear has been
reinstated to possibly trigger a decline in performance.
