+++
title = "rAja bhoja: the glory and tragedy of the setting Hindu Sun"

+++
bhoja’s military and political career  
The paramAra rAjpUts are supposed to have arisen from the sacrificial
pit on arbuda parvata, which was the source of many kShatriyas who were
generated by the devas for the destruction of the turuShkas and
mlechChas who were a pestilence on Aryavarta. In historical reality
paramAras were a subsidiary branch of the rAShTrakUTas, who were
appointed as governors of central India in mAlava province by the main
ruling branch. The paramAra rAjputs founded the notable city of dhArA in
central India, which remained their capital until its ultimate conquest.
It was here that their greatest king and a remarkable genius, bhoja rAja
came to power by 1000 AD and ruled for more than half a century. He was
the son of sindhurAja, who was a notable conqueror, who defeated the
chAlukyas, hUNas and shilaharas of the Konkan region. bhoja’s path was
similar to other great Hindu rulers of the time engaged in wasteful
internecine struggles for supremacy. We get some glimpses of his
remarkable life from the apocryphal biography bhoja prabandhaM. Early in
his career, just before he came to power, bhoja was afflicted by a tumor
in his brain which used to cause him intense head aches. Two learned
brahmin brothers from the school of Ujjain, who were pre-eminent
surgeons of the era, performed a surgery on his brain and relieved him
of his tumor. The description of the surgery that survives suggests that
they artificially induced a coma with a special preparation known as the
sammohini and then opened his skull to remove the tumor. He was then
brought back to consciousness with another drug.

bhoja survived this surgery remarkably well and had an illustrious reign
both as a military commander and encylopaedic scholar. bhoja long
desired to reduce his arch-rivals the chAlukyas of the Deccan and
initiated several successful campaigns again them. Then he tried a
remarkable political game to destroy the chAlukyas: by forming an
alliance with the choLa king rAjendra, bhoja induced him to attack the
chAlukyas from the south. Likewise he induced the kalachuri king kumara
gA\~Ngeyadeva (who claimed descent from the haihayas who had survived
the ancient assault of the bhArgavas) to attack the chAlukyas from the
east. bhoja himself pressed on them from the north. For this purpose he
erected the mighty fortifications of mANDu and intially put the
chAlukyas on the retreat. But the chAlukyas, suddenly reviving the glory
that pulakeshin-II had taken them to, remained firm in the 3 front war,
eventually causing bhoja’s allies to give up. someshvara, the chAlukya
subsequently invaded the paramAra kingdom and stormed the fort of mANDu
after a long siege, then took Ujjain, and finally captured dhAra the
capital of bhoja from him. bhoja unfazed retreated north and with the
help of rAjendra choLa who kept the pressure from the south, took back
dhAra and ujjain. Then bhoja conquered chitrakUTa (Chittor) and
medhapATha (Mewar) from the shishodias and established his sway over the
arbuda fort (Mount Abu).

rAja bhoja then organized his armies to attack Mahmud Ghaznavi who had
invaded Somnath. Ghaznavi fearing the powerful army of bhoja retreated
via the desert of sindh to avoid a clash (reported by Turkic author
Gardizi as Hindu padishaw parmar dev) with the hindu king and lost many
of his men. bhoja repulsed the ghaznavid Masu’d who lead a huge army
into India to attack the rich inner cities which his father had failed
to raid. Then bhoja realizing the national threat from Islam, organized
a confedration of Hindu kings including the kalachuri lakShmI-karNa, the
ChahamAna and other rAjpUts to fight the Ghaznavid Maliq Salar Masud. In
the great battle of Bahraich the Hindu confedracy fought a pitched
battle for about a month with the Moslems and completely defeated
them, killing Salar Masud in the process. They then went on to liberate
Hansi, Thaneshvar, Nagarkot and other cities taken by the Ghaznavids and
marched against Lahore and besieged it. Just at the point Lahore was
about to fall to them, the Hindu kings had a disagreement over who would
own the liberated territories and their armies disbanded and dispersed
in a huff. bhoja started fighting his erstwhile allies in the war
against the Moslems.

bhoja first defeated the ChAhamAnas of shAkambharI, but the ChAhamanas
of naDDula repulsed his attempt to take their kingdom. bhoja next tried
to seize the kingdom of the chandellas, but they formed an alliance with
the rAShTrakUTas of Kannauj and kachChapaghAtas of Gwalior and repulsed
him. bhoja however, did keep the ghaznavids in check with help from his
shishodia feudatories. bhoja then seized the territory of the western
chAlukya bhIma of Gujarat. bhIma unfazed by this formed an alliance with
the haihaya, lakShmI-karNa to attack bhoja in a two front war on both
east and west. bhoja was caught in the pincer grip, and while fighting
his two enemies he was shot down by an arrow on the battle field. Thus,
the great rAja bhoja having spent his career in numerous campaigns had
fallen like a true kShatriya in the defense of his capital.

Hence its said that when he was alive the poets would say:

“adya dhArA sadAdhArA sadAlambA sarasvatI |  
paNDitAH maNDitAH sarve bhojarAje bhuvaM gate ||”  
Today dhArA is ever supported, and the Goddess Sarasvati is ever propped
up. All the pundits are adorned with the coming of king Bhoja on this
earth.

When he fell in the defending dhArA from his rivals they said:

“adya dhArA nirAdhArA nirAlambA sarasvatI |  
paNDitAH khaNDitAH sarve bhojarAje divaM gate ||“  
Today dhArA is unsupported, and the Goddess Sarasvati is without a prop.
All the pundits are scattered with the ascent of king Bhoja to heaven.  
  
bhoja the genius  
An analysis of bhoja’s military campaigns show that he was undoubtedly a
good general in war and was studded with many major victories over rival
rAjas and Islamic marauders. His military career was however, hardly any
greater than his equally warlike and militarily successful
contemporaries such as rAjendra choLa or lakShmI-karNa kalachuri or
someshvara chAlukya. Yet rAja bhoja is remembered much more than any of
these contemporaries of his and is often compared with the illustrious
vikramAditya of the golden gupta era. His name is a household one
amongst all brought up in the sanskritic culture. Why is this so?

The main reason for this is that Hindus have always remembered
philosphers, poets and scholars much more than kings merely decorated
with military success. A king who did good to the people was much more
embedded in the collective memory of the Hindus than a king who
conquered vast territories. rAja bhoja definitely stood out in this
regard as one of historical India’s most remarkable intellectuals with
an astonishing variety of interests and oceanic knowledge.

bhoja rAja constructed several spectacular temples, one of the most
dramatic of which is seen in the form of the great temple of shiva
termed bhojeshvara at bhojapura a some distance from the modern city of
Bhopal. Another notable construction, which is a historical civil
engineering masterpiece, is the bhoja lake which was built by daming and
channelizing the Betwa river. He is also supposed to have paid great
attention to the education of his people, so much so that even humble
weavers in kingdom are supposed to have composed metrical sanskrit
kAvyas. In addition to patronizing the ancient schools in ujjaini he
also built a large university in bhojapura with an attached temple of
sarasvatI in 1034 CE . This university was apparently attended by 1400
advanced students, and also housed a number of noted sanskrit writers
and poets such as uvaTa and dhanapAla. The university was later
destroyed by Dilaawar Khan Ghori and Mahmud Khalji during their
invasions of Malava. The sarasvatI idol from the temple was taken by the
Britons to the museum in London.

rAja bhoja also wrote 84 books during his life of which several survive
and we shall summarize a few below to illustrate the remarkable breadth
of his knowledge and originality:  
  
sarasvati kaNThAbharaNa: a treatise on Sanskrit grammar for poetic and
rhetorical compositions. Some of the poetic examples provided by him in
this work are still appreciated as the highest cream of Sanskrit poetry.

rAjamArtANda(pata\~Njali yoga sUtra bhAshya): Major commentary on the
yoga sUtras of pata\~Njali, wherein the rAja clearly explains various
forms of meditations such as savitarka, savichAra, sAnanda and sAsmita,
which are critical for understanding the nature of cognition from the
view point of yoga.

samarangaNa-sUtradhara: A treatise on civil engineering detailing
construction of buildings, forts, temples, idols of deities and
mechanical devices including a so called flying machine or glider. It is
composed largely in the anuShTubh meter and in about 83 chapters.

tattva-prakAsha: A remarkable siddhAnta tantra work providing a
synthesis of the entire ancient and voluminous literature of the
siddhanta tantras of shiva. It was the basis of all subsequent
developments of the saiddhAntika shaiva streams that followed.

rasa-rAja-mR^igA\~nka: A treatise on chemistry, especially dealing with
the extraction of metals from ores, and production of various drugs.

jyotiSha-rAja-mR^igA\~nka: A treatise on astronomy and construction of
instruments for astronomical observations.

yuktikalpataru: A technological manual describing the construction of
ships for naval warfare and the making of glass amongst other things.

shR^i\~NgAra prakAsha: A treatise on Hindu erotics.

dharmashAstra vR^itti: A commentary on the Hindu legalistic literature.

champU rAmAyaNa: A re-narration of the rAmAyaNa in mixture of prose and
poetry, which characterizes the champUs. The description of hanumat’s
qualities are particularly poetic.

The classical Hindu twilight and modern India  
Perusing bhoja’s surviving works one sees that the Hindu world just
prior to its eclipse by the violent Islamic whirlwind from Central Asia
was not one in its decline. On the contrary, due geniuses like bhoja, it
was in the peak in of achievements in terms of arts, technology and
science. Yet, this India and its illustrious rulers were almost opaque
to impending doom that loomed large. Some authors have attributed to
this to regionalism or the lack of a national Hindu spirit. This was not
entirely lacking as evidenced by the confedration that overthrew the
Ghaznavids. Yet, the fact that these illustrious rulers were pulling
down each other even as their common enemy Mahmud was savaging North
India is rather striking. Another paradoxical point to note is that a
rAja bhoja became a pan-Indian epitome of a great ruler from the Tamil
country to Kashmir. This suggests that the cultural unity of greater
India remained intact even in this period–there were indeed figures who
capable of being pan-Indian heros even if they were only regional in the
military achievements. Centuries later the great Vijayanagaran monarch
took the title abhinava-bhoja (the new bhoja) rather than calling
himself after any other rAja. In conclusion, there was a collective
Indian mind, that appreciated the scholarly king, but failed to
collectively respond to the problem possed by Islam. Likewise, the kings
of bhoja’s era did not lack courage or military skills, but *apparently*
remained in their childish coccoons of romantic military adventures,
even as a greater danger threatened to extinguish them.

The lesson of the twilight of classical Hindu India is a chilling one
for modern India. The modern Indians in the same way as their ancestors
pride themselves of their intellectual and technological achievements.
Despite the depredations of centuries they have the vestiges of cultural
unity and continue to have pan-India icons, howsoever crass they may be
in comparison to the legendary rAja bhoja. But sadly they remain as
naive as their predecessors in the twilight era to the impending threats
from Islam and Christianity.
