---
title: RELIGION NOT THE CRYING NEED OF INDIA

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](02_chicago_record_sep_11_1893.htm)

## RELIGION NOT THE CRYING NEED OF INDIA

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 1, pp. 123-26.)

*\[A verbatim transcript of the address, delivered at the*

*Parliament of Religions, September 20, 1893\]*

(Cf. ["Religion Not the Crying Need of India", *Complete Works*, I:
20](../../../volume_1/addresses_at_the_parliament/v1_c1_crying_need.htm)
, for select quotations from the full address.)

\[*Chicago Inter Ocean,* September 21, 1893\]

Suami Vivekananda

At the close of the reading of Mr. Headland's paper on "Religion in
Peking" Dr. Momerie announced that the other speakers bulletined for the
evening had failed to appear. It was but 9 o'clock, and the main
auditorium and galleries were well filled. There was an outburst of
applause as they caught sight of the Hindoo monk, Vivekananda, sitting
in his orange robe and scarlet turban upon the platform.

This popular Hindoo responded to the generous applause by saying that he
did not come to speak to-night. He took occasion, however, to criticise
many of the statements made in the paper by Mr. Headland. Referring to
the poverty which prevails in China, he said that the missionaries would
do better to work in appeasing hunger than in endeavoring to persuade
the Chinese to renounce their faith of centuries and embrace
Christianity at \[as\] the price of food. And then the Hindu stepped
back on the platform and whispered to Bishop Keane, of the Catholic
church, a moment.

He then resumed his address by saying that Bishop Keane had told him
that Americans would not be offended at honest criticism. He said he had
heard of all the terrible things and horrible conditions which prevail
in China but he had not heard that any asylums had been erected by
Christians for remedying all these difficulties. He said:

Christian brethren of America, you are so fond of sending out
missionaries to save the souls of heathens. I ask you what have you done
and are doing to save their bodies from starvation? (Applause). In
India, there are 300,000,000 men and women living on an average of a
little more than 50 cents a month. I have seen them living for years
upon wild flowers. Whenever there was a little famine hundreds of
thousands died of starvation. Christian missionaries come and offer life
but only on condition that the Hindoos become Christians, abandoning the
faith of their fathers and forefathers. Is it right? There are hundreds
of asylums, but if the Mohammedans or the Hindoos go there they would be
kicked out. There are thousands of asylums erected by Hindoos where
anybody would be received. There are hundreds of churches that have been
erected with the assistance of the Hindoos, but no Hindoo temples for
which a Christian has given a penny.

What the East Needs

Brethren of America, the crying evil of the East is not religion. We
have more than religion enough; what they want is bread, but they are
given a stone. (Applause). It is an insult to a suffering man dying of
hunger to preach to him metaphysics. Therefore, if you wish to
illustrate the meaning of "brotherhood" treat the Hindoo more kindly,
even though he be a Hindoo and is faithful to his religion. Send
missionaries to them to teach them how better to earn a better piece of
bread and not to teach them metaphysical nonsense. (Great applause).

And then the monk said he was in ill health today and wished to be
excused. But there were thunders of applause and cries of "Go on" and
Mr. Vivekananda continued.

The paper just read says something about the miserable and ignorant
priest. The same may be said of India. I am one of those monks who have
been described as beggarly. That is the pride of my life. (Applause). I
am proud in that sense to be Christ-like. I eat what I have today and
think not of tomorrow. "Behold the lilies of the field; they toil not,
neither do they spin." The Hindoo carries that out literally. Many
gentlemen present in Chicago sitting on this platform can testify that
for the last twelve years I never knew whence my next meal was coming. I
am proud to be a beggar for the sake of the Lord. The idea in the east
is \[that\] to preach or teach anything for the sake of money is low and
vulgar, but to teach the name of the Lord for pay is such a degradation
as would cause the priest to lose caste and be spat upon. There is one
suggestion in the paper that is true: If the priests of China and India
were organized there is an enormous amount of potential energy which
could be used for regeneration of society and humanity. I endeavored to
organize it in India, but failed for lack of money. It may be I shall
get the help I want in America.  
But we know it is very hard for a heathen to get any help from
"Christian people". (Great applause). I have heard so much of this land
of freedom, of liberty and freedom of thought that I am not discouraged.
I thank you, ladies and gentlemen.

And then the popular visitor bowed gracefully and sought to retire with
a graceful smile, but the audience cried to him to proceed. Mr.
Vivekananda, fairly bubbling with an expression of good nature, then
explained the Hindoo theory of \[re\]incarnation. At the close of the
address Dr. Momerie \[a delegate from England\] said that he now
understood why the newspapers had well called this parliament an
approach to the millennium. . . .

[→](04_ny_critic_nov_11_1893.htm)

</div>
