---
title: A HINDOO MONK

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](21_detroit_evening_news_mar_21_1894.htm)

## A HINDOO MONK

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 2, pp. 6-7. Cf. “Swami Vivekananda on India”,
([*Complete Works*, II:
479-81.](../../../volume_2/reports_in_american_newspapers/swami_vivekananda_on_india.htm))

\[*Bay City Times Press*, March 21, 1894\]

He gave an interesting lecture at the Opera House last evening. It is
rarely that Bay City people have the opportunity of listening to a
lecture similar to the one given last evening by Swami Vive Kananda. The
gentleman is a native of India, hav ing been born at Calcutta about 30
years ago. The lower floor of the Opera house was about half filled when
the speaker was introduced by Dr. C. T. Newkirk. During his discourse,
he scored the people of this country for their worship of the almighty
dollar. It is true that there is caste in India. There, a murderer can
never reach the top. Here, if he gets a million dollars he is as good as
any one. In India, if a man is a criminal once, he is degraded forever.
One of the great factors in the Hindoo religion is its tolerance of
other religions and beliefs. Missionaries are much more severe on the
religions of India than upon that of other Oriental countries, because
the Hindoos allow them to be, thus carrying out one of their cardinal
beliefs, that of toleration. Kananda is a highly educated and polished
gentleman. It is said that he was asked in Detroit if the Hindoos throw
their children into the river. Whereupon, he replied that they do not,
neither do they burn witches at the stake. The speaker lectures in
Saginaw tonight.

[→](23_saginaw_evening_news_mar_21_1894.htm)

</div>
