---
title: THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF INDIA

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](23_saginaw_evening_news_mar_21_1894.htm)

## THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF INDIA

(*The Vedanta Kesari*, 1987 Annual Issue, pp. 445-46 and *New
Discoveries*, Vol. 2. pp. 37-39.)

\[*The Lynn Daily Evening Item*, (date?)\]

NORTH SHORE CLUB

The Meeting, Tuesday Afternoon, Addressed by Suami Vive Kananda, a
Learned Monk from India — Description of the Manners and Customs of His
Country

(Delivered April 17, 1894, of which there is no verbatim transcript
available.)

At the meeting of the North Shore Club, Tuesday afternoon, the audience
was a large and brilliant one, representing the highest culture, and
including many distinguished guests. Suami Vive Kananda, from India, a
learned monk, who speaks English with ease and fluency, gave an
intensely interesting description of the manners and customs of his
country. Suami Vive Kananda, who wore the yellow robe and turban of his
order, began by saying that India is divided into two parts, the
northern and the southern. In each the language and customs are so
different that the speaker who was from the northern portion on meeting
a fellow countryman at the Parliament of Religions from the southern,
was obliged to converse with him in English, neither being able to
understand the other's native language. Throughout the entire country
there are nine languages and 100 dialects spoken.

There is some uniformity of religion, yet each sect is a religion and a
law unto itself. Many erroneous descriptions have been written about
India, based on imperfect knowledge from which inferences have been
drawn that have been most prejudicial. With the Hindoo everything is
subservient to religion and he gives up all that is antagonistic to it,
his creed being that he is not to enjoy life but to conquer it and gain
a supreme mastery over self, which is the highest type of civilization.
Caste distinctions which are being obliterated are simply the Aryans and
the un-Aryans — the Brahmins and the Sudras. The Brahmin, who is the
child of a thousand years' culture, must lead a life of rigid
discipline; but the Sudra, who is ignorant, is allowed great latitude.

Woman in the position of mother is accorded universal reverence in
India. When a son who has become a monk returns to his home, his father,
when greeting him, must kneel and touch his forehead to the earth; but
the monk must kneel before his mother. Women in India do not throw their
children into the rivers to be devoured by crocodiles. Widows are not
burned on the funeral pyre of their husband unless it is a voluntary act
of self-immolation.

There is no divorce allowed for the high class; a woman who leaves her
husband, even if she be most degraded, holds still an interest in his
property. Suami Vive Kananda recited a beautiful passage from the Legend
of the Ramayana, one of the grandest poems of India, which showed what
the love of a wife for her husband should be. The love of Sita for Rama.
He added, “Much is said in these days of the 'survival of the fittest,'”
and western nations use it as an argument against India, reasoning that
their own wealth, prosperity and power show them to be greater and their
religion higher and purer.

But India has seen mighty nations rise and fall whose aim has been only
the power of conquest and the glory of this life. India has been
repeatedly despoiled, has worn the yoke of the conqueror and borne the
burden of oppression with indomitable patience and has shown tolerance
to all, because she has possessed the knowledge that her people hold
fast to a religion that stands securely on a high spirituality and not
on the shifting sand of present enjoyment.

[→](25_ny_daily_tribune_apr_25_1894.htm)

</div>
