---
title: PRIEST SWAMI IN TOWN

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](33_baltimore_american_oct_13_1894.htm)

## PRIEST SWAMI IN TOWN

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 2, pp. 196-200.)

\[*Baltimore News*, October 13, 1894\]

A High Caste Hindoo Visiting in Baltimore

———

HIS GORGEOUS GARB ATTRACTS MUCH ATTENTION IN THE LOBBY AT THE RENNERT —
HE WHISTLES AND INDULGES IN EAST INDIAN WIT — HE COMES TO BALTIMORE ON A
TOUR OF THE COUNTRY AND WILL SPEAK AT THE LYCEUM TOMORROW NIGHT.

Swami Vivekananda, High Priest of the Hindoos, walked into the lobby of
the Hotel Rennert this forenoon attired in a flaming red cloak and a
gaudy yellow turban that made him the centre of all eyes. . . .

His Idea of Humor

Swami Vivekananda has the sense of humor about him. He was talking this
morning about the Food Show, which he intends to visit. He says he
doesn't know much about food except to swallow it, and that is a very
representative specimen of the wit of Ormus (Hormuz, or Ormuz, an
ancient Iranian town.) and of Ind.

Another time he spoke of women's rights and said laughingly that women
had more rights the world over than they were credited with having. When
he changed his black coat, before going to the Rennert, and put on the
cardinal red garment with the yellow turban he came out of his room
smiling, and said:

"A transformation!"

The High Priest can whistle and has enough music in his soul to start
the tunes in class-meeting if he were Methodist instead of Hindoo. He
whistled a couple of strains in his room this morning for a reporter of
The News. It was not "Daisy Bell" nor yet "Sweet Marie," and must have
been some sort of a heathen Hindoo jingle. . . .

  

Views on Topics of the Day

Swami is traveling around the country, as he says, lecturing and
studying American institutions, but he seems not to have got much into
the pith of American sociology, for he knows nothing of such questions
as European immigration, divorce, the race problem, etc., which are
worrying the economists of the land.

He is, however, posted on Oriental immigration, and says the United
States has no right to bar out the Chinese. He says the law of love must
prevail and force must yield. He predicts the downfall of any nation
that uses force. He says also that the United States should open her
doors to the world. He believes the Southern part of the continent
should be filled with Hindoos and Chinese.

"There is no such thing as divorce in India," he said;

our law does not allow it. Our women are more limited in their sphere
than the women of America. Some of them are as highly educated. They are
entering the medical profession to some extent now. I see no reason why
American women should not vote.

He evaded a question as to the position of Hindoo women in their homes
and their treatment by their husbands. It may be that he does not know
much about it. He is not a married man. Priests of his caste do not
marry.

He mentioned two things which he said had impressed him in America. One
was the absence of poverty in the country at large, and the other was
the unusual prevalence of ignorance in the South.

Likes the Elevator

When he went to the elevator at the Rennert he said:

There is an American institution which we do not have to any extent in
India. I like it very much.

A lady was just coming off the elevator. She was somewhat startled by
the red and yellow costume of the priest, but his imperturbable
countenance gave no sign of consciousness of the attention he attracted.

His address tomorrow night at the Lyceum will be mainly introductory of
himself and explanatory of the Hindoo nation. He will speak briefly, but
will remain in Baltimore and speak more at length a week from tomorrow
night.

[→](35_baltimore_sunday_herald_oct_14_1894.htm)

</div>
