---
title: THE DOCTRINE OF THE SWAMI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](40_ny_world_dec_8_1895.htm)

## THE DOCTRINE OF THE SWAMI

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 3, pp. 340-41.)

\[*New York Herald*, January 19, 1896\]

The following is a brief sketch of the Swami's fundamental teachings: (A
summary of the Swami's teachings taken from what appears to be a written
statement.)

Every man must develop according to his own nature. As every science has
its methods so has every religion. Methods of attaining the end of our
religion are called Yoga, and the different forms of Yoga that we teach
are adapted to the different natures and temperaments of men. We
classify them in the following way, under four heads:  
(1) Karma Yoga — The manner in which a man realizes his own divinity
through works and duty.  
(2) Bhakti Yoga — The realization of a divinity through devotion to and
love of a personal God.  
(3) Rajah Yoga — The realization of divinity through control of mind.  
(4) Gnana Yoga — The realization of man's own divinity through
knowledge.  
These are all different roads leading to the same center — God. Indeed,
the varieties of religious belief are an advantage, since all faiths are
good, so far as they encourage man to religious life. The more sects
there are the more opportunities there are for making successful appeals
to the divine instinct in all men.

[→](42_hartford_daily_times_feb_1_1896.htm)

</div>
