---
title: '"UNIVERSAL RELIGION"'

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](41_ny_herald_jan_19_1896.htm)

## "UNIVERSAL RELIGION"

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 3, pp. 475-79.)

Vivekananda's Lecture on the Creeds of the World

\[*Hartford Daily Times*, February 1, 1896\]

A fair house greeted the Hindu monk, Vivekananda, last night. . . . He
was introduced by Mr. C. B. Patterson, in some fitting remarks. . . .
His subject last night was "The Ideal, or Universal Religion". ("The
Ideal of a Universal Religion" was delivered January 31, 1896, of which
there is no verbatim transcript available.)

Throughout the universe there are two forces constantly at work, the
centrifugal and centripetal, positive and negative, action and reaction,
attraction and repulsion. We find love and hatred, good and evil. What
plane is stronger than the spiritual plane, the plane of religion? The
world furnishes no hate stronger than that engendered by religion, and
no love stronger. No teachings have brought more unhappiness into the
world, nor more happiness. The beautiful teachings of Buddha have been
carried across the Himalayas, at a height of 20,000 feet, by his
disciples. Five hundred years later came the teachings of your beautiful
Christ, and these have been carried on the wings of the wind. On the
other hand, look at your beautiful earth deluged in blood in the
interest of propagandism and religion. As soon as a man comes into the
company of those who do not believe as he does, his very nature changes.
It is his own opinions he fights for, not religion. He becomes the very
embodiment of cruelty and fanaticism. His religion is all right, but
when he starts out to fight for his own selfish opinions he is all
wrong. People are up in arms about the Armenian and the Turkish
butcheries, but their consciences don't say a word when the butcheries
are committed in the interest of their own religion. In human beings we
find a curious mixture of God, man, and devil, and religion stirs up the
latter more than anything else. When we all think alike, the God side of
our nature comes out; but let there be a clash of opinions, and presto,
change! the devil has the floor. This has been so from time immemorial,
and will be so always. In India we know what fanaticism means, for that
country for the last thousand years has been the especial field of
missionaries. But above the clash of opinions, and the fight for
religions, there comes the voice of peace. For 3,000 years efforts have
been made to bring the different religions into harmony. But we know how
this effort has failed. And it always will fail, and it ought to fail.
We have a network of words about love, peace, and universal brotherhood,
which were meant all right originally, but we repeat them like parrots,
and to us they mean nothing. Is there a universal philosophy for the
world? Not yet. Each religion has its own creeds and dogmas and insists
upon propagating them. You can't make one religion for the whole world.
That must not be. The Armenians say it will be all right if you will all
become Armenians. And the Pope of Rome says: "O yea, it is a very easy
thing. If you will all become Roman Catholics, it will be all right."
And so with the Greek church, and the Protestant church, and all the
rest. There can never be one religion only, it would be death to all
other religions. If every one thought alike there would be no more
thought to think. If everybody looked alike, what monotony! Look alike
and think alike — what could we do but sit down and die in despair? We
can't live like a row of chipmunks; variation belongs to human life. One
God, one religion is an old sing—song, but there's danger in it. But,
thank God, it can never be. Start out with your long purse, and your
guns and cannon, to push your propagandism. And suppose you succeed for
a while? In ten years your so—called unity would be split into
fragments. That is why there are so many sects. Take the largest
religion, the Buddhist. They try to help the world to be better. Next
come the Christians, with \[a\] good many things to teach. They have
three Gods in one, and one in three, and one of the three took on the
sins of the world and was killed. Whoever doesn't believe in him, goes
to a very hot place. And Mohammed, whoever doesn't believe in him will
have his skin burnt off, and then a fresh one will be furnished to be
burnt, that he may know that Allah is the all-powerful. All religions
came originally from the Orient. These great teachers or incarnations
come in different forms. The Hindus have ten incarnations; the first was
a fish, and so on, down to the fifth, and from there, they were all men.
The Buddhists say: "We don't care to have so many incarnations; we want
only one." The Christians say: "We will have only one, and this is
Christ." And they say he is the only one. But the Buddhist says they
have the start in time; their great teacher came five hundred years
earlier. And the Mohammedans say theirs came last, and therefore is the
best. Each one loves his own, just as a mother loves her own child. The
Buddhist never sees any fault in Buddha; the Christian never sees any
fault in Christ, and the Mohammedan never sees any fault in Mo hammed.
The Christian says their God took the form of a dove and came down, and
that they say is not mythology, but history. The Hindu says his god is
manifested in a cow and that he says is not superstition, but history.
The Jew thinks his Holy of Holies can be contained in a box or chest,
with an angel on guard on either side. But the Christian's God in the
form of a beautiful man or woman, is a horrible idol. "Break it down!"
they say. One man's prophet did such and such wonderful things, while
others call it only superstition. So where's your unity? Then there are
your rituals. The Roman Catholic puts on his robe, as I have mine. He
has his bells and candles and holy water, and says these are good and
necessary, but what you do, he says is only superstition. We can never
upset all this and have but one religion for the very life of thought is
the differentiation of thought. We must learn to love those who think
exactly opposite to us. We have humanity for the background, but each
must have his own individuality and his own thought. Push the sects
forward and forward till each man and woman are sects unto themselves.
We must learn to love the man who differs from us in opinion. We must
learn that differentiation is the life of thought. We have one common
goal, and that is the perfection of the human soul, the god within us.
Religion is the great force to help unfold the god within man. But we
have to unfold in our own way. We can't all assimilate the same kind of
food. Let your aspirations be of the highest, and your inspirations will
be in harmony with reason and all known laws, and the Lord will always
be with you.

[→](43_tribune_mar_5_1896.htm)

</div>
