---
title: OUT OF THE EAST

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](45_boston_evening_transcript_mar_21_1896.htm)

## OUT OF THE EAST

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 4, pp. 60-62.)

\[*Boston Daily Globe*, March 24, 1896\]

———

Message Brought by the Swami Vivekananda —  
in His Country the Gods Are "Bright Ones" That Help

The Swami Vivekananda is enjoying as great a degree of popularity on his
present visit to Boston as he did when society, fashionable,
intellectual and faddist, went wild over him on his former visit. . . .

. . . A New York paper published an interview with the Swami, in which
he is reported to have expressed the opinion that in Boston "the women
are all faddists, all fickle, merely bent on following something new and
strange." (Cf. *[Complete
Works](../../../volume_5/sayings_and_utterances.htm#v9_amnews)*, V: 413
.) But Swami Vivekananda says that this is an exaggerated and distorted
presentation of a criticism which he made upon all American women, that
they were too superficial and too prone to follow the sensational and to
change from one thing to another. This he says his observation has
forced upon him. The American women are intellectual, but they are not
steady, serious and sincere.

The first of the Swami's lectures was delivered before an audience of
400 people in the Allen gymnasium, Saturday evening on "The Science of
Work," and the second one of the course on "Devotion"[1](#fn1) was given
in the same place, the hall being filled and a number turned away unable
to gain admittance.

The lecture was exceedingly interesting and the speaker's manner was
very magnetic. In his country, said the Swami, the gods were the "bright
ones" who gave help to men and received help from them. The gods are
only human beings who are somewhat elevated after death, but God, the
highest, is never prayed to or asked for help. He is given only love and
worship without anything being asked in return. There are two phases of
this God, the one, the abstract God behind the substance of the
universe, and the other the personal God who is seen through human
intellect and given attributes by it.

The love which is given to God never takes, but always gives, and it
does not depend on anything. The worshiper does not pray for health,
money or any other thing, but is content with the lot apportioned to
him.

People who ask about religion from mere motives of curiosity become
faddists, they are always looking for some—thing new and their brains
degenerate until they become old rags. It is a religious dissipation
with them.

It is not the place that makes heaven or hell, but the mind. Love knows
no fear, there can be no love where it is. In love of any sort external
objects are only suggested by something within — it is one's own ideal
projected, and God is the highest ideal that can be conceived of.

Hatred of the world does not drive good men from it, but the world slips
away from the great and saintly. The world, the family and social life,
are all training grounds, that is all.

When one realizes that God is love, it does not matter what his other
attributes are, that is the only essential.

The more a man throws himself away, the more God comes in, hence
self-abnegation, which is the secret of all religion and morality.

Too many people bring down their ideals. They want a comfortable
religion, but there is none such. It is all self-surrender and upward
striving.

[→](47_boston_evening_transcript_mar_27_1896.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Delivered March 21 and March 23, 1896 respectively, of
    which there are no verbatim transcripts available.
