---
title: "SWAMI VIVEKANANDA AT THE\n LOS ANGELES HOME"

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](54_la_herald_jan_26_1900.htm)

## SWAMI VIVEKANANDA AT THE LOS ANGELES HOME

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 5, pp. 218-20.)

\[*Unity*, February (?) 1900\]

. . . . . .

. . . We had eight lectures at the Home by the Swami (This newspaper
report is an overview of eight class lectures delivered at the Home of
Truth in December 1899 and January 1900, of which there is only one
verbatim transcript, "Hints on Practical Spirituality", published in
[*Complete Works*, II:
24-37](../../../volume_2/hints_on_practical_spirituality.htm) .) and all
were intensely interesting, though a few malcontents complained because
he did not give some short cuts into the King dom \[of Heaven\] and show
an easy way to the attainment of mental powers; instead he would say,

Go home and promise yourself that you will not worry for a whole month
even though the maid breaks all your best china.

There is combined in the Swami Vivekananda the learning of a university
president, the dignity of an archbishop, with the grace and winsomeness
of a free natural child. Getting on the platform without a moment's
preparation he would soon be in the midst of his subject, sometimes
becoming almost tragic as his mind would wander from deep metaphysics to
the prevailing condition in Christian countries today who go and seek to
reform Filipinos with the swords in one hand and the Bible in the other,
or in South Africa allow children of the same father to cut each other
to pieces. To contrast this condition of things he described what took
place during the last famine in India where men would die of starvation
beside their cattle rather than stretch forth a hand to kill. (Will
Unity readers remember the fifty million Hindoos who are starving today
and send them a blessing?)

Instead of trying to give much of what we heard from the Swami direct, I
will append a few of the sayings of his master, Ramakrishna, that will
better indicate the nature of his teaching. His chief aim seems to be to
encourage people in living simple, quiet wholesome lives — that the life
shall be the religion, not something separate and apart.

To the true mother he gives the highest place, counting her as more to
be esteemed than those who simply run around teaching. "Anyone can
talk," he said,

but if I had to look after a baby, I could not endure existence for more
than three days.

Frequently he would speak of the "mother" as we speak of the "father,"
and would say "the mother will take care of us," or "the mother will
look after things."

We had a lecture on Christmas day from the Swami entitled, "Christ's
Mission to the World," and a better one on this subject I never heard.
No Christian minister could have presented Jesus as a character worthy
(of) the greatest reverence more eloquently or more powerfully than did
this learned Hindoo, who told us that in this country on account of his
dark skin he has been refused admission to hotels, and even barbers have
sometimes objected to shave him. Is it any wonder that our "heathen"
brethren never fail to make mention of this fact that even "our" Master
was an Oriental?

[→](56_sf_chronicle_feb_24_1900.htm)

</div>
