---
title: HINDOO MONK LECTURES

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](55_unity_feb_1900.htm)

## HINDOO MONK LECTURES

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 5, pp. 315-16.)

\[*San Francisco Chronicle*, February 24, 1900\]

Swami Vivekananda's Topic Is "The Idea of Universal

Religion"

At Golden Gate Hall last evening Swami Vivekananda, a Hindoo monk,
entertained an audience for an hour and a half with his lecture on "The
Idea of Universal Religion." (Of which no verbatim transcript is
available.) . . .

Tracing religion from the commencement of history he spoke of the
existence of creeds. Sects were known from the earliest time, he said.
As time rolled on there began various contests for a supremacy between
the various sects. History, he declared, was a mere repetition of
slaughter under the guise of religion. Superstition, he thought, was
fast becoming a thing of the past through the expansion of the minds of
men. They had more liberality of thought now. They were deeper students
of philosophy and through the principles of true philosophy only could
religion in its deepest form be found. Until men could accord to others
the right of free belief on all subjects, and be willing to believe
truth under whatever form it might appear, no universal religion would
be manifest to the world, he declared. It would never be promulgated by
any society, but would grow instinctively as the intellect of man
developed.

[→](57_oakland_tribune_feb_26_1900.htm)

</div>
