---
title: TRUE RELIGION

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [American Newspaper
Reports](american_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](57_oakland_tribune_feb_26_1900.htm)

## TRUE RELIGION

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 6, pp. 405-6.)

\[*The Alameda Encinal*, April 5, 1900\]

Hindu Philosopher Gives His Ideas

Last evening the Swami Vivekananda gave the first of a series of three
public lectures at Tucker Hall on "The Development of Religious Ideas."
(Of which no verbatim transcript is available.)

The speaker dwelt briefly on the similarity of ideas in the minds of
orthodox Christians, Mohammedans and Hindus with regard to the origin of
their religions. Each believed his particular prophet or teacher to have
been inspired in some mysterious way by a God or Gods, who as it were,
regulated or influenced the affairs of this world from a distance. The
modern scientific mind, on the contrary, instead of seeking for outside
or supernatural causes for phenomena endeavored to find cause in the
thing or condition itself.

While at first glance this method of investigation might seem to take
from religion some of its vital elements, yet in reality it resulted in
man finding that the spiritual attributes of deity and the states of
mind producing heaven and hell were all within himself, and although the
result of this rational modern inquiry might appear to contradict much
that had been handed down in the old religious writings such as Bible,
Koran and Vedas, yet the contradiction was more apparent than real, for
the prophets and teachers of old had true perceptions, but were mistaken
only in attributing their experiences to outside agencies, instead of
realizing them to be the development and expression of elements in their
own souls before unknown and unrecognized.

The lecturer traced some of the common beliefs regarding location of
heavens and hells, of various burial rites and customs, and he spoke of
the impressions made on the primitive mind that resulted in a
personification of the active natural forces in the phenomena with which
we are surrounded. . . .

[→](../part_ii_european_newspaper_reports/european_newspaper_contents.htm)

</div>
