+++
title = "Strange and frightening conversation"

+++
I received a call and we set off for the evening. The women-folk wanted
to make their stock of powders and pickles for the quarter and had spent
the day collecting their ingredients. As we converged at the
pre-destined venue. While the women milled away at the kitchen, Marc and
me had planned to re-live some youthful fancies that we much missed- we
had planned some experiments. R had told Marc of the dIpAvallI vacation
of ekAdashAnta, when she and me had experimented extensively with what
in bhArata were known as snake-tablets. Marc obsessed over them and
wanted to make his own snake tablets. While he was certain he had
reached a recipe he did not have all the substances at home for the
synthesis. Instead we decided to settle for other stuff that we thought
might also entertain the kids usefully while the women milled away their
powders. We first decided to make “hydrogen bombs”- basically exploding
mixtures of oxygen and hydrogen trapped in soap suds following
electrolysis. We also wanted to make pure silicon. Many years back
during the same dIpAvalI vacation R and I had made use of our stash of
Mg wire to isolate silicon, but we ended up with a somewhat dangerous
result with our test-tube exploding in the vigorous heating. But Marc
now managed this step with great ease and then let it cool. The moment
of reckoning came when we dumped the mixture into the acid solution and
watched the spectacular pyrotechnics as the silicon precipitated to the
bottom.

R unable to stay out of all this dropped the powders and joined in.
Towards the end while the kids were sent away to play or study, and we
were eating, the conversation turned to the sleeping disease \[For
reasons of confidentiality I cannot say why the conversation went to
that topic, hence elements of the narrative may appear disconnected\]. I
recalled the founding Mogol tyrant Babur may have suffered from it but
spectacularly recovered. We wondered what history might have been if he
had died or been paralyzed, like most victims normally are. However, the
classical sleeping disease (encephalitis lethargica) swept the world
during 1917 to 1928 in the form of a great epidemic that killed numerous
thousands of peoples. It was identified as a novel brain disease by
Constantin von Economo, the famous Austrian neuro-scientist, and has
been the focal point of the well-known narrative of Oliver Sacks. At
this point Sharada made a very strange comment: “I have been interested
in this disease even while I was an intern. Your(R’s) father told me
something that I did not believe at all. He said that victims of a
particularly severe dhUmavatI mAraNa attack showed symptoms similar to
encephalitis lethargica, and long before Sacks the tantrics knew that
there was one counter that could help- Atmagupta. He could not at that
point show me any patients. However, several years later when he was
visiting bhArata, (X) showed both of us a patient who was in a condition
very similar to encephalitis lethargica due to “witch-craft”. Of course
they did not know what prayoga was deployed on the victim, but we were
definitely reminded of the similarity with the supposed effects of
dhUmavatI prayoga. Over the years we have become aware of at least one
other victim of “witch-craft” with such effects but he could not try out
Atmagupta because of actual scorn of the other physicians”

This striking statement by Sharada reminded me of something that was
particular resonant. One of the victims of a confirmed dhUmAvatI attack
(whose account was narrated to me) started displaying frequent
coprolalia, followed by phase of voice change and finally catatonia. The
victim’s parents tried to resort to a variety of psychiatric diagnosis
but failed. Interestingly the victim as reversed to the normal state by
a vaiShNava prayoga whose details are kept secret. The same informer
narrated a second account as an example of the deadliest of the
dhUmavatI attacks, where her “head-falling prayoga” was combined with
her dreaded daughter rakta-jyeShTA. The symptoms of this were dramatic :
there was a simulation of both streptococcal infection and subsequent
encephalitis lethargica. Our informer used the secret Ashvina prayoga
along with its specific oShadhi-s (which include ashvagandha, Atmagupta,
khadira amongst others) to save the victim of this attack. A third
victim of a similar dhUmavatI attack was the sister of MM as a part of
the generational conflicts. It is indeed confirmed that catatonia was
pronounced in her. She never recovered fully though she was relieved for
her torpor by the counter-prayoga.

Sharada was convinced that viSha-s were deployed in the deadly dhUmavatI
prayoga. But my informer was evasive on the matter, though not denying
the fact that viSha’s may be in use. I had the same suspicion in the
event that killed the young senAnI’s relative. R was shaken to hear all
this and the excitement of the evening dampened to silence for some
reason. Only Sharada seemed to be excited about it and continued
conversing with me.
