+++
title = "Indo-Aryans: Movement of their culture, languages and genes"

+++
Indo-Aryans have heavily influenced the world by way to the movements of
their genes, languages and culture. Let us compare some of these
movements to understand their dynamics.  
1\) The invasion of the Indian sub-continent: After breaking away from
the Balto-Slavic with which they are unified by the synapomorphies such
as the Satem state and the classical RUKI rule the Indo-Iranian stem
developed a distinctive culture for a period in the Eurasian grassland
and its northern border zones. At some point, most likely between
3500-1200 BCE they entered the India sub-continent and came to dominate
much of it, converting the entire area to Indo-Aryan speaking and a
culturally Indo-Aryan zone. This parallels the later invasion of Iran by
their cousins the Iranians and the conversion of that region to an
Iranian speaking zone. In these newly occupied zones in the
sub-continent and Iran they established Arya-varta or AiryAna vaejo —
the land of the Aryas, which became epitomes of the two branches of
Aryan civilization. Genetically the Indo-Aryans left a huge impact on
the Indian population with anywhere between 80-20% genetic contribution
to the non-tribal caste populations.

2\) The Middle East (1600-1200 BCE): As we saw in the earlier essay the
Indo-Aryan influence in the middle east was mainly as a superstratum or
in the form of loan words in Hurrian and Hittite. They clearly entered
the Middle east well before the Iranians and mainly introduced
equestrian, and personal names amongst the elite. However, their
cultural influence was seen in Egypt and the Middle East though their
formal religion was only mildly present.

3\) The Dravidian zone of South India (800BCE-1700 AD): There were many
waves of Indo-Aryan settlers in the Dravidian zone of South Indian over
a period of almost 2000 years from different parts to the IA zone. Again
the IA influence is mainly seen in the form of loan words in Tamil and
old Dravidian languages and as a superstrate in various other Middle and
Southern Dravidian languages. Indo-Aryan culture was however nearly
completely adopted by the Dravidian-speaking elite. Many Indo-Aryan
settlers in the Dravidian zone of South India adopted local dravidian
languages with a heavy IA superstrate. The IA influence is particularly
strong in religious and political terminology. The genetic imprint of IA
migrations is strong.

4\) China (1200 BC (?)- 1200 AD): Again there were many waves of IA
influence on China, some of which may have been very early and from the
inner Eurasian original home land of the IAs. However, the principal
historical ones occurred in connection with the “Silk route” trade ,
Eastern Sea trade and the spread of the tantric religion and the nAstIka
dharma to China. The IA cultural influence on China was heavy, but there
was very little linguistic influence. Main influence was in the form of
religious bauddha material (largely in translation rather than
acquisition of a superstrate), and IA medicine. It is in the latter
context several loans into Chinese are seen. Very little to no genetic
imprint of IA speakers is seen.

5\) Burma, Thailand and “Indo-China” (400 BC (?)-1200 AD): Several Indic
colonies and kingdoms appeared in these regions. There was clearly and
Indo-Aryan hybrid elite all these regions in the form of kShatriya-s and
brAhmaNas. In linguistic terms the original Burman and Austro-Asiatic
languages of the region were not displaced, though there was
considerable bi-linguality with Sanskrit and other IA languages like
Pali. The IA influence was extensive and persistant in terms of
royal/administrative terminology and religious terminology of the
tantric forms of the IA religion and the bauddha mata. These regions
were cultural heavily Indo-Aryanized. While precise estimates of genetic
admixture await further analysis, anywhere between 5-10% IA genetic
influence could be seen in these populations.

6\) Malaysia, Indonesia and the Austronesian Zone: The Indic influence
on these regions is highly comparable to the above region. The original
Austronesian languages remain, but there is major influence of IA on
toponymy and hydronymy, and significant IA superstratum affecting
various aspects of life. The IA cultural influence is also major with
islands like Bali still retaining the IA culture intact even after
Mohammedan ravages over rest of the region. Studies in Bali suggests a
10-20 % genetic contribution to the gene pool from IA speakers.

7\) Tibet/Bhutan: IA influence is mainly seen in religious thought due
to spread of the IA tantric religion and bauddha mata. IA language and
words are largely encountered only in a religious context.

8\) Shri Lanka: If we are to believe the Shri Lanka chronicles, the land
was Indo-Aryanized from the pre-existing Veddoid stock by a relatively
small group of IA immigrants possibly from the west of India. The
genetic influence of IA speakers is also similar to that in South India.
Elements of the possibly Veddoid substratum is seen in the modern
Sinhala.

9\) Tocharian/Central Asia: The secondary influence of Indo-Aryan on the
Tocharian and central Asian zone is seen in the form of the Niya Prakrit
and literature associated with the “Silk Route” trade. The IA influence
was clearly heavy in cultural terms. In linguistic terms there might
have been bilinguality but probably not out right replacement of
Tocharian or local Iranian dialects by an IA tongue.

10\) Parya: Appears to be a late translocation of a Northwestern branch
of Indo-Aryan to Uzbekistan/Tajikistan. LIkely to be a band of isolated
Indo-Aryan speaking traders from India.

11\) Gypsies: A nomadic IA branch dispersed all over the west.
Genetically show clear signs of significant IA ancestory. Culturally
largely degenerate and have absorbed various local cultural influences
and live as marginal elements in their respective societies hounded by
Europeans. Nevertheless, they have transmitted elements of IA culture to
the West.

In conclusion we note that Indo-Aryans have only on rare occasions
completely displaced the local language. They have often culturally
influenced pre-established well-developed civilizations (China and
Egypt) but not affected these linguistically or genetically. While
interacting middle level civilization and tribal societies they have
extensively influenced cultural as well and language, but did not
displace the local language yet. They retained their language only when
they did not interact much with the local population in a religious or
elite situation (e.g Parya, Gypsies and to some degree Saurashtrians).
In face of all this, their complete displacement of the original
language and culture of the advanced IVC, if there were such, is rather
anomalous. It was definitely different from other IA movements and must
be considered more carefully. The rather complete Aryanization of
toponyms and hydronyms in North India is striking given that even in US,
22 states maintain names derived from the Paleo-American languages.
