+++
title = "Is bhArata safe?"

+++
Is the geographical nation of the Hindus safe? Nay is the nation of
Hindus itself safe? This is a topic I did not really want to write about
but the flurry of chats have almost forced to repeat myself on the
issue. Firstly, an important point that Sitaram Goel and Ram Swarup
brought to the fore should be remembered here: Hindus are by definition
a nation. It is the sanAtana dharma that gives them their nationhood.
The geography that they occupy is secondary to the role of the sanAtana
dharma. The geography of India is important today because it constitutes
the natural habitat of the Hindus.

However, this habitat of the Hindus has been historically attacked by
the two violent monotheisms and its safety is compromised. The freedom
from the British reign did not result in freedom for the Hindu mind.
Sadly, rather than re-establishing a state under the natural principles
of sanAtana dharma, fooled by the West the founders of the new Indian
empire established a secular state. The result of this secular state is
a further defanging of the Hindus. Secularism has eroded Hindu
traditions that are the only scaffold of India- if we wanted a secular
state we did not require freedom from the British. We could have happily
continued under the secular rule of a Western powers, after all England
and the rest of Europe were secularizing. We needed freedom only to have
a state under dharma not under secularism. But now secularism has had an
even more threatening aspect: It denuded the spirit of dharma amongst
the Hindus and replaced it with crap in the form puerile Hindi cinema,
blind imitation of the West, like the proverbial jackal with a blue hide
in viShNusharman’s tale, decadence of brahminical social leadership, and
“atheism” (in the sense of avoidance of Hindu ritual observances), a
direct consequence of secularism. In contrast it embolded the two
monotheists to act with impunity funded respectively by their Western
evangelist and Middle Eastern Ghazi masters.

As a result there are two serious attacks on the very existence of
Hindus: One destroying its very innards through a insiduous attack on
the Hindu plebian, now even targeting the holiest Hindu shrines like
venkaTAdri; the other openly slaying Hindus in a display of the Jihad.
Sitaram Goel and Ram Swarup had remarked astutely that for all the
carnage, the riots after partition on the Indian side showed the spirit
of India was not entirely dead. There are other things we just cannot
talk about here, but one thing is clear the recent assault by the Ghazis
on the Hindus, nearly 10 centuries after the accursed Mahmud Ghaznavi
(may sewers, which are perfumes for the Momeen, flow on his Mazar), the
Hindu spirit does seem dead in India. And, any recently astute observer
can note that this is a direct consequence of secularism. Hindus appear
to have no say in India, and are blathering secular nothings, while the
Imam of leading the congregation of the masses bereft of their foreskins
thunders: “We were rulers here for 800 years. Inshaallah, we shall
return to power here once again”. This in my humble opinion is a serious
symptom. Combined with the demographic assault by the Mohammedan, and
the secularization of the Hindu elite, I fear we are witnessing the
symptoms of the newest loss of Hindu freedom.

Remember the throughout the far east there were Hindus once: Thailand,
Vietnam, Cambodia, Malaysia Java, Sumatra and Bali. Now they are only
there in the smallest of these territories- Bali. They are gone in
Afghanistan, saindhava desha, Central Asia and Roman territories. In
light of this, the symptoms we are witnessing suggest to me that even
residual India may be lost. Some call me paranoid but I believe we could
see the fruition of these events even in the near future.

We have two famous parallels in history– our cultural cousins the Romans
and the Iranians. The Romans were a highly pluralistic culture. Every
religion of Asia could be practiced in its boundaries with relative
freedom. The state did not do much to interfere in religion. They
produced brilliant philosopher emperors like Marcos Aurelius, who might
have even impressed a sha\~Nkara bhagavat pAda, as well as worthless
rulers like Severus and others like our own worthless rulers of modern
India. Their rich state temples were operated with rites resembling
those of the Agamas- abhishekas, prasAdas, dIpa dhUpa and all that, and
were economic powerhouses just as Tirupati or Vaishodevi. The Roman
political system for that era was reasonably strong, and their army
large and tough. Yet, the terrible curse of Isaism over took the king
due to a few crucial mishaps. Christian women from the bar in the family
of Constantine turned the whole west into a seething cauldron of Isaism.
Likewise the barmaid Sonia, marrying the vagrant prince of India could
be set to turning India towards a decline.

The Zoroasterians, our linguistic and cultural cousins, were likewise
outright destroyed by the other monotheism Mohammedanism through
demographic and military means, when their empire blinked and failed to
pay attention to the storm that was building in the Arabian desert
inside their own empire. We similarly pay no attention to the storm
gathering in the little Islamic hell-holes throughout the length and
breadth of the country. Both the above powerful heathen nations are now
buried in the sands of history. While we did much better in round one, I
do not see a bright future in our natural habitat.

In light of this the reasonably astute Hindus need to install seeds of
their nation in safe havens away from their old home that might fall to
the predators.
