---
title: 'THE BELUR MATH: AN APPEAL'

---
<div>

[←](the_message_of_divine_wisdom.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Writings: Prose and
Poems](writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_advaita_ashrama_himalayas.htm)

  

## THE BELUR MATH: AN APPEAL

The success which attended the labours of the disciples of Shri
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa in diffusing the principles of Hindu religion
and obtaining some respect for our much abused faith in the West, gave
rise to the hope of training a number of young Sannyâsins to carry on
the propaganda, both in and out of India. And an attempt is being made
to educate a number of young men according to the Vedic principle of
students living in touch with the Guru.

A Math has already been started on the Ganga near Calcutta, through the
kindness of some European and American friends.

The work, to produce any visible results in a short time, requires funds
and hence this appeal to those who are in sympathy with our efforts.

It is intended to extend the operations of the Math, by educating in the
Math as many young men as the funds can afford, in both Western science
and Indian spirituality, so that in addition to the advantages of a
University education, they will acquire a manly discipline by living in
contact with their teachers.

The central Math near Calcutta will gradually start branches in other
parts of the country as men become ready and the means are forthcoming.

It is a work which will take time to bring forth any permanent result
and requires a great deal of sacrifice on the part of our young men and
on those who have the means of helping this work.

We believe the men are ready, and our appeal therefore is to those who
really love their religion and their country and have the means to show
their sympathy practically by helping the cause.

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
