+++
title = "The phantoms of thexa0bone-pipe-2"
date = "2021-05-03"

+++
Vidrum had been introduced to a synesthetic patient by a neurologist
colleague. The patient’s manifestation of synesthesia left a rather
profound impact on him; thus, when he had a break of an hour in his
duties, wanting to explore the issue more, he decided to do some quiet
reading on his computer in the library. He took his favorite seat beside
the window looking out into a sylvan patch, and thought to himself:
“This display of synesthesia would have interested Vrishchika a lot.”
Even as he said so to himself, to his utter shock, he saw someone
looking just like Lootika or Vrishchika go past him and take a seat
another a little ahead. He almost exclaimed aloud: “that cannot be true!
they are away in a faraway land enjoying the pleasures of conjunction
with their puruṣa-s.” He looked at the girl again and realized it had to
be Jhilleeka. “What is she doing here? This is not her kṣetra.” He
walked up to her: “Hey Jhilli, what are you doing here. For a moment, I
thought it was one of your sisters who had manifested themselves using
their ghostly powers.” Jhilleeka smiled but seemed to be a bit at a loss
to say anything. Vidrum went on: “I’ve not seen you in a while, but you
have become a light-eyed version of your sisters.” Jh: “I’m taking that
to be a compliment, but it must be just some homozygosity that found its
way into me. Hope you are alright and fully recovered from the
tumultuous events that are now past us.” V: “Let the past lie. But are
you alright?” Vidrum pointed to her bandaged foot.

Jh: “Sort of. But that wound is the result of what one could call an
adventure of sorts.” V: “What happened?” Jh: “If you run into my
parents, do not tell them the whole thing. But if you want to hear the
story, we can go outside.” V: “Sure.” By some fancy, I decided to take
the shortcut through Viṇmārga back home from the university, which, as
you know, passes through the rougher part of the city. From there, I
took the bylane that leads to Mahiṣamūtra-mārga, and I quickly sighted
that a knot of roughs led by Sphicmukha and Chāgalaṇḍa, who I believe
were your classmates at school, had laid a predatory trap. They had set
large branches of Vachellia bramble on the road to funnel drivers onto
the side they had littered with nails and other metal objects. I avoided
them from puncturing my bike but, in a flash of indiscretion, decided to
kick one of the pegs out of the way while still riding — that did not go
well, and I ended up with a deep cut on my leg. That’s why I came here
to get a tetanus shot. I’m just waiting for my father to get back home.”
V: “Some of the characteristic traits of your elder sisters are very
much visible in you too. In any case, is this not your last month in
college? I’m sure you are pursuing graduate school like your elder
sisters.”

Jh: “That is correct. Prachetas and I did contemplate whether to start a
company of our own and give grad school a skip given the deteriorating
environment in educational institutions abroad. Thankfully, we got over
that delusion after some further thought as we realized we were v1s to
our core and not v3s by nature. Nor were we inclined to take the job
offers we had because we had that independent academic streak. Moreover,
we got into the same graduate school; so, we would not be facing the
separation and the disjunction that Lootika and Somakhya faced when in
graduate school.” V: “But those two told me that their disjunction was a
key part of their character-building experience where they proved their
individual worth by themselves.” Jh: “That may be so, but you can hardly
deny that Lootika and Somakhya had the luck of being together all the
way from school to the end of college — something the rest of us did not
have the pleasure of. So that disjunction is not something they needed
to cry about. Moreover, for all the ice in that period, the rest of us
knew how Lootika kept thinking about Somakhya. We thought grad school is
a good idea because, apart from the fact that we are fundamentally
academically oriented, it gives an opportunity to prove ourselves under
hostile fire. If luck, for some reason, doesn’t favor us, we can always
quit it and get down to more real things like furthering our genes. If
everything fails, in the least, I can teach my nephews and nieces
mathematics and computation as they come of age.”

V: “Well, good luck. But even if you don’t start a company, I hope
someday you and maybe Prachetas will build for me a robot that is like
the late lamented Meghana.” Jhilleeka chuckled: “What purpose would such
a robot serve even if we were to build it? Talk to Lootika and Somakhya
— they will teach you a mantra of the Southern Path. Meditating thus on
Śiva and Bhairavī, you will attain your desire more satisfyingly.” V:
“Young lady, they are far away, and we are not in frequent touch. It is
hard to find a time that matches to talk to them — let alone them
imparting me a mantra. Moreover, do you even believe such mantra-s
work?” Jh: “Well, you will learn if they work or not. Never mind if you
don’t want to ask them about this, there is always the musical bone-pipe
my sister Vrishchika gave you.” V: “Jhilli, do you think Meghana could
be summoned that way?” Jh: “She may visit you that way, but it is not
something you want to look forward to. It will not be pleasant. But the
other phantoms who come to you via the bone-pipe might help you reach
the equilibrium you seek.” Just then, Jhilleeka got her father’s call,
and Vidrum had to return to his duties.

![LootikaMedallion](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/lootikamedallion.png)

Lootika’s medallion

The following Saturday, Vidrum’s duties had ended by the afternoon;
early that evening, he went with Sharvamanyu and Abhirosha for dinner.
A: “So Vidrum, when will the construction of your new house begin?” V:
“Sadly, it is not happening! If anything, my luck seems to remain the
same” S: “But why — were you not set to hire the contractors?” V: “It is
a strange story. But I decided it is better safe than sorry.” S: “I
don’t get it! But if you don’t want to share it with us, fine.” V: “Oh
no! I would gladly do so, but you may think I am crazily superstitious.”
A: “Now that makes us even more curious.”

V: “Have you ever been gifted something interesting by the four
sisters?” A: “Now, why do you ask that of all things? But yes.”
Abhirosha pulled out an inlay-work medallion from her bag and showed it
to Vidrum. “This is some art Lootika made for me. I realized that it was
more than just art because she said that there was no need to display it
but to just keep it with me, somewhere close.” Saying so, Abhirosha
handed it to Vidrum. Looking at it closely, he passed it to Sharvamanyu:
“It has a nice feel to it. Our friend has some eye for symmetry. I saw
Vrishchika making something similar for her husband Indrasena shortly
after the tumultuous events. What I received was something more sinister
— a bone-pipe made from a human femur. Vrishchika gave it to me. But
they all seem to know of it, for the other day, the youngest Jhilleeka
asked me to ply it.”

A: “Now, how did you run into Jhilli?” V: “Well, that is a story of its
own.” S: “Fine, but what does all this have to do with your abandoning
the construction of your new house.” V: “Listen, it is a long and crazy
story. If you blow into that bone-pipe you can get nice and haunting
tunes. The haunting part is very real — it is not at all uncommon for a
phantom to manifest thereafter and tell you something. The short story
is that I was rather depressed with my luck that day and vocalized that
matter to Jhilli. She reminded me of the bone-pipe her sister had given
me and asked me to ply it.”

S: “OK, that sounds like an interesting object — a blast from the past —
you never showed it to us?” V: “Well, I’ll show it to you guys the next
time you’re home. I had put it aside, given all the trauma from the last
visitation. But I realized paying attention to those visitations can
actually be helpful. The encounter I had was somewhat dramatic.” A: “Ah!
This sounds like the old times. Tell us the story.” V: “Sure. I blew
into the pipe a song I heard in a movie — I’m sure it was one I had
watched you guys. The phantom came on very fast. I had hardly blown out
a couple of lines when I heard a gruff voice with a south Indian accent.
I did not see anything, but I could feel an obvious presence. He asked
to be seated on the couch across from my desk, saying that he needs a
proper seat to ease his distress. I took a dictation of his story that
I’ll read out once we are done with dinner.” It went thus:

“My name is Gunottaman (Guṇottaman), but most of the people who knew me
called me Kāttutĕran, a moniker I acquired from my capacity to drive my
father’s car at incredible speeds even as a ten-year-old. My family
hails from the Dravidian country but had moved to the Karnāṭa country.
While we came from a brahminical background, my father was the last in
our lineage to have a slung a thread on his shoulder. He was a man of
vision and modernity. He told us there was nothing to be gained by
studying supernatural śloka-s and songs with which the brahmins earned a
living by fooling gullible people. Instead, he said we should choose the
Buddha, the Christ and Mahatma Gandhi as role models for leading a good
and ethical life. In my teens, I read a little information pamphlet and
added a new figure to that pantheon. He was the great biochemist
Yerrapragada Subbarow. I was inspired by him to discover new drugs.
Accordingly, I studied for a B.Sc. in chemistry and a further degree in
chemical engineering from a reputed college.

Shortly after that, I became acquainted with a biologist known as
Ayyangār. He had identified an amoeba-killing compound from an
actinobacterium but did not know what it was. He saw the potential for
making it into a treatment for amoebiasis, which raging in some
villages. Having obtained a grant, he teamed up with me, and I showed
that it was a peptaibol. Eventually, I even synthesized the peptaibol,
which earned me a thesis and many accolades, including an invitation to
work at a Japanese university. Having cleared that hurdle, I was now
renowned as a double Ph.D. and was offered a professorship at a college.
A couple of years into that, I realized that the humdrum teaching of
dullards was not for me. I wanted to emulate my heroes and do good to
humanity. I wished to make pharmaceuticals, but that path was not easy
for a man with a modest income. By then, I was married and already had
two children, and a third was on the way. But some luck came my way. I
had a friend from college, Adhyankar (Āḍhyaṃkara), hailing from the
merchant community. He had started a paint business that was flourishing
due to the housing boom. One day, over lunch, he asked me if I could
synthesize anti-fungal compounds for his paints. He had been importing
these compounds and said that any breakthrough would result in a
significant profit of which I would receive a share. While it was not
the pharmaceutical work I wanted to do, I saw it as a break and took a
one-year voluntary suspension from my college job to set up a lab funded
by Adhyankar. My hard work paid off, and I synthesized a siloxane
halamine derivative that could work well as an anti-fungal. With my
team, we soon set up an industrial manufacturing process for producing
and incorporating it into Adhyankar’s paints.

A major problem in our country is the discoloration of walls by
cyanobacteria. Hence, I wondered if we could augment our paints with
anti-cyanobacterials. During my Ph.D. in Japan, I had made acquaintance
with a fellow graduate student who had identified and determined the
structure of anti-cyanobacterial compound which had the sequence:
Me![\_3](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=_3&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)R-V-V-OHMeR-MeR.
I synthesized a truncated brominated derivative thereof that had
100-fold higher anti-cyanobacterial activity. When we brought this into
production, I was able to negotiate a fuller partnership in the company
of Adhyankar. The profits helped me to dabble with my true interests. I
realized that the antiviral field was a wide-open opportunity, and
Adhyankar was willing to again partner with me, thereby giving me a long
rope to explore exciting possibilities.

By then, I had a flourishing family with three sons and a daughter. What
is misery to some can be a gain for others. It was around that time the
Great Dhori Virus Outbreak fell upon us. Building on my
anti-cyanobacterial work, I had synthesized a bacterial cyanoalkaloid,
whose halogenated derivatives had an excellent antiviral capacity that
played a decisive role in flattening that outbreak. From the profits
materialized during this time, I wanted to build a new lab and plant. I
bribed a derelict temple’s management to procure some good land
bypassing the usual bureaucratic strictures. During the building of the
new lab, we unearthed a religious image that the Hiṇḍū-s worship under
the name of some god, I think he is called Śiva. While I cared little
for such superstition, I did not want it to be destroyed because it
might be an object of veneration for people who believe in such things.
Hence, I handed it over to some pundits at a temple. With a new lab in
place, I often took my children there to intern and develop a scientific
temper.

However, my fortune seems to have peaked there, and it was all downhill
thereafter. My daughter acquired an undiagnosed neurological illness and
committed suicide by jumping off the balcony in a fit of delirium. Then
my youngest son developed a mysterious idiopathic anemia and died
despite all our attempts to treat him. My next son, like me, was a great
car enthusiast, but this proved to be the tragedy of our lives. He too
enjoyed the thrill of speeding but sadly lost control of the car and
expired on hitting a flyover pillar. Perhaps due to this stress or maybe
due to her nature, my wife upbraided and slapped our eldest son one day
in front of all his friends for not doing as well as we had expected in
one of his exams. He was angered by that and ran away from home, and we
never saw him again despite filing many a missing person report. Then
when my turn came, it almost seemed like relief from all the suffering I
was going through. I was altered by the alarm system regarding a problem
in the lab. I was initially informed by the staff that there was nothing
to fear. I thought it was just a false alarm and casually went in a
little later to check things. At that point, there was a big phosgene
leak, and I died from the exposure.

What happened thereafter was remarkable. I could see my corpse being
donated by my wife to the hospital for study. With much horror, I
watched it being cut up and my tissue being examined microscopically and
analyzed. After what was left of my corpse was consigned to oxidation at
the incinerator by Adhyankar, something even more striking happened. I
found myself sitting in a ghostly corpus on a large boulder that lay
outside my laboratory building. Marching in front of me was a vast horde
of other ghostly beings. Some looked like skeletons, others had strange
animal heads, yet others had a misty, shape-shifting nature. Far behind,
I saw the leaders of that horde of ghosts — they were emitting a
radiance and appeared more real than anything I had seen in life. I
think they were gods, as I remember seeing images in the likenesses of
them being taken out during Hiṇḍū festivals. One of them had an
ape-face, another had six heads, yet another a proboscis, and still
another was a dark bluish-black hue. A ghost from that immense horde
came up to me and said: \`You are appointed as the regent of this land
that you once purchased through underhand means from the temple. You
shall sit here and keep others away from it after your lab has been
demolished. I spent a while wandering in my lab as though doing
experiments but finally, one day, a government crew appeared and
demolished it. I sat on the stone and made it my routine to haunt anyone
who trespassed it grimly. When you bought this land, you came with a
brahmin and his wife to take possession. They seemed to have some spells
to those very same gods I saw when I was appointed as the guardian of
the land. Hence, I was rendered powerless to do anything to you or them
then. But now that it is just you, I can knead you like dough. If you
were to build on this land, I shall reduce you to a fate that is not
very different from mine. If you do not and let my stone remain, then I
will even use my ghostly powers to aid your quest for a new vehicle,
woman and house.”

Abhirosha: “Vidrum, even I would have acted the same if I’d had
encountered a phantasmagoria as this.” V: “Even if this were just an
illusion, spurred by the visitation, I did some investigations that led
me to a clear decision. I dug up old reports that the city auction had
hidden from me. Those showed that indeed a chemical laboratory had stood
on that plot. It was demolished after being decommissioned following an
accident, and the plant nearby had been shut down for safety issues. I
reasoned that the mysterious deaths of our visitor’s children were
probably again from the poor safety leading to their affliction by toxic
compounds. Who knows, some toxic stuff might still be lingering therein.
Hence, I thought it prudent to abandon the plan of building my house on
that site and let the agents of Mahādeva reclaim it.”

![VrishchikaMedallion](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/vrishchikamedallion.png)

Vrishchika’s medallion
