+++
title = "Pandemic days: Vaccines andxa0war"
date = "2021-05-23"

+++
In American history-writing we come across various attempts to the
justify the use of nuclear weapons on Japan in the closing phase of WW2.
We often hear the claim that by using the nukes they avoided a large
number of casualties that they would have suffered in a long-drawn
conventional war to conquer Japan. Neutral outsiders who have studied
the matter realize that this is merely the American narrative to justify
and positively spin something, which many of their own people (some
leaders included) found rather disturbing. A closer look indicates that
the Japanese were brought to the brink of surrender by the demolition
they faced at the hands of the Rus in Manchuria. Indeed, the Rus were
poised to invade the main islands and probably kill the emperor of
Japan. Faced with this, the Japanese calculated that surrendering to the
Americans might help them save the emperor and perhaps avert a more
brutal assault that the Soviet military would have subjected them to.
Were the Americans aware of this? While we rarely hear anything pointing
in this direction in the many American presentations of these events, it
seems very likely to us that the Americans were fully aware of the
situation. Hence, we posit that the reason the Americans used the nukes
on densely populated Japanese cities was to graphically demonstrate to
the Rus what the “super-weapons” in their possession could do and that
their leaders were dead serious about earlier hints they had given the
Rus. Hence, the intended audience for nukes was likely the Soviets
rather than the Japanese. This was one of clearest examples of a
technological change of game in times closer to our own. The Rus and
other nations eventually developed their own nuclear weapons despite the
American attempts to prevent some of them from succeeding. However, we
do think that being the first to make and use the nukes contributed in a
big way to the American rise to superpower status.

There are indications that the rising new religion of Navyonmāda might
be turning that arc of American superpowerdom to towards the horizontal;
however, even in these days of late empire the accumulated technological
capital of the superpower could make a major difference in the “war of
the day”. We had briefly alluded to this in the past note. In this note,
we shall expand a bit on that. Right from when the Wuhan corruption
exploded among the Cīna-s, it was clear that the disease was being used
as a geopolitical tool. With hindsight we can say that the Cīna-s knew
early on that it was a respiratory disease likely transmitted by the
airborne route. Despite all the show of disinfecting the streets of
Wuhan with chemical sprays, early in the epidemic they were wearing
masks and practicing social distancing. However, they did little to stop
international traffic despite restricting internal traffic between
cities with high infection. Moreover, via the WHO, they initially held
back information on human-to-human spread instead pointing to wet
markets. Then they used the WHO to project messages about washing hands
rather than wearing the appropriate masks (Sure, early the cruise ship
incidents had a norovirus-like fomite feel to it, but the Cīna-s knew
better). Thus, even as they facilitated an information blackout to the
rest of the world, within their own borders they took draconian measures
of isolation and blockade to curb the disease. As a result, even as the
left-liberal occidental media was running paradoxical pieces on how
“totalitarian” governments fare worse with pandemics and how
Vijayanāma-vyāpārin was being xenophobic towards their Galtonian
partners, the virus breached their defenses and established itself in
their midst. The result was waves of massacres that really made the
occidental powers look limp. At the end of it, emperor Xi had deftly
leveraged the epidemic in his lands to hit his rivals while hiding his
own losses from it.

[![vaccines](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/vaccines-1.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/vaccines-1.png)Figure
1

With the virus established in their midst, both the Cīna-s and the
mleccha-s soon realized that lasting victory could only be achieved by
an effective treatment — vaccination being the method of choice for the
long-term. Here is where a technological race, like the one to make the
nukes, came to the fore. It was not easy, given that human coronavirus
vaccination programs (like those inspired by SARS) had not really
reached their culmination as the disease had been curbed by public
health measures well before a vaccine became necessary. Figure 1 shows
the popular vaccines in use or close to deployment (by no means
comprehensive) classified by method, along with the country that
developed them. One can see that the Americans were able mobilize
multiple vaccines based on “advanced methods” — i.e. those using
artificial mRNA with modified nucleobases, adenovirus vectors and
baculovirus expression systems. The most basic of these technologies,
i.e., cloning of the gene for the viral spike protein, can be easily
mastered. However, to develop a truly successful vaccine, there is a lot
more knowledge and technology that needs to be in place. These include:
1) the knowledge of and a repository of vector viruses like the Human
Adenoviruses 26 and 5, or the Chimpanzee Adenovirus in the vector-based
vaccines. 2) the capacity for chemical synthesis of nucleic acids for
producing codon-optimized genes. 3) A knowledge of protein structure and
evolution to produce optimal S protein constructs to be used as
vaccines. 4) In the case of mRNA vaccines, the knowledge of and the
capacity to synthesize modified nucleobases. The *de novo* development
of these vaccines need a long-standing and well-developed culture of
molecular biology and biochemistry. The totality of this knowledge is
possessed by only a few nations in the world. Thus, developing the
vaccine indigenously from scratch is not possible for most of the world.
This fact in itself can be weaponized in a pandemic situation to gain a
geopolitical advantage. It is in this regard that the superpower capital
accumulated by the USA remains unchallenged.

Of the others, the British managed to successfully develop an
adenovirus-based vaccine, showing that their accumulated intellectual
capital still powers some technological propulsion in crisis. While we
do not know as much regarding the success of the Russian attempt from
external trials, they too seem to have achieved something comparable to
the Brits with their Sputnik vaccine. Their subunit vaccine seems to
deploy a rather unusual concept and its true efficacy remains entirely
unclear to us. Still the gulf between these and the multiple American
successes remains, illustrating the distinction between the great powers
and the superpower. Several other nations possess the scientific and
technological capacity to develop vaccines by themselves. In the Orient,
we have Japan and Korea. In the Occident we have Germany and France.
None of these have managed to develop and deploy their own vaccines to
date. Some of them are even facing the adverse edge of not having a
suitable vaccine that they can use. This hints that the task at hand it
not easy in practice, even if a nation were to possess the theoretical
know-how.

The Cīna-s have shown great prowess in molecular biology in recent
times. A closer look at their research capacity in this regard has shown
a tendency for plagiarism, faking and imitation of more original work
coming from elsewhere. However, as the Americans say, you can fake it
till you make it. Keeping with that, the Cīna-s have recently managed
some pieces of high-end original research suggesting that they are
coming of age. However, this is not visible in term of the vaccines that
they have managed to deploy — to date they have only managed the
conventional inactivated viral vaccines. There are suggestions that they
have been trying to pilfer more advanced technologies and reverse
engineer them, but we are yet to see the results of those attempts.
Thus, the head-start the Cīna-s had with the virus has not really
translated into vaccinological success. Finally, coming to India, we
infer that the leadership correctly realized the danger posed by the
virus to a populous country with little scope for urban social
distancing and went for obtaining a vaccine as soon as possible.
Perhaps, they correctly judged that the Indian biotechnological capacity
was not up to the mark of developing any of the advanced vaccines
indigenously *in time*. However, they did leverage the same low-tech
solution as the Cīna-s to develop the indigenous inactivated virus
Covaxin vaccine. Wisely, in a parallel track they purchased a stake in
the AstraZeneca adenoviral vector vaccine developed by the Brits and the
American subunit vaccine Novovax for local manufacture.

Next we come to the question of how these vaccines actually fared on the
ground. The American and British image had taken a heavy beating at the
hands of the virus by early 2021. The US had stacked up nearly a million
deaths from the virus in an year (with almost 1 in 10 Americans being
infected), while the count in UK is at least 200,000 (probably 1 in
12-15 people have been infected, keeping in mind their poorer accounting
of cases ). However, both these nations have flattened their curves and
have gone a long way towards mitigating the pandemic in their lands.
This is in no small measure from the success of their vaccines — the
capacity to develop and deploy them in time. The confidence in this
success in the US is reflected in the recent CDC statement relaxing the
use of masks among the fully vaccinated. From the viewpoint of both
cases and fatalities, France and Germany have done poorly with respect
to their island counterpart — to us this is a clear indication of their
failure at vaccine deployment. A similar situation is seen with Poland —
a western aligned Slavic nation. The Russian situation is harder to
assess. Despite their Sputnik vaccine being apparently successful (as
per their published papers) they have had no success in bringing down
their deaths significantly from mid-February to mid-May 2021. The causes
for this remain unclear to us.

Coming to the Cīna-s, they saw immense potential to use
vaccine-diplomacy to leverage their head-start with the virus and the
pandemic they had helped create. They sent their vaccines to all takers
but as of date of this note there are no great results to see. Recently,
a good comparison has come up in the form of two countries, the small
Israel and the tiny Seychelles. Given the ties the CEO of Pfizer company
has to Israel, they were able to obtain that vaccine right away. The
latter received the Sinopharm (majority) and AstraZeneca (minority)
vaccines. The former managed to control the epidemic within their
borders with their mass vaccination program, whereas the later has so
far failed to do so despite fully vaccinating 60% of its people. In
large part this seems to stem from the lackluster performance of the
Cīna vaccine. UAE, which also deployed this Cīna vaccine, is now
thinking of going for a 3rd dose to improve immunity. The results of
Sinovac in the field are not inspiring confidence either. Further
evidence for the Cīna failure comes from the statements of emperor Xi
asking for international collaboration on vaccines. Why would he want
“collaboration” if his “guns” were firing alright? This generally poor
performance of the conventional inactivated virus vaccine raises
questions about how the Indian Covaxin would fare in the field — we
still await the official publications in this regard.

A recent study by Khoury et al indicates that the modified mRNA vaccines
developed in the US provided the strongest neutralizing-antibody
response, whereas the AstraZeneca vaccine providse a lower tier
response. Moreover, it also appears that the American vaccines are
likely to provide sufficient (severe disease/death) protection against
the B.1.351 South African strain whereas the AZ vaccine might be far
less efficacious in preventing infection by that strain. In conclusion,
the vaccine race has left the Americans as the clear winner both in
terms of currently possessing the best vaccines (and an abundance of
them) and having reasonable success in controlling the disease (As of
the date of writing, the US still has a 7 day rolling average of over
500 deaths daily but we suspect in large part this can be contained if
more people were proactive in getting the vaccines and observing
disease-limiting behavior). This allows them to weaponize the vaccine in
geopolitics.

It is precisely this point which brings us to the Indian situation.
India began by handling the first wave reasonably well. This was
followed by a good start to the vaccination program among elderly people
with the AZ vaccine. Then we saw the Indian version of vaccine
diplomacy, where the mass manufacture of the AZ vaccine was used to
distribute it to several small countries, including those in the
Caribbean. The overconfidence and behavioral recklessness (mask laxity
and vaccination hesitancy) which ensued, along with ignorance of the
function
![y=ke^{rx}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=y%3Dke%5E%7Brx%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002),
poorly managed testing and contact-tracing, Khalistani rioting in the
Panjab spreading the British B.1.1.7 strain, and the emergence of the
(likely) more virulent B.1.617 strain resulted in the brutal second
wave. Evidence from both within India and the UK indicates that the
B.1.617 strain can displace other ambient strains, making it
particularly dangerous. While this strain breaks past the AZ vaccine and
causes disease, that vaccine seems to be capable of preventing
death/serious disease in most vaccinated people. Thus, it was of
paramount importance for India to ramp up vaccine production and
vaccinate as many people as possible. While we admit that is a difficult
task for a big country, we feel that the inability to keep up the
vaccination program as a percentage of the population was a one of
failures on the part of the nation.

The question which then arises is what the proximal cause for this might
be. In our opinion, a major reason for this was the embargo placed on
raw material by the Mahāmleccha led by Vṛddhapiṇḍaka. If one were to
game Mahāmleccha geopolitical realism from it is foundational principle,
it is obvious they would do everything to limit any rival potentate that
aspires “great power” status. Even if it is regional player, it has to
be broken if it marginally challenges the pañcanetra mleccha power.
Moreover, Vṛddhapiṇḍaka has been placed in power by Big Tech and
navyonmāda which has a svabhāva-vairam with all things H. Thus, H power,
however, limited in the big picture is not something they tolerate —
they were in particular pricked by Indian vaccine-diplomacy in their own
hemisphere. Thus, they decided to use their victory in the vaccine war
to settle scores with the Lāṭeśvara by limiting resources during the
critical phase of the second wave in India. The job has been done as it
took quite a bit of the sheen of the nation and showed it to be no
better than a third-rate power, leave alone aspirations of “great power”
status. Importantly, it has also taken the sheen of the the Lāṭeśvara,
even among those generally supportive of him. The evidence for the
mleccha hand is further supported by the active subversion program by
Big Tech (Jāka-Bejha-Mukhagiri-Dvārādiduṣṭāḥ), Soraduṣṭa and the first
responders dove-tailing their action with this wave.

That said, the deeper problem is the failure of the H to learn from
history. Such perfidious mleccha action has been seen time and again —
for instance the mleccha mercenaries hired by the Marāṭḥā-s or the sale
of defective weapons by the English to them. Hence, the H leadership
should have been prepared for mleccha action against them, especially
with overthrow of Vijaya-nāma-vyāpārin in their land by the
navyonmatta-s. They should have prepared to source key materials to keep
themselves afloat in the vaccine war. The production failures are seen
more generally with things like antifungals (e.g. amphotericin B) which
are needed to tackle the ongoing epidemic of mycoses accompanying the
Wuhan disease. An even deeper issue is the regard for research in India.
Before the pandemic there was a generally dismissive attitude towards
doing hard original science (not scientism or show-science) among the H.
Instead, most people with such capacity were being funneled to quite a
degree into service industries that do not ultimately make a nation a
“great power”. You cannot build up scientific capacity to do hard stuff
overnight and the results can be seen. The physicians and nurses on the
ground are limited if there is no scientific capacity holding them up.
