+++
title = "A brief review of:The Rise of Mahasena:The transformation of Skanda-Karttikeya in Northxa0India"
date = "2019-12-07"

+++
Book in question: [The Rise of Mahasena:The transformation of
Skanda-Karttikeya in North India from the Kusana to Gupta
Empires(Brill’s Indological
Library)](https://www.amazon.in/Rise-Mahasena-Transformation-Skanda-Karttikeya-Indological/dp/9004217541)
by Richard D Mann

The book in question is good regarding some early textual sources and
also highlighing some of the grahas associated with Him,but I found it
unsatisfactory in its explanation of why Skanda upāsanā has almost
completely vanished from the North(claiming that ‘refining’ Him led to a
loss of popularity and what not),while a more fuller picture of
Him(presenting His tāttvic reality in the language of siddhānta āgama
rather than the older Kaumāra tantra as we see in Arunagirinathar’s
hymns) long after that form of upAsanA was forgotten in the North. As
[@Ghorangirasa](https:twitter.com/Ghorangirasa) noted: Blaming a largely
southern “refinement” for the loss of popularity in the north is
ill-conceived. The book however makes one decent point:That he was
subsumed into \[Saiddhāntika\] Śaiva mārga,though I would place this
subsuming somewhat later. One can say that this subsuming has its
beginnings in the Gupta era,nothing more than that.

That being said,Skanda and Vishnu are two deities whose mantramārga(not
in terms of mantras standalone,but the full scale dīkṣā etc) have been
subsumed into contexts distinct from their original context and the
original tāntrika picture of these deities(talking of archaic Pāñcarātra
for Vishnu and Kaumāra tantra for skanda) has faded/been co-opted into
other sampradāyas(Śrīvaiṣṇava and saiddhāntika śaiva) and have become
more ‘bhaktimārga pradhāna’,for lack of a better word.

OM agninandanāya namaḥ\|
