---
title: II

---
<div>

[←](discussion_at_the_graduate_philosophical.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Questions and
Answers](questions_and_answers_contents.htm)
/ [→](brooklyn_ethical_society.htm)

  

## II

(*At the Twentieth Century Club of Boston, U. S. A.*)

*Q*. — Did Vedanta exert any influence over Mohammedanism?

*A*. — This Vedantic spirit of religious liberality has very much
affected Mohammedanism. Mohammedanism in India is quite a different
thing from that in any other country. It is only when Mohammedans come
from other countries and preach to their co-religionists in India about
living with men who are not of their faith that a Mohammedan mob is
aroused and fights.

*Q*. — Does Vedanta recognise caste?

*A*. — The caste system is opposed to the religion of the Vedanta. Caste
is a social custom, and all our great preachers have tried to break it
down. From Buddhism downwards, every sect has preached against caste,
and every time it has only riveted the chains. Caste is simply the
outgrowth of the political institutions of India; it is a hereditary
trade guild. Trade competition with Europe has broken caste more than
any teaching.

*Q*. — What is the peculiarity of the Vedas?

*A*. — One peculiarity of the Vedas is that they are the only scriptures
that again and again declare that you must go beyond them. The Vedas say
that they were written just for the child mind; and when you have grown,
you must go beyond them.

*Q*. — Do you hold the individual soul to be eternally real?

*A*. — The individual soul consists of a man's thoughts, and they are
changing every moment. Therefore, it cannot be eternally real. It is
real only in the phenomenal. The individual consists of memory and
thought, how can that be real?

*Q*. — Why did Buddhism as a religion decline in India?

*A*. — Buddhism did not really decline in India; it was only a gigantic
social movement. Before Buddha great numbers of animals were killed for
sacrifice and other reasons, and people drank wine and ate meat in large
quantities. Since Buddha's teaching drunkenness has almost disappeared,
and the killing of animals has almost gone.

</div>
