---
title: VII

---
<div>

[←](in_answer_to_nivedita.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Questions and
Answers](questions_and_answers_contents.htm)
/ [→](../conversations_and_dialogues/i_shri_surendra_nath_das_gupta.htm)

  

## VII

GURU, AVATARA, YOGA, JAPA, SEVA

*Q*. — How can Vedanta be realised?

*A*. — By "hearing, reflection, and meditation". Hearing must take place
from a Sad-guru. Even if one is not a regular disciple, but is a fit
aspirant and hears the Sad-guru's words, he is liberated.

*Q*. — Who is a Sad-guru?

*A*. — A Sad-guru is one on whom the spiritual power has descended by
Guru-paramparâ, or an unbroken chain of discipleship.

To play the role of a spiritual teacher is a very difficult thing. One
has to take on oneself the sins of others. There is every chance of a
fall in less advanced men. If merely physical pain ensues, then he
should consider himself fortunate.

*Q*. — Cannot the spiritual teacher make the aspirant fit?

*A*. — An Avatâra can. Not an ordinary Guru.

*Q*. — Is there no easy way to liberation?

*A*. — "There is no royal road to Geometry" — except for those who have
been fortunate enough to come in contact with an Avatara. Paramahamsa
Deva used to say, "One who is having his last birth shall somehow or
other see me."

*Q*. — Is not Yoga an easy path to that?

*A*. — (Jokingly) You have said well, I see! — Yoga an easy path! If
your mind be not pure and you try to follow Yoga, you will perhaps
attain some supernatural power, but that will be a hindrance. Therefore
purity of mind is the first thing necessary.

*Q*. — How can this be attained?

*A*. — By good work. Good work is of two kinds, positive and negative.
"Do not steal" — that is a negative mandate, and "Do good to others" —
is a positive one.

*Q*. — Should not doing good to others be performed in a higher stage,
for if performed in a lower stage, it may bind one to the world?

*A*. — It should be performed in the first stage. One who has any desire
at first gets deluded and becomes bound, but not others. Gradually it
will become very natural.

*Q*. — Sir, last night you said, "In you is everything." Now, if I want
to be like Vishnu, shall I have to meditate on the form also, or only on
the idea?

*A*. — According to capacity one may follow either way.

*Q*. — What is the means of realisation?

*A*. — The Guru is the means of realisation. "There is no knowledge
without a teacher."

*Q*. — Some say that there is no necessity of practicing meditation in a
worship-room. How far is it true?

*A*. — Those who have already realised the Lord's presence may not
require it, but for others it is necessary. One, however, should go
beyond the form and meditate on the impersonal aspect of God, for no
form can grant liberation. You may get worldly prosperity from the sight
of the form. One who ministers to his mother succeeds in this world; one
who worships his father goes to heaven; but the worshipper of a Sâdhu
(holy man) gets knowledge and devotion.

*Q*. — What is the meaning of "क्षणमिह सज्जनसंगतिरेका" etc. — Even a
moment's association with the holy ones serves to take one beyond this
relative existence"?

*A*. — A fit person coming in contact with a true Sadhu attains to
liberation. True Sadhus are very rare, but their influence is such that
a great writer has said, "Hypocrisy is the tribute which vice pays to
virtue." But Avataras are Kapâlamochanas, that is, they can alter the
doom of people. They can stir the whole world. The least dangerous and
best form of worship is worshipping man. One who has got the idea of
Brahman in a man has realised it in the whole universe. Monasticism and
the householder's life are both good, according to different
circumstances. Knowledge is the only thing necessary.

*Q*. — Where should one meditate — inside the body or outside it? Should
the mind be withdrawn inside or held outside?

*A*. — We should try to meditate inside. As for the mind being here or
there, it will take a long time before we reach the mental plane. Now
our struggle is with the body. When one acquires a perfect steadiness in
posture, then and then alone one begins to struggle with the mind. Âsana
(posture) being conquered, one's limbs remain motionless, and one can
sit as long as one pleases.

*Q*. — Sometimes one gets tired of Japa (repetition of the Mantra).
Should one continue it or read some good book instead?

*A*. — One gets tired of Japa for two reasons. Sometimes one's brain is
fatigued, sometimes it is the result of idleness. If the former, then
one should give up Japa for the time being, for persistence in it at the
time results in seeing hallucinations, or in lunacy etc. But if the
latter, the mind should be forced to continue Japa.

*Q*. — Sometimes sitting at Japa one gets joy at first, but then one
seems to be disinclined to continue the Japa owing to that joy. Should
it be continued then?

*A*. — Yes, that joy is a hindrance to spiritual practice, its name
being Rasâsvâdana (tasting of the sweetness). One must rise above that.

*Q*. — Is it good to practice Japa for a long time, though the mind may
be wandering?

*A*. — Yes. As some people break a wild horse by always keeping his seat
on his back.

*Q*. — You have written in your *Bhakti-Yoga* that if a weak-bodied man
tries to practice Yoga, a tremendous reaction comes. Then what to do?

*A*. — What fear if you die in the attempt to realise the Self! Man is
not afraid of dying for the sake of learning and many other things, and
why should you fear to die for religion?

*Q*. — Can Jiva-sevâ (service to beings) alone give Mukti ?

*A*. — Jiva-seva can give Mukti not directly but indirectly, through the
purification of the mind. But if you wish to do a thing properly, you
must, for the time being, think that that is all-sufficient. The danger
in any sect is want of zeal. There must be constancy (Nishthâ), or there
will be no growth. At present it has become necessary to lay stress on
Karma.

*Q*. — What should be our motive in work — compassion, or any other
motive?

*A*. — Doing good to others out of compassion is good, but the Seva
(service) of all beings in the spirit of the Lord is better.

*Q*. — What is the efficacy of prayer?

*A*. — By prayer one's subtle powers are easily roused, and if
consciously done, all desires may be fulfilled by it; but done
unconsciously, one perhaps in ten is fulfilled. Such prayer, however, is
selfish and should therefore be discarded.

*Q*. — How to recognise God when He has assumed a human form?

*A*. — One who can alter the doom of people is the Lord. No Sadhu,
however advanced, can claim this unique position. I do not see anyone
who realises Ramakrishna as God. We sometimes feel it hazily, that is
all. To realise Him as God and yet be attached to the world is
inconsistent.

</div>
