---
title: II 1

---
<div>

[←](001_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](003_sir.htm)

  

[«](001_sir.htm) Chronology [»](003_sir.htm)  
[«](001_sir.htm) Addressee [»](003_sir.htm)

## II [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6002e6002.pdf)* )

VRINDABAN,  
*20th Aug., 1888.*

DEAR SIR,

An aged brother-disciple of mine who has just come back to Vrindaban
after visiting Kedarnath and Badrinath met Gangadhar. Twice did
Gangadhar ascend up to Tibet and Bhutan. He is in great happiness and
felt overwhelmed and wept at the meeting. He spent the winter at
Kankhal. The Karoâ (waterpot) you gave him, he still keeps with him. He
is coming back and is expected at Vrindaban this very month. So in the
hope of meeting him, I postpone my going to Hardwar for some days.
Please convey my deepest respects to the Brahmin devotee of Shiva who is
with you and accept the same yourself. 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.  

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
