---
title: IV 1

---
<div>

[←](003_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](005_m.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/001_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](005_m.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/001_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/002_sir.htm)

## IV [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6005e6004.pdf)* )

*Victory to God!*

BARANAGORE,  
*4th Feb., 1889.*

DEAR SIR,

For some reason I had been feeling today agitated and cramped in my
mind, when your letter of invitation to the heavenly city of Varanasi
reached me. I accept it as the call of Vishveshvara. (The Lord of the
Universe, or Shiva, as installed in the leading temple of Varanasi or
Kashi.) I am going now on a pilgrimage to the place of my Master's
nativity, and after a sojourn of a few days there, I shall present
myself to you. He must be made of stone whose mind does not melt at the
sigh of Kashi and its Lord! I feel now much improved in health. My
regards to Jnanananda. I am coming as soon as I can. It all depends
ultimately on Vishveshvara's will . . . . More when we meet.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
