---
title: VI 1

---
<div>

[←](005_m.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](007_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/003_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](007_sir.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/003_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](007_sir.htm)

## VI [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6009e6006.pdf)* )

*Shri Durgâ be my Refuge!*

BARANAGORE,  
*26th June, 1889*.

DEAR SIR,

For sundry reasons I have been unable to write to you for long, for
which please excuse me. I have now obtained news of Gangadhar. He met
one of my brother -disciples, and both are now staying in the
Uttarakhanda (the sacred Himalayas). Four of us from here are in the
Himalayas now, and with Gangadhar they are five. One brother-disciple
named Shivananda came across Gangadhar at Srinagara on the way to holy
Kedarnath, and Gangadhar has sent two letters here. During his first
year in the Himalayas, he could not secure permission to enter Tibet,
but he got it the next year. The Lamas love him much, and he had picked
up the Tibetan language. He says the Lamas form ninety per cent of the
population, but they mostly practice Tântrika forms of worship. The
country is intensely cold — eatables there are scarcely any — only dried
meat; and Gangadhar had to travel and live on that food. My health is
passable, but the state of mind is terrible! 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
