---
title: 'IX

  1'

---
<div>

[←](008_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](010_sir.htm)

  

[«](008_sir.htm) Chronology [»](010_sir.htm)  
[«](008_sir.htm) Addressee [»](010_sir.htm)

## IX [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6013e6009.pdf)* )

BARANAGORE,  
*17th Aug., 1889.*

DEAR SIR,

You have expressed embarrassment in your last favour for being addressed
reverentially. But the blame attaches not to me but to your own
excellent qualities. I wrote in one letter before that from the way I
feel attracted by your lofty virtues, it seems we had some affinity from
previous births. I make no distinction as to householder or Sannyasin in
this, that for all time my head shall bend low in reverence wherever I
see greatness, broadness of heart, and holiness — Shântih! Shântih!
Shântih! My prayer is that among the many people embracing Sannyâsa
nowadays, greedy of honour, posing renunciation for the sake of a
living, and fallen off from the ideal on both sides, may one in a lakh
at least become high-souled like you! To you my Brahmin fellow-disciples
who have heard of your noble virtues tender their best prostrations.

About one amongst my several questions to which you sent your replies,
my wrong idea is corrected. For this I shall remain indebted to you for
ever. Another of these questions was: Whether Acharya Shankara gives any
conclusion regarding caste based on Gunas as mentioned in Puranâs like
the Mahabharata. If he does, where is it to be found? I have no doubt
that according to the ancient view in this country, caste was
hereditary, and it cannot also be doubted that sometimes the Shudras
used to be oppressed more than the helots among the Spartans and the
negroes among the Americans! As for myself, I have no partiality for any
party in this caste question, because I know it is a social law and is
based on diversity of Guna and Karma. It also means grave harm if one
bent on going beyond Guna and Karma cherishes in mind any caste
distinctions. In these matters, I have got some settled ideas through
the grace of my Guru but, if I come to know of your views, I may just
confirm some points or rectify others in them. One doesn't have honey
dripping unless one pokes at the hive — so I shall put you some more
questions; and looking upon me as ignorant and as a boy, please give
proper replies without taking any offence.

1\. Is the Mukti, which the *Vedanta-Sutras* speaks of, one and the same
with the Nirvana of the Avadhuta-Gitâ and other texts?

2\. What is really meant by Nirvana if, according to the aphorism,
"Without the function of creating etc."[2](#fn2) (ibid., IV. iv. 7),
none can attain to the fullest Godhead?

3\. Chaitanya-deva is said to have told Sârvabhauma at Puri, "I
understand the Sutras (aphorisms) of Vyasa, they are dualistic; but the
commentator makes them, monistic, which I don't understand." Is this
true? Tradition says, Chaitanya-deva had a dispute with Prakashananda
Sarasvati on the point, and Chaitanya-deva won. One commentary by
Chaitanya-deva was rumoured to have been existing in Prakashananda's
Math.

4\. In the Tantra, Acharya Shankara has been called a crypto-Buddhist;
views expressed in *Prajnâparamitâ*, the Buddhist Mâhâyana book,
perfectly tally with the Vedantic views propounded by the Acharya. The
author of *Panchadashi* also says, "What we call Brahman is the same
truth as the Shunya of the Buddhist." What does all this mean?

5\. Why has no foundation for the authority of the Vedas been adduced in
the *Vedanta-Sutras*? First, it has been said that the Vedas are the
authority for the existence of God, and then it has been argued that the
authority for the Vedas is the text: "It is the breath of God." Now, is
this statement not vitiated by what in Western logic is called an
argument in a circle?

6\. The Vedanta requires of us faith, for conclusiveness cannot be
reached by mere argumentation. Then why, has the slightest flaw,
detected in the position of the schools of Sânkhya and Nyâya, been
overwhelmed with a fusillade of dialectics? In whom, moreover, are we to
put our faith? Everybody seems to be mad over establishing his own view;
if, according to Vyasa, even the great Muni Kapila, "the greatest among
perfected souls",[3](#fn3) is himself deeply involved in error, then who
would say that Vyasa may not be so involved in a greater measure? Did
Kapila fail to understand the Vedas?

7\. According to the Nyaya, "Shabda or Veda (the criterion of truth), is
the word of those who have realised the highest"; so the Rishis as such
are omniscient. Then how are they proved, according to the
*Surya-siddhânta*, to be ignorant of such simple astronomical truths?
How can we accept their intelligence as the refuge to ferry us across
the ocean of transmigratory existence, seeing that they speak of the
earth as triangular, of the serpent Vâsuki as the support of the earth
and so on?

8\. If in His acts of creation God is dependent on good and evil Karmas,
then what does it avail us to worship Him? There is a fine song of
Nareshchandra, where occurs the following: "If what lies in one's
destiny is to happen anyhow, O Mother, then what good all this invoking
by the holy name of Durgâ?"

9\. True, it is improper to hold many texts on the same subject to be
contradicted by one or two. But why then are the long-continued customs
of Madhuparka[4](#fn4) and the like repealed by one or two such texts
as, "The horse sacrifice, the cow sacrifice, Sannyasa, meat-offerings in
Shrâddha", etc.? If the Vedas are eternal, then what are the meaning and
justification of such specifications as "this rule of Dharma is for the
age of Dvâpara," "this for the age of Kali", and so forth?

10\. The same God who gives out the Vedas becomes Buddha again to annul
them; which of these dispensations is to be obeyed? Which of these
remains authoritative, the earlier or the later one?

11\. The Tantra says, in the Kali-Yuga the Veda-Mantras are futile. So
which behest of God, the Shiva, is to be followed?

12\. Vyasa makes out in the *Vedanta-Sutras* that it is wrong to worship
the tetrad of divine manifestation, Vâsudeva, Sankarshana, etc., and
again that very Vyasa expatiates on the great merits of that worship in
the *Bhâgavata*! Is this Vyasa a madman?

I have many doubts besides these, and, hoping to have them dispelled
from my mind through your kindness, I shall lay them before you in
future. Such questions cannot be all set forth except in a personal
interview; neither can as much satisfaction be obtained as one expects
to. So I have a mind to lay before you all these facts when presenting
myself to you, which I expect will be very soon, by the grace of the
Guru.

I have heard it said that without inner progress in the practice of
religion, no true conclusion can be reached concerning these matters,
simply by means of reasoning; but satisfaction, at least to some extent,
seems to be necessary at the outset.

Yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.
2.  [^](#txt2)"जगद्व्यापारवर्जं प्रकरणादसंनिहितत्वाच्च" — "Having regard
    to the context which ascribes the threefold function relating to the
    universe only to God, and because the fact of their conscious mental
    distinction comes between that function and their liberated state,
    we have to conclude that the state of final liberation or Mukti in
    the case of men is devoid of the capacity to create, preserve, and
    dissolve the universe." So if this capacity is reserved only for
    God, what is meant, Swamiji asks, by saying that in Nirvana the
    human merges completely into the Divine? We must remember that many
    of the questions here reflect the intellectual stages through which
    Swamiji was reaching out in those days towards that plenitude of
    Vedantic wisdom which was his in future years. We also find a
    glimpse of those processes through which his intellect was growing
    towards a fuller understanding of our ancient scriptures and
    customs.
3.  [^](#txt3)Kapila is so spoken of in Shvetâshvatara Upanishad, V.2 In
    his commentary of Vedanta-Sutras, II. i. 1, Shankara doubts the
    identity of the Vedic Kapila with the Sankhyan Kapila.
4.  [^](#txt4)Madhuparka was a Vedic ceremony, usually in honour of
    guest, in which a respectful offering was to be made consisting,
    among other dainties, of beef. The text which Swamiji partially
    quotes forbids such food. The full text means that in the Kali-Yuga
    the following five customs are to be forsaken: The horse sacrifice,
    cow-killing ceremonies, meat-offerings in Shraddha, Sannyasa, and
    maintaining the line of progeny through the husband's younger
    brother in case of failure through the husband.

</div>
