---
title: XI 1

---
<div>

[←](010_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](012_sir.htm)

  

[«](010_sir.htm) Chronology [»](012_sir.htm)  
[«](010_sir.htm) Addressee [»](012_sir.htm)

## XI [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6015e6011.pdf)* )

BAGHBAZAR,  
*3rd Dec., 1889.*

DEAR SIR,

I have not heard from you for a long time, I hope you are doing well in
body and mind. Two of my brother disciples are shortly leaving for
Varanasi. One is Rakhal by name, the other is Subodh. The first-named
was beloved of my Master and used to stay much with him. Please
recommend them to some Satra (house of alms.) during their stay in the
city, if you find it convenient. You will hear from them all my news.

With my best regards and greetings.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Gangadhar is now proceeding to Kailas. The Tibetans wanted to slash
him up on the way, taking him to be a spy of the foreigners. Eventually
some Lamas kindly set him free. We obtain this news from a Tibet-going
trader. Gangadhar's blood won't cool down before seeing Lhasa. The gain
is that his physical endurance has grown immensely — one night he passed
uncovered on a bed of snow, and that without much hardship. 

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
