---
title: 'XIII

  1'

---
<div>

[←](012_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](014_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/01_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](014_sir.htm)  
[«](012_sir.htm) Addressee [»](014_sir.htm)

## XIII [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6018e6013.pdf)* )

BAIDYANATH,  
*26th Dec., 1889.*

DEAR SIR,

After a long attempt, I think, I am now in a position to present myself
before you. In a day or two I take myself to your feet at holy Kashi.

I have been putting up here for some days with a gentleman of Calcutta,
but my mind is much longing for Varanasi. My idea is to remain there for
some time, and to watch how Vishvanâtha and Annapurnâ (Shiva and His
Divine Spouse as installed in Varanasi.) deal it out to my lot. And my
resolve is something like "either to lay down my life or realise my
ideal" "शरीरं वा पातयामि मन्त्रं वा साधयामि ।" — so help me the Lord of
Kashi.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
