---
title: 'XIV

  1'

---
<div>

[←](013_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](015_sir.htm)

  

[«](013_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/02_sir.htm)  
[«](013_sir.htm) Addressee [»](016_sir.htm)

## XIV [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6020e6014.pdf)* )

ALLAHABAD,  
*30th Dec., 1889.*

DEAR SIR,

I wrote in a letter to you that I was to go to Varanasi in a day or two,
but who can nullify the decree of Providence? News reached me that a
brother-disciple, Yogen by name, had been attacked with smallpox after
arriving here from a pilgrimage to Chitrakuta, Omkarnath, etc., and so I
came to this place to nurse him. He has now completely recovered. Some
Bengali gentlemen here are of a greatly pious and loving disposition.
They are very lovingly taking care of me, and their importunate desire
is that I should stay here during the month of Mâgha (Jan.-Feb.) keeping
the Kalpa vow. (Special ablutions and worship regularly performed in
that holy confluence — a very solemn and sacred practice.) But my mind
is very keenly harping on the name of Varanasi and is quite agog to see
you. Yes, I am going to try my best to slip away and avoid their
importunities in a day or two and betake myself to the holy realm of the
Lord of Varanasi. If one of my monastic brother-disciples, Achyutananda
Sarasvati by name, calls on you to enquire of me, please tell him I am
soon coming to Varanasi. He is indeed a very good man and learned. I was
obliged to leave him behind at Bankipore. Are Rakhal and Subodh still
there in Varanasi? Please inquire and inform me whether the Kumbha fair
this year is going to be held at Hardwar or not.

Many a man of wisdom, of piety, many a Sâdhu (holy man) and Pundit have
I met in so many places, and I have been very much favoured by them, but
"भिन्नरुचिर्हि लोकाः — Men are of varying tastes" — *Raghuvamsham*). I
know not what sort of soul-affinity there is between us, for nowhere
else does it seem so pleasing and agreeable as with you. Let me see how
the Lord of Kashi disposes.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
My address is:

C/o Govinda Chandra Basu, Chauk, Allahabad.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
