---
title: XVI 1

---
<div>

[←](015_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](017_sir.htm)

  

[«](015_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/03_sir.htm)  
[«](014_sir.htm) Addressee [»](017_sir.htm)

## XVI [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6024e6016.pdf)* )

C/O BABU SATISH CHANDRA MUKHERJI,  
GORABAZAR, GHAZIPUR,  
*21st Jan., 1890.*

DEAR SIR,

I reached Ghazipur three days ago. Here I am putting up in the house of
Babu Satish Chandra Mukherji, a friend of my early age. The place is
very pleasant. Close by flows the Ganga, but bathing there is
troublesome, for there is no regular path, and it is hard work wading
through sands. Babu Ishan Chandra Mukherji, my friend's father, that
noble-hearted man of whom I spoke to you, is here. Today he is leaving
for Varanasi whence he will proceed to Calcutta. I again had a great
mind to go over to Kashi, but the object of my coming here, namely, an
interview with the Bâbâji (Pavhâri Bâbâ, the great saint.), has not yet
been realised, and. hence the delay of a few days becomes necessary.
Everything here appears good. The people are all gentlemen, but very
much Westernised; and it is a pity I am so thoroughly against every
affectation of the Western idea. Only my friend very little affects such
ideals. What a frippery civilisation is it indeed that the foreigners
have brought over here! What a materialistic illusion have they created!
May Vishvanâtha save these weak-hearted! After seeing Babaji, I shall
send you a detailed account.

Yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Alas for the irony of our fate, that in this land of Bhagavân
Shuka's birth, renunciation is looked down upon as madness and sin!

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
