---
title: XVII 1

---
<div>

[←](016_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](018_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/03_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](018_sir.htm)  
[«](016_sir.htm) Addressee [»](018_sir.htm)

## XVII [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6026e6017.pdf)* )

GHAZIPUR,  
*31st Jan., 1890.*

DEAR SIR,

It is so very difficult to meet the Babaji. He does not step out of his
home; and, when willing to speak at all, he just comes near the door to
speak from inside. I have come away with having just a view of his
garden-house with chimneys tapering above and encircled by high walls —
no means of admittance within! People say there are cave-like rooms
within where he dwells; and he only knows what he does there, for nobody
has had a peep. I had to come away one day sorely used up with waiting
and waiting, but shall take my chance again. On Sunday, I leave for holy
Varanasi — only the Babus here won't let me off; otherwise all my fancy
to see the Babaji has flattened down. I am prepared to be off today, but
anyhow, I am leaving on Sunday. What of your plan of going to
Hrishikesh?

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. The redeeming feature is that the place seems healthy.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
