---
title: XIX 1

---
<div>

[←](018_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](020_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/001_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/002_sir.htm)  
[«](018_sir.htm) Addressee [»](020_sir.htm)

## XIX [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6028e6019.pdf)* )

GHAZIPUR,  
*7th Feb., 1890.*

DEAR SIR,

I feel very happy to hear from you just now. Apparently in his features,
the Babaji is a Vaishnava the embodiment, so to speak, of Yoga, Bhakti,
and humility. His dwelling has walls on all sides with a few doors in
them. Inside these walls, there is one long underground burrow wherein
he lays himself up in Samâdhi. He talks to others only when he comes out
of the hole. Nobody knows what he eats, and so they call him Pavhâri
(One living on air.) Bâbâ. Once he did not come out of the hole for five
years, and people thought he had given up the body. But now again he is
out. But this time he does not show himself to people and talks from
behind the door. Such sweetness in speech I have never come across! He
does not give a direct reply to questions but says, "What does this
servant know?" But then fire comes out as the talking goes on. On my
pressing him very much he said, "Favour me highly by staying here some
days." But he never speaks in this way; so from this I understood he
meant to reassure me and whenever I am importunate, he asks me to stay
on. So I wait in hope. He is a learned man no doubt but nothing in the
line betrays itself. He performs scriptural ceremonials, for from the
full-moon day to the last day of the month, sacrificial oblations go on.
So it is sure, he is not retiring into the hole during this period. How
can I ask his permission, (Evidently for a proposed visit to the saint
by the correspondent, Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi.) for he never gives
a direct reply; he goes on multiplying such expressions as "this
servant", "my fortune", and so on. If you yourself have a mind, then
come sharp on receipt of this note. Or after his passing away, the
keenest regret will be left in your mind. In two days you may return
after an interview — I mean a talk with him *ab intra*. My friend Satish
Babu will receive you most warmly. So, do come up directly you receive
this; I shall meanwhile let Babaji know of you. 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Even though one can't have his company, no trouble taken for the
sake of such a great soul can ever go unrewarded.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
