---
title: XXII 1

---
<div>

[←](021_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](023_akhandananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/05_gupta.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/003_sir.htm)  
[«](021_sir.htm) Addressee [»](024_sir.htm)

## XXII [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6033e6022.pdf)* )

*Victory to the Lord!*

GHAZIPUR,  
*19th Feb., 1890.*

DEAR SIR,

I wrote a letter to brother Gangadhar asking him to stop his wandering
and settle down somewhere and to send me an account of the various
Sadhus he had come across in Tibet and their ways and customs. I enclose
the reply that came from him. Brother Kali is having repeated attacks of
fever at Hrishikesh. I have sent him a wire from this place. So if from
the reply I find I am wanted by him, I shall be obliged to start direct
for Hrishikesh from this place, otherwise I am coming to you in a day or
two. Well, you may smile, sir, to see me weaving all this web of Mâyâ —
and that is no doubt the fact. But then there is the chain of iron, and
there is the chain of gold. Much good comes of the latter; and it drops
off by itself when all the good is reaped. The sons of my Master are
indeed the great objects of my service, and here alone I feel I have
some duty left for me. Perhaps I shall send brother Kali down to
Allahabad or somewhere else, as convenient. At your feet are laid a
hundred and one faults of mine — "I am as thy son, so guide me who have
taken refuge in thee." (An adaptation from the Gitâ, II. 7.)   
  
Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
