---
title: XXV 1

---
<div>

[←](024_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](026_sir.htm)

  

[«](024_sir.htm) Chronology [»](026_sir.htm)  
[«](024_sir.htm) Addressee [»](026_sir.htm)

## XXV [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6037e6025.pdf)* )

*Victory to the Lord!*

GHAZIPUR,  
*3rd March, 1890*.

DEAR SIR,

Your kind letter comes to hand just now. You know not, sir, I am a very
soft-natured man in spite of the stern Vedantic views I hold. And this
proves to be my undoing. At the slightest touch I give myself away; for
howsoever I may try to think only of my own good, I slip off in spite of
myself to think of other peoples' interests. This time it was with a
very stern resolve that I set out to pursue my own good, but I had to
run off at the news of the illness of a brother at Allahabad! And now
comes this news from Hrishikesh, and my mind has run off with me there.
I have wired to Sharat, hut no reply yet — a nice place indeed to delay
even telegrams so much! The lumbago obstinately refuses to leave me, and
the pain is very great. For the last few days I haven't been able to go
to see Pavhariji, but out of his kindness he sends every day for my
report. But now I see the whole matter is inverted in its bearings!
While I myself have come, a beggar, at his door, he turns round and
wants to learn of me! This saint perhaps is not yet perfected — too much
of rites, vows, observances, and too much of self-concealment. The ocean
in its fullness cannot be contained within its shores, I am sure. So it
is not good, I have decided not to disturb this Sâdhu (holy man) for
nothing, and very soon I shall ask leave of him to go. No help, you see;
Providence has dealt me my death to make me so tender! Babaji does not
let me off, and Gagan Babu (whom probably you know — an upright, pious,
and kindhearted man) does not let me off. If the wire in reply requires
my leaving this place, I go; if not, I am coming to you at Varanasi in a
few days. I am not going to let you off  — I must take you to Hrishikesh
— no excuse or objections will do. What are you saying about
difficulties there of keeping clean? Lack of water in the hills or lack
of room!! Tirthas (places of pilgrimage) and Sannyasins of the Kali-Yuga
— you know what they are. Spend money and the owners of temples will
fling away the installed god to make room for you; so no anxiety about a
resting-place! No trouble to face there, I say; the summer heat has set
in there now, I believe, though not that degree of it as you find at
Varanasi — so much the better. Always the nights are quite cool there,
from which good sleep is almost a certainty.

Why do you get frightened so much? I stand guarantee that you shall
return home safe and that you shall have no trouble anywhere. It is my
experience that in this British realm no fakir or householder gets into
any trouble.

Is it a mere idle fancy of mine that between us there is some connection
from previous birth? Just see how one letter from you sweeps away all my
resolution and, I bend my steps towards Varanasi leaving all matters
behind! . . .

I have written again to brother Gangadhar and have asked him this time
to return to the Math. If he comes, he will meet you. How is the climate
at Varanasi now? By my stay here I have been cured of all other symptoms
of malaria, only the pain in the loins makes me frantic; day and night
it is aching and chafes me very much. I know not how I shall climb up
the hills. I find wonderful endurance in Babaji, and that's why I am
begging something of him; but no inkling of the mood to give, only
receiving and receiving! So I also fly off. 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. To no big person am I going any longer —

"Remain, O mind, within yourself, go not to anybody else's door;
whatever you seek, you shall obtain sitting at your ease, only seek for
it in the privacy of your heart. There is the supreme Treasure, the
philosophers' stone and He can give whatever you ask for; for countless
gems, O mind, lie strewn about the portals of His abode. He is the
wishing-stone that confers boons at the mere thought." Thus says the
poet Kamalâkânta.

So now the great conclusion is that Ramakrishna has no peer; nowhere
else in this world exists that unprecedented perfection, that wonderful
kindness for all that does not stop to justify itself, that intense
sympathy for man in bondage. Either he must be the Avatâra as he himself
used to say, or else the ever-perfected divine man whom the Vedanta
speaks of as the free one who assumes a body for the good of humanity.
This is my conviction sure and certain; and the worship of such a divine
man has been referred to by Patanjali in the aphorism: "Or the goal may
be attained by meditating on a saint." (Patanjali's aphorism has
"Ishvara" in place of "saint". Nârada has an aphorism which runs thus :
Bhakti (Supreme Love) is attainable chiefly through the grace of a
saint, or by a bit of Divine Grace.)

Never during his life did he refuse a single prayer of mine; millions of
offences has he forgiven me; such great love even my parents never had
for me. There is no poetry, no exaggeration in all this. It is the bare
truth and every disciple of his knows it. In times of great danger,
great temptation, I wept in extreme agony with the prayer, "O God, do
save me," but no response came from anybody; but this wonderful saint,
or Avatara, or anything else he may be, came to know of all my
affliction through his powers of insight into human hearts and lifted it
off — in spite of my desire to the contrary — after getting me brought
to his presence. If the soul be deathless, and so, if he still lives, I
pray to trim again and again: "O Bhagavan Ramakrishna, thou infinite
ocean of mercy and my only refuge, do graciously fulfil the desires of
my esteemed friend, who is every inch a great man." May he impart to you
all good, he whom alone I have found in this world to be like an ocean
of unconditioned mercy! Shântih, Shântih, Shântih.

Please send a prompt reply.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
