---
title: XXVII

---
<div>

[←](026_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](028_akhandananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/004_balaram_babu.htm) Chronology
[»](028_akhandananda.htm)  
[«](023_akhandananda.htm) Addressee [»](028_akhandananda.htm)

## XXVII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6036e6027.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna!*

GHAZIPUR,  
*March, 1890*.

BELOVED AKHANDANANDA,

Very glad to receive your letter yesterday. I am at present staying with
the wonderful Yogi and devotee of this place, called Pavhariji. He never
comes out of his room and holds conversations with people from behind
the door. Inside the room there is a pit in which he lives. It is
rumoured that he remains in a state of Samadhi for months together. His
fortitude is most wonderful. Our Bengal is the land of Bhakti and of
Jnana, where Yoga is scarcely so much as talked of even. What little
there is, is but the queer breathing exercises of the Hatha-Yoga — which
is nothing but a kind of gymnastics. Therefore I am staying with this
wonderful Raja-Yogi — and he has given me some hopes, too. There is a
beautiful bungalow in a small garden belonging to a gentleman here; I
mean to stay there. The garden is quite close to Babaji's cottage. A
brother of the Babaji stays there to look after the comforts of the
Sadhus, and I shall have my Bhikshâ at his place. Hence, with a view to
seeing to the end of this fun, I give up for the present my plan of
going to the hills. For the last two months I have had an attack of
lumbago in the waist, which also makes it impossible to climb the hills
now. Therefore let me wait and see what Babaji will give me.

My motto is to learn whatever good things I may come across anywhere.
This leads many friends to think that it will take away from my devotion
to the Guru. These ideas I count as those of lunatics and bigots. For
all Gurus are one and are fragments and radiations of God, the Universal
Guru.

If you come to Ghazipur, you have but to inquire at Satish Babu's or
Gagan Babu's at Gorabazar, and you know my whereabouts. Or, Pavhari Baba
is so well-known a person here that everyone will inform you about his
Ashrama at the very mention of his name, and you have only to go there
and inquire about the Paramahamsa, and they will tell you of me. Near
Moghul Sarai there is a station named Dildarnagar, where you have to
change to a short branch railway and get down at Tarighat, opposite
Ghazipur; then you have to cross the Ganga to reach Ghazipur.

For the present, I stay at Ghazipur for some days, and wait and see what
the Babaji does. If you come, we shall stay together at the said
bungalow for some time, and then start for the hills, or for any other
place we may decide upon. Don't, please, write to anyone at Baranagore
that I am staying at Ghazipur.

With blessings and best wishes, 

Ever yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
