---
title: XXVIII

---
<div>

[←](027_akhandananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](029_sir.htm)

  

[«](027_akhandananda.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/06_sir.htm)  
[«](027_akhandananda.htm) Addressee [»](055_akhandananda.htm)

## XXVIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6042e6028.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna!*

GHAZIPUR,  
*March, 1890*.

BELOVED AKHANDANANDA,

Received another letter of yours just now, and with great difficulty
deciphered the scribblings. I have written everything in detail in my
last letter. You start immediately on receipt of this. I know the route
to Tibet via Nepal that you have spoken of. As they don't allow anyone
to enter Tibet easily, so they don't allow anybody to go anywhere in
Nepal, except Katmandu, its capital, and one or two places of
pilgrimage. But a friend of mine is now a tutor to His Highness the
Maharaja of Nepal, and a teacher in his school, from whom I have it that
when the Nepal government send their subsidy to China, they send it via
Lhasa. A Sadhu contrived in that way to go to Lhasa, China, Manchuria,
and even to the holy seat of Târâ Devi in north China. We, too, can
visit with dignity and respect Tibet, Lhasa, China, and all, if that
friend of mine tries to arrange it. You therefore start immediately for
Ghazipur. After a few days' stay here with the Babaji, I shall
correspond with my friend, and, everything arranged, I shall certainly
go to Tibet via Nepal.

You have to get down at Dildarnagar to come to Ghazipur. It is three or
four stations from Moghul Sarai. I would have sent you the passage if I
could have collected it here; so you get it together and come. Gagan
Babu with whom I am putting up, is an exceedingly courteous, noble, and
generous-minded man. No sooner did he come to know of Kali's illness
than he sent him the passage at Hrishikesh; he has besides spent much on
my account. Under the circumstances it would be violating a Sannyasin's
duty to tax him for the passage to Kashmir, and I desist from it. You
collect the fare and start as soon as you receive this letter. Let the
craze for visiting Amarnath be put back for the present. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
