---
title: XXXIII 1

---
<div>

[←](032_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](034_sharat.htm)

  

[«](032_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/005_sir.htm)  
[«](032_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/005_sir.htm)

## XXXIII [1](#fn1)

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6047e6033.pdf)* )

57, RAMAKANTA BOSE'S STREET,  
BAGHBAZAR, CALCUTTA,  
*26th May, 1890*.

DEAR SIR,

I write this to you while caught in a vortex of many untoward
circumstances and great agitation of mind; with a prayer to Vishvanatha,
please think of the propriety and possibility, or otherwise, of all that
I set forth below and then oblige me greatly by a reply.

1\. I already told you at the outset that I am Ramakrishna's slave,
having laid my body at his feet "with Til and Tulasi leaves", I cannot
disregard his behest. If it is in failure that that great sage laid down
his life after having attained to superhuman heights of Jnana, Bhakti,
Love, and powers, and after having practiced for forty years stern
renunciation, non-attachment, holiness, and great austerities, then
where is there anything for us to count on? So I am obliged to trust his
words as the words of one identified with truth.

2\. Now his behest to me was that I should devote myself to the service
of the order of all-renouncing devotees founded by him, and in this I
have to persevere, come what may, being ready to take heaven, hell,
salvation, or anything that may happen to me.

3\. His command was that his all-renouncing devotees should group
themselves together, and I am entrusted with seeing to this. Of course,
it matters not if any one of us goes out on visits to this place or
that, but these shall be but visits, while his own opinion was that
absolute homeless wandering suited him alone who was perfected to the
highest point. Before that state, it is proper to settle somewhere to
dive down into practice. When all the ideas of body and the like are
dissolved of themselves, a person may then pursue whatever state comes
to him. Otherwise, it is baneful for a practicing aspirant to be always
wandering.

4\. So in pursuance cf this his commandment, his group of Sannyasins are
now assembled in a dilapidated house at Baranagore, and two of his lay
disciples, Babu Suresh Chandra Mitra and Babu Balaram Bose, so long
provided for their food and house-rent.

5\. For various reasons, the body of Bhagavan Ramakrishna had to be
consigned to fire. There is no doubt that this act was very blamable.
The remains of his ashes are now preserved, and if they be now properly
enshrined somewhere on the banks of the Ganga, I presume we shall be
able in some measure to expiate the sin lying on our head. These sacred
remains, his seat, and his picture are every day worshipped in our Math
in proper form; and it is known to you that a brother-disciple of mine,
of Brahmin parentage, is occupied day and night with the task. The
expenses of the worship used also to be borne by the two great souls
mentioned above.

6\. What greater regret can there be than this that no memorial could
yet be raised in this land of Bengal in the very neighbourhood of the
place where he lived his life of Sâdhanâ — he by whose birth the race of
Bengalees has been sanctified, the land of Bengal has become hallowed,
he who came on earth to save the Indians from the spell of the worldly
glamour of Western culture and who therefore chose most of his
all-renouncing disciples from university men?

7\. The two gentlemen mentioned above had a strong desire to have some
land purchased on the banks of the Ganga and see the sacred remains
enshrined on it, with the disciples living there together; and Suresh
Babu had offered a sum of Rs. 1,000 for the purpose, promising to give
more, but for some inscrutable purpose of God he left this world
yesternight! And the news of Balaram Babu's death is already known to
you.

8\. Now there is no knowing as to where his disciples will stand with
his sacred remains and his seat (and you know well, people here in
Bengal are profuse in their professions, but do not stir out an inch in
practice). The disciples are Sannyasins and are ready forthwith to
depart anywhere their way may lie. But I, their servant, am in an agony
of sufferings, and my heart is breaking to think that a small piece of
land could not be had in which to install the remains of Bhagavan
Ramakrishna.

9\. It is impossible with a sum of Rs. 1,000 to secure land and raise a
temple near Calcutta. Some such land would at least cost about five to
seven thousands.

10\. You remain now the only friend and patron of Shri Ramakrishna's
disciples. In the NorthWestern Province great indeed is your fame, your
position, and your circle of acquaintance. I request you to consider, if
you feel like it, the propriety of your getting the affair through by
raising subscriptions from well-to-do pious men known to you in your
province. If you deem it proper to have some shelter erected on the
banks of the Ganga in Bengal for Bhagavan Ramakrishna's sacred remains
and for his disciples, I shall with your leave report myself to you, and
I have not the slightest qualm to beg from door to door for this noble
cause, for the sake of my Lord and his children. Please give this
proposal your best thoughts with prayers to Vishvanatha. To my mind, if
all these sincere, educated, youthful Sannyasins of good birth fail to
dive up to the ideals of Shri Ramakrishna owing to want of an abode and
help, then alas for our country!

11\. If you ask, "You are a Sannyasin, so why do you trouble over these
desires?" — I would then reply, I am Ramakrishna's servant, and I am
willing even to steal and rob, if by doing so I can perpetuate his name
in the land of his birth and Sâdhanâ (spiritual struggle) and help even
a little his disciples to practice his great ideals. I know you to be my
closest in kinship, and I lay my mind bare to you. I returned to
Calcutta for this reason. I had told you this before I left, and now I
leave it to you to do what you think best.

12\. If you argue that it is better to have the plan carried out in some
place like Kashi, my point is, as I have told you, it would be the
greatest pity if the memorial shrine could not be raised in the land of
his birth and Sadhana! The condition of Bengal is pitiable. The people
here cannot even dream what renunciation truly means — luxury and
sensuality have been so much eating into the vitals of the race! May God
send renunciation and unworldliness into this land! They have here
nothing to speak of, while the people of the North-Western Province,
specially the rich there as I believe, have great zeal in noble causes
like this. Please send me such reply as you think best. Gangadhar has
not yet arrived today, and may do so tomorrow. I am so eager to see him
again.

Please write to the address given above. 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Letters i - iv, vi - xiv, xvi - xxii, xxiv - xxvi, xxix,
    xxxi - xxxiii and cxxiv are translated from Bengali letters written
    to Pramadadas Mitra of Varanasi, an orthodox Hindu, for whose
    profound erudition and piety Swamiji had the highest regard. These
    letters are most interesting being written (except the last) at a
    time when, after his Master's passing away, Swamiji was leading a
    wandering monk's life. In the early days he used to sign his name as
    Narendranath, though his now famous name, Vivekananda, is printed in
    all these pages for easy comprehension.

</div>
