---
title: XLI

---
<div>

[←](040_maharaja_of_khetri.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](042_sir.htm)

  

[«](040_maharaja_of_khetri.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/014_mother.htm)  
Addressee [»](047_brother_disciples.htm)

## XLI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6084e6041.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna!*

C/O GEORGE W. HALE, ESQ.,  
541 DEARBORN AVENUE, CHICAGO,  
*19th March, 1894*.

MY DEAR SHASHI (RAMAKRISHNANANDA),

I have not written to you since coming to this country. But Haridas
Bhai's[1](#fn1) letter gives me all the news. It is excellent that G. C.
Ghosh[2](#fn2) and all of you have treated him with due consideration.

I have no wants in this country, but mendicancy has no vogue here, and I
have to labour, that is, lecture in places. It is as cold here as it is
hot. The summer is not a bit less hot than in Calcutta. And how to
describe the cold in winter! The whole country is covered with snow,
three or four feet deep, nay, six or seven feet at places! In the
southern parts there is no snow. Snow, however, is a thing of little
consideration here. For it snows when the mercury stands at 32° F. In
Calcutta it scarcely comes down to 60° and it rarely approaches zero in
England. But here, your mercury sinks to *minus* 4° or 5°. In Canada, in
the north, mercury becomes condensed, when they have to use the alcohol
thermometer. When it is too cold, that is, when the mercury stands even
below 20°F, it does not snow. I used to think that it must be an
exceedingly cold day on which the snow falls. But it is not so, it snows
on comparatively warm days. Extreme cold produces a sort of
intoxication. No carriages would run; only the sledge, which is without
wheels, slides on the ground! Everything is frozen stiff — even an
elephant can walk on rivers and canals and lakes. The massive falls of
Niagara, of such tremendous velocity, are frozen to marble!! But I am
doing nicely. I was a little afraid at first, but necessity makes me
travel by rail to the borders of Canada one day, and the next day finds
me lecturing in south U.S.A.! The carriages are kept quite warm, like
your own room, by means of steam pipes, and all around are masses of
snow, spotlessly white. Oh, the beauty of it!

I was mortally afraid that my nose and ears would fall off, but to this
day they are all right. I have to go out, however, dressed in a heap of
warm clothing surmounted by a fur-coat, with boots encased in a woollen
jacket, and so on. No sooner do you breathe out than the breath freezes
among the beard and moustache! Notwithstanding all this, the fun of it
is that they won't drink water indoors without putting a lump of ice
into it. This is because it is warm indoors. Every room and the
staircase are kept warm by steam pipes. They are first and foremost in
art and appliances, foremost in enjoyment and luxury, foremost in making
money, and foremost in spending it. The daily wages of a coolie are six
rupees, as also are those of a servant; you cannot hire a cab for less
than three rupees, nor get a cigar for less than four annas. A decent
pair of shoes costs twenty-four rupees, and a suit, five hundred rupees.
As they earn, so they spend. A lecture fetches from two hundred up to
three thousand rupees. I have got up to five hundred.[3](#fn3) Of course
now I am in the very heyday of fortune. They like me, and thousands of
people come to hear me speak.

As it pleased the Lord, I met here Mr. Mazoomdar. He was very cordial at
first, but when the whole Chicago population began to flock to me in
overwhelming numbers, then grew the canker in his mind! . . . The
priests tried their utmost to snub me. But the Guru (Teacher) is with
me, what could anybody do? And the whole American nation loves and
respects me, pays my expenses, and reveres me as a Guru. ... It was not
in the power of your priests to do anything against me. Moreover, they
are a nation of scholars. Here it would no longer do to say, "We marry
our widows", "We do not worship idols", and things of that sort. What
they want is philosophy, learning; and empty talk will no more do.

Dharmapala is a fine boy. He has not much of learning but is very
gentle. He had a good deal of popularity in this country.

Brother, I have been brought to my senses. . . .ये निध्नन्ति निरर्थकं
परहितं ते के न जानीमहे — We do not know what sort of people they are who
for nothing hinder the welfare of others" (Bhartrihari). Brother, we can
get rid of everything, but not of that cursed jealousy. . . . That is a
national sin with us, speaking ill of others, and burning at heart at
the greatness of others. Mine alone is the greatness, none else should
rise to it!!

Nowhere in the world are women like those of this country. How pure,
independent, self-relying, and kindhearted! It is the women who are the
life and soul of this country. All learning and culture are centred in
them. The saying, "या श्री: स्वयं सुकृतिनां भवनेषु — Who is the Goddess
of Fortune Herself in the families of the meritorious" (*Chandi*) —
holds good in this country, while that other, "अलक्ष्मीः पापात्मनां —
The Goddess of ill luck in the homes of the sinful" (ibid.) — applies to
ours. Just think on this. Great God! I am struck dumb with wonderment at
seeing the women of America. "त्वं श्रीस्त्वमीश्वरी त्वं ह्रीः — Thou
art the Goddess of Fortune, Thou art the supreme Goddess, Thou art
Modesty" (ibid.), "या देवी सर्वभूतेषु शक्तिरूपेण संस्थिता — The Goddess
who resides in all beings as Power" (ibid.) — all this holds good here.
There are thousands of women here whose minds are as pure and white as
the snow of this country. And look at our girls, becoming mothers below
their teens!! Good Lord! I now see it all. Brother, "यत्र नार्यस्तु
पूज्यन्ते रमन्ते तत्र देवताः — The gods are pleased where the women are
held in esteem" — says the old Manu. We are horrible sinners, and our
degradation is due to our calling women "despicable worms", "gateways to
hell", and so forth. Goodness gracious! There is all the difference
between heaven and hell!! "याथातथ्यतोऽर्थान् ब्यदधात् — He adjudges
gifts according to the merits of the case" (Isha, 8). Is the Lord to be
hoodwinked by idle talk? The Lord has said, "त्वं स्त्री त्वं पुमानसि
त्वं कुमार उत वा कुमारी— Thou art the woman, Thou art the man, Thou art
the boy and the girl as well." (Shvetâshvatara Upa.) And we on our part
are crying, "दूरमपसर रे चण्डाल — Be off, thou outcast!" "केनैषा निर्मिता
नारी मोहिनी etc. — Who has made the bewitching woman?" My brother, what
experiences I have had in the South, of the upper classes torturing the
lower! What Bacchanalian orgies within the temples! Is it a religion
that fails to remove the misery of the poor and turn men into gods! Do
you think our religion is worth the name? Ours is only Don't touchism,
only "Touch me not", "Touch me not." Good heavens! A country, the big
leaders of which have for the last two thousand years been only
discussing whether to take food with the right hand or the left, whether
to take water from the right-hand side or from the left, ... if such a
country does not go to ruin, what other will? "कालः सुप्तेषु जागर्ति
कालो हि दुरतिक्रमः — Time keeps wide awake when all else sleeps. Time is
invincible indeed!" He knows it; who is there to throw dust in His eyes,
my friend?

A country where millions of people live on flowers of the Mohuâ plant,
and a million or two of Sadhus and a hundred million or so of Brahmins
suck the blood out of these poor people, without even the least effort
for their amelioration — is that a country or hell? Is that a religion,
or the devil's dance? My brother, here is one thing for you to
understand fully — I have travelled all over India, and seen this
country too — can there be an effect without cause? Can there be
punishment without sin?

सर्वशास्त्रपुराणेषु व्यासस्य वचनं ध्रुवम् ।  
परोपकारः पुण्याय पापाय परपीडनम् ॥

— "Amidst all the scriptures and Purânas, know this statement of Vyâsa
to be true, that doing good to others conduces to merit, and doing harm
to them leads to sin."

Isn't it true?

My brother, in view of all this, specially of the poverty and ignorance,
I had no sleep. At Cape Comorin sitting in Mother Kumari's temple,
sitting on the last bit of Indian rock — I hit upon a plan: We are so
many Sannyasins wandering about, and teaching the people metaphysics —
it is all madness. Did not our Gurudeva use to say, "An empty stomach is
no good for religion"? That those poor people are leading the life of
brutes is simply due to ignorance. We have for all ages been sucking
their blood and trampling them underfoot.

. . . Suppose some disinterested Sannyasins, bent on doing good to
others, go from village to village, disseminating education and seeking
in various ways to better the condition of all down to the Chandâla,
through oral teaching, and by means of maps, cameras, globes, and such
other accessories — can't that bring forth good in time? All these plans
I cannot write out in this short letter. The long and the short of it is
— if the mountain does not come to Mohammed, Mohammed must go to the
mountain. The poor are too poor to come to schools and Pâthashâlâs, and
they will gain nothing by reading poetry and all that sort of thing. We,
as a nation, have lost our individuality, and that is the cause of all
mischief in India. We have to give back to the nation its lost
individuality and *raise the masses*. The Hindu, the Mohammedan, the
Christian, all have trampled them underfoot. Again the force to raise
them must come from inside, that is, from the orthodox Hindus. In every
country the evils exist not with, but against, religion. Religion
therefore is not to blame, but men.

To effect this, the first thing we need is men, and the next is funds.
Through the grace of our Guru I was sure to get from ten to fifteen men
in every town. I next travelled in search of funds, but do you think the
people of India were going to spend money! . . . . Selfishness
personified — are they to spend anything? Therefore I have come to
America, to earn money myself, and then return to my country and devote
the rest of my days to the realisation of this one aim of my life.

As our country is poor in social virtues, so this country is lacking in
spirituality. I give them spirituality, and they give me money. I do not
know how long I shall take to realise my end. ...These people are not
hypocrites, and jealousy is altogether absent in them. I depend on no
one in Hindusthan. I shall try to earn the wherewithal myself to the
best of my might and carry out my plans, or die in the attempt.
"सन्निमित्ते वरं त्यागो विनाशे नियते सति — When death is certain, it is
best to sacrifice oneself for a good cause."

You may perhaps think what Utopian nonsense all this is! You little know
what is in me. If any of you help me in my plans, all right, or Gurudeva
will show me the way out. ... We cannot give up jealousy and rally
together. That is our national sin!! It is not to be met with in this
country, and this is what has made them so great.

Nowhere in the world have I come across such "frogs-in-the-well" as we
are. Let anything new come from some foreign country, and America will
be the first to accept it. But we? — oh, there are none like us in the
world, we men of Aryan blood!! Where that heredity really expresses
itself, I do not see. ...Yet they are descendants of the Aryans? 

Ever yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Ex-Dewan of Junagarh. Shortly before Swamiji left India
    for America, he became intimately acquainted with this gentleman,
    and was introduced by him to many Indian princes.
2.  [^](#txt2)Girish Chandra Ghosh, the great actor-dramatist of Bengal,
    and a staunch devotee of Shri Ramakrishna.
3.  [^](#txt3)For some time after the Chicago addresses, Swamiji
    lectured on behalf of a lecture bureau. He soon gave it up as
    curtailing his independence, and devoted most of the money thus
    earned to various charitable works in the U.S.A. and India.

</div>
