---
title: XLII

---
<div>

[←](041_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](043_sisters.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_4/writings_prose/our_duty_to_the_masses.htm) Chronology
[»](043_sisters.htm)  

## XLII

CHICAGO,  
*23rd June, 1894*.

DEAR SIR, (Rao Bahadur Narasimhachariar.)

Your kindness to me makes me venture to take a little advantage of it.
Mrs. Potter Palmer is the chief lady of the United States. She was the
lady president of the World's Fair. She is much interested in raising
the women of the world and is at the head of a big organisation for
women. She is a particular friend of Lady Dufferin and has been
entertained by the Royalties of Europe on account of her wealth and
position. She has been very kind to me in this country. Now she is going
to make a tour in China, Japan, Siam, and India. Of course she will be
entertained by the Governors and other high people in India. But she is
particularly anxious to see our society apart from English official aid.
I have on many occasions told her about your noble efforts in raising
the Indian women, of your wonderful College in Mysore. I think it is our
duty to show a little hospitality to such personages from America in
return for their kindness to our countrymen who came here. I hope she
will find a warm reception at your hands and be helped to see a little
of our women as they are. And I assure you she is no missionary, nor
Christian even as to that. She wants to work apart from all religions to
ameliorate the conditions of women all over the world. This would also
be helping me a great deal in this country. May the Lord bless you! 

Yours for ever and ever,

Affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
