---
title: XLIV

---
<div>

[←](043_sisters.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](045_brothers.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/024_babies.htm) Chronology
[»](045_brothers.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/024_babies.htm) Both Sisters
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/025_sisters.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/024_babies.htm) Mary or
Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/025_sisters.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/024_babies.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/025_sisters.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/024_babies.htm) Mary Hale
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/025_sisters.htm)

## XLIV

GREENACRE INN,  
ELLIOT, MAINE,  
*31st July, 1894*.

DEAR SISTERS,

I have not written you long, and I have not much to write. This is a big
inn and farm-house where the Christian Scientists are holding a session.
Last spring in New York I was invited by the lady projector of the
meeting to come here, and after all I am here. It is a beautiful and
cool place, no doubt, and many of my old friends of Chicago are here.
Mrs. Mills, Miss Stockham, and several other ladies and gentlemen live
in tents which they have pitched on the open ground by the river. They
have a lively time and sometimes all of them wear what you call your
scientific dress the whole day. They have lectures almost every day. One
Mr. Colville from Boston is here; he speaks every day, it is said, under
spirit control. The Editor (?) of the *Universal Truth* has settled
herself down here. She is conducting religious services and holding
classes to heal all manner of diseases, and very soon I expect them to
be giving eyes to the blind, and the like! After all, it is a queer
gathering. They do not care much about social laws and are quite free
and happy. Mrs. Mills is quite brilliant, and so are many other ladies.
... Another lady from Detroit — very cultured and with beautiful black
eyes and long hair is going to take me to an island fifteen miles out at
sea. I hope we shall have a nice time. ... I may go over to Annisquam
from here, I suppose. This is a beautiful and nice place and the bathing
is splendid. Cora Stockham has made a bathing dress for me, and I am
having as good a time in the water as a duck this is delicious even for
the denizens of mud Ville. I do not find anything more to write. Only I
am so busy that I cannot find time enough to write to Mother Church
separately. My love and respects to Miss Howe.

There is here Mr. Wood of Boston who is one of the great lights of your
sect. But he objects to belong to the sect of Mrs. Whirlpool. So he
calls himself a mental healer of metaphysico-chemico-physico-religiosio
what not! Yesterday there was a tremendous cyclone which gave a good
"treatment" to the tents. The big tent under which they had the lectures
had developed so much spirituality, under the "treatment", that it
entirely disappeared from mortal gaze, and about two hundred chairs were
dancing about the grounds under spiritual ecstasy! Mrs. Figs of Mills
company gives a class every morning; and Mrs. Mills is jumping all about
the place; they are all in high spirits. I am especially glad for Cora,
for they have suffered a good deal last winter and a little hilarity
would do her good. You will be astounded with the liberty they enjoy in
the camps, but they are very good and pure people there — a little
erratic and that is all. I shall be here till Saturday next. ...

... The other night the camp people went to sleep beneath a pine tree
under which I sit every morning *a la* Hindu and talk to them. Of course
I went with them, and we had a nice night under the stars, sleeping on
the lap of mother earth, and I enjoyed every bit of it. I cannot
describe to you that night's glories — after a year of brutal life that
I have led, to sleep on the ground, to meditate under the tree in the
forest! The inn people are more or less well-to-do, and the camp people
are healthy, young, *sincere*, and holy men and women. I teach them
Shivo'ham, Shivo'ham, and they all repeat it, innocent and pure as they
are and brave beyond all bounds. And so I am happy and glorified. Thank
God for making me poor, thank God for making these children in the tents
poor. The Dudes and Dudines are in the Hotel, but iron-bound nerves and
souls of triple steel and spirits of fire are in the camp. If you had
seen them yesterday, when the rain was falling in torrents and the
cyclone was overturning everything, hanging by their tent strings to
keep them from being blown down, and standing on the majesty of their
souls — these brave ones — it would have done your hearts good. I will
go a hundred miles to see the like of them. Lord bless them! I hope you
are enjoying your nice village life. Never be anxious for a moment. I
*will* be taken care of, and if not, I *will* know my time has come and
shall pass out.

"Sweet One! Many people offer to You many things, I am poor — but I have
the body, mind, and soul. I give them over to You. Deign to accept, Lord
of the Universe, and refuse them not." — So have I given over my life
and soul once for all. One thing — they are a dry sort of people here —
and as to that very few in the whole world are there that are not. They
do not understand "Mâdhava", the Sweet One. They are either intellectual
or go after faith cure, table turning, witchcraft, etc., etc. Nowhere
have I heard so much about "love, life, and liberty" as in this country,
but nowhere is it less understood. Here God is either a terror or a
healing power, vibration, and so forth. Lord bless their souls! And
these parrots talk day and night of love and love and love!

Now, good dreams, good thoughts for you. You are good and noble. Instead
of materialising the spirit, that is, dragging the spiritual to the
material plane as these folks do, convert the matter into spirit, catch
a glimpse at least, every day, of that world of infinite beauty and
peace and purity — the spiritual, and try to live in it day and night.
Seek not, touch not with your toes even, anything that is uncanny. Let
your souls ascend day and night like an "unbroken string" unto the feet
of the Beloved whose throne is in your own hearts and let the rest take
care of themselves, that is the body and everything else. Life is
evanescent, a fleeting dream; youth and beauty fade. Say day and night,
"Thou art my father, my mother, my husband, my love, my lord, my God — I
want nothing but Thee, nothing but Thee, nothing but Thee. Thou in me, I
in Thee, I am Thee. Thou art me." Wealth goes, beauty vanishes, life
flies, powers fly — but the Lord abideth for ever, love abideth for
ever. If here is glory in keeping the machine in good trim, it is more
glorious to withhold the soul from suffering with the body — that is the
only demonstration of your being "not matter", by letting the matter
alone.

Stick to God! Who cares what comes to the body or to anything else!
Through the terrors of evil, say — my God, my love! Through the pangs of
death, say — my God, my love! Through all the evils under the sun, say —
my God, my love! Thou art here, I see Thee. Thou art with me, I feel
Thee. I am Thine, take me. I am not of the world's but Thine, leave not
then me. Do not go for glass beads leaving the mine of diamonds! This
life is a great chance. What, seekest thou the pleasures of the world? —
He is the fountain of all bliss. Seek for the highest, aim at that
highest, and you *shall* reach the highest. 

Yours with all blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
