---
title: IL

---
<div>

[←](048_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](050_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/040_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/019_vehemia.htm)  
[«](047_brother_disciples.htm) Addressee
[»](054_swami_ramakrishnananda.htm)

## IL

(*Translated from Bengali*)

BALTIMORE, U.S.A.,  
*22nd October, 1894.*

DEAR—, (Swami Ramakrishnananda.)

Glad to receive your letter and go through the contents. I received
today a letter of Akshay Kumar Ghosh from London, which also gives me
some information. . . .

Now you have come to know your own powers. Strike the iron while it is
hot. Idleness won't do. Throw overboard all idea of jealousy and
egotism, once for all. Come on to the practical field with tremendous
energy; to work, in the fullness of strength! As to the rest, the Lord
will point out the way. The whole world will be deluged by a tidal wave.
Work, work, work — let this be your motto. I cannot see anything else.
There is no end of work here — I am careering all over the country.
Wherever the seed of his power will find its way, there it will fructify
— अद्य वा अब्दशतान्ते वा — be it today, or in a hundred years." You must
work in sympathy with all, then only it will lead to quick results . . .
.

Our object is to do good to the world, and not the trumpeting of our own
names. Why doesn't Niranjan (Niranjanananda) learn Pali in Ceylon, and
study Buddhist books? I cannot make out what good will come of aimless
rambling. Those that have come under *his* protection, have virtue,
wealth, desires, and freedom lying at their feet. माभैः माभैः — Courage!
Everything will come about by degrees. From all of you I want this that
you must discard for ever self-aggrandisement, faction-mongering, and
jealousy. You must be all-forbearing, like Mother Earth. If you can
achieve this, the world will be at your feet. . . .

Try to give less of material food in the anniversary celebrations, and
give some food for the brain instead. . . .

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
