---
title: LI

---
<div>

[←](050_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](052_govinda_sahay.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/023_kidi.htm) Chronology
[»](052_govinda_sahay.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/038_doctor.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/061_dr_nanjunda_rao.htm)

## LI

U.S.A.,  
*30th November, 1894*.

DEAR AND BELOVED, (Dr. Nanjunda Rao.)

Your beautiful letter just came to hand. I am so glad that you have come
to know Shri Ramakrishna. I am very glad at the strength of your
Vairâgya. It is the one primary necessity in reaching God. I had always
great hopes for Madras, and still I have the firm belief that from
Madras will come the spiritual wave that will deluge India. I can only
say Godspeed to your good intentions; but here, my son, are the
difficulties. In the first place, no man ought to take a hasty step. In
the second place, you must have some respect for the feelings of your
mother and wife. True, you may say that we, the disciples of
Ramakrishna, had not always shown great deference to the opinions of our
parents. I know, and know for sure, that great things are done only by
great sacrifices. I know for certain that India requires the sacrifice
of her highest and best, and I sincerely hope that it will be your good
fortune to be one of them.

Throughout the history of the world you find great men make great
sacrifices and the mass of mankind enjoy the benefit. If you want to
give up everything for your own salvation, it is nothing. Do you want to
forgo even your own salvation for the good of the world? You are God,
think of that. My advice to you is to live the life of a Brahmacharin,
i.e. giving up all sexual enjoyments for a certain time live in the
house of your father; this is the "Kutichaka" stage. Try to bring your
wife to consent to your great sacrifice for the good of the world. And
if you have burning faith and all-conquering love and almighty purity, I
do not doubt that you will shortly succeed. Give yourself body and soul
to the work of spreading the teachings of Shri Ramakrishna, for work
(Karma) is the first stage. Study Sanskrit diligently as well as
practice devotion. For you are to be a great teacher of mankind, and my
Guru Maharaja used to say, "A penknife is sufficient to commit suicide
with, but to kill others one requires guns and swords." And in the
fullness of time it will be given unto you when to go forth out of the
world and preach His sacred name. Your determination is holy and good.
Godspeed to you, but do not take any hasty step. First purify yourself
by work and devotion India has suffered long, the Religion Eternal has
suffered long. But the Lord is merciful. Once more He has come to help
His children, once more the opportunity is given to rise to fallen
India. India can only rise by sitting at the feet of Shri Ramakrishna.
His life and his teachings are to be spread far and wide, are to be made
to penetrate every pore of Hindu society. Who will do it? Who are to
take up the flag of Ramakrishna and march for the salvation of the
world? Who are to stem the tide of degeneration at the sacrifice of name
and fame, wealth and enjoyment — nay of every hope of this or other
worlds? A few young men have jumped in the breach, have sacrificed
themselves. They are a few; we want a few thousands of such as they, and
*they will come*. I am glad that our Lord has put it in your mind to be
one of them Glory unto him on whom falls the Lord's choice. Your
determination is good, your hopes are high, your aim is the noblest in
the world — to bring millions sunk in darkness to the light of the Lord.

But, my son, here are the drawbacks. Nothing shall be done in haste.
Purity, patience, and perseverance are the three essentials to success
and, above all, *love*. All time is yours, there is no indecent haste.
Everything will come right if you are pure and sincere. We want hundreds
like you bursting upon society and bringing new life and vigour of the
Spirit wherever they go. Godspeed to you. 

Yours with all blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
