---
title: LV

---
<div>

[←](054_swami_ramakrishnananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](056_dear_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](054_swami_ramakrishnananda.htm) Chronology
[»](056_dear_and_beloved.htm)  
[«](028_akhandananda.htm) Addressee [»](072_akhandananda.htm)

## LV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7144e6055.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna!*

(March or April?) *1894*.

MY DEAR AKHANDANANDA,

I am very glad to receive your letter. It is a great pleasure to me to
learn that you have regained your health to a great extent by your stay
at Khetri.

Brother Tarak (Shivananda) has done a good deal of work in Madras. Very
agreeable news indeed! I heard much praise of him from the people of
Madras. . . .

Try to develop spirituality and philanthropy amongst the Thakurs in the
different places of Rajputana. We must work, and this cannot be done by
merely sitting idle. Make a trip now and then to Malsisar, Alsisar, and
all the other "sars" that are there. And carefully learn Sanskrit and
English. Gunanidhi is in the Punjab, I presume. Convey my special love
to him and bring him to Khetri. Learn Sanskrit with his help, and teach
him English. Let me have his address by all means. ...

Go from door to door amongst the poor and lower classes of the town of
Khetri and teach them religion. Also, let them have oral lessons on
geography and such other subjects. No good will come of sitting idle and
having princely dishes, and saying "Ramakrishna, O Lord!" — unless you
can do some good to the poor. Go to other villages from time to time,
and teach the people the arts of life as well as religion. Work,
worship, and Jnana (knowledge) — first work, and your mind will be
purified; otherwise everything will be fruitless like pouring oblations
on a pile of ashes instead of in the sacred fire. When Gunanidhi comes,
move from door to door of the poor and the destitute in every village of
Rajputana. If people object to the kind of food you take, give it up
immediately. It is preferable to live on grass for the sake of doing
good to others. The Geruâ robe is not for enjoyment. It is the banner of
heroic work. You must give your body, mind, and speech to "the welfare
of the world". You have read — "मातृदेवो भव, पितृदेवो भव — Look upon
your mother as God, look upon your father as God" — but I say 
"दरिद्रदेवो भव, मूर्खदेवो भव — The poor, the illiterate, the ignorant,
the afflicted — let these be your God." Know that service to these alone
is the highest religion.

Ever yours, with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
