---
title: LVIII

---
<div>

[←](057_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](059_sanyal.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/030_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/047_miss_thursby.htm)  
Addressee [»](091_sarada.htm)

## LVIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7254e6058.pdf)* )

228 W.39, NEW YORK,  
*17th Jan., 1895.*

DEAR SARADA,

Your two letters are to hand, as also the two of Ramdayal Babu. I have
got the bill of lading; but it will be long before the goods arrive.
Unless one arranges for the prompt despatch of goods they take about six
months to come. It is four months since Haramohan wrote that the
Rudrâksha beads and Kusha mats had been despatched, but there is no news
of their whereabouts yet. The thing is, when the goods reach England,
the agent of the company here gives me notice; and about a month later,
the goods arrive. I received your bill of lading about three weeks ago,
but no sign of the notice! Only the goods sent by Raja of Khetri arrive
quickly. Most probably he spends a lot of money for them. However it is
a matter of congratulation that goods do arrive without fail in this
region of Pâtâla, at the other end of the globe. I shall let you know as
soon as the goods come. Now keep quiet for at least three months.

Now is the time for you to apply yourself to start the magazine. Tell
Ramdayal Babu that though the gentleman of whom he speaks be a competent
person, I am not in a position to have anybody in America at present. .
. . What about your article on Tibet? When it is published in the
*Mirror*, send me a copy. . . . Come, here is a task for you, conduct
that magazine. Thrust it on people and make them subscribe to it, and
don't be afraid. What work do you expect from men of little hearts? —
Nothing in the world! You must have an iron will if you would cross the
ocean. You must be strong enough to pierce mountains. I am coming next
winter. We shall set the world on fire — let those who will, join us and
be blessed, and those that won't come, will lag behind for ever and
ever; let them do so. You gird up your loins and keep yourself ready . .
. . Never mind anything! In your lips and hands the Goddess of Learning
will make Her seat; the Lord of infinite power will be seated on your
chest; you will do works that will strike the world with wonder. By the
bye, can't you shorten your name a bit, my boy? What a long, long name —
a single name enough to fill a volume! Well, you hear people say that
the Lord's name keeps away death! It is not the simple name Hari, mind
you. It is those deep and sonorous names, such as अघभगनरकविनाशन
(Destroyer of Agha, Bhaga, and Naraka) त्रिपुरमगभञ्जन (Subduer of the
pride of Tripura, demon of the "three cities"), and अशेषनिःशेषकल्याणकर
(Giver of infinite and endless blessings), and so forth — that put to
rout King Death and his whole party. Won't it look nice if you simplify
yours a little? But it is too late, I am afraid as it has already been
abroad. But, believe me, it is a world-entrancing, death-defying name
that you have got! (The full name which Swami Trigunatita, to whom this
letter was addressed, bore at first was "Swami Trigunatitananda"— hence
Swamiji's pleasantry about it.) 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Throw the whole of Bengal and, for the matter of that, the whole of
India into convulsion! Start centres at different places.

The *Bhâgavata* has reached me — a very nice edition indeed; but people
of this country have not the least inclination for studying Sanskrit;
hence there is very little hope for its sale. There may be a little in
England, for there many are interested in the study of Sanskrit. Give my
special thanks to the editor. I hope his noble attempt will meet with
complete success. I shall try my best to push his book here. I have sent
his prospectus to different places. Tell Ramdayal Babu that a
flourishing trade can be set on foot with England and America in Mung
Dâl, Arhar Dâl, etc. Dâl soup will have a go if properly introduced.
There will be a good demand for these things if they be sent from house
to house, in small packets, with directions for cooking on them and a
depot started for storing a quantity of them. Similarly Badis (Pellets
made of Dal, pounded and beaten.) too will have a good market. We want
an enterprising spirit. Nothing is done by leading idle lives. If anyone
forms a company and exports Indian goods here and into England, it will
be a good trade. But they are a lazy set, enamoured of child marriage
and nothing else.

</div>
