---
title: LX

---
<div>

[←](059_sanyal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](061_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](059_sanyal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/049_mother.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/031_ole_bull.htm) Addressee
[»](061_mrs_bull.htm)

## LX

54 W. 33rd ST., NEW YORK,  
*14th Feb., 1895*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

Accept my heartfelt gratitude for your motherly advice. I hope I will be
able to carry out them in life.

How can I express my gratitude to you for what you have already done for
me and my work, and my eternal gratitude to you for your offering to do
something more this year. But I sincerely believe that you ought to turn
all your help to Miss Farmer's Greenacre work this year. India can wait
as she is waiting centuries and an immediate work at hand should always
have the preference.

Again, according to Manu, collecting funds even for a good work is not
good for a Sannyasin, and I have begun to feel that the old sages were
right. "Hope is the greatest misery, despair is the greatest happiness."
It appears like a hallucination. I am getting out of them. I was in
these childish ideas of doing this and doing that.

"Give up all desire and be at peace. Have neither friends nor foes, and
live alone. Thus shall we travel having neither friends nor foes,
neither pleasure nor pain, neither desire nor jealousy, injuring no
creatures, being the cause of injury to no creatures — from mountain to
mountain, from village to village, preaching the name of the Lord."

"Seek no help from high or low, from above or below. Desire nothing —
and look upon this vanishing panorama as a witness and let it pass."

Perhaps these mad desires were necessary to bring me over to this
country. And I thank the Lord for the experience.

I am very happy now. Between Mr. Landsberg and me, we cook some rice and
lentils or barley and quietly eat it, and write something or read or
receive visits from poor people who want to learn something, and thus I
feel I am more a Sannyasin now than I ever was in America.

"In wealth is the fear of poverty, in knowledge the fear of ignorance,
in beauty the fear of age, in fame the fear of backbiters, in success
the fear of jealousy, even in body is the fear of death. Everything in
this earth is fraught with fear. He alone is fearless who has given up
everything" (*Vairâgya-Shatakam*, 31).

I went to see Miss Corbin the other day, and Miss Farmer and Miss
Thursby were also there. We had a nice half-hour and she wants me to
hold some classes in her home from next Sunday.

I am no more seeking for these things. If they come, the Lord be
blessed, if not, blessed more be He.

Again accept my eternal gratitude. 

Your devoted son,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
