---
title: LXIII

---
<div>

[←](062_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](064_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](062_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/040_friend.htm)  
[«](054_swami_ramakrishnananda.htm) Addressee [»](069_shashi.htm)

## LXIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7174e6063.pdf)* )

U.S.A.,  
*11th April, 1895*.

MY DEAR SHASHI,

. . . You write that you have recovered from your illness; but you must
henceforth be very careful. Late dinners or unwholesome food, or living
in a stinking place may bring on a relapse, and make it hard to escape
the clutches of malaria. First of all you should hire a small
garden-house — you may get one for thirty or forty rupees. Secondly, see
that cooking and drinking water be filtered — a bamboo filter of a big
size will do. Water is the cause of all sorts of disease. It is not the
clearness or dirtiness of water, but its being full of disease germs,
that causes disease. Let the water be boiled and filtered. You must all
pay attention to your health first. A cook, a servant, clean beds, and
timely meals — these are absolutely necessary. Please see that all these
suggestions be carried out *in toto*. . . . The success of your
undertakings depends wholly upon your mutual love. There is no good in
store so long as malice and jealousy and egotism will prevail. ...
Kali's pamphlet is very well written and has no exaggerations. Know that
talking ill of others in private is a sin. You must wholly avoid it.
Many things may occur to the mind, but it gradually makes a mountain of
a molehill if you try to express them. Everything is ended if you
forgive and forget. It is welcome news that Shri Ramakrishna's festival
was celebrated with great éclat. You must try so that there is a muster
of a hundred thousand people next year. Put your energies together to
start a magazine. Shyness won't do any more.... He who has infinite
patience and infinite energy at his back, will alone succeed. You must
pay special attention to study. Do you understand? You must not huddle
together too many fools. I shall be glad if you bring together a few
real men. Why, I don't hear even a single one opening his lips. You
distributed sweets at the festival, and there was singing by some
parties, mostly idlers. True, but I don't hear what spiritual food you
have given. So long as that *nil admirari* attitude is not gone, you
will not be able to do anything, and none of you will have courage.
Bullies are always cowards.

Take up everyone with sympathy, whether he believes in Shri Ramakrishna
or not. If anybody comes to you for vain dispute, politely withdraw
yourselves. ... You must express your sympathy with people of all sects.
When these cardinal virtues will be manifested in you, then only you
will be able to work with great energy. Otherwise, mere taking the name
of the Guru will not do. However, there is no doubt that this year's
festival has been a great success, and you deserve special thanks for
it; but you must push forward, do you see? What is Sharat doing? Never
shall you be able to know anything if you persist in pleading ignorance.
... We want something of a higher tone — that will appeal to the
intellect of the learned. It won't do merely to get up musical parties
and all that. Not only will this festival be his memorial, but also the
central union of an intense propaganda of his doctrines. ... All will
come in good time. But at times I fret and stamp like a leashed hound.
Onward and forward, my old watchword. I am doing well. No use going back
to India in a hurry. Summon all your energies and set yourselves to work
heart and soul; that will really be heroic.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
