---
title: LXIV

---
<div>

[←](063_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](065_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/040_friend.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/28_brother.htm)  
[«](062_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee [»](065_mrs_bull.htm)

## LXIV

54 W. 33rd STREET, NEW YORK,  
*25th April, 1895*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

The day before yesterday I received a kind note from Miss Farmer
including a cheque for a hundred dollars for the Barbar House lectures.
She is coming to New York next Saturday. I will of course tell her to
put my name in her circulars; and what is more, I cannot go to Greenacre
now; I have arranged to go to the Thousand Islands, wherever that may
be. There is a cottage belonging to Miss Dutcher, one of my students,
and a few of us will be there in rest and peace and seclusion. I want to
manufacture a few "Yogis" out of the materials of the classes, and a
busy farm like Greenacre is the last place for that, while the other is
quite out of the way, and none of the curiosity-seekers will dare go
there.

I am very glad that Miss Hamlin took down the names of the 130 persons
who come to the Jnana-Yoga class. There are 50 more who come to the
Wednesday Yoga class and about 50 more to the Monday class. Mr.
Landsberg had all the names; and they will come anyhow, names or no
names.... If they do not, others will, and so it will go on — the Lord
be praised.

Taking down names and giving notices is a big task, no doubt, and I am
very thankful to both of them for doing that for me. But I am thoroughly
persuaded that it is laziness on my part, and therefore immoral, to
depend on others, and always evil comes out of laziness. So henceforth I
will do it all myself. ...

However, I will be only too glad to take in any one of Miss Hamlin's
"right sort of persons", but unfortunately for me, not one such has as
yet turned up. It is the duty of the teacher always to turn the "right
sort" out of the most "unrighteous sort" of persons. After all, though I
am very, very grateful to the young lady, Miss Hamlin, for the great
hope and encouragement she gave me of introducing me to the "right sort
of New Yorkers" and for the practical help she has given me, I think I
hard better do my little work with my own hands. . . .

I am only glad that you have such a great opinion about Miss Hamlin. I
for one am glad to know that you will help her, for she requires it.
But, mother, through the mercy of Ramakrishna, my instinct "sizes up"
almost infallibly a human face as soon as I see it, and the result is
this: you may do anything you please with my affairs, *I will not even
murmur*; — I will be only too glad to take Miss Farmer's advice, in
spite of ghosts and spooks. Behind the spooks I *see* a heart of immense
love, only covered with a thin film of *laudable* ambition — even that
is bound to vanish in a few years. Even I will allow Landsberg to
"monkey" with my affairs from time to time; but here I put a full stop.
Help from any other persons besides these *frightens* me. That is all I
can say. Not only for the help you have given me, but from my instinct
(or, as I call it, inspiration of my *Master*), I regard you as my
mother and will always abide by any advice you may have for me — but
only personally. When you select a medium, I will beg leave to exercise
my choice. That is all.

Herewith I send the English gentleman's letter. I have made a few notes
on the margin to explain Hindustani words.

Your obedient son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
