---
title: LXIX

---
<div>

[←](068_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](070_alberta.htm)

  

[«](068_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/044_joe.htm)  
[«](063_shashi.htm) Addressee [»](075_shashi.htm)

## LXIX

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7189e6069.pdf)* )

*1895*.

DEAR SHASHI,

. . . I am quite in agreement with what Sarada is doing, but it is not
necessary to preach that Ramakrishna Paramahamsa was an Incarnation, and
things of that sort. He came to do good to the world; not to trumpet his
own name — you must always remember this. Disciples pay their whole
attention to the preservation of their master's name and throw overboard
his teachings; and sectarianism etc., are the result. Alasinga writes of
Charu; but I do not recollect him. Write all about him and convey him my
thanks. Write in detail about all; I have no time to spare for idle
gossip .... Try to give up ceremonials. They are not meant for
Sannyasins; and one must work only so long as one does not attain to
illumination .... I have nothing to do with sectarianism. Or
party-forming and playing the frog-in-the-well, whatever else I may
do.... It is impossible to preach the catholic ideas of Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa and form sects at the same time.... Only one kind of work I
understand, and that is doing good to others; all else is doing evil. I
therefore prostrate myself before the Lord Buddha.... I am a Vedantist;
Sachchidananda — Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute — is my God. I
scarcely find any other God than the majestic form of my own Self. By
the word "Incarnation" are meant those who have attained that
Brahmanhood, in other words, the Jivanmuktas — those who have realised
this freedom in this very life. I do not find any speciality in
Incarnations: all beings from Brahmâ down to a clump of grass will
attain to liberation-in-life in course of time, and our duty lies in
helping all to reach that state. This help is called religion; the rest
is irreligion. This help is work; the rest is evil-doing — I see nothing
else. Other kinds of work, for example, the Vaidika or the Tântrika, may
produce results; but resorting to them is simply waste of life, for that
purity which is the goal of work is realisable only through doing good
to others. Through works such as sacrifices etc., one may get
enjoyments, but it is impossible to have the purity of soul....
Everything exists already in the Self of all beings. He who asserts he
is free, shall be free. He who says he is bound, bound he shall remain.
To me, the thought of oneself as low and humble is a sin and ignorance.
"नायमात्मा बलहीनेन लभ्य: — This Atman is not to be attained by one who
is weak." अस्ति ब्रह्म वदसि चेदस्ति, नास्ति ब्रह्म बदसि चेन्नास्त्येव —
If you say Brahman *is*, existence will be the result; if you say
Brahman *is not*, non existent It shall verily become." He who always
thinks of himself as weak wild never become strong, but he who knows
himself to be a lion, "निर्गच्छति जगज्जालत् पिञ्जरादिव केशरी — rushes
out from the world's meshes, as a lion from its cage." Another point, it
was no new truth that Ramakrishna Paramahamsa came to preach, though his
advent brought the old truths to light. In other words, he was the
embodiment of all the past religious thoughts of India. His life alone
made me understand what the Shâstras really meant, and the whole plan
and scope of the old Shastras.

Missionaries and others could not do much against me in this country.
Through the Lord's grace the people here like me greatly and are not to
be tricked by the opinions of any particular class. They appreciate my
ideas in a manner my own countrymen cannot do, and are not selfish. I
mean, when it comes to practical work they will give up jealousy and all
those ideas of self-sufficiency. Then all of them agree and act under
the direction of a capable man. That is what makes them so great. But
then they are a nation of Mammon-worshippers. Money comes before
everything. People of our country are very liberal in pecuniary matters,
but not so much these people. Every home has a miser. It is almost a
religion here. But they fall into the clutches of the priests when they
do something bad, and then buy their passage to heaven with money. These
things are the same in every country — priestcraft. I can say nothing as
to whether I shall go back to India and when. There also I shall have to
lead a wandering life as I do here; but here thousands of people listen
to and understand my lectures, and these thousands are benefited. But
can you say the same thing about India? . . . I am perfectly at one with
what Sarada is doing. A thousand thanks to him.... In Madras and Bombay
I have lots of men who are after my heart. They are learned and
understand everything. Moreover they are kind-hearted and can therefore
appreciate the philanthropic spirit.... I have printed neither books nor
anything of the kind. I simply go on lecturing tours.... When I take a
retrospective view of my past life, I feel no remorse. From country to
country I have travelled teaching something, however little, to people,
and in exchange for that have partaken of their slices of bread. If I
had found I had done no work, but simply supported myself by imposing
upon people, I would have committed suicide today. Why do those who
think themselves unfit to teach their fellow-beings, wear the teacher's
garb and earn their bread by cheating them? Is not that a deadly sin?
... 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
