---
title: LXX

---
<div>

[←](069_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](071_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/046_friend.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/047_maharaja_of_khetri.htm)  
Addressee [»](087_alberta.htm)

## LXX

19 W. 38, NEW YORK,  
*8th July, 1895*.

DEAR ALBERTA, (Miss Alberta Sturges.)

I am sure you are engrossed in your musical studies now. Hope you have
found out all about the scales by this time. I will be so happy to take
a lesson on the scales from you next time we meet.

We had such jolly good time up there at Percy with Mr. Leggett — isn't
he a saint?

Hollister is also enjoying Germany greatly, I am sure, and I hope none
of you have injured your tongues in trying to pronounce German words —
especially those beginning with sch, tz, tsz, and other sweet things.

I read your letter to your mother from on board. Most possibly I am
going over to Europe next September. I have never been to Europe yet. It
will not be very much different from the United States after all. And I
am already well drilled in the manners and customs of this country.

We had a good deal of rowing at Percy and I learnt a point or two in
rowing. Aunt Joe Joe had to pay for her sweetness, for the flies and
mosquitoes would not leave her for a moment. They rather gave me a wide
berth, I think because they were very orthodox sabbatarian flies and
would not touch a heathen. Again, I think, I used to sing a good deal at
Percy, and that must have frightened them away. We had such fine birch
trees. I got up an idea of making books out of the bark, as was used to
be done in ancient times in our country, and wrote Sanskrit verses for
your mother and aunt.

I am sure, Alberta, you are going to be a tremendously learned lady very
soon.

With love and blessings for both of you, 

Ever your affectionate,

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
