---
title: LXXI

---
<div>

[←](070_alberta.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](072_akhandananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/052_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](072_akhandananda.htm)  
[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/30_rakhal.htm) Addressee
[»](074_rakhal.htm)

## LXXI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7159e6071.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna*!

*1895*.

DEAR RAKHAL,

I have now got lots of newspapers etc., and you need not send any more.
Let the movement now confine itself to India....

It isn't much use getting up a sensation every day. But avail yourselves
of this stir that is rife all over the country, and scatter yourselves
in all quarters. In other words, try to start branches at different
places. Let it not be an empty sound merely. You must join the Madrasis
and start associations etc., at different places. What about the
magazine which I heard was going to be started? Why are you nervous
about conducting it? ... Come? Do something heroic! Brother, what if you
do not attain Mukti, what if you suffer damnation a few times? Is the
saying untrue? —

"मनसि वचसि कये पुण्यपीयूषपूर्णाः  
त्रिभुवनमुपकारश्रेणिभिः प्रीणयन्तः।  
परगुणपरमाणुं पर्वतीकृत्य नित्यं  
निजहृदि विकसन्तः सन्ति सन्तः कियन्तः

— There are some saints who full of holiness in thought, word, and
bleed, please the whole world by their numerous beneficent acts, and who
develop their own hearts by magnifying an atom of virtue in others as if
it were as great as a mountain" (Bhartrihari, *Nitishataka*).

What if you don't get Mukti? What childish prattle! Lord! They say even
the venom of a snake loses its power by firmly denying it. Isn't it
true? What queer humility is this to say, "I know nothing!" "I am
nothing!" This is pseudo-renunciation and mock modesty, I tell you. Off
with such a self-debasing spirit! "If *I* do not know, who on earth
does!" What have you been doing so long if you now plead ignorance?
These are the words of an atheist — the humility of a vagabond wretch.
We can do everything, and will do everything! He who is fortunate enough
will heroically join us, letting the worthless mew like cats from their
corner. A saint writes, "Well, you have had enough of blazoning. Now
come back home." I would have called him a man if he could build a house
and call me. Ten years' experience of such things has made me wiser. I
am no more to be duped by words. Let him who has courage in his mind and
love in his heart come with me. I want none else. Through Mother's
grace, single-handed I am worth a hundred thousand now and will be worth
two millions.... There is no certainty about my going back to India. I
shall have to lead a wandering life there also, as I am doing here. But
here one lives in the company of scholars, and there one must live among
fools — there is this difference as of the poles. People of this country
organise and work, while *our* undertakings all come to dust clashing
against laziness — miscalled "renunciation," — and jealousy, etc. —
writes me big letters now and then, half of which I cannot decipher,
which is a blessing to me. For a great part of the news is of the
following description — that in such and such a place such and such a
man was speaking ill of me, and that he, being unable to bear the same,
had a quarrel with him, and so forth. Many thanks for his kind defence
of me. But what seriously hinders me from listening to what particular
people may be saying about me is — "स्वल्पश्च कालो बहवश्च विघ्ना: — Time
is short, but the obstacles are many." . . .

An organised society is wanted. Let Shashi look to the household
management, Sanyal take charge of money matters and marketing, and
Sharat act as secretary, that is, carry on correspondence etc. Make a
permanent centre — it is no use making random efforts as you are doing
now. Do you see my point? I have quite a heap of newspapers, now I want
you to do something. If you can build a Math, I shall say you are
heroes; otherwise you are nothing. Consult the Madras people when you
work. They have a great capacity for work. Celebrate this year's Shri
Ramakrishna festival with such éclat as to make it a record. The less
the feeding propaganda is, the better. It is enough if you distribute
Prasâda in earthen cups to the devotees standing in rows....

I am going to write a very short sketch of Shri Ramakrishna's life in
English, which I shall send you. Have it printed and translated into
Bengali and sell it at the festival — people do not read books that are
distributed free. Fix some nominal price. Have the festival done with
great pomp. . . .

You must have an all-sided intellect to do efficient work. In any towns
or villages you may visit, start an association wherever you find a
number of people revering Shri Ramakrishna. Have you travelled through
so many villages all for nothing? We must slowly absorb the Hari Sabhâs
and such other associations. Well, I cannot tell you all — if I could
but get another demon like me! The Lord will supply me everything in
time.... If one has got power, one must manifest it in action. ... Off
with your ideas of Mukti and Bhakti! There is only one way in the world,
"परोपकाराय हि सतां जीवितं," "परार्थे प्राज्ञ उत्सृजेत्" — "The good live
for others alone", "The wise man should sacrifice himself for others". I
can secure my own good only by doing you good. There is no other way,
none whatsoever.... You are God, I am God, and man is God. It is this
God manifested through humanity who is doing everything in this world.
Is there a different God sitting high up somewhere? To work, therefore!

Bimala has sent me a book written by Shashi (Sanyal). ... From a perusal
of that work Bimala has come to know that all the people of this world
are impure and that they are by their very nature debarred from having a
jot of religion; that only the handful of Brahmins that are in India
have the sole right to it, and among these again, Shashi (Sanyal) and
Bimala are the sun and moon, so to speak. Bravo! What a powerful
religion indeed! In Bengal specially, that sort of religion is very easy
to practice. There is no easier way than that. The whole truth about
austerities and spiritual exercises is, in a nutshell, that I am pure
and all the rest are impure! A beastly, demoniac, hellish religion this!
If the American people are unfit for religion, if it is improper to
preach religion here, why then ask their help? . . . What can remedy
such a disease? Well, tell Shashi (Sanyal) to go to Malabar. The Raja
there has taken his subjects' land and offered it at the feet of
Brahmins. There are big monasteries in every village where sumptuous
dinners are given, supplemented by presents in cash. ... There is no
harm in touching the non-Brahmin classes when it serves one's purpose;
and when you have done with it, you bathe, for the non-Brahmins are as a
class unholy and must never be touched on other occasions! Monks and
Sannyasins and Brahmins of a certain type have thrown the country into
ruin. Intent all the while on theft and wickedness, these pose as
preachers of religion! They will take gifts from the people and at the
same time cry, "Don't touch me!" And what great things they have been
doing! — "If a potato happens to touch a brinjal, how long will the
universe last before it is deluged?" "If they do not apply earth a dozen
times to clean their hands, will fourteen generations of ancestors go to
hell, or twenty-four?" — For intricate problems like these they have
been finding out scientific explanations for the last two thousand years
— while one fourth of the people are starving. A girl of eight is
married to a man of thirty, and the parents are jubilant over it.... And
if anyone protests against it, the plea is put forward, "Our religion is
being overturned." What sort of religion have they who want to see their
girls becoming mothers before they attain puberty even and offer
scientific explanations for it? Many, again, lay the blame at the door
of the Mohammedans. They are to blame, indeed! Just read the
*Grihya-Sutras* through and see what is given as the marriageable age of
a girl. ... There it is expressly stated that a girl must be married
before attaining puberty. The entire *Grihya-Sutras* enjoin this. And in
the Vedic Ashvamedha sacrifice worse things would be done.... All the
*Brâhmanas* mention them, and all the commentators admit them to be
true. How can you deny them?

What I mean by mentioning all this is that there were many good things
in the ancient times, but there were bad things too. The good things are
to be retained, but the India that is to be, the future India, must be
much greater than ancient India. From the day Shri Ramakrishna was born
dates the growth of modern India and of the Golden Age. And you are the
agents to bring about this Golden Age. To work, with this conviction at
heart!

Hence, when you call Shri Ramakrishna an Incarnation and in the same
breath plead your ignorance unhesitatingly, I say, "You are false to the
backbone!" If Ramakrishna Paramahamsa be true, you also are true. But
you must show it. ... In you all there is tremendous power. The atheist
has nothing but rubbish in him. Those who are believers are heroes. They
will manifest tremendous power. The world will be swept before them.
"Sympathy and help to the poor"; "Man is God, he is Nârâyana"; "In Atman
there is no distinction of male or female, of Brahmin or Kshatriya, and
the like"; "All is Narayana from the Creator down to a clump of grass."
The worm is less manifested, the Creator more manifested. Every action
that helps a being manifest its divine nature more and more is *good*,
every action that retards it is *evil*.

The only way of getting our divine nature manifested is by helping
others to do the same.

If there is inequality in nature, still there must be equal chance for
all — or if greater for some and for some less — the weaker should be
given more chance than the strong.

In other words, a Brahmin is not so much in need of education as a
Chandâla. If the son of a Brahmin needs one teacher, that of a Chandala
needs ten. For greater help must be given to him whom nature has not
endowed with an acute intellect from birth. It is a madman who carries
coals to Newcastle. The poor, the downtrodden, the ignorant, let these
be your God.

A dreadful slough is in front of you — take care; many fall into it and
die. The slough is this, that the present religion of the Hindus is not
in the Vedas, nor in the Puranas, nor in Bhakti, nor in Mukti — religion
has entered into the cooking-pot. The present religion of the Hindus is
neither the path of knowledge nor that of reason — it is
"Don't-touchism". "Don't touch me!" "Don't touch me!" — that exhausts
its description. See that you do not lose your lives in this dire
irreligion of "Don't-touchism". Must the teaching, "आत्मवत् सर्वभूतेषु —
Looking upon all beings as your own self" — be confined to books alone?
How will they grant salvation who cannot feed a hungry mouth with a
crumb of bread? How will those who become impure at the mere breath of
others purify others? Don't-touchism is a form of mental disease.
Beware! All expansion is life, all contraction is death. All love is
expansion, all selfishness is contraction. Love is therefore the only
law of life. He who loves lives, he who is selfish is dying. Therefore
love for love's sake, because it is the only law of life, just as you
breathe to live. This is the secret of selfless love, selfless action
and the rest. ... Try to help Shashi (Sanyal) if you can, in any way. He
is a very good and pious man, but of a narrow heart. It does not fall to
the lot of all to feel for the misery of others. Good Lord! Of all
Incarnations Lord Chaitanya was the greatest, but he was comparatively
lacking in knowledge; in the Ramakrishna Incarnation there is knowledge,
devotion and love — infinite knowledge, infinite love, infinite work,
infinite compassion for all beings. You have not yet been able to
understand him. "श्रुत्वाप्येनं वेद न चैव कश्चित् — Even after hearing
about Him, most people do not understand Him." What the whole Hindu race
has thought in ages, he *lived* in one life. His life is the living
commentary to the *Vedas* of all nations. People will come to know him
by degrees. My old watchword — struggle, struggle up to light! Onward! 

Yours in service,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
