---
title: LXXII

---
<div>

[←](071_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](073_brother_disciples.htm)

  

[«](071_rakhal.htm) Chronology [»](073_brother_disciples.htm)  
[«](055_akhandananda.htm) Addressee [»](085_akhandananda.htm)

## LXXII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7215e6072.pdf)* )

C/O E. T. STURDY, ESQ.,  
HIGH VIEW, CAVERSHAM,  
*1895*.

BELOVED AKHANDANANDA,

I am glad to go through the contents of your letter. Your idea is grand
but our nation is totally lacking in the faculty of organisation. It is
this one drawback which produces all sorts of evil. We are altogether
averse to making a common cause for anything. The first requisite for
organisation is obedience. I do a little bit of work when I feel so
disposed, and then let it go to the dogs — this kind of work is of no
avail. We must have plodding industry and perseverance. Keep a regular
correspondence, I mean, make it a point to write to me every month, or
twice a month, what work you are doing and what has been its outcome. We
want here (in England) a Sannyasin well-versed in English and Sanskrit.
I shall soon go to America again, and he is to work here in my absence.
Except Sharat and Shashi — I find no one else for this task. I have sent
money to Sharat and written to him to start at once. I have requested
Rajaji that his Bombay agent may help Sharat in embarking. I forgot to
write — but if you can take the trouble to do it, please send through
Sharat a bag of Mung, gram, and Arhar Dâl, also a little of the spice
called Methi. Please convey my love to Pundit Narayan Das, Mr. Shankar
Lal, Ojhaji, Doctor, and all. Do you think you can get the medicine for
Gopi's eyes here? — Everywhere you find patent medicines, which are all
humbug. Please give my blessings to him and to the other boys.
Yajneshwar has founded a certain society at Meerut and wants to work
conjointly with us. By the bye, he has got a certain paper too; send
Kali there, and let him start a Meerut centre, if he can and, try to
have a paper in Hindi. I shall help a little now and then. I shall send
some money when Kali goes to Meerut and reports to me exactly how
matters stand. Try to open a centre at Ajmer. ... Pundit Agnihotri has
started some society at Saharanpur. They wrote me a letter. Please keep
in correspondence with them. Live on friendly terms with all. Work!
Work! Go on opening centres in this way. We have them already in
Calcutta and Madras, and it will be excellent if you can start new ones
at Meerut and Ajmer. Go on slowly starting centres at different places
like that. Here all my letters etc., are to be addressed in care of E.
T. Sturdy, Esq., High View, Caversham, Reading, England, and those for
America, C/o Miss Phillips, 19 W. 38 Street, New York. By degrees we
must spread the world over. The first thing needed is obedience. You
must be ready to plunge into fire — then will work be done. ... Form
societies like that at different villages in Rajputana. There you have a
hint. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
