---
title: LXXV

---
<div>

[←](074_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](076_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](074_rakhal.htm) Chronology [»](076_rakhal.htm)  
[«](069_shashi.htm) Addressee [»](077_shashi.htm)

## LXXV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7249e6075.pdf)* )

U.S.A.,  
(Beginning of?) *1895*.

MY DEAR SHASHI,

Yesterday I received a letter from you in which there was a smattering
of news, but nothing in detail. I am much better now. Through the grace
of the Lord I am proof against the severe cold for this year. Oh, the
terrible cold! But these people keep all down through scientific
knowledge. Every house has its cellar underground, in which there is a
big boiler whence steam is made to course day and night through every
room. This keeps all the rooms warm, but it has one defect, that while
it is summer indoors, it is 30 to 40 degrees below zero outside! Most of
the rich people of this country make for Europe during the winter, which
is comparatively warm.

Now, let me give you some instructions. This letter is meant for you.
Please go through these instructions once a day and act up to them. I
have got Sarada's letter — he is doing good work — but now we want
organization. To him, Brother Tarak, and others please give my special
love and blessings. The reason why I give you these few instructions is
that there is an organising power in you — the Lord has made this known
to me — but it is not yet fully developed. Through His blessings it will
soon be. That you never lose your centre of gravity is an evidence of
this, but it must be both intensive and extensive.

1\. All the Shâstras hold that the threefold misery that there is in
this world is not natural, hence it is removable.

2\. In the Buddha Incarnation the Lord says that the root of the
Âdhibhautika misery or, misery arising from other terrestrial beings, is
the formation of *classes* (Jâti); in other words, every form of
class-distinction, whether based on birth, or acquirements, or wealth is
at the bottom of this misery. In the Atman there is no distinction of
sex, or Varna[1](#fn1) or Ashrama,[2](#fn2) or anything of the kind, and
as mud cannot be washed away by mud, it is likewise impossible to bring
about oneness by means of separative ideas.

3\. In the Krishna Incarnation He says that the root of all sorts of
misery is Avidyâ (Nescience) and that selfless work purifies the mind.
But "किं कर्म किमकर्मेति कवयोऽप्यत्र मोहिताः — Even sages are bewildered
to decide what is work and what is no-work" (Gita).

4\. Only that kind of work which develops our spirituality is work.
Whatever fosters materiality is no-work.

5\. Therefore work and no-work must be regulated by a person's aptitude,
his country, and his age.

6\. Works such as sacrifices were suited to the olden times but are not
for the modern times.

7\. From the date that the Ramakrishna Incarnation was born, has sprung
the Satya-Yuga (Golden Age) . . . .

8\. In this Incarnation atheistic ideas ... will be destroyed by the
sword of Jnana (knowledge), and the whole world will be unified by means
of Bhakti (devotion) and Prema (Divine Love). Moreover, in this
Incarnation, Rajas, or the desire for name and fame etc., is altogether
absent. In other words, blessed is he who acts up to His teachings;
whether he accepts Him or not, does not matter.

9\. The founders of different sects, in the ancient or modern times,
have not been in the wrong. They have done well, but they must do
better. Well — better — best.

10\. Therefore we must take all up where they are, that is, we must lead
them on to higher and higher ideals, without upsetting their own chosen
attitude. As to social conditions, those that prevail now are good, but
they shall be better — best.

11\. There is no chance for the welfare of the world unless the
condition of women is improved. It is not possible for a bird to fly on
only one wing.

12\. Hence, in the Ramakrishna Incarnation the acceptance of a woman as
the Guru, hence His practicing in the woman's garb and frame of
mind,[3](#fn3) hence too His preaching the motherhood of women as
representations of the Divine Mother.

13\. Hence it is that my first endeavour is to start a Math for women.
This Math shall be the origin of Gârgis and Maitreyis, and women of even
higher attainments than these. . . .

14\. No great work can be achieved by humbug. It is through love, a
passion for truth, and tremendous energy, that all undertakings are
accomplished. तत् कुरु पौरूषम् — Therefore, manifest your manhood.

15\. There is no need for quarrel or dispute with anybody. Give your
message and leave others to their own thoughts. "सत्यमेव जयते नानृतम् —
Truth alone triumphs, not falsehood." तदा किं विवादेन — Why then fight?

. . . Combine seriousness with childlike *naïveté*. Live in harmony with
all. Give up all idea of egoism, and entertain no sectarian views.
Useless wrangling is a great sin.

. . . From Sarada's letter I came to know that N— Ghosh has compared me
with Jesus Christ, and the like. That kind of thing may pass muster in
our country, but if you send such comments here in print, there is a
chance of my being insulted! I mean, I do not like to hamper anybody's
freedom of thought — am I a missionary? If Kali has not sent those
papers to this country, tell him not to do it. Only the Address will do,
I do not want the proceedings. Now many respectable ladies and gentlemen
of this country hold me in reverence. The missionaries and others of
that ilk have tried their utmost to put me down, but finding it useless
have now become quiet. Every undertaking must pass through a lot of
obstacles. Truth triumphs if only one pursues a peaceful course. I have
no need to reply to what a Mr. Hudson has spoken against me. In the
first place, it is unnecessary, and secondly, I shall be bringing myself
down to the level of people of Mr. Hudson's type. Are you mad? Shall I
fight from here with one Mr. Hudson? Through the Lord's grace, people
who are far above Mr. Hudson in rank listen to me with veneration.
Please do not send any more papers. Let all that go on in India, it will
do no harm. For the Lord's work at one time there was need for that kind
of newspaper blazoning. When that is done, there is no more need for it.
. . . It is one of the attendant evils of name and fame that you can't
have anything private. . . . Before you begin any undertaking, pray to
Shri Ramakrishna, and he will show you the right way. We want a big plot
of land to begin with, then building and all will come. Slowly our Math
is going to raise itself, don't worry abbot it. . . .

Kali and all others have done good work. Give my love and best wishes to
all. Work in unison with the people of Madras, and let someone or other
amongst you go there at intervals. Give up for ever the desire for name
and fame and power. While I am on earth, Shri Ramakrishna is working
through me. So long as you believe in this there is no danger of any
evil for you.

The *Ramakrishna Punthi* (Life of Shri Ramakrishna in Bengali verse)
that Akshaya has sent is very good, but there is no glorification of the
*Shakti* at the opening which is a great defect. Tell him to remedy it
in the second edition. Always bear this in mind that we are now standing
before the gaze of the world, and that people are watching every one of
our actions and utterances. Remember this and work.

. . . Be on the look-out for a site for our Math. . . . If it be at some
little distance from Calcutta, no harm. Wherever we shall build our
Math, there we shall have a stir made. Very glad to learn about Mahim
Chakravarty. The Andes have turned into the holy Gaya, I see! Where is
he? Please give him, Sj. Bijoy Goswami, and our other friends my cordial
greetings. . . . To beat an opponent one needs a sword and buckler, so
carefully learn English and Sanskrit. Kali's English is getting nicer
every day, while that of Sarada is deteriorating. Tell Sarada to give up
the flowery style. It is extremely difficult to write a flowery style in
a foreign tongue. Please convey to him a hundred thousand bravos from
me! There's a hero indeed. ... Well done, all of you! Bravo, lads! The
beginning is excellent. Go on in that way. If the adder of jealousy foes
not come in, there is no fear! माभैः — Cheer up! "मद्भक्तानाञ्च ये
भक्तास्ते मे भक्ततमा मताः — Those who serve My devotees are My best
devotees." Have all of you a little grave bearing. I am not writing any
book on Hinduism at present. But I am jotting down my thoughts. Every
religion is an expression, a language to express the same truth, and we
must speak to each in his own language. That Sarada has grasped this, is
all right. It will be time enough to look to Hinduism later on. Do you
think people in this country would be much attracted if I talk of
Hinduism? — The very name of narrowness in ideas will scare them away!
The real thing is — *the Religion* taught by Shri Ramakrishna, let the
Hindus call it Hinduism — and others call it in their own way. Only you
must proceed slowly. "शनैः पन्थाः — One must make journeys slowly." Give
my blessings to Dinanath, the new recruit. I have very little time to
write — always lecture, lecture, lecture. Purity, Patience,
Perseverance.... You must ask those numerous people who are now paying
heed to Shri Ramakrishna's teachings, to help you pecuniarily to a
certain extent. How can the Math be maintained unless they help you? You
must not be shy of making this plain to all. ...

There is no gain in hastening my return from this country. In the first
place, a little sound made here will resound there a great deal. Then,
the people of this country are immensely rich and are bold enough to
pay. While the people of our country have neither money nor the least
bit of boldness.

You will know everything by degrees. Was Shri Ramakrishna the Saviour of
India merely? It is this narrow idea that has brought about India's
ruin, and her welfare is an impossibility so long as this is not rooted
out. Had I the money I would send each one of you to travel all over the
world. No great idea can have a place in the heart unless one steps out
of his little corner. It will be verified in time. Every great
achievement is done slowly. Such is the Lord's will. ...

Why didn't any of you write about Daksha and Harish? I shall be glad to
know if you watch their whereabouts. That Sanyal is feeling miserable is
because his mind is not yet pure like the water of the Ganga. It is not
yet selfless, but will be in time. He will have no misery if he can give
up the little crookedness and be straightforward. My special loving
greetings to Rakhal and Hari. Take great care of them. ... Never forget
that Rakhal was the special object of Shri Ramakrishna's love. Let
nothing daunt you. Who on earth has the power to snub us so long as the
Lord favours us? Even if you are at your last breath, be not afraid.
Work on with the intrepidity of a lion but, at the same time with the
tenderness of a flower. Let this year's Shri Ramakrishna festival be
celebrated in great pomp. Let the feeding be quite ordinary — Prasâda
being distributed in earthen plates among the devotees standing in rows.
There should be readings from Shri Ramakrishna's Life. Place books like
the Vedas and the Vedanta together and perform Ârati before them. . . .
Avoid issuing invitation cards of the old style. "आमन्त्रये भवन्तं
साशीर्वादं भगवतो रामकृष्णस्य बहुमानपुर:सरञ्च — With Bhagavan Shri
Ramakrishna's blessings and our great esteem we have the pleasure to
invite you." Write some such line, and then write that to defray the
expenses of Shri Ramakrishna's Birthday Festival and those of the
maintenance of the Math, you want his assistance. That if he likes, he
may kindly send the money to such and such, at such and such address,
and so on. Also add a page in English. The term "Lord Ramakrishna" has
no meaning. You must give it up. Write "Bhagavan" in English characters,
and add a line or two in English:

THE ANNIVERSARY OF BHAGAVAN SHRI RAMAKRISHNA

Sir, we have great pleasure in inviting you to join us in celebrating
the ——th anniversary of Bhagavan Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. For the
celebration of this great occasion and for the maintenance of the
Alambazar Math funds are absolutely necessary. If you think that the
cause is worthy of your sympathy, we shall be very grateful to receive
your contribution to the great work.

Yours obediently,

(Name)

If you get more than enough money, spend only a little of it and keep
the surplus as a reserve fund to defray your expenses. On the plea of
offering the food to the Lord, do not make everybody wait till he is
sick, to have a stale and unsavoury dinner. Have two filters made and
use that filtered water for both cooking and drinking purposes. Boil the
water before filtering. If you do this, you will never more hear of
malaria. Keep a strict eye on everybody's health. If you can give up
lying on the floor — in other words, if you can get the money to do it,
it will be excellent indeed. Dirty clothes are the chief cause of
disease. ... About the food offering, let me tell you that only a little
Payasânna (milk-rice with sugar) will do. He used to love that alone. It
is true that the worship-room is a help to many, but it is no use
indulging in Râjasika and Tâmasika food. Let the ceremonials give place
to a certain extent to a little study of the Gita or the Upanishads or
other sacred books. What I mean is this — let there be as little
materialism as possible, with the maximum of spirituality. . . . Did
Shri Ramakrishna come for this or that particular individual, or for the
world at large? If the latter, then you must present him in such a light
that the whole world may understand him. . . . *You must not identify
yourselves with any life of his written by anybody nor give your
sanction to any*. There is no danger so long as such books do not come
out associated with our name. . . . "Say yea, yea, to all and stick to
your own."

. . . A thousand thanks to Mahendra Babu for his kindly helping us. He
is a very liberal-hearted man. ... About Sanyal, he will attain the
highest good by doing his bit of work attentively, that is, by simply
serving Shri Ramakrishna's children. . . . Brother Tarak is doing very
good work. Bravo! Well done! That is what we want. Let me see all of you
shoot like so many meteors! What is Gangadhar doing? Some Zemindars in
Rajputana respect him. Tell him to get some money from them as Bhikshâ;
then he is a man. ...

Just now I read Akshaya's book. Give him a hundred thousand hearty
embraces from me. Through his pen Shri Ramakrishna is manifesting
himself. Blessed is Akshaya! Let him recite that *Punthi* before all. He
must recite it before all in the Festival. If the work be too large, let
him read extracts of it. Well, I do not find a single irrelevant word in
it. I cannot tell in words the joy I have experienced by reading his
book. Try all of you to give the book an extensive sale. Then ask
Akshaya to go from village to village to preach. Well done Akshaya! He
is doing his work. Go from village to village and proclaim to all Shri
Ramakrishna's teachings, can there be a more blessed lot than this? I
tell you, Akshaya's book and Akshaya himself must electrify the masses.
Dear, dear, Akshaya, I bless you with all my heart, my dear brother. May
the Lord sit in your tongue! Go and spread his teachings from door to
door. There is no need whatever of your becoming a Sannyasin. . . .
Akshaya is the future apostle for the masses of Bengal. Take great care
of Akshaya; his faith and devotion have borne fruit.

Ask Akshaya to write these few points in the third section of his book,
"The Propagation of the Faith".

1\. Whatever the Vedas, the Vedanta, and all other Incarnations have
done in the past, Shri Ramakrishna lived to practice in the course of a
single life.

2\. One cannot understand the Vedas, the Vedanta, the Incarnations, and
so forth, without understanding *his* life. For he was the explanation.

3\. From the very date that he was born, has sprung the Satya-Yuga
(Golden Age). Henceforth there is an end to all sorts of distinctions,
and everyone down to the Chandâla will be a sharer in the Divine Love.
The distinction between man and woman, between the rich and the poor,
the literate and illiterate, Brahmins and Chandalas — he lived to root
out all. And he was the harbinger of Peace — the separation between
Hindus and Mohammedans, between Hindus and Christians, all are now
things of the past. That fight about distinctions that there was,
belonged to another era. In this Satya-Yuga the tidal wave of Shri
Ramakrishna's Love has unified all.

Tell him to expand these ideas and write them in his own style.

Whoever — man or woman — will worship Shri Ramakrishna, be he or she
ever so low, will be then and there converted into the very highest.
Another thing, the Motherhood of God is prominent in this Incarnation.
He used to dress himself as a woman — he was, as it were, our Mother —
and we must likewise look upon all women as the reflections of the
Mother. In India there are two great evils. Trampling on the women, and
grinding the poor through caste restrictions. He was the Saviour of
women, Saviour of the masses, Saviour of all, high and low. And let
Akshaya introduce his worship in every home — Brahmin or Chandala, man
or woman — everyone has the right to worship him. Whoever will worship
him only with devotion shall be blessed for ever.

Tell him to write in this strain. Never mind anything — the Lord will be
at his side.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. ... Ask Sanyal to send me a copy each of the *Nârada* and *Shândilya
Sutras*, and one of the *Yogavâsishtha*, that has been translated in
Calcutta. I want the English translation of the last, not a Bengali
edition....

1.  [^](#txt1)The four principal castes, viz Brahmin, Kshatriya,
    Vaishya, and Shudra.
2.  [^](#txt2)The four orders of life, viz Brahmacharya, Gârhasthya,
    Vânaprastha, and Sannyâsa.
3.  [^](#txt3)For some time Shri Ramakrishna dressed himself as a woman
    and practiced Sâdhanâ conceiving himself to be a woman to get rid of
    the sex-idea.

</div>
