---
title: LXXVII

---
<div>

[←](076_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](078_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](076_rakhal.htm) Chronology [»](078_rakhal.htm)  
[«](075_shashi.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/34_shashi.htm)

## LXXVII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7226e6077.pdf)* )

C/O E. T. STURDY, ESQ.,  
HIGH VIEW, CAVERSHAM, ENGLAND,  
*1895*.

DEAR SHASHI,

. . . I am in receipt of Rakhal's letter today. I am sorry to hear that
— has suffered from gravel. Most probably it was due to indigestion.
Gopal's debts have been cleared; now ask him to join the monastic order.
The worldly-wise instinct is most difficult to root out. . . . Let him
come and work in the Math. One is apt to imbibe a lot of mischievous
ideas by concerning oneself too long in worldly affairs. If he refuses
to take the monastic vow, please tell him to clear out. I don't want
amphibious type of men who will be half monks and half householders. . .
. Haramohan has coined a *Lord* Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, I see. What
does he mean? English Lord, or Duke? Tell Rakhal, let people say
whatever they will — "Men (who wrongly criticise) are to be treated as
worms!" as Shri Ramakrishna used to say. Let there be no disparity
between what you profess and what you do, also eschew the very name of
Jesuitism. Was I ever an orthodox, Paurânika Hindu, an adherent of
social usages? I do not pose as one. You will not have to say things
that will be *pleasant* to any section of people. You must not so much
as notice what the Bengalis say for or against us. . . . They could not
do a penny-worth of service to him whose birth has sanctified their
country where the primary laws of health and sanitation are trampled,
and yet they would talk big! What matters is, my brother, what such men
have got to say! . . . It is for you to go on doing your own work. Why
look up to men for approbation, look up to God! I hope Sharat will be
able to teach them the Gita and the Upanishads and their commentaries
somehow, with the help of the dictionary. — Or, is it an empty Vairâgya
that you have? The days of such Vairagya are gone! It is not for
everyone, my boy, to become Ramakrishna Paramahamsa! I hope Sharat has
started by this time. Please send a copy of the *Panchadashi*, a copy of
the Gita (with as many commentaries as possible), a copy each of the
*Nârada* and *Shândilya Sutras* (published in Varanasi), a translation
(good, not worthless) of the *Panchadashi* — if it is available — and
the translation by Kâlivara Vedântavâgisha of Shankara's Commentary. And
if there be any translation, Bengali or English (by Shrish Babu of
Allahabad), of Pânini's Sutras, or the *Kâshikâ-Vritti*, or the
*Phani-Bhâshya*, please send a copy of each. ... Now, just tell your
Bengalis to send me a copy of the *Vâchaspatya* Dictionary, and that
will be a good test for those tall-talking people. In England, religious
movements make very slow progress. These people here are either bigots
or atheists. And the former again have only a bit of formal religion.
They say, "Patriotism is our religion." That is all.

Send the books to America, c/o Miss Mary Phillips, 19 West 38th Street,
New York, U.S.A. That is my American address. By the end of November I
shall go to America. So send my books etc., there. If Sharat has started
immediately on your receipt of my letter, then only I may meet him,
otherwise not. Business is business, no child's play. Mr. Sturdy will
see to him and accommodate him. This time I have come to England just to
probe a little. Next summer I shall try to make some stir. The winter
after that, I shall go to India. . . . Correspond regularly with those
who are interested in us, so as to keep up their interest. Try to open
centres in places all over Bengal.... This much for the present. In my
next I shall give you more details. Mr. Sturdy is a very nice gentleman,
a staunch Vedantist, and understands a smattering of Sanskrit. It is
with a good deal of labour that you can do a little bit of work in these
countries; a sheer uphill task, with cold and rain into the bargain.
Moreover, here you must support yourself and do your labour of love.
Englishmen won't spend a penny on lectures or things of that sort. If
they do come to listen to you, well, thank your stars — as is the case
in our country. Besides, the common people here do not even know of me
now. In addition to all this, they will give you a wide berth if you
preach God and such things to them. They think this must be another
clergyman! Well, you just patiently do one thing — set about collecting
everything that books, beginning with the Rig-Veda down to the most
insignificant of Puranas and Tantras, have got to say about creation and
annihilation of the universe, about race, heaven, and hell, the soul,
consciousness, and intellect, etc., the sense-organs, Mukti,
transmigration, and suchlike things. No child's play would do, I want
real scholarly work. The most important thing is to collect the
materials. My love to you all. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
