---
title: LXXVIII

---
<div>

[←](077_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](079_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](077_shashi.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/052_joe_joe.htm)  
[«](076_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](083_rakhal.htm)

## LXXVIII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7156e6078.pdf)* )

*1895*.

DEAR RAKHAL,

. . . Your suggestion to me to go back to India is no doubt right, but a
seed has been sown in this country, and there is the possibility of its
being nipped in the bud if I go away all on a sudden. Hence I have to
wait some time. Moreover it will be possible to manage everything nicely
from here. Everybody requests me to return to India. It is all right,
but don't you see it is not wise to depend upon others. A wise man
should stand firm on his own legs and act. Everything will come about
slowly. For the present don't forget to be on the look-out for a site.
We want a big plot — of about ten to twenty thousand rupees — it must be
right on the Ganga. Though my capital is small, I am exceedingly bold.
Have an eye on securing the land. At present we shall have to work three
centres, one in New York, another in Calcutta and a third in Madras.
Then, by degrees, as the Lord will arrange. ... You must keep a strict
eye on your health; let everything else be subordinated to that. ...

Brother Tarak is eager for travel. Well, it is good, but these are very
expensive countries; a preacher needs here at least a thousand rupees a
month. But Brother Tarak has boldness, and it is God who provides every
thing. Quite true, but he must have to improve his English a little. The
thing is, one has to snatch one's bread from the jaws of the missionary
scholars. That is, one must prevail over these people by dint of
learning, or one will be blown off at a puff. They understand neither
Sâdhus nor your Sânnyasins, nor the spirit of renunciation. What they do
understand is the vastness of learning, the display of eloquence and
tremendous activity. Over and above that, the whole country will be
searching for flaws, the clergy will day and night try to snub you,
through force or guile. You must get rid of these obstructions to preach
your doctrines. Through the mercy of the Divine Mother everything is
possible. But in my opinion if Brother Tarak goes on starting some
societies in the Punjab and Madras, and you become organised, it will be
the best thing. It is indeed a great thing to discover a new path, but
it is as difficult a task to cleanse that path and make it spacious and
nice. If you live for some time in places where I have sown the seeds of
our Master's ideals and succeed in developing the seeds into plants, you
will be doing much greater work than I did. What will they who cannot
manage some ready-made thing do with regard to things that are yet to
come? If you cannot add a little salt to a dish almost done, how am I to
believe that you will collect all the ingredients? Let Brother Tarak, as
an alternative, start a Himalayan Math at Almora and have a library
there, so that we may spend some of our spare time in a cool place and
practice spiritual exercises. However, I have nothing to say against any
particular course which any one may be led to adopt; on the contrary,
God-speed — "शिवाः वः सन्तु पन्थानः — May your journey be prosperous".
Tell him to wait a bit. What's the good of being in a hurry? You shall
all travel the whole world. Courage! Brother Tarak has a great capacity
for work within him. Hence I expect much of him. . . . You remember, I
suppose, how after Shri Ramakrishna's passing away, all forsook us as so
many worthless, ragged boys. Only people like Balaram, Suresh, Master,
and Chuni Babu were our friends at that hour of need. And we shall never
be able to repay our debts to them. ... Tell Chuni Babu in private that
he has nothing to fear, that those who are protected by the Lord must be
above fear. I am a puny man, but the glories of the Lord are infinite.
माभैः माभैः — Discard fear. Let not your faith be shaken. ...Has danger
any power over one whom the Lord has taken into His fold? 

Ever yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
