---
title: LXXXI

---
<div>

[←](080_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](082_dear.htm)

  

[«](080_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology [»](082_dear.htm)  
Addressee [»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/111_mother.htm)

## LXXXI

C/O E. T. STURDY, ESQ.,  
HIGH VIEW, CAVERSHAM, READING,  
ENGLAND,  
*October, 1895*.

DEAR MOTHER, (Mrs. F. H. Leggett)

You have not forgotten your son? Where are you now? And Tante and the
babies? What about our saintly worshipper at your shrine? Joe Joe is not
entering "Nirvana" so soon, but her deep silence almost seems to be a
big "Samadhi".

Are you on the move? I am enjoying England very much. I am living with
my friend on *philosophy*, leaving a little margin for eating and
smoking. We are getting nothing else but Dualism and Monism and all the
rest of them.

Hollister has become very manly, I suppose, in his long trousers; and
Alberta is studying German.

The Englishmen here are very friendly. Except a few Anglo-Indians, they
do not hate black men at all. Not even do they hoot at me in the
streets. Sometimes I wonder whether my face has turned white, but the
mirror tells the truth. Yet they are all so friendly here.

Again, the English men and women who love India are more Hindu than the
Hindus themselves. I am getting plenty of vegetables cooked, you will be
surprised to hear, *à la Indienne* perfectly. When an Englishman takes
up a thing, he goes to its very depths. Yesterday I met a Prof. Fraser,
a high official here. He has been half his life in India; and he has
lived so much in ancient thought and wisdom that he does not care a fig
for anything out of India!! You will be astonished to hear that many of
the thoughtful English men and women think that the Hindu caste is the
only solution of the social problem. With that idea in their head you
may imagine how they hate the socialists and other social democrats!!
Again, here the men — and the most highly educated — take the greatest
interest in Indian thought, and very few women. The woman's sphere is
narrower here than in America. So far everything is going very well with
me. I shall let you know any further developments.

With my love to paterfamilias, to the Queen Mother, to Joe Joe (no
title), and to the babies, 

Ever yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
