---
title: LXXXV

---
<div>

[←](084_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](086_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/060_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/054_alasinga.htm)  
[«](072_akhandananda.htm) Addressee [»](128_akhandananda.htm)

## LXXXV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7232e6085.pdf)* )

LONDON,  
*13th Nov., 1895.*

MY DEAR AKHANDANANDA,

I am very glad to receive your letter. It is excellent work that you are
doing. R— is very liberal and openhanded, but no advantage should be
taken over him for that reason. About the raising of funds by Shrimân —,
well, it is a fair enterprise; but my boy, this is a very queer world,
where even the World-Gods Brahmâ and Vishnu find it difficult to evade
the clutches of lust and gold. Wherever there is any the least concern
with money, there is the chance for misunderstanding. Let therefore
nobody undertake such work as raising money on behalf of the Math. ...
Whenever you hear of any householder collecting funds in my or our name
on the plea of erecting a Math, or some such thing, the first thing you
should do is to distrust him, and never set your hand to it. The more
so, as householders of poor means take to various tricks to supply their
wants. Therefore, if ever a trusty devotee or a householder with a
heart, being of affluent circumstances, undertakes such works as the
founding of a Math, or if the funds raised be kept in the custody of a
trusty householder of wealth — well and good, otherwise never have a
hand in it. On the contrary, you must dissuade others from such a thing.
You are but a boy and are ignorant of the snare of gold. Opportunities
will turn even a staunch moralist into a cheat. This is the way of the
world.

It is not at all in our nature to do a work conjointly. It is to this
that our miserable condition is due. He who knows how to obey knows how
to command. Learn obedience first. Among these Western nations, with
such a high spirit of independence, the spirit of obedience is equally
strong. We are all of us self-important — which never produces any work.
Great enterprise, boundless courage, tremendous energy, and, above all,
perfect obedience — these are the only traits that lead to individual
and national regeneration. These traits are altogether lacking in us.

Go on with the work as you are doing it, but then you must pay
particular attention to study. J— Babu has sent a Hindi magazine, in
which Pundit R— of Alwar has published a translation of my Chicago
Address. Please convey my special indebtedness and thanks to both.

Let me now address myself to you — take particular care to start a
centre in Rajputana. It must be in some central place like Jaipur or
Ajmer. Then branches must be established in towns like Alwar and Khetri.
You must mix with all, we do not want to quarrel with any. Give my
loving embrace to Pundit N—; the man is very energetic, and will be a
very practical man in time. Tender my loving regards to Mr. M— and —ji
too. A Religious Association or something of the kind has been afoot at
Ajmer — what is it? Let me know all about it. M— Babu writes that he and
others have written me letters; but I have not received any up till now.
. . . About Maths, or centres, or anything of the kind, it is no use
starting them in Calcutta; Varanasi is the place for them. I have many
plans like that, but all depends on funds. You will know of them by
degrees. You might have noticed from the papers that our movement is
steadily gaining ground in England. Every enterprise in this country
takes some time to have a go. But once John Bull sets his hand to a
thing, he will never let it go. The Americans are quick, but they are
somewhat like straw on fire, ready to be extinguished. Do not preach to
the public that Ramakrishna Paramahamsa was an Incarnation, and things
of that sort. I have some followers at — look after them. . . . Infinite
power will come unto you — never fear. Be pure, have faith, be obedient.

Teach against the marriage of boys. No scripture ever sanctions it. But
for the present say nothing against little girls being married. Directly
you stop the marriage of boys, that of girls will stop of itself. Girls
surely are not going to marry among themselves! Write to the Secretary,
Arya Samaj, Lahore, asking the whereabouts of a Sannyasin named
Achyutananda who used to live with them. Make special inquiry of the
man. . . . Never fear. 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
