---
title: XCI

---
<div>

[←](090_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](092_yogen.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/069_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](092_yogen.htm)  
[«](058_sarada.htm) Addressee [»](094_sarada.htm)

## XCI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7251e6091.pdf)* )

*Jan., 1896.*

DEAR SARADA,

. . .Your idea of the paper is very good indeed. Apply yourself to it
heart and soul. . . . Never mind the funds. . . . There are many to
preach Christianity and Mohammedanism — you just go through the
preaching of your own country's religion. But then if you can get hold
of a Mohammedan who is versed in Arabic and have old Arabic books
translated, it will be a good plan. There is much of Indian history in
the Persian language. If you can have the books translated bit by bit,
it will be a good regular item. We want quite a number of writers, then
there is the difficult task of getting subscribers. The way out is this:
You lead a wandering life; wherever you find Bengali language spoken,
thrust the paper on whomsoever you can lay your hands on. Enlist them by
vehemence! — they would always turn tail the moment they have to spend
something. Never mind anything! Push it on! Begin to contribute
articles, all of you who can. It won't do merely to sit idle. You have
done a heroic deed! Bravo! Those who falter and vacillate will lag
behind, and you will jump straight on top of all! Those that are working
for their own salvation will neither have their own nor that of others.
Let the commotion that you make be such as to resound to the world's
end. There are people who are ready to pick holes in everything, but
when it comes to the question of work, not a scent of them can be had!
To work! — as far as in you lies! Then I shall go to India and move the
whole country. What fear! "Even a snake loses its venom if it is
insisted that it has none." These people will go on the negative track,
till they are actually reduced to nothing! . . .

Gangadhar has done right heroic work! Well done! Kali has joined him in
work — thrice well done!! Let one go to Madras, and another to Bombay,
let the world shake on its hinges! Oh, the grief! If I could get two or
three like me, I could have left the world convulsed. As it is, I have
to proceed gently. Move the world to its foundations! Send one to China,
another to Japan! What will the poor householders do, with their little
bits of life? It is for the Sannyasins, Shiva's demons, to rend the
skies with their shouts of "Hara! Hara! Shambho!" 

Yours affectionately

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
