---
title: XCIV

---
<div>

[←](093_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](095_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/070_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/087_friend.htm)  
[«](091_sarada.htm) Addressee [»](097_sarada.htm)

## XCIV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7261e6094.pdf)* )

BOSTON,  
*2nd March, 1896*.

DEAR SARADA,

Your letter informed me of everything; but I note that you do not so
much as refer to the cable I sent about the celebration. The dictionary
that Shashi sent a few months ago has not arrived so far. ... I am going
to England soon. Sharat need not come now at all; for I am myself going
to England. I do not want people who take such a long time to make up
their minds. I did not invite him for a European tour, and I do not have
the money either. So ask him not to come, and none else need.

On perusal of your letter on Tibet, I came to lose all regard for your
common sense. In the first place, it is nonsense to say that Notovitch's
book is genuine. Did you see any original copy, or bring it to India?
Secondly, you say you saw in the Kailas Math the portrait of Jesus and
the Samaritan Woman. How do you know that it was Jesus' portrait, and
not that of a man in the street? Even taking it for granted, how do you
know that it was not put up in the said Math by someone who was a
Christian? And your opinions on the Tibetans too are unsound; you did
not certainly see the heart of Tibet, but only a fringe of the trade
route. In places like those only the dregs of a nation are to be met. If
on seeing the Chinabazar and Barabazar quarters of Calcutta, anybody
called every Bengali a liar, would that be correct?

Consult Shashi properly when writing any article. ... What you need is
only obedience. ... 

Yours affectionately

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
