---
title: XCIX

---
<div>

[←](098_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](100_shashi.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/076_mary.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/36_miss_noble.htm)  
[«](098_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/094_mrs_bull.htm)

## XCIX

63 ST. GEORGE'S ROAD, LONDON S.W.,  
*5th June, 1896*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

The *Raja-Yoga* book is going on splendidly. Saradananda goes to the
States soon.

I do not like any one whom I love to become a lawyer, although my father
was one. My Master was against it, and I believe that that family is
sure to come to grief where there are several lawyers. Our country is
full of them; the universities turn them out by the hundreds. What my
nation wants is pluck and scientific genius. So I want Mohin to be an
electrician. Even if he fails in life, still I will have the
satisfaction that he strove to become great and really useful to his
country. ... In *America alone* there is that something in the air which
brings out whatever is best in every one. ... I want him to be daring,
bold, and to struggle to cut a new path for himself and his nation. An
electrical engineer can make a living in India. 

Yours with love,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Goodwin is writing to you this mail with reference to a magazine in
America. I think something of the sort is necessary to keep the work
together, and shall of course do all that I can to help it on in the
line he suggests.  . . . I think it very probable that he will come over
with Saradananda.

</div>
