---
title: CII

---
<div>

[←](101_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](103_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](101_shashi.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/37_friend.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/067_friend.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/093_sir.htm)

## CII

63 ST. GEORGE'S ROAD, LONDON S.W.,  
*6th July, 1896*.

DEAR FRANKINCENSE, (Mr. Francis H. Leggett whom Swamiji addressed thus.)

. . . Things are going on with me very well on this side of the
Atlantic.

The Sunday lectures were quite successful; so were the classes. The
season has ended and I too am thoroughly exhausted. I am going to make a
tour in Switzerland with Miss Müller. The Galsworthys have been very
very kind. Joe (Miss Josephine MacLeod, also referred to as Joe Joe.)
brought them round splendidly. I simply admire Joe in her tact and quiet
way. She is a feminine statesman or woman. She can wield a kingdom. I
have seldom seen such strong yet good common sense in a human being. I
will return next autumn and take up the work in America.

The night before last I was at a party at Mrs. Martin's, about whom you
must already know a good deal from Joe.

Well, the work is growing silently yet surely in England. Almost every
other man or woman came to me and talked about the work. This British
Empire with all its drawbacks is the greatest machine that ever existed
for the dissemination of ideas. I mean to put my ideas in the centre of
this machine, and they will spread all over the world. Of course, all
great work is slow, and the difficulties are too many, especially as we
Hindus are the conquered race. Yet, that is the very reason why it is
bound to work, for spiritual ideals have always come from the
downtrodden. Jews overwhelmed the Roman Empire with their spiritual
ideals. You will be pleased to know that I am also learning my lessons
every day in patience and, above all, in sympathy. I think I am
beginning to see the Divine, even inside the high and mighty
Anglo-Indians. I think I am slowly approaching to that state when I
should be able to love the very "Devil" himself, if there were any.

At twenty years of age I was the most unsympathetic, uncompromising
fanatic; I would not walk on the footpath on the theatre side of the
streets in Calcutta. At thirty-three, I can live in the same house with
prostitutes and never would think of saying a word of reproach to them.
Is it degenerate? Or is it that I am broadening out into the Universal
Love which is the Lord Himself? Again I have heard that if one does not
sea the evil round him he cannot do good work — he lapses into a sort of
fatalism. I do not see that. On the other hand, my power of work is
immensely increasing and becoming immensely effective. Some days I get
into a sort of ecstasy. I feel that I must bless every one, everything,
love and embrace everything, and I do see that evil is a delusion. I am
in one of these moods now, dear Francis, and am actually shedding tears
of joy at the thought of you and Mrs. Leggett's love and kindness to me.
I bless the day I was born. I have had so much of kindness and love
here, and that Love Infinite that brought me into being has guarded
every one of my actions, good or bad, (don't be frightened), for what am
I, what was I ever, but a tool in His hands, for whose service I have
given up everything, my beloved ones, my joys, my life? He is my playful
darling, I am His playfellow. There is neither rhyme nor reason in the
universe! That reason binds Him? He the playful one is playing these
tears and laughters over all parts of the play! Great fun, great fun, as
Joe says.

It is a funny world, and the funniest chap you ever saw is He — the
Beloved Infinite! Fun, is it not? Brotherhood or playmatehood — a school
of romping children let out to play in this playground of the world!
Isn't it? Whom to praise, whom to blame, it is all His play. They want
explanations, but how can you explain Him? He is brainless, nor has He
any reason. He is fooling us with little brains and reason, but this
time He won't find me napping.

I have learnt a thing or two: Beyond, beyond reason and learning and
talking is the feeling, the "Love", the "Beloved". Ay, *saké*, fill up
the cup and we will be mad.

Yours ever in madness,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
