---
title: CVI

---
<div>

[←](105_sahji.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](107_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/065_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Chronology [»](107_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](101_shashi.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/090_shashi.htm)

## CVI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7300e6106.pdf)* )

LAKE LUCERNE, SWITZERLAND,

*23rd August, 1896*.

MY DEAR SHASHI,

Today I received a letter from Ramdayal Babu, in which he writes that
many public women attend the Ramakrishna anniversary festival at
Dakshineswar, which makes many less inclined to go there. Moreover, in
his opinion one day should be appointed for men and another for women.
My decision on the point is this:

1\. If public women are not allowed to go to such a great place of
pilgrimage as Dakshineswar, where else shall they go to? It is for the
sinful that the Lord manifests Himself specially, not so much for the
virtuous.

2\. Let distinctions of sex, caste, wealth, learning, and the whole host
of them, which are so many gateways to hell, be confined to the world
alone. If such distinctions persist in holy places of pilgrimage, where
then lies the difference between them and hell itself?

3\. Ours is a gigantic City of Jagannâtha, where those who have sinned
and those who have not, the saintly and the vicious, men and women and
children irrespective of age, all have equal right. That for one day at
least in the year thousand of men and women get rid of the sense of sin
and ideas of distinction and sing and hear the name of the Lord, is in
itself a supreme good.

4\. If even in a place of pilgrimage people's tendency to evil be not
curbed for one day, the fault lies with you, not them. Create such a
huge tidal wave of spirituality that whatever people come near will be
swept away.

5\. Those who, even in a chapel, would think this is a public woman,
that man is of a low caste, a third is poor, and yet another belongs to
the masses — the less be the number of such people (that is, whom you
call gentlemen) the better. Will they who look to the caste, sex, or
profession of Bhaktas appreciate our Lord? I pray to the Lord that
hundreds of public women may come and bow their heads at His feet; it
does not matter if not one gentleman comes. Come public women, come
drunkards, come thieves and all — His Gate is open to all. "It is easier
for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to
enter the Kingdom of God." Never let such cruel, demoniacal ideas have a
place in your mind.

6\. But then some social vigilance is needed. How are we to do that? A
few men (old men, preferably) should take charge as the warders for the
day. They will make circuits round the scene of the festival, and in
case they find any man or woman showing impropriety of speech or
conduct, they will at once expel them from the garden. But so long as
they behave like good men and women, they are Bhaktas and are to be
respected — be they men or women, honest citizens or unchaste.

I am at present travelling in Switzerland, and shall soon go to Germany,
to see Professor Deussen. I shall return to England from there about the
23rd or 24th September, and the next winter will find me back in my
country.

My love to you and all.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
