---
title: CXII

---
<div>

[←](111_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](113_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/100_miss_noble.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/071_alasinga.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/077_babies.htm) Both Sisters
[»](116_sisters.htm)  
[«](108_sister.htm) Mary or Harriet Hale [»](116_sisters.htm)  
[«](108_sister.htm) Harriet Hale [»](116_sisters.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/085_sister.htm) Mary Hale
[»](116_sisters.htm)

## CXII

14 GREYCOAT GARDENS, WESTMINSTER,  
LONDON, ENGLAND,  
*1st November, 1896*.

MY DEAR MARY, (Miss Mary Hale.)

"Silver and gold", my dear Mary, "have I none; but such as I have give I
thee" freely, and that is the knowledge that the goldness of gold, the
silverness of silver, the manhood of man, the womanhood of woman, the
reality of everything is the Lord — and that this Lord we are trying to
realise from time without beginning in the objective, and in the attempt
throwing up such "queer" creatures of our fancy as man, woman, child,
body, mind, the earth, sun, moon, stars, the world, love, hate,
property, wealth, etc.; also ghosts, devils, angels and gods, God etc.

The fact being that the Lord is in us, we are He, the eternal subject,
the real ego, never to be objectified, and that all this objectifying
process is mere waste of time and talent. When the soul becomes aware of
this, it gives up objectifying and falls back more and more upon the
subjective. This is the evolution, less and less in the body and more
and more in the mind — *man* the highest form, meaning in Sanskrit
*manas*, thought — the animal that thinks and not the animal that
"senses" only. This is what in theology is called "renunciation". The
formation of society, the institution of marriage, the love for
children, our good works, morality, and ethics are all different forms
of renunciation. All our lives in every society are the subjection of
the will, the thirst, the desire. This surrender of the will or the
fictitious self — or the desire to jump out of ourselves, as it were —
the struggle still to objectify the subject — is the one phenomenon in
this world of which all societies and social forms are various modes and
stages. Love is the easiest and smoothest way towards the self-surrender
or subjection of the will and hatred, the opposite.

People have been cajoled through various stories or superstitions of
heavens and hells and Rulers above the sky, towards this one end of
self-surrender. The philosopher does the same knowingly without
superstition, by giving up desires.

An objective heaven or millennium therefore has existence only in the
fancy — but a subjective one is already in existence. The musk-deer,
after vain search for the cause of the scent of the musk, at last will
have to find it in himself.

Objective society will always be a mixture of good and evil — objective
life will always be followed by its shadow death, and the longer the
life, the longer will also be the shadow. It is only when the sun is on
our own head that *there is no shadow*. When God and good and everything
else is in us, there is no evil. In objective life, however, every
bullet has its billet — evil goes with every good as its shadow. Every
improvement is coupled with an equal degradation. The reason being that
good and evil are not two things but one, the difference being only in
manifestation — one of degree, not kind.

Our very lives depend upon the death of others — plants or animals or
bacilli! The other great mistake we often make is that good is taken as
an ever-increasing item, whilst evil is a fixed quantity. From this it
is argued that evil being diminished every day, there will come a time
when good alone will remain. The fallacy lies in the assumption of a
false premise. If good is increasing, so is evil. My desires have been
much more than the desires of the masses among my race. My joys have
been much greater than theirs — but my miseries a million times more
intense. The same constitution that makes you feel the least touch of
good makes you feel the least of evil too. The same nerves that carry
sensations of pleasure carry the sensations of pain too — and the same
mind feels both. The progress of the world means more enjoyment and more
misery too. This mixture of life and death, good and evil, knowledge and
ignorance is what is called Maya — or the universal phenomenon. You may
go on for eternity inside this net, seeking for happiness — you find
much, and much evil too. To have good and no evil is childish nonsense.
Two ways are left open — one by giving up all hope to take up the world
as it is and bear the pangs and pains in the hope of a crumb of
happiness now and then. The other, to give up the search for pleasure,
knowing it to be pain in another form, and seek for *truth* — and those
that dare try for truth succeed in finding that truth as ever present —
present in themselves. Then we also discover how the same truth is
manifesting itself both in our relative error and knowledge — we find
also that the same truth is bliss which again is manifesting itself as
good and evil, and with it also we find real existence which is
manifesting itself as both death and life.

Thus we realise that all these phenomena are but the reflections,
bifurcated or manifolded, of the one existence, truth-bliss-unity — my
real Self and the reality of everything else. Then and then only is it
possible to do good without evil, for such a soul has known and got the
control of the material of which both good and evil are manufactured,
and he alone can manifest one or the other as he likes, and we know he
manifests only good. This is the Jivan-mukta — the living free — the
goal of Vedanta as of all other philosophies.

Human society is in turn governed by the four castes — the priests, the
soldiers, the traders, and the labourers. Each state has its glories as
well as its defects. When the priest (Brahmin) rules, there is a
tremendous exclusiveness on hereditary grounds; the persons of the
priests and their descendants are hemmed in with all sorts of safeguards
— none but they have any knowledge — none but they have the right to
impart that knowledge. Its glory is that at this period is laid the
foundation of sciences. The priests cultivate the mind, for through the
mind they govern.

The military (Kshatriya) rule is tyrannical and cruel, but they are not
exclusive; and during that period arts and social culture attain their
height.

The commercial (Vaishya) rule comes next. It is awful in its silent
crushing and blood-sucking power. Its advantage is, as the trader
himself goes everywhere, he is a good disseminator of ideas collected
during the two previous states. They are still less exclusive than the
military, but culture begins to decay.

Last will come the labourer (Shudra) rule. Its advantages will be the
distribution of physical comforts — its disadvantages, (perhaps) the
lowering of culture. There will be a great distribution of ordinary
education, but extraordinary geniuses will be less and less.

If it is possible to form a state in which the knowledge of the priest
period, the culture of the military, the distributive spirit of the
commercial, and the ideal of equality of the last can all be kept
intact, minus their evils, it will be an deal state. But is it possible?

Yet the first three have had their day. Now is the time for the last —
they must have it — none can resist it. I do not know all the
difficulties about the gold or silver standards (nobody seems to know
much as to that), but this much I see that the gold standard has been
making the poor poorer, and the rich richer. Bryan was right when he
said, "We refuse to be crucified on a cross of gold." The silver
standard will give the poor a better chance in this unequal fight. I am
a socialist not because I think it is a perfect system, but half a loaf
is better than no bread.

The other systems have been tried and found wanting. Let this one be
tried — if for nothing else, for the novelty of the thing. A
redistribution of pain and pleasure is better than always the same
persons having pains and pleasures. The sum total of good and evil in
the world remains ever the same. The yoke will be lifted from shoulder
to shoulder by new systems, that is all.

Let every dog have his day in this miserable world, so that after this
experience of so-called happiness they may all come to the Lord and give
up this vanity of a world and governments and all other botherations.

With love to you all, 

Ever your faithful brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
