---
title: CXXII

---
<div>

[←](121_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](123_mary.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/104_gentlemen.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/105_christina.htm)  
[«](118_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/106_mrs_bull.htm)

## CXXII

ALAMBAZAR MATH, CALCUTTA,  
*25th Feb., 1897.*

DEAR MRS. BULL,

Saradananda sends £20 to be placed in the famine relief in India. But as
there is famine in his own home, I thought it best to relieve that
first, as the old proverb says. So it has been employed accordingly.

I have not a moment to die as they stay, what with processions and
tomtomings and various other methods of reception all over the country;
I am almost dead. As soon as the Birthday is over I will fly off to the
hills. I received an address from the Cambridge Conference as well as
one from the Brooklyn Ethical Association. One from the Vedanta
Association of New York, as mentioned in Dr. Janes's letter, has not yet
arrived.

Also there is a letter from Dr. Janes suggesting work along the line of
your conference, here in India. It is almost impossible for me to pay
any attention to these things. I am so, so tired. I do not know whether
I would live even six months more or not, unless I have some rest.

Now I have to start two centres, one in Madras, the other in Calcutta.
The Madras people are deeper and more sincere, and, I am sure, will be
able to collect funds from Madras itself. The Calcutta people are mostly
enthusiastic (I mean the aristocracy) through patriotism, and their
sympathy would never materialise. On the other hand, the country is full
of persons, jealous and pitiless, who would leave no stones unturned to
pull my work to pieces.

But as you know well, the more the opposition, the more the demon in me
is roused. My duty would not be complete if I die without starting the
two places, one for the Sannyasins, the other for the women.

I have already £500 from England about, £500 from Mr. Sturdy, and if
your money be added to it, I am sure I will be able to start the two. I
think, therefore, you ought to send the money as soon as possible. The
safest way is to put the money in a bank in America in your and my name
jointly, so that either of us may draw it. In case I die before the
money is employed, you will be able to draw it all and put it to the use
I wanted. So that, in case of my death, none of my people would be able
to meddle with it. The English money has been put in the bank in the
same position in the joint names of Mr. Sturdy and myself.

With love to Saradananda and eternal love and gratitude to yourself, 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
