---
title: CXXVI

---
<div>

[←](125_shuddhananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](127_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/094_marie.htm) Chronology
[»](127_rakhal.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/091_miss_noble.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/095_miss_noble.htm)

## CXXVI

ALMORA,  
*3rd June, 1897*.

DEAR MISS NOBLE,

. . . As for myself I am quite content. I have roused a good many of our
people, and that was all I wanted. Let things have their course and
Karma its sway. I have no bonds here below. I have seen life, and it is
all self — life is for self, love for self, honour for self, everything
for self. I look back and scarcely find any action I have done for self
— even my wicked deeds were not for self. So I am content; not that I
feel I have done anything specially good or great, but the world is so
little, life so mean a thing, existence so, so servile — that I wonder
and smile that human beings, rational souls, should be running after
this self — so mean and detestable a prize.

This is the truth. We are caught in a trap, and the sooner one gets out,
the better for one. I have seen the truth — let the body float up or
down, who cares?

It is a beautiful mountain park I am living in now. On the north,
extending almost all along the horizon, are peak after peak of the
snow-clad Himalayas — forests abounding. It is not cold here, neither
very warm; the evenings and mornings are simply delicious. I should like
to be here this summer, and when the rains set in, I go down to the
plains to work.

I was born for the life of a scholar — retired, quiet, poring over my
books. But the Mother dispenses otherwise — yet the tendency is there.

 

Yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
