---
title: CXXIX

---
<div>

[←](128_akhandananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](130_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](128_akhandananda.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/095_miss_noble.htm)  
[«](127_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](130_rakhal.htm)

## CXXIX

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7348e6129.pdf)* )

ALMORA,  
*20th June, 1897*.

DEAR RAKHAL,

Glad to learn that you are better in health than before. Well, it is
seldom that Brother Yogen reports the bare truths, so do not at all be
anxious to hear them. I am all right now, with plenty of muscular
strength, and no thirst. ... The liver, too, acts well. I am not certain
as to what effects Shashi (Babu)'s medicine had. So I have stopped using
it. I am having plenty of mangoes. I am getting exceptionally adept in
riding, and do not feel the least pain or exhaustion even after a run of
twenty or thirty miles at a stretch. Milk I have altogether stopped for
fear of corpulence.

Yesterday I came to Almora, and shall not go any more to the garden.
Henceforth I am to have three meals a day in the English fashion, as
Miss Müller's guest. . . .

Shuddhananda writes to say that they are going on with Ruddock's
Practice of Medicine or something of that sort. What nonsense do you
mean by having such things taught in the class? A set of common
apparatus for physics and another for chemistry, an ordinary telescope
and a microscope — all these can be had for Rupees 150 to 200. Shashi
Babu may give a lecture on practical chemistry once a week, and
Hariprasanna on physics etc. *And buy all the good scientific books that
you can have in Bengali, and have them read.*

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
