---
title: CXXX

---
<div>

[←](129_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](131_akhandananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/114_shivananda.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/097_joe_joe.htm)  
[«](129_rakhal.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/098_rakhal.htm)

## CXXX

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7352e6130.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna*!

ALMORA,  
*10th July, 1897*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

Today I send back the proofs of the objects of our Association that you
sent me, corrected. The rules and regulations portion (which the members
of our Association had read) is full of mistakes. Correct it very
carefully and reprint it, or people will laugh.

. . . The kind of work that is going on at Berhampore is exceedingly
nice. It is those works that will triumph — can doctrines and dogmas
touch the heart? Work, work — live the life; what do doctrines and
opinions count? Philosophy and Yoga and penance — the worship-room —
your sunned rice or vegetable offerings — all these constitute the
religion of one man or one country; doing good to others is the one
great, universal religion. Men and women, young and old, down to the
Pariah, nay, the very animal — all can grasp this religion. Can a merely
negative religion be of any avail? The stone is never unchaste, the cow
never tells a lie, nor do trees commit theft or robbery, but what does
it matter? Granted that you do not steal, nor tell a lie, nor lead an
unchaste life, but meditate four hours a day and religiously ring the
bell for twice as many hours — yet, what matters it after all? That
work, little as it is, that you have done, has brought Berhampore to
your feet for ever — now people will do whatever you wish them to. Now
you will no longer have to argue to the people that "Ramakrishna *is*
God." Without it what will mere lectures do? — Do fine words butter any
parsnips? If you could do like that in ten districts, all the ten would
become yours to have and hold. Therefore, like the intelligent boy that
you are, lay your greatest stress, for the present, on that work
department, and try heart and soul to augment the utility of that alone.
Organise a number of boys to go from door to door, let them fetch, in
the manner of the Alakhiâ Sâdhus, whatever they can get — money, or worn
out clothes, or rice and eatables, or anything. Then distribute them.
That is work, work indeed. After that people will have faith, and will
then do what they are told.

Whatever is left over after defraying the expenses of the Calcutta
meeting, remit for famine relief, or help with it the countless poor
that live in the slums of Calcutta; let Memorial Halls and things of
that kind go to the dogs. The Lord will do what He thinks best. I am at
present in excellent health. . . .

Why are you not collecting materials? — I shall go down and start the
paper myself. Kindness and love can buy you the whole world; lectures
and books and philosophy all stand lower than these.

Please write to Shashi to open a work department like this for the
service of the poor.

. . . Curtail the expenses of worship to a rupee or two per mensem. The
children of the Lord are dying of starvation. . . . Worship with water
and Tulasi leaves alone, and let the allowance for His Bhoga (food
offerings) be spent in offering food to the Living God who dwells in the
persons of the poor — then will His grace descend on everything. Yogen
felt unwell here; so today he started for Calcutta. I shall again go to
Dewaldhar tomorrow. Please accept my love and tender it to all. 

Affly. yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
