---
title: CXXXI

---
<div>

[←](130_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](132_akhandananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/41_miss_noble.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/099_marie.htm)  
[«](128_akhandananda.htm) Addressee [»](132_akhandananda.htm)

## CXXXI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7357e6131.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna*!

ALMORA,  
*24th July, 1897*.

MY DEAR AKHANDANANDA,

I am very glad to receive your letter and go through the contents. Your
wishes about the orphanage are very good and Shri Maharaj (Shri
Ramakrishna.) will not fail to fulfil them at an early date. Try your
best to found a permanent centre. ... Never worry about money. Tomorrow
I shall leave Almora for the plains; and wherever there will be made
some stir, I shall open a subscription list for famine — set your mind
easy on that score. When in every district there will be a Math on the
model of our Math in Calcutta, then will my heart's desire be fulfilled.
Let not the work of preaching, too, be at a standstill, and greater even
than preaching, is the work of imparting education. By means of lectures
and the like, the village people must be taught religion, history, and
such other subjects — specially history. To help our educational work
there is a Society in England, which, as I find from reports, is doing
excellent work. In time we shall get help of this kind from everywhere,
don't be frightened. They only do work who think that help *will* come,
directly they are on the field of work.

All strength is in you, have faith in it. It will not go unmanifested.
Accept my heartiest love and blessings, and convey them to the
Brahmachârin. Write now and then fiery letters to the Math, so that all
may take heart and work. Victory to the Guru!

Yours affly.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
