---
title: CXXXII

---
 

<div>

[←](131_akhandananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](133_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/100_shashi.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/080_joe.htm)  
[«](131_akhandananda.htm) Addressee [»](136_akhandananda.htm)

## CXXXII

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7362e6132.pdf)* )

ALMORA,  
*30th July, 1897*.

MY DEAR AKHANDANANDA,

According to your instructions, I write a letter to Mr. Levinge, the
Dist. Magistrate. Besides, you will write a big letter to the *Indian
Mirror*, describing in detail his method of work (having got the same
revised by Dr. Shashi), and send a copy of it to the gentleman named
above. Our fools only search for people's shortcomings. Let them see
some virtues too.

I am leaving this place next Monday. ...

What do you talk of the difficulty in getting orphans? Better ask for
four or five men from the Math, if you like; you can find some orphans
in two days, if you seek from village to village.

Of course we must have a permanent centre. And can anything be done in
this country unless the —— help? Do not mix in politics etc., nor have
any connection with them. At the same time you need not have any quarrel
with anybody. You must put your body, mind, and all you have to some one
work. Here I gave a lecture to a European audience in English, and
another to the Indian residents in Hindi. This was my maiden speech in
Hindi, but everyone liked it for all that. Of course the Westerners, as
is their wont, were in raptures over it, as coming from a "nigger"! "Oh,
how wonderful!" and that sort of thing. Next Saturday there will be
another lecture for the Europeans. A big Association has been set on
foot here — let us wait and see how far it works in future. The object
of the Association is to impart education and religion.

Monday next, trip to Bareilly then to Saharanpur, next to Ambala,
thence, most probably, to Mussoorie with Captain Sevier, and as soon as
it is a little cool, return to the plains and journey to Rajputana etc.
Go on working at top speed. Never fear! I, too, have determined to work.
The body must go, no mistake about that. Why then let it go in idleness?
It is better to wear out than rust out. Don't be anxious even when I
die, my very bones will work miracles. We must spread over the whole of
India in ten years, short of this it is no good. To work like an
athlete! Victory to the Guru! Money and all will come of themselves, we
want men, not money. It is man that makes everything, what can money do?
— Men we want, the more you get, the better. ... Here, for instance, was
M— who brought together a lot of money, but there was no man, and what
good did he achieve?

Yours affly.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
