---
title: CXXXIII

---
<div>

[←](132_akhandananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](134_mother.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/080_joe.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/101_shashi.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/112_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/120_dhira_mata.htm)

## CXXXIII

THE MATH,  
(The letter was actually written from Ambala.)  
*19th August, 1897*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

. . . My health is indifferent, and although I have some rest, I do not
think I shall be able to regain my usual vigour till winter next. I had
a letter from Joe saying that you are both coming to India. I, of
course, will be very glad to see you in India, only you ought to know
from the first that India is the dirtiest and unhealthiest hole in the
world, with scarcely any European comforts except in the big capitals.

I learn from England that Mr. Sturdy is sending Abhedananda to New York.
It seems that the English work is impossible without me. Only a magazine
will be started and worked by Mr. Sturdy. I had arranged to come to
England this season, but I was foolishly prevented by the doctors. In
India the work is going on.

I do not think any European or American will be of any service here just
now, and it will be hard for any Westerner to bear the climate. Annie
Besant with her exceptional powers works only among the Theosophists,
and thus she submits to all the indignities of isolation which a
Mlechchha is made to undergo here. Even Goodwin smarts now and then and
has to be called to order. Goodwin is doing good work, as he is a man
and can mix with the people. Women have no place in men's society here,
and she can do good only among her own sex in India. The English friends
that came over to India have not been of any help as yet, and do not
know whether they will be of any in the future. With all these, if
anybody wants to try, she is welcome.

If Saradananda wants to come, he may, and I am sure he will be of very
good service to me just now in organising the work, now that my health
is broken. There is a young English woman, Miss Margaret Noble, very
eager to come to India to learn the state of things, so that she may do
some work when she is back home. I have written her to accompany you in
case you come via London. The great difficulty is that you can never
understand the situation here from a distance. The two types are so
entirely different in all things that it is not possible to form any
idea from America or England.

You ought to think that you are starting for the interior of Africa, and
if you meet anything better, that will be unexpected.

Ever yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
