---
title: CXXXIX

---
<div>

[←](138_m.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](140_mother.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/114_rakhal.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/115_rakhal.htm)  
[«](138_m.htm) Addressee [»](140_mother.htm)

## CXXXIX

(*Translated from [Bengali](b8385e6139.pdf)* )

LAHORE,  
*15th November, 1897*.

DEAR MOTHER, (Shrimati Indumati Mitra)

It is a matter of deep regret that in spite of my earnest wishes, I do
not find it feasible to go to Karachi this time and see you. First,
because Captain and Mrs. Sevier, who have come from England and are
travelling with me for the last nine months nearly, are very anxious to
buy some land at Dehra Dun and start an orphanage there. It is their
special request that I should go and open the work. This makes it
unavoidable to go to Dehra Dun.

Secondly, owing to my kidney troubles I cannot count upon a long life.
Even now it is one of my desires to start a Math in Calcutta, towards
which as yet I could do nothing. Moreover, the people of my country have
withheld the little help that they used to give to our Math of late.
They have got a notion that I have brought plenty of money from England!
Over and above that, it is impossible to celebrate Shri Ramakrishna's
festival this year, for the proprietors of Rasmani's garden would not
let me go there, as I am returned from the West! Hence my first duty
lies in seeing the few friends we have in Rajputana and trying my best
to have a centre in Calcutta. For these reasons I have been very sorry
to postpone my tour to Sindh at present. I shall try my best to go there
via Rajputana and Kathiawar. Please do not be sorry. Never for a day do
I forget you all. But duty must be done first. It will ease me of my
anxiety when a Math is established in Calcutta. Then I can hope that the
work for which I struggled all my life through all sorts of privation
and suffering will not die out after I cease to live in this body. I
start for Dehra Dun this very day. After a week's stay there, to
Rajputana, thence to Kathiawar, and so on.

With blessings, 

Yours sincerely,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
