---
title: CXLII

---
<div>

[←](141_margot.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](143_margot.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/083_your_highness.htm)
Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/125_mr_j_j_goodwins_mother.htm)

## CXLII

(*Written to Mohammed Sarfaraz Husain of Naini Tal*)

ALMORA,  
*10th June, 1898*.

MY DEAR FRIEND,

I appreciate your letter very much and am extremely happy to learn that
the Lord is silently preparing wonderful things for our motherland.

Whether we call it Vedantism or any *ism*, the truth is that Advaitism
is the last word of religion and thought and the only position from
which one can look upon all religions and sects with love. I believe it
is the religion of the future enlightened humanity. The Hindus may get
the credit of arriving at it earlier than other races, they being an
older race than either the Hebrew or the Arab; yet practical Advaitism,
which looks upon and behaves to all mankind as one's own soul, was never
developed among the Hindus universally.

On the other hand, my experience is that if ever any religion approached
to this equality in an appreciable manner, it is Islam and Islam alone.

Therefore I am firmly persuaded that without the help of practical
Islam, theories of Vedantism, however fine and wonderful they may be,
are entirely valueless to the vast mass of mankind. We want to lead
mankind to the place where there is neither the Vedas, nor the Bible,
nor the Koran; yet this has to be done by harmonising the Vedas, the
Bible and the Koran. Mankind ought to be taught that religions are but
the varied expressions of THE RELIGION, which is Oneness, so that each
may choose that path that suits him best.

For our own motherland a junction of the two great systems, Hinduism and
Islam — Vedanta brain and Islam body — is the only hope.

I see in my mind's eye the future perfect India rising out of this chaos
and strife, glorious and invincible, with Vedanta brain and Islam body.

Ever praying that the Lord may make of you a great instrument for the
help of mankind, and especially of our poor, poor motherland.

Yours with love,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
