---
title: CL

---
<div>

[←](149_margot.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](151_margot.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/159_christina.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/160_brahmananda.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/155_dhira_mata.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/151_dhira_mata.htm)

## CL

*12th Dec., 1899.*

MY DEAR MRS. BULL,

You are perfectly right; I am brutal, very indeed. But about the
tenderness etc., that is my fault. I wish I had less, much less of that
— that is my weakness — and alas! all my sufferings have come from that.
Well, the municipality is trying to tax us out — good; that is my fault
as I did not make the Math public property by a deed of trust. I am very
sorry I use harsh language to my boys, but they also know I love them
more than anybody else on earth. I may have had Divine help — true; but
oh, the pound of blood every bit of Divine help has been to me!! I would
be gladder and a better man without that. The present looks very gloomy
indeed; but I am a fighter and must die fighting, not give way — that is
why I get crazy at the boys. I don't ask them to fight, but not to
hinder my fight.

I don't grudge my fate. But oh! now I want a man, one of my boys, to
stand by me and fight against all odds! Don't you vex yourself; if
anything is to be done in India, my presence is necessary; and I am much
better in health; possibly the sea will make me better. Anyway I did not
do anything this time in America except bother my friends. Possibly Joe
will help me out with the passage, and I have some money with Mr.
Leggett. I have hopes of collecting some money in India yet. I did not
see any of my friends in different parts of India. I have hope of
collecting the fifteen thousand that will make up the fifty thousand,
and a deed of trust will bring down the municipal taxes. If I cannot
collect that — it is better to struggle and die for it than vegetate
here in America. My mistakes have been great; but everyone of them was
from too much love. How I hate *love*! Would I never had any Bhakti!
Indeed, I wish I could be an Advaitist, calm and heartless. Well, this
life is done. I will try in the next. I am sorry, especially now, that I
have done more injury to my friends than there have been blessings on
them. The peace, the quiet I am seeking, I never found.

I went years ago to the Himalayas, never to come back; and my sister
committed suicide, the news reached me there, and that weak heart flung
me off from that prospect of peace! It is the weak heart that has driven
me out of India to seek some help for those I love, and here I am! Peace
have I sought, but the heart, that seat of Bhakti, would not allow me to
find it. Struggle and torture, torture and struggle. Well, be it then,
since it is my fate, and the quicker it is over, the better. They say I
am impulsive, but look at the circumstances!!! I am sorry I have been
the cause of pain to you, to you above all, who love me so much, who
have been so, so kind. But it is done — was a fact. I am now going to
cut the knot or die in the attempt.

Ever your son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. As Mother wants it, so let it be. I am going to beg of Joe a passage
via San Francisco to India. If she gives it, I start immediately via
Japan. It would take a month. In India, I think, I can raise some money
to keep things straight or on a better footing — at least to leave
things where I get them all muddled. The end is getting very dark and
very much muddled; well, I expected it so. Don't think I give in in a
moment. Lord bless you; if the Lord has made me His hack to work and die
on the streets, let Him have it. I am more cheerful just now after your
letter than I was for years — *Wah Guru ki Fateh*! Victory unto the
Guru!! Yes, let the world come, the hells come, the gods come, let
Mother come, I fight and do not give in. Râvana got his release in three
births by fighting the Lord Himself! It is glorious to fight Mother.

All blessings on you and yours. You have done for me more, much more,
than I deserved ever.

Love to Christine and Turiyananda. 

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
