---
title: CLIII

---
<div>

[←](152_margot.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](154_akhandananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/162_margo.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/155_dhira_mata.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/162_margo.htm) Addressee
[»](155_nivedita.htm)

## CLIII

C/O MISS MEAD,  
447 DOUGLAS BUILDING,  
LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA,  
*15th Feb., 1900*.

MY DEAR NIVEDITA,

Yours of the — reached me today at Pasadena. I see Joe has missed you at
Chicago — although I have not heard anything from them yet from New
York.

There was a bundle of English newspapers from England with a line on the
envelope expressing good wishes for me and signed, F.H.M. Nothing
important was in those, however. I would have written a letter to Miss
Müller, but I do not know the address; then I was afraid to frighten
her.

In the meanwhile, Mrs. Leggett started a plan of a $100 subscription
each a year for ten years to help me, and headed the list with her $100
for 1900, and got 2 others here to do the same. Then she went on writing
letters to all my friends asking each to join in it. When she went on
writing to Mrs. Miller I was rather shy — but she did it before I knew.
A very polite but cold letter came to her in reply from Mrs. Hale,
written by Mary, expressing their inability and assuring her of their
love for me. I am afraid Mrs. Hale and Mary are displeased. But it was
not my fault at all!!

I get news from Mrs. Sevier that Niranjan is seriously ill in Calcutta.
I do not know if he has passed away. Well — but I am strong now, Margo,
stronger than ever I was mentally. I was mentally getting a sort of
ironing over my heart. I am getting nearer a Sannyasin's life now. I
have not had any news from Saradananda for two weeks. I am glad you got
the stories; rewrite them if you think so — get them published if you
find anybody to do it and take the proceeds, if any, for your work. I do
not want any I have got a few hundred dollars here. Going to San
Francisco next week, and hope to do better there. Tell Mary when you see
her next that I had nothing whatsoever to do with the proposal of $100 a
year subscription to Mrs. Hale. I am so grateful to them.

Well, money will come for your school, never fear — it has got to come;
if it does not come, who cares? One road is quite as good as the other.
Mother knows best. I don't know whether I am very soon going to the East
or not. If I have an opportunity, of course I will go to Indiana.

The international scheme is a good one and by all mean join it, and be
the medium of getting some Indian women's clubs to join it through you,
which is better. . . .

Things shall look up for us, never mind. As soon as the war is finished
we go to England and try to do a big work there. What do you think?
Shall I write to Mother Superior? If so, send her whereabouts. Has she
written to you? Sturdies and "Shakies" will all come round — hold on.

You are learning your lessons — that is all I want. So am I; the moment
we are fit, money and men must flow towards us. Between my nerves and
your emotion we may make a mess of everything just now. So Mother is
curing my nerves and drilling you into level-headedness — and then we
go. This time good is coming in chunks, I am sure. We will make the
foundations of the old land shake this time.

. . . I am getting cool as a cucumber — let anything come, I am ready.
The next move — any blow shall tell — not one miss — such is the next
chapter.

With all love,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
