---
title: CLVII

---
<div>

[←](156_nivedita.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](158_joe.htm)

  

[«](156_nivedita.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/165_mary.htm)  
[«](156_nivedita.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/171_margot.htm)

## CLVII

1719 TURK STREET,  
SAN FRANCISCO,  
*28th March, 1900*.

MY DEAR MARGOT, (Margaret E. Noble or Sister Nivedita)

I am so glad at your good fortune. Things have got to come round if we
are steady. I am sure you will get all the money you require here or in
England.

I am working hard; and the harder I work, the better I feel. This ill
health has done me a great good, sure. I am really understanding what
non-attachment means. And I hope very soon to be perfectly non-attached.

We put all our energies to concentrate and get attached to one thing;
but the other part, though equally difficult, we seldom pay any
attention to — the faculty of detaching ourselves at a moment's notice
from anything.

Both attachment and detachment perfectly developed make a man great and
happy.

I am so glad at Mrs. Leggett's gift of $1,000. She is working up, wait.
She has a great part to play in Ramakrishna's work, whether she knows it
or not.

I enjoyed your accounts of Prof. Geddes, and Joe has a funny account of
a clairvoyant. Things are just now beginning to turn. . . .

This letter, I think, Will reach you at Chicago. . . .

I had a nice letter from Max Gysic, the young Swiss who is a great
friend of Miss Souter. Miss Souter also sends her love, and they ask to
know the time when I come over to England. Many people are inquiring,
they say.

Things have got to come round — the seed must die underground to come up
as the tree. The last two years were the underground rotting. I never
had a struggle in the jaws of death, but it meant a tremendous upheaval
of the whole life. One such brought me to Ramakrishna, another sent me
to the U.S., this has been the greatest of all. It is gone — I am so
calm that it astonishes me sometimes!! I work every day morning and
evening, eat anything any hour — and go to bed at 12 p.m. in the night —
but such fine sleep!! I never had such power of sleeping before!

Yours with all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
