---
title: CLXI

---
<div>

[←](160_nivedita.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](162_nivedita.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/183_christine.htm) Chronology
[»](162_nivedita.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/182_nivedita.htm) Addressee
[»](162_nivedita.htm)

## CLXI

6 PLACE DES ETATS UNIS, PARIS,  
*25th Aug., 1900.*

DEAR NIVEDITA,

Your letter reached me just now. Many thanks for the kind expressions.

I gave a chance to Mrs. Bull to draw her money out of the Math; and as
she did not say anything about it, and the trust deeds were waiting here
to be executed, I got them executed duly at the British Consulate; and
they are on their way to India now.

Now I am free, as I have kept no power or authority or position for me
in the work. I also have resigned the presidentship of the Ramakrishna
Mission.

The Math etc., belong now to the immediate disciples of Ramakrishna
except myself. The presidentship is now Brahmananda's — next it will
fall on Premananda etc., etc., in turn.

I am so glad a whole load is off me, now I am happy. I have served
Ramakrishna through mistakes and success for 20 years now. I retire for
good and devote the rest of my life to myself.

I no longer represent anybody, nor am I responsible to anybody. As to my
friends, I had a morbid sense of obligation. I have thought well and
find I owe nothing to anybody; if anything, I have given my best
energies, unto death almost, and received only hectoring and
mischief-making and botheration. I am done with everyone here and in
India.

Your letter indicates that I am jealous of your new friends. You must
know once for all, I am born without jealousy, without avarice, without
the desire to rule — whatever other vices I am born with.

I never directed you before; now, after I am nobody in the work, I have
no direction whatever. I only know this much: So long as you serve
"Mother" with a whole heart, She will be your guide.

I never had any jealousy about what friends you made. I never criticised
my brethren for mixing up in anything. Only I do believe the Western
people have the peculiarity of trying to force upon others whatever
seems good to them, forgetting that what is good for you may not be good
for others. As such, I am afraid you might try to force upon others
whatever turn your mind might take in contact with new friends. That was
the only reason I sometimes tried to stop any particular influence, and
nothing else.

You are free, have your own choice, your own work. ...

Friends or foes, they are all instruments in Her hands to help us work
out our own Karma, through pleasure or pain. As such "Mother" bless them
all.

With all love and blessings,

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
