---
title: CLXII

---
<div>

[←](161_nivedita.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm) / [→](163_mother.htm)

  

[«](161_nivedita.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/192_hari.htm)  
[«](161_nivedita.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/188_sister_nivedita.htm)

## CLXII

PARIS,  
*28th August, 1900*.

DEAR NIVEDITA,

Such is life — grind, grind; and yet what else are we to do? Grind,
grind! Something will come — some way will be opened. If it does not, as
it probably never will — then, then — what then? All our efforts are
only to stave off, for a season, the great climax — death! Oh, what
would the world do without you, Death! Thou great healer!

The world, as it is, is not real, is not eternal, thank the Lord!! How
can the future be any better? That must be an effect of this one — at
least like this, if not worse!

Dreams, oh dreams! Dream on! Dream, the magic of dream, is the cause of
this life, it is also the remedy. Dream, dream, only dream! Kill dream
by dream!

I arm trying to learn French, talking to — here. Some are very
appreciative already. Talk to all the world — of the eternal riddle, the
eternal spool of fate, whose thread-end no one finds and everyone seems
to find, at least to his own satisfaction, at least for a time — to fool
himself a moment, isn't it?

Well, now great things are to be done! Who cares for great things? Why
not do small things as well? One is as good as the other. The greatness
of little things, that is what the Gita teaches — bless the old book!! .
. .

I have not had much time to think of the body. So it must be well.
Nothing is ever well here. We forget them at times, and that is being
well and doing well. . . .

We play our parts here — good or bad. When the dream is finished and we
have left the stage, we will have a hearty laugh at all this — of this
only I am sure.

 

Yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
