---
title: CLXVIII

---
<div>

[←](167_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Second
Series](epistles_second_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](../conversations_and_dialogues/i_sharat_chakravarty.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/112_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/204_christine.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/193_margot.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/207_margo.htm)

## CLXVIII

THE MATH, BELUR,  
*7th Sept., 1901.*

DEAR NIVEDITA,

We all work by bits, that is to say, in this cause. I try to keep down
the spring, but something or other happens, and the spring goes whirr,
and there you are — thinking, remembering, scribbling, scrawling, and
all that!

Well, about the rains — they have come down now in right earnest, and it
is a deluge, pouring, pouring, pouring night and day. The river is
rising, flooding the banks; the ponds and tanks have overflowed. I have
just now returned from lending a hand in cutting a deep drain to take
off the water from the Math grounds. The rain-water stands at places
some feet high. My huge stork is full of glee, and so are the ducks and
geese. My tame antelope fled from the Math and gave us some days of
anxiety in finding him out. One of my ducks unfortunately died
yesterday. She had been gasping for breath more than a week. One of my
waggish old monks says, "Sir, it is no use living in this Kali-Yuga when
ducks catch cold from damp and rain, and frogs sneeze!"

One of the geese had her plumes falling off. Knowing no other method, I
left her some minutes in a tub of water mixed with mild carbolic, so
that it might either kill or heal; and she is all right now. 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
