+++
title = "Yet another flashback"

+++
[Links to
this](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/11/07/the-prelude-to-the-philosophical-penetration/)

After we had recovered from the wounds sustained in the battle of
dvAdashAnta, we were on a train was chugging along somewhere close to
the modern boundary between the mahArATTa and karNATa country. On both
sides stretched, as far as our eye could see, the great expanse of the
holy land of bhAratavarSha. The landscape was devoid of humans but for
those in the train and the flat expanse was dotted by wild lemons
glowing golden from the rays emanating from the unrelenting eye of the
great kShatriya who watches over then men from the yonder suvargolokaH.
On the stretching field was a tall tree that had been split in half by
the vajra, much as an avrata, a dasyu, a despiser of the yaj\~na, had
been smashed by the thunderer on behalf of the bringers of idhma. In our
hand was a text on the interactions of aromatic pi-electron clouds.
Interesting as it was, our eyes were being lulled into sleep by the
steady rocking of the train. We lapsed in and out of a reverie wherein
we saw histidines, purines and pyrimidines meet with each and with
metals and their pi electron clouds merge with the empty shells of the
large metal atom or with each other. But we were just unable to focus on
the wave functions describing those delocalized electrons. For some
reason, our thought also drifted to metals in colored proteins and then
to the great Linus Pauling’s obsession with ascorbate at the same time –
these apparently unconnected issues were to connect way in the future
leading to one of the great discoveries of our life. But our reverie was
tinged by a mixture of rasa-s of another kind: the adbhuta from the
depths of the chemistry one side and that emerging from the likelihood
that we might never see lUtikA again. At this point a stark hypnagogic
vision crowded our eyes. We saw a strange biomorphic shape flash across
our field of view. It divide into two and then into four in geometric
growth. Finally, some of them were attracted towards a bright moving
spots and when they touched them died. Only those that did not touch
them did not die. But the cycles of replication went on with several
dying in each round.After many rounds of birth and death the whole field
of view exploded and vanished. Then many more bright flashes of
explosions lit the field ending into total blackness. But just before
that two phrases intensely flashed in the minds eye: “The ruby in the
crown” and the “hare’s ear.” We smiled to ourselves.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-NEenbMS1T-k/UGebptvxZmI/AAAAAAAACdQ/zvsObsMAdE8/s400/mathuraman.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/Ti9Nl7i2F4Qast5GsNUsvdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)The
mauryan mathurA puruSha with his striyau

Our journey ended as we saw Mn arrived to meet us. After exchanges on
the behavior of lanthanides that were to matter more in his life than
mine, he introduced us to his charming striyau of oppressive beauty, MC
of noble brAhmaNa birth and KM a shauNDikA: flanked by them he looked
much like the mystery man from Mathura of yore. Sometime later he
queried us: “Why do you perform these saMdhyA rites?” We retorted: “It
was you who taught us the basics of the yajuSh-es and now you ask us?”
Mn: “Ah\! Sad are those who are bound by beliefs of those who came
before them. They say you perform these yAga-s to attain suvargolokaH.
But you can get there in a rocket, before the shyena chiti ever gets
flying. And even if you can do that, do you want to get there after all
\! The man who reaches chandraloka certainly cannot live long there and
even before he reaches sUryaloka he would be verily reduced to plasma.
Let me tell you, suvarga is not up there, it is here on this pR^ithivI –
the sukha of suvarga is obtained right here in the embrace of the
splendid ladies like MC and KM. So stop wasting time on pleasing mitra
or varuNa; shape up and pursue such pleasures as I have achieved.” We
smiled to ourselves: “chUDasya kuruvinda” and “shashakarNa”.

Realizing, the divergence between us was underway, we moved our own
ways. So we decided not to go the long way to the apara-lakShmInagara.
Few days later we were returning from the apara-jIvashAla late in the
night. Suddenly, the thunderer massed great heaps of atmospheric water
in the welkin even as the marut-s began the chanting their arka-s (as
the shruti says: archanty arkaM arkiNaH) to accompany the flashes of the
vajra. We fled for cover towards a secluded looking house. To our great
surprise we also saw ST scampering towards the same house to take cover.
We knew she was in the general region but were struck by the coincidence
in timing. A guy in uniform invited was guarding the house. Most
remarkably he invited us into the porch and asked us to take a seat. It
was only when we did so did we realize what that house was. The guard
asked who we were? Before he did so, ST and me had quickly exchanged a
plan in the dramiDa bhASha, which we inferred from the guard’s accent
that he did not know. We declared our links to the powerful and
irascible taittirIyaka and the mahAdhyakSha respectively. The guard took
us in immediately to what may be called a lobby and invited us to take
seats on plush cushions. Then an assistant arrived and asked if we might
want something to eat. ST she would like to take a look directly at the
kitchen to make a decision and soon came back after having given him the
preferred menu. After a sumptuous dinner we were planning to return to
our abodes when the assistant arrived and asked if we might want rooms
for the night for free. Surprised at the power of our influence, and as
our nobody could have guessed our location we accepted the offer.
Shortly, past midnight there was the proverbial calm after the storm.
The sky had been washed clean of the pollution from the mahAnagara and
the glories of pitA dyaus shone forth. We then enticed ST to an
astronomy lesson on the terrace.

After the usual circuit of the deep sky objects and interesting
asterisms, which our occular could afford, I moved to take a look at the
jewel in the northern crown. Just in the last year even in the midst of
the great yuddha we had witnessed its “mini-minimum” with the reddening,
which left us with an image for life. We felt we had show ST the same
and struggled to make her aim the occular at the star. What is the so
significant about a star such as that one she asked?

We had sometime back read a remarkable paper from 1979 by Carl Sagan and
Bishun Khare which defined the tholins. Where did the carbon come for
these tholins we wondered. This led us in the direction of these sooty
stars. Perhaps, the precursors of the tholins were already being formed
in the outer zones of the planetary nebulae ejected by these stars. On
reading the famous S & K paper it immediately dawned on us that the
origin of life lay in the tholins and thus went back to carbon stars
(one of the most dramatic of which we had see was R Leporis, the hare’s
ear). But unlike them we felt it was not earth that the tholins
facilitated the emergence of life but in more distant locales, perhaps
on comets, or on plutino-like objects or perhaps even protoplanetary
nebulae seeded by the detritus of the carbon stars. We then moved to the
longitude of shravaNa and found shaNaishchara mounting the eastern sky.
We made ST aim at that to see Titan to get a feel for that great vessel
of tholins in the solar system. At that time we remarked that autotrophy
was a derived feature of life and these tholins suggest that
heterotrophy, or more precisely tholinovory was the most likely
primitive state for life. It is interesting that a month after we made
this statement Sagan and colleagues published a paper showing
utilization of tholins by numerous bacteria. They said: “Tholins may
have formed the base of the food chain for an early heterotrophic
biosphere before the evolution of autotrophy on the early Earth.” It is
just that even then we felt that this tholinovorous biosphere was
delivered on earth along with the tholins and it was the seeding on
earth that offered new niches for autotrophy, chemoautotrophy first and
photoautotrophy thereafter leading to the great oxygenation. We also
remarked that the lipid envelopes of our cells is a “memory” of the
tholin world and there was never anything like an iron-sulfur world.

From the stars we were made and in a star we will end\! Hence, to us the
smoke that arose from the ritual fires of ours and those of our
ancestors represents that soot which shot forth from stars which made
us.
