+++
title = "Rehabilitating king vidyAdhara and the sense of Hindu identity"

+++
[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-LfrLHmD4S40/TnUV_IPaKvI/AAAAAAAACMg/SXsjPLROaXM/s400/kaNDariya_mahAdeva.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/pdLG1zx_7EU6ph_p1STRrA?feat=embedwebsite)

**The prelude  
** tvam Adau vikramAdityaH sR^iShTo .abhUH svAMshato mayA |  
mlechCha-rUpAvatIrNAnAm asurANAM prashAntaye || (bhaTTa somadeva in the
vetAla pa\~nchaviMshati)

I generated you vikramAditya as a part of my own self to silence the
asura-s in the form of the mlechCha-s

Ekanetra remarked that there was nothing really new to state in
geopolitics: either we had prognosticated everything or the events were
too subtle for our fragile brains to comprehend. While we were sort of
fumbling with connecting the geopolitical dots, ST interrupted us and
got me talking about some other issue. Since we felt a certain
continuity in having provided a modern explanation for a problem that
our great atharvan ancestors first discovered (AV-vulgate 7.116), we
waxed on this for a while, losing sight of the geopolitical exposition.
Finally, we got around to discussing it with some renewed focus with ST
joining – in a sense we spent a while getting her up to speed so the
repetition did not sound boring. The central question that concerned us
was whether Anglospheric colonialism, i.e. control over the Hindu
territory and the Hindu sphere of influence has really ended. On these
pages we have repeatedly presented the answer as being a resounding NO.

**Erasure and fragmentation of the sacred geography in the Hindu
consciousness**  
As long as mlechCha-s operate with impunity in TSP, a former portion the
Hindu sacred geography, the colonialism cannot be said to have been
completely overcome. It should be reiterated, because many among the
Hindu elite do not understand it; the very creation of TSP and the
subsequent abundant patronage offered to it by the mlechCha-s was to
ensure that the colonial venture in the subcontinent does not end at
all. The Hindus have also internalized some subtle historical propaganda
in this regard: The mlechCha-s have been active in creating an
alternative history for the sImAnta pradesha-s. Key to their patently
false historical narrative is to push the delegitimization of Hindu
presence in this lands back in history by claiming the that gandhAra and
bAhlika were never a part of the Hindu sphere. Instead, they are handed
over to the Iranians and it is presented as though the Greeks
legitimately acquired these territories by conquering the Iranians. The
Iranian Kushana-s are presented as being cultural derivatives of
Hellenism rather than Hindu rulers. Since, the mlechCha-s have also
created a false narrative ([which is central to their own
identity](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/08/14/the-making-of-identities/))
that they are the true successors of the yavana-s they hold that these
sImanta-pradesha-s are actually a natural sphere of their activity. They
might even go as far as claiming that they actually belonged to them as
as they are the successors of the yavana-s.

**The realization**  
In past the Hindu-s close to the sImAnta-pradesha-s were concerned about
the intrusion of barbarous peoples. For example, in the
kathA-sarit-sAgara of the great kavI somadeva, viShNu tells the deva-s
that he has caused the emergence of gupta kings like vikramAditya and
trivikramasena, strengthened them by his power, to clear the land of the
bhArata-s irruptions of the dreadful mlechCha-s (i.e. hUNa-s and Iranian
invaders). The consciousness of the need to attack garjanapura (Ghazna)
and drive out the Arabs and Turks was also not lacking. Unlike the
claims of several modern historical narratives, this was not lost on
Hindu kings over a long phase of history nearly lasting 7 centuries.
That was not restricted to the kings closer to the sImAnta. [The great
chAlukya vikramAditya-04 from the south sent a force to attack the
turuShka-s from garjanaka and drive them off the
Panjab.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/05/19/the-karnata-s-in-tirabhukti-and-nepal/)
Much latter the mahArATTa-s from the south also set their objectives as
taking back the land of gandhAra.

But all this is kept largely concealed from the larger Hindu
consciousness. The journey of our own realization dawned many many moons
ago around the first time we met Ekanetra. After a long journey towards
the senAprastha we met them and we got talking about medieval history as
was customary for us. Ekanetra introduced me to the events concerning
the invasions of the accursed Sebüktegin and Mahmud of garjanaka. We
were touched deep within by the pitched battles fought against the
turuShka-s in the valiant though unsuccessful defense of the borders of
bhArata by jayapAla, AnandapAla and trilochanapAla the last Hindu kings
of Afghanistan and the western Panjab. Few months later we encountered
the material concerning the invasions of Mahmud in our history textbook.
The narrative it conveyed completely obscured not only the struggle of
the shAhIya-s but also made it appear that the Hindus were truly
imbeciles who verily “scattered like atoms before Amir Mahmud’s
assaults”. It gave the impression that the Hindus did not even know to
ply a sword or bow even as the turuShka romped all over uttarApatha and
madhyadesha. Indeed, the Hindu student perusing the textbook was left
imprinted with a sense of deep shame – the textbook might have as well
have been one from TSP, glorifying the hero of that hellhole. It was
then that it struck us that something was wrong here. The textbook was
in essence forcing down our throats a view that had been constructed by
certain early English historians of India who informed us that the
pusillanimous kings of madhyadesha had fled in terror at the approach of
Mahmud. In particular, we were struck by the statement of the English
historian Smith that the chandrAtreya monarch of jejAkabhukti retreated
in “craven flight” and “capitulated without fighting” when faced with
the turuShka assault. This really rubbed the salt in – were our rAjan-s
so weak that they were not even capable defending the turuShka rampage?
– much like our team in cricket.We wondered if the predecessor of rAnI
durgAvatI, who valiantly led her troops against the jihad of the Mogol
tyrant Akbar, would flee in so cowardly a manner, especially when their
dynasty was at the height of its power. Our textbooks and lecturers were
not the ones to answer such questions – in fact they were even unaware
of the existence of the paramAra-s or the chandrAtreya-s\!

Yet, we noticed that the record of English writers closer to the
cataclysmic events leading to their own conquest of bhArata conveyed a
rather different picture of the Hindu military capabilities in defending
their land. For example we may quote the major W. Thorn on the wars
fought against the mahArATTa armies in 1803 (as supplied by the
historian Randolf Cooper):

*“Hitherto the most incorrect notions have prevailed in this country
respecting Indian warfare; in consequence of which misconceptions, the
hardest battles have been undervalued, and the most splendid victories
have been thrown into shade. Thus the services of our armies in that
region suffer in the general estimation, and the exemplary conduct of
individuals loses its reward, owing to the distance of the scene, and
the comparatively little interest which it occupies in the public mind.
The mass of the people are also uninformed in regard to the changes that
have taken place among the warlike tribes of India, through the
introduction of European tactics and French discipline; which, combined
with their natural courage, often bordering on frenzy, and their
numerical superiority, has rendered our conflicts with them sanguinary
in the extreme … their infantry stood till the English bayonets touched
their breasts; the artillery men, with similar firmness, served their
guns without receding an inch; and when they could no longer fire, they
made use of their tollwars \[footnote 1\], till they fell under the
carriage wheels of their cannon; while the cavalry, in the same spirit,
charged up to the very muzzles of our firelocks.”*

While Thorn not unexpectedly tries to attribute the military tactics of
the Indian armies to European ideas \[Footnote 2\] he yet concedes their
natural courage and their ability to hold the line. Reading such
accounts we wondered how the natural courage of the Hindus suddenly
materialized in only in the 1800s? How come it was not there when Mahmud
of garjanaka was launching his invasions on bhArata – when our kings are
said to have fled headlong.

![](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/oimg?key=0AmaG9ycvsc7tdGticEFmNml4Q2tMV0lIVF9pZ21lM3c&oid=2&zx=mnhvgkja8ynh)

To understand this better in the year of “great quiz” we started
collecting data, which was in those days not easily accessible,
regarding the Jihads waged by the Mohammedans on the Hindus. Having
collected all data we could about these encounters, we visualized the
emerging picture (above). It became clear that the Army of Islam
episodically surged with its characteristic ferocity, followed by
troughs in which the Jihad turned flaccid. These troughs followed
periods of intense fighting in which a clear Hindu response was seen
after a tipping point of Islamic insults had been reached – the Indian
elephant had responded. In the first two centuries the Hindu armies
completely neutralized any attempts of the Arab-led Jihad to move beyond
the successes of ibn Qasim. The next two surges were led by different
Turkic tribes which had a superior military technique to Arabs – even in
this case, despite the constraints in terms of supply of horses against
the Turkic cavalry force, a comparable pattern of Hindu response could
be discerned. These studies lead us along two distinct paths – 1) the
hypothesis of the religion of peace being a “memetic prion” that
interacted to amplify certain genetic traits in the population (e.g.
monoamine oxidase genetic variants) leading to a self-sustaining cycle
to generate more Ghazis for the Jihad. This line of reasoning is only
now receiving support from genetic associations studies and provides the
explanation of what Huntington called “violence within and without” and
explains how the Jihad kept on going despite the Hindu resistance. 2) It
brought home the enormity of the Hindu struggle against Jihad which had
been glossed over by modern historians due to various influences ranging
from the English imposed narratives to the newly-wrought obfuscations of
Marxist ideology and its manifestations. It was in this context that we
began to appreciate the need for proper Hindu narratives of their heroes
who placed a wall steel against the waves of the religion of peace.

\-o-o-O-o-o-  
In 962 CE the Turkic amir Alptegin decided to wage holy war on the
Hindus. The shAhIya-s taking up the challenge, pushed back the
Mohammedan assault, and took the fort of garjanaka. However, he sent a
force to take it back in 963 CE. With this the opening round in the
second great Mohammedan surge towards India was initiated. Alptegin
purchased Sebuktegin from a pious Arab slave dealer Nasir Haji, just as
Alptegin himself had be bought by the Samanid sultan. In 965 Sebuktegin
was sent against the Hindus. The Hindu army intercepted the invading
army of Islam near Lamghan in Afghanistan and a fierce encounter took
place and the Moslems were repulsed. Over the next 8 years there were
marauding Mohammedan raids to seize women and boys. In 973 CE the
jayapAla the shAhIya king realized the great danger of the Jihad
powerfully retaliated by a raid on garjanaka; however he failed to take
Ghazni, though his effort put the Moslems on the backfoot. He also
communicated with the vijayan ruler of Khotan, pagan Turkic chiefs and
the Mongol khan of the Khitan kingdom to form a large network against
the army of Islam. In succeeding years, Alptegin died and there was a
contest between his son Ishaq, their homosexual lovers such as Pirai and
the pagan Turks like Bilgetegin and Toghan. At the end of this contest
it was Sebuktegin who was successful and became Amir of Ghazna. He
immediately prosecuted the jihad with greatest vigor by invading and
seizing Kandahar in 977 CE. Not put off by this jayapAla immediately
assembled his army and launched an attack on the Mohammedans. There was
a fierce encounter near Jalalabad and the Mohammedan army was forced to
retreat. Over the next few years there continued to be raids but on the
whole Sebuktegin had been checked. But in 991 CE Sebuktegin had
assembled a massive Ghazi force to launch a full-fledged assault on the
shAhIya-s. It was at this point that jayapAla realized he might not be
able to hold his own against powerful Islamic advance. He called for
help to the pratihAra, and the mahAsAmanta-s, the ChAhamAna-s and the
chandrAtreya-s. The Hindus put up a united front but the results were
mixed as they lost Lamghan to the Mohammedans. Nevertheless, it should
not be forgotten that the rAjpUt coalition managed to prevent further
advance of the Mohammedans in the Hindu frontier by checking their
armies near the krumu river \[Footnote 3\]. This series of events showed
that the chandrAtreya-s were willing to take forward action and were not
wimps in standing up to the Islamic terror. Indeed this action kept the
Moslem out of the way for 10 years.

But the Hindu-s were soon to be put to more severe tests soon after
Mahmud, the son of Sebuktegin, came to power between 998 and 999 and
inaugurated his reign with a jihad against the Shia Assassins of Multan.
His jihads against the Hindus began in 1001 – the very first of which
eliminated the shAhIya king jayapAla. The coming 25 years that followed
the Hindus were subject to 18 devastating invasions of the army of
Islam. The only rAjA-s who remained standing against the ghazi whirlwind
were vidyAdhara-deva the chandrAtreya, bhoja-deva the paramAra and
saMgrAmarAja of Kashmir. The first casualty of the struggle was shAhIya
dynasty – four generations of shAhIya fought with utmost valor in the
defense of the Hindu dharma. The very first assault of Mahmud in 1001 CE
overwhelmed the Hindu defenses of the Khyber pass and a huge encounter
with the old rAjA jayapAla army took place just north of puShpapura
(modern Peshawar in the terrorist state). The Hindus in an inferior
strategic position, with the Moslems commanding the heights, were routed
and their rAjA was taken prisoner to be sold as a slave in the market of
Ghazni. But before this ignominy could overtaken him jayapAla committed
suicide. With this the march of the army of Islam into the Panjab was
initiated. Despite his father’s fall the brave AnandapAla continued the
struggle by taking the help of the chandrAtreya-s and pratIhAra to
defend the rest of the Panjab. Seeing the threat of the Sunni Mahmud,
even the Shia Assassin Abdul Dawood joined hands with along side
AnandapAla’s mahAsAmanta vijayarAya of the sindhu (capital at modern Uch
in TSP) to outflank Mahmud. But they were instead outflanked by the
rapidly moving cavalry of Mahmud and the move of AnandapAla to send a
force to pincer grip Mahmud failed. There was intense fighting near
puShpapura and then south of mUlasthAna. In the latter battle the
Mohammedan chroniclers themselves admit that they were repeatedly
repulsed by vijayarAya. But Mahmud pressed on and eventually broke
through his defenses and slaughtered and plundered the Hindus ending the
last Hindu principality of the sindhu. Then he attacked the Shias and
forcibly converted Dawood to Sunnism also destroying the famous saura
temple in mUlasthAna. However, AnandapAla’s troops ambushed Mahmud while
crossing the swollen sindhu and relieved him of his plunder. Then Mahmud
proceeded on a central Asian campaign to attack Ilek Khan of Kashgar,
and deal with Anandapala subsequently. In 1008 CE having finished his
adversaries in the north the Mahmud launched a major invasion into the
Panjab descending via the Khyber pass. AnandapAla and his son
trilochanapAla along with chandrAtreya, pratIhAra and other rAjpUt and
Kashmirian troops advanced to meet him – it was clear that despite their
internal rivalry the rAjA-s realized the existential danger to the land
of the Arya-s, dharma and their very way of life from Islam and put
together an alliance.

The Hindu alliance came face to face with the army of Islam north of
Attock in the line between puShpapura and udbhANDapura (Hund in TSP) in
the biting cold of the winter of 1008 CE. There was skirmishing for 40
days in course of which Mahmud realized that he did not stand a chance
of making frontal assault on the Hindu army. He decided to take up a
fortified camp on a commanding height and wait out to see if the winter
and the possible ensuing break in the supply lines of the Hindus made
them falter. He soon realized that his advantage of height might allow
him to launch a mounted archer attack followed by a cavalry charge to
break the Hindus. He first probed in an early morning attack by sending
a mobile mounted cavalry to shower arrows on the Hindu ranks and return.
The Hindus counter-attacked with their long bow archers and having
repulsed the mobile cavalry mounted a fierce cavalry attack followed by
a massed infantry attack. The Hindu cavalry division broke through the
Moslem defenses and fell upon the Mahmud’s center killing several
thousand ghazis yearning for their boys and girls in Allah’s paradise.
Over the day a bloody battle raged and the Hindus seemed to be gaining
the upper hand until a Mahmud pressed an intense attack close to
darkness with burning arrows. AnandapAla who was leading from an
elephant ordered a retreat to regroup but came under fire himself from
sharpshooters and the tactical retreat turned disorderly. Mahmud sensed
this immediately and pressed a massive cavalry charge this broke the
Hindu order completely and they squandered what was turning to be a near
victory. The Moslem charge left several thousand Hindus dead and the
rest retreated in utter disarray. The defeat resulted in complete
smashing of the Panjab with bhImanagara (Nagarkot) and lavapura (Lahore)
fell in quick succession and AnandapAla died a couple of years later.
But trilochanapAla moving to the fort of nandana in the Salt Range along
with his son bhImapAla continued the struggle with great courage. In
1013 CE bhImapAla fought bravely trying to defend the Marigala pass
(near Rawalpindi in modern TSP). In this intense encounter bhImapAla put
down a Moslem commander Mohammed ibn Ibrahim after engaging him in a
hand-to hand combat with his sword, and turned back their army \[hence
even the Moslems acknowledge him as niDar bhIm\], but Mahmud
subsequently returned with a superior force and overwhelmed him . After
much fighting for an year the fort of nandana was undermined by Mahmud’s
siege moles and it was taken with much slaughter. In the mean time
trilochanapAla took the aid of the Kashmirian saMgrAmarAja and advanced
to fight Mahmud. This time bolstered by the Kashmirian troops the
shAhIya laid a trap for the Moslems after they crossed the Jhelum in
1014 CE. As they were trying to take the Toshmaidan pass the Hindu long
bow archers showered arrows on the Moslems from the height. When the
Moslem ranks were disarrayed by the attack, aided by the Kashmirian
cavalry, trilochanapAla engaged them in short cavalry encounters
followed by feigned retreats into the hills, followed by a major thrust
which completed routed Mahmud’s army. Knowing that he could be taken
Mahmud hastily retreated to Ghazna.

With breaching of the bulwark of the shAhIya-s in the sImAnta-pradesha-s
Mahmud took aim at the civilizational centers in bhArata to fulfill the
aims of the religion of peace. Mahmud who had been defeated by the rAjA
of Kashmir, took three years to recoup and build up his army for a big
jihad. The aged pratIhAra king rAjyapAla who had suffered heavy losses
in the campaign of the Hindu coalition to shore up AnandapAla was not
willing to risk another such effort when trilochanapAla and bhImapAla
sought his aid to fight back. He feared that in rejoining a new
coalition against the Moslems he might bear the brunt of the attack and
retreated from his main cities of sthAnIshvara and kanyAkubja hoping to
lure Mahmud deep into his kingdom. But his plan utterly failed, as
seeing this moment of weakness among the Hindus, Mahmud struck
powerfully savaging the old centers of Hindu sacred geography in deep
invasion into madhyadesha: First sthAnIshvara, the city of the great
emperor harSha whose court was embellished by some of the greatest
Sanskrit wordsmiths, then mathura the holy land of the vaiShNava-s,
pAshupatha-s and kaumAra-s and finally kanyAkubja the hoary city of the
kaushika-s were reduced to smoldering ruins in the aftermath of this
whirlwind attack of 1018. The only Hindu ruler who advanced the against
Mohammedan surge was the chandrAtreya monarch vidyAdhara-deva. Based on
Katare’s analysis of the jayavarman inscription it is clear that
vidyAdhara’s attack on the Moslem army forced them retreat from
bhAratavarSha. It is a small wonder that the Mohammedan historians are
silent on the matter that is mentioned in the above inscription:  
nira\~Nkusha-yashaH prasaraH sa jaj\~ne vidyAdharo
dharaNI-dhAraNa-vIrabAhuH |  
hammIra-vIram-uru-vAri-nidhiM pramathya pR^ithivi-bhR^itA karaTikaH
…\]  
The brave vidyAdhara is mentioned as having churned the ocean of the
amir’s army in battle. He likely encountered the Mohammedan army East of
Gwalior in a sanguinary battle and forced them to retreat. A depiction
of this battle in Khajuraho shows the crushing of Islamic warriors under
feet of chandrAtreya war elephants. Infuriated by rajyapAla-s
inefficient vidyAdhara dispatched his mahAsAmanta arjuna to depose
rAjyapAla and take over the territory – rAjyapAla, who showed no
intention to fight the Moslems, instead tried to fight arjuna and was
killed by arrow in the encounter – a sad end to the pratIhAra power
which had on early occasions manfully stood against the army of Islam in
the defense of India. Now vidyAdhara gave aid to trilochanapAla and
bhImapAla, and sent them supplies to withstand Mahmud and began
organizing a large force for the defense of bhArata. In 1019 with the
aim of annihilating the shAhIya-s and the wreaking vengeance on
vidyAdhara for his actions Mahmud returned with much fury. The
Mohammedan chroniclers mention a battle fought on the banks of the
yamunA (Moslem Jun) or some other river (Moslem Raahib) between
trilochanapAla and the Moslems. The Hindu king resolutely tried to
prevent the Mohammedans from crossing the river by showering arrows and
bringing down hundreds of Moslems. But wave after wave the ghazis kept
pressing on eventually reaching the other side with their Sultan and
engaging the Hindu army in close combat with lances and swords.
trilochanapAla personally led his men and was surrounded by a Moslem
force but he cut his way through with injuries and was relieved by
bhImapAla, who drove back the attackers. They felt it might be better to
retreat to jejAjabhukti and join the chandrAtreya-s but trilochanapAla
either died from his wounds or was assassinated shortly thereafter. With
that bhImapAla sought refuge in Kashmir. Thus, after a valiant struggle
by 1019 CE the shAhIya kingdom came to an end. Despite the loss of their
kingdom, with what ever personal wealth they had left they continued to
support Hindu educational structures in Aryavarta till the death of
bhImapAla around 1026 CE. Even a partisan of the the enemy, al Biruni,
could not help admiring them – indicating that they were good rulers who
did not give up defense of Aryavarta without the most strenuous
struggle:  
“*This Hindu Shahiya dynasty is now extinct, and of the whole there is
no longer the slightest remnant in existence. We must say that in all
their grandeur, they never slackened in the ardent desire of doing that
which is good and right, that they were men of noble sentiment and noble
bearing.*”  
It is unfortunate that modern Hindus do little to honor the memories of
these intrepid men, who even if unsuccessful, put everything into their
struggles against the evils of the rAkShasa mata.

With this the mantle of the struggle against the jihad fell upon
vidyAdhara. Analysis of the Mohammedan accounts concerning these
encounters are confused and contradictory, in contrast to their general
consistency in recording the deeds of Mahmud that are an object of great
pride for them. None of them state a proper location regarding where the
next battle with vidyAdhara took place. Based on al Athir’s account one
might reconstruct that the battle was probably joined South of Bari and
North of Gwalior along the line connecting them. We may reconstruct what
happened thus: When the two armies came face to face. Mahmud first sent
a messenger asking vidyAdhara to convert to Islam in which case he would
not go to fight. Of course vidyAdhara rebuffed this offer and prepared
for an assault. Mahmud seeing the force of 36,000 cavalry buttressed by
infantry and elephant corps amassed by vidyAdhara turned nervous.
According to most Moslem authors, except al Athir, no encounter occurred
and each claims a miraculous event in which due to Allah’s mercy
vidyAdhara fled in terror at night. Mahmud is said to have returned
victoriously to Ghazni collecting 580 elephants from vidyAdhara’s
deserted camp. The purposeful obfuscation of these accounts and the
evidence for a major battle from the Khajuraho depictions suggest that a
great battle (confirmed by al Athir) did occur and indeed the Moslems
were put to flight. Mahmud sent a band of infantry spearmen to first
probe Hindus. vidyAdhara responded similarly with his cavalry – the
carvings show that the Hindu infantry fought with khaDga-s, khukri-s and
spears. Seeing his men being overcome by the ferocity of the Hindu
infantry, Mahmud sent it his cavalry backed by camel corps with lances.
The Hindu khaDga and spear-armed cavalry moved into the field to parry
it and an intense battle occurred till night fall. By then Hindus
inflicted heavy losses on the Moslems and Mahmud saw it wise to retreat.
So he sent a messenger to vidyAdhara to seek a safe retreat – who
apparently offered it in a typical Hindu fashion and he retreated to
Ghazni.

Three years later the Amir-al-Muminin decided to teach vidyAdhara a
comprehensive lesson and at the head of a large ghazi force invaded
India again in 1022. vidyAdhara sent his sAmanta kIrtirAja the
kachChapaghAta to protect Gwalior. Mahmud tried to storm the fort of
Gwalior but after four days for persistent fighting he failed to breach
the fortifications. Avoiding a sally from kIrtirAja he advanced towards
mahotsava and boasted that he would take the fort of kAla\~Njar. But the
Mohammedan chroniclers again note a peculiar end to this campaign:
Apparently vidyAdhara sent a Sanskrit verse (Zaban-i-Hind) to Mahmud
praising his valor, which was translated to him into Persian and Arabic.
In return he also sent his congratulations praising vidyAdhara and
conferred on him 15 forts and other gifts and returned to Ghazni in
triumph. How come, we may ask, does one return in triumph after giving
15 forts and gifts to the kaffir enemy one seeks to eliminate\! This
euphemism suggests that the campaign against kAl\~Njar was an
unmitigated disaster for Mahmud. Indeed after this campaign we never see
Mahmud attempting an invasion of this part of India. We observe the same
pattern with Kashmir: After the saMgrAmarAja offered help to
trilochanapAla, who defeated Mahmud at the Toshmaidan battle, Mahmud
attacked him in 1015 CE. The Kashmirians defended their land using the
fort of loharakoTa and repulsed Mahmud. Pricked by this defeat he made a
second attempt in 1021 but was routed again by saMgrAma – he never went
the Kashmir side again. Indeed, this suggests that Mahmud recognized
superior armies and after being hammered by them rarely attempted
engaging them again. This was similarly the case when he encountered
bhojadeva after the invasion of 1025 CE. Marxist historians and their
mlechCha fellow travelers have suggested that Mahmud’s primary intention
for the raids were economic and that is why he did not hold on to the
territories that he conquered in India. But the euphemisms expressed by
the Mohammedan chroniclers regarding the encounter with vidyAdhara
indicate that this was not the case at all. Rather, he has simply been
overrated based on biased Islamic sources – he simply could not hold his
own against the more powerful Hindu armies and faced with vidyAdhara
defending from the formidable fort of kAla\~Njar, with its elaborate 8
kilometer perimeter defenses, and supply systems, he was forced to cede
the territories he had taken on account of rAjyapAla’s capitulation and
retreat. While he massed 30-40,000 cavalry before kAla\~Njar he realized
he stood no chance against it. This was probably a skillful use of a
psychological threat by vidyAdhara to reduce his morale. After that he
launched a series of attacks on the Moslems to reconquer the strongholds
taken by Mahmud and eventually nullified and reversed his advance in
madhydesha. Thus, far from having retreated it was vidyAdhara who saved
the core of North India from the second great surge of the army Islam –
it is not without reason the last great chandrAtreya inscription from
Mau remembers vidyAdhara as one of greatest of their clan, who was like
indra battling the asura-s.

Until recently the glory of his deeds stood only in the form the great
kandariyA mahadeva (above), jagadambi (originally a viShNu) and
chitragupta (a sUrya) temples, which are exemplars of the respective
Agama-s – perhaps among the greatest works of Hindu architecture
\[Footnote 4\]. The engineering and fractal patterning have never been
reproduced thereafter in Indian temple construction. Only recently
excavations in Jatkari near Khajuraho have revealed the ruins of an even
greater monument that vidyAdhara is likely to have built – the colossal
45 meter temple of rudra (the spire of kandariyA is 30 m). Among these
ruins one finds images of the wars fought by the rAjA against the army
of Islam – a testimony of his standing up to Mahmud’s assaults.
Ironically, in 2008 CE a Moslem book dealer in Uttar Pradesh uncovered a
61cm, 4.25kg copper plate inscription of vidyAdhara with his signature
from scrap metal dealers thereby rescuing a critical piece of India’s
history. This inscription, while not fully published, indicates that
vidyAdhara at kAla\~Njara was indeed the wall that blocked Islam in
India.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-4F14KMmpxD4/Tn7XHv4L13I/AAAAAAAACOI/hjky4LMI3tg/s400/khajurAho_battle.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/3dT1tlEMsHKId8ssBFfliA?feat=embedwebsite)  
\~oOo\~  
Footnote 1: tollwars or the talvAr is a curved saber of Mongol origin
that seems to have been adopted by Hindus after their prolonged
encounter with the Moslem. The first effective talvAr-s were made by the
Chingizid Mongols and used in their conflicts as an effective cavalry
weapon in their maneuvers. It was introduced to bhArata during the
invasions of the Mongols after the establishment of the Delhi Sultanate.
In the coming centuries it was adopted by the rAjpUt-s and then spread
among the mahArATTa-s with the spread of pitched cavalry encounters with
the Moslems. Traditionally, the rAjpUt-s before that pointed had used
the classical Indo-Aryan khaDga, which was also the main sword used by
the south Indian Vijayanagaran state.

Footnote 2: While the Hindus were good at adopting various tactics and
weapons from all from quarters Thorn’s blanket claim can be contested.
In actual tactics the Hindu armies diverged in many ways from the
European model – this can be the topic for a separate discussion in
itself. In fact Wellesley adopted some Hindu tactics which led to his
successes in the Indian wars but were appropriated and attributed to his
genius.

Footnote 3: The Moslem accounts of the incidents surrounding this period
is partisan, but their characteristic silence shows the lack of success
that they would have otherwise inflated. The inscription in the
chandrAtreya capital of mahotsava (Mahoba) shows that there was major
battle fought by the rAjpUt coalition in which the Hindu troops
contained the Mohammedan onslaught in the least. The chandella rAjA
dha\~Nga-deva, rAjyapAla the pratIhAra, the tomara-s and the ChahamAna-s
were the major players in the coalition.It is possible that
dha\~Ngadeva’s mother was a princess from gandhAra, which was added
incentive for him to send his forces for the defense of jayapAla.

Footnote 4: The architecture of the kharjuravAhika temples has been
primarily sensationalized for their sexual imagery leading to the
popular idea that they were temple of “sex” depicting the kAmasUtra and
displaying the erotic excesses of the chandrAtreya rAjA-s. This is not
surprising given that most modern Hindus do not understand why these
sexual depictions are found on temples and might regard them as obscene
along with mlechCha-s and turuShka-s. There are other points of
misunderstanding seen in this regard – certain white indologists and
their westernized Indian imitators also believed that these depictions
were advertisements for secular sexual services provided by devAlaya
kanyA-s. None of these really come close to their real origins. First,
it should be noted that these depictions are not limited to Khajuraho
but are found throughout India in temples of smArta, pAshupata (i.e.
kAlAmukha), saiddhAntika, pA\~ncharAtrika, kaula and bauddha affinities.
Thus, its origins go back to the ancestral Agama traditions of bhArata.
Indeed the early smArta Agama texts mention placing mithuna-s as
auspicious marks in the facades and doorways of temple. In this
tradition lie the origins of these depictions. In the sthApana tantra-s
of the kaula tradition (now largely lost with exceptions like the shilpa
prakAsha and the South Indian brahma-yAmala; not to be confused with the
original pichu-mata) these underwent an elaboration. In these Agama-s
the kAma-bandha-s are said to be depicted on temples to conceal and
divert attention away from secret maNDala-s placed beneath them such as
the kAmakalA yantra, which protect and consecrate the mandira. The
pradhAna devatA-s of this maNDala are mahAkAmakaleshvarI and kAma-shiva
and their retinue of yoginI-s of the vIrabhUmi. These yantra-s are said
to be understood and revealed only to the tAntra dIkShita-s and are
placed on the facades of temples. It is likely that these further
developments in the kaula streams were mirrored in other Agamic schools.
In this context it might be noted that the chandrAtreya-s themselves
were smArta brAhmaNa-s turned kShatriya-s who did receive kaula and
saiddhAntika dIkSha-s. One of their earliest temples is a chatushShaShTi
yoginI prAsAda of the yoginI-kaula tradition and those in the know can
deconvolute the kAmakalA yantra below some of the most famous depictions
in Khajuraho.
