+++
title = "bANa and mayUra"

+++
bANa and mayUra are reputed to have had a major rivalry in the court of
the great emperor harShavardhana of sthAnIshvara. We had earlier noted
one of mayUra’s greatest poetic master pieces the
[mayUrAShTaka](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/04/16/mayurashtakam/)
which was composed on baNa’s beautiful wife leading to much tension
between them. It was brought to our attention by the great paNDita that
the verse regarding the
[tripura-dahana](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/04/11/the-richness-of-meaning/)
that we had cited before was actually a work of bANa from amaru’s
collection of subhAShita-s. We consider that verse one of the greatest
miniature master pieces of the virtuoso. This lead us to stumble upon a
verse of mayUra on the same topic that bears striking resemblance to
that of bAna, suggesting that they possibly tried to out-do each other
by producing similar verses. Both verses have the same striking blend of
the amorous, terrifying and the tragic tropes:  
saMvyAnaaMshuka-pallaveShu taralaM veNI-guNeShu sthiraM mandaM
ka\~nchuka-sandhiShu stana-taTotsa\~NgeShu dIptArchiSham |  
Alokya tripurAvarodhana-vadhUvargasya dhUma-dhvajaM
hasta-srasta-sharAsano vijayate devo dayArdrekShaNaH ||

saMvyAna= upper garment; aMshuka=blouse; pallava=fringe of the dress;
taralam=tremulously; veNI-guNa=strands of tresses; sthiraM=firmly;
mandaM=slowly’ ka\~nchuka-sandhi= borders of the bra;
stana-taTotsa\~Nga= the contours of the breasts; dIptArchiSham= blazes
into a flame; Alokya=sees;  
tripurAvarodhana-vadhUvargasya= Attacking the throngs of tripura ladies;
dhUma-dhvajaM= column of smoke; hasta= hand; srasta= drops; sharAsano=
bow; vijayate= victory to; devo= the god; dayArdrekShaNaH= eye moist
with pity.

Roughly: Victory to the god who with eyes most with pity looks on at the
column of smoke attacking the throngs of tripura ladies, tremulously
\[seizing\] the fringes of the upper garments and blouses, firmly
\[seizing\] the strands of their tresses and slowly moving upon the
borders of their bras and the contours of their breasts blazes into a
flame.

Here is bANa’s repeated for comparison:  
kShipto hastAvalagnaH prasabham abhihato .apy AdadAno .aMshukAntaM
gR^ihNan kesheShv apAstash charaNa-nipatito nekShitaH saMbhrameNa |  
Ali\~Ngan yo .avadhUtas tripura-yuvatibhiH sAshru-netrotpalAbhiH
kAmIvArdrAparAdhaH sa dahatu duritaM shAmbhavo vaH sharAgniH ||

kShipto=cast off; hastA= hands; avalagnaH= adhering to;
prasabham=forcibly; abhihato= pushed away; .apy= moreover ; AdadAno=
taking; aMshuka= dress; antaM=fringes; gR^ihNan=seized kesheShv=hair
(locative plural); apAstash=thrown off; charaNa= foot; nipatito= fallen
down; nekShitaH= not looked at; saMbhrameNa=perturbed/fear (instrumental
singular)

Ali\~Ngan= embrace; yo= which; .avadhUtas= shaken off;
tripura-yuvatibhiH= tripura maids; sAshru-netrotpalAbhiH= tear-laden
eye-lotuses (instrumental plural); kAmiiva= like a lover; ardrAparAdhaH=
transgression of an affair; sa=he; dahatu=burn; duritaM=sins;
shAmbhavo=of shaMbhu; vaH= you; sharAgniH= arrow fire.

Roughly: Though cast off he grasped their hands, moreover though
forcibly pushed away he took hold of the fringes of their dress, though
thrown off he got into their hair; though in fearful awe he was not
looked at, he fell at their feet like a lover guilty from the affair
with another; thus, though shaken off by the tripura maids, with their
lotus eyes laden with tears, did the fire from shaMbhu’s missile embrace
them; may he burn your sins.

Another effort on the identical theme is that of the obscure poet
ma\~Ngala who is cited by many poets at least after the 900s of the
CE:  
sindUra shrIr lalATe kanaka-rasa-mayaH karNa-pArshve .avataMso vaktre
tAmbUla-rAgaH pR^ithu-kucha-kalashe ku\~NkumasyaanulepaH |  
daityAdhIshaa\~NganAnAM jaghana-parisare lAkShika-kShauma-lakShmIr
ashreyAMsi kShiNoti tripura-hara-sharodgAra-janmAnalo vaH ||

sindUra= vermilion; shrIr= auspicious mark; lalATe=on fore head;
kanaka-rasa-mayaH=gold and mercury burnished; karNa-pArshve .avataMso=
earrings of the earlobes; vaktre=on mouth; tAmbUla-rAgaH=betelnut paste;
pR^ithu-kucha-kalashe= broad pitcher-like breasts; ku\~NkumasyaanulepaH=
smearings of ku\~Nkuma; daityAdhIshaa\~NganAnAM= of the women of the
lord of the daityas; jaghana-parisare= around the hips;
lAkShika-kShauma-lakShmIr= rich carmine-dyed silk; ashreyAMsi=
infelicities; kShiNoti= removes; tripura-hara-sharodgAra-janmAnalo=fire
born from the discharge of the arrow that destroyed the three citadels;
vaH= your

May fire born from the discharge of the arrow that destroyed the three
citadels, which \[burns\] like the auspicious vermilion on mark on the
forehead of the women of the lord the daitya-s, like the gold and
mercury burnished earrings on their lobes, the betelnut paste on their
mouths, like the ku\~Nkuma smearings on their broad pitcher-like breasts
and like the rich carmine-dyed silk around their hips, remove your
infelicities.

This verse by ma\~Ngala, while ornate, at least to our tastes, seems a
less smooth than those of the masters bANa and mayUra. In any case these
verses offer some interesting lifestyle information about the early
medieval period of Hindu India: 1) Three terms of female attire:
ka\~nchuka, aMshuka and saMvyAna suggest that multiply layered upper
garments were worn by women since at least the 600s of the CE contrary
to the claims made based on the iconography.  
2\) ma\~Ngala’s verse provides evidence for lAkShika, i.e. the carmine
dye extracted from the scale insect *Laccifer lacca* being used to dye
silk. Of course other uses of the lAkSha (AV-vulgate 5.5), as a plaster
for bone fractures, or in making flammable structures (the kaurava plot
in the bhArata), or to extract medicinal compounds are widely seen in
old Sanskrit literature.
