+++
title = "The engineer, the dead fish and the bag of earth-the End"

+++
[From
Part-V](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/05/29/the-engineer-the-dead-fish-and-the-bag-of-earth-v/ "The engineer, the dead fish and the bag of earth-V")  
kathA-puchChaM  
Viruses have been around since the beginning of life and locked in
conflict with cells and other viruses since then. In course of this epic
conflict they have given genes to cells and taken genes from them. These
exchanged genes usually code for weaponry used in these battles fought
from times immemorial. The fact is without this weaponry, life as we
know it would not exist and we ourselves owe our very existence to such.
So indeed such is the story of life in a nutshell – there is no life for
the unarmed. Hence, the vipra who knows this becomes a seer who has seen
and recites the following brahma-vAkya-s of life:  
sarvo vai menyA jivati | jivo vai menyAM pratiShThitaH | mener vai
jIvasya nAnA rupANi saMbhavanti ||

Time had passed by and some had become oblations in the great iShTi to
the buffalo-riding son of vivasvAn. Others were waiting for their turn
to become samidh-s in that offering from which none escapes. Vidrum,
Sharvamanyu, Somakhya and Indrasena were thankful that they had not yet
been offered. It was late one night they were seated at the table after
dinner and reminiscing of the past. Somakhya: “Vidrum, there is
something in the story that perhaps only you might be able to throw
light on.” Vidrum: “It is all very painful but then this is what I
believe transpired. It appears Vrishchika tipped off the IB agent who
was active on this matter. He had obtained intelligence that the
mlechCha-s had to passed the viruses on their close Islamic ally Saudi
Arabia to use on Iran. Faqih ibn al-Ass was here to study how it was
being deployed so that his agents could do the same in Iran. He had come
under the guise of learning some technical aspects relating to a
bat-borne virus in his country. Thus, he had managed to get biological
material into the country. Acting on this intelligence, the IB agent
asked me if I had anything to say about Tom, Harry and Faqih ibn al-Ass.
I told him all that I knew and mentioned that Tom and Harry had fallen
out with me and were to leave shortly. He kept a close watch on them.
Just before leaving the agent caught Harry admonishing ibn al-Ass as to
why he had brought units of the vaccine with him into bhArata and asked
him to destroy them immediately. To this he answered that he had merely
got them as a precaution. However, our IB agent had the intelligence
that in reality he intended to pass them over to the Mujahideen al-Hind
in course of a meeting he was to have with their leader in the auspices
of the Saudi Arabian embassy. The IB agent saw the opportunity to get
hold of the vaccine in the process. I was seeking revenge for Meghana’s
murder and suggested to him we not just get hold of the vaccine but also
retaliate. So I obtained the virus you guys designed from Vrishchika and
handed it over to the IB agent. In the mean time the two mlechCha-s
wanted some virus samples from here for their study. But their
praNidhi-s had informed them that if they tried to sneak them out the
might be caught. Hence, they decided to use their ally Faqih ibn al-Ass
who had already obtained the paperwork for taking some biological
material back. He came to me asking if he could have some samples. While
I was holding him in conversation the IB agent got to the freezer where
he kept stuff and replaced it with our engineered virus and took away
his vaccine samples. In the mean time I too gave him the samples that in
reality contained our engineered virus. I believe you may know more of
the rest of the story.”

Somakhya: “Ah\! That’s how it played out. I believe Faqih ibn al-Ass was
given a royal entrance into the mlechCha precincts for they believed
they knew all about what he was carrying. He gave the spiked stuff to
Dick Shuman with whom he got playing with them in cell-culture and
animal experiments. I believe it was the sloppiness of al-Ass which
ultimately proved the game-changer. Things got out of hand in course of
his experimental training and the rest as they say is history. Little
did I know when I first read of Varoli’s work that it would spark such
events. But then let’s not forget that Varoli was not the first to
invent these, her namesake (e.g. Cotesia) had stumbled on this strategy
with polydnaviruses and nudiviruses to overpower kaMbala-kITaka-s
millions of years ago\!”
