+++
title = "Remembering Emperor Julian"

+++
On 26th June 363 CE the [great philosopher-emperor
Julian](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/27/emperor-julian/ "Emperor Julian")
died from a wound that was inflicted in all likelihood by a Christian
traitor in his own ranks (said to be sent by Christian saint Basil for
his assassination). He was retreating after having failed to take the
Iranian capital city of Ctesiphon led by Shapur-II, who was believed to
have been conferred invincibility by Mithra and Ahura Mazda. The
untimely death of Julian, aged 32, changed the history of the world
itself – no longer could the dreadful cult of Jeshua ibn Yusuf be held
back. Consequently, it along with its younger sister cult was to bring
misery to the whole world. Hence, in memory of this great heathen
philosopher-emperor we post his letter from 362 CE to Arsacius the
heathen high-priest of Galatia while he was on his way to Antioch on a
campaign (translated from Greek in the Loeb Series):

“*The Hellenic religion does not yet prosper as I desire, and it is the
fault of those who profess it; for the worship of the gods is on a
splendid and magnificent scale, surpassing every prayer and every hope.
May Adrasteia pardon my words, for indeed no one, a little while ago,
would have ventured even to pray for a change of such a sort or so
complete within so short a time. Why, then, do we think that this is
enough, why do we not observe that it is their benevolence to strangers,
their care for the graves of the dead and the pretended holiness of
their lives that have done most to increase atheism? I believe that we
ought really and truly to practice every one of these virtues. And it is
not enough for you alone to practice them, but so must all the priests
in Galatia, without exception. Either shame or persuade them into
righteousness or else remove them from their priestly office, if they do
not, together with their wives, children and servants, attend the
worship of the gods but allow their servants or sons or wives to show
impiety towards the gods and honor atheism more than piety.*

*In the second place, admonish them that no priest may enter a theater
or drink in a tavern or control any craft or trade that is base and not
respectable. Honor those who obey you, but those who disobey, expel from
office. In every city establish frequent hostels in order that strangers
may profit by our benevolence; I do not mean for our own people only,
but for others also who are in need of money. I have but now made a plan
by which you may be well provided for this; for I have given directions
that 30,000 modii of grain shall be assigned every year for the whole of
Galatia, and 60,000 sextarii of wine. I order that one-fifth of this be
used for the poor who serve the priests, and the remainder be
distributed by us to strangers and beggars. For it is disgraceful that,
when no Jew ever has to beg, and the impious Galilaeans support not only
their own poor but ours as well, all men see that our people lack aid
from us. Teach those of the Hellenic religion to contribute to public
service of this sort, and the Hellenic villages to offer their first
fruits to the gods ; and accustom those who love the Hellenic religion
to these good works by teaching them that this was our practice of old.*

*At any rate Homer makes Eumaeus say: “Stranger, it is not lawful for
me, not even though a baser man than you should come, to dishonor a
stranger. For from Zeus come all strangers and beggars. And a gift,
though small, is precious.” Then let us not, by allowing others to outdo
us in good works, disgrace by such remissness, or rather, utterly
abandon, the reverence due to the gods. If I hear that you are carrying
out these orders I shall be filled with joy. As for the government
officials, do not interview them often at their homes, but write to them
frequently. And when they enter the city no priest must go to meet them,
but only meet them within the vestibule when they visit the temples of
the gods. Let no soldier march before them into the temple, but any who
will may follow them; for the moment that one of them passes over the
threshold of the sacred precinct he becomes a private citizen.*

*For you yourself, as you are aware, have authority over what is within,
since this is the bidding of the divine ordinance. Those who obey it are
in very truth respectful of the gods, while those who oppose it with
arrogance are vainglorious and empty-headed. I am ready to assist
Pessinus if her people succeed in winning the favor of the Mother of the
Gods. But, if they neglect her, they are not only not free from blame,
but, not to speak harshly, let them beware of reaping my enmity also.
For it is not lawful for me to cherish or to pity men who are the
enemies of the immortal gods. Therefore persuade them, if they claim my
patronage, that the whole community must become suppliants of the Mother
of the Gods.*”

## Notes  
● Adrasteia: The Loeb translation says that Adrasteia is Nemesis.
However, it should be noted that in the account of the birth of the
great god Zeus Adrasteia is also termed Themis. The epithet is also used
for Rhea, the deva-mAtR^i of the yavana-s and some other goddesses.
Here, she is the fate goddess probably identified with the
devAnAM-mAtR^i mentioned at the end of the letter (the cognate of the
Hindu aditi).

● When Julian uses the term “atheist” or “impious Galilaeans” he means
the pretonmatta-s, i.e. the worshipers of Yeshua ibn Yusuf. They are
atheists as they dishonor and prevent the worship of the theoi (yavana
devAH).

● Julian notes the age-old practice of pretAcharin-s of trying to win
converts by way of charity to strangers and the poor. What was happening
in 362 CE in the Roman empire is also happening today in our own holy
land, the last bastion of Indo-European heathenism. Literally hundreds
of church organizations and their covert assistants in the form of
non-governmental organizations are preying upon the Hindu poor in the
very same way. In this they were aided by the previous UPA government
headed by our own Helena and a rather inappropriate and dull-witted
cognate of Constantine. Yet, with their memetic immune systems disarmed
by the preta virus, the average Hindus do not see the dangers of the
encroaching death-sentence being imposed on them by the pretamata. From
this letter of emperor Julian we may infer that the average Hellenes
were similarly lax and uninformed about the noose cast around them by
pretAcharin-s. Hindus today show less awareness than even what they
seemed to have in the days of Julian. We learn from the Roman histories
that gupta, Bactrian, pANDyan, and shrIlankan emissaries from India had
journeyed to Julian’s court to congratulate him “on account of learning
of his knowledge of justice”. It is conceivable that this means that
they recognized the revival of heathenism by him.

● The solution Julian proposes to counter the pretamata is to set up
heathen charities supported by the heathen state that would render the
preta activity in this regard superfluous. Indeed, the Hindu
organizations like the RSS have been attempting this, but unfortunately
the Hindu state rendered comatose by the evil of secularism and several
rich temples fail to do so.

● Importantly, Julian calls upon Arsacius to have everyone participate
in Hellenic religion, by persuasion or shaming so that they are not
drawn towards the pretamata at the expense of heathenism. He recognizes
the need for this to be an important step to counter the preta religion
from taking hold, especially among the members of the family and
servants. In modern India, again under the toxicity of secularism the
government allows subtle and covert Galilaean memes to be broadcast on
television, thereby softening the population for the action of the
churches and NGOs. If the Hindu nation wishes to survive it needs
squeeze out the pretamata from every avenue of public discourse and
replace it not by modern atheism but by the Hindu religion. Moreover, in
India the Babiastic religions could colonize niches which are vacated by
the pretonmAda, if and when it is squeezed out, much like *Clostridium
difficile* after antibiotic treatment. Hence, the Julian plan is of
utmost importance.

● It is interesting to note that Julian insists that the priests observe
their “brAhmaNa-dharma”: He admonishes them regarding drinking at
taverns or participating in disreputable activities.

● One may note the lucidity of his concluding statement where he makes
clear that he cannot pity anyone who goes against the “deva-dharma”. In
modern India, not one ruler has been able to say this as clearly as
Julian. When will we hear the words: “**The Indian state cannot cherish
or pity anyone who goes against the deva-dharma.**” With this in mind
one cannot but have a sinking feeling that the Hindus are following the
footsteps of the Hellenes.
