---
title: ON PROFESSOR MAX MÜLLER

---
<div>

[←](on_dr_paul_deussen.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](..%5Cvolume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](sketch_of_the_life_of_pavhari_baba.htm)

  

## ON PROFESSOR MAX MÜLLER

(Written for the *Brahmâvadin*, from London, June 6, 1896.)

Though the ideal of work of our *Brahmavâdin* should always be
"कर्मण्येवाधिकारस्ते मा फलेषु कदाचन — To work thou hast the right, but
never to the fruits thereof", yet no sincere worker passes out of the
field of activity without making himself known and catching at least a
few rays of light.

The beginning of our work has been splendid, and the steady earnestness
shown by our friends is beyond all praise. Sincerity of conviction and
purity of motive will surely gain the day; and even a small minority,
armed with these, is surely destined to prevail against all odds.

Keep away from all insincere claimants to supernatural illumination; not
that such illumination is impossible, but, my friends, in this world of
ours "lust, or gold, or fame" is the hidden motive behind ninety per
cent of all such claims, and of the remaining ten per cent, nine per
cent are cases which require the tender care of physicians more than the
attention of metaphysicians.

The first great thing to accomplish is to establish a character, to
obtain, as we say, the प्रतिष्ठिता प्रज्ञा (established Wisdom). This
applies equally to individuals and to organised bodies of individuals.
Do not fret because the world looks with suspicion at every new attempt,
even though it be in the path of spirituality. The poor world, how often
has it been cheated! The more the संसार that is, the worldly aspect of
life, looks at any growing movement with eyes of suspicion, or, even
better still, presents to it a semi-hostile front, so much the better is
it for the movement. If there is any truth this movement has to
disseminate, any need it is born to supply, soon will condemnation be
changed into praise, and contempt converted into love. People in these
days are apt to take up religion as a means to some social or political
end. Beware of this. Religion is its own end. That religion which is
only a means to worldly well-being is not religion, whatever else it may
be; and it is sheer blasphemy against God and man to hold that man has
no other end than the free and full enjoyment of all the pleasure of his
senses.

Truth, purity, and unselfishness — wherever these are present, there is
no power below or above the sun to crush the possessor thereof. Equipped
with these, one individual is able to face the whole universe in
opposition.

Above all, beware of compromises. I do not mean that you are to get into
antagonism with anybody, but you have to hold on to your own principles
in weal or woe and never adjust them to others' "fads" through the greed
of getting supporters. Your Âtman is the support of the universe — whose
support do you stand in need of? Wait with patience and love and
strength; if helpers are not ready now, they will come in time. Why
should we be in a hurry? The real working force of all great work is in
its almost unperceived beginnings.

Whoever could have thought that the life and teachings of a boy born of
poor Brâhmin parents in a wayside Bengal village would, in a few years,
reach such distant lands as our ancestors never even dreamed of? I refer
to Bhagavan Ramâkrishna. Do you know that Prof. Max Müller has already
written an article on Shri Ramakrishna for the *Nineteenth Century*, and
will be very glad to write a larger and fuller account of his life and
teachings if sufficient materials are forthcoming? What an extraordinary
man is Prof. Max Müller! I paid a visit to him a few days ago. I should
say, that I went to pay my respects to him, for whosoever loves Shri
Ramakrishna, whatever be his or her sect, or creed, or nationality, my
visit to that person I hold as a pilgrimage. "मद्भक्तानां च ये भक्तास्ते
मे भक्ततमा मताः — They who are devoted to those who love Me — they are
My best devotees." Is that not true?

The Professor was first induced to inquire about the power behind, which
led to sudden and momentous changes in the life of the late Keshab
Chandra Sen, the great Brâhmo leader; and since then, he has been an
earnest student and admirer of the life and teachings of Shri
Ramakrishna. "Ramakrishna is worshipped by thousands today, Professor",
I said. "To whom else shall worship be accorded, if not to such", was
the answer. The Professor was kindness itself, and asked Mr. Sturdy and
myself to lunch with him. He showed us several colleges in Oxford and
the Bodleian library. He also accompanied us to the railway station; and
all this he did because, as he said, "It is not every day one meets a
disciple of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa."

The visit was really a revelation to me. That nice little house in its
setting of a beautiful garden, the silverheaded sage, with a face calm
and benign, and forehead smooth as a child's in spite of seventy
winters, and every line in that face speaking of a deep-seated mine of
spirituality somewhere behind; that noble wife, the helpmate of his life
through his long and arduous task of exciting interest, overriding
opposition and contempt, and at last creating a respect for the thoughts
of the sages of ancient India — the trees, the flowers, the calmness,
and the clear sky — all these sent me back in imagination to the
glorious days of Ancient India, the days of our Brahmarshis and
Râjarshis, the days of the great Vânaprasthas, the days of Arundhatis
and Vasishthas.

It was neither the philologist nor the scholar that I saw, but a soul
that is every day realising its oneness with the Brahman, a heart that
is every moment expanding to reach oneness with the Universal. Where
others lose themselves in the desert of dry details, he has struck the
well-spring of life. Indeed his heartbeats have caught the rhythm of the
Upanishads  "तमेवैकं जानथ आत्मानमन्या वाचो विमुञ्चथ — Know the Atman
alone, and leave off all other talk."

Although a world-moving scholar and philosopher, his learning and
philosophy have only led him higher and higher to the realisation of the
Spirit, his अपरा विद्या (lower knowledge) has indeed helped him to reach
the परा विद्या (higher knowledge). This is real learning. विद्या ददाति
विनयम् — "Knowledge gives humility." Of what use is knowledge if it does
not show us the way to the Highest?

And what love he bears towards India! I wish I had a hundredth part of
that love for my own motherland! Endued with an extraordinary, and at
the same time intensely active mind, he has lived and moved in the world
of Indian thought for fifty years or more, and watched the sharp
interchange of light and shade in the interminable forest of Sanskrit
literature with deep interest and heartfelt love, till they have all
sunk into his very soul and coloured his whole being.

Max Müller is a Vedantist of Vedantists. He has, indeed, caught the real
soul of the melody of the Vedanta, in the midst of all its settings of
harmonies and discords — the one light that lightens the sects and
creeds of the world, the Vedanta, the one principle of which all
religions are only applications. And what was Ramakrishna Paramahamsa?
The practical demonstration of this ancient principle, the embodiment of
India that is past, and a foreshadowing of the India that is to be, the
bearer of spiritual light unto nations. The jeweller alone can
understand the worth of jewels; this is an old proverb. Is it a wonder
that this Western sage does study and appreciate every new star in the
firmament of Indian thought, before even the Indians themselves realise
its magnitude?

"When are you coming to India? Every heart there would welcome one who
has done so much to place the thoughts of their ancestors in the true
light", I said. The face of the aged sage brightened up — there was
almost a tear in his eyes, a gentle nodding of the head, and slowly the
words came out: "I would not return then; you would have to cremate me
there." Further questions seemed an unwarrantable intrusion into realms
wherein are stored the holy secrets of man's heart. Who knows but that
it was what the poet has said—

तच्चेतसा स्मरति नूनमबोधपूर्वं ।  
भावस्थिराणि जननान्तरसौहृदानि ॥

—"He remembers with his mind the friendships of former births, firmly
rooted in his heart."

His life has been a blessing to the world; and may it be many, many
years more, before he changes the present plane of his existence!

</div>
