---
title: SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF PAVHARI BABA

---
<div>

[←](on_professor_max_muller.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](aryans_and_tamilians.htm)

  

## SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF PAVHARI BABA

To help the suffering world was the gigantic task to which the Buddha
gave prominence, brushing aside for the time being almost all other
phases of religion; yet he had to spend years in self-searching to
realise the great truth of the utter hollowness of clinging to a selfish
individuality. A more unselfish and untiring worker is beyond our most
sanguine imagination: yet who had harder struggles to realise the
meaning of things than he? It holds good in all times that the greater
the work, the more must have been the power of realisation behind.
Working out the details of an already laid out masterly plan may not
require much concentrated thought to back it, but the great impulses are
only transformed great concentrations. The theory alone perhaps is
sufficient for small exertions, but the push that creates the ripple is
very different from the impulsion that raises the wave, and yet the
ripple is only the embodiment of a bit of the power that generates the
wave.

Facts, naked facts, gaunt and terrible may be; truth, bare truth, though
its vibrations may snap every chord of the heart; motive selfless and
sincere, though to reach it, limb after limb has to be lopped off — such
are to be arrived at, found, and gained, before the mind on the lower
plane of activity can raise huge work-waves. The fine accumulates round
itself the gross as it rolls on through time and becomes manifest, the
unseen crystallises into the seen, the possible becomes the practical,
the cause the effect, and thought, muscular work.

The cause, held back by a thousand circumstances, will manifest itself,
sooner or later, as the effect; and potent thought, however powerless at
present, will have its glorious day on the plane of material activity.
Nor is the standard correct which judges of everything by its power to
contribute to our sense-enjoyment.

The lower the animal, the more is its enjoyment in the senses, the more
it lives in the senses. Civilisation, true civilization, should mean the
power of taking the animal-man out of his sense-life — by giving him
visions and tastes of planes much higher — and not external comforts.

Man knows this instinctively. He may not formulate it to himself under
all circumstances. He may form very divergent opinions about the life of
thought. But it is there, pressing itself to the front in spite of
everything, making him pay reverence to the hoodoo-worker, the
medicine-man, the magician, the priest, or the professor of science. The
growth of man can only be gauged by his power of living in the higher
atmosphere where the senses are left behind, the amount of the pure
thought-oxygen his lungs can breathe in, and the amount of time he can
spend on that height.

As it is, it is an obvious fact that, with the exception of what is
taken up by the necessities of life, the man of culture is loth to spend
his time on so-called comforts, and even necessary actions are performed
with lessened zeal, as the process moves forward.

Even luxuries are arranged according to ideas and ideals, to make them
reflect as much of thought-life as possible — and this is Art.

"As the one fire coming into the universe is manifesting itself in every
form, and yet is more besides" — yes, infinitely more besides! A bit,
only a small bit, of infinite thought can be made to descend to the
plane of matter to minister to our comfort — the rest will not allow
itself to be rudely handled. The superfine always eludes our view and
laughs at our attempts to bring it down. In this case, Mohammed must go
to the mountain, and no "nay". Man must raise himself to that higher
plane if he wants to enjoy its beauties, to bathe in its light, to feel
his life pulsating in unison with the Cause-Life of the universe.

It is knowledge that opens the door to regions of wonder, knowledge that
makes a god of an animal: and that knowledge which brings us to That,
"knowing which everything else is known" (the heart of all knowledge —
whose pulsation brings life to all sciences — the science of religion)
is certainly the highest, as it alone can make man live a complete and
perfect life in thought. Blessed be the land which has styled it
"supreme science"!

The principle is seldom found perfectly expressed in the practical, yet
the ideal is never lost. On the one hand, it is our duty never to lose
sight of the ideal, whether we can approach it with sensible steps, or
crawl towards it with imperceptible motion: on the other hand, the truth
is, it is always loosening in front of us — though we try our best to
cover its light with our hands before our eyes.

The life of the practical is in the ideal. It is the ideal that has
penetrated the whole of our lives, whether we philosophise, or perform
the hard, everyday duties of life. The rays of the ideal, reflected and
refracted in various straight or tortuous lines, are pouring in through
every aperture and windhole, and consciously or unconsciously, every
function has to be performed in its light, every object has to be seen
transformed, heightened, or deformed by it. It is the ideal that has
made us what we are, and will make us what we are going to be. It is the
power of the ideal that has enshrouded us, and is felt in our joys or
sorrows, in our great acts or mean doings, in our virtues and vices.

If such is the power of the ideal over the practical, the practical is
no less potent in forming the ideal. The truth of the ideal is in the
practical. The fruition of the ideal has been through the sensing of the
practical. That the ideal is there is a proof of the existence of the
practical somehow, somewhere. The ideal may be vaster, yet it is the
multiplication of little bits of the practical. The ideal mostly is the
summed-up, generalized, practical units.

The power of the ideal is in the practical. Its work on us is in and
through the practical. Through the practical, the ideal is brought down
to our sense-perception, changed into a form fit for our assimilation.
Of the practical we make the steps to rise to the ideal. On that we
build our hopes; it gives us courage to work.

One man who manifests the ideal in his life is more powerful than
legions whose words can paint it in the most beautiful colours and spin
out the finest principles.

Systems of philosophy mean nothing to mankind, or at best only
intellectual gymnastics, unless they are joined to religion and can get
a body of men struggling to bring them down to practical life with more
or less success. Even systems having not one positive hope, when taken
up by groups and made somewhat practical, had always a multitude; and
the most elaborate positive systems of thought withered away without it.

Most of us cannot keep our activities on a par with our thought-lives.
Some blessed ones can. Most of us seem to lose the power of work as we
think deeper, and the power of deep thought if we work more. That is why
most great thinkers have to leave to time the practical realisation of
their great ideals. Their thoughts must wait for more active brains to
work them out and spread them. Yet, as we write, comes before us a
vision of him, the charioteer of Arjuna, standing in his chariot between
the contending hosts, his left hand curbing the fiery steeds — a
mail-clad warrior, whose eagle-glance sweeps over the vast army, and as
if by instinct weighs every detail of the battle array of both parties —
at the same time that we hear, as it were, falling from his lips and
thrilling the awestruck Arjuna, that most marvellous secret of work: "He
who finds rest in the midst of activity, and activity in rest, he is the
wise amidst men, he the Yogi, he is the doer of all work" (Gita, IV.
18).

This is the ideal complete. But few ever reach it. We must take things
as they are, therefore, and be contented to piece together different
aspects of human perfection, developed in different individuals.

In religion we have the man of intense thought, of great activity in
bringing help to others, the man of boldness and daring
self-realisation, and the man of meekness and humility.

The subject of this sketch was a man of wonderful humility and intense
self-realisation.

Born of Brâhmin parents in a village near Guzi, Varanasi, Pavhâri Bâbâ,
as he was called in after life, came to study and live with his uncle in
Ghazipur, when a mere boy. At present, Hindu ascetics are split up into
the main divisions of Sannyâsins, Yogis, Vairâgis, and Panthis. The
Sannyasins are the followers of Advaitism after Shankarâchârya; the
Yogis, though following the Advaita system, are specialists in
practicing the different systems of Yoga; the Vairagis are the dualistic
disciples of Râmânujâchârya and others; the Panthis, professing either
philosophy, are orders founded during the Mohammedan rule. The uncle of
Pavhari Baba belonged to the Ramanuja or Shri sect, and was a Naishthika
Brahmachârin, i.e. one who takes the vow of lifelong celibacy. He had a
piece of land on the banks of the Ganga, about two miles to the north of
Ghazipur, and had established himself there. Having several nephews, he
took Pavhari Baba into his home and adopted him, intending him to
succeed to his property and position.

Not much is known of the life of Pavhari Baba at this period. Neither
does there seem to have been any indication of those peculiarities which
made him so well known in after years. He is remembered merely as a
diligent student of Vyâkarana and Nyâya, and the theology of his sect,
and as an active lively boy whose jollity at times found vent in hard
practical jokes at the expense of his fellow-students.

Thus the future saint passed his young days, going through the routine
duties of Indian students of the old school; and except that he showed
more than ordinary application to his studies, and a remarkable aptitude
for learning languages, there was scarcely anything in that open,
cheerful, playful student life to foreshadow the tremendous seriousness
which was to culminate in a most curious and awful sacrifice.

Then something happened which made the young scholar feel, perhaps for
the first time, the serious import of life, and made him raise his eyes,
so long riveted on books, to scan his mental horizon critically and
crave for something in religion which was a fact, and not mere
book-lore. His uncle passed away. One face on which all the love of that
young heart was concentrated had gone, and the ardent boy, struck to the
core with grief, determined to supply the gap with a vision that can
never change.

In India, for everything, we want a Guru. Books, we Hindus are
persuaded, are only outlines. The living secrets must be handed down
from Guru to disciple, in every art, in every science, much more so in
religion. From time immemorial earnest souls in India have always
retired to secluded spots, to carry on uninterrupted their study of the
mysteries of the inner life, and even today there is scarcely a forest,
a hill, or a sacred spot which rumour does not consecrate as the abode
of a great sage. The saying is well known:

"The water is pure that flows.  
The monk is pure that goes."

As a rule, those who take to the celibate religious life in India spend
a good deal of their life in journeying through various countries of the
Indian continent, visiting different shrines — thus keeping themselves
from rust, as it were, and at the same time bringing religion to the
door of everyone. A visit to the four great sacred places, situated in
the four corners of India, is considered almost necessary to all who
renounce the world.

All these considerations may have had weight with our young
Brahmacharin, but we are sure that the chief among them was the thirst
for knowledge. Of his travels we know but little, except that, from his
knowledge of Dravidian languages, in which a good deal of the literature
of his sect is written, and his thorough acquaintance with the old
Bengali of the Vaishnavas of Shri Chaitanya's order, we infer that his
stay in Southern India and Bengal could not have been very short.

But on his visit to one place, the friends of his youth lay great
stress. It was on the top of mount Girnâr in Kathiawar, they say, that
he was first initiated into the mysteries of practical Yoga.

It was this mountain which was so holy to the Buddhists. At its foot is
the huge rock on which is inscribed the first-deciphered edict of the
"divinest of monarchs", Asoka. Beneath it, through centuries of
oblivion, lay the conclave of gigantic Stupas, forest covered, and long
taken for hillocks of the Girnar range. No less sacred is it still held
by the sect of which Buddhism is now thought to be a revised edition,
and which strangely enough did not venture into the field of
architectural triumphs till its world-conquering descendant had melted
away into modern Hinduism. Girnar is celebrated amongst Hindus as having
been sanctified by the stay of the great Avadhuta Guru Dattâtreya, and
rumour has it that great and perfected Yogis are still to be met with by
the fortunate on its top.

The next turning-point in the career of our youthful Brahmacharin we
trace to the banks of the Ganga some where near Varanasi, as the
disciple of a Sannyasin who practiced Yoga and lived in a hole dug in
the high bank of the river. To this yogi can be traced the
after-practice of our saint, of living inside a deep tunnel, dug out of
the ground on the bank of the Ganga near Ghazipur. Yogis have always
inculcated the advisability of living in caves or other spots where the
temperature is even, and where sounds do not disturb the mind. We also
learn that he was about the same time studying the Advaita system under
a Sannyasin in Varanasi.

After years of travel, study, and discipline, the young Brahmacharin
came back to the place where he had been brought up. Perhaps his uncle,
if alive, would have found in the face of the boy the same light which
of yore a greater sage saw in that of his disciple and exclaimed,
"Child, thy face today shines with the glory of Brahman!" But those that
welcomed him to his home were only the companions of his boyhood — most
of them gone into, and claimed for ever by, the world of small thought
and eternal toil.

Yet there was a change, a mysterious — to them an awe-inspiring —
change, in the whole character and demeanour of that school-day friend
and playmate whom they had been wont to understand. But it did not
arouse in them emulation, or the same research. It was the mystery of a
man who had gone beyond this world of trouble and materialism, and this
was enough. They instinctively respected it and asked no questions.

Meanwhile, the peculiarities of the saint began to grow more and more
pronounced. He had a cave dug in the ground, like his friend near
Varanasi, and began to go into it and remain there for hours. Then began
a process of the most awful dietary discipline. The whole day he worked
in his little Âshrama, conducted the worship of his beloved Râmachandra,
cooked good dinners — in which art he is said to have been
extraordinarily proficient — distributed the whole of the offered food
amongst his friends and the poor, looked after their comforts till night
came, and when they were in their beds, the young man stole out, crossed
the Ganga by swimming, and reached the other shore. There he would spend
the whole night in the midst of his practices and prayers, come back
before daybreak and wake up his friends, and then begin once more the
routine business of "worshipping others", as we say in India.

His own diet, in the meanwhile, was being attenuated every day, till it
came down, we are told, to a handful of bitter Nimba leaves, or a few
pods of red pepper, daily. Then he gave up going nightly to the woods on
the other bank of the river and took more and more to his cave. For days
and months, we are told, he would be in the hole, absorbed in
meditation, and then come out. Nobody knows what he subsisted on during
these long intervals, so the people called him Pav-âhâri (or air-eater)
Bâbâ (or father).

He would never during his life leave this place. Once, however, he was
so long inside the cave that people gave him up as dead, but after a
long time, the Baba emerged and gave a Bhândârâ (feast) to a large
number of Sâdhus.

When not absorbed in his meditations, he would be living in a room above
the mouth of his cave, and during this time he would receive visitors.
His fame began to spread, and to Rai Gagan Chandra Bahadur of the Opium
Department, Ghazipur — a gentleman whose innate nobility and
spirituality have endeared him to all — we owe our introduction to the
saint.

Like many others in India, there was no striking or stirring external
activity in this life. It was one more example of that Indian ideal of
teaching through life and not through words, and that truth bears fruit
in those lives only which have become ready to receive. Persons of this
type are entirely averse to preaching what they know, for they are for
ever convinced that it is internal discipline alone that leads to truth,
and not words. Religion to them is no motive to social conduct, but an
intense search after and realisation of *truth* in this life. They deny
the greater potentiality of one moment over another, and every moment in
eternity being equal to every other, they insist on seeing the truths of
religion face to face now and here, not waiting for death.

The present writer had occasion to ask the saint the reason of his not
coming out of his cave to help the world. At first, with his native
humility and humour, he gave the following strong reply:

"A certain wicked person was caught in some criminal act and had his
nose cut off as a punishment. Ashamed to show his noseless features to
the world and disgusted with himself, he fled into a forest; and there,
spreading a tiger-skin on the ground, he would feign deep meditation
whenever he thought anybody was about. This conduct, instead of keeping
people off, drew them in crowds to pay their respects to this wonderful
saint; and he found that his forest-life had brought him once again an
easy living. Thus years went by. At last the people around became very
eager to listen to some instruction from the lips of the silent
meditative saint; and one young man was specially anxious to be
initiated into the order. It came to such a pass that any more delay in
that line would undermine the reputation of the saint. So one day he
broke his silence and asked the enthusiastic young man to bring on the
morrow a sharp razor with him. The young man, glad at the prospect of
the great desire of his life being speedily fulfilled, came early the
next morning with the razor. The noseless saint led him to a very
retired spot in the forest, took the razor in his hand, opened it, and
with one stroke cut off his nose, repeating in a solemn voice, 'Young
man, this has been my initiation into the order. The same I give to you.
Do you transmit it diligently to others when the opportunity comes!' The
young man could not divulge the secret of this wonderful initiation for
shame, and carried out to the best of his ability the injunctions of his
master. Thus a whole sect of nose-cut saints spread over the country. Do
you want me to be the founder of another such?"

Later on, in a more serious mood, another query brought the answer: "Do
you think that physical help is the only help possible? Is it not
possible that one mind can help other minds even without the activity of
the body?"

When asked on another occasion why he, a great Yogi, should perform
Karma, such as pouring oblations into the sacrificial fire, and
worshipping the image of Shri Raghunâthji, which are practices only
meant for beginners, the reply came: "Why do you take for granted that
everybody makes Karma for his own good? Cannot one perform Karma for
others?"

Then again, everyone has heard of the thief who had come to steal from
his Ashrama, and who at the sight of the saint got frightened and ran
away, leaving the goods he had stolen in a bundle behind; how the saint
took the bundle up, ran after the thief, and came up to him after miles
of hard running; how the saint laid the bundle at the feet of the thief,
and with folded hands and tears in his eyes asked his pardon for his own
intrusion, and begged hard for his acceptance of the goods, since they
belonged to him, and not to himself.

We are also told, on reliable authority, how once he was bitten by a
cobra; and though he was given up for hours as dead, he revived; and
when his friends asked him about it, he only replied that the cobra "was
a messenger from the Beloved".

And well may we believe this, knowing as we do the extreme gentleness,
humility, and love of his nature. All sorts of physical illness were to
him only "messengers from the Beloved", and he could not even bear to
hear them called by any other name, even while he himself suffered
tortures from them. This silent love and gentleness had conveyed
themselves to the people around, and those who have travelled through
the surrounding villages can testify to the unspoken influence of this
wonderful man. Of late, he did not show himself to anyone. When out of
his underground retiring-place, he would speak to people with a closed
door between. His presence above, ground was always indicated by the
rising smoke of oblations in the sacrificial fire, or the noise of
getting things ready for worship.

One of his great peculiarities was his entire absorption at the time in
the task in hand, however trivial. The same amount of care and attention
was bestowed in cleaning a copper pot as in the worship of Shri
Raghunathji, he himself being the best example of the secret he once
told us of work: "The means should be loved and cared for as if it were
the end itself."

Neither was his humility kindred to that which means pain and anguish or
self-abasement. It sprang naturally from the realization of that which
he once so beautifully explained to us, "O King, the Lord is the wealth
of those who have nothing — yes, of those", he continued, "who have
thrown away all desires of possession, even that of one's own soul." He
would never directly teach, as that would be assuming the role of a
teacher and placing himself in a higher position than another. But once
the spring was touched, the fountain welled up with infinite wisdom; yet
always the replies were indirect.

In appearance he was tall and rather fleshy, had but one eye, and looked
much younger than his real age. His voice was the sweetest we have ever
heard. For the last ten years or more of his life, he had withdrawn
himself entirely from the gaze of mankind. A few potatoes and a little
butter were placed behind the door of his room, and sometimes during the
night this was taken in when he was not in Samâdhi and was living above
ground. When inside his cave, he did not require even these. Thus, this
silent life went on, witnessing to the science of Yoga, and a living
example of purity, humility, and love.

The smoke, which, as we have said already, indicated his coming out of
Samadhi, one clay smelled of burning flesh. The people around could not
guess what was happening; but when the smell became overpowering, and
the smoke was seen to rise up in volumes, they broke open the door, and
found that the great Yogi had offered himself as the last oblation to
his sacrificial fire, and very soon a heap of ashes was all that
remained of his body.

Let us remember the words of Kâlidâsa: "Fools blame the actions of the
great, because they are extraordinary and their reasons past the
finding-out of ordinary mortals."

Yet, knowing him as we do, we can only venture to suggest that the saint
saw that his last moments had come, and not wishing to cause trouble to
any, even after death, performed this last sacrifice of an Ârya, in full
possession of body and mind.

The present writer owes a deep debt of gratitude to the departed saint
and dedicates these lines, however unworthy, to the memory of one of the
greatest Masters he has loved and served.

</div>
