---
title: INDIA'S MESSAGE TO THE WORLD

---
<div>

[←](the_social_conference_address.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](stray_remarks_on_theosophy.htm)

  

## INDIA'S MESSAGE TO THE WORLD

The following notes were discovered among Swami Vivekananda's papers. He
intended to write a book and jotted down forty-two points as a syllabus
for the work, but only a few points were dealt with as an introduction
by him and the work was left unfinished. We give the manuscript as
found.

SYLLABUS

1\. Bold has been my message to the people of the West. Bolder to those
at home.

2\. Four years of residence in the marvellous West has made India only
the better understood. The shades are deeper and the lights brighter.

3\. The survey — it is not true that the Indians have degenerated.

4\. The problem here has been as it has been everywhere else — the
assimilation of various races, but nowhere has it been so vast as here.

5\. Community of language, government and, above all, religion has been
the power of fusion.

6\. In other lands this has been attempted by "force", that is, the
enforcement of the culture of *one* race only over the rest. The result
being the production of a short-lived vigorous national life; then,
dissolution.

7\. In India, on the other hand, the attempts have been as gentle as the
problem vast, and from the earliest times, the customs, and especially
the religions, of the different elements tolerated.

8\. Where it was a small problem and force was sufficient to form a
unity, the effect really was the nipping in the bud of various healthy
types in the germ of all the elements except the dominant one. It was
only one set of brains using the vast majority for its own good, thus
losing the major portion of the possible amount of development, and thus
when the dominant type had spent itself, the apparently impregnable
building tottered to its ruins, e.g., Greece, Rome, the Norman.

9\. A common language would be a great desideratum; but the same
criticism applies to it, the destruction of the vitality of the various
existing ones.

10\. The only solution to be reached was the finding of a great sacred
language of which all the others would be considered as manifestations,
and that was found in the Sanskrit.

11\. The Dravidian languages may or may not have been originally
Sanskritic, but for practical purposes they are so now, and every day we
see them approaching the ideal more and more, yet keeping their
distinctive vital peculiarities.

12\. A racial background was found — the Âryas.

13\. The speculation whether there was a distinct, separate race called
the Aryas living in Central Asia to the Baltic.

14\. The so-called types. Races were always mixed.

15\. The "blonde" and the "brunette".

16\. Coming to practical common sense from so-called historical
imagination. The Aryas in their oldest records were in the land between
Turkistan and the Punjab and N. W. Tibet.

17\. This leads to the attempt at fusion between races and tribes of
various degrees of culture.

18\. Just as Sanskrit has been the linguistic solution, so the Arya the
racial solution. So the Brâhminhood is the solution of the varying
degrees of progress and culture as well as that of all social and
political problems.

19\. The great ideal of India — Brahminhood.

20\. Property-less, selfless, subject to no laws, no king except the
moral.

21\. Brahminhood by descent — various races have claimed and acquired
the right in the past as well as in the present.

22\. No claim is made by the doer of great deeds, only by lazy worthless
fools.

23\. Degradation of Brahminhood and Kshatriyahood. The Puranas said
there will be only non-Brahmins in the Kali Yuga, and that is true,
becoming truer every day. Yet a few Brahmins remain, and in India alone.

24\. Kshatriyahood — we must pass through that to become a Brahmin. Some
may have passed through in the past, but the present must show that.

25\. But the disclosure of the whole plan is to be found in religion.

26\. The different tribes of the same race worship similar gods, under a
generic name as the Baals of the Babylonians, the Molochs of the
Hebrews.

27\. The attempt in Babylonia of making all the Baals merge in
Baal-Merodach — the attempt of the Israelites to merge all the Molochs
in the Moloch Yavah or Yahu.

28\. The Babylonians destroyed by the Persians; and the Hebrews who took
the Babylonian mythology and adapted it to their own needs, succeeded in
producing a strict monotheistic religion.

29\. Monotheism like absolute monarchy is quick in executing orders, and
a great centralization of force, but it grows no farther, and its worst
feature is its cruelty and persecution. All nations coming within its
influence perish very soon after a flaring up of a few years.

30\. In India the same problem presented itself — the solution found —
एकं सद्विप्रा बहुधा वदन्ति

This is the keynote to everything which has succeeded, and the keystone
of the arch.

31\. The result is that wonderful toleration of the Vedantist.

32\. The great problem therefore is to harmonise and unify without
destroying the individuality of these various elements.

33\. No form of religion which depends Upon persons, either of this
earth or even of heaven, is able to do that.

34\. Here is the glory of the Advaita system preaching a principle, not
a person, yet allowing persons, both human and divine, to have their
full play.

35\. This has been going on all the time; in this sense we have been
always progressing. The Prophets during the Mohammedan rule.

36\. It was fully conscious and vigorous in old days, and less so of
late; in this sense alone we have degenerated.

37\. This is going to be in the future. If the manifestation of the
power of one tribe utilising the labours of the rest produced wonderful
results at least for a certain length of time, here is going to be the
accumulation and the concentration of all the races that have been
slowly and inevitably getting mixed up in blood and ideas, and in my
mind's eye, I see the future giant slowly maturing. The future of India,
the youngest and the most glorious of the nations of earth as well as
the oldest.

38\. The way — we will have to work. Social customs as barriers, some as
founded upon the Smritis. But none from the Shrutis. The Smritis must
change with time. This is the admitted law.

39\. The principles of the Vedanta not only should be preached
everywhere in India, but also outside. Our thought must enter into the
make-up of the minds of every nation, not through writings, but through
persons.

40\. Gift is the only Karma in Kali Yuga. None attaining knowledge until
purified by Karma.

41\. Gift of spiritual and secular knowledge.

42\. Renunciation — Renouncers — the national call.

INTRODUCTION

Bold has been my message to the people of the West, bolder is my message
to you, my beloved countrymen. The message of ancient India to new
Western nations I have tried my best to voice — ill done or well done
the future is sure to show; but the mighty voice of the same future is
already sending forward soft but distinct murmurs, gaining strength as
the days go by, the message of India that is to be to India as she is at
present.

Many wonderful institutions and customs, and many wonderful
manifestations of strength and power it has been my good fortune to
study in the midst of the various races I have seen, but the most
wonderful of all was to find that beneath all these apparent variations
of manners and customs, of culture and power, beats the same mighty
human heart under the impulsion of the same joys and sorrows, of the
same weakness and strength

Good and evil are everywhere and the balance is wondrously even; but,
above all, is the glorious soul of man everywhere which never fails to
understand any one who knows how to speak its own language. Men and
women are to be found in every race whose lives are blessings to
humanity, verifying the words of the divine Emperor Asoka: "In every
land dwell Brâhmins and Shramanas."

I am grateful to the lands of the West for the many warm hearts that
received me with all the love that pure and disinterested souls alone
could give; but my life's allegiance is to this my motherland; and if I
had a thousand lives, every moment of the whole series would be
consecrated to your service, my countrymen, my friends.

For to this land I owe whatever I possess, physical, mental, and
spiritual; and if I have been successful in anything, the glory is
yours, not mine. Mine alone are my weaknesses and failures, as they come
through my in ability of profiting by the mighty lessons with which this
land surrounds one, even from his very birth.

And what a land! Whosoever stands on this sacred land, whether alien or
a child of the soil, feels himself surrounded — unless his soul is
degraded to the level of brute animals — by the living thoughts of the
earth's best and purest sons, who have been working to raise the animal
to the divine through centuries, whose beginning history fails to trace.
The very air is full of the pulsations of spirituality. This land is
sacred to philosophy, to ethics and spirituality, to all that tends to
give a respite to man in his incessant struggle for the preservation of
the animal to all training that makes man throw off the garment of
brutality and stand revealed as the spirit immortal, the birthless, the
deathless, the ever-blessed — the land where the cup of pleasure was
full, and fuller has been the cup of misery, until here, first of all,
man found out that it was all vanity; here, first of all in the prime of
youth, in the lap of luxury, in the height of glory and plenitude of
power, he broke through the fetters of delusion. Here, in this ocean of
humanity, amidst the sharp interaction of strong currents of pleasure
and pain, of strength and weakness, of wealth and poverty, of joy and
sorrow, of smile and tear, of life and death, in the melting rhythm of
eternal peace and calmness, arose the throne of renunciation! Here in
this land, the great problems of life and death, of the thirst for life,
and the vain mad struggles to preserve it only resulting in the
accumulation of woes were first grappled with and solved — solved as
they never were before and never will be hereafter; for here and here
alone was discovered that even life itself is an evil, the shadow only
of something which alone is real. This is the land where alone religion
was practical and real, and here alone men and women plunged boldly in
to realise the goal, just as in other lands they madly plunge in to
realise the pleasures of life by robbing their weaker brethren. Here and
here alone the human heart expanded till it included not only the human,
but birds, beasts, and plants; from the highest gods to grains of sand,
the highest and the lowest, all find a place in the heart of man, grown
great, infinite. And here alone, the human soul studied the universe as
one unbroken unity whose every pulse was his own pulse.

We all hear so much about the degradation of India. There was a time
when I also believed in it. But today standing on the vantage-ground of
experience, with eyes cleared of obstructive predispositions and above
all, of the highly-coloured pictures of other countries toned down to
their proper shade and light by actual contact, I confess in all
humility that I was wrong. Thou blessed land of the Aryas, thou wast
never degraded. Sceptres have been broken and thrown away, the ball of
power has passed from hand to hand, but in India, courts and kings
always touched only a few; the vast mass of the people, from the highest
to the lowest, has been left to pursue its own inevitable course, the
current of national life flowing at times slow and half-conscious, at
others, strong and awakened. I stand in awe before the unbroken
procession of scores of shining centuries, with here and there a dim
link in the chain, only to flare up with added brilliance in the next,
and there she is walking with her own majestic steps — my motherland —
to fulfil her glorious destiny, which no power on earth or in heaven can
check — the regeneration of man the brute into man the God.

Ay, a glorious destiny, my brethren, for as far back as the days of the
Upanishads we have thrown the challenge to the world: न प्रजया धनेन
त्यागेनैके अमृतत्वमानशुः — "Not by progeny, not by wealth, but by
renunciation alone immortality is reached." Race after race has taken
the challenge up and tried their utmost to solve the world-riddle on the
plane of desires. They have all failed in the past — the old ones have
become extinct under the weight of wickedness and misery, which lust for
power and gold brings in its train, and the new ones are tottering to
their fall. The question has yet to be decided whether peace will
survive or war; whether patience will survive or non-forbearance,
whether goodness will survive or wickedness; whether muscle will survive
or brain; whether worldliness will survive or spirituality. We have
solved our problem ages ago, and held on to it through good or evil
fortune, and mean to hold on to it till the end of time. Our solution is
unworldliness — renunciation.

This is the theme of Indian life-work, the burden of her eternal songs,
the backbone of her existence, the foundation of her being, the *raison
d'être* of her very existence — the spiritualisation of the human race.
In this her life-course she has never deviated, whether the Tartar ruled
or the Turk, whether the Mogul ruled or the English.

And I challenge anybody to show one single period of her national life
when India was lacking in spiritual giants capable of moving the world.
But her work is spiritual, and that cannot be done with blasts of
war-trumpets or the march of cohorts. Her influence has always fallen
upon the world like that of the gentle dew, unheard and scarcely marked,
yet bringing into bloom the fairest flowers of the earth. This
influence, being in its nature gentle, would have to wait for a
fortunate combination of circumstances, to go out of the country into
other lands, though it never ceased to work within the limits of its
native land. As such, every educated person knows that whenever the
empire-building Tartar or Persian or Greek or Arab brought this land in
contact with the outside world, a mass of spiritual influence
immediately flooded the world from here. The very same circumstances
have presented themselves once more before us. The English high roads
over land and sea and the wonderful power manifested by the inhabitants
of that little island have once more brought India in contact with the
rest of the world, and the same work has already begun. Mark my words,
this is but the small beginning, big things are to follow; what the
result of the present work outside India will be I cannot exactly state,
but this I know for certain that millions, I say deliberately, millions
in every civilised land are waiting for the message that will save them
from the hideous abyss of materialism into which modern money-worship is
driving them headlong, and many of the leaders of the new social
movements have already discovered that Vedanta in its highest form can
alone spiritualise their social aspirations. I shall have to return to
this towards the end I take up therefore the other great subject, the
work within the country.

The problem assumes a twofold aspect, not only spiritualisation but
assimilation of the various elements of which the nation is composed.
The assimilation of different races into one has been the common task in
the life of every nation.

</div>
