---
title: 'STRAY REMARKS ON THEOSOPHY '

---
<div>

[←](indias_message_to_the_world.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](reply_to_the_maharaja_of_khetri.htm)

  

## STRAY REMARKS ON THEOSOPHY

(Found among Swami Vivekananda's papers.)

The Theosophists are having a jubilee time of it this year, and several
press-notices are before us of their goings and doings for the last
twenty-five years.

Nobody has a right now to say that the Hindus are not liberal to a
fault. A coterie of young Hindus has been found to welcome even this
graft of American Spiritualism, with its panoply of taps and raps and
hitting back and forth with Mahâtmic pellets.

The Theosophists claim to possess the original divine knowledge of the
universe. We are glad to learn of it, and gladder still that they mean
to keep it rigorously a secret. Woe unto us, poor mortals, and Hindus at
that, if all this is at once let out on us! Modern Theosophy is Mrs.
Besant. Blavatskism and Olcottism seem to have taken a back seat. Mrs.
Besant means well at least — and nobody can deny her perseverance and
zeal.

There are, of course, carping critics. We on our part see nothing but
good in Theosophy — good in what is directly beneficial, good in what is
pernicious, as they say, indirectly good as we say — the intimate
geographical knowledge of various heavens, and other places, and the
denizens thereof; and the dexterous finger work on the visible plane
accompanying ghostly communications to live Theosophists — all told. For
Theosophy is the best serum we know of, whose injection never fails to
develop the queer moths finding lodgment in some brains attempting to
pass muster as sound.

We have no wish to disparage the good work of the Theosophical or any
other society. Yet exaggeration has been in the past the bane of our
race and if the several articles on the work of the Theosophical Society
that appeared in the *Advocate* of Lucknow be taken as the temperamental
gauge of Lucknow, we are sorry for those it represents, to say the
least; foolish depreciation is surely vicious, but fulsome praise is
equally loathsome.

This Indian grafting of American Spiritualism — with only a few Sanskrit
words taking the place of spiritualistic jargon — Mahâtmâ missiles
taking the place of ghostly raps and taps, and Mahatmic inspiration that
of obsession by ghosts.

We cannot attribute a knowledge of all this to the writer of the
articles in the *Advocate*, but he must not confound himself and his
Theosophists with the great Hindu nation, the majority of whom have
clearly seen through the Theosophical phenomena from the start and,
following the great Swami Dayânanda Sarasvati who took away his
patronage from Blavatskism the moment he found it out, have held
themselves aloof.

Again, whatever be the predilection of the writer in question, the
Hindus have enough of religious teaching and teachers amidst themselves
even in this Kali Yuga, and they do not stand in need of dead ghosts of
Russians and Americans.

The articles in question are libels on the Hindus and their religion. We
Hindus — let the writer, like that of the articles referred to, know
once for all — have no need nor desire to import religion from the West.
Sufficient has been the degradation of importing almost everything else.

The importation in the case of religion should be mostly on the side of
the West, we are sure, and our work has been all along in that line. The
only help the religion of the Hindus got from the Theosophists in the
West was not a ready field, but years of uphill work, necessitated by
Theosophical sleight-of-hand methods. The writer ought to have known
that the Theosophists wanted to crawl into the heart of Western Society,
catching on to the skirts of scholars like Max Müller and poets like
Edwin Arnold, all the same denouncing these very men and posing as the
only receptacles of universal wisdom. And one heaves a sigh of relief
that this wonderful wisdom is kept a secret. Indian thought,
charlatanry, and mango-growing fakirism had all become identified in the
minds of educated people in the West, and this was all the help rendered
to Hindu religion by the Theosophists.

The great immediate visible good effect of Theosophy in every country,
so far as we can see, is to separate, like Prof. Koch's injections into
the lungs of consumptives, the healthy, spiritual, active, and patriotic
from the charlatans, the morbids, and the degenerates posing as
spiritual beings.

</div>
