---
title: REPLY TO THE MADRAS ADDRESS

---
<div>

[←](reply_to_the_maharaja_of_khetri.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](a_message_of_sympathy_to_a_friend.htm)

  

## REPLY TO THE MADRAS ADDRESS

(When the success of the Swami in America became well known in India,
several meetings were held and addresses of thanks and congratulations
were forwarded to him. The first reply which he wrote was that to the
Address of the Hindus of Madras.)

FRIENDS, FELLOW-COUNTRYMEN AND CO-RELIGIONISTS OF MADRAS,

It is most gratifying to me to find that my insignificant service to the
cause of our religion has been acceptable to you, not because it is as a
personal appreciation of me and my work in a foreign and distant land,
but as a sure sign that, though whirlwind after whirlwind of foreign
invasion has passed over the devoted head of India, though centuries of
neglect on our part and contempt on the part of our conquerors have
visibly dimmed the glories of ancient Âryâvarta, though many a stately
column on which it rested, many a beautiful arch, and many a marvellous
corner have been washed away by the inundations that deluged the land
for centuries — the centre is all sound, the keystone is unimpaired. The
spiritual foundation upon which the marvellous monument of glory to God
and charity to all beings has been reared stands unshaken, strong as
ever. Your generous appreciation of Him whose message to India and to
the whole world, I, the most unworthy of His servants, had the privilege
to bear shows your innate spiritual instinct which saw in Him and His
message the first murmurs of that tidal wave of spirituality which is
destined at no distant future to break upon India in all its
irresistible powers, carrying away in its omnipotent flood all that is
weak and defective, and raising the Hindu race to the platform it is
destined to occupy in the providence of God, crowned with more glory
than it ever had even in the past, the reward of centuries of silent
suffering, and fulfilling its mission amongst the races of the world —
the evolution of spiritual humanity.

The people of Northern India are especially grateful to you of the
South, as the great source to which most of the impulses that are
working in India today can be traced. The great Bhâshyakâras,
epoch-making Âchâryas, Shankara, Râmânuja, and Madhva were born in
Southern India. Great Shankara to whom every Advâitavâdin in the world
owes allegiance; great Ramanuja whose heavenly touch converted the
downtrodden pariahs into Âlwârs; great Madhva whose leadership was
recognised even by the followers of the only Northern Prophet whose
power has been felt all over the length and breadth of India — Shri
Krishna Chaitanya. Even at the present day it is the South that carries
the palm in the glories of Varanasi — your renunciation controls the
sacred shrines on the farthest peaks of the Himalayas, and what wonder
that with the blood of Prophets running in your veins, with your lives
blessed by such Acharyas, you are the first and foremost to appreciate
and hold on to the message of Bhagavân Shri Ramakrishna.

The South had been the repository of Vedic learning, and you will
understand me when I state that, in spite of the reiterated assertions
of aggressive ignorance, it is the Shruti still that is the backbone of
all the different divisions of the Hindu religion.

However great may be the merits of the Samhitâ and the Brâhmana portions
of the Vedas to the ethnologists or the philologists, however desirable
may be the results that the अग्निमीले[1](#fn1)
or इषेत्वोर्जेत्वा[2](#fn2) or शन्नो देवीरभीष्टये[3](#fn3) in
conjunction with the different Vedis (altars) and sacrifices and
libations produce — it was all in the way of Bhoga; and no one ever
contended that it could produce Moksha. As such, the Jnâna-Kânda, the
Âranyakas, the Shrutis *par excellence* which teach the way to
spirituality, the Moksha-Mârga, have always ruled and will always rule
in India.

Lost in the mazes and divisions of the "Religion Eternal", by
prepossession and prejudice unable to grasp the meaning of the only
religion whose universal adaptation is the exact shadow of the
अणोरणीयान् महतो महीयान् \[ (Smaller than the smallest, greater than the
greatest (Katha, II. 20)) God it preaches, groping in the dark with a
standard of spiritual truth borrowed second-hand from nations who never
knew anything but rank materialism, the modern young Hindu struggles in
vain to understand the religion of his forefathers, and gives up the
quest altogether, and becomes a hopeless wreck of an agnostic, or else,
unable to vegetate on account of the promptings of his innate religious
nature, drinks carelessly of some of those different decoctions of
Western materialism with an Eastern flavour, and thus fulfils the
prophecy of the Shruti:

परियन्ति मूढा अन्धेनैव नीयमाना यथान्धाः।

— "Fools go staggering to and fro, like blind men led by the blind."
They alone escape whose spiritual nature has been touched and vivified
by the life-giving touch of the "Sad-Guru". (The good teacher.)

Well has it been said by Bhagavan Bhashyakara:

दुर्लभं त्रयमेवैतत् देवानुग्रहहेतुकम्।  
मनुष्यत्वं मुमुक्षुत्वं महापुरुशसंश्रयः॥

— "These three are difficult to obtain in this world, and depend on the
mercy of the gods — the human birth, the desire for salvation, and the
company of the great-souled ones."

Either in the sharp analysis of the Vaisheshikas, resulting in the
wonderful theories about the Paramânus, Dvyanus, and Trasarenus, (Atoms,
Entities composed of two atoms, Entities composed of three atoms.) or
the still more wonderful analysis displayed in the discussions of the
Jâti, Dravya, Guna, Samavâya, (Genus, Substance, Quality, Inhesion or
Inseparability.) and to the various categories of the Naiyâyikas, rising
to the solemn march of the thought of the Sânkhyas, the fathers of the
theories of evolution, ending with the ripe fruit, the result of all
these researches, the Sutras of Vyâsa — the one background to all these
different analyses and syntheses of the human mind is still the Shrutis.
Even in the philosophical writings of the Buddhists or Jains, the help
of Shrutis is never rejected, and at least in some of the Buddhistic
schools and in the majority of the Jain writings, the authority of the
Shrutis is fully admitted, excepting what they call the Himsaka Shrutis,
which they hold to be interpolations of the Brahmins. In recent times,
such a view has been held by the late great Swami Dayânanda Saraswati.

If one be asked to point out the system of thought towards which as a
centre all the ancient and modern Indian thoughts have converged, if one
wants to see the real backbone of Hinduism in all its various
manifestations, the Sutras of Vyasa will unquestionably be pointed out
as constituting all that.

Either one hears the Advaita-Keshari roaring in peals of thunder — the
Asti, Bhâti, and Priya —  (Exists (Sat), Shines (Chit), Is beloved
(Ânanda) — the three indicatives of Brahman.) amidst the heart-stopping
solemnities of the Himalayan forests, mixing with the solemn cadence of
the river of heaven, or listens to the cooing of the Piyâ, Pitam in the
beautiful bowers of the grove of Vrindâ: whether one mingles with the
sedate meditations of the monasteries of Varanasi or the ecstatic dances
of the followers of the Prophet of Nadia; whether one sits at the feet
of the teacher of the Vishishtâdvaita system with its Vadakale, Tenkale,
(The two divisions of the Ramanuja sect.) and all the other
subdivisions, or listens with reverence to the Acharyas of the Mâdhva
school; whether one hears the martial "Wâ Guruki Fateh" (Victory to the
Guru) of the secular Sikhs or the sermons on the Grantha Sâhib of the
Udâsis and Nirmalâs; whether he salutes the Sannyâsin disciples of Kabir
with "Sat Sâhib" and listens with joy to the Sâkhis (Bhajans); whether
he pores upon the wonderful lore of that reformer of Rajputana, Dâdu, or
the works of his royal disciple, Sundaradâsa, down to the great
Nishchaladâsa, the celebrated author of *Vichâra sâgara*, which book has
more influence in India than any that has been written in any language
within the last three centuries; if even one asks the Bhangi Mehtar of
Northern India to sit down and give an account of the teachings of his
Lâlguru — one will find that all these various teachers and schools have
as their basis that system whose authority is the Shruti, Gitâ its
divine commentary, the *Shâriraka-Sutras* its organised system, and all
the different sects in India, from the Paramahamsa Parivrâjakâchâryas to
the poor despised Mehtar disciples of Lâlguru, are different
manifestations.

The three Prasthânas, ("Courses", viz, the Upanishad (Shruti), the Gita,
and the *Shariraka-Sutras*.) then, in their different explanations as
Dvaita, Vishishtadvaita, or Advaita, with a few minor recensions, form
the "authorities" of the Hindu religion. The Purânas, the modern
representations of the ancient Nârâsamsi (anecdote portion of the
Vedas), supply the mythology, and the Tantras, the modern
representations of the Brâhmanas (ritual and explanatory portion of the
Vedas), supply the ritual. Thus the three Prasthanas, as authorities,
are common to all the sects; but as to the Puranas and Tantras, each
sect has its own.

The Tantras, as we have said, represent the Vedic rituals in a modified
form; and before any one jumps into the most absurd conclusions about
them, I will advise him to read the Tantras in conjunction with the
Brahmanas, especially the Adhvaryu portion. And most of the Mantras,
used in the Tantras, will be found taken verbatim from their Brahmanas.
As to their influence, apart from the Shrauta and Smârta rituals, all
the forms of the rituals in vogue from the Himalayas to the Comorin have
been taken from the Tantras, and they direct the worship of the Shâkta,
or Shaiva, or Vaishnava, and all the others alike.

Of course, I do not pretend that all the Hindus are thoroughly
acquainted with these sources of their religion. Many, especially in
lower Bengal, have not heard of the names of these sects and these great
systems; but consciously or unconsciously, it is the plan laid down in
the three Prasthanas that they are all working out.

Wherever, on the other hand, the Hindi language is spoken, even the
lowest classes have more knowledge of the Vedantic religion than many of
the highest in lower Bengal.

And why so?

Transported from the soil of Mithilâ to Navadvipa, nurtured and
developed by the fostering genius of Shiromani, Gadâdhara, Jagadisha,
and a host of other great names, an analysis of the laws of reasoning,
in some points superior to every other system in the whole world,
expressed in a wonderful and precise mosaic of language, stands the
Nyâya of Bengal, respected and studied throughout the length and breadth
of Hindusthân. But, alas, the Vedic study was sadly neglected, and until
within the last few years, scarcely anyone could be found in Bengal to
teach the *Mahâbhâshya* of Patanjali. Once only a mighty genius rose
above the never-ending Avachchhinnas and Avachchhedakas (In Nyaya,
'Determined', and 'determining attribute'.) — Bhagavân Shri Krishna
Chaitanya. For once the religious lethargy of Bengal was shaken, and for
a time it entered into a communion with the religious life of other
parts of India.

It is curious to note that though Shri Chaitanya obtained his Sannyâsa
from a Bhârati, and as such was a Bharati himself, it was through
Mâdhavendra Puri that his religious genius was first awakened.

The Puris seem to have a peculiar mission in rousing the spirituality of
Bengal. Bhagavan Shri Ramakrishna got his Sannyâsâshrama from Totâ Puri.

The commentary that Shri Chaitanya wrote on the *Vyâsa-Sutras* has
either been lost or not found yet. His disciples joined themselves to
the Madhvas of the South, and gradually the mantles of such giants as
Rupa and Sanâtana and Jiva Goswâmi fell on the shoulders of Bâbâjis, and
the great movement of Shri Chaitanya was decaying fast, till of late
years there is a sign of revival. Hope that it will regain its lost
splendour.

The influence of Shri Chaitanya is all over India. Wherever the
Bhakti-Mârga is known, there he is appreciated, studied, and worshipped.
I have every reason to believe that the whole of the Vallabhâchârya
recension is only a branch of the sect founded by Shri Chaitanya. But
most of his so-called disciples in Bengal do not know how his power is
still working all over India; and how can they? The disciples have
become Gadiâns (Heads of monasteries), while he was preaching barefooted
from door to door in India, begging Âchandâlas (all down to the lowest)
to love God.

The curious and unorthodox custom of hereditary Gurus that prevails in
Bengal, and for the most part in Bengal alone, is another cause of its
being cut off from the religious life of the rest of India.

The greatest cause of all is that the life of Bengal never received an
influx from that of the great brotherhood of Sannyasins who are the
representatives and repositories of the highest Indian spiritual culture
even at the present day.

Tyâga (renunciation) is never liked by the higher classes of Bengal.
Their tendency is for Bhoga (enjoyment). How can they get a deep insight
into spiritual things? त्यागेनैके अमृतत्वमानशुः — "By renunciation alone
immortality was reached." How can it be otherwise?

On the other hand, throughout the Hindi-speaking world, a succession of
brilliant Tyâgi teachers of far-reaching influence has brought the
doctrines of the Vedanta to every door. Especially the impetus given to
Tyaga during the reign of Ranjit Singh of the Punjab has made the
highest teachings of the Vedantic philosophy available for the very
lowest of the low. With true pride, the Punjabi peasant girl says that
even her spinning wheel repeats: "Soham", "Soham". And I have seen
Mehtar Tyagis in the forest of Hrishikesh wearing the garb of the
Sannyasin, studying the Vedanta. And many a proud high-class man would
be glad to sit at their feet and learn. And why not? अन्त्यादपि परं
धर्मं — "Supreme knowledge (can be learnt) even from the man of low
birth."

Thus it is that the North-West and the Punjab have a religious education
which is far ahead of that of Bengal, Bombay, or Madras. The
ever-travelling Tyagis of the various orders, Dashanâmis or Vairâgis or
Panthis bring religion to everybody's door, and the cost is only a bit
of bread. And how noble and disinterested most of them are! There is one
Sannyasin belonging to the Kachu Panthis or independents (who do not
identify themselves with any sect), who has been instrumental in the
establishing of hundreds of schools and charitable asylums all over
Rajputana. He has opened hospitals in forests, and thrown iron bridges
over the gorges in the Himalayas, and this man never touches a coin with
his hands, has no earthly possession except a blanket, which has given
him the nickname of the "Blanket Swami", and begs his bread from door to
door. I have never known him taking a whole dinner from one house, lest
it should be a tax on the householder. And he is only one amongst many.
Do you think that so long as these Gods on earth live in India and
protect the "Religion Eternal" with the impenetrable rampart of such
godly characters, the old religion will die?

In this country, (United States of America) the clergymen sometimes
receive as high salaries as rupees thirty thousand, forty thousand,
fifty thousand, even ninety thousand a year, for preaching two hours on
Sunday only, and that only six months in a year. Look at the millions
upon millions they spend for the support of their religion, and Young
Bengal has been taught that these Godlike, absolutely unselfish men like
Kambli-Swami are idle vagabonds. मद्भक्तानाञ्च च ये भक्तास्ते मे भक्ततमा
मताः — "Those who are devoted to My worshippers are regarded as the best
of devotees."

Take even an extreme case, that of an extremely ignorant Vairagi. Even
he, when he goes into a village tries his best to impart to the
villagers whatever he knows, from Tulasidâsa, or
*Chaitanya-Charitâmrita* or the Âlwârs in Southern India. Is that not
doing some good? And all this for only a bit of bread and a rag of
cloth. Before unmercifully criticising them, think how much you do, my
brother, for your poor fellow-countrymen, at whose expense you have got
your education, and by grinding whose face you maintain your position
and pay your teachers for teaching you that the Babajis are only
vagabonds.

A few of your fellow-countrymen in Bengal have criticised what they call
a new development of Hinduism. And well they may. For Hinduism is only
just now penetrating into Bengal, where so long the whole idea of
religion was a bundle of Deshâchâras (local customs) as to eating and
drinking and marriage.

This short paper has not space for the discussion of such a big subject
as to whether the view of Hinduism, which the disciples of Ramakrishna
have been preaching all over India, was according to the "Sad-Shâstras"
or not. But I will give a few hints to our critics, which may help them
in understanding our position better.

In the first place, I never contended that a correct idea of Hinduism
can be gathered from the writings of Kâshidâsa or Krittivâsa, though
their words are "Amrita Samâna" (like nectar), and those that hear them
are "Punyavâns" (virtuous). But we must go to Vedic and Dârshanika
authorities, and to the great Acharyas and their disciples all over
India.

If, brethren, you begin with the Sutras of Gautama, and read his
theories about the Âptas (inspired) in the light of the commentaries of
Vâtsyâyana, and go up to the Mimâmsakas with Shabara and other
commentators, and find out what they say about the
अलौकिकप्रत्यक्षम् (supersensuous realisation), and who are Aptas, and
whether every being can become an Apta or not, and that the proof of the
Vedas is in their being the words of such Aptas if you have time to look
into the introduction of Mahidhara to the Yajur-Veda, you will find a
still more lucid discussion as to the Vedas being laws of the inner life
of man, and as such they are eternal.

As to the eternity of creation — this doctrine is the corner-stone not
only of the Hindu religion, but of the Buddhists and Jains also.

Now all the sects in India can be grouped roughly as following the
Jnâna-Mârga or the Bhakti-Mârga. If you will kindly look into the
introduction to the *Shâriraka-Bhâshya* of Shri Shankarâchârya, you will
find there the Nirapekshatâ (transcendence) of Jnana is thoroughly
discussed, and the conclusion is that realisation of Brahman or the
attainment of Moksha do not depend upon ceremonial, creed, caste,
colour, or doctrine. It will come to any being who has the four
Sâdhanâs, which are the most perfect moral culture.

As to the Bhaktas, even Bengali critics know very well that some of
their authorities even declared that caste or nationality or sex, or, as
to that, even the human birth, was never necessary to Moksha. Bhakti is
the one and only thing necessary.

Both Jnana and Bhakti are everywhere preached to be unconditioned, and
as such there is not one authority who lays down the conditions of caste
or creed or nationality in attaining Moksha. See the discussion on the
Sutra of Vyâsa — अन्तरा चापि तु तद्दृष्टेः[4](#fn4) by Shankara,
Ramanuja, and Madhva.

Go through all the Upanishads, and even in the Samhitas, nowhere you
will find the limited ideas of Moksha which every other religion has. As
to toleration, it is everywhere, even in the Samhita of the Adhvaryu
Veda, in the third or fourth verse of the fortieth chapter, if my memory
does not fail; it begins with न बुध्दिभेदं जनयेदज्ञानां
कर्मसंगिनाम्।[5](#fn5) This is running through everywhere. Was anybody
persecuted in India for choosing his Ishta Devatâ, or becoming an
atheist or agnostic even, so long as he obeyed the social regulations?
Society may punish anybody by its disapprobation for breaking any of its
regulations, but no man, the lowest Patita (fallen), is ever shut out
from Moksha. You must not mix up the two together. As to that, in
Malabar a Chandâla is not allowed to pass through the same street as a
high-caste man, but let him become a Mohammedan or Christian, he will be
immediately allowed to go anywhere; and this rule has prevailed in the
dominion of a Hindu sovereign for centuries. It may be queer, but it
shows the idea of toleration for other religions even in the most
untoward circumstances.

The one idea the Hindu religions differ in from every other in the
world, the one idea to express which the sages almost exhaust the
vocabulary of the Sanskrit language, is that man must realise God even
in this life. And the Advaita texts very logically add, "To know God is
to become God."

And here comes as a necessary consequence the broadest and most glorious
idea of inspiration — not only as asserted and declared by the Rishis of
the Vedas, not only by Vidura and Dharmavyâdha and a number of others,
but even the other day Nischaladâsa, a Tyagi of the Dâdu panthi sect,
boldly declared in his *Vichâra-Sâgara*: "He who has known Brahman has
become Brahman. His words are Vedas, and they will dispel the darkness
of ignorance, either expressed in Sanskrit or any popular dialect."

Thus to realise God, the Brahman, as the Dvaitins say, or to become
Brahman, as the Advaitins say — is the aim and end of the whole teaching
of the Vedas; and every other teaching, therein contained, represents a
stage in the course of our progress thereto. And the great glory of
Bhagavan Bhashyakara Shankaracharya is that it was his genius that gave
the most wonderful expression to the ideas of Vyasa.

As absolute, Brahman alone is true; as relative truth, all the different
sects, standing upon different manifestations of the same Brahman,
either in India or elsewhere, are true. Only some are higher than
others. Suppose a man starts straight towards the sun. At every step of
his journey he will see newer and newer visions of the sun — the size,
the view, and light will every moment be new, until he reaches the real
sun. He saw the sun at first like a big ball, and then it began to
increase in size. The sun was never small like the ball he saw; nor was
it ever like all the succession of suns he saw in his journey. Still is
it not true that our traveller always saw the sun, and nothing but the
sun? Similarly, all these various sects are true — some nearer, some
farther off from the real sun which is our एकमेवाद्वितीयम् — "One
without a second".

And as the Vedas are the only scriptures which teach this real absolute
God, of which all other ideas of God are but minimised and limited
visions; as the सर्वलोकहितैषिणी  (The well-wisher to all the world.)
Shruti takes the devotee gently by the hand, and leads him from one
stage to another, through all the stages that are necessary for him to
travel to reach the Absolute; and as all other religions represent one
or other of these stages in an unprogressive and crystallized form, all
the other religions of the world are included in the nameless,
limitless, eternal Vedic religion.

Work hundreds of lives out, search every corner of your mind for ages —
and still you will not find one noble religious idea that is not already
imbedded in that infinite mine of spirituality.

As to the so-called Hindu idolatry — first go and learn the forms they
are going through, and where it is that the worshippers are really
worshipping, whether in the temple, in the image, or in the temple of
their own bodies. First know for certain what they are doing — which
more than ninety per cent of the revilers are thoroughly ignorant of —
and then it will explain itself in the light of the Vedantic philosophy.

Still these Karmas are not compulsory. On the other hand, open your Manu
and see where it orders every old man to embrace the fourth Ashrama, and
whether he embraces it or not, he must give up all Karma. It is
reiterated everywhere that all these Karmas ज्ञाने परिसमाप्यते। —
"finally end in Jnana".

As to the matter of that, a Hindu peasant has more religious education
than many a gentleman in other countries. A friend criticised the use of
European terms of philosophy and religion in my addresses. I would have
been very glad to use Sanskrit terms; it would have been much more easy,
as being the only perfect vehicle of religious thought. But the friend
forgot that I was addressing an audience of Western people; and although
a certain Indian missionary declared that the Hindus had forgotten the
meaning of their Sanskrit books, and that it was the missionaries who
unearthed the meaning, I could not find one in that large concourse of
missionaries who could understand a line in Sanskrit — and yet some of
them read learned papers criticising the Vedas, and all the sacred
sources of the Hindu religion!

It is not true that I am against any religion. It is equally untrue that
I am hostile to the Christian missionaries in India. But I protest
against certain of their methods of raising money in America. What is
meant by those pictures in the school-books for children where the Hindu
mother is painted as throwing her children to the crocodiles in the
Ganga? The mother is black, but the baby is painted white, to arouse
more sympathy, and get more money. What is meant by those pictures which
paint a man burning his wife at a stake with his own hands, so that she
may become a ghost and torment the husband's enemy? What is meant by the
pictures of huge cars crushing over human beings? The other day a book
was published for children in this country, where one of these gentlemen
tells a narrative of his visit to Calcutta. He says he saw a car running
over fanatics in the streets of Calcutta. I have heard one of these
gentlemen preach in Memphis that in every village of India there is a
pond full of the bones of little babies.

What have the Hindus done to these disciples of Christ that every
Christian child is taught to call the Hindus "vile", and "wretches", and
the most horrible devils on earth? Part of the Sunday School education
for children here consists in teaching them to hate everybody who is not
a Christian, and the Hindus especially, so that, from their very
childhood they may subscribe their pennies to the missions. If not for
truth's sake, for the sake of the morality of their own children, the
Christian missionaries ought not to allow such things going on. Is it
any wonder that such children grow up to be ruthless and cruel men and
women? The greater a preacher can paint the tortures of eternal hell —
the fire that is burning there, the brimstone - the higher is his
position among the orthodox. A servant-girl in the employ of a friend of
mine had to be sent to a lunatic asylum as a result of her attending
what they call here the revivalist-preaching. The dose of hell-fire and
brimstone was too much for her. Look again at the books published in
Madras against the Hindu religion. If a Hindu writes one such line
against the Christian religion, the missionaries will cry fire and
vengeance.

My countrymen, I have been more than a year in this country. I have seen
almost every corner of the society, and, after comparing notes, let me
tell you that neither are we devils, as the missionaries tell the world
we are, nor are they angels, as they claim to be. The less the
missionaries talk of immorality, infanticide, and the evils of the Hindu
marriage system, the better for them. There may be actual pictures of
some countries before which all the imaginary missionary pictures of the
Hindu society will fade away into light. But my mission in life is not
to be a paid reviler. I will be the last man to claim perfection for the
Hindu society. No man is more conscious of the defects that are therein,
or the evils that have grown up under centuries of misfortunes. If,
foreign friends, you come with genuine sympathy to help and not to
destroy, Godspeed to you. But if by abuses, incessantly hurled against
the head of a prostrate race in season and out of season, you mean only
the triumphant assertion of the moral superiority of your own nation,
let me tell you plainly, if such a comparison be instituted with any
amount of justice, the Hindu will be found head and shoulders above all
other nations in the world as a moral race.

In India religion was never shackled. No man was ever challenged in the
selection of his Ishta Devatâ, or his sect, or his preceptor, and
religion grew, as it grew nowhere else. On the other hand, a fixed point
was necessary to allow this infinite variation to religion, and society
was chosen as that point in India. As a result, society became rigid and
almost immovable. For liberty is the only condition of growth.

On the other hand, in the West, the field of variation was society, and
the constant point was religion. Conformity was the watchword, and even
now is the watchword of European religion, and each new departure had to
gain the least advantage only by wading through a river of blood. The
result is a splendid social organisation, with a religion that never
rose beyond the grossest materialistic conceptions.

Today the West is awakening to its wants; and the "true self of man and
spirit" is the watchword of the advanced school of Western theologians.
The student of Sanskrit philosophy knows where the wind is blowing from,
but it matters not whence the power comes so longs as it brings new
life.

In India, new circumstances at the same time are persistently demanding
a new adjustment of social organisations. For the last three-quarters of
a century, India has been bubbling over with reform societies and
reformers. But, alas, every one of them has proved a failure. They did
not know the secret. They had not learnt the great lesson to be learnt.
In their haste, they laid all the evils in our society at the door of
religion; and like the man in the story, wanting to kill the mosquito
that sat on a friend's forehead, they were trying to deal such heavy
blows as would have killed man and mosquito together. But in this case,
fortunately, they only dashed themselves against immovable rocks and
were crushed out of existence in the shock of recoil. Glory unto those
noble and unselfish souls who have struggled and failed in their
misdirected attempts. Those galvanic shocks of reformatory zeal were
necessary to rouse the sleeping leviathan. But they were entirely
destructive, and not constructive, and as such they were mortal, and
therefore died.

Let us bless them and profit by their experience. They had not learnt
the lesson that all is a growth from inside out, that all evolution is
only a manifestation of a preceding involution. They did not know that
the seed can only assimilate the surrounding elements, but grows a tree
in its own nature. Until all the Hindu race becomes extinct, and a new
race takes possession of the land, such a thing can never be — try East
or West, India can never be Europe until she dies.

And will she die — this old Mother of all that is noble or moral or
spiritual, the land which the sages trod, the land in which Godlike men
still live and breathe? I will borrow the lantern of the Athenian sage
and follow you, my brother, through the cities and villages, plains and
forests, of this broad world — show me such men in other lands if you
can. Truly have they said, the tree is known by its fruits. Go under
every mango tree in India; pick up bushels of the worm-eaten, unripe,
fallen ones from the ground, and write hundreds of the most learned
volumes on each one of them — still you have not described a single
mango. Pluck a luscious, full-grown, juicy one from the tree, and now
you have known all that the mango is.

Similarly, these Man-Gods show what the Hindu religion is. They show the
character, the power, and the possibilities of that racial tree which
counts culture by centuries, and has borne the buffets of a thousand
years of hurricane, and still stands with the unimpaired vigour of
eternal youth.

Shall India die? Then from the world all spirituality will be extinct,
all moral perfection will be extinct, all sweet-souled sympathy for
religion will be extinct, all ideality will be extinct; and in its place
will reign the duality of lust and luxury as the male and female
deities, with money as its priest, fraud, force, and competition its
ceremonies, and the human soul its sacrifice. Such a thing can never be.
The power of suffering is infinitely greater than the power of doing;
the power of love is infinitely of greater potency than the power of
hatred. Those that think that the present revival of Hinduism is only a
manifestation of patriotic impulse are deluded.

First, let us study the quaint phenomenon.

Is it not curious that, whilst under the terrific onset of modern
scientific research, all the old forts of Western dogmatic religions are
crumbling into dust; whilst the sledge-hammer blows of modern science
are pulverising the porcelain mass of systems whose foundation is either
in faith or in belief or in the majority of votes of church synods;
whilst Western theology is at its wit's end to accommodate itself to the
ever-rising tide of aggressive modern thought; whilst in all other
sacred books the texts have been stretched to their utmost tension under
the ever-increasing pressure of modern thought, and the majority of them
are broken and have been stored away in lumber rooms; whilst the vast
majority of thoughtful Western humanity have broken asunder all their
ties with the church and are drifting about in a sea of unrest, the
religions which have drunk the water of life at that fountain of light,
the Vedas — Hinduism and Buddhism — alone are reviving?

The restless Western atheist or agnostic finds in the Gitâ or in the
*Dhammapada* the only place where his soul can anchor.

The tables have been turned, and the Hindu, who saw through tears of
despair his ancient homestead covered with incendiary fire, ignited by
unfriendly hands, now sees, when the searchlight of modern thought has
dispersed the smoke, that his home is the one that is standing in all
its strength, and all the rest have either vanished or are building
their houses anew after the Hindu plan. He has wiped away his tears, and
has found that the axe that tried to cut down to the roots the
ऊर्ध्वमूलमधःशाखामश्वत्थं प्राहुरव्ययम्  (Gita, XV. 1) has proved the
merciful knife of the surgeon.

He has found that he has neither to torture texts nor commit any other
form of intellectual dishonesty to save his religion. Nay, he may call
all that is weak in his scriptures, weak, because they were meant to be
so by the ancient sages, to help the weak, under the theory
of अरुन्धतीदर्शनन्याय[6](#fn6). Thanks to the ancient sages who have
discovered such an all-pervading, ever-expanding system of religion that
can accommodate all that has been discovered in the realm of matter, and
all that is to be known; he has begun to appreciate them anew, and
discover anew, that those discoveries which have proved so disastrous to
every limited little scheme of religion are but rediscoveries, in the
plane of intellect and sense-consciousness, of truths which his
ancestors discovered ages ago in the higher plane of intuition and
superconsciousness.

He has not, therefore, to give up anything, nor go about seeking for
anything anywhere, but it will be enough for him if he can utilise only
a little from the infinite store he has inherited and apply it to his
needs. And that he has begun to do and will do more and more. Is this
not the real cause of this revival?

Young men of Bengal, to you I especially appeal. Brethren, we know to
our shame that most of the real evils for which the foreign races abuse
the Hindu nation are only owing to us. We have been the cause of
bringing many undeserved calumnies on the head of the other races in
India. But glory unto God, we have been fully awakened to it, and with
His blessings, we will not only cleanse ourselves, but help the whole of
India to attain the ideals preached in the religion eternal.

Let us wipe off first that mark which nature always puts on the forehead
of a slave — the stain of jealousy. Be jealous of none. Be ready to lend
a hand to every worker of good. Send a good thought for every being in
the three worlds.

Let us take our stand on the one central truth in our religion — the
common heritage of the Hindus, the Buddhists, and Jains alike — the
spirit of man, the Atman of man, the immortal, birthless, all-pervading,
eternal soul of man whose glories the Vedas cannot themselves express,
before whose majesty the universe with its galaxy upon galaxy of suns
and stars and nebulae is as a drop. Every man or woman, nay, from the
highest Devas to the worm that crawls under our feet, is such a spirit
evoluted or involuted. The difference is not in kind, but in degree.

This infinite power of the spirit, brought to bear upon matter evolves
material development, made to act upon thought evolves intellectuality,
and made to act upon itself makes of man a God.

First, let us be Gods, and then help others to be Gods. "Be and make."
Let this be our motto. Say not man is a sinner. Tell him that he is a
God. Even if there were a devil, it would be our duty to remember God
always, and not the devil.

If the room is dark, the constant feeling and repeating of darkness will
not take it away, but bring in the light. Let us know that all that is
negative, all that is destructive, all that is mere criticism, is bound
to pass away; it is the positive, the affirmative, the constructive that
is immortal, that will remain for ever. Let us say, "We are" and "God
is" and "We are God", "Shivoham, Shivoham", and march on. Not matter but
spirit. All that has name and form is subject to all that has none. This
is the eternal truth the Shrutis preach. Bring in the light; the
darkness will vanish of itself. Let the lion of Vedanta roar; the foxes
will fly to their holes. Throw the ideas broadcast, and let the result
take care of itself. Let us put the chemicals together; the
crystallization will take its own course. Bring forth the power of the
spirit, and pour it over the length and breadth of India; and all that
is necessary will come by itself.

Manifest the divinity within you, and everything will be harmoniously
arranged around it. Remember the illustration of Indra and Virochana in
the Vedas; both were taught their divinity. But the Asura, Virochana,
took his body for his God. Indra, being a Deva, understood that the
Atman was meant. You are the children of India. You are the descendants
of the Devas. Matter can never be your God; body can never be your God.

India will be raised, not with the power of the flesh, but with the
power of the spirit; not with the flag of destruction, but with the flag
of peace and love, the garb of the Sannyâsin; not by the power of
wealth, but by the power of the begging bowl. Say not that you are weak.
The spirit is omnipotent. Look at that handful of young men called into
existence by the divine touch of Ramakrishna's feet. They have preached
the message from Assam to Sindh, from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin.
They have crossed the Himalayas at a height of twenty thousand feet,
over snow and ice on foot, and penetrated into the mysteries of Tibet.
They have begged their bread, covered themselves with rags; they have
been persecuted, followed by the police, kept in prison, and at last set
free when the Government was convinced of their innocence.

They are now twenty. Make them two thousand tomorrow. Young men of
Bengal, your country requires it. The world requires it. Call up the
divinity within you, which will enable you to bear hunger and thirst,
heat and cold. Sitting in luxurious homes, surrounded with all the
comforts of life, and doling out a little amateur religion may be good
for other lands, but India has a truer instinct. It intuitively detects
the mask. You must give up. Be great. No great work can be done without
sacrifice. The Purusha Himself sacrificed Himself to create this world.
Lay down your comforts, your pleasures, your names, fame or position,
nay even your lives, and make a bridge of human chains over which
millions will cross this ocean of life. Bring all the forces of good
together. Do not care under what banner you march. Do not care what be
your colour — green, blue, or red — but mix up all the colours and
produce that intense glow of white, the colour of love. Ours is to work.
The results will take care of themselves. If any social institution
stands in your way of becoming God, it will give way before the power of
Spirit. I do not see into the future; nor do I care to see. But one
vision I see dear as life before me: that the ancient Mother has
awakened once more, sitting on Her throne rejuvenated, more glorious
than ever. Proclaim Her to all the world with the voice of peace and
benediction.

Yours ever in love and labour,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)ओं अग्निमीले पुरोहितं यज्ञस्य देवमृत्विजम्। होतारं
    रत्नधातमम्॥ ऋग्वेदः।१।१।१।
2.  [^](#tx2)ओं इषेत्वोर्जेत्वा वायवः स्थोपायवः स्थ देवो वः सविता
    प्रापयतु श्रेष्ठतमाय कर्मणे। यजुर्वेदः।१।१।१।
3.  [^](#tx3)ओं शन्नो देवीरमीष्टये आपो भवन्तु पीतये शंयोरभिस्त्रवन्तु
    नः॥ अथर्ववेदः।१।१।१।
4.  [^](#txt4)"But also (persons standing) between (are qualified for
    knowledge); for that is seen (in scripture)."— III. iv. 36. A person
    even if he does not belong to an Ashrama (possessing not the means
    to entitle him to one or other of the Ashramas, stages of life) and
    thus stands between, as it were, is qualified for the knowledge of
    Brahman; for we meet scriptural passages declaring that persons of
    such a class possessed the knowledge of Brahman. Vide Chhând.
    Upa. IV. i; Bri. Upa. III. vi. & viii.
5.  [^](#txt5)"(The wise one) should not unsettle the understanding of
    the ignorant, attached to action." The line also occurs in the Gita
    (III. 26).
6.  [^](#txt6)When a bride is brought to the house of her husband for
    the first time he shows her a very tiny star, called Arundhati. To
    do this, he has to direct her gaze the right way, which he does by
    asking her to look at something near and something big in the
    direction of the star, e.g., a branch of a tree. Next he draws her
    attention to a large bright star observed beyond this branch and so
    on, till by several steps, he succeeds in leading her eyes to the
    right thing. This method of leading to a subtle object through easy
    and gradual steps is called Arundhati Nyaya.

</div>
