---
title: A MESSAGE OF SYMPATHY TO A FRIEND

---
<div>

[←](reply_to_the_madras_address.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](what_we_believe_in.htm)

  

[«](../../unpublished/ii_your_highness.htm) Chronology [»  
](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/039_mother.htm)

## A MESSAGE OF SYMPATHY TO A FRIEND

(Written from Bombay on 23rd May, 1893 to D. R. Balaji Rao who just had
a severe domestic affliction.)

"Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither;
the Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the
Lord." Thus said the old Jewish saint when suffering the greatest
calamities that could befall man, and he erred not. Herein lies the
whole secret of Existence. Waves may roll over the surface and tempest
rage, but deep down there is the stratum of infinite calmness, infinite
peace, and infinite bliss. "Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall
be comforted." And why? Because it is during these moments of
visitations when the heart is wrung by hands which never stop for the
father's cries or the mother's wail, when under the load of sorrow,
dejection, and despair, the world seems to be cut off from under our
feet, and when the whole horizon seems to be nothing but an impenetrable
sheet of misery and utter despair — that the internal eyes open, light
flashes all of a sudden, the dream vanishes, and intuitively we come
face to face with the grandest mystery in nature — Existence. Yes, then
it is — when the load would be sufficient to sink a lot of frail vessels
— that the man of genius, of strength, the hero, sees that infinite,
absolute, ever-blissful Existence *per se*, that infinite being who is
called and worshipped under different names in different climes. Then it
is, the shackles that bind the soul down to this hole of misery break,
as it were, for a time, and unfettered it rises and rises until it
reaches the throne of the Lord, "Where the wicked cease from troubling
and the weary are at rest". Cease not, brother, to send up petitions day
and night, cease not to say day and night — THY WILL BE DONE.

"Ours not to question why,  
Ours but to do and die."

Blessed be Thy name, O Lord! And Thy will be done. Lord, we know that we
are to submit; Lord, we know that it is the Mother's hand that is
striking, and "The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak." There is,
Father of Love, an agony at the heart which is fighting against that
calm resignation which Thou teachest". Give us strength, O Thou who
sawest Thy whole family destroyed before Thine eyes, with Thine hands
crossed on Thy breast. Come, Lord, Thou Great Teacher, who has taught us
that the soldier is only to obey and speak not. Come, Lord, come
Arjuna's Charioteer, and teach me as Thou once taughtest him, that
resignation in *Thyself* is the highest end and aim of this life, so
that with those great ones of old, I may also firmly and resignedly cry,
Om Shri Krishnârpanamastu.

May the Lord send you peace is the prayer day and night of —

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
