---
title: WHAT WE BELIEVE IN

---
<div>

[←](a_message_of_sympathy_to_a_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](our_duty_to_the_masses.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/011_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/012_mother.htm)  
Addressee [»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/015_kidi.htm)

## WHAT WE BELIEVE IN

(Written to "Kidi" on March 3, 1894, from Chicago.)

I agree with you so far that faith is a wonderful insight and that it
alone can save; but there is the danger in it of breeding fanaticism and
barring further progress.

Jnâna is all right; but there is the danger of its becoming dry
intellectualism. Love is great and noble; but it may die away in
meaningless sentimentalism.

A harmony of all these is the thing required. Ramakrishna was such a
harmony. Such beings are few and far between; but keeping him and his
teachings as the ideal, we can move on. And if amongst us, each one may
not individually attain to that perfection, still we may get it
collectively by counteracting, equipoising, adjusting, and fulfilling
one another. This would be *harmony* by a number of persons and a
decided advance on all other forms and creeds.

For a religion to be effective, enthusiasm is necessary. At the same
time we must try to avoid the danger of multiplying creeds. We avoid
that by being a nonsectarian sect, having all the advantages of a sect
and the broadness of a universal religion.

God, though everywhere, can be known to us in and through human
character. No character was ever so perfect as Ramakrishna's, and that
should be the centre round which we ought to rally, at the same time
allowing everybody to regard him in his own light, either as God,
saviour, teacher, model, or great man, just as he pleases. We preach
neither social equality nor inequality, but that every being has the
same rights, and insist upon freedom of thought and action in every way.

We reject none, neither theist, nor pantheist, monist, polytheist,
agnostic, nor atheist; the only condition of being a disciple is
modelling a character at once the broadest and the most intense. Nor do
we insist upon particular codes of morality as to conduct, or character,
or eating and drinking, except so far as it injures others.

Whatever retards the onward progress or helps the downward fall is
*vice*; whatever helps in coming up and becoming harmonised is *virtue*.

We leave everybody free to know, select, and follow whatever suits and
helps him. Thus, for example, eating meat may help one, eating fruit
another. Each is welcome to his own peculiarity, but he has no right to
criticise the conduct of others, because that would, if followed by him,
injure him, much less to insist that others should follow his way. A
wife may help some people in this progress, to others she may be a
positive injury. But the unmarried man has no right to say that the
married disciple is wrong, much less to force his own ideal of morality
upon his brother.

We believe that every being is divine, is God. Every soul is a sun
covered over with clouds of ignorance, the difference between soul and
soul is owing to the difference in density of these layers of clouds. We
believe that this is the conscious or unconscious basis of all
religions, and that this is the explanation of the whole history of
human progress either in the material, intellectual, or spiritual plane
— the same Spirit is manifesting through different planes.

We believe that this is the very essence of the Vedas.

We believe that it is the duty of every *soul* to treat, think of, and
behave to other *souls* as such, i.e. as *Gods*, and not hate or
despise, or vilify, or try to injure them by any manner or means. This
is the duty not only of the Sannyasin, but of all men and women.

The soul has neither sex, nor caste, nor imperfection

We believe that nowhere throughout the Vedas, Darshanas, or Purânas, or
Tantras, is it ever said that the soul has any sex, creed, or caste.
Therefore we agree with those who say, "What has religion to do with
social reforms?" But they must also agree with us when we tell them that
religion has no business to formulate social laws and insist on the
difference between beings, because its aim and end is to obliterate all
such fictions and monstrosities.

If it be pleaded that through this difference we would reach the final
equality and unity, we answer that the same religion has said over and
over again that mud cannot be washed with mud. As if a man can be moral
by being immoral!

Social laws were created by economic conditions under the sanction of
religion. The terrible mistake of religion was to interfere in social
matters. But how hypocritically it says and thereby contradicts itself,
"Social reform is not the business of religion"! True, what we want is
that religion should not be a social reformer, but we insist at the same
time that society has no right to become a religious law-giver. Hands
off! Keep yourself to your own bounds and everything would come right.

Education is the manifestation of the perfection already in man.

Religion is the manifestation of the Divinity already in man.

Therefore the only duty of the teacher in both cases is to remove all
obstructions from the way. Hands off! as I always say, and everything
will be right. That is, our duty is to clear the way. The Lord does the
rest.

Especially, therefore, you must bear in mind that religion has to do
only with the soul and has no business to interfere in social matters;
you must also bear in mind that this applies completely to the mischief
which has already been done. It is as if a man after forcibly taking
possession of another's property cries through the nose when that man
tries to regain it — and preaches the doctrine of the sanctity of human
right!

What business had the priests to interfere (to the misery of millions of
human beings) in every social matter?

You speak of the meat-eating Kshatriya. Meat or no meat, it is they who
are the fathers of all that is noble and beautiful in Hinduism. Who
wrote the Upanishads? Who was Râma? Who was Krishna? Who was Buddha? Who
were the Tirthankaras of the Jains? Whenever the Kshatriyas have
preached religion, they have given it to everybody; and whenever the
Brahmins wrote anything, they would deny all right to others. Read the
Gitâ and the Sutras of Vyâsa, or get someone to read them to you. In the
Gita the way is laid open to all men and women, to all caste and colour,
but Vyasa tries to put meanings upon the Vedas to cheat the poor
Shudras. Is God a nervous fool like you that the flow of His river of
mercy would be dammed up by a piece of meat? If such be He, His value is
not a pie!

Hope nothing from me, but I am convinced as I have written to you, and
spoken to you, that India is to be saved by the Indians themselves. So
you, young men of the motherland, can dozens of you become almost
fanatics over this new ideal? Take thought, collect materials, write a
sketch of the life of Ramakrishna, *studiously avoiding all miracles*.
The life should be written as an illustration of the doctrines he
preached. Only his — do not bring me or any living persons into that.
The main aim should be to give to the world what he taught, and the life
as illustrating that. I, unworthy though I am, had one commission — to
bring out the casket of jewels that was placed in my charge and make it
over to you. Why to you? Because the hypocrites, the jealous, the
slavish, and the cowardly, those who believe in matter only, can never
do anything. Jealousy is the bane of our national character, natural to
slaves. Even the Lord with all His power could do nothing on account of
this jealousy. Think of me as one who has done all his duty and is now
dead and gone. Think that the whole work is upon your shoulders. Think
that you, young men of our motherland, are destined to do this. Put
yourselves to the task. Lord bless you. Leave me, throw me quite out of
sight. Preach the new ideal, the new doctrine, the new life. Preach
against nobody, against no custom. Preach neither for nor against caste
or any other social evil. Preach to let "hands off", and everything will
come right.

My blessings on you all, my brave, steadfast, and loving souls.

</div>
