---
title: TO MY BRAVE BOYS

---
<div>

[←](reply_to_the_calcutta_address.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](a_plan_of_work_for_india.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/044_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/022_alasinga.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/021_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Addressee [»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/022_alasinga.htm)

## TO MY BRAVE BOYS

(Written to Alasinga Perumal from New York on 19th November, 1894.)

Push on with the organization. Nothing else is necessary but these —
*love, sincerity, and patience*. What is life but growth, i.e.
expansion, i.e. love? Therefore all love is life, it is the only law of
life; all selfishness is death, and this is true here or hereafter. It
is life to do good, it is death not to do good to others. Ninety per
cent of human brutes you see are dead, are ghosts — for none lives, my
boys, but he who loves. Feel, my children, feel; feel for the poor, the
ignorant, the downtrodden; feel till the heart stops and the brain reels
and you think you will go mad — then pour the soul out at the feet of
the Lord, and then will come power, help, and indomitable energy.
Struggle, struggle, was my motto for the last ten years. Struggle, still
say I. When it was all dark, I used to say, struggle; when light is
breaking in, I still say, struggle. Be not afraid, my children. Look not
up in that attitude of fear towards that infinite starry vault as if it
would crush you. Wait! In a few hours more, the whole of it will be
under your feet. Wait, money does not pay, nor name; fame does not pay,
nor learning. It is love that pays; it is character that cleaves its way
through adamantine walls of difficulties.

Now the question before us is this. There cannot be any growth without
liberty. Our ancestors freed religious thought, and we have a wonderful
religion. But they put a heavy chain on the feet of society, and our
society is, in a word, horrid, diabolical. In the West, society always
had freedom, and look at them. On the other hand, look at their
religion.

Liberty is the first condition of growth. Just as man must have liberty
to think and speak, so he must have liberty in food, dress, and
marriage, and in every other thing, so long as he does not injure
others.

We talk foolishly against material civilisation. The grapes are sour.
Even taking all that foolishness for granted, in all India there are,
say, a hundred thousand really spiritual men and women. Now, for the
spiritualisation of these, must three hundred millions be sunk in
savagery and starvation? Why should any starve? How was it possible for
the Hindus to have been conquered by the Mohammedans? It was due to the
Hindus' ignorance of material civilization. Even the Mohammedans taught
them to wear tailor-made clothes. Would the Hindus had learnt from the
Mohammedans how to eat in a cleanly way without mixing their food with
the dust of the streets! Material civilization, nay, even luxury, is
necessary to create work for the poor. Bread! Bread! I do not believe in
a God, who cannot give me bread here, giving me eternal bliss in heaven!
Pooh! India is to be raised, the poor are to be fed, education is to be
spread, and the evil of priestcraft is to be removed. No priestcraft, no
social tyranny! More bread, more opportunity for everybody! Our young
fools organise meetings to get more power from the English. They only
laugh. None deserves liberty who is not ready to give liberty. Suppose
the English give over to you all the power. Why, the powers that be
then, will hold the people down, and let them not have it. Slaves want
power to make slaves.

Now, this is to be brought about slowly, and by only insisting on our
religion and giving liberty to society. Root up priestcraft from the old
religion, and you get the best religion in the world. Do you understand
me? Can you make a European society with India's religion? I believe it
is possible, and must be.

The grand plan is to start a colony in Central India, where you can
follow your own ideas independently, and then a little leaven will
leaven all. In the meanwhile form a Central Association and go on
branching off all over India. Start only on religious grounds now, and
do not preach any violent social reform at present; only do not
countenance foolish superstitions. Try to revive society on the old
grounds of universal salvation and equality as laid down by the old
Masters, such as Shankarâchârya, Râmânuja, and Chaitanya.

Have fire and spread all over. Work, work. Be the servant while leading.
Be unselfish, and *never listen to one friend in private accusing
another*. Have infinite patience, and success is yours.

Now take care of this: Do not try to "boss" others, as the Yankees say.
Because I always direct my letters to you, you need not try to show your
consequence over my other friends. I know you never can be such a fool,
but still I think it my duty to warn you. This is what kills all
organizations. Work, work, for, to work only for the good of others is
life.

I want that there should be no hypocrisy, no Jesuitism, no roguery. I
have depended always on the Lord, always on Truth broad as the light of
day. Let me not die with stains on my conscience for having played
Jesuitism to get up name or fame, or even to do good. There should not
be a breath of immorality, nor a stain of policy which is bad.

No shilly-shally, no *esoteric blackguardism*, no secret humbug, nothing
should be done in a corner. No special favouritism of the Master, no
Master at that, even. Onward, my brave boys — money or no money — men or
no men! Have you love? Have you God? Onward and forward to the breach,
you are irresistible.

How absurd! The Theosophical magazines saying that they, the
Theosophists, prepared the way to my success! Indeed! Pure nonsense!
Theosophists prepared the way!

Take care! Beware of everything that is untrue; stick to truth and we
shall succeed, maybe slowly, but surely. Work on as if I never existed.
Work as if on each of you depended the whole work. Fifty centuries are
looking on you, the future of India depends on you. Work on. I do not
know when I shall be able to come. This is a great field for work. They
can at best praise in India, but they will not give a cent for anything;
and where shall they get it, *beggars* themselves? Then, they have lost
the faculty of doing public good for the last two thousand years or
more. They are just learning the ideas of nation, public, etc. So I need
not blame them.

Blessings to you all!

</div>
