+++
title = "Navratri – The Nine Nights of Goddessxa0Durga"
date = "October 10, 2018"

+++
![21762094_10159373640625574_5968834606492638825_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/21762094_10159373640625574_5968834606492638825_n.jpg?w=676)  
Tonight marks the start of NavRatri – the Nine Nights of Goddess Durga.
In North Indian tradition, we mark each one of the Nine as being
dedicated to a particular NavaDurga Aspect of MataDI; whereas in South
India, it is more common to regard it as three sets of three days apiece
– one for each of the TriDevi. In either case, NavaRatri isfollowed by
a tenth day – Dussehra –which is symbolically tied to a number of
mythic culminations of war against evil.

As applies the tradition we follow, in addition to the more commonly
commemorated Victory of Mother Durga against the demon Mahishasur, the
Nine Nights also trace a ‘deeper’ set of stories and cycle – that of the
(re-)birth and resurrection of the Goddess as the Daughter of the
Mountain \[‘Shailaputri’; the Mountain in question being the King of the
Himalayas\] following Her self-immolation upon the pyre of the
ill-starred Sacrifice of Daksha, and the ongoing pathway of ascension
and (re-)empowerment which She undergoes until eventually
re-immanentizing the ‘true’ status as the all-powerful (a rather
figurative partial rendering of ‘Siddhidhatri’ now that I think about
it) Shakti.श्री महाराज्ञी , श्रीमत् सिंहासनेश्वरी , भुवनेश्वरी, देवी
दुर्गा

It is also, of course, as with many great religious texts – a beautiful
love story. In part composed of the Goddess’s determination to overcome
even death itself (although Mritunjaya is, of course, appropriately
enough, a title more commonly affixed to another …) in pursuit of
Reunification with Her Beloved Mahadeva; and the post-reincarnation
tribulations She encounters (particularly as ‘Brahmacharini’ – the
‘Seeker of the Absolute’) when endeavouring to win (back) the heart of
the grieving Great God – Who has become so overwhelmed with the loss of
His ‘other half’ \[the theonym of Ardhanarishvara helping to show just
how sincerely this term is meant\] , that in addition to carrying out
the most appropriately brutal of dismembering sanctions against those
responsible and wandering the Universe in search of peace, that He has
(mythically) literally burnt to ashes Kamadeva (‘Love’ – a figure not
entirely unlike modern Western depictions of Cupid in some elements of
form and function) for daring to attempt to intervene.

The re-unification of the Divine Pair, which is associated with the
culmination of the first three nights of NavRatri, and in particular the
celebrated Marriage which takes place following the ‘revelation’ of
ChandraGhanta \[lit.: “Moon-Bell”, although more figuratively,
“Illumination”\], leads on to a perhaps more ‘exoterically directed’
phase of the NavaDurgs. Here, just as ‘Moon’ progresses to ‘Sun’ with a
growing intensity of rays and warmth and generative power following the
Dawn, ‘Princess’ takes on the greater regality of ‘Queen’; with the
Aspect of Kushmanda having the supreme imperial power even over the Sun,
Surya \[this, as a point of interest, records what is very likely the
very ancient Proto-Indo-European pantheon’s setup – wherein in direct
contrast to the Greek-influenced popular perception of such things, it
appears that the Solar Deity was, in fact, female; something also
attested via Sol in the Nordic cosmology and associated mythography\],
and exercising judicious responsibility for the nourishment of the whole
of creation via the Sun’s holy rays. What may be regarded as a
‘motherly’, ‘generative’, and ‘matrimonial’ phase of the NavaDurgs is
then presented in more literal terms with Skandamata \[‘Mother of
Skanda’, the Hindu War God … well, one of the deities with a strong
‘war’ function to Their portfolio – takes after His Mother in that
regard 😛 ; although interestingly, as connoted by the Kartikeya theonym
of Skanda, She does not necessarily give birth to Him … but that, is
another story for another time – although it nevertheless occurs that
notwithstanding the fact that She is genetically Skanda’s mother, the
recognition of and consequent incorporation of worthy figures directly
into the Imperial Household via ‘adoption’ of a sort, continues the
Regal emblematic-exemplary conduct of this phase of the NavaDurgs\].

The Birth of Lord Skanda does not simply represent a greater
immanentization of ‘motherhood’ into the NavaDurga Cycle – but also,
introduces a most serious (my)theme of righteous violence. For the
ensuing NavaDurga Forms, Katyayani and KaalRatri, are counted amongst
the foremost Warrior Forms and Slayer/Destroyer Aspects of the Goddess;
the former directly responsible for the slaying of Mahishasur (which we
might perhaps regard as something akin to the ‘archetypal’ Durga
demon-slaying myth) and radiant as the beautiful force embodiment of
Divine Anger, the self-empowered blade of vindication through
Deva-station; while the latter is as ‘dark’ (‘Kaal’) as the void which
preceded Creation, as ‘all-consuming’ as Time (‘Kaal’; the ‘fire’ in
which the universe entire burns during the span of existence), as
‘all-enfolding’ as Night (‘Ratri’) (and with all the ‘finality’ and
‘Annihilation’ that the ‘ultimate’ Destroyer of the Universe. These Two
NavaDurg Aspects thus represent both the righteous upholding and
protection of Dharma (through most beautiful(ly incarnated) violence),
as well as the power and penchant to protect Her Devotees . Dharmo
Rakshati Rakshitaha. KaalRatri also represents ‘illumination’ – for in
the dark of the night (‘KaalRatri’), the truth can shine clearer,
particularly if, like the Stars, it is ‘hidden’ in daylight hours.

But if the phase running to KaalRatri represents the rising power of
anger, and the celebration of righteous violence – then the transition
from KaalRatri to MahaGauri \[‘Great White\[ness\]’\] is its culmination
and transcension. Here, the immense fury of KaalRatri, which burns with
such black intensity as to exceed the universe itself, is sublimated
into a more ‘beatific’ emotion; and while in some tellings, MahaGauri is
the ‘restoration’ of the fairness and beauty of Devi following whatever
calamitous crisis that Kali was manifested for having passed (generally
in tide of blood), it would perhaps be more apt to regard this state not
as the absence of anger – but rather as the establishment of ‘control’
over the previous quality of berserk fury, so that it does not burn ‘out
of control’ and become destabilizing in its all-consuming rage. This can
be adduced, in part, from some of the specific mythology around
MahaGauri – wherein, after having managed to once again regain Her most
fair complexion from the blackness of the Kali Form as MahaGauri, Durga
voluntarily re-adopts the terrifying Annihilator Aspect as necessary to
confront the specific threats arrayed before Her.

This (self-)mastery, and its accompanying mastery of the universe at
large, also underpins the subsequent and final transition – that from
MahaGauri into Siddhidhatri. Just as the movement from blackness to
white light entails the spectrum from (that which is beyond) nothingness
to ‘everything’ (for within white light, as can be seen via the aid of a
prism, lies the entire run of the colours and qualities of visible
light), so too does the Final Form entail, put simply, “all and
everything”. Here, Siddhidhatri is regarded on one level as the
‘Bestower of Boons, of Powers’ – with the ‘Siddhis’ in question being
regarded as abilities that MataDI has attained, and representing
qualities and faculties that can be bestowed upon the worthy and learned
devotee.

Yet it is intriguing to look further at the linguistics at play here –
as Siddhi can also mean ‘perfection’, ‘fulfilment’, ‘wisdom’, and
‘liberation’. This is thus a most fitting ‘final destination’ along the
NavaDurg Path. While ‘Dhatri’, in addition to its meaning as ‘bestower’
or ‘giver’ \[also cognate and from the same roots as English terms like
“Dative” and “”Donation”\], with slight change of inflection is rendered
as “Earth” (thus conceptually linking back to both Durga as
‘Earth-Mother’, and more figuratively with the symbolic connotation of
the span of the universe in mind, in conjunction with Siddhi, referring
to one who ‘makes whole’ the World – as we often regard those we love ..
wives in adulthood, our mothers more especially when we are younger;
although, as ever, and as extensively shown via the specific myths of
the previous Eight Forms, this ‘making whole’ of the World often
entailing active violence against those who would poison and destroy its
fabric and inhabitants both mortal and otherwise\], as well as in
slightly more modern connotation, the idea of a “foster mother”.

The idea of the ‘perfect’ (foster) mother is very much an appropriate
one for how we regard Her, and stands at the opposite end of the
spectrum … and yet not at all distinct … from young maid Shailaputri
with whom the NavaDurga Cycle began. Interestingly, though, it also
represents arguably a greater ‘(self-)realization’ , empowerment,
(self-)mastery, and universally-immanent Might , as compared to the
‘previous’ culmination of a cycle of Devi – as Lady Sati, the Wife of
Lord Shiva Whose self-immolation in response to Her father’s most rash
and affronting endeavours at the humiliation of the Divine Couple leads
to Her reincarnation as Shailaputri as a result (I hesitate to say “in
the first place”, for other \[Adi-\]Shakta/i related reasons\].

After all, not only do we see the ‘mistakes of the past’ successfully
overcome, the ‘pattern” of the previous cycle abrogated with, for
instance, ChandraGhanta’s dispelling of Her Father’s highly unfavourable
mis-perception of Mahadeva – thus allowing for a far better relationship
between Shiva and His father-in-law this time around as compared to the
lethally fractious one He had grimacingly borne from Daksha as father of
Sati towards Him earlier … but it is hard further to imagine Durga, by
now the mightiest of the Gods in part as a result of this quest or
journey of ’empowerment’, and quite literally universally (that is to
say, by the Universe and its fabric itself) hailed as \*the\* Power
\[‘Shakti’\] allowing Herself to be placed in such a clearly iniquitous
position by the petty and small-minded dictates of what is ultimately, a
lesser being.

In both cases, there are ardent lessons for the Devotee, of clear and
valuable ambit.

And a universe strewn with titanic corpses of some of those who have
refused to get the point.

Bringing it back to matters contemporary – I shall endeavour to do as I
have done in previous years, and post imagery and commentary on each
NavaDurga Aspect, upon their Night.

To begin, we have this excellent Pandal – which depicts each of the Nine
NavaDurgas , as well as Lady Sati upon the pyre, as well as the Presence
of Mahadev as you can see from the Tripundra & Tryambaka. Alongside can
also be seen Her Sons, Ganesha and Skanda; in addition to the other
TriDevi, Lakshmi, and Saraswati; as well as, of course, Dawon – the
Vahana of Mother Durga.

A fitting beginning 😉

जय माता दी

जय जय हे महिषासुरमर्दिनि रम्यकपर्दिनि शैलसुते

जै माता कालि जै माता दुर्गे।  
कालि दुर्गे नमो नमः॥
