+++
title = "MahaGauri – The Eighth Night of NavRatri – Eighth of thexa0NavaDurgas"
date = "October 19, 2018"

+++
![1509954_10156188166155574_8661708707416533420_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/1509954_10156188166155574_8661708707416533420_n.jpg?w=676)

The Eight Night of #NavRatri is dedicated to Ma as MahaGauri – The Great
White One.

Now, as readers of yesterday’s piece – on KaalRatri – will be patently
aware, this stands in seemingly stark contrast to the previous Night’s
Aspect of MataJI, Who is the great(est) Black one. And yet, as it
happens, a ‘deeper’ perspective sees Them entirely differently. That is
to say, that Ma as MahaGauri is in fact a \*continuation\*, a
\*furtherance\* of Ma as KalaRatri. And, indeed, the ongoing trajectory
of the NavaDurga Mythic Cycle that runs right through from Ma as
Shailaputri to Ma as SiddhiDatri , and beyond.

So who is this Goddess, and what explains Her Name?

MahaGauri is a beneficent and beautiful form of Parvati (indeed, while I
have translated “Gauri” rather directly as “White” (compare the closely
related modern Hindi term “Gora” – ‘white person’), its rendering is
perhaps more aptly “Fair” (and therefore, “Beauty”) – for even more so
than today, in ancient times, “Fairness” of complexion and “Beauty” were
often (although, as we have seen from last night’s post on Kali, not
always) correlated); and is situated within the Mythic Cycle of
NavRatri, perhaps rather curiously, at two points simultaneously. I
shall expand upon why I think this might be so, later in this piece.

As applies Her occurrence immediately following KaalRatri, this is
because Ma as Kali, once the demonic threat was defeated and She was no
longer required to assume the Aspect of the (Dark) Annihilator, She
undertook to transform ‘back’ to a more gentle and perhaps beauteous
form. This is, in some tellings, the result of a joke made by MahaDev
toward Ma while She is still Kali – in which He comments upon Her Black
Complexion, and remarks that She is “Kaal” … which due to the inherent
double-meaning of the term, also connotes that She is Death to Him. This
is of course, truthful within the context of much of the mythology – but
I can understand why She may have been a bit upset by such a remark, and
therefore undertaken to become the opposite in at least partial direct
response.

She therefore sloughs off Her Dark Skin, to reveal the glistening White
Form which lies inside; and is recognized as MataDI in a less …
potentially-omnicidal guise, as a result.

This therefore shows the MahaGauri Aspect as the ‘transcending’ of an
array of the elements bound up with and intrinsic to Ma as Kali (as
well as, for that matter, an array of Durga’s other Forms – such as the
Katyayani Aspect which also precedes KaalRatri) – the supreme anger, the
death-dealing aspect, the war and violence, the terrifying experience,
the all-consuming nature of Time …

… and rather moves back toward the ‘other pole’ (or, more properly
speaking, the ‘other approach to the \*same\* pole’) of Parvati as the
Absolute, represented simultaneously by Ma as Kushmanda and Ma as
SiddhiDhatri. The much more ‘calm’ and ‘purified’ (for such, white can
also be a colour of – c.f the Brahmacharini Aspect we met upon the
Second Night of NavaRatri, in particular) visage of Uma as MahaGauri is
therefore the logical ‘progression’ between Ma as KaalRatri and Ma as
SiddhiDhatri (although, as we noted yesterday, Ma as Maha Kali is
\*also\* this ‘pole’ of Shakti in a Supreme Form and Immanentization
here into our Universe).

The ‘second’ occurrence of MahaGauri within the NavRatri mythic cycle,
is ‘actually’ chronologically earlier, if not as commonly thought of in
this context. It relates to the period immediately after Ma as
Brahmacharini had been pursuing Lord Shiva through the living of the
life of an ascetic, a ‘wild man’ up in His preferred Mountainous
environment. This had, perhaps predictably, lead to Ma winding up quite
‘dirty’ – as She had been living well beyond the ‘creature comforts’ of
Her Father’s Palace, in the wilderness. Once She had successfully won
His Mighty Heart, She therefore undertook to bathe in one of our sacred
rivers, partially as ‘purification’, so that She might once again appear
radiant for Her Marriage ceremony. Having washed off the patina of dirt
and dust and (cannabis?) smoke which had accumulated upon Her Divine
Form, She therefore was now resplendent as MahaGauri (Who then
implicitly goes on to once more (at least partially) Ascend toward
Brahman further as Ma ChandraGhanta – channelling the Illumination of
the Above through Her Moon Crown, and thence becoming, once married Ma
as Kushmanda – HiranyaGarbha Incarnate and thus Brahman). Now,
especially given the previously advanced logic that Mahadev is \*also\*
Brahman – and therefore that Ma Marrying Him \*again\* represents Her
(re-)Unification not only with Her Beloved Husband, but also with The
Absolute … this, too, shows the importance of the MahaGauri form as the
‘Purified’ stage immediately pre-ceding the (re-)Union with the Absolute
(whether Kushmanda or SiddhiDhatri, in this instance of the NavaDurga
Processional).

Yet there are two very important elements yet to be discussed that go
‘deeper’ than this more ‘surface-level’ (perhaps ironical phrasing
there) ‘narrative’ situation.

The first is the nature of the ‘impurities’ that are cleansed in order
to attain the MahaGauri state. These are, in very real senses,
‘Attachments’, as well as the physical side of things. And one can quite
feasibly reason that the ritual purifications inherent in the
\*actions\* of bathing in the Sacred River, scrubbing one’s skin,
removing dirt or .. er .. removing one’s own skin (with its
blood-spatter considering the Aspect in Question Whose Skin It Was And
Is – and consequentially, the setting aside of Weapons) etc. – these are
‘performative’ ‘echoes’, of the ‘spiritual purification’ going on
within. Indeed, due to the occasionally indirect manner by which we must
approach Sanskara matters, especially as mortals used to operating
largely in the material plane … it can definitely be argued that the
metaphysical resonance of these ‘performative actions’ is not merely
symbolic – but rather, through the acts required to establish ritual
purity in and with our bodies, not least due to the purposes to which we
are applying these actions (i.e. respect and endeavouring to allow us to
be closer to the Divine, righteousness, right-conduct in general) … they
\*also\* reshape our minds, our metaphysical presence, our spirits, our
soul.

Hence, the Example of MahaGauri is one to be followed in both senses:
that of one’s exterior form bathing in the sacred river, so to speak
(and maintaining cleanliness where possible and necessary, as
appropriate), and that of attempting to maintain a ‘purified’ spirit (as
necessary, possible, and appropriate – as the KaalRatri Aspect and
other, associated tales shows (such as the legend of KaalBhairavJi’s
necessary decapitation of Brahma), this is not always the right course
of action and precedence \*all the time\*) \*within\* said form …
‘metaphorically’ Sacred River Bathing, so to speak? … they are \*both\*
part and parcel of proper conduct.

Although, as we can see with the movement from KaalRatri to MahaGauri,
as compared to the movement from ‘wilderness-flecked’ Brahmacharini to
MahaGauri .. with greater attainment of spiritual understanding,
potency, ‘enlightenment’ following the ongoing cultivation of the soul
and one’s essence … the ‘direct’/’literal’ approach of the \*exterior\*
(performative) actions aforementioned becomes less and less required in
order to carry out the \*inner\* (transformative) actions required.
After all, to accomplish the transition to ‘Gauri’ status, Brahmacharini
must bathe in the Sacred River. Whereas KaalRatri (and, I suppose,
MahaGauri Herself, given the form ‘hiding’ (‘veiled’) under the Kali
Destroyer Aspect) is simply able to ‘will it’, so to speak – and Her
Dark Skin sloughs off to reveal the Truth Inside. (This, not at all
coincidentally, is a figurative rendering of ‘MahaGauri’ – for what can
be more beautiful than the Truth).

But what are these ‘attachments’ aforementioned? Well, on one level, it
is the necessary involvement (I repeat – \*necessary\*) and entanglement
here in this mortal-material Universe of ours. Whether as Brahmacharini
engaged in the practices of figures such as mortal ascetics (but also
the AdiYogi, of course) up in the Himalayan Mountains (practices which
do not affect Eternal Goddesses in the same way that they do mortal
ascetics, especially once They (She) have ‘remembered’ Their (Her) True
Nature 😛 ); or as KaalRatri engaged in the bloody business of
demon-slaying, and battling here on the extant planes (inside-universe).

And on another level, it is the emotional ties – which, again, are
vitally necessary, especially in the context of the NavaDurga Cycle.
After all, to reference Terry Pratchett – “What would humans be without
love?” “RARE”. So, too, with these ‘attachments’ of emotions on the part
of the Goddess. The Love of Ma Parvati for MahaDev represents the
impulse via which She returns to Him and sets the Universe back into
Balance after it had been torn asunder via the Death of Sati and the
subsequent effects upon Mahadev and the surrounding Cosmos. Without
Love, in other words, She and He may not have reunified, especially as
and when They did. Although ‘at the same time’ (in fact, earlier, as
well as ‘omniwhen’), the passionate, questing, errant, \*seeking\* Love
displayed by Parvati for Mahadev, that too gets Sublimated into
something ‘higher’ through the course of the
Brahmacharini-through-to-(MahaGauri)-Chandraghanta evolutionary
progression. Had it remained as the hopeful ‘seeking’ ‘attachment’ (as
in, both the ‘seeking’ of re-attachment to Mahadev, as well as the sense
of this as an emotional attachment), it would have continued to bind Her
in embroilment … whereas the unification with and realization of the
Absolute, means that part is no longer necessary – the Eternal is what
remains.

The other emotional tie in question is that emblematic and intrinsic to
Ma as Kali – the great vengeance, the furious anger. This, without a
‘target’ to be affixed to and meted out upon, can only turn within … to
self-destruction. Nietzsche – “in times of peace, the warlike man fights
himself”. And this, too, is what we see (sadly) played out when Mother
Kali in frenzy inadvertently attacks Lord Shiva – for just as They are
two parts of the same Whole, (Ardhanarishvara), so too does that
represent an implicit ‘self-destructive’ / ‘self-harming’ act.

The Worlds-Burning Anger of Kali, therefore, had \*also\* to be
sublimated. For while it was necessary as the protective element, and
will be necessary still further as the World-Cleanser at the End of Time
.. it is a manifestation, a projection of the Absolute here into our
universe. As a vital form of ‘self-protection’ against the threat to
Dharma, to Rta, to the fabric of the Cosmos itself.

The Projection, however, is not the Absolute in its entirety. And
’embodying’ the Anger (for such Kali Is, amongst many, many other
elements and truth(s)), especially if it is ‘all-consuming’, is an
interference for many in \*being\* the Absolute (insofar as Brahman and
‘being’ even belong in the same sentence, particularly extra-universally
speaking), not least because it is focus (and therefore, in a certain
sense, ‘essence’) which keeps getting pulled back to concerns \*inside\*
the Universe (i.e. righteous combat against various demons) rather than
its implicit transcension .

\[Although I do maintain that the converse is also true – that the
transition between Katyayani and KaalRatri represents, further, Anger in
its escalation, as a pathway \*to\* the Absolute, for Kali is also
regarded as the Absolute, as Shakti; however, I shall refrain from
elaborating upon this point in order to perhaps expand upon it at some
future time … 😀 \]

The much more ‘calm’ and ‘beatific’ (in both, possibly three senses of
the term) demeanour and visage of MahaGauri, then, represents the
overcoming of these emotional ‘attachments’, en route to SiddhiDhatri,
and/or to Unification with Mahadev (in the context of their Marriage and
what it symbolizes; not least for and to Them).

However, there is yet a further sense by which MahaGauri is symbolic of
the movement toward and the ‘purification’ necessary on the way to The
Absolute.

I mentioned toward the start of this piece, the fact that MahaGauri
appears, so to speak, ‘twice’ within the NavaRatri Mythic Cycle – with
one of these being, arguably, somewhat ‘out of Chronological order’, and
the other being immediately following KaalRatri. These are no
coincidences.

For think about what “Kali” represents, what ‘Kaal’ means (well, \*one\*
particular element in both, I mean). “Time”.

That is to say, the realization of the Absolute (indeed, the process of
‘realization’ inherent in moving from illusion to truth, from darkness
to light – to reference a certain Upanishad … which also entails moving
from death \[also Kaal\] to immortality – the Eternal) implicitly
requires the transcension of Time. Time also stands, here, for, so to
speak “space-time” – that is to say, existence within the universe with
both its time-stream as well as the fact that, to quote Fight Club, on a
long enough time-line everybody’s survival rate drops to zero. (Some
might read the subtext there, in this Hindu context, as a hopeful note 😛
)

Thus we should find it of no suprise for the MahaGauri Aspect of Mata JI
to ‘turn up’, as and when required, ‘out of Time’ in terms of its
natural and ordinary flow, as well as immediately following the
transcension through KaalRatri.

Because she is, in a very real sense, to reference a certain
controversial thinker’s typology – a (Wo)Man Above Time. (It is an open
exercise in speculation, I suppose, as to whether Ma as KaalRatri would
therefore represent a (Wo)Man \*Against\* Time, as well … due to
standing against the rising, onrushing tide of demonic filth and
representing the armed arm of the prior virtuous age \*as well as\* the
Eternal (the ‘All-Time’), and the Outside Time, Who Shall End It)

So with all of that in mind … it should come as no especial surprise
that we invoke the example of Ma as MahaGauri, for Her beatitude and
grace, Her facility with the purification of the soul and the body and
the essence and the spirit, Her Charity and Love for Her Children – for
this, too, is from the Eternal; and represents a warm response to the
tribulations of life which we may get ourselves bound up and entangled
within, and which thus require Sublimation within this glorious White
Light lest they unconceivably (to us, anyway – trapped in the middles
thereof) hinder us upon our ongoing journeys of cultivation, development
and enlightenment.

Iconographically, Ma as MahaGauri both recalls a number of previous
Aspects of the NavaDurgas – in particular Ma as Shailaputri (Whom She is
occasionally regarded as a perhaps younger iteration of), as well as Ma
as Brahmacharini – as well as subtly hinting at being a ‘furtherance’
from either.

She is depicted with Hands in both Abhaya and Varada Mudra, as well as
bearing the Trishula and a Damaru in Her other Hands. Now, this is
especially interesting – for almost always the Trishula and Damaru are
to be depicted Together! And, as noted in last night’s KaalRatri
posting, where They are to be separated, this is something very profound
– namely, with the Trishula standing for the Eternal, the Empowerment,
the Divine, Regal, (Adi) Shakti .. and the Damaru as the Universe – with
its Time, regulated by the flow of beats from same … this is therefore a
‘decoupling’ of the Two. A subtle yet important reminder that
ultimately, the Eternal is indeed ‘beyond’ Universe. And that the
‘regulation’ of the Universe is not (although it \*is\* affixed to ..
when the Universe is ‘in bloom’ – which MahaGauri may be represented as
\*beyond\*, in terms of ‘time’) the Eternal Rule – directly speaking,
anyway. Although the regulation of our universe, the enforcement of its
maintenance, may very well be carried out with this most fearsome Weapon
representing the grand, supra-divine, Rta Rule. The Trishula’s ensign
significance as the emblem of Mahadev and of Rulership throughout the
Three Worlds and mastery of the forces of Creation (the three qualities,
inter alia) as well as Destruction, is also pertinent here – not least
because of the implicit symbology of all of these as ‘the same’ ,
especially as it happens within the Hands of the ETERNAL MA.

(And, in any case, the Trishula – with Its fearsome and formidable
powers of potentially universal annihilation – this, too, represents
Purification. For after all, the erasure of all that is ‘delusion’ or
‘illusion’ in the sense of having contingent existence or no real
existence at all … will leave only the Eternal. The destruction, the
unmaking, the MahaPralaya of the Universe, then, is the ultimate act of
Purification – as obliquely noted in the commentary upon Ma Kali as
presented last night. Although it is also worth noting that in Her Hands
here, this is held in abeyance (bilingual pun there) by Ma MahaGauri.
(Even despite the separation of Damaru and Trishula, which might perhaps
cause one a momentary panic of thinking the End of the World had been
and gone, leaving us trapped here after the Twilight of the Gods in some
sort of utterly interminable ‘hangover-morning’ .. metaphysically
speaking..).).

The Damaru may also, via its own internal paradox, speak to the nature
of MahaGauri and indeed Shakti – as the Damaru, via its
dhagad-dhagad-dhagad beat, symbolizes the flow and regularity of time
\*within\* the Universe, directing even Gods as the beat informs a
Dancer (well, two of Them, at least 😛 ) – but is also, simultaneously,
a \*ritual implement\*. That is to say, an important part of the
processes by which we may ‘encounter’ the Divine, the Eternal – and
therefore ‘step outside’ (or the Eternal may ‘step in’ within that
Sacred Space thus created by the drum-skin and the drum-beat’s bounds
and resonance, especially with in our minds conditioned and
re-calibrated by same) the temporal. Just as MahaGauri Is. “To be \*in\*
the World, yet not \*of\* the World”, indeed.

She is also very much depicted in association with the colour White –
which in addition to the emblematic value of ‘purity’ and ‘purification’
from dirt or ‘darkness’ or attachment (hence partially why (mortal)
Widows may also tend toward wearing White – for their ‘attachment’ to
their husbands is now a thing of the past, sundered via the almost
indisputable and occasionally seemingly incessant Blade of Mortality;
and not always easily stayed even via the best wishes of and
supplication to Its Holy Wielder(s)) on these values’ own terms (insofar
as ‘purification’ as a process can be understood sans both That Which Is
To Be Purified and That Which Must Be
Burned/Washed/Scrubbed/Sloughed/Sundered Away), also represents the
contrast with Ma as Kali that signifies the (not so much ‘ongoing’ as
that implies ‘within the timestream’ , as ‘Eternal’) transcension of
Time. Time, after all, is “the Fire in which we burn”. And therefore –
in a manner similar to how the Fire, when it has subsided, leaves potent
white ash (‘Vibhuti’ – which also means ‘power’ … which we see in
Sanskrit as … 😀 ) from the burning away of something’s perceived
‘impurities’, so too may MahaGauri be thought of.

The White Bull, as well, recalls Shiva and Nandi (i.e. the Unity, the
Absolute), and in addition to representing the conveyance of one blessed
and on the ascension (as we saw with Shailaputri’s path into the
(higher) Mountains in pursuit of MahaDeva), also recalls Ma as
Shailaputri for the purpose of showing the ‘circular’ shape of the
NavaDurga Mythic Cycle. Which, although it is not a ‘closed loop’, is
perhaps better ‘visualized’ (other than with these lovely depictions of
Each NavaDurga I’v been posting, of course!) as something of a
‘helicase’, a ‘spiral’ – that is ‘circular’ in two-dimensions, yet when
considered in three, winds ‘around’ but also in so doing so, progresses
on an inexorable pathway ‘upward’.

Although, of course, if one were to view it \*four-dimensionally\* or
more (that is to say, not just in the sense of viewing it unfolding ‘in
time’ in front of one .. somehow – as it is an achingly slow process,
some might argue, dependent upon one’s perspective and
‘attachment-immersion’ within Time; but also with the ‘pathway’ of Time
mapped as well, and therefore re-intersecting out of ‘three-dimensional’
order, so to speak, functioning according to its own ‘deeper’ logic and
(no doubt,) spiraliform existence ..); then further patterns emerge.
Especially when, as is somewhat pictographically represented with
yesterday’s exquisitely beautiful murti Ma Kali as this \*also\*
intersects with The Infinite, the Eternal, Shakti ‘unbound’,
‘unfettered’, ‘unmanifested’ as the Lingodbhava running through the
Cosmos an the Dimensions, so to speak.

In any case, She is Most Beautiful (MahaGauri); and Bounteous in Her
Charity, via the expressed desire for relief from these shackles upon
us, which She can grant, upon the road upwards, ever upwards, via
Shuddh. For just as Mata KALI is the Supreme Liberator … so, too, is
MahaGauri. And arguably in a more ‘easy’ and ‘equitable’ pathway for
those not necessarily capable or willing to manifest the Omnicidal Rage
as a tool to transcend the Universe (in either sense – that of
transcension in the sense of ‘escape’ or ‘endurance’ … or of
destruction until nothing remains \*except\* the Eternal – That Which
\*IS\*) . .

Onwards, Upwards, as the rising smoke from the ‘purification’ pyre, and
as the rising heat energy from the sacrificial Havan is a conduit to
DevaLoka …

… to SiddhiDhatri. Perfection. Shakti (Incarnate).

Jai.

ॐ देवी महागौर्यै नम
