+++
title = "Kushmanda – 4th Navadurga, The 4th Night ofxa0NavRatri"
date = "October 14, 2018"

+++
![21766318_10159392096785574_5065876651659804768_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/21766318_10159392096785574_5065876651659804768_n.jpg?w=350&h=467)

The Fourth Night of #NavRatri is dedicated to Ma as Kushmanda – the
Power of the Sun. Now, this is my own somewhat figurative rendering of
the name; with a more direct translation working out something like
“Warmth of the Cosmic Egg”. And while it might be tempting, I suppose,
to think of the Sun as perhaps being the warmth-associated round yellow
object (like the yolk of an egg maybe) of the cosmos, there’s quite a
bit more going on here than simply that interpretation.

For in addition to the Sun (which is commanded and ’empowered’ by Her –
thus recalling, in somewhat residual format, the quite likely identity
of the Proto-Indo-European solar deity as \*female\* rather than male,
something preserved to a certain extent also with the Nordic figure of
Sol), She is also associated with the HiranyaGarbha – the ‘Golden Egg’
mentioned in an ancient Hymn of the RigVeda (Hymn 121 of the 10th
Mandala) which forms one of the earlier Hindu creation myths.

Now, this is very interesting – for in addition to its obvious
generative function, the Egg in question is also identified in
post-RigVedic literature as Brahman, that is to say “the Absolute”. And
according to the subsequent elaborations upon the Vedic hymnal in
question, shortly after the inception of the universe via its coming
into being, it undergoes a process I suppose you might refer to as
‘mitosis’, whereby the Egg splits into two (which may, in fact, be what
is metaphorically referred to via the notion of Kushmanda \*smiling\* to
create the universe – for a mouth shape entails a line wherein the face
comes apart; while a smile ensures this is regarded positively rather
than a ‘mere’ fracture; if the grin exposes teeth it shows the ‘bones’
of its bearer, also). These two, as with many ‘fundamental pairings’ to
be found in an array of cultures the world over (I am reminded instantly
of the New Zealand Maori figures of Rangi and Papatuanuku, the Ouranos
and Gaia (or, for that matter, Chronos & Rhea) of the Greeks, and no
doubt many more examples besides) are the Heavens and the Earth.

However, the original Vedic scripture is rather more terse when it comes
to such details – only insisting that this figure (not at all
coincidentally translated by Ralph Griffith as “Mother of the World”),
who is to be regarded and worshipped as supreme, is responsible for the
creation, filling, ordering, and I suppose one might say “en-lightening”
of the Cosmos.

![kushmanda
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/kushmanda-1.jpg?w=676)

In either case, I believe the implication is quite clear: This
‘Cosmokrator’, this Mother of the World with golden, shining radiance
as Her hall-mark (in multiple senses of the term) … is Adi Shakti. The
First Power, Who precedes the Universe, and Who is responsible for its
investiture with All and Everything at its Beginning. Which, of course,
gels with another translation often proffered for HiranyaGarbha – Golden
Womb.

Kushmanda, then, as a Theonym, does not simply refer to She Who in the
present provides the Sun with its radiance and lustre – its “warmth”
(or, ‘energy’ I suppose one might additionally render it as), as well as
its direction. But rather, to She Who at the very outset of there even
having been a Sun did so. Has always done so. Indeed, created and set
the Sun into Its Portion of the ‘Cosmic Vault’ in the very literal
‘first place’. The primordial ‘energy’ and ’empowerment’ \[for such
‘Shakti’ directly is\] at the inception of our reality.

So, having explained and expanded somewhat upon the name “Kushmanda” and
who She ‘really’ is … the obvious question upon our minds is – just what
is She doing here, at this part and portion of the NavaDurga Cycle?
Surely, She should be positioned at the very Beginning? Or, in
considerable ‘light’ of what I have earlier said about Ma as
Siddhidhatri, She should be positioned at the \*end\* of the NavaRatri
Cycle as the re-unification of wandering Parvati’s path through the
phases with Her Greatest and Highest Self?

Ah, now you are catching on! Take another look at that last clause.
“Re-Unification”, rendering Her as Her Highest Self.

For what happened immediately prior to This Night in the NavRatri Cycle?
That’s right – the Marriage of Parvati to Shiva. What is this? Why, a
Re-Unification. But not just \*any\* re-unification. Nor even one of
most beauteous lovers separated by bounds of death and beguilement and
circumstance.

Parvati is the Earth Mother – this can be seen even most directly in Her
Theonym : (Female) Stone or Mountain. Shiva is the Sky Father.

The bringing back together of these two, then, as happened when Ma as
Chandraghanta was able to ensure Their Divinely Ordained Marriage could
once again take place (which itself was only able to take place
following the metaphysical-theological Debate of Ma as Brahmacharini
with Lord Shiva, wherein She sets out to Him and vice versa the ways in
which the two ‘parts’ of the Universe may perhaps be re-joined), thus
‘makes whole the Universe’. Putting \*back together\* the Sky and the
Earth which are regarded as having \*divided\* from the Hiranyagarbha.
And, of course, re-creating the fundamental unity of essence inherent in
the Ardhanarishvara shared/combined Aspect of Lord Shiva and Lady
Parvati.

Or, to phrase it perhaps more simply – At the Beginning of Time, They
were One. Even despite having emanated (back – for all of this has
happened before, in a previous cycle of Creation) into Two, They
remained so close as to be inseparable. Up until tragedy and calamity,
engineered perhaps unwittingly by the Spawn of Brahma, lead to Their
fundamental severance, with the Slaying of Sati, and a consequent
unfurling of Darkness in a most ‘benighting’ and horrendous sense
throughout the very fabric of space-time with the Grief of Shiva and His
wanderings throughout the Universe bearing Her slain body (For even in
Death, on one level at least, They could not be Parted).

Which could only be \*un-done\* … via Her reincarnation, first as
Shailaputri, then as Brahmacharini, and then as Chandraghanta (in all
cases, Ma as Parvati), and re-marriage to Her Mahadev. (Har Mahadev!)

Thus, She (and, for that matter, He) (are)is once more rendered,
“whole”, “complete”, Brahman made manifest, The Absolute.

And as a further point of interest, it is also possible to trace
‘backwards’ the emanation of the Sun’s Rays through the above
enumeration of the preceding NavaDurga Forms. For The Light after sunset
and at night (remembering the aforementioned metaphysical condition of
darkness about the three worlds as a result of the occlusion of the
smoking-pyre of Sati’s self-immolatory ‘sacrifice’;) last of all falls
upon the terrestrial (the ‘Shaila’, of which She is also Putri), having
descended (the opposite of the ‘ascent’ implied in Brahmacharini – and
recall also the rendering of this Theonym as the ‘Seeker of the
Absolute!’ Finally She has Won!), from the Radiance of the Moon
(ChandraGhanta), which is itself a reflection of the Radiance of the Sun
– which, as noted above in the cursory writeup of the ‘contemporary’
role and function of Ma as Kushmanda, is generously provided via Shakti
Brahman to the Sun in the first place.

You see how it all ‘hangs together’ just so?

![Mata Kushmanda – Fourth
Durga](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/mata-kushmanda-e28093-fourth-durga.jpg?w=676)

This also represents the ‘pathway back to the Light’ for not just the
Devotee, but also for Lord Shiva and even Lady Parvati, after a sense.
Particularly after we consider the effect of Lady ChandraGhanta to
‘clear away the darkness’ and occlusion – behind and both prior and
subsequent to which … the Sun is radiantly apparent! ‘Divinity’ in a
most direct sense! (this hinges around the etymology of the word back to
its PIE roots) Although it may take another kind of ‘eyes’ entirely to
look ‘behind’ ‘above’ and indeed ‘through’ the otherwise potentially
literally ‘blinding’ light of the Sun ‘further’ to the actual Source
Herself !

In any case, to bring things back to the more ‘contemporary’ and perhaps
‘day to day’ (I hesitate to use the term ‘mundane’! ‘Mundus’, perhaps,
notwithstanding) sense of Kushmanda, just as Ma as ChandraGhanta
represented the Devi as the Princess endeavouring to be wed, and regal
yet with a certain sense of contingent regency upon another (an
additional appropriateness for the Lunar symbolism!), Kushmanda
therefore represents Ma as Queen. As MahaRani, indeed, of the Cosmos.
Where Her Power (both as half of the Absolute Sovereign, as well as, in
an overlapping sense, that Sovereign Herself) is not that drawn from
another and exercised ‘contingently’. But rather, ‘self-empowering’, the
‘grund-norm’ (a term drawn from an interesting legal theory as to what
makes Law Law, which is, now that I think about it both incredibly apt
for Adi Shakti, and also for Shakti-As-Brahman-As-Dharma As Rta!), upon
which all else, via the Power of the Sun (for truly, pretty much almost
all life here on Earth is, in a very real sense, either directly or
indirectly “solar powered” if one thinks upon it) Depends.

While Devi as Queen, in the more ‘matronly’ sense via which She also
literally (in a sense perhaps surely somewhat different to previous)
‘once again’ becomes a Mother, is the \*next\* phase of the NavaDurgas –
with the Birth of Lord Skanda (admittedly, to other mothers – yet more
upon that tomorrow night!); this is also arguably the first instance
wherein Devi is presented as a Mother, as well as the first instance
within the cycle wherein She is held as (resumptive) Absolute. I believe
this adds yet another layer of meaning to both the traditional Hindu
theological/ethical maxim that positive conduct toward one’s Parents is
the Highest Act Of Piety, as well as the myth of Lords Ganesha and
Skanda circumambulating the world (or, in the case of Ganesha, Their
Parents – the aforementioned Divine Pairing of Shiva & Shakti-Parvati)
which is customarily utilized to illustrate same. After all, by
performing parikrama about the HiranyaGarbha, Lord Ganesha has therefore
Traced with His Glorious Footsteps a Path around the Universe Entire.

We thus pray to and honour Ma as Kushmanda both as the act of honouring
one’s ultimate parent(s), the author(s) of not just our particular
existence – but of the Universe and the Cosmos Entire. It is right, and
it is most eminently righteous, to do so.

We also ask Kushmanda and Her Radiant Smile to bless us by bestowing the
Solar-connoted virtues which are inherent in the Sun’s en-livening rays
throughout creation. What is meant by this, is Charisma – the shining
and glowing force of one’s personality, to be directed toward positive
and productive purpose; is Health and Wealth – the former being
intrinsically contingent upon the empowerment of the Sun (and not least
via vitamin D and melatonin-regulation and suchlike), the latter also
ultimately deriving from it and perhaps also being metaphorically
resonant with the ‘sunny’ lustre of gold as its iconographic
representation; for the removal of darkness and negativity – as the
Sun’s rays quite directly do, and to reference the political maxim about
sunlight being “the best disinfectant”; for encouragement – just as the
Sun’s rising stirs our hearts and strengthens our spirits even as it
removes the gloom; for the fertility of imagination (and elsewhere) that
is directly correlate with Her role in our mythohistory, and the
illumination of concepts and (re-)connection ‘back with the source’ via
solar inspiration which She can bestow; and for Empowerment – in the
‘microcosm’ of our lives and personhoods and physical forms and
communities .. just as, in an initial and ongoing sense, the Universe,
the Cosmos at large.

![21765083_10159392097425574_8362860769558449757_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/21765083_10159392097425574_8362860769558449757_n.jpg?w=676)

Iconographically, Kushmanda continues the broad themes of the previous
Incarnation of Parvati as Chandraghanta – Being a multi-armed clearly
radiant Devi form accompanied by Dawon; although with significant
additions to both the Weaponry and other Instruments of Piety carried by
the previous Aspect. These are the Chakra (often associated with Lord
Vishnu, and somewhat luridly translated by myself from time to time as
the “destructo-disc”; its 108 razor-sharp edges are symbolic of Dharma,
its shape may also suggest the Solar Disc in our sky (especially with
the radiating blades/points therefrom), and its range indicates that the
scope and ambit of the Bearer’s Power is unlimited – encompassing the
Universe Entire. Most aptly appropriate for Her!); as well as another
liquid-carrying vessel that is said to carry the Amrit – the ‘elixir of
life’.

And, of course, for reasons that ought be patently obvious, instead of
the Moon, She is Crowned with the Sun. (In many illustrated portrayals,
anyway)

Homage To You Who Is Mother Of The Universe Entire

ॐ देवी कूष्माण्डायै नम

Jai Mata DI !
