---
title: SWAMI VIVEKANANDA ON INDIA

---
<div>

[←](divinity_of_man.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](religious_harmony.htm)

  

## SWAMI VIVEKANANDA ON INDIA

(Bay City *Daily Tribune*, March 21, 1894)

Bay City had a distinguished visitor yesterday in the person of Swami
Vive Kananda, the much talked of Hindoo monk. He arrived at noon from
Detroit where he has been the guest of Senator Palmer and proceeded
immediately to the Fraser house. There he was seen by a reporter for
*The Tribune*.

Kananda spoke entertainingly of his country and his impressions of this
country. He came to America via the Pacific and will return via the
Atlantic. "This is a great land," he said, "but I wouldn't like to live
here. Americans think too much of money. They give it preference over
everything else. Your people have much to learn. When your nation is as
old as ours you will be wiser. I like Chicago very much and Detroit is a
nice place."

Asked how long he intended remaining in America, he replied: "I do not
know. I am trying to see most of your country. I go east next and will
spend some time at Boston and New York. I have visited Boston but not to
stay. When I have seen America I shall go to Europe. I am very anxious
to visit Europe. I have never been there."

Concerning himself the easterner said he was 30 years old. He was born
at Calcutta and educated at a college in that city. His profession calls
him to all parts of the country, and he is at all times the guest of the
nation.

India has a population of 285,000,000," he said. "Of these about
65,000,000 are Mohammedans and most of the others Hindoos. There are
only about 600,000 Christians in the country, and of these at least
250,000 are Catholics. Our people do not, as a rule, embrace
Christianity; they are satisfied with their own religion. Some go into
Christianity for mercenary motives. They are free to do as they wish. We
say let everybody have his own faith. We are a cunning nation. We do not
believe in bloodshed. There are wicked men in our country and they are
in the majority, same as in your country. It is unreasonable to expect
people to be angels."

Vive Kananda will lecture in Saginaw to-night

LECTURE LAST NIGHT

The lower floor of the opera house was comfortably filled when the
lecture began last evening. Promptly at 8:15 o'clock Swami Vive Kananda
made his appearance on the stage, dressed in his beautiful oriental
costume. He was introduced in a few words by Dr. C. T. Newkirk.

The first part of the discourse consisted of an explanation of the
different religions of India and of the theory of transmigration of
souls. In connection with the latter, the speaker said it was on the
same basis as the theory of conservation was to the scientist. This
latter theory, he said, was first produced by a philosopher of his
country. They did not believe in a creation. A creation implied making
something out of nothing. That was impossible. There was no beginning of
creation, just as there was no beginning of time. God and creation are
as two lines — without end, without beginning, without \[?\] parallel.
Their theory of creation is, "It is, was, and is to be." They think all
punishment is but re-action. If we put our hand in the fire it is
burned. That is the re-action of the action. The future condition of
life is determined by the present condition. They do not believe God
punishes. "You, in this land," said the speaker, "praise the man who
does not get angry and denounce the man who does become angry. And yet
thousands of people throughout this country are every day accusing God
of being angry. Everybody denounces Nero, who sat and played on his
instrument while Rome was burning, and yet thousands of your people are
accusing God of doing the same thing today."

The Hindoos have no theory of redemption in their religion. Christ is
only to show the way. Every man and woman is a divine being, but covered
as though by a screen, which their religion is trying to remove. The
removal of that Christians call salvation, they, freedom. God is the
creator, preserver, and destroyer of the universe.

The speaker then sought to vindicate the religions of his country. He
said it had been proven that the entire system of the Roman Catholic
Church had been taken from the books of Buddhism. The people of the west
should learn one thing from India — toleration.

Among other subjects which he held up and overhauled were: The Christian
missionaries, the zeal of the Presbyterian church and its
non-toleration, the dollar-worshipping in this country, and the priests.
The latter he said were in the business for the dollars there were in
it, and wanted to know how long they would stay in the church if they
had to depend on getting their pay from God. After speaking briefly on
the Caste system in India, our civilization in the south, our general
knowledge of the mind, and various other topics the speaker concluded
his remarks.

</div>
