---
title: RELIGIOUS HARMONY

---
<div>

[←](swami_vivekananda_on_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](from_far_off_india.htm)

  

## RELIGIOUS HARMONY

(*Saginaw Evening News*, March 22, 1894)

Swami Vive Kananda, the much talked of Hindoo monk, spoke to a small but
deeply interested audience last evening at the academy of music on "The
Harmony of Religions". He was dressed in oriental costume and received
an extremely cordial reception. Hon. Rowland Connor gracefully
introduced the speaker, who devoted the first portion of his lecture to
an explanation of the different religions of India and of the theory of
transmigration of souls. The first invaders of India, the Aryans, did
not try to exterminate the population of India as the Christians have
done when they went into a new land, but the endeavour was made to
elevate persons of brutish habits. The Hindoo is disgusted with those
people of his own country who do not bathe and who eat dead animals. The
Northern people of India have not tried to force their customs on the
southerns, but the latter gradually adopted many ways of the former
class. In southernmost portions of India there are a few persons who are
Christians and who have been so for thousands \[?\] of years. The
Spaniards came to Ceylon with Christianity. The Spaniards thought that
their God commanded them to kill and murder and to tear down heathen
temples.

If there were not different religions no one religion would survive. The
Christian needs his selfish religion. The Hindoo needs his own creed.
Those which were founded on a book still stand. Why could not the
Christian convert the Jew? Why could they not make the Persians
Christians? Why not so with the Mohammedans? Why cannot any impression
be made upon China or Japan? The Buddhists, the first missionary
religion, have double the number of converts of any other religion and
they did not use the sword. The Mohammedans used the most force, and
they number the least of the three great missionary, religions. The
Mohammedans have had their day. Every day you read of Christian nations
acquiring land by bloodshed. What missionaries preach against this? Why
should the most bloodthirsty nations exalt an alleged religion which is
not the religion of Christ? The Jews and the Arabs were the fathers of
Christianity, and how have they been persecuted by the Christians! The
Christians have been weighed in the balance in India and found wanting.

The speaker did not wish to be unkind, but he wanted to show Christians
how they looked in other eyes. The Missionaries who preach the burning
pit are regarded with horror. The Mohammedans rolled wave after wave
over India, waving the sword, and today where are they? The farthest
that all religions can see is the existence of a spiritual entity. So no
religion can teach beyond this point. In every religion there is the
essential truth and nonessential casket in which this jewel lies. The
believing in the Jewish book or the Hindoo book is non-essential.
Circumstances change, the receptacle is different; but the central truth
remains. The essentials being the same, the educated people of every
community retain the essentials. The shell of the oyster is not
attractive, but the pearls are within. Before a small fraction of the
world is converted Christianity will be divided into many creeds. That
is the law of nature. Why take a single instrument from the great
religious orchestras of the earth? Let the grand symphony go on. Be
pure, urged the speaker, give up superstition and see the wonderful
harmony of nature. Superstition gets the better of religion. All the
religions are good since the essentials are the same. Each man should
have the perfect exercise of his individuality but these individualities
form a perfect whole. This marvellous condition is already in existence.
Each creed has had something to add to the wonderful structure.

The speaker sought throughout to vindicate the religions of his country
and said that it had been proven that the entire system of the Roman
Catholic Church had been taken from the books of Buddhism. He dilated at
some length on the high code of morality and purity of life that the
ethics of Buddha taught but allowed that as far as the belief in the
personality of God was concerned, agnosticism prevailed, the main thing
being to follow out Buddha's precepts which were, "Be good, be moral, be
perfect."

</div>
