---
title: SECTS AND DOCTRINES IN INDIA

---
<div>

[←](the_religions_of_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](less_doctrine_and_more_bread.htm)

  

## SECTS AND DOCTRINES IN INDIA

(*Harvard Crimson*, May 17, 1894)

Swami Vivekananda, the Hindoo monk, gave an address last evening in
Sever Hall under the auspices of the Harvard Religious Union. The
address was very interesting, the clear and eloquent voice of the
speaker, and his low, earnest delivery making his words singularly
impressive.

There are various sects and doctrines in India, said Vivekananda, some
of which accept the theory of a personal God, and others which believe
that God and the universe are one; but whatever sect the Hindoo belongs
to he does not say that his is the only right belief, and that all
others must be wrong. He believes that there are many ways of coming to
God; that a man who is truly religious rises above the petty quarrels of
sects or creed. In India if a man believes that he is a spirit, a soul,
and not a body, then he is said to have religion and not till then.

To become a monk in India it is necessary to lose all thought of the
body; to look upon other human beings as souls. So monks can never
marry. Two vows are taken when a man becomes a monk, poverty and
chastity. He is not allowed to receive or possess any money whatever.
The first ceremony to be performed on joining the order is to be burnt
in effigy, which supposed to destroy once for all the old body, name and
caste. The man then receives a new name, and is allowed to go forth and
preach or travel, but must take no money for what he does.

</div>
