---
title: LESS DOCTRINE AND MORE BREAD

---
<div>

[←](sects_and_doctrines_in_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_religion_of_buddha.htm)

  

## LESS DOCTRINE AND MORE BREAD

(*Baltimore American*, October 15, 1894)

The Lyceum Theater was crowded last night at the first of a series of
meetings by the Vrooman Brothers. The subject discussed was "Dynamic
Religion".

Swami Vivekananda, the high priest \[?\] from India, was the last
speaker. He spoke briefly, and was listened to with marked attention.
His English and his mode of delivery were excellent. There is a foreign
accent to his syllables, but not enough to prevent him from being
plainly understood. He was dressed in the costume of his native country,
which was decidedly picturesque. He said he could speak but briefly
after the oratory that had preceded him, but he could add his
endorsement to all that had been said. He had traveled a great deal, and
preached to all kinds of people. He had found that the particular kind
of doctrine preached made little difference. What is wanted is practical
sort of work. If such ideas could not be carried out, he would lose his
faith in humanity. The cry all over the world is "less doctrine and more
bread". He thought the sending of missionaries to India all right; he
had no objections to offer, but he thought it would be better to send
fewer men and more money. So far as India was concerned, she had
religious doctrine to spare. Living up to the doctrines was needed more
than more doctrines. The people of India, as well as the people all over
the world, had been taught to pray, but prayer with the lips was not
enough; people should pray with their hearts. "A few people in the
world," he said, "really try to do good. Others look on and applaud, and
think that they themselves have done great good. Life is love, and when
a man ceases to do good to others, he is dead spiritually."

On Sunday evening next Swami Vivekananda will make the address of the
evening at the Lyceum.

(*Sun*, October 15, 1894)

Vivekananda sat on the stage last night with imperturbable stolidity
until it came his turn to speak. Then his manner changed and he spoke
with force and feeling. He followed the Vrooman brothers and said there
was little to add to what had been said save his testimony as a "man
from the Antipodes".

"We have doctrines enough," he continued. "What we want now is practical
work as presented in these speeches. When asked about the missionaries
sent to India I reply all right. But we want money more and men less.
India has bushels full of doctrines and to spare. What is wanted is the
means to carry them out.

"Prayer may be done in different ways. Prayer with the hands is yet
higher than prayer with the lips and is more saving.

"All religions teach us to do good for our brothers. Doing good is
nothing extraordinary — it is the only way to live. Everything in nature
tends to expansion for life and contraction for death. It is the same in
religion. Do good by helping others without ulterior motives. The moment
this ceases contraction and death follow."

</div>
