---
title: THE RELIGION OF BUDDHA

---
<div>

[←](less_doctrine_and_more_bread.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](all_religions_are_good.htm)

  

## THE RELIGION OF BUDDHA

(*Morning Herald*, October 22, 1894)

An audience which filled the Lyceum Theatre \[Baltimore\] from pit to
dome assembled last night at the second of the series of meetings held
by the Vrooman Brothers in the interest of "Dynamic Religion". Fully
3,000 persons were present. Addresses were made by the Rev. Hiram
Vrooman, Rev. Walter Vrooman and Rev. Swarri Vivekananda, the Brahmin
High Priest now visiting this city. The speakers of the evening were
seated on the stage, the Rev. Vivekananda being an object of particular
interest to all. He wore a yellow turban and a red robe tied in at the
waste \[sic\] with a sash of the same color, which added to the Oriental
cast of his features and invested him with a peculiar interest. His
personality seemed to be the feature of the evening. His address was
delivered in an easy, unembarrassed manner, his diction being perfect
and his accent similar to that of a cultured member of the Latin race
familiar with the English language. He said in part:

THE HIGH PRIEST SPEAKS

"Buddha began to found the religion of India 600 years before the birth
of Christ He found the religion of India at that time mainly engaged in
eternal discussions upon the nature of the human soul. There was no
remedy according to the ideas then prevailing for the cure of religious
ills but sacrifices of animals, sacrificial altars and similar methods.

"In the midst of this system a priest \[?\] was born who was a member of
one of the leading families who was the founder of Buddhism. His was, in
the first place, not the founding of a new religion, but a movement of
reformation. He believed in the good of all. His religion, as formulated
by him, consisted of the discovery of three things: First, 'There is an
evil'; second, 'What is the cause of this evil?' This he ascribed to the
desires of men to be superior to others, an evil that could be cured by
unselfishness. Third, 'This evil is curable by becoming unselfish'.
Force, he concluded, could not cure it; dirt cannot wash dirt; hate
cannot cure hate.

"This was the basis of his religion. So long as society tries to cure
human selfishness by laws and institutions whose aim is to force others
to do good to their neighbors, nothing can be done. The remedy is not to
place trick against trick and force against force. The only remedy is in
making unselfish men and women. You may enact laws to cure present
evils, but they will be of no avail.

"Buddha found in India too much talking about God and His essence and
too little work. He always insisted upon this fundamental truth, that we
are to be pure and holy, and that we are to help others to be holy also.
He believed that man must go to work and help others; find his soul in
others; find his life in others. He believed that in the conjunction of
doing good to others is the only good we do ourselves. \[sic\] He
believed that there was always in the world too much theory and too
little practice. A dozen Buddhas in India at the present time would do
good, and one Buddha in this country would also be beneficial.

"When there is too much doctrine, too much belief in my father's
religion, too much rational superstition, a change is needed. Such
doctrine produces evil, and a reformation is necessary."

At the conclusion of Mr. Vivekananda's address there was a hearty burst
of applause.

(*Baltimore American*, October 22, 1894)

The Lyceum Theater was crowded to the doors last night at the second
meeting of the series conducted by the Vrooman brothers on "Dynamic
Religion". Swami Vivekananda, of India, made the principal address. He
spoke on the Buddhist religion, and told of the evils which existed
among the people of India, at the time of the birth of Buddha. The
social inequalities in India, he said, were at that period a thousand
times greater than anywhere else in the world. "Six hundred years before
Christ," he continued, "the priesthood of India exercised great
influence over the minds of the people, and between the upper and nether
millstone of intellectuality and learning the people were ground.
Buddhism, which is the religion of more than two-third of the human
family, was not founded as an entirely new religion, but rather as a
reformation which carried off the corruption of the times. Buddha seems
to have been the only prophet who did everything for others and
absolutely nothing for himself. He gave up his home and all the
enjoyments of life to spend his days in search of the medicine for the
terrible disease of human misery. In an age when men and priests were
discussing the essence of the deity, he discovered what people had
overlooked, that misery existed. The cause of evil is our desire to be
superior to others and our selfishness. The moment that the world
becomes unselfish all evil will vanish. So long as society tries to cure
evil by laws and institutions, evil will not be cured. The world has
tried this method ineffectually for thousands of years. Force against
force never cures, and the only cure for evil is unselfishness. We need
to teach people to obey the laws rather than to make more laws. Buddhism
was the first missionary religion of the world but it was one of the
teachings of Buddhism not to antagonize any other religion. Sects weaken
their power for good by making war on each other."

</div>
