---
title: ALL RELIGIONS ARE GOOD

---
<div>

[←](the_religion_of_buddha.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_hindu_way_of_life.htm)

  

## ALL RELIGIONS ARE GOOD

(*Washington Post*, October 29, 1894)

Mr. Kananda spoke yesterday at the People's Church on the invitation of
Dr. Kent, pastor of the church. His talk in the morning was a regular
sermon, dealing entirely with the spiritual side of religion, and
presenting the, to orthodox sects, rather original proposition that
there is good in the foundation of every religion, that all religions,
like languages, are descended from a common stock, and that each is good
in its corporal and spiritual aspects so long as it is kept free from
dogma and fossilism. The address in the afternoon was more in the form
of a lecture on the Aryan race, and traced the descent of the various
allied nationalities by their language, religion and customs from the
common Sanskrit stock.

After the meeting, to a *Post* reporter Mr. Kananda said: "I claim no
affiliation with any religious sect, but occupy the position of an
observer, and so far as I may, of a teacher to mankind. All religion to
me is good. About the higher mysteries of life and existence I can do no
more than speculate, as others do. Reincarnation seems to me to be the
nearest to a logical explanation for many things with which we are
confronted in the realm of religion. But I do not advance it as a
doctrine. It is no more than a theory at best, and is not susceptible of
proof except by personal experience, and that proof is good only for the
man who has it. Your experience is nothing to me, nor mine to you. I am
not a believer in miracles — they are repugnant to me in matters of
religion. You might bring the world tumbling down about my ears, but
that would be no proof to me that there was a God, or that you worked by
his agency, if there was one.

HE BELIEVES IT BLINDLY

"I must, however, believe in a past and a hereafter as necessary to the
existence of the present. And if we go on from here, we must go in other
forms, and so comes any belief in reincarnation. But I can prove
nothing, and any one is welcome to deprive me of the theory of
reincarnation provided they will show me something better to replace it.
Only up to the present I have found nothing that offers so satisfactory
an explanation to me."

Mr. Kananda is a native of Calcutta, and a graduate of the government
university there. He speaks English like a native, having received his
university training in that tongue. He has had good opportunity to
observe the contact between the native and the English, and it would
disappoint a foreign missionary worker to hear him speak in very
unconcerned style of the attempts to convert the natives. In this
connection he was asked what effect the Western teaching was having on
the thought of the Orient.

"Of course," he said, "no thought of any sort can come into a country
without having its effect, but the effect of Christian teaching on
Oriental thought is, if it exists, so small as to be imperceptible. The
Western doctrines have made about as much impression there as have the
Eastern doctrines here, perhaps not so much. That is, among the higher
thinkers of the country. The effect of the missionary work among the
masses is imperceptible. When converts are made they of course drop at
once out of the native sects, but the mass of the population is so great
that the converts of the missionaries have very little effect that can
be seen."

THE YOGIS ARE JUGGLERS

When asked whether he knew anything of the alleged miraculous
performances of the yogis and adepts Mr. Kananda replied that he was not
interested in miracles, and that while there were of course a great many
clever jugglers in the country, their performances were tricks. Mr.
Kananda said that he had seen the mango trick but once, and then by a
fakir on a small scale. He held the same view about the alleged
attainments of the lamas. "There is a great lack of trained, scientific,
and unprejudiced observers in all accounts of these phenomena," said he,
"so that it is hard to select the false from the true."

</div>
