---
title: THE HINDU VIEW OF LIFE

---
<div>

[←](all_religions_are_good.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](ideals_of_womanhood.htm)

  

## THE HINDU VIEW OF LIFE

(*Brooklyn Times*, December 31, 1894)

The Brooklyn Ethical Association, at the Pouch Gallery last night,
tendered a reception to Swami Vivekananda. . . . Previous to the
reception the distinguished visitor delivered a remarkably interesting
lecture on "The Religions of India". Among other things he said:

"The Hindoo's view of life is that we are here to learn; the whole
happiness of life is to learn; the human soul is here to love learning
and get experience. I am able to read my Bible better by your Bible, and
you will learn to read your Bible the better by my Bible. If there is
but one religion to be true, all the rest must be true. The same truth
has manifested itself in different forms, and the forms are according to
the different circumstances of the physical or mental nature of the
different nations.

"If matter and its transformation answer for all that we have, there is
no necessity for supposing the existence of a soul. But it can \[not\]
be proven that thought has been evolved out of matter. We can not deny
that bodies inherit certain tendencies, but those tendencies only mean
the physical configuration through which a peculiar mind alone can act
in a peculiar way. These peculiar tendencies in that soul have been
caused by past actions. A soul with a certain tendency will take birth
in a body which is the fittest instrument for the display of that
tendency, by the laws of affinity. And this is in perfect accord with
science, for science wants to explain everything by habit, and habit is
got through repetitions. So these repetitions are also necessary to
explain the natural habits of a new-born soul. They were not got in this
present life; therefore, they must have come down from past lives.

"All religions are so many stages. Each one of them represents the stage
through which the human soul passes to realize God. Therefore, not one
of them should be neglected. None of the stages are dangerous or bad.
They are good. Just as a child becomes a young man, and a young man
becomes an old man, so they are travelling from truth to truth; they
become dangerous only when they become rigid, and will not move further
— when he ceases to grow. If the child refuses to become an old man,
then he is diseased, but if they steadily grow, each step will lead them
onward until they reach the whole truth. Therefore, we believe in both a
personal and impersonal God, and at the same time we believe in all the
religions that were, all the religions that are, and all the religions
that will be in the world. We also believe we ought not only tolerate
these religions, but to accept them.

"In the material physical world, expansion is life, and contraction is
death. Whatever ceases to expand ceases to live. Translating this in the
moral world we have: If one would expand, he must love, and when he
ceases to love he dies. It is your nature; you must, because that is the
only law of life. Therefore, we must love God for love's sake, so we
must do our duty for duty's sake; we must work for work's sake without
looking for any reward — know that you are purer and more perfect, know
that this is the real temple of God."

(*Brooklyn Daily Eagle*, December 31, 1894)

After referring to the views of the Mohammedans, the Buddhists and other
religious schools of India, the speaker said that the Hindoos received
their religion through the revelations of the Vedas, who teach that
creation is without beginning or end. They teach that man is a spirit
living in a body. The body will die, but the man will not. The spirit
will go on living. The soul was not created from nothing for creation
means a combination and that means a certain future dissolution. If then
the soul was created it must die. Therefore, it was not created. He
might be asked how it is that we do not remember anything of our past
lives. This could be easily explained. Consciousness is the name only of
the surface of the mental ocean, and within its depths are stored up all
our experiences. The desire was to find out something that was stable.
The mind, the body, all nature, in fact, is changing. This question of
finding something that was infinite had long been discussed. One school
of which the modern Buddhists are the representatives, teach that
everything that could not be solved by the five senses was nonexistent.
That every object is dependent upon all others, that it is a delusion
that man is an independent entity. The idealists, on the other hand,
claim that each individual is an independent body. The true solution of
this problem is that nature is a mixture of dependence and independence,
of reality and idealism. There is a dependence which is proved by the
fact that the movements of our bodies are controlled by our minds, and
our minds are controlled by the spirit within us, which Christians call
the soul. Death is but a change. Those who have passed beyond and are
occupying high positions there are but the same as those who remain
here, and those who are occupying lower positions there are the same as
others here. Every human being is a perfect being. If we sit down in the
dark and lament that it is so dark it will profit us nothing, but if we
procure matches and strike a light, the darkness goes out immediately.
So, if we sit down and lament that our bodies are imperfect, that our
souls are imperfect, we are not profited. When we call in the light of
reason, then this darkness of doubt will disappear. The object of life
is to learn. Christians can learn from the Hindus, and the Hindus from
Christians. He could read his Bible better after reading ours. "Tell
your children," he said, "that religion is a positive something, and not
a negative something. It is not the teachings of men, but a growth, a
development of something higher within our nature that seeks outlet.
Every child born into the world is born with a certain accumulated
experience. The idea of independence which possesses us shows there is
something in us besides mind and body. The body and mind are dependent.
The soul that animates us is an independent factor that creates this
wish for freedom. If we are not free how can we hope to make the world
good or perfect? We hold that we are makers of ourselves, that what we
have we make ourselves. We have made it and we can unmake it. We believe
in God, the Father of us all, the Creator and Preserver of His children,
omnipresent and omnipotent. We believe in a personal God, as you do, but
we go further. We believe that we are He. We believe in all the
religions that have gone before, in all that now exist and in all that
are to come. The Hindu bows down to the all religion \[sic\] for in this
world the idea is addition, not subtraction. We would make up a bouquet
of all beautiful colors for God, the Creator, who is a personal God. We
must love God for love's sake, we must do our duty to Him for duty's
sake, and must work for Him for work's sake and must worship Him for
worship's sake.

"Books are good but they are only maps. Reading a book by direction of a
man I read that so many inches of rain fell during the year. Then he
told me to take the book and squeeze it between my hands. I did so and
not a drop of water came from it. It was the idea only that the book
conveyed. So we can get good from books, from the temple, from the
church, from anything, so long as it leads us onward and upward.
Sacrifices, genuflections, rumblings and mutterings are not religion.
They are all good if they help us to come to a perception of the
perfection which we shall realize when we come face to face with Christ.
These are words or instructions to us by which we may profit. Columbus,
when he discovered this continent, went back and told his countrymen
that he had found the new world. They would not believe him, or some
would not, and he told them to go and search for themselves. So with us,
we read these truths and come in and find the truths for ourselves and
then we have a belief which no one can take from us."

After the lecture an opportunity was given those present to question the
speaker on any point on which they wished to have his views. Many of
them availed themselves of this offer. (See *Complete Works*, Vol. V. in
the Section, ["Questions and
Answers"](../../volume_5/questions_and_answers/brooklyn_ethical_society.htm).)

</div>
