---
title: CHILD WIDOWS OF INDIA

---
<div>

[←](indias_gift_to_the_world.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](some_customs_of_the_hindus.htm)

  

## CHILD WIDOWS OF INDIA

(*Daily Eagle*, February 27, 1895)

Swami Vivekananda, the Hindu monk, lectured in Historical hall Monday
night under the auspices of the Brooklyn Ethical association, on
"India's Gift to the World". There were about two hundred and fifty
people in the hall when the Swami stepped on the platform. Much interest
was manifested on account of the denial by Mrs. James McKeen, president
of the Brooklyn Ramabai circle, which is interested in Christian work in
India, of the statement attributed to the lecture that the child widows
of India were not protected \[ill-treated\]. In no part of his lecture
was reference made to this denial, but after he had concluded, one of
the audience asked the lecturer what explanation he had to make to the
statement. Swami Vivekananda said that it was untrue that child widows
were abused or ill treated in any way. He added:

"It is a fact that some Hindus marry very young. Others marry when they
have attained a fair age and some do not marry at all. My grandfather
was married when quite a child. My father when he was 14 years old and I
am 30 years old and am not yet married. When a husband dies all his
possessions go to his widow. If a widow is poor she is the same as poor
widows in any other country. Old men sometimes marry children, but if
the husband was wealthy it was all the better for the widow the sooner
he died. I have traveled all over India, but failed to see a case of the
ill treatment mentioned. At one time there were religious fanatics,
widows, who threw themselves into a fire and were consumed by the flames
at the death of their husbands. The Hindus did not believe in this, but
did not prevent it, and it was not until the British obtained control of
India that it was finally prohibited. These women were considered saints
and in many instances monuments were erected to their memory."

</div>
