+++
title = "Some biological analogies for certain sociopolitical issues"

+++
In Hindu society we often see certain relatively straightforward
sociopolitical issues endlessly debated. A person with relatively
commonplace IQ should in principle easily arrive a correct apprehension
of these issues by applying correct analogy and/or logic. However, due
to emotionalism and other factors, as discussed in this [fictional
account](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/12/23/lutika-somakhyo%e1%b8%a5-pravada%e1%b8%a5/),
they do not grasp the matter for some reason. On the other hand an
excuse that is commonly used is that we do not have a yard stick for
properly positioning a geopolitical stance. Here is where, even for very
simple matters, biological analogies can be very useful. They are
particularly useful because the adverse edge of natural selection is
most unforgiving – there is no place for fancies and only what works
finally makes it past the hatchet. Likewise, the role of chance and
absence of constraints are also placed in proper perspective.

To build the analogy for the matters under consideration we start by a
brief description of certain basic biological facts for the less-aware
reader of these pages. In any biological system be it a living organism
or a virus or some other nucleic acid parasite like a plasmid the
biochemical functionality is divided into two basic categories: 1) Core
functions and 2) peripherals.

The core functions pertain to the essence of life. They are
evolutionarily more strongly conserved than the peripherals suggesting
that there are much stronger constraints on them – purifying selection
is the stronger force active on them. Now, within the core functions
there are three broad domains of biochemical activity: 1) Replication of
the genetic nucleic acid. 2) Transcription of the genetic nucleic acid
into RNA for templating proteins or for action by itself. 3)
Translation: the process of making proteins based on the genetic
information encoded in the messenger RNA. Of the three processes the
maximal evolutionary constraints are seen on the translation. The
translation system is what is universal conserved across the three
domains of life. Its basic components, proteins (ribosomal proteins and
translation factors) and RNA, are easily recognizable as cognate between
the three superkingdoms of life. Their phylogeny has a strong vertical
signal i.e. they have been inherited from parent to offspring for
billions of years from the last universal common ancestor. There is
lower lateral transfer i.e. exchange of the genes coding for these
components between distantly related organisms. Even when that does
happen it works alright because the system is so conserved. After the
translation system the transcription system is the next highly conserved
– in the form of the RNA polymerase subunits. Finally, the least
conserved of the core systems are the replication apparatus proteins
starting from the DNA polymerase down to other components like the
replication enzymes like ligases and helicases.

What this tells us is that in general diversity is not tolerated in
these core systems. Even more tellingly the strongest constraints being
on translation and then transcription indicates that in an organism the
language and apparatus for communicating and interpreting the genetic
information tolerates even lesser diversity than the apparatus for
copying the genetic information for inter-generational transmission.
Furthermore, organisms are constantly locked in biological conflicts
with each other and one of the most frequent targets for attack across
all levels of life’s organization is the translation apparatus. This is
not just because it tends to be conserved but also because crippling it
is most damaging for an organism (just think ricin). Despite of all of
this the bottom-line is that the common language of translation remains
in place and all attacks against it are countered by increasing fidelity
in face of attacks rather than just evolving away from the attack by
diverging. It is indeed this common language that has made intimate
symbiosis possible. Two distantly related bacteria *Sulcia* (a
bacteroidetes) and *Hodgkinia* (an alphaproteobacterium) reside as
endosymbionts in insects known as cicadas. They have individually
degenerated to such an extent that neither of them encodes a complete
set of ribosomal proteins or tRNA synthetases. They instead make it up
by complementing these components. Also they share a common
![\\sigma](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Csigma&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\sigma") subunit for their RNA polymerases (encoded by *Sulcia*). This
would not have been possible if the core system was not so well
conserved between such distant organisms. Likewise eukaryotic organisms
like us have evolved only because of this common language in the core
systems – the eukaryote is a symbiont of an alphaproteobacterium and an
asgardarchaeon. A now extinct bacteroidetes was also likely part of this
endosymbiosis. The mRNAs of bacterial origin can be translated in the
archaeal-derived translation system for use in the bacterial
endosymbiont (the mitochondrion). This again is only possible due to
common language and the ability for it to be deciphered the same way
between the distantly related organisms. Indeed, close to the origin of
life with which we are monophyletic might have involved exchanges
between distant replicons that was possible only because of the common
translational language. First, we notice that even today there is some
surviving diversity in the types of distinct RNA polymerases catalyzing
transcription and the DNA polymerases catalyzing replication but we see
only one ancient translation system that can produce genuine proteins.
Why might this be the case. It is likely because in the earliest phases
of life’s evolution those systems that shared a common code and
code-reader could exchange genes more effectively and as a group have a
fitness advantage over those with unique codes and translation systems
that could not be read by others. Thus, the common language helps the
group resources to come together more effectively.

Peripherals include many other biochemical functionalities. Some of the
most important being: 1) energy production; 2) metabolite biosynthesis;
3) sensing and signaling external and internal environmental changes; 4)
weaponry for biological conflicts. These, in stark contrast to the core
components show enormous diversity between organisms, often even between
closely related ones. Why? Because here there tends to be more of
positive selection which might diversify information rather than
purifying selection which favors stasis. This is easy to understand:
being able to use different kinds of energy production mechanism or
metabolite biosynthetic mechanisms helps exploit different kinds of
niches. Likewise, sensing and signaling needs also changes with the
local niche which the organism adapts to: an organism capable of
anaerobic growth needs to sense oxidation potential in its environs. An
organism that uses light needs light sensors while one living deep in a
cave does not. Thus, these systems are constantly under selection for
diversification. Biological conflicts involve cycles of evolutionary
arms races thus diversity is often an asset in these systems.
Interestingly, our studies indicated that genes involved in these more
peripheral aspects of life like exploiting unusual compounds or
resistance against xenobiotics tend to be more “noisily” expressed in a
population of cells. So the cells appear to be hedging their bets via a
diversified strategy even as the cliché, which your financial adviser
might use regarding a your investment strategy.

Thus, in conclusion there are some systems where there is a strong
selection for conservatism and preservation of a common language and
“sense” while in others there is simultaneous selection for
diversification – all explainable by the same process of natural
selection i.e. survival of the fittest. How and where does all this
basic biology serve as an analogy for sociopolitical issues.

For that let us first look at the development of the Hindu nation in the
Indian subcontinent. Prior to the coming of the Indo-Aryans, there was
probably already some degree of unity established by the neolithic and
early metal age agricultural cultures. We still see echoes of that unity
in our agriculture-/rural-economy- related words from an extinct
language (e.g. kustumburu, karkaṭi, kulāla, kīnaśa etc). The coming of
the Indo-Aryans sometime during the Harappan period or after it provided
a strong unifying force in the form of a common language (old Indo-Aryan
aka Sanskrit in its living expression) and religion (the extant Hindu
dharma in its living expression). As the Indo-Aryans and Aryanized
peoples spread over the vast subcontinent over nearly a millennium this
factor played a major role in the formation of a unified system in the
subcontinent. Certain mobile groups played a over-sized role in this
unification but the more sedentary groups played along rather than
oppose them. However, at the same time, the longitudinal extent of the
subcontinent and major terrain variations implied that the phenomenon of
local diversification in terms of linguistics to a greater extent and
religion to a smaller extent was also going to take place. As a result
in the coming two-three thousand years we had a peculiar situation where
both diversification and unity simultaneously existed – a cliché Indians
oft use.

All this was fine as long as India remained heathen. But starting with
the irruptions of Mohammad bin Qasim and culminating in the conquests of
the Turkic Mohammedans this heathen unity was mostly broken due to the
direct attacks on the centers of the Hindu religion and the unifying
Sanskrit language (despite protestations of white supporters of the
Mohammedans to the contrary). However, the Mohammedan tyranny in India
did not great break the diversified local linguistic formations and to
some extant not even the local (“folk”) expressions of religion. This
had a negative effect on the unity of the Hindu system. The Hindu
reconquest of the subcontinent was neither complete nor prolonged enough
to restore the situation to the old state when English conquered the
subcontinent from them. While the English imposed their language, which
we continue to use today, that too did not deeply penetrate the Indian
masses. In the end when the English departed and we had partial
restoration of Hindudom under a secular state we were left with the main
unifying undergirding in the form of the Hindu religion and Sanskrit
language in shambles. In contrast, the diversified regional languages
and the identity associated with them remained relatively untouched.
This was only strengthened with the secular state caving in to the
demands of local identity by instituting linguistic states and calling
for Hindi (whatever its quite serious merits) rather than Sanskrit as
the national language.

Thus, today we are faced with a scenario where a major component of
India’s masses have their local languages rather than nationalism or
national issues as the biggest animating factor\! Indeed it is rather
palpable that it forms the core of their identity much more than the
Hindu religion or the Indian nation – you commonly see a man typically
call himself first a Tamil or Marathi or something like that rather than
a Hindu. This subnational identity was perhaps fine in world where there
were no serious conflicts with extrinsic doctrines like Abrahamism. Some
of my interlocutors have objected that local languages have stymied the
progress of Abrahamism because they preserved local non-Abrahamistic
cultural elements. They have bellowed against Hindi as purveyor of
Abrahamism via its Mohammedanized register, more correctly the Urdu. But
our own observations indicate the opposite – an unhealthy local language
identity transcending religion is widely seen – Panjabi Hindus
sympathizing with Mohammedan speakers of that language (often across the
modern border); Bengalis defining themselves as that rather than as
Hindus; the Malayali identity which wraps in Mohammedans and Christians
alike and so on.

Hence, we posit we that when confronted with large groups unified by
their urge to place heathens like us in the grave or the museum there is
not much to be gained from the local linguistic diversity and an
identity based on it. It will simply result in the eventual ruin of each
group by itself. Hence, for our survival we need to function as a larger
unified group with a natural unity coming from the pre-Mohammedan past
where Sanskrit and the Hindu dharma played the role of the unifying
framework. This unified super-group of Hindus would have much greater
chance of survival against the Abrahamisms and be able to better command
the resources of India and abroad. Here is where the biological analogy
buttresses things. For this symbiosis as a super-group we need a unified
language and religion which forms the basis of our identity. That common
language with a common script for it would be like the translation and
transcription apparatus. The analogy gives a decisive basis for whether
linguistic and associated script diversity is good or bad diversity –
diversity here will not be advantageous by any means and will not
increase robustness in the system. Hence, the only hope for Hindus is to
surrender their local linguistic identities for a national unitary
linguistic identity. The religion might be compared to the replication
apparatus it allows greater diversity than the translation or
transcription apparatus but is still mostly part of the conserved core.
So we can have some diversity there but again unity dominates.

So let us be resoundingly clear about this thing – not all diversity is
good or a strength – there are systems where tolerance for it has to be
low. Now that said the biological analogy should also show you where
diversity can be useful. Putting the nations future on IT or making just
doctors and low-grade engineers is unlikely to be a recipe for success.
However, since something as simple as this is not easily understood by
people, it is clear that, like with many other issues, the going is not
going to be smooth for our people – and that is putting it mildly.
