+++
title = "A superficial look at national population density and some life history features"

+++
Over the years we have repeatedly checked out various collections of
data pertaining to the human condition in the same manner as we
attempted to apprehend scientific data. We have wondered whether to
write on them in any detail. We desisted for the examination was rather
superficial and these are matters that are subject to weighty study and
superior illustration by those directly involved in such studies. Yet,
we finally decided to do so because sometimes even simple illustrations
and only partly correct hunches when done by yourself might spark useful
lines of thinking and contribute to your understanding of the world.
This is the caveat for any such note.

Below is one such examination of the population density of nations of
the world. We have a dataset of 242 nations, territories and nation-like
entities most derived via the United Nations data repository which forms
the basis of this analysis. The mean population density for these 242 is
about 400 people/square km and the median is about 84. The first panel
of the first graph is the histogram of log(population density) of these
242 nation/nation-like entities. It is pretty normally distributed and
might be even more tightly distributed (boxplot in second panel) so but
for 1) unusual city states: Saint Martin, Bermuda, Malta, Maldives,
Bahrain, Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Singapore, Monaco, Macau (one can see
them as the long tail of outliers in the boxplot below); 2) sparse
countries like Greenland, Mongolia, Namibia, Australia.

![pop\_density](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/05/pop_density.png?w=640)

Given the relatively tight distribution of the rest we plotted a scatter
of population versus area in square km for all these nations both on the
log-scale.

![pop\_vs\_are](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/05/pop_vs_are.png?w=640)

As can be see from the figure they are color-coded by continent: Asia,
Africa, Europe, Oceania, North America, South America, Australia,
Central America, America (Rest). The two countries in Asia, India and
Japan, with high population densities but very different structure (one
a subcontinent one a large island group) are circled on the plot. The
plot is pretty linear and has a decent ![r^2=
0.7024](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D+0.7024&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2= 0.7024"), holding across continents and a wide range of area and
population magnitudes. This suggests that there is an intrinsic limit
likely from carrying capacity of land. The high-density nations like
India and Japan show how even with very different structures similar
population densities can be achieved over large magnitude range of both
population and area.

The next plot has mean life-expectancy by continent (with mean for all
continents). Mean life-expectancy for the African continent
significantly deviates from the mean life-expectancy for all other
continents (![p= 2.5 \\times 10^{-11} .. 1.5 \\times
10^{-14}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=p%3D+2.5+%5Ctimes+10%5E%7B-11%7D+..+1.5+%5Ctimes+10%5E%7B-14%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"p= 2.5 \\times 10^{-11} .. 1.5 \\times 10^{-14}") by t-tests).

![Life\_exp\_bar](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/05/life_exp_bar.png?w=640)

The life-expectancy is shown in the next plot on the world map. Since
humans originated in Africa one might speculate that this lower life
expectancy reflects a state closer to the condition of the early humans.
But then it could also be due to disruption of the traditional ways of
life in Africa due to the clash of civilizations. The clash of
civilizations might also be behind another feature that becomes obvious
from the map – the Western European nations and their leukospheric
settlements enjoy some of the highest life-expectancy in contrast to old
civilizations like India, China, Iran (now under Moslem occupation).
This disparity might reflects the monopolization of world wealth and
resources by the former during the period of their ascendancy often at
the expense of the latter leaving them broken.

![Life\_exp\_map](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/05/life_exp_map.png?w=640)

We next plot life-expectancy versus population density (both on the
log-scale). One may ask why these are being plotted. One could reason
that higher population densities mean lower sanitary conditions, easier
spread of diseases, greater population, lower resources, all resulting
lowered life-expectancy.

![life\_Expectency\_vs\_popdense](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/05/life_expectency_vs_popdense.png?w=640)

However, the plot makes it clear that there is hardly any correlation
between the two
(![r^2=0.0209](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D0.0209&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=0.0209")). This means humans have long crossed that time when high
population densities could not be sustained for reasons as above. But
what comes out in the plot again is the separation of Africa (orange)
versus the rest irrespective of population density. Africa (especially
sub-Saharan Africa) is special in this regard because it fares worse
than any of the other tropical nations. Thus, it is not just tropical
diseases but their special prevalence in Africa and other factors that
lead to the observed life-expectancy. If biological diseases can result
in low life-expectancy then the same can arise from memetic diseases and
damage due to them. There is only one nation outside sub-Saharan Africa
which has life-expectancy in that range – Afghanistan which was once
home to a brilliant expression of the Hindu civilization. So why is it
there? The answer quite plainly is the memetic disease known as the
ekarākṣasonmāda. In Asia, Japan and India present extremes for similar
population densities in terms of life-expectancy (both circled again).
The Asian city-states enjoy a similar life-expectancy as Japan. We hold
that India too is damaged by the same memetic diseases. Given India’s
human biodiversity and tropical position we may not be able to reach
Japan or the Asian city states in terms of life expectancy. However, Sri
Lanka shows us that with similar population density, without the
unmāda-s having any power, what can be in the least achieved in
principle. I am sure people will think I am trying to connect unrelated
things and shift the blame on the unmāda-s for India’s intrinsic
problems. But those who are discerning enough will see why this is not
far-fetched and the comparison is valid.

It is likely that this lower-life expectancy has had profound impact on
other aspects human life-history and strategies. In that context we plot
below average national IQ (where available) versus life-expectancy
(color-coded by continent; here Africa is green).

![Life\_exp\_IQ](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/05/life_exp_iq.png?w=640)

The average national IQ values are controversial and have been disputed.
Yet, for general trends they might have some value. The correlation
between IQ and life-expectancy is reasonable
(![r^2=0.61](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=r%5E2%3D0.61&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"r^2=0.61") for 174 countries). People have argued for IQ being a
predictor of life-expectancy in individuals and this holds even when
averaged for countries. Their conjecture runs along the lines that
higher IQ favors better education and understanding of complex
relationships. This might in turn inform against risky behaviors and
enable foretelling less-apparent dangers. But it is not entirely clear
if the arrow of causation does run that way on the country-level. It is
possible that emergence of higher life-expectancy allowed for higher IQ
to make a real difference, thus selecting for it. In the lower-life
expectancy regime it might not have mattered as much as death could
strike irrespective of that.
