+++
title = "Rudra’s portion of the ritual offering, the Kaṭha Āraṇyaka and the Atharvaśiras: a brief journey through early śaiva thought"

+++
A version of this article was published first at [India
Facts](http://indiafacts.co.in/rudra-a-brief-journey-through-early-saiva-thought/)

There is a persistent motif of the deva Rudra (Śiva) being originally
refused ritual offerings of the yajña to which the other deva-s were
entitled. Rudra eventually acquires his share of the offering, often via
a violent confrontation with the other deva-s. One version of this
legend, first seen in the Brāhmaṇa texts like the Gopatha Brāhmaṇa of
the Atharvaveda, has Rudra destroy the ritual of Prajāpati and injure
several of the deva-s upon being excluded from the ritual offering
(Gopatha Uttarabrāhmaṇa 2-4). In parallel in other Brāhmaṇa texts there
are other narratives of the confrontation between the progenitor deva
Prajāpati and Rudra. One of these involves the slaying of Prajāpati by
Rudra for the former’s act of incest with his own daughter. An allusion
to this legend is found in the Ṛgveda itself where the deva-s are said
to call upon Rudra to enforce natural law by preventing the incest of
Prajāpati (RV 10.61.7). This is an astronomical legend that preserves
memory of the ancient movement of the equinoctical colure towards Rohiṇī
( the daughter of Prajāpati i.e. the orange star Alderbaran). In the sky
the slain Prajāpati is represented by the constellation of Mṛgaśiras
(Orion), his semen by the Milky Way, Rudra by Ārdra (Sirius) the
brightest star in the sky (in apparent terms). The Invaka-s, three
bright stars in a straight line (the belt of Orion), are said to
represent the arrow of Rudra that pierced Prajāpati \[Footnote 1\].

By the time of the Mahabhārata the old legends underwent diversification
and recombination. One version in the is closer to the Vedic version in
the Gopatha Brāhmaṇa another one is closer to those found in the
Purāṇa-s. A version generally sharing elements with those found in
the Mahabhārata also forms the foundation of the narrative regarding the
origin of diseases from the wrath of Rudra in the Hindu medical
Saṃhitā-s like those of Caraka. In the Purāṇa-s various versions of
these legends emerge as products of a complex evolutionary process. This
resulted in a “standard” version of the legend that is well-known to
Hindus today. This combines four basic elements: 1) The suicide of Sati,
the wife of Rudra in response to him being insulted by the Prajāpati at
the ritual; 2) the retaliatory destruction of the ritual of Prajāpati by
Rudra’s agents like Vīrabhadra; 3) an attack on the remaining deva-s and
devī-s by Rudra’s agents resulting in serious injury to them; 4) the
slaying of Prajāpati Dakṣa himself Rudra or his agents.

The exclusion of Rudra, the destruction of the divine yajña by him, and
his subsequent accommodation have been interpreted by some as evidence
for Rudra being an outsider to the Vedic religion and being acquired
from a non-Aryan source. We hold that this idea is rather untenable. The
Vedic religion keeping with the ancestral Indo-European religion had
different domains for different gods, and Rudra was by definition a god
associated with the dreadful aspects of existence that are placed to
exterior to the cocoon of civilization. His exclusion merely reflects
his belonging to that realm. His eventual inclusion is an explanation
for how the Vedic ritual can make such dangers of the world exterior to
civilization beneficent (śiva) to those inside it. Thus, Rudra is regent
of disease and toxins, but at the same time he is also the regent of
medicines.

That this nature of Rudra was an integral aspect of the Vedic religion
is supported by the fact cognates might be found in other branches of
Indo-European:  
1\) In the Greek Apollo is the cognate deity of Rudra. He is called both
Loimios, i.e. the bringer of plague and Paion i.e. the healer. He is
also invoked as Apotropaios meaning one who is called upon to averts the
harm that he can inflict. This is reminiscent of the Vedic mantra:
“rudrasya hetiḥ pari vo vṛṇaktu | (May Rudra’s missile be averted)”.
Apollo is a fierce god who is the slayer of many demonic entities even
as Rudra is the slayer of many Dānava-s and Daitya-s. Finally, in the
Homeric hymn to Apollo he is explicitly mentioned as being feared by the
other gods as he approaches Olympos (the Greek svarga) with his bow and
shining weapons – a clear parallel to the Vedic situation with Rudra:

I will remember and not be forgetful of the archer Apollo,  
who by the gods is dreaded within Zeus’ house as he enters.  
Straightaway all of them leap to their feet as he nearer approaches,  
Out of their seats, so soon as his shining weapons he levels.  
(Homeric hymn to Apollo 1-4; translated by WC Lawton)

2\) In Germanic tradition Odin is the cognate of Rudra. In what survives
of Northern Germanic legend there is an allusion to Odin being the god
of the criminals or the outlaws. Likewise, in the long collection of
mantra-s to Rudra known as the Śatarudrīya from the Yajurveda we see him
being described as manifesting as various criminals. In the Germanic
tradition preserved in Denmark there a specific allusion to a tale where
the other gods kept Odin out of the realm of the gods for ten years so
that they may not be tarnished by his “dangerous” connections.

Given this brief background we shall consider in greater detail a
less-known version of the encounter of Rudra with the deva-s and his
eventual acceptance as the great god from the Kaṭha branch of the
Yajurveda. The Kaṭha school of the Yajurveda was once widely practiced
in Kashmir and hills of the Panjab/Himachal Pradesh. It is today sadly
all but extinct due to the depredations of the Mohammedans in those
regions. The text in concern comes from the Āraṇyaka of the Kaṭha-s,
which is rather distinct in parts from its cognate of the widely
practiced Taittirīya school:

devā vai rudraṃ svargaṃ lokaṃ gataṃ na vyajānann ādityavarṇaṃ carantan |
te .abruvan ko .asīti ? ahaṃ rudro .aham indro .aham ādityo .ahaṃ
sarvasyāvayā haraso divyasyeti | te .abruvan nirbhajāmainam iti | tān
ruvann abhyavadata | tān prādhrajat | te .abruvan bhavān sarvam iti |
yad ruvann abhyavadat tad rudrasya rudratvam | yad bhavān iti tad
bhavasya bhavatvam | yat sarvam iti tac charvasya śarvatvam | sa śivo
.abhavat tac chivasya śivatvam | tebhyo .amṛḍata tan mṛḍasya mṛḍatvam|
taṃ devā abruvan bhavasya bhūtasya bhavyasyādhipatyam iti |
sarvasyādhipatyaṃ yajamānaṃ gamayati || KA 2.100

Indeed the deva-s did not recognize Rudra who had entered the heavenly
world wandering in with a solar luster. They said: “Who are you?”. \[He
replied\]: “I am Rudra, I am Indra, I am the Āditya, I am the arrival of
all the divine luster. They \[i.e. other deva-s\] said: We shall not
offer a share to this one \[i.e. Rudra\]. Roaring he \[Rudra\] yelled at
them. He rushed at them. They \[the other deva-s\] said: “Sir, you are
all of this”. Because roaring he yelled at them that is Rudra’s
fierceness (rudratvam). Because they called him sir (bhavān) that is
Bhava’s lordship over existence. Because they said you are all this that
revealed Śarva’s \[prowess\] as an archer. Because he then became
favorable that is Śiva’s benevolence. Because he became kind to them
\[the other deva-s\] that is Mṛḍa’s compassion. The deva-s said to him:
“The overlordship of the present, the past and the future \[is
yours\]. \[If he knows this while performing the ritual, i.e. offering
the portion for Rudra\] it leads the ritualist to lordship over all.

In this Āraṇyaka section Rudra is given five names. In this it departs
from the narratives in the Kauśītaki and Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa-s, where
Prajāpati afraid of Rudra’s wrath confers eight and nine names
respectively on him. Some of these names correspond to the five names
given in the Kaṭha tradition. The ninth name in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa,
Kumāra, is taken to be that of Rudra’s son. The five names are explained
by some followers of the Kaṭha tradition as corresponding to the five
faces of Rudra whose mantra-s are found in the terminal section of the
Taittirīya Āraṇyaka. Thus, we have:

Rudra : Tatpuruṣa (the eastern face associated with the aquiline deity
Garuḍa)  
Bhava: Sadyojāta (The western face associated the ghostly hosts of
Rudra)  
Śarva: Aghora (The southern face associated with the terrifying
Bhairava-s)  
Mṛḍa: Vāmadeva (The northern face associated with the goddess Umā or the
Śakti of Rudra)  
Śiva: Iśāna (The upward face associated with the Sadāśiva or the benign
form of the god)

This narrative from the Kaṭha Āraṇyaka provides clues regarding the
origin of frame-narrative of a key early śaiva upaniṣad, the
Atharvaśiras. Three śaiva upaniṣad-s can be considered early with their
probable temporal order being: 1) Nīlarudra which is associated with the
Paippalāda school of the Atharvaveda; 2) Śvetāśvatara which is
associated with the Taittirīya (or perhaps originally Caraka) school of
the Kṛṣṇa-Yajurveda; 3) Atharvaśiras which is associated with the
Atharvaveda, though its śakha affiliation remains unknown. It survives
today as four parallel recensions which share a similar frame narrative.
The first two of these upaniṣad-s contain mantra-s from their respective
Vedic Saṃhitā-s that are used in the rituals for Rudra. Of them, the
Śvetāśvatara, presents one of the earliest extant teachings of yoga.
Atharvaśiras also presents an important early teaching of meditative
yoga. Together these form the root of the later śaiva yoga practices,
which appear serially in traditions known as the atimārga starting with
the Pāśupata sūtra-s and the mantra-mārga, which is expounded in the
numerous śaiva tantra-s of various streams.

The Atharvaśiras opens thus (while the 3 recensions are similar in this
regard; I am using the one I follow in my practice):  
devā ha vai svargalokam āyaṃs te rudram apṛcchan ko bhavān iti |  
The deva-s indeed went to the heavenly world and they asked Rudra: “Sir,
who are you?”

so .abravīd aham ekaḥ prathamam āsīd vartāmi ca bhaviṣyāmi ca nānyaḥ
kaścin matto vyatirikta iti |  
He \[Rudra\] replied: “I am the sole and primal one who ever was, is,
and will be; there is nothing else other than mine.

The text thus parallels the Kaṭha Āraṇyaka but inverts the initial
encounter between Rudra and the other deva-s with the other deva-s being
the one going to the svarga to see Rudra and Rudra being the one who
declares himself as encompassing the three stages of time. The text then
continues to identify Rudra with various entities such as the
directions, the Veda-s, the ritual fires, cows, and the essences of
various entities like the ritual offerings, dharma, natural truth and
the like. Then Rudra is said to vanish from the sight of the other
deva-s and they are described as praising him identifying him with each
of the deva-s. Thereafter, Rudra is connected with the essence of the
insight attained upon drinking Soma in the ritual. It uses the following
mantra, which is derived version of a ṛk recited by the ritualist upon
drinking Soma:

apāma somam amṛtā abhūmāganma jyotir avidāma devān | kiṃ nūnam asmān
kṛṇavad arātiḥ | kim u dhūrtir amṛta martyasya soma-sūryapurastāt
sūkṣmaḥ puruṣaḥ |  
(Note the aorist (luṅ) 1st person plural forms of verbs are used, e.g.
apāma for pā= drink, implying context of the recently completed ritual
libation)  
We have drunk Soma, we have become immortal, we have attained the light,
we have seen the deva-s. What indeed can the evil-doers do to us? What
is the mortal’s roguishness to the immortal – \[such is the power
stemming from\] the subtle being who existed before the sun and moon
(i.e. Rudra).

Thereafter the Atharvaśiras narrates several functions of Rudra and the
epithets corresponding to them and finally gives the teaching of
meditative yoga and the teaching of the śaiva ritual action of smearing
oneself with ash.

The Vedic accounts, including the one in the Kaṭha Āraṇyaka, are used to
illustrate a ritual point or special “insight” by knowing which the
ritualist is able to attain success or power. We see that this ancestral
frame work is used in the Atharvaśiras to present central śaiva
teachings: 1) the primacy of Rudra; 2) the universal nature of Rudra; 3)
finally the method of yoga. In the Kaṭha Āraṇyaka we already see
elements relating to the first two of these points and these are used as
is or expanded upon in the upaniṣad. Where the upaniṣad reconfigures
matters is relates to yoga. Both the Āraṇyaka and the upaniṣad presents
the knowledge of the nature of Rudra as the means of achieving power via
the ritual (the latter accepts the attainment of such power upon
performing the soma rite via the grace of Rudra). However, it
additionally presents yoga as the means to an insight that releases one
from a certain bondage that is characterized as the being similar to the
bondage of a domestic animal (the paśu-pāśa). It is this freeing insight
that came to be key concern of subsequent śaiva tradition. At the same
time it should be emphasized that even later śaiva tradition did not
lose sight of the acquisition of power either. Thus, via the Kaṭha
Āraṇyaka we can trace how the old encounter of Rudra with the other
deva-s evolved into the frame in which śaiva teaching was presented.

::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: As the great patriot Lokamanya Tilak pointed out the three
Invaka stars also represent the belt/girdle or upavīta of Prajāpati.
Indeed, even to this date when observers of Vedic tradition change their
upavīta-s they use a mantra in which the girdle of Prajāpati at the head
of the ecliptic path of Nakṣatra-s is invoked.
