+++
title = "Turkic miscellany: plucking the red apple"

+++
In 527 CE Justinian became the emperor at Constantinople. He is
remembered as a saint in the orthodox church and is famed for his
enforcing of the Nicean creed. He crushed other interpretations of the
Christianity and rebuilt the famous church known as Hagia Sophia in
Constantinople. He then took decisive moves to put an end to heathenism
once and for all. He seized control of one of the last surviving centers
of the Greek/Neoplatonic religion at Athens and forcible suppressed it.
He provided muscle to John of Ephesus to convert thousands of heathens
throughout Anatolia. After completing the conquest of North Africa he
completely suppressed the worship of the Egyptian deity Amun Ra in the
midst of the Libyan desert. He crushed the last remaining center of the
worship of the goddess Isis in an island on the Nile. He sent
missionaries to forcibly convert several Germanic peoples and set up
institutional surveillance to check if anyone, including those in high
office, practiced heathenism in private. Those who were found to do so
were subject to persecutions till they became Christian. The younger
Abrahamism turned on the older Abrahamism as Justinian even ordered the
persecution of the Jews. Fostering Christianity abroad he sent
missionaries from the church of Egypt to subvert the population by
carrying out conversions in Iranian territory. He waged holy war on the
Zoroastrian Iranians but was thoroughly defeated by them under the
leadership of Shah Khosrau-I Anushiruwān. In addition to the Hagia
Sophia, he made his mark on Constantinople as the prime nursing father
of the Christian church by having a gigantic statue of himself erected
therein in 543 CE. This statue showed Justinian riding a horse and
holding a globe in his hand. This globe came to be the symbol of the
name of Constantinople as the Red Apple.

A century and half later the Red Apple, the pride of the Christian
world, was to be coveted by Christianity’s equally violent younger
sister Mohammedanism. Mohammed the founder of the latter Abrahamism
himself believed that some day his followers would take Constantinople.
Soon enough in 650 CE the Mohammedans launched their first attack on the
city. But it was to take them 13 attempts before finally the Osmans
under Sultan Mehmed-II took it in 1453 CE. Between the first Arab attack
on the city and its final conquest in 1453 CE, the Mohammedans were not
the only ones seeking to take the city. Between 860 to 941 CE the
heathen Khaganate of the Rus made 3-4 attempts to take the city albeit
without success. However, following this period they were converted to
the orthodox flavor of Christianity, which resulted in them becoming
coreligionists of the Byzantines, and they came to see the city as their
own religious guide.

In 1451 CE the Mehmed, who had been underestimated by the western
Christian powers, decided the fulfill the hope of the founder of Islam:
“One day Constantinople will certainly be conquered. A good Amir al
Momin and a good army will be able to accomplish this.” Before Mehmed
his grandfather Sultan Bayezid-I had tried to take Constantinople after
an eight year siege but just before he accomplished his objective, Islam
being bloody within and without, he was struck in the rear by Amir
Timur. Routed by Timur, Bayezid was taken prisoner and died in
captivity. But the 20 year old Mehmed was not daunted by all this and
started rigorous preparations to take the Red Apple. Having rapidly
built multiple fortifications to secure his crossing of the Bosporus
strait, in late 1452 CE he sent a ghāzī force under Turahan Pasha to
fiercely attack the Greek territory of the Peloponnese to prevent any
help from that quarter. Then the Sultan himself at the head of his
Yenicheri forces (i.e. European boys captured early in their life and
converted to Islam as the Sultan’s personal force) led the siege of the
city from the landward side in 1453. His naval divisions surrounded to
city except for the inlet of the sea, the Golden Horn. Here the
Christians had set up a strong counter-naval chain preventing entry of
the Turkic navy. The Sultan sent his admiral Suleyman Baltoghlu to probe
this defense with his ships. The admiral conquered the islands in the
Sea of Marmara and engaged the Christian ships on 20th April 1453 CE. In
the naval battle that ensued the Moslems suffered heavy losses and four
Christian ships broke the blockade and supplied the besieged city with
grains.

The Sultan was in despair when his Sufi adviser Shaikh Akshamseddin sent
him a message that he had heard from Allah that victory was at hand. The
Sultan and his ghāzīs’ morale was raised and two days later the Sultan
started rolling his ships by way of land from the north into the Golden
Horn and a week later they were already in the inlet completing the
encirclement of Constantinople. The Christians launched one last naval
attack hoping to destroy these ships but the Mohammedans routed them
this time around and sunk their ships. On the landward side the Sultan
kept up the bombardment with his heavy artillery, including the over one
ton bolides launched from a gigantic cannon cast by the renegade
German-Hungarian engineer Urban. These assaults eventually breached the
walls of the city and on May 29th 1453 CE three hours before dawn the
Mohammedans launched an all out assault on the city in three waves. The
third wave broke through the Christian defenses and the Sultan leading
the Yenicheri force charged into a gateway. Here the Christians launched
a massed attack on the Sultan and his men. He fell back a bit and
ordered fire from his heavy artillery. This broke up the Christian
defense and smashed the gateway allowing the Moslems to pour in. Fierce
fighting followed for a while in which the last Christian ruler of
Constantinople was killed and his corpse never recovered.

The Mohammedan chronicler Tursun Bey gives a florid account of the last
battle:  
“*Once the smoke of Greek fire and the soul of the Fire-worshipping
prince had descended over the castle “as though a shadow (a quotation
from the Qoran)” the import was manifest: the devout Sultan of good
fortune had, as it were, “suspended the mountain (another Qoranic
quotation)” over this people of polytheism and destruction like Allah
himself. Thus, both from within and without, the cannons and muskets and
falconets and small arrows and arrows and crossbows spewed and flung out
a profusion of drops of Pharaonic-seeming perspiration as in the rains
of April – like a messenger of the prayers of the Moslems – and a
veritable precipitation and downpouring of calamities from the heavens
as decreed by Allah. And, from the furthest reaches below to the topmost
parts, and from the upper heights down to ground level, hand-to-hand
combat and charging was being joined with a clashing and plunging of
arms and hooked pikes and halbreds in the breaches amidst the ruin
wrought by the cannon…*” \[From Osman’s Dream by Caroline Finkel\]

It is rather remarkable to note that Moslems, despite fighting a sister
Abrahamism, where still unable to outgrow their original imagery of the
destruction of the fire-worshiping Iranians. The church of Hagia Sophia
was promptly made into a masjid – verily even as the second Abrahamism
had sown by destroying heathen temples to erect their churches they were
now reaping with the third Abrahamism coming to return the favor to
them. Shaikh Akshamseddin led the Mohammedans in their prayer at the
newly acquired masjid. In the mean time the pious Shaikh claimed to have
discovered the mazhār of the Arab Jihadist Ayub Ansari (a friend of
Mohammad the founder of Islam) who had died in course of the attack on
Constantinople in the 668 CE campaign. The Turks took this to be a
miracle and built a large dargah in his honor. Mehmed now taking on the
title Fetih further rubbed it in to the Christians by adding a madrasah
to the Hagia Sophia complex. He followed it up by converting five more
churches to masjids and adding more madarasahs to the mix. The irony was
complete when Mehmet took on the title Kayser-i Rum and demolished the
gargantuan statue of Justinian – the younger Abrahamism was only doing
to the older, what it had done to the images of the heathens. This was
one the high-points of Mohammedanism in the west – the Red Apple had
finally been plucked and eaten by Allah’s marauders – now it was
Istanbul rhyming with Islambol (i.e. full of Islam).

The Osman Khilafat has since ceased to exist but Istanbul remains in
Turkish hands. But there was one power that did not let this possession
go unchallenged. The vicissitudes of history eventually raised the
successor state of the Khaganate of the Rus, the tsardom of Russia over
the Osmans. The tsar of all Russias indeed shared a title with the Osman
Sultans after the conquest of Constantinople – tsar and Kayser-i Rum.
It was not just limited to that. As the most powerful force in the
world of orthodox Christianity, Russia saw itself as a protector of the
Church against Islam. In the 1850s the Russians had inflicted a heavy
blow on the declining Osman power by smashing their fleet at Sinope. But
the West in the form of the English and the French came to the aid of
the Turks and helped inflict a blow on the Russians in the Crimean war.
Thus they imposed a humiliating treaty on the Russians on account of
which they could not have a fleet on the Black Sea. The Russians did not
take this lying down. Aided by the diplomatic links to the Germanic
power of Prussia the Russians worked on countering the west. The
Prussians defeated the French, and the fellow Germanic Austrians and the
Danes with the support of the Russians and unified the core Germania to
form the new nation of Germany. Aided by Germany, the Russians cast off
the humiliating treaty imposed on them. Finally, in 1877 to avenge
Crimea the Russians attacked the Osman Turks. Now they were helped the
freedom movements in Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia, and Montenegro, and were
able to inflict heavy losses on the Moslems, acting as defenders of the
church. In this war the Russians came within 20 km of Istanbul but
failed to take it. However, they did gain territory and inflict a
serious blow on the Osmans that was eventually to prove to be their
undoing.

A lesson from all this for the Hindu is that Mohammedanism can be
remarkably persistent in its goals of conquest. Hence, merely preventing
conquest is not sufficient. Rather, completely rolling back
Mohammedanism from reconquered lands is essential. The Russian hand in
achieving this in Eastern Europe has been downplayed or in some cases
outright denied in tellings of history by the Anglosphere and its
vassals. In any case some of these lands in Eastern Europe have been
left permanently scarred despite their liberation. However, a closer
look shows that while the Europeans have regained some of these lands
their hold on it might not be for ever and a new wave of Mohammedanism
with new tactics might eventually succeed where even Suleyman failed.
