---
title: SOUL, GOD AND RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](../raja-yoga/appendix.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_hindu_religion.htm)

  

## SOUL, GOD AND RELIGION

Through the vistas of the past the voice of the centuries is coming down
to us; the voice of the sages of the Himalayas and the recluses of the
forest; the voice that came to the Semitic races; the voice that spoke
through Buddha and other spiritual giants; the voice that comes from
those who live in the light that accompanied man in the beginning of the
earth — the light that shines wherever man goes and lives with him for
ever — is coming to us even now. This voice is like the little rivulets;
that come from the mountains. Now they disappear, and now they appear
again in stronger flow till finally they unite in one mighty majestic
flood. The messages that are coming down to us from the prophets and
holy men and women of all sects and nations are joining their forces and
speaking to us with the trumpet voice of the past. And the first message
it brings us is: Peace be unto you and to all religions. It is not a
message of antagonism, but of one united religion.

Let us study this message first. At the beginning of this century it was
almost feared that religion was at an end. Under the tremendous
sledge-hammer blows of scientific research, old superstitions were
crumbling away like masses of porcelain. Those to whom religion meant
only a bundle of creeds and meaningless ceremonials were in despair;
they were at their wit's end. Everything was slipping between their
fingers. For a time it seemed inevitable that the surging tide of
agnosticism and materialism would sweep all before it. There were those
who did not dare utter what they thought. Many thought the case hopeless
and the cause of religion lost once and for ever. But the tide has
turned and to the rescue has come — what? The study of comparative
religions. By the study of different religions we find that in essence
they are one. When I was a boy, this scepticism reached me, and it
seemed for a time as if I must give up all hope of religion. But
fortunately for me I studied the Christian religion, the Mohammedan, the
Buddhistic, and others, and what was my surprise to find that the same
foundation principles taught by my religion were also taught by all
religions. It appealed to me this way. What is the truth? I asked. Is
this world true? Yes. Why? Because I see it. Are the beautiful sounds we
just heard (the vocal and instrumental music) true? Yes. Because we
heard them. We know that man has a body, eyes, and ears, and he has a
spiritual nature which we cannot see. And with his spiritual faculties
he can study these different religions and find that whether a religion
is taught in the forests and jungles of India or in a Christian land, in
essentials all religions are one. This only shows us that religion is a
constitutional necessity of the human mind. The proof of one religion
depends on the proof of all the rest. For instance, if I have six
fingers, and no one else has, you may well say that is abnormal. The
same reasoning may be applied to the argument that only one religion is
true and all others false. One religion only, like one set of six
fingers in the world, would be unnatural. We see, therefore, that if one
religion is true, all others must be true. There are differences in
non-essentials, but in essentials they are all one. If my five fingers
are true, they prove that your five fingers are true too. Wherever man
is, he must develop a belief, he must develop his religious nature.

And another fact I find in the study of the various religions of the
world is that there are three different stages of ideas with regard to
the soul and God. In the first place, all religions admit that, apart
from the body which perishes, there is a certain part or something which
does not change like the body, a part that is immutable, eternal, that
never dies; but some of the later religions teach that although there is
a part of us that never dies, it had a beginning. But anything that has
a beginning must necessarily have an end. We — the essential part of us
— never had a beginning, and will never have an end. And above us all,
above this eternal nature, there is another eternal Being, without end —
God. People talk about the beginning of the world, the beginning of man.
The word *beginning* simply means the beginning of the cycle. It nowhere
means the beginning of the whole Cosmos. It is impossible that creation
could have a beginning. No one of you can imagine a time of beginning.
That which has a beginning must have an end. "Never did I not exist, nor
you, nor will any of us ever hereafter cease to be," says the
Bhagavad-Gita. Wherever the beginning of creation is mentioned, it means
the beginning of a cycle. Your body will meet with death, but your soul,
never.

Along with this idea of the soul we find another group of ideas in
regard to its perfection. The soul in itself is perfect. The Old
Testament of the Hebrews admits man perfect at the beginning. Man made
himself impure by his own actions. But he is to regain his old nature,
his pure nature. Some speak of these things in allegories, fables, and
symbols. But when we begin to analyse these statements, we find that
they all teach that the human soul is in its very nature perfect, and
that man is to regain that original purity. How? By knowing God. Just as
the Bible says, "No man can see God but through the Son." What is meant
by it? That seeing God is the aim and goal of all human life. The
sonship must come before we become one with the Father. Remember that
man lost his purity through his own actions. When we suffer, it is
because of our own acts; God is not to be blamed for it.

Closely connected with these ideas is the doctrine — which was universal
before the Europeans mutilated it — the doctrine of reincarnation. Some
of you may have heard of and ignored it. This idea of reincarnation runs
parallel with the other doctrine of the eternity of the human soul.
Nothing which ends at one point can be without a beginning and nothing
that begins at one point can be without an end. We cannot believe in
such a monstrous impossibility as the beginning of the human soul. The
doctrine of reincarnation asserts the freedom of the soul. Suppose there
was an absolute beginning. Then the whole burden of this impurity in man
falls upon God. The all-merciful Father responsible for the sins of the
world! If sin comes in this way, why should one suffer more than
another? Why such partiality, if it comes from an all-merciful God? Why
are millions trampled underfoot? Why do people starve who never did
anything to cause it? Who is responsible? If they had no hand in it,
surely, God would be responsible. Therefore the better explanation is
that one is responsible for the miseries one suffers. If I set the wheel
in motion, I am responsible for the result. And if I can bring misery, I
can also stop it. It necessarily follows that we are free. There is no
such thing as fate. There is nothing to compel us. What we have done,
that we can undo.

To one argument in connection with this doctrine I will ask your patient
attention, as it is a little intricate. We gain all our knowledge
through experience; that is the only way. What we call experiences are
on the plane of consciousness. For illustration: A man plays a tune on a
piano, he places each finger on each key consciously. He repeats this
process till the movement of the fingers becomes a habit. He then plays
a tune without having to pay special attention to each particular key.
Similarly, we find in regard to ourselves that our tendencies are the
result of past conscious actions. A child is born with certain
tendencies. Whence do they come? No child is born with a *tabula rasa* —
with a clean, blank page — of a mind. The page has been written on
previously. The old Greek and Egyptian philosophers taught that no child
came with a vacant mind. Each child comes with a hundred tendencies
generated by past conscious actions. It did not acquire these in this
life, and we are bound to admit that it must have had them in past
lives. The rankest materialist has to admit that these tendencies are
the result of past actions, only they add that these tendencies come
through heredity. Our parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents come
down to us through this law of heredity. Now if heredity alone explains
this, there is no necessity of believing in the soul at all, because
body explains everything. We need not go into the different arguments
and discussions on materialism and spiritualism. So far the way is clear
for those who believe in an individual soul. We see that to come to a
reasonable conclusion we must admit that we have had past lives. This is
the belief of the great philosophers and sages of the past and of modern
times. Such a doctrine was believed in among the Jews. Jesus Christ
believed in it. He says in the Bible, "Before Abraham was, I am." And in
another place it is said, "This is Elias who is said to have come."

All the different religions which grew among different nations under
varying circumstances and conditions had their origin in Asia, and the
Asiatics understand them well. When they came out from the motherland,
they got mixed up with errors. The most profound and noble ideas of
Christianity were never understood in Europe, because the ideas and
images used by the writers of the Bible were foreign to it. Take for
illustration the pictures of the Madonna. Every artist paints his
Madonna according to his own pre-conceived ideas. I have been seeing
hundreds of pictures of the Last Supper of Jesus Christ, and he is made
to sit at a table. Now, Christ never sat at a table; he squatted with
others, and they had a bowl in which they dipped bread — not the kind of
bread you eat today. It is hard for any nation to understand the
unfamiliar customs of other people. How much more difficult was it for
Europeans to understand the Jewish customs after centuries of changes
and accretions from Greek, Roman, and other sources! Through all the
myths and mythologies by which it is surrounded it is no wonder that the
people get very little of the beautiful religion of Jesus, and no wonder
that they have made of it a modern shop-keeping religion.

To come to our point. We find that all religions teach the eternity of
the soul, as well as that its lustre has been dimmed, and that its
primitive purity is to be regained by the knowledge of God. What is the
idea of God in these different religions? The primary idea of God was
very vague. The most ancient nations had different Deities — sun, earth,
fire, water. Among the ancient Jews we find numbers of these gods
ferociously fighting with each other. Then we find Elohim whom the Jews
and the Babylonians worshipped. We next find one God standing supreme.
But the idea differed according to different tribes. They each asserted
that their God was the greatest. And they tried to prove it by fighting.
The one that could do the best fighting proved thereby that its God was
the greatest. Those races were more or less savage. But gradually better
and better ideas took the place of the old ones. All those old ideas are
gone or going into the lumber-room. All those religions were the
outgrowth of centuries; not one fell from the skies. Each had to be
worked out bit by bit. Next come the monotheistic ideas: belief in one
God, who is omnipotent and omniscient, the one God of the universe. This
one God is extra-cosmic; he lies in the heavens. He is invested with the
gross conceptions of His originators. He has a right side and a left
side, and a bird in His hand, and so on and so forth. But one thing we
find, that the tribal gods have disappeared for ever, and the one God of
the universe has taken their place: the God of gods. Still He is only an
extra-cosmic God. He is unapproachable; nothing can come near Him. But
slowly this idea has changed also, and at the next stage we find a God
immanent in nature.

In the New Testament it is taught, "Our Father who art in heaven" — God
living in the heavens separated from men. We are living on earth and He
is living in heaven. Further on we find the teaching that He is a God
immanent in nature; He is not only God in heaven, but on earth too. He
is the God in us. In the Hindu philosophy we find a stage of the same
proximity of God to us. But we do not stop there. There is the
non-dualistic stage, in which man realises that the God he has been
worshipping is not only the Father in heaven, and on earth, but that "I
and my Father are one." He realises in his soul that he is God Himself,
only a lower expression of Him. All that is real in me is He; all that
is real in Him is I. The gulf between God and man is thus bridged. Thus
we find how, by knowing God, we find the kingdom of heaven within us.

In the first or dualistic stage, man knows he is a little personal soul,
John, James, or Tom; and he says, "I will be John, James, or Tom to all
eternity, and never anything else." As well might the murderer come
along and say, "I will remain a murderer for ever." But as time goes on,
Tom vanishes and goes back to the original pure Adam.

"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." Can we see God?
Of course not. Can we know God? Of course not. If God can be known, He
will be God no longer. Knowledge is limitation. But I and my Father are
one: I find the reality in my soul. These ideas are expressed in some
religions, and in others only hinted. In some they were expatriated.
Christ's teachings are now very little understood in this country. If
you will excuse me, I will say that they have never been very well
understood.

The different stages of growth are absolutely necessary to the
attainment of purity and perfection. The varying systems of religion are
at bottom founded on the same ideas. Jesus says the kingdom of heaven is
within you. Again he says, "Our father who art in Heaven." How do you
reconcile the two sayings? In this way: He was talking to the uneducated
masses when he said the latter, the masses who were uneducated in
religion. It was necessary to speak to them in their own language. The
masses want concrete ideas, something the senses can grasp. A man may be
the greatest philosopher in the world, but a child in religion. When a
man has developed a high state of spirituality he can understand that
the kingdom of heaven is within him. That is the real kingdom of the
mind. Thus we see that the apparent contradictions and perplexities in
every religion mark but different stages of growth. And as such we have
no right to blame anyone for his religion. There are stages of growth in
which forms and symbols are necessary; they are the language that the
souls in that stage can understand.

The next idea that I want to bring to you is that religion does not
consist in doctrines or dogmas. It is not what you read, nor what dogmas
you believe that is of importance, but what you realise. "Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God," yea, in this life. And that
is salvation. There are those who teach that this can be gained by the
mumbling of words. But no great Master ever taught that external forms
were necessary for salvation. The power of attaining it is within
ourselves. We live and move in God. Creeds and sects have their parts to
play, but they are for children, they last but temporarily. Books never
make religions, but religions make books. We must not forget that. No
book ever created God, but God inspired all the great books. And no book
ever created a soul. We must never forget that. The end of all religions
is the realising of God in the soul. That is the one universal religion.
If there is one universal truth in all religions, I place it here — in
realising God. Ideals and methods may differ, but that is the central
point. There may be a thousand different radii, but they all converge to
the one centre, and that is the realisation of God: something behind
this world of sense, this world of eternal eating and drinking and
talking nonsense, this world of false shadows and selfishness. There is
that beyond all books, beyond all creeds, beyond the vanities of this
world and it is the realisation of God within yourself. A man may
believe in all the churches in the world, he may carry in his head all
the sacred books ever written, he may baptise himself in all the rivers
of the earth, still, if he has no perception of God, I would class him
with the rankest atheist. And a man may have never entered a church or a
mosque, nor performed any ceremony, but if he feels God within himself
and is thereby lifted above the vanities of the world, that man is a
holy man, a saint, call him what you will. As soon as a man stands up
and says he is right or his church is right, and all others are wrong,
he is himself all wrong. He does not know that upon the proof of all the
others depends the proof of his own. Love and charity for the whole
human race, that is the test of true religiousness. I do not mean the
sentimental statement that all men are brothers, but that one must feel
the oneness of human life. So far as they are not exclusive, I see that
the sects and creeds are all mine; they are all grand. They are all
helping men towards the real religion. I will add, it is good to be born
in a church, but it is bad to die there. It is good to be born a child,
but bad to remain a child. Churches, ceremonies, and symbols are good
for children, but when the child is grown, he must burst the church or
himself. We must not remain children for ever. It is like trying to fit
one coat to all sizes and growths. I do not deprecate the existence of
sects in the world. Would to God there were twenty millions more, for
the more there are, there will be a greater field for selection. What I
do object to is trying to fit one religion to every case. Though all
religions are essentially the same, they must have the varieties of form
produced by dissimilar circumstances among different nations. We must
each have our own individual religion, individual so far as the
externals of it go.

Many years ago, I visited a great sage of our own country, a very holy
man. We talked of our revealed book, the Vedas, of your Bible, of the
Koran, and of revealed books in general. At the close of our talk, this
good man asked me to go to the table and take up a book; it was a book
which, among other things, contained a forecast of the rainfall during
the year. The sage said, "Read that." And I read out the quantity of
rain that was to fall. He said, "Now take the book and squeeze it." I
did so and he said, "Why, my boy, not a drop of water comes out. Until
the water comes out, it is all book, book. So until your religion makes
you realise God, it is useless. He who only studies books for religion
reminds one of the fable of the ass which carried a heavy load of sugar
on its back, but did not know the sweetness of it."

Shall we advise men to kneel down and cry, "O miserable sinners that we
are!" No, rather let us remind them of their divine nature. I will tell
you a story. A lioness in search of prey came upon a flock of sheep, and
as she jumped at one of them, she gave birth to a cub and died on the
spot. The young lion was brought up in the flock, ate grass, and bleated
like a sheep, and it never knew that it was a lion. One day a lion came
across the flock and was astonished to see in it a huge lion eating
grass and bleating like a sheep. At his sight the flock fled and the
lion-sheep with them. But the lion watched his opportunity and one day
found the lion-sheep asleep. He woke him up and said, "You are a lion."
The other said, "No," and began to bleat like a sheep. But the stranger
lion took him to a lake and asked him to look in the water at his own
image and see if it did not resemble him, the stranger lion. He looked
and acknowledged that it did. Then the stranger lion began to roar and
asked him to do the same. The lion-sheep tried his voice and was soon
roaring as grandly as the other. And he was a sheep no longer.

My friends, I would like to tell you all that you are mighty as lions.

If the room is dark, do you go about beating your chest and crying, "It
is dark, dark, dark!" No, the only way to get the light is to strike a
light, and then the darkness goes. The only way to realise the light
above you is to strike the spiritual light within you, and the darkness
of sin and impurity will flee away. Think of your higher self, not of
your lower.

\*          \*          \*

Some questions and answers here followed.

Q. A man in the audience said, "If ministers stop preaching hell-fire,
they will have no control over their people."

A. They had better lose it then. The man who is frightened into religion
has no religion at all. Better teach him of his divine nature than of
his animal.

Q. What did the Lord mean when he said, "The kingdom of heaven is not of
this world?"

A. That the kingdom of heaven is within us. The Jewish idea was a
kingdom of heaven upon this earth. That was not the idea of Jesus.

Q. Do you believe we come up from the animals?

A. I believe that, by the law of evolution, the higher beings have come
up from the lower kingdoms.

Q. Do you know of anyone who remembers his previous life ?

A. I have met some who told me they did remember their previous life.
They had reached a point where they could remember their former
incarnations.

Q. Do you believe in Christ's crucifixion?

A. Christ was God incarnate; they could not kill him. That which was
crucified was only a semblance, a mirage.

Q. If he could have produced such a semblance as that, would not that
have been the greatest miracle of all?

A. I look upon miracles as the greatest stumbling-blocks in the way of
truth. When the disciples of Buddha told him of a man who had performed
a so-called miracle — had taken a bowl from a great height without
touching it — and showed him the bowl, he took it and crushed it under
his feet and told them never to build their faith on miracles, but to
look for truth in everlasting principles. He taught them the true inner
light — the light of the spirit, which is the only safe light to go by.
Miracles are only stumbling-blocks. Let us brush them aside.

Q. Do you believe Jesus preached the Sermon on the Mount?

A. I do believe he did. But in this matter I have to go by the books as
others do, and I am aware that mere book testimony is rather shaky
ground. But we are all safe in taking the teachings of the Sermon on the
Mount as a guide. We have to take what appeals to our inner spirit.
Buddha taught five hundred years before Christ, and his words were full
of blessings: never a curse came from his lips, nor from his life; never
one from Zoroaster, nor from Confucius.

</div>
