---
title: WHAT IS RELIGION?

---
<div>

[←](the_hindu_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](vedic_religious_ideals.htm)

  

## WHAT IS RELIGION?

A huge locomotive has rushed on over the line and a small worm that was
creeping upon one of the rails saved its life by crawling out of the
path of the locomotive. Yet this little worm, so insignificant that it
can be crushed in a moment, is a living something, while this
locomotive, so huge, so immense, is only an engine, a machine. You say
the one has life and the other is only dead matter and all its powers
and strength and speed are only those of a dead machine, a mechanical
contrivance. Yet the poor little worm which moved upon the rail and
which the least touch of the engine would have deprived of its life is a
majestic being compared to that huge locomotive. It is a small part of
the Infinite and, therefore, it is greater than this powerful engine.
Why should that be so? How do we know the living from the dead? The
machine mechanically performs all the movements its maker made it to
perform, its movements are not those of life. How can we make the
distinction between the living and the dead, then? In the living there
is freedom, there is intelligence; in the dead all is bound and no
freedom is possible, because there is no intelligence. This freedom that
distinguishes us from mere machines is what we are all striving for. To
be more free is the goal of all our efforts, for only in perfect freedom
can there be perfection. This effort to attain freedom underlies all
forms of worship, whether we know it or not.

If we were to examine the various sorts of worship all over the world,
we would see that the rudest of mankind are worshipping ghosts, demons,
and the spirits of their forefathers — serpent worship, worship of
tribal gods, and worship of the departed ones. Why do they do this?
Because they feel that in some unknown way these beings are greater,
more powerful than themselves, and limit their freedom. They, therefore,
seek to propitiate these beings in order to prevent them from molesting
them, in other words, to get more freedom. They also seek to win favour
from these superior beings, to get by gift of the gods what ought to be
earned by personal effort.

On the whole, this shows that the world is expecting a miracle. This
expectation never leaves us, and however we may try, we are all running
after the miraculous and extraordinary. What is mind but that ceaseless
inquiry into the meaning and mystery of life? We may say that only
uncultivated people are going after all these things, but the question
still is there: Why should it be so? The Jews were asking for a miracle.
The whole world has been asking for the same these thousands of years.
There is, again, the universal dissatisfaction. We make an ideal but we
have rushed only half the way after it when we make a newer one. We
struggle hard to attain to some goal and then discover we do not want
it. This dissatisfaction we are having time after time, and what is
there in the mind if there is to be only dissatisfaction? What is the
meaning of this universal dissatisfaction? It is because freedom is
every man's goal. He seeks it ever, his whole life is a struggle after
it. The child rebels against law as soon as it is born. Its first
utterance is a cry, a protest against the bondage in which it finds
itself. This longing for freedom produces the idea of a Being who is
absolutely free. The concept of God is a fundamental element in the
human constitution. In the Vedanta, Sat-chit-ânanda
(Existence-Knowledge-Bliss) is the highest concept of God possible to
the mind. It is the essence of knowledge and is by its nature the
essence of bliss. We have been stifling that inner voice long enough,
seeking to follow law and quiet the human nature, but there is that
human instinct to rebel against nature's laws. We may not understand
what the meaning is, but there is that unconscious struggle of the human
with the spiritual, of the lower with the higher mind, and the struggle
attempts to preserve one's separate life, what we call our
"individuality".

Even hells stand out with this miraculous fact that we are born rebels;
and the first fact of life — the inrushing of life itself — against this
we rebel and cry out, "No law for us." As long as we obey the laws we
are like machines, and on goes the universe, and we cannot break it.
Laws as laws become man's nature. The first inkling of life on its
higher level is in seeing this struggle within us to break the bond of
nature and to be free. "Freedom, O Freedom! Freedom, O Freedom!" is the
song of the soul. Bondage, alas, to be bound in nature, seems its fate.

Why should there be serpent, or ghost, or demon worship and all these
various creeds and forms for having miracles? Why do we say that there
is life, there is being in anything? There must be a meaning in all this
search, this endeavour to understand life, to explain being. It is not
meaningless and vain. It is man's ceaseless endeavour to become free.
The knowledge which we now call science has been struggling for
thousands of years in its attempt to gain freedom, and people ask for
freedom. Yet there is no freedom in nature. It is all law. Still the
struggle goes on. Nay, the whole of nature from the very sun to the
atoms is under law, and even for man there is no freedom. But we cannot
believe it. We have been studying laws from the beginning and yet cannot
— nay, will not — believe that man is under law. The soul cries ever,
"Freedom, O Freedom!" With the conception of God as a perfectly free
Being, man cannot rest eternally in this bondage. Higher he must go, and
unless the struggle were for himself, he would think it too severe. Man
says to himself, "I am a born slave, I am bound; nevertheless, there is
a Being who is not bound by nature. He is free and Master of nature."

The conception of God, therefore, is as essential and as fundamental a
part of mind as is the idea of bondage. Both are the outcome of the idea
of freedom. There cannot be life, even in the plant, without the idea of
freedom. In the plant or in the worm, life has to rise to the individual
concept. It is there, unconsciously working, the plant living its life
to preserve the variety, principle, or form, not nature. The idea of
nature controlling every step onward overrules the idea of freedom.
Onward goes the idea of the material world, onward moves the idea of
freedom. Still the fight goes on. We are hearing about all the quarrels
of creeds and sects, yet creeds and sects are just and proper, they must
be there. The chain is lengthening and naturally the struggle increases,
but there need be no quarrels if we only knew that we are all striving
to reach the same goal.

The embodiment of freedom, the Master of nature, is what we call God.
You cannot deny Him. No, because you cannot move or live without the
idea of freedom. Would you come here if you did not believe you were
free? It is quite possible that the biologist can and will give some
explanation of this perpetual effort to be free. Take all that for
granted, still the idea of freedom is there. It is a fact, as much so as
the other fact that you cannot apparently get over, the fact of being
under nature.

Bondage and liberty, light and shadow, good and evil must be there, but
the very fact of the bondage shows also this freedom hidden there. If
one is a fact, the other is equally a fact. There must be this idea of
freedom. While now we cannot see that this idea of bondage, in
uncultivated man, is his struggle for freedom, yet the idea of freedom
is there. The bondage of sin and impurity in the uncultivated savage is
to his consciousness very small, for his nature is only a little higher
than the animal's. What he struggles against is the bondage of physical
nature, the lack of physical gratification, but out of this lower
consciousness grows and broadens the higher conception of a mental or
moral bondage and a longing for spiritual freedom. Here we see the
divine dimly shining through the veil of ignorance. The veil is very
dense at first and the light may be almost obscured, but it is there,
ever pure and undimmed — the radiant fire of freedom and perfection. Man
personifies this as the Ruler of the Universe, the One Free Being. He
does not yet know that the universe is all one, that the difference is
only in degree, in the concept.

The whole of nature is worship of God. Wherever there is life, there is
this search for freedom and that freedom is the same as God. Necessarily
this freedom gives us mastery over all nature and is impossible without
knowledge. The more we are knowing, the more we are becoming masters of
nature. Mastery alone is making us strong and if there be some being
entirely free and master of nature, that being must have a perfect
knowledge of nature, must be omnipresent and omniscient. Freedom must go
hand in hand with these, and that being alone who has acquired these
will be beyond nature.

Blessedness, eternal peace, arising from perfect freedom, is the highest
concept of religion underlying all the ideas of God in Vedanta —
absolutely free Existence, not bound by anything, no change, no nature,
nothing that can produce a change in Him. This same freedom is in you
and in me and is the only real freedom.

God is still, established upon His own majestic changeless Self. You and
I try to be one with Him, but plant ourselves upon nature, upon the
trifles of daily life, on money, on fame, on human love, and all these
changing forms in nature which make for bondage. When nature shines,
upon what depends the shining? Upon God and not upon the sun, nor the
moon, nor the stars. Wherever anything shines, whether it is the light
in the sun or in our own consciousness, it is He. He shining, all shines
after Him.

Now we have seen that this God is self-evident, impersonal, omniscient,
the Knower and Master of nature, the Lord of all. He is behind all
worship and it is being done according to Him, whether we know it or
not. I go one step further. That at which all marvel, that which we call
evil, is His worship too. This too is a part of freedom. Nay, I will be
terrible even and tell you that, when you are doing evil, the impulse
behind is also that freedom. It may have been misguided and misled, but
it was there; and there cannot be any life or any impulse unless that
freedom be behind it. Freedom breathes in the throb of the universe.
Unless there is unity at the universal heart, we cannot understand
variety. Such is the conception of the Lord in the Upanishads. Sometimes
it rises even higher, presenting to us an ideal before which at first we
stand aghast — that we are in essence one with God. He who is the
colouring in the wings of the butterfly, and the blossoming of the
rose-bud, is the power that is in the plant and in the butterfly. He who
gives us life is the power within us. Out of His fire comes life, and
the direst death is also His power. He whose shadow is death, His shadow
is immortality also. Take a still higher conception. See how we are
flying like hunted hares from all that is terrible, and like them,
hiding our heads and thinking we are safe. See how the whole world is
flying from everything terrible. Once when I was in Varanasi, I was
passing through a place where there was a large tank of water on one
side and a high wall on the other. It was in the grounds where there
were many monkeys. The monkeys of Varanasi are huge brutes and are
sometimes surly. They now took it into their heads not to allow me to
pass through their street, so they howled and shrieked and clutched at
my feet as I passed. As they pressed closer, I began to run, but the
faster I ran, the faster came the monkeys and they began to bite at me.
It seemed impossible to escape, but just then I met a stranger who
called out to me, "Face the brutes." I turned and faced the monkeys, and
they fell back and finally fled. That is a lesson for all life — face
the terrible, face it boldly. Like the monkeys, the hardships of life
fall back when we cease to flee before them. If we are ever to gain
freedom, it must be by conquering nature, never by running away. Cowards
never win victories. We have to fight fear and troubles and ignorance if
we expect them to flee before us.

What is death? What are terrors? Do you not see the Lord's face in them?
Fly from evil and terror and misery, and they will follow you. Face
them, and they will flee. The whole world worships ease and pleasure,
and very few dare to worship that which is painful. To rise above both
is the idea of freedom. Unless man passes through this gate he cannot be
free. We all have to face these. We strive to worship the Lord, but the
body rises between, nature rises between Him and us and blinds our
vision. We must learn how to worship and love Him in the thunderbolt, in
shame, in sorrow, in sin. All the world has ever been preaching the God
of virtue. I preach a God of virtue and a God of sin in one. Take Him if
you dare — that is the one way to salvation; then alone will come to us
the Truth Ultimate which comes from the idea of oneness. Then will be
lost the idea that one is greater than another. The nearer we approach
the law of freedom, the more we shall come under the Lord, and troubles
will vanish. Then we shall not differentiate the door of hell from the
gate of heaven, nor differentiate between men and say, "I am greater
than any being in the universe." Until we see nothing in the world but
the Lord Himself, all these evils will beset us and we shall make all
these distinctions; because it is only in the Lord, in the Spirit, that
we are all one; and until we see God everywhere, this unity will not
exist for us.

Two birds of beautiful plumage, inseparable companions, sat upon the
same tree, one on the top and one below. The beautiful bird below was
eating the fruits of the tree, sweet and bitter, one moment a sweet one
and another a bitter. The moment he ate a bitter fruit, he was sorry,
but after a while he ate another and when it too was bitter, he looked
up and saw the other bird who ate neither the sweet nor the bitter, but
was calm and majestic, immersed in his own glory. And then the poor
lower bird forgot and went on eating the sweet and bitter fruits again,
until at last he ate one that was extremely bitter; and then he stopped
again and once more looked up at the glorious bird above. Then he came
nearer and nearer to the other bird; and when he had come near enough,
rays of light shone upon him and enveloped him, and he saw he was
transformed into the higher bird. He became calm, majestic, free, and
found that there had been but one bird all the time on the tree. The
lower bird was but the reflection of the one above. So we are in reality
one with the Lord, but the reflection makes us seem many, as when the
one sun reflects in a million dew-drops and seems a million tiny suns.
The reflection must vanish if we are to identify ourselves with our real
nature which is divine. The universe itself can never be the limit of
our satisfaction. That is why the miser gathers more and more money,
that is why the robber robs, the sinner sins, that is why you are
learning philosophy. All have one purpose. There is no other purpose in
life, save to reach this freedom. Consciously or unconsciously, we are
all striving for perfection. Every being must attain to it.

The man who is groping through sin, through misery, the man who is
choosing the path through hells, will reach it, but it will take time.
We cannot save him. Some hard knocks on his head will help him to turn
to the Lord. The path of virtue, purity, unselfishness, spirituality,
becomes known at last and what all are doing unconsciously, we are
trying to do consciously. The idea is expressed by St. Paul, "The God
that ye ignorantly worship, Him declare I unto you." This is the lesson
for the whole world to learn. What have these philosophies and theories
of nature to do, if not to help us to attain to this one goal in life?
Let us come to that consciousness of the identity of everything and let
man see himself in everything. Let us be no more the worshippers of
creeds or sects with small limited notions of God, but see Him in
everything in the universe. If you are knowers of God, you will
everywhere find the same worship as in your own heart.

Get rid, in the first place, of all these limited ideas and see God in
every person — working through all hands, walking through all feet, and
eating through every mouth. In every being He lives, through all minds
He thinks. He is self-evident, nearer unto us than ourselves. To know
this is religion, is faith, and may it please the Lord to give us this
faith! When we shall feel that oneness, we shall be immortal. We are
physically immortal even, one with the universe. So long as there is one
that breathes throughout the universe, I live in that one. I am not this
limited little being, I am the universal. I am the life of all the sons
of the past. I am the soul of Buddha, of Jesus, of Mohammed. I am the
soul of the teachers, and I am all the robbers that robbed, and all the
murderers that were hanged, I am the universal. Stand up then; this is
the highest worship. You are one with the universe. That only is
humility — not crawling upon all fours and calling yourself a sinner.
That is the highest evolution when this veil of differentiation is torn
off. The highest creed is Oneness. I am so-and-so is a limited idea, not
true of the real "I". I am the universal; stand upon that and ever
worship the Highest through the highest form, for God is Spirit and
should be worshipped in spirit and in truth. Through lower forms of
worship, man's material thoughts rise to spiritual worship and the
Universal Infinite One is at last worshipped in and through the spirit.
That which is limited is material. The Spirit alone is infinite. God is
Spirit, is infinite; man is Spirit and, therefore, infinite, and the
Infinite alone can worship the Infinite. We will worship the Infinite;
that is the highest spiritual worship. The grandeur of realising these
ideas, how difficult it is! I theorise, talk, philosophize; and the next
moment something comes against me, and I unconsciously become angry, I
forget there is anything in the universe but this little limited self, I
forget to say, "I am the Spirit, what is this trifle to me? I am the
Spirit." I forget it is all myself playing, I forget God, I forget
freedom.

Sharp as the blade of a razor, long and difficult and hard to cross, is
the way to freedom. The sages have declared this again and again. Yet do
not let these weaknesses and failures bind you. The Upanishads have
declared, "Arise ! Awake ! and stop not until the goal is reached." We
will then certainly cross the path, sharp as it is like the razor, and
long and distant and difficult though it be. Man becomes the master of
gods and demons. No one is to blame for our miseries but ourselves. Do
you think there is only a dark cup of poison if man goes to look for
nectar? The nectar is there and is for every man who strives to reach
it. The Lord Himself tells us, "Give up all these paths and struggles.
Do thou take refuge in Me. I will take thee to the other shore, be not
afraid." We hear that from all the scriptures of the world that come to
us. The same voice teaches us to say, "Thy will be done upon earth, as
it is in heaven," for "Thine is the kingdom and the power and the
glory." It is difficult, all very difficult. I say to myself, "This
moment I will take refuge in Thee, O Lord. Unto Thy love I will
sacrifice all, and on Thine altar I will place all that is good and
virtuous. My sins, my sorrows, my actions, good and evil, I will offer
unto Thee; do Thou take them and I will never forget." One moment I say,
"Thy will be done," and the next moment something comes to try me and I
spring up in a rage. The goal of all religions is the same, but the
language of the teachers differs. The attempt is to kill the false "I",
so that the real "I", the Lord, will reign. "I the Lord thy God am a
jealous God. Thou shalt have no other gods before me," say the Hebrew
scriptures. God must be there all alone. We must say, "Not I, but Thou,"
and then we should give up everything but the Lord. He, and He alone,
should reign. Perhaps we struggle hard, and yet the next moment our feet
slip, and then we try to stretch out our hands to Mother. We find we
cannot stand alone. Life is infinite, one chapter of which is, "Thy will
be done," and unless we realise all the chapters we cannot realise the
whole. "Thy will be done" — every moment the traitor mind rebels against
it, yet it must be said, again and again, if we are to conquer the lower
self. We cannot serve a traitor and yet be saved. There is salvation for
all except the traitor and we stand condemned as traitors, traitors
against our own selves, against the majesty of Mother, when we refuse to
obey the voice of our higher Self. Come what will, we must give our
bodies and minds up to the Supreme Will. Well has it been said by the
Hindu philosopher, "If man says twice, 'Thy will be done,' he commits
sin." "Thy will be done," what more is needed, why say it twice? What is
good is good. No more shall we take it back. "Thy will be done on earth
as it is in heaven, for Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory
for evermore."

</div>
