---
title: VEDIC RELIGIOUS IDEALS

---
<div>

[←](what_is_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_vedanta_philosophy.htm)

  

## VEDIC RELIGIOUS IDEALS

What concerns us most is the religious thought — on soul and God and all
that appertains to religion. We will take the Samhitâs. These are
collections of hymns forming, as it were, the oldest Aryan literature,
properly speaking, the oldest literature in the world. There may have
been some scraps of literature of older date here and there, older than
that even, but not books, or literature properly so called. As a
collected book, this is the oldest the world has, and herein is
portrayed the earliest feeling of the Aryans, their aspirations, the
questions that arose about their manners and methods, and so on. At the
very outset we find a very curious idea. These hymns are sung in praise
of different gods, Devas as they are called, the bright ones. There is
quite a number of them. One is called Indra, another Varuna, another
Mitra, Parjanya, and so on. Various mythological and allegorical figures
come before us one after the other — for instance, Indra the thunderer,
striking the serpent who has withheld the rains from mankind. Then he
lets fly his thunderbolt, the serpent is killed, and rain comes down in
showers. The people are pleased, and they worship Indra with oblations.
They make a sacrificial pyre, kill some animals, roast their flesh upon
spits, and offer that meat to Indra. And they had a popular plant called
Soma. What plant it was nobody knows now; it has entirely disappeared,
but from the books we gather that, when crushed, it produced a sort of
milky juice, and that was fermented; and it can also be gathered that
this fermented Soma juice was intoxicating. This also they offered to
Indra and the other gods, and they also drank it themselves. Sometimes
they drank a little too much, and so did the gods. Indra on occasions
got drunk. There are passages to show that Indra at one time drank so
much of this Soma juice that he talked irrelevant words. So with Varuna.
He is another god, very powerful, and is in the same way protecting his
votaries, and they are praising him with their libations of Soma. So is
the god of war, and so on. But the popular idea that strikes one as
making the mythologies of the Samhitas entirely different from the other
mythologies is, that along with every one of these gods is the idea of
an infinity. This infinite is abstracted, and sometimes described as
Âditya. At other times it is affixed, as it were, to all the other gods.
Take, for example, Indra. In some of the books you will find that Indra
has a body, is very strong, sometimes is wearing golden armour, and
comes down, lives and eats with his votaries, fights the demons, fights
the snakes, and so on. Again, in one hymn we find that Indra has been
given a very high position; he is omnipresent and omnipotent, and Indra
sees the heart of every being. So with Varuna. This Varuna is god of the
air and is in charge of the water, just as Indra was previously; and
then, all of a sudden, we find him raised up and said to be omnipresent,
omnipotent, and so on. I will read one passage about this Varuna in his
highest form, and you will understand what I mean. It has been
translated into English poetry, so it is better that I read it in that
form.

The mighty Lord on high our deeds, as if at hand, espies;  
The gods know all men do, though men would fain their acts disguise;  
Whoever stands, whoever moves, or steals from place to place,  
Or hides him in his secret cell — the gods his movements trace.  
Wherever two together plot, and deem they are alone,  
King Varuna is there, a third, and all their schemes are known.  
This earth is his, to him belong those vast and boundless skies;  
Both seas within him rest, and yet in that small pool he lies,  
Whoever far beyond the sky should think his way to wing.  
He could not there elude the grasp of Varuna the King.  
His spies, descending from the skies, glide all this world around;  
Their thousand eyes all-scanning sweep to earth's remotest bound.

So we can multiply examples about the other gods; they all come, one
after the other, to share the same fate — they first begin as gods, and
then they are raised to this conception as the Being in whom the whole
universe exists, who sees every heart, who is the ruler of the universe.
And in the case of Varuna, there is another idea, just the germ of one
idea which came, but was immediately suppressed by the Aryan mind, and
that was the idea of fear. In another place we read they are afraid they
have sinned and ask Varuna for pardon. These ideas were never allowed,
for reasons you will come to understand later on, to grow on Indian
soil, but the germs were there sprouting, the idea of fear, and the idea
of sin. This is the idea, as you all know, of what is called monotheism.
This monotheism, we see, came to India at a very early period.
Throughout the Samhitas, in the first and oldest part, this monotheistic
idea prevails, but we shall find that it did not prove sufficient for
the Aryans; they threw it aside, as it were, as a very primitive sort of
idea and went further on, as we Hindus think. Of course in reading books
and criticisms on the Vedas written by Europeans, the Hindu cannot help
smiling when he reads, that the writings of our authors are saturated
with this previous education alone. Persons who have sucked in as their
mother's milk the idea that the highest ideal of God is the idea of a
Personal God, naturally dare not think on the lines of these ancient
thinkers of India, when they find that just after the Samhitas, the
monotheistic idea with which the Samhita portion is replete was thought
by the Aryans to be useless and not worthy of philosophers and thinkers,
and that they struggled hard for a more philosophical and transcendental
idea. The monotheistic idea was much too human for them, although they
gave it such descriptions as "The whole universe rests in Him," and
"Thou art the keeper of all hearts." The Hindus were bold, to their
great credit be it said, bold thinkers in all their ideas, so bold that
one spark of their thought frightens the so-called bold thinkers of the
West. Well has it been said by Prof. Max Müller about these thinkers
that they climbed up to heights where their lungs only could breathe,
and where those of other beings would have burst. These brave people
followed reason wherever it led them, no matter at what cost, never
caring if all their best superstitions were smashed to pieces, never
caring what society would think about them, or talk about them; but what
they thought was right and true, they preached and they talked.

Before going into all these speculations of the ancient Vedic sages, we
will first refer to one or two very curious instances in the Vedas. The
peculiar fact — that these gods are taken up, as it were, one after the
other, raised and sublimated, till each has assumed the proportions of
the infinite Personal God of the Universe — calls for an explanation.
Prof. Max Müller creates for it a new name, as he thinks it peculiar to
the Hindus: he calls it "Henotheism". We need not go far for the
explanation. It is within the book. A few steps from the very place
where we find those gods being raised and sublimated, we find the
explanation also. The question arises how the Hindu mythologies should
be so unique, so different from all others. In Babylonian or Greek
mythologies we find one god struggling upwards, and he assumes a
position and remains there, while the other gods die out. Of all the
Molochs, Jehovah becomes supreme, and the other Molochs are forgotten,
lost for ever; he is the God of gods. So, too, of all the Greek gods,
Zeus comes to the front and assumes big proportions, becomes the God of
the Universe, and all the other gods become degraded into minor angels.
This fact was repeated in later times. The Buddhists and the Jains
raised one of their prophets to the Godhead, and all the other gods they
made subservient to Buddha, or to Jina. This is the world-wide process,
but there we find an exception, as it were. One god is praised, and for
the time being it is said that all the other gods obey his commands, and
the very one who is said to be raised up by Varuna, is himself raised
up, in the next book, to the highest position. They occupy the position
of the Personal God in turns. But the explanation is there in the book,
and it is a grand explanation, one that has given the theme to all
subsequent thought in India, and one that will be the theme of the whole
world of religions: "Ekam Sat Viprâ Bahudhâ Vadanti — That which exists
is One; sages call It by various names." In all these cases where hymns
were written about all these gods, the Being perceived was one and the
same; it was the perceiver who made the difference. It was the hymnist,
the sage, the poet, who sang in different languages and different words,
the praise of one and the same Being. "That which exists is One; sages
call It by various names." Tremendous results have followed from that
one verse. Some of you, perhaps, are surprised to think that India is
the only country where there never has been a religious persecution,
where never was any man disturbed for his religious faith. Theists or
atheists, monists, dualists, monotheists are there and always live
unmolested. Materialists were allowed to preach from the steps of
Brahminical temples, against the gods, and against God Himself; they
went preaching all over the land that the idea of God was a mere
superstition, and that gods, and Vedas, and religion were simply
superstitions invented by the priests for their own benefit, and they
were allowed to do this unmolested. And so, wherever he went, Buddha
tried to pull down every old thing sacred to the Hindus to the dust, and
Buddha died of ripe old age. So did the Jains, who laughed at the idea
of God. "How can it be that there is a God?" they asked; "it must be a
mere superstition." So on, endless examples there are. Before the
Mohammedan wave came into India, it was never known what religious
persecution was; the Hindus had only experienced it as made by
foreigners on themselves. And even now it is a patent fact how much
Hindus have helped to build Christian churches, and how much readiness
there is to help them. There never has been bloodshed. Even heterodox
religions that have come out of India have been likewise affected; for
instance, Buddhism. Buddhism is a great religion in some respects, but
to confuse Buddhism with Vedanta is without meaning; anyone may mark
just the difference that exists between Christianity and the Salvation
Army. There are great and good points in Buddhism, but these great
points fell into hands which were not able to keep them safe. The jewels
which came from philosophers fell into the hands of mobs, and the mobs
took up their ideas. They had a great deal of enthusiasm, some
marvellous ideas, great and humanitarian ideas, but, after all, there is
something else that is necessary — thought and intellect — to keep
everything safe. Wherever you see the most humanitarian ideas fall into
the hands of the multitude, the first result, you may notice, is
degradation. It is learning and intellect that keep things sure. Now
this Buddhism went as the first missionary religion to the world,
penetrated the whole of the civilised world as it existed at that time,
and never was a drop of blood shed for that religion. We read how in
China the Buddhist missionaries were persecuted, and thousands were
massacred by two or three successive emperors, but after that, fortune
favoured the Buddhists, and one of the emperors offered to take
vengeance on the persecutors, but the missionaries refused. All that we
owe to this one verse. That is why I want you to remember it: "Whom they
call Indra, Mitra, Varuna — That which exists is One; sages call It by
various names."

It was written, nobody knows at what date, it may be 8,000 years ago, in
spite of all modern scholars may say, it may be 9,000 years ago. Not one
of these religious speculations is of modern date, but they are as fresh
today as they were when they were written, or rather, fresher, for at
that distant date man was not so civilised as we know him now. He had
not learnt to cut his brother's throat because he differed a little in
thought from himself; he had not deluged the world in blood, he did not
become demon to his own brother. In the name of humanity he did not
massacre whole lots of mankind then. Therefore these words come to us
today very fresh, as great stimulating, life-giving words, much fresher
than they were when they were written: "That which exists is One; sages
call It by various names." We have to learn yet that all religions,
under whatever name they may be called, either Hindu, Buddhist,
Mohammedan, or Christian, have the same God, and he who derides any one
of these derides his own God.

That was the solution they arrived at. But, as I have said, this ancient
monotheistic idea did not satisfy the Hindu mind. It did not go far
enough, it did not explain the visible world: a ruler of the world does
not explain the world — certainly not. A ruler of the universe does not
explain the universe, and much less an external ruler, one outside of
it. He may be a moral guide, the greatest power in the universe, but
that is no explanation of the universe; and the first question that we
find now arising, assuming proportions, is the question about the
universe: "Whence did it come?" "How did it come?" "How does it exist?"
Various hymns are to be found on this question struggling forward to
assume form, and nowhere do we find it so poetically, so wonderfully
expressed as in the following hymn:

"Then there was neither aught nor naught, nor air, nor sky, nor
anything. What covered all? Where rested all? Then death was not, nor
deathlessness, nor change to night and day." The translation loses a
good deal of the poetical beauty. "Then death was not, nor
deathlessness, nor change to night and day;" the very sound of the
Sanskrit is musical. "*That* existed, that breath, covering as it were,
that God's existence; but it did not begin to move." It is good to
remember this one idea that it existed motionless, because we shall find
how this idea sprouts up afterwards in the cosmology, how according to
the Hindu metaphysics and philosophy, this whole universe is a mass of
vibrations, as it were, motions; and there are periods when this whole
mass of motions subsides and becomes finer and finer, remaining in that
state for some time. That is the state described in this hymn. It
existed unmoved, without vibration, and when this creation began, this
began to vibrate and all this creation came out of it, that one breath,
calm, self-sustained, naught else beyond it.

"Gloom existed first." Those of you who have ever been in India or any
tropical country, and have seen the bursting of the monsoon, will
understand the majesty of these words. I remember three poets' attempts
to picture this. Milton says, "No light, but rather darkness visible."
Kalidasa says, "Darkness which can be penetrated with a needle," but
none comes near this Vedic description, "Gloom hidden in gloom."
Everything is parching and sizzling, the whole creation seems to be
burning away, and for days it has been so, when one afternoon there is
in one corner of the horizon a speck of cloud, and in less than half an
hour it has extended unto the whole earth, until, as it were, it is
covered with cloud, cloud over cloud, and then it bursts into a
tremendous deluge of rain. The cause of creation was described as will.
That which existed at first became changed into will, and this will
began to manifest itself as desire. This also we ought to remember,
because we find that this idea of desire is said to be the cause of all
we have. This idea of will has been the corner-stone of both the
Buddhist and the Vedantic system, and later on, has penetrated into
German philosophy and forms the basis of Schopenhauer's system of
philosophy. It is here we first hear of it.

Now first arose desire, the primal seed of mind.  
Sages, searching in their hearts by wisdom, found the bond,  
Between existence and non-existence.

It is a very peculiar expression; the poet ends by saying that "perhaps
He even does not know." We find in this hymn, apart from its poetical
merits, that this questioning about the universe has assumed quite
definite proportions, and that the minds of these sages must have
advanced to such a state, when all sorts of common answers would not
satisfy them. We find that they were not even satisfied with this
Governor above. There are various other hymns where the same idea, comes
in, about how this all came, and just as we have seen, when they were
trying to find a Governor of the universe, a Personal God, they were
taking up one Deva after another, raising him up to that position, so
now we shall find that in various hymns one or other idea is taken up,
and expanded infinitely and made responsible for everything in the
universe. One particular idea is taken as the support, in which
everything rests and exists, and that support has become all this. So on
with various ideas. They tried this method with Prâna, the life
principle. They expanded the idea of the life principle until it became
universal and infinite. It is the life principle that is supporting
everything; not only the human body, but it is the light of the sun and
the moon, it is the power moving everything, the universal motive
energy. Some of these attempts are very beautiful, very poetical. Some
of them as, "He ushers the beautiful morning," are marvellously lyrical
in the way they picture things. Then this very desire, which, as we have
just read, arose as the first primal germ of creation, began to be
stretched out, until it became the universal God. But none of these
ideas satisfied.

Here the idea is sublimated and finally abstracted into a personality.
"He alone existed in the beginning; He is the one Lord of all that
exists; He supports this universe; He who is the author of souls, He who
is the author of strength, whom all the gods worship, whose shadow is
life, whose shadow is death; whom else shall we worship? Whose glory the
snow-tops of the Himalayas declare, whose glory the oceans with all
their waters proclaim." So on it goes, but, as I told you just now, this
idea did not satisfy them.

At last we find a very peculiar position. The Aryan mind had so long
been seeking an answer to the question from outside. They questioned
everything they could find, the sun, the moon, and stars, and they found
all they could in this way. The whole of nature at best could teach them
only of a personal Being who is the Ruler of the universe; it could
teach nothing further. In short, out of the external world we can only
get the idea of an architect, that which is called the Design Theory. It
is not a very logical argument, as we all know; there is something
childish about it, yet it is the only little bit of anything we can know
about God from the external world, that this world required a builder.
But this is no explanation of the universe. The materials of this world
were before Him, and this God wanted all these materials, and the worst
objection is that He must be limited by the materials. The builder could
not have made a house without the materials of which it is composed.
Therefore he was limited by the materials; he could only do what the
materials enabled him to. Therefore the God that the Design Theory gives
is at best only an architect, and a limited architect of the universe;
He is bound and restricted by the materials; He is not independent at
all. That much they had found out already, and many other minds would
have rested at that. In other countries the same thing happened; the
human mind could not rest there; the thinking, grasping minds wanted to
go further, but those that were backward got hold of them and did not
allow them to grow. But fortunately these Hindu sages were not the
people to be knocked on the head; they wanted to get a solution, and now
we find that they were leaving the external for the internal. The first
thing that struck them was, that it is not with the eyes and the senses
that we perceive that external world, and know anything about religion;
the first idea, therefore, was to find the deficiency, and that
deficiency was both physical and moral, as we shall see. You do not
know, says one of these sages, the cause of this universe; there has
arisen a tremendous difference between you and me — why? Because you
have been talking sense things and are satisfied with sense-objects and
with the mere ceremonials of religion, while I have known the Purusha
beyond.

Along with this progress of spiritual ideas that I am trying to trace
for you, I can only hint to you a little about the other factor in the
growth, for that has nothing to do with our subject, therefore I need
not enlarge upon it — the growth of rituals. As those spiritual ideas
progressed in arithmetical progression, so the ritualistic ideas
progressed in geometrical progression. The old superstitions had by this
time developed into a tremendous mass of rituals, which grew and grew
till it almost killed the Hindu life And it is still there, it has got
hold of and permeated every portion of our life and made us born slaves.
Yet, at the same time, we find a fight against this advance of ritual
from the very earliest days. The one objection raised there is this,
that love for ceremonials, dressing at certain times, eating in a
certain way, and shows and mummeries of religion like these are only
external religion, because you are satisfied with the senses and do not
want to go beyond them. This is a tremendous difficulty with us, with
every human being. At best when we want to hear of spiritual things our
standard is the senses; or a man hears things about philosophy, and God,
and transcendental things, and after hearing about them for days, he
asks: After all, how much money will they bring, how much
sense-enjoyment will they bring? For his enjoyment is only in the
senses, quite naturally. But that satisfaction in the senses, says our
sage, is one of the causes which have spread the veil between truth and
ourselves. Devotion to ceremonials, satisfaction in the senses, and
forming various theories, have drawn a veil between ourselves and truth.
This is another great landmark, and we shall have to trace this ideal to
the end, and see how it developed later on into that wonderful theory of
Mâyâ of the Vedanta, how this veil will be the real explanation of the
Vedanta, how the truth was there all the time, it was only this veil
that had covered it.

Thus we find that the minds of these ancient Aryan thinkers had begun a
new theme. They found out that in the external world no search would
give an answer to their question. They might seek in the external world
for ages, but there would be no answer to their questions. So they fell
back upon this other method; and according to this, they were taught
that these desires of the senses, desires for ceremonials and
externalities have caused a veil to come between themselves and the
truth, and that this cannot be removed by any ceremonial. They had to
fall back on their own minds, and analyse the mind to find the truth in
themselves. The outside world failed and they turned back upon the
inside world, and then it became the real philosophy of the Vedanta;
from here the Vedanta philosophy begins. It is the foundation-stone of
Vedanta philosophy. As we go on, we find that all its inquiries are
inside. From the very outset they seemed to declare — look not for the
truth in any religion; it is here in the human soul, the miracle of all
miracles in the human soul, the emporium of all knowledge, the mine of
all existence — seek here. What is not here cannot be there. And they
found out step by step that that which is external is but a dull
reflection at best of that which is inside. We shall see how they took,
as it were, this old idea of God, the Governor of the universe, who is
external to the universe, and first put Him inside the universe. He is
not a God outside, but He is inside; and they took Him from there into
their own hearts. Here He is in the heart of man, the Soul of our souls,
the Reality in us.

Several great ideas have to be understood, in order to grasp properly
the workings of the Vedanta philosophy. In the first place it is not
philosophy in the sense we speak of the philosophy of Kant and Hegel. It
is not one book, or the work of one man. Vedanta is the name of a series
of books written at different times. Sometimes in one of these
productions there will be fifty different things. Neither are they
properly arranged; the thoughts, as it were, have been jotted down.
Sometimes in the midst of other extraneous things, we find some
wonderful idea. But one fact is remarkable, that these ideas in the
Upanishads would be always progressing. In that crude old language, the
working of the mind of every one of the sages has been, as it were,
painted just as it went; how the ideas are at first very crude, and they
become finer and finer till they reach the goal of the Vedanta, and this
goal assumes a philosophical name. Just at first it was a search after
the Devas, the bright ones, and then it was the origin of the universe,
and the very same search is getting another name, more philosophical,
clearer — the unity of all things — "Knowing which everything else
becomes known."

</div>
