---
title: THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY

---
<div>

[←](vedic_religious_ideals.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](reason_and_religion.htm)

  

## THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY

The Vedanta philosophy, as it is generally called at the present day,
really comprises all the various sects that now exist in India. Thus
there have been various interpretations, and to my mind they have been
progressive, beginning with the dualistic or Dvaita and ending with the
non-dualistic or Advaita. The word Vedanta literally means the end of
the Vedas — the Vedas being the scriptures of the Hindus.[1](#fn1)
Sometimes in the West by the Vedas are meant only the hymns and rituals
of the Vedas. But at the present time these parts have almost gone out
of use, and usually by the word Vedas in India, the Vedanta is meant.
All our commentators, when they want to quote a passage from the
scriptures, as a rule, quote from the Vedanta, which has another
technical name with the commentators — the Shrutis. (The term Shruti —
meaning "that which is heard" — though including the whole of the Vedic
literature, is chiefly applied by the commentators to the Upanishads.)
Now, all the books known by the name of the Vedanta were not entirely
written after the ritualistic portions of the Vedas. For instance, one
of them — the Ishâ Upanishad — forms the fortieth chapter of the
Yajur-Veda, that being one of the oldest parts of the Vedas. There are
other Upanishads[2](#fn2) which form portions of the Brahmanas or
ritualistic writings; and the rest of the Upanishads are independent,
not comprised in any of the Brahmanas or other parts of the Vedas; but
there is no reason to suppose that they were entirely independent of
other parts, for, as we well know, many of these have been lost entirely
and many of the Brahmanas have become extinct. So it is quite possible
that the independent Upanishads belonged to some Brahmanas, which in
course of time fell into disuse, while the Upanishads remained. These
Upanishads are also called Forest Books or Aranyakas.

The Vedanta, then, practically forms the scriptures of the Hindus, and
all systems of philosophy that are orthodox have to take it as their
foundation. Even the Buddhists and Jains, when it suits their purpose,
will quote a passage from the Vedanta as authority. All schools of
philosophy in India, although they claim to have been based upon the
Vedas, took different names for their systems. The last one, the system
of Vyâsa, took its stand upon the doctrines of the Vedas more than the
previous systems did, and made an attempt to harmonise the preceding
philosophies, such as the Sânkhya and the Nyâya, with the doctrines of
the Vedanta. So it is especially called the Vedanta philosophy; and the
Sutras or aphorisms of Vyasa are, in modern India, the basis of the
Vedanta philosophy. Again, these Sutras of Vyasa have been variously
explained by different commentators. In general there are three sorts of
commentators[3](#fn3) in India now; from their interpretations have
arisen three systems of philosophy and sects. One is the dualistic, or
Dvaita; a second is the qualified non-dualistic, or Vishishtâdvaita; and
a third is the non-dualistic, or Advaita. Of these the dualistic and the
qualified non-dualistic include the largest number of the Indian people.
The non-dualists are comparatively few in number. Now I will try to lay
before you the ideas that are contained in all these three sects; but
before going on, I will make one remark — that these different Vedanta
systems have one common psychology, and that is, the psychology of the
Sankhya system. The Sankhya psychology is very much like the
psychologies of the Nyaya and Vaisheshika systems, differing only in
minor particulars.

All the Vedantists agree on three points. They believe in God, in the
Vedas as revealed, and in cycles. We have already considered the Vedas.
The belief about cycles is as follows: All matter throughout the
universe is the outcome of one primal matter called Âkâsha; and all
force, whether gravitation, attraction or repulsion, or life, is the
outcome of one primal force called Prâna. Prana acting on Akasha is
creating or projecting[4](#fn4) the universe. At the beginning of a
cycle, Akasha is motionless, unmanifested. Then Prana begins to act,
more and more, creating grosser and grosser forms out of Akasha —
plants, animals, men, stars, and so on. After an incalculable time this
evolution ceases and involution begins, everything being resolved back
through finer and finer forms into the original Akasha and Prana, when a
new cycle follows. Now there is something beyond Akasha and Prana. Both
can be resolved into a third thing called Mahat — the Cosmic Mind. This
Cosmic Mind does not create Akasha and Prana, but changes itself into
them.

We will now take up the beliefs about mind, soul, and God. According to
the universally accepted Sankhya psychology, in perception — in the case
of vision, for instance — there are, first of all, the instruments of
vision, the eyes. Behind the instruments — the eyes — is the organ of
vision or Indriya — the optic nerve and its centres — which is not the
external instrument, but without which the eyes will not see. More still
is needed for perception. The mind or Manas must come and attach itself
to the organ. And besides this, the sensation must be carried to the
intellect or Buddhi — the determinative, reactive state of the mind.
When the reaction comes from Buddhi, along with it flashes the external
world and egoism. Here then is the will; but everything is not complete.
Just as every picture, being composed of successive impulses of light,
must be united on something stationary to form a whole, so all the ideas
in the mind must be gathered and projected on something that is
stationary — relatively to the body and mind — that is, on what is
called the Soul or Purusha or Âtman.

According to the Sankhya philosophy, the reactive state of the mind
called Buddhi or intellect is the outcome, the change, or a certain
manifestation of the Mahat or Cosmic Mind. The Mahat becomes changed
into vibrating thought; and that becomes in one part changed into the
organs, and in the other part into the fine particles of matter. Out of
the combination of all these, the whole of this universe is produced.
Behind even Mahat, the Sankhya conceives of a certain state which is
called Avyakta or unmanifested, where even the manifestation of mind is
not present, but only the causes exist. It is also called Prakriti.
Beyond this Prakriti, and eternally separate from it, is the Purusha,
the soul of the Sankhya which is without attributes and omnipresent. The
Purusha is not the doer but the witness. The illustration of the crystal
is used to explain the Purusha. The latter is said to be like a crystal
without any colour, before which different colours are placed, and then
it seems to be coloured by the colours before it, but in reality it is
not. The Vedantists reject the Sankhya ideas of the soul and nature.
They claim that between them there is a huge gulf to be bridged over. On
the one hand the Sankhya system comes to nature, and then at once it has
to jump over to the other side and come to the soul, which is entirely
separate from nature. How can these different colours, as the Sankhya
calls them, be able to act on that soul which by its nature is
colourless? So the Vedantists, from the very first affirm that this soul
and this nature are one.[5](#fn5) Even the dualistic Vedantists admit
that the Atman or God is not only the efficient cause of this universe,
but also the material cause. But they only say so in so many words. They
do not really mean it, for they try to escape from their conclusions, in
this way: They say there are three existences in this universe — God,
soul, and nature. Nature and soul are, as it were, the body of God, and
in this sense it may be said that God and the whole universe are one.
But this nature and all these various souls remain different from each
other through all eternity. Only at the beginning of a cycle do they
become manifest; and when the cycle ends, they become fine, and remain
in a fine state. The Advaita Vedantists — the non-dualists — reject this
theory of the soul, and, having nearly the whole range of the Upanishads
in their favour, build their philosophy entirely upon them. All the
books contained in me Upanishads have one subject, one task before them
— to prove the following theme: "Just as by the knowledge of one lump of
clay we have the knowledge of all the clay in the universe, so what is
that, knowing which we know everything in the universe?" The idea of the
Advaitists is to generalise the whole universe into one — that something
which is really the whole of this universe. And they claim that this
whole universe is one, that it is one Being manifesting itself in all
these various forms. They admit that what the Sankhya calls nature
exists, but say that nature is God. It is this Being, the Sat, which has
become converted into all this — the universe, man, soul, and everything
that exists. Mind and Mahat are but the manifestations of that one Sat.
But then the difficulty arises that this would be pantheism. How came
that Sat which is unchangeable, as they admit (for that which is
absolute is unchangeable), to be changed into that which is changeable,
and perishable? The Advaitists here have a theory which they call
Vivarta Vâda or apparent manifestation. According to the dualists and
the Sankhyas, the whole of this universe is the evolution of primal
nature. According to some of the Advaitists and some of the dualists,
the whole of this universe is evolved from God. And according to the
Advaitists proper, the followers of Shankaracharya, the whole universe
is the *apparent* evolution of God. God is the material cause of this
universe, but not really, only apparently. The celebrated illustration
used is that of the rope and the snake, where the rope appeared to be
the snake, but was not really so. The rope did not really change into
the snake. Even so this whole universe as it exists is that Being. It is
unchanged, and all the changes we see in it are only apparent. These
changes are caused by Desha, Kâla and Nimitta (space, time, and
causation), or, according to a higher psychological generalization, by
Nâma and Rupa (name and form). It is by name and form that one thing is
differentiated from another. The name and form alone cause the
difference. In reality they are one and the same. Again, it is not, the
Vedantists say, that there is something as phenomenon and something as
noumenon. The rope is changed into the snake apparently only; and when
the delusion ceases, the snake vanishes. When one is in ignorance, he
sees the phenomenon and does not see God. When he sees God, this
universe vanishes entirely for him. Ignorance or Mâyâ, as it is called,
is the cause of all this phenomenon — the Absolute, the Unchangeable,
being taken as this manifested universe. This Maya is not absolute zero,
nor non-existence. It is defined as neither existence nor non-existence.
It is not existence, because that can be said only of the Absolute, the
Unchangeable, and in this sense, Maya is non-existence. Again, it cannot
be said it is non-existence; for if it were, it could never produce
phenomenon. So it is something which is neither; and in the Vedanta
philosophy it is called Anirvachaniya or inexpressible. Maya, then, is
the real cause of this universe. Maya gives the name and form to what
Brahman or God gives the material; and the latter seems to have been
transformed into all this. The Advaitists, then, have no place for the
individual soul. They say individual souls are created by Maya. In
reality they cannot exist. If there were only one existence throughout,
how could it be that I am one, and you are one, and so forth? We are all
one, and the cause of evil is the perception of duality. As soon as I
begin to feel that I am separate from this universe, then first comes
fear, and then comes misery. "Where one hears another, one sees another,
that is small. Where one does not see another, where one does not hear
another, that is the greatest, that is God. In that greatest is perfect
happiness. In small things there is no happiness."

According to the Advaita philosophy, then, this differentiation of
matter, these phenomena, are, as it were, for a time, hiding the real
nature of man; but the latter really has not been changed at all. In the
lowest worm, as well as in the highest human being, the same divine
nature is present. The worm form is the lower form in which the divinity
has been more overshadowed by Maya; that is the highest form in which it
has been least overshadowed. Behind everything the same divinity is
existing, and out of this comes the basis of morality. Do not injure
another. Love everyone as your own self, because the whole universe is
one. In injuring another, I am injuring myself; in loving another, I am
loving myself. From this also springs that principle of Advaita morality
which has been summed up in one word — self-abnegation. The Advaitist
says, this little personalised self is the cause of all my misery. This
individualised self, which makes me different from all other beings,
brings hatred and jealousy and misery, struggle and all other evils. And
when this idea has been got rid of, all struggle will cease, all misery
vanish. So this is to be given up. We must always hold ourselves ready,
even to give up our lives for the lowest beings. When a man has become
ready even to give up his life for a little insect, he has reached the
perfection which the Advaitist wants to attain; and at that moment when
he has become thus ready, the veil of ignorance falls away from him, and
he will feel his own nature. Even in this life, he will feel that he is
one with the universe. For a time, as it were, the whole of this
phenomenal world will disappear for him, and he will realise what he is.
But so long as the Karma of this body remains, he will have to live.
This state, when the veil has vanished and yet the body remains for some
time, is what the Vedantists call the Jivanmukti, the living freedom. If
a man is deluded by a mirage for some time, and one day the mirage
disappears — if it comes back again the next day, or at some future
time, he will not be deluded. Before the mirage first broke, the man
could not distinguish between the reality and the deception. But when it
has once broken, as long as he has organs and eyes to work with, he will
see the image, but will no more be deluded. That fine distinction
between the actual world and the mirage he has caught, and the latter
cannot delude him any more. So when the Vedantist has realised his own
nature, the whole world has vanished for him. It will come back again,
but no more the same world of misery. The prison of misery has become
changed into Sat, Chit, Ânanda — Existence Absolute, Knowledge Absolute,
Bliss Absolute — and the attainment of this is the goal of the Advaita
Philosophy.

(The above address was delivered before the Graduate Philosophical
Society of Harvard University, on March 25, 1896.)  
(A discussion following this is available at [Vol.
V.](../../volume_5/questions_and_answers/discussion_at_the_graduate_philosophical.htm))

1.  [^](#tx1)The Vedas are divided mainly into two portions: the
    Karma-kânda and the Jnâna-kânda — the work-portion and the
    knowledge-portion. To the Karma-kanda belong the famous hymns and
    the rituals of Brâhmanas. Those books which treat of spiritual
    matters apart from ceremonials are called Upanishads. The Upanishads
    belong to the Jnana-kanda, or knowledge-portion. It is not that all
    the Upanishads were composed as a separate portion of the Vedas.
    Some are interspersed among the rituals, and at least one is in the
    Samhita, or hymn-portion. Sometimes the term Upanishad is applied to
    books which are not included in the Vedas — e.g the Gita, but as a
    rule it is applied to the philosophical treatises scattered through
    the Vedas. These treatises have been collected, and are called the
    Vedanta.
2.  [^](#tx2)The Upanishads are said to be one hundred and eight in
    number. Their dates cannot be fixed with certainty — only it is
    certain that they are older than the Buddhistic movement. Though
    some of the minor Upanishads contain allusions indicating a later
    date, yet that does not prove the later date of the treatise, as in
    very many cases in Sanskrit literature, the substance of a book,
    though of very ancient date, receives a coating, as it were, of
    later events in the hands of the sectarians, to exalt their
    particular sect.
3.  [^](#tx3)The commentaries are of various sorts such as the Bhâshya,
    Tikâ, Tippani, Churni, etc., of which all except the Bhashya are
    explanations of the text or difficult words in the text. The Bhashya
    is not properly a commentary, but the elucidation of a system of
    philosophy out of texts, the object being not to explain the words,
    but to bring out a philosophy. So the writer of a Bhashya expands
    his own system, taking texts as authorities for his system. There
    have been various commentaries on the Vedanta. Its doctrines found
    their final expression in the philosophical aphorisms of Vyasa. This
    treatise, called the Uttara Mimâmsâ, is the standard authority of
    Vedantism — nay, is the most authoritative exposition of the Hindu
    scriptures. The most antagonistic sects have been compelled, as it
    were, to take up the texts of Vyasa, and harmonise them with their
    own philosophy. Even in very ancient times the commentators on the
    Vedanta philosophy formed themselves into the three celebrated Hindu
    sects of dualists, qualified non-dualists, and non dualists. The
    ancient commentaries are perhaps lost; but they have been revived in
    modern times by the post-Buddhistic commentators, Shankara,
    Râmânuja, and Madhva. Shankara revived the nondualistic form,
    Ramanuja, the qualified non-dualistic form of the ancient
    commentator Bodhayana; and Madhva, the dualistic form. In India the
    sects differ mainly in their philosophy; the difference in rituals
    is slight, the basis of their philosophy and religion being the
    same.
4.  [^](#tx4)The word which is "creation", in the English language is in
    Sanskrit exactly "projection," because there is no sect in India
    which believes in creation as it is regarded in the West — a
    something coming out of nothing. What we mean by creation is
    projection of that which already existed.
5.  [^](#tx5)The Vedanta and the Sankhya philosophy are very little
    opposed to each other. The Vedanta God developed out of the
    Sankhya's Purusha. All the systems take up the psychology of the
    Sankhya. Both the Vedanta and the Sankhya believe in the infinite
    soul, only the Sankhya believes there are many souls. According to
    the Sankhya, this universe does not require any explanation from
    outside. The Vedanta believes that there is the one Soul, which
    appears as many; and we build on the Sankhya's analysis.

</div>
