---
title: VEDANTA AS A FACTOR IN CIVILISATION

---
<div>

[←](reason_and_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_spirit_and_influence_of_vedanta.htm)

  

## VEDANTA AS A FACTOR IN CIVILISATION

(*Extract from an address delivered at Airlie Lodge, Ridgeway Gardens,
England*)

People who are capable of seeing only the gross external aspect of
things can perceive in the Indian nation only a conquered and suffering
people, a race of dreamers and philosophers. They seem to be incapable
of perceiving that in the spiritual realm India conquers the world. No
doubt it is true that just as the too active Western mind would profit
by an admixture of Eastern introspect ion and the meditative habit, so
the Eastern would benefit by a somewhat greater activity and energy.
Still we must ask: What may be that force which causes this afflicted
and suffering people, the Hindu, and the Jewish too (the two races from
which have originated all the great religions of the world) to survive,
when other nations perish? The cause can only be their spiritual force.
The Hindus are still living though silent, the Jews are more numerous
today than when they lived in Palestine. The philosophy of India
percolates throughout the whole civilised world, modifying and
permeating as it goes. So also in ancient times, her trade reached the
shores of Africa before Europe was known, and opened communication with
the rest of the world, thus disproving the belief that Indians never
went outside of their own country.

It is remarkable also that the possession of India by a foreign power
has always been a turning-point in the history of that power, bringing
to it wealth, prosperity, dominion, and spiritual ideas. While the
Western man tries to measure how much it is possible for him to possess
and to enjoy, the Eastern seems to take the opposite course, and to
measure how little of material possessions he can do with. In the Vedas
we trace the endeavour of that ancient people to find God. In their
search for Him they came upon different strata; beginning with ancestor
worship, they passed on to the worship of Agni, the fire-god, of Indra,
the god of thunder, and of Varuna, the God of gods. We find the growth
of this idea of God, from many gods to one God, in all religions; its
real meaning is that He is the chief of the tribal gods, who creates the
world, rules it, and sees into every heart; the stages of growth lead up
from a multiplicity of gods to monotheism. This anthropomorphic
conception, however, did not satisfy the Hindus, it was too human for
them who were seeking the Divine. Therefore they finally gave up
searching for God in the outer world of sense and matter, and turned
their attention to the inner world. Is there an inner world? And what is
it? It is Âtman. It is the Self, it is the only thing an individual can
be sure of. If he knows himself, he can know the universe, and not
otherwise. The same question was asked in the beginning of time, even in
the Rig-Veda, in another form: "Who or what existed from the beginning?"
That question was gradually solved by the Vedanta philosophy. The Atman
existed. That is to say, what we call the Absolute, the Universal Soul,
the Self, is the force by which from the beginning all things have been
and are and will be manifested.

While the Vedanta philosophers solved that question, they at the same
time discovered the basis of ethics. Though all religions have taught
ethical precepts, such as, "Do not kill, do not injure; love your
neighbour as yourself," etc., yet none of these has given the reason.
Why should I not injure my neighbour? To this question there was no
satisfactory or conclusive answer forthcoming, until it was evolved by
the metaphysical speculations of the Hindus who could not rest satisfied
with mere dogmas. So the Hindus say that this Atman is absolute and
all-pervading, therefore infinite. There cannot be two infinites, for
they would limit each other and would become finite. Also each
individual soul is a part and parcel of that Universal Soul, which is
infinite. Therefore in injuring his neighbour, the individual actually
injures himself. This is the basic metaphysical truth underlying all
ethical codes. It is too often believed that a person in his progress
towards perfection passes from error to truth; that when he passes on
from one thought to another, he must necessarily reject the first. But
no error can lead to truth. The soul passing through its different
stages goes from truth to truth, and each stage is true; it goes from
lower truth to higher truth. This point may be illustrated in the
following way. A man is journeying towards the sun and takes a
photograph at each step. How different would be the first photograph
from the second and still more from the third or the last, when he
reaches the real sun! But all these, though differing so widely from
each other, are true, only they are made to appear different by the
changing conditions of time and space. It is the recognition of this
truth, which has enabled the Hindus to perceive the universal truth of
all religions, from the lowest to the highest; it has made of them the
only people who never had religious persecutions. The shrine of a
Mohammedan saint which is at the present day neglected and forgotten by
Mohammedans, is worshipped by Hindus! Many instances may be quoted,
illustrating the same spirit of tolerance.

The Eastern mind could not rest satisfied till it had found that goal,
which is the end sought by all humanity, namely, Unity. The Western
scientist seeks for unity in the atom or the molecule. When he finds it,
there is nothing further for him to discover, and so when we find that
Unity of Soul or Self, which is called Atman, we can go no further. It
becomes clear that everything in the sense world is a manifestation of
that One Substance. Further, the scientist is brought to the necessity
of recognising metaphysics, when he supposes that atoms having neither
breadth nor length yet become, when combined, the cause of extension,
length, and breadth. When one atom acts upon another, some medium is
necessary. What is that medium? It will be a third atom. If so, then the
question still remains unanswered, for how do these two act on the
third? A manifest *reductio ad absurdum*. This contradiction in terms is
also found in the hypothesis necessary to all physical science that a
point is that which has neither parts nor magnitude, and a line has
length without breadth. These cannot be either seen or conceived. Why?
Because they do not come within the range of the senses. They are
metaphysical conceptions. So we see, it is finally the mind which gives
the form to all perception. When I see a chair, it is not the real chair
external to my eye which I perceive, but an external something plus the
mental image formed. Thus even the materialist is driven to metaphysics
in the last extremity.

</div>
