---
title: THE SPIRIT AND INFLUENCE OF VEDANTA

---
<div>

[←](vedanta_as_a_factor_in_civilisation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm)
/ [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](steps_of_hindu_philosophic_thought.htm)

  

## THE SPIRIT AND INFLUENCE OF VEDANTA

(*Delivered at the Twentieth Century Club, Boston*)

Before going into the subject of this afternoon, will you allow me to
say a few words of thanks, now that I have the opportunity? I have lived
three years amongst you. I have travelled over nearly the whole of
America, and as I am going back from here to my own country, it is meet
that I should take this opportunity of expressing my gratitude in this
Athens of America. When I first came to this country, after a few days I
thought I would be able to write a book on the nation. But after three
years' stay here, I find I am not able to write even a page. On the
other hand, I find in travelling in various countries that beneath the
surface differences that we find in dress and food and little details of
manners, man is man all the world over; the same wonderful human nature
is everywhere represented. Yet there are certain characteristics, and in
a few words I would like to sum up all my experiences here. In this land
of America, no question is asked about a man's peculiarities. If a man
is a man, that is enough, and they take him into their hearts, and that
is one thing I have never seen in any other country in the world.

I came here to represent a philosophy of India, which is called the
Vedanta philosophy. This philosophy is very, very ancient; it is the
outcome of that mass of ancient Aryan literature known by the name of
the Vedas. It is, as it were, the very flower of all the speculations
and experiences and analyses, embodied in that mass of literature —
collected and culled through centuries. This Vedanta philosophy has
certain peculiarities. In the first place, it is perfectly impersonal;
it does not owe its origin to any person or prophet: it does not build
itself around one man as a centre. Yet it has nothing to say against
philosophies which do build themselves around certain persons. In later
days in India, other philosophies and systems arose, built around
certain persons — such as Buddhism, or many of our present sects. They
each have a certain leader to whom they owe allegiance, just as the
Christians and Mohammedans have. But the Vedanta philosophy stands at
the background of all these various sects, and there is no fight and no
antagonism between the Vedanta and any other system in the world.

One principle it lays down — and that, the Vedanta claims, is to be
found in every religion in the world — that man is divine, that all this
which we see around us is the outcome of that consciousness of the
divine. Everything that is strong, and good, and powerful in human
nature is the outcome of that divinity, and though potential in many,
there is no difference between man and man essentially, all being alike
divine. There is, as it were, an infinite ocean behind, and you and I
are so many waves, coming out of that infinite ocean; and each one of us
is trying his best to manifest that infinite outside. So, potentially,
each one of us has that infinite ocean of Existence, Knowledge, and
Bliss as our birthright, our real nature; and the difference between us
is caused by the greater or lesser power to manifest that divine.
Therefore the Vedanta lays down that each man should be treated not as
what he manifests, but as what he stands for. Each human being stands
for the divine, and, therefore, every teacher should be helpful, not by
condemning man, but by helping him to call forth the divinity that is
within him.

It also teaches that all the vast mass of energy that we see displayed
in society and in every plane of action is really from inside out; and,
therefore, what is called inspiration by other sects, the Vedantist begs
the liberty to call the *expiration* of man. At the same time it does
not quarrel with other sects; the Vedanta has no quarrel with those who
do not understand this divinity of man. Consciously or unconsciously,
every man is trying to unfold that divinity.

Man is like an infinite spring, coiled up in a small box, and that
spring is trying to unfold itself; and all the social phenomena that we
see the result of this trying to unfold. All the competitions and
struggles and evils that we see around us are neither the causes of
these unfoldments, nor the effects. As one of our great philosophers
says — in the case of the irrigation of a field, the tank is somewhere
upon a higher level, and the water is trying to rush into the field, and
is barred by a gate. But as soon as the gate is opened, the water rushes
in by its own nature; and if there is dust and dirt in the way, the
water rolls over them. But dust and dirt are neither the result nor the
cause of this unfolding of the divine nature of man. They are coexistent
circumstances, and, therefore, can be remedied.

Now, this idea, claims the Vedanta, is to be found in all religions,
whether in India or outside of it; only, in some of them, the idea is
expressed through mythology, and in others, through symbology. The
Vedanta claims that there has not been one religious inspiration, one
manifestation of the divine man, however great, but it has been the
expression of that infinite oneness in human nature; and all that we
call ethics and morality and doing good to others is also but the
manifestation of this oneness. There are moments when every man feels
that he is one with the universe, and he rushes forth to express it,
whether he knows it or not. This expression of oneness is what we call
love and sympathy, and it is the basis of all our ethics and morality.
This is summed up in the Vedanta philosophy by the celebrated aphorism,
Tat Tvam Asi, "Thou art That".

To every man, this is taught: Thou art one with this Universal Being,
and, as such, every soul that exists is your soul; and every body that
exists is your body; and in hurting anyone, you hurt yourself, in loving
anyone, you love yourself. As soon as a current of hatred is thrown
outside, whomsoever else it hurts, it also hurts yourself; and if love
comes out from you, it is bound to come back to you. For I am the
universe; this universe is my body. I am the Infinite, only I am not
conscious of it now; but I am struggling to get this consciousness of
the Infinite, and perfection will be reached when full consciousness of
this Infinite comes.

Another peculiar idea of the Vedanta is that we must allow this infinite
variation in religious thought, and not try to bring everybody to the
same opinion, because the goal is the same. As the Vedantist says in his
poetical language, "As so many rivers, having their source in different
mountains, roll down, crooked or straight, and at last come into the
ocean  — so, all these various creeds and religions, taking their start
from different standpoints and running through crooked or straight
courses, at last come unto THEE."

As a manifestation of that, we find that this most ancient philosophy
has, through its influence, directly inspired Buddhism, the first
missionary religion of the world, and indirectly, it has also influenced
Christianity, through the Alexandrians, the Gnostics, and the European
philosophers of the middle ages. And later, influencing German thought,
it has produced almost a revolution in the regions of philosophy and
psychology. Yet all this mass of influence has been given to the world
almost unperceived. As the gentle falling of the dew at night brings
support to all vegetable life, so, slowly and imperceptibly, this divine
philosophy has been spread through the world for the good of mankind. No
march of armies has been used to preach this religion. In Buddhism, one
of the most missionary religions of the world, we find inscriptions
remaining of the great Emperor Asoka — recording how missionaries were
sent to Alexandria, to Antioch, to Persia, to China, and to various
other countries of the then civilised world. Three hundred years before
Christ, instructions were given them not to revile other religions: "The
basis of all religions is the same, wherever they are; try to help them
all you can, teach them all you can, but do not try to injure them."

Thus in India there never was any religious persecution by the Hindus,
but only that wonderful reverence, which they have for all the religions
of the world. They sheltered a portion of the Hebrews, when they were
driven out of their own country; and the Malabar Jews remain as a
result. They received at another time the remnant of the Persians, when
they were almost annihilated; and they remain to this day, as a part of
us and loved by us, as the modern Parsees of Bombay. There were
Christians who claimed to have come with St. Thomas, the disciple of
Jesus Christ; and they were allowed to settle in India and hold their
own opinions; and a colony of them is even now in existence in India.
And this spirit of toleration has not died out. It will not and cannot
die there.

This is one of the great lessons that the Vedanta has to teach. Knowing
that, consciously or unconsciously, we are struggling to reach the same
goal, why should we be impatient? If one man is slower than another, we
need not be impatient, we need not curse him, or revile him. When our
eyes are opened and the heart is purified, the work of the same divine
influence, the unfolding of the same divinity in every human heart, will
become manifest; and then alone we shall be in a position to claim the
brotherhood of man.

When a man has reached the highest, when he sees neither man nor woman,
neither sect nor creed, nor colour, nor birth, nor any of these
differentiations, but goes beyond and finds that divinity which is the
real man behind every human being — then alone he has reached the
universal brotherhood, and that man alone is a Vedantist.

Such are some of the practical historical results of the Vedanta.

</div>
