---
title: KRISHNA

---
<div>

[←](privilege.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [→](the_gita_i.htm)

  

## KRISHNA

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however,
Swamiji's speed was too great for her in her early days, dots are put in
the articles to indicate the omissions, while the words within square
brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts.

(*Delivered in California, on April 1, 1900*)

Almost the same circumstances which gave birth to Buddhism in India
surrounded the rise of Krishna. Not only this, the events of that day we
find happening in our own times.

There is a certain ideal. At the same time there must always be a large
majority of the human race who cannot come up to the ideal, not even
intellectually. ... The strong ones carry it out and many times have no
sympathy for the weak. The weak to the strong are only beggars. The
strong ones march ahead. ... Of course, we see at once that the highest
position to take is to be sympathetic and helpful to those who are weak.
But then, in many cases the philosopher bars the way to our being
sympathetic. If we go by the theory that the whole of this infinite life
has to be determined by the few years' existence here and now, ... then
it is very hopeless for us, ... and we have no time to look back upon
those who are weak. But if these are not the conditions — if the world
is only one of the many schools through which we have to pass, if the
eternal life is to be moulded and fashioned and guided by the eternal
law, and eternal law, eternal chances await everyone — then we need not
be in a hurry. We have time to sympathise, to look around, stretch out a
helping hand to the weak and bring them up.

With Buddhism we have two words in Sanskrit: one is translated religion,
the other, a sect. It is the most curious fact that the disciples and
descendants of Krishna have no name for their religion \[although\]
foreigners call it Hinduism or Brâhmanism. There is one religion, and
there are many sects. The moment you give it a name, individualise it
and separate it from the rest, it is a sect, no more a religion. A sect
\[proclaims\] its own truth and declares that there is no truth anywhere
else. Religion believes that there has been, and still is, one religion
in the world. There never were two religions. It is the same religion
\[presenting\] different aspects in different places. The task is to
conceive the proper understanding of the goal and scope of humanity.

This was the great work of Krishna: to clear our eyes and make us look
with broader vision upon humanity in its march upward and onward. His
was the first heart that was large enough to see truth in all, his the
first lips that uttered beautiful words for each and all.

This Krishna preceded Buddha by some thousand years. ... A great many
people do not believe that he ever existed. Some believe that \[the
worship of Krishna grew out of\] the old sun worship. There seem to be
several Krishnas: one was mentioned in the Upanishads, another was king,
another a general. All have been lumped into one Krishna. It does not
matter much. The fact is, some individual comes who is unique in
spirituality. Then all sorts of legends are invented around him. But,
all the Bibles and stories which come to be cast upon this one person
have to be recast in \[the mould of\] his character. All the stories of
the New Testament have to be modelled upon the accepted life \[and\]
character of Christ. In all of the Indian stories about Buddha the one
central note of that whole life is kept up — sacrifice for others. ...

In Krishna we find ... two ideas \[stand\] supreme in his message: The
first is the harmony of different ideas; the second is non-attachment. A
man can attain to perfection, the highest goal, sitting on a throne,
commanding armies, working out big plans for nations. In fact, Krishna's
great sermon was preached on the battlefield.

Krishna saw plainly through the vanity of all the mummeries, mockeries,
and ceremonials of the old priests; and yet he saw some good in them.

If you are a strong man, very good! But do not curse others who are not
strong enough for you. ... Everyone says, "Woe unto you people! !" Who
says, "Woe unto me that I cannot help you?" The people are doing all
right to the best of their ability and means and knowledge. Woe unto me
that I cannot lift them to where I am!

So the ceremonials, worship of gods, and myths, are all right, Krishna
says. ... Why? Because they all lead to the same goal. Ceremonies,
books, and forms— all these are links in the chain. Get hold! That is
the one thing. If you are sincere and have really got hold of one link,
do not let go; the rest is bound to come. \[But people\] do not get
hold. They spend the time quarrelling and determining what they should
get hold of, and do not get hold of anything. ... We are always after
truth, but never want to get it. We simply want the pleasure to go about
and ask. We have a lot of energy and spend it that way. That is why
Krishna says: Get hold of any one of these chains that are stretched out
from the common centre. No one step is greater than another. ... Blame
no view of religion so far as it is sincere. Hold on to one of these
links, and it will pull you to the centre. Your heart itself will teach
all the rest. The teacher within will teach all the creeds, all the
philosophies. ...

Krishna talks of himself as God, as Christ does. He sees the Deity in
himself. And he says, "None can go a day out of my path. All have to
come to me. Whosoever wants to worship in whatsoever form, I give him
faith in that form, and through that I meet him. ..."(Gita, IV. 12.) His
heart is all for the masses.

Independent, Krishna stands out. The very boldness of it frightens us.
We depend upon everything — ... upon a few good words, upon
circumstances. When the soul wants to depend upon nothing, not even upon
life, that is the height of philosophy, the height of manhood. Worship
leads to the same goal. Krishna lays great stress upon worship. Worship
God!

Various sorts of worship we see in this world. The sick man is very
worshipful to God. ... There is the man who loses his fortune; he also
prays very much, to get money. The highest worship is that of the man
who loves God for God's sake. \[The question may be asked :\] "Why
should there be so much sorrow if there is a God?" The worshipper
replies! " ... There is misery in the world; \[but\] because of that I
do not cease to love God. I do not worship Him to take away my
\[misery\]. I love Him because He is love itself." The other \[types of
worship\] are lower-grade; but Krishna has no condemnation for anything.
It is better to do something than to stand still. The man who begins to
worship God will grow by degrees and begin to love God for love's sake.
...

How to attain purity living this life? Shall we all go to the forest
caves? What good would it do? If the mind is not under control, it is no
use living in a cave because the same mind will bring all disturbances
there. We will find twenty devils in the cave because all the devils are
in the mind. If the mind is under control, we can have the cave
anywhere, wherever we are.

It is our own mental attitude which makes the world what it is for us.
Our thoughts make things beautiful, our thoughts make things ugly. The
whole world is in our own minds. Learn to see things in the proper
light. First, believe in this world — that there is meaning behind
everything. Everything in the world is good, is holy and beautiful. If
you see something evil, think that you are not understanding it in the
right light. Throw the burden on yourselves! ... Whenever we are tempted
to say that the world is going to the dogs, we ought to analyse
ourselves, and we shall find that we have lost the faculty of seeing
things as they are.

Work day and night! "Behold, I am the Lord of the Universe. I have no
duty. Every duty is bondage. But I work for work's sake. If I ceased to
work for a minute, \[there would be chaos\]."(Ibid. III. 22-23.) So do
thou work, without any idea of duty. ...

This world is a play. You are His playmates. Go on and work, without any
sorrow, without any misery. See His play in the slums, in the saloons!
Work to lift people! Not that they are vile or degraded; Krishna does
not say that.

Do you know why so little good work is done? My lady goes to the slum.
... She gives a few ducats and says, "My poor men, take that and be
happy!" ... Or my fine woman, walking through the street, sees a poor
fellow and throws him five cents. Think of the blasphemy of it! Blessed
are we that the Lord has given us his teaching in your own Testament.
Jesus says, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me." It is blasphemy to think that you
can help anyone. First root out this idea of helping, and then go to
worship. God's children are your Master's children. \[And children are
but different forms of the father.\] You are His servant. ... Serve the
living God! God comes to you in the blind, in the halt, in the poor, in
the weak, in the diabolical. What a glorious chance for you to worship!
The moment you think you are "helping", you undo the whole thing and
degrade yourself. Knowing this, work. "What follows?" you say. You do
not get that heartbreak, that awful misery. ... Then work is no more
slavery. It becomes a play, and joy itself. ... Work! Be unattached!
That is the whole secret. If you get attached, you become miserable. ...

With everything we do in life we identify ourselves. Here is a man who
says harsh words to me. I feel anger coming on me. In a few seconds
anger and I are one, and then comes misery. Attach yourselves to the
Lord and to nothing else, because everything else is unreal. Attachment
to the unreal will bring misery. There is only one Existence that is
real, only one Life in which there is neither object nor \[subject\].
...

But unattached love will not hurt you. Do anything — marry, have
children. ... Do anything you like — nothing will hurt you. Do nothing
with the idea of "mine". Duty for duty's sake; work for work's sake.
What is that to you? You stand aside.

When we come to that non-attachment, then we can understand the
marvellous mystery of the universe; how it is intense activity and
vibration, and at the same time intensest peace and calm; how it is work
every moment and rest every moment. That is the mystery of the universe
— the impersonal and personal in one, the infinite and finite in one.
Then we shall find the secret. "He who finds in the midst of intense
activity the greatest rest, and in the midst of the greatest rest
intense activity, he has become a Yogi." (Ibid. IV. 18.) He alone is a
real worker, none else. We do a little work and break ourselves. Why? We
become attached to that work. If we do not become attached, side by side
with it we have infinite rest. ...

How hard it is to arrive at this sort of non-attachment! Therefore
Krishna shows us the lower ways and methods. The easiest way for
everyone is to do \[his or her\] work and not take the results. It is
our desire that binds us. If we take the results of actions, whether
good or evil, we will have to bear them. But if we work not for
ourselves, but all for the glory of the Lord, the results will take care
of themselves. "To work you have the right, but not to the fruits
thereof." (Ibid. II. 47.) The soldier works for no results. He does his
duty. If defeat comes, it belongs to the general, not to the soldier. We
do our duty for love's sake — love for the general, love for the Lord.
...

If you are strong, take up the Vedanta philosophy and be independent. If
you cannot do that, worship God; if not, worship some image. If you lack
strength even to do that, do some good works without the idea of gain.
Offer everything you have unto the service of the Lord. Fight on!
"Leaves and water and one flower — whosoever lays anything on my altar,
I receive it with equal delights."(Ibid IX. 26.) If you cannot do
anything, not a single good work, then take refuge \[in the Lord\]. "The
Lord resides within the heart of the being, making them turn upon His
wheel. Do thou with all thy soul and heart take refuge in Him. ...(Ibid
XVIII. 61-62.)

These are some of the general ideas that Krishna preached on this idea
of love \[in the Gita\]. There are \[in\] other great books, sermons on
love — as with Buddha, as with Jesus. ...

A few words about the life of Krishna. There is a great deal of
similarity between the lives of Jesus and Krishna. A discussion is going
on as to which borrowed of the other. There was the tyrannical king in
both places. Both were born in a manger. The parents were bound in both
cases. Both were saved by angels. In both cases all the boys born in
that year were killed. The childhood is the same. ... Again, in the end,
both were killed. Krishna was killed by accident; he took the man who
killed him to heaven. Christ was killed, and blessed the robber and took
him to heaven.

There are a great many similarities in of the New Testament and the
Gita. The human thought goes the same way. ... I will find you the
answer in the words of Krishna himself: "Whenever virtue subsides and
irreligion prevails, I come down. Again and again I come. Therefore,
whenever thou seest a great soul struggling to uplift mankind, know that
I am come, and worship. ..."(Ibid. IV. 8; X. 41.)

At the same time, if he comes as Jesus or as Buddha, why is there so
much schism? The preachings must be followed! A Hindu devotee would say:
It is God himself who became Christ and Krishna and Buddha and all these
\[great teachers\]. A Hindu philosopher would say: These are the great
souls; they are already free. And though free, they refuse to accept
their liberation while the whole world is suffering. They come again and
again, take a human embodiment and help mankind. They know from their
childhood what they are and what they come for. ... They do not come
through bondage like we do. ... They come out of their own free will,
and cannot help having tremendous spiritual power. We cannot resist it.
The vast mass of mankind is dragged into the whirlpool of spirituality,
and the vibration goes on and on because one of these \[great souls\]
gives a push. So it continues until all mankind is liberated and the
play of this planet is finished.

Glory unto the great souls whose lives we have been studying! They are
the living gods of the world. They are the persons whom we ought to
worship. If He comes to me, I can only recognise Him if He takes a human
form. He is everywhere, but do we see Him? We can only see Him if He
takes the limitation of man. .... If men and ... animals are
manifestations of God, these teachers of mankind are leaders, are Gurus.
Therefore, salutations unto you, whose footstool is worshipped by
angels! Salutations unto you leaders of the human race! Salutations unto
you great teachers! You leaders have our salutations for ever and ever!

</div>
