---
title: THE GITA I

---
<div>

[←](krishna.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [→](the_gita_ii.htm)

  

## THE GITA I

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however,
Swamiji's speed was too great for her in her early days, dots are put in
the articles to indicate the omissions, while the words within square
brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts.

(*Delivered in San Francisco, on May 26, 1900*)

To understand the Gita requires its historical background. The Gita is a
commentary on the Upanishads. The Upanishads are the Bible of India.
They occupy the same place as the New Testament does. There are \[more
than\] a hundred books comprising the Upanishads, some very small and
some big, each a separate treatise. The Upanishads do not reveal the
life of any teacher, but simply teach principles. They are \[as it
were\] shorthand notes taken down of discussion in \[learned
assemblies\], generally in the courts of kings. The word Upanishad may
mean "sittings" \[or "sitting near a teacher"\]. Those of you who may
have studied some of the Upanishads can understand how they are
condensed shorthand sketches. After long discussions had been held, they
were taken down, possibly from memory. The difficulty is that you get
very little of the background. Only the luminous points are mentioned
there. The origin of ancient Sanskrit is 5000 B.C.; the Upanishads \[are
at least\] two thousand years before that. Nobody knows \[exactly\] how
old they are. The Gita takes the ideas of the Upanishads and in \[some\]
cases the very words. They are strung together with the idea of bringing
out, in a compact, condensed, and systematic form, the whole subject the
Upanishads deal with.

The \[original\] scriptures of the Hindus are called the Vedas. They
were so vast — the mass of writings — that if the texts alone were
brought here, this room would not contain them. Many of them are lost.
They were divided into branches, each branch put into the head of
certain priests and kept alive by memory. Such men still exist. They
will repeat book after book of the Vedas without missing a single
intonation. The larger portion of the Vedas has disappeared. The small
portion left makes a whole library by itself. The oldest of these
contains the hymns of the Rig-Veda. It is the aim of the modern scholar
to restore \[the sequence of the Vedic compositions\]. The old, orthodox
idea is quite different, as your orthodox idea of the Bible is quite
different from the modern scholar's. The Vedas are divided into two
portions: one the Upanishads, the philosophical portion, the other the
work portion.

We will try to give a little idea of the work portion. It consists of
rituals and hymns, various hymns addressed to various gods. The ritual
portion is composed of ceremonies, some of them very elaborate. A great
many priests are required. The priestly function became a science by
itself, owing to the elaboration of the ceremonials. Gradually the
popular idea of veneration grew round these hymns and rituals. The gods
disappeared and in their place were left the rituals. That was the
curious development in India. The orthodox Hindu \[the Mimâmsaka\] does
not believe in gods, the unorthodox believe in them. If you ask the
orthodox Hindu what the meaning is of these gods in the Vedas, \[he will
not be able to give any satisfactory answer\]. The priests sing these
hymns and pour libations and offering into the fire. When you ask the
orthodox Hindu the meaning of this, he says that words have the power to
produce certain effects. That is all. There is all the natural and
supernatural power that ever existed. The Vedas are simply words that
have the mystical power to produce effects if the sound intonation is
right. If one sound is wrong it will not do. Each one must be perfect.
\[Thus\] what in other religions is called prayer disappeared and the
Vedas became the gods. So you see the tremendous importance that was
attached to the words of the Vedas. These are the eternal words out of
which the whole universe has been produced. There cannot be any thought
without the word. Thus whatever there is in this world is the
manifestation of thought, and thought can only manifest itself through
words. This mass of words by which the unmanifested thought becomes
manifest, that is what is meant by the Vedas. It follows that the
external existence of everything \[depends on the Vedas, for thought\]
does not exist without the word. If the word "horse" did not exist, none
could think of a horse. \[So\] there must be \[an intimate relation
between\] thought, word, and the external object. What are these words
\[in reality\]? The Vedas. They do not call it Sanskrit language at all.
It is Vedic language, a divine language. Sanskrit is a degenerate form.
So are all other languages. There is no language older than Vedic. You
may ask, "Who wrote the Vedas?" They were not written. The words are the
Vedas. A word is Veda, if I can pronounce it rightly. Then it will
immediately produce the \[desired\] effect.

This mass of Vedas eternally exists and all the world is the
manifestation of this mass of words. Then when the cycle ends, all this
manifestation of energy becomes finer and finer, becomes only words,
then thought. In the next cycle, first the thought changes into words
and then out of those words \[the whole universe\] is produced. If there
is something here that is not in the Vedas, that is your delusion. It
does not exist.

\[Numerous\] books upon that subject alone defend the Vedas. If you tell
\[their authors\] that the Vedas must have been pronounced by men first,
\[they will simply laugh\]. You never heard of any \[man uttering them
for the first time\]. Take Buddha's words. There is a tradition that he
lived and spoke these words \[many times before\]. If the Christian
stands up and says, "My religion is a historical religion and therefore
yours is wrong and ours is true," \[the Mimamsaka replies\], "Yours
being historical, you confess that a man invented it nineteen hundred
years ago. That which is true must be infinite and eternal. That is the
one test of truth. It never decays, it is always the same. You confess
your religion was created by such-and-such a man. The Vedas were not. By
no prophets or anything. ... Only infinite words, infinite by their very
nature, from which the whole universe comes and goes." In the abstract
it is perfectly correct. ... The sound must be the beginning of
creation. There must be germ sounds like germ plasm. There cannot be any
ideas without the words. ... Wherever there are sensations, ideas,
emotions, there must be words. The difficulty is when they say that
these four books are the Vedas and nothing else. \[Then\] the Buddhist
will stand up and say, "Ours are Vedas. They were revealed to us later
on." That cannot be. Nature does not go on in that way. Nature does not
manifest her laws bit by bit, an inch of gravitation today and \[another
inch\] tomorrow. No, every law is complete. There is no evolution in law
at all. It is \[given\] once and for ever. It is all nonsense, this "new
religion and better inspiration," and all that. It means nothing. There
may be a hundred thousand laws and man may know only a few today. We
discover them — that is all. Those old priests with their tremendous
\[claims about eternal words\], having dethroned the gods, took the
place of the gods. \[They said\], "You do not understand the power of
words. We know how to use them. We are the living gods of the world. Pay
us; we will manipulate the words, and you will get what you want. Can
you pronounce the words yourself? You cannot, for, mind you, one mistake
will produce the opposite effect. You want to be rich, handsome, have a
long life, a fine husband?" Only pay the priest and keep quiet!

Yet there is another side. The ideal of the first part of the Vedas is
entirely different from the ideal of the other part, the Upanishads. The
ideal of the first part coincides with \[that of\] all other religions
of the world except the Vedanta. The ideal is enjoyment here and
hereafter — man and wife, husband and children. Pay your dollar, and the
priest will give you a certificate, and you will have a happy time
afterwards in heaven. You will find all your people there and have this
merry-go-round without end. No tears, no weeping — only laughing. No
stomach-ache, but yet eating. No headache, but yet \[parties\]. That,
considered the priests, was the highest goal of man.

There is another idea in this philosophy which is according to your
modern ideas. Man is a slave of nature, and slave eternally he has got
to remain. We call it Karma. Karma means law, and it applies everywhere.
Everything is bound by Karma. "Is there no way out?" "No! Remain slaves
all through the years  — fine slaves. We will manipulate the words so
that you will only have the good and not the bad side of all —  if you
will pay \[us\] enough." That was the ideal of \[the Mimamsakas\]. These
are the ideals which are popular throughout the ages. The vast mass of
mankind are never thinkers. Even if they try to think, the \[effect of
the\] vast mass of superstitions on them is terrible. The moment they
weaken, one blow comes, and the backbone breaks into twenty pieces. They
can only be moved by lures and threats. They can never move of their own
accord. They must be frightened, horrified, or terrorised, and they are
your slaves for ever. They have nothing else to do but to pay and obey.
Everything else is done by the priest. ... How much easier religion
becomes! You see, you have nothing to do. Go home and sit quietly.
Somebody is doing the whole thing for you. Poor, poor animals!

Side by side, there was the other system. The Upanishads are
diametrically opposite in all their conclusions. First of all, the
Upanishads believe in God, the creator of the universe, its ruler. You
find later on \[the idea of a benign Providence\]. It is an entirely
opposite \[conception\]. Now, although we hear the priest, the ideal is
much more subtle. Instead of many gods they made one God.

The second idea, that you are all bound by the law of Karma, the
Upanishads admit, but they declare the way out. The goal of man is to go
beyond law. And enjoyment can never be the goal, because enjoyment can
only be in nature.

In the third place, the Upanishads condemn all the sacrifices and say
that is mummery. That may give you all you want, but it is not
desirable, for the more you get, the more you \[want\], and you run
round and round in a circle eternally, never getting to the end —
enjoying and weeping. Such a thing as eternal happiness is impossible
anywhere. It is only a child's dream. The same energy becomes joy and
sorrow.

I have changed my psychology a bit today. I have found the most curious
fact. You have a certain idea and you do not want to have it, and you
think of something else, and the idea you want to suppress is entirely
suppressed. What is that idea? I saw it come out in fifteen minutes. It
came out and staggered me. It was strong, and it came in such a violent
and terrible fashion \[that\] I thought here was a madman. And when it
was over, all that had happened \[was a suppression of the previous
emotion\]. What came out? It was my own bad impression which had to be
worked out. "Nature will have her way. What can suppression do?" (Gita,
III. 33.) That is a terrible \[statement\] in the Gita. It seems it may
be a vain struggle after all. You may have a hundred thousand \[urges
competing\] at the same time. You may repress \[them\], but the moment
the spring rebounds, the whole thing is there again.

\[But there is hope\]. If you are powerful enough, you can divide your
consciousness into twenty parts all at the same time. I am changing my
psychology. Mind grows. That is what the Yogis say. There is one passion
and it rouses another, and the first one dies. If you are angry, and
then happy, the next moment the anger passes away. Out of that anger you
manufactured the next state. These states are always interchangeable.
Eternal happiness and misery are a child's dream. The Upanishads point
out that the goal of man is neither misery nor happiness, but we have to
be master of that out of which these are manufactured. We must be
masters of the situation at its very root, as it were.

The other point of divergence is: the Upanishads condemn all rituals,
especially those that involve the killing of animals. They declare those
all nonsense. One school of old philosophers says that you must kill
such an animal at a certain time if the effect is to be produced. \[You
may reply\], "But \[there is\] also the sin of taking the life of the
animal; you will have to suffer for that." They say that is all
nonsense. How do you know what is right and what is wrong? Your mind
says so? Who cares what your mind says? What nonsense are you talking?
You are setting your mind against the scriptures. If your mind says
something and the Vedas say something else, stop your mind and believe
in the Vedas. If they say, killing a man is right, that is right. If you
say, "No, my conscience says \[otherwise," it won't do\]. The moment you
believe in any book as the eternal word, as sacred, no more can you
question. I do not see how you people here believe in the Bible whenever
you say about \[it\], "How wonderful those words are, how right and how
good!" Because, if you believe in the Bible as the word of God, you have
no right to judge at all. The moment you judge, you think you are higher
than the Bible. \[Then\] what is the use of the Bible to you? The
priests say, "We refuse to make the comparison with your Bible or
anybody's. It is no use comparing, because — what is the authority?
There it ends. If you think something is not right, go and get it right
according to the Vedas."

The Upanishads believe in that, \[but they have a higher standard too\].
On the one hand, they do not want to overthrow the Vedas, and on the
other they see these animal sacrifices and the priests stealing
everybody's money. But in the psychology they are all alike. All the
differences have been in the philosophy, \[regarding\] the nature of the
soul. Has it a body and a mind? And is the mind only a bundle of nerves,
the motor nerves and the sensory nerves? Psychology, they all take for
granted, is a perfect science. There cannot be any difference there. All
the fight has been regarding philosophy — the nature of the soul, and
God, and all that.

Then another great difference between the priests and the Upanishads.
The Upanishads say, renounce. That is the test of everything. Renounce
everything. It is the creative faculty that brings us into all this
entanglement. The mind is in its own nature when it is calm. The moment
you can calm it, that \[very\] moment you will know the truth. What is
it that is whirling the mind? Imagination, creative activity. Stop
creation and you know the truth. All power of creation must stop, and
then you know the truth at once.

On the other hand, the priests are all for \[creation\]. Imagine a
species of life \[in which there is no creative activity. It is
unthinkable\]. The people had to have a plan \[of evolving a stable
society. A system of rigid selection was adopted. For instance,\] no
people who are blind and halt can be married. \[As a result\] you will
find so much less deformity \[in India\] than in any other country in
the world. Epileptics and insane \[people\] are very rare \[there\].
That is owing to direct selection. The priests say, "Let them become
Sannyâsins." On the other hand, the Upanishads say, "Oh no, \[the\]
earth's best and finest \[and\] freshest flowers should be laid upon the
altar. The strong, the young, with sound intellect and sound body — they
must struggle for the truth."

So with all these divergences of opinion, I have told you that the
priests already differentiated themselves into a separate caste. The
second is the caste of the kings. ... All the Upanishadic philosophy is
from the brains of kings, not priests. There \[runs\] an economic
struggle through every religious struggle. This animal called man has
some religious influence, but he is guided by economy. Individuals are
guided by something else, but the mass of mankind never made a move
unless economy was \[involved\]. You may \[preach a religion that may
not be perfect in every detail\], but if there is an economic background
\[to it\], and you have the most \[ardent champions\] to preach it, you
can convince a whole country. ...

Whenever any religion succeeds, it must have economic value. Thousands
of similar sects will be struggling for power, but only those who meet
the real economic problem will have it. Man is guided by the stomach. He
walks and the stomach goes first and the head afterwards. Have you not
seen that? It will take ages for the head to go first. By the time a man
is sixty years of age, he is called out of \[the world\]. The whole of
life is one delusion, and just when you begin to see things the way they
are, you are snatched off. So long as the stomach went first you were
all right. When children's dreams begin to vanish and you begin to look
at things the way they are, the head goes. Just when the head goes
first, \[you go out\].

\[For\] the religion of the Upanishads to be popularised was a hard
task. Very little economy is there, but tremendous altruism. ...

The Upanishads had very little kingdom, although they were discovered by
kings that held all the royal power in their hands. So the struggle ...
began to be fiercer. Its culminating point came two thousand years
after, in Buddhism. The seed of Buddhism is here, \[in\] the ordinary
struggle between the king and the priest; and \[in the struggle\] all
religion declined. One wanted to sacrifice religion, the other wanted to
cling to the sacrifices, to Vedic gods, etc. Buddhism ... broke the
chains of the masses. All castes and creeds alike became equal in a
minute. So the great religious ideas in India exist, but have yet to be
preached: otherwise they do no good. ...

In every country it is the priest who is conservative, for two reasons —
because it is his bread and because he can only move with the people.
All priests are not strong. If the people say, "Preach two thousand
gods," the priests will do it. They are the servants of the congregation
who pay them. God does not pay them. So blame yourselves before blaming
the priests. You can only get the government and the religion and the
priesthood you deserve, and no better.

So the great struggle began in India and it comes to one of its
culminating points in the Gita. When it was causing fear that all India
was going to be broken up between \[the\] two ... \[groups\], there rose
this man Krishna, and in the Gita he tries to reconcile the ceremony and
the philosophy of the priests and the people. Krishna is loved and
worshipped in the same way as you do Christ. The difference is only in
the age. The Hindus keep the birthday of Krishna as you do Christ's.
Krishna lived five thousand years ago and his life is full of miracles,
some of them very similar to those in the life of Christ. The child was
born in prison. The father took him away and put him with the shepherds.
All children born in that year were ordered to be killed. ... He was
killed; that was his fate.

Krishna was a married man. There are thousands of books about him. They
do not interest me much. The Hindus are great in telling stories, you
see. \[If\] the Christian missionaries tell one story from their Bible,
the Hindus will produce twenty stories. You say the whale swallowed
Jonah; the Hindus say someone swallowed an elephant. ... Since I was a
child I have heard about Krishna's life. I take it for granted there
must have been a man called Krishna, and his Gita shows he has \[left\]
a wonderful book. I told you, you can understand the character of a man
by analysing the fables about him. The fables have the nature \[of
decorations\]. You must find they are all polished and manipulated to
fit into the character. For instance, take Buddha. The central idea
\[is\] sacrifice. There are thousands of folklore, but in every case the
sacrifice must have been kept up. There are thousands of stories about
Lincoln, about some characteristic of that great man. You take all the
fables and find the general idea and \[know\] that that was the central
character of the man. You find in Krishna that non-attachment is the
central idea. He does not need anything. He does not want anything. He
works for work's sake. "Work for work's sake. Worship for worship's
sake. Do good because it is good to do good. Ask no more." That must
have been the character of the man. Otherwise these fables could not be
brought down to the one idea of non-attachment. The Gita is not his only
sermon. ...

He is the most rounded man I know of, wonderfully developed equally in
brain and heart and hand. Every moment \[of his\] is alive with
activity, either as a gentleman, warrior, minister, or something else.
Great as a gentleman, as a scholar, as a poet. This all-rounded and
wonderful activity and combination of brain and heart you see in the
Gita and other books. Most wonderful heart, exquisite language, and
nothing can approach it anywhere. This tremendous activity of the man —
the impression is still there. Five thousand years have passed and he
has influenced millions and millions. Just think what an influence this
man has over the whole world, whether you know it or not. My regard for
him is for his perfect sanity. No cobwebs in that brain, no
superstition. He knows the use of everything, and when it is necessary
to \[assign a place to each\], he is there. Those that talk, go
everywhere, question about the mystery of the Vedas, etc., they do not
know the truth. They are no better than frauds. There is a place in the
Vedas \[even\] for superstition, for ignorance. The whole secret is to
find out the proper place for everything.

Then that heart! He is the first man, way before Buddha, to open the
door of religion to every caste. That wonderful mind! That tremendously
active life! Buddha's activity was on one plane, the plane of teaching.
He could not keep his wife and child and become a teacher at the same
time. Krishna preached in the midst of the battlefield. "He who in the
midst of intense activity finds himself in the greatest calmness, and in
the greatest peace finds intense activity, that is the greatest \[Yogi
as well as the wisest man\]." (Ibid. IV. 18.) It means nothing to this
man — the flying of missiles about him. Calm and sedate he goes on
discussing the problems of life and death. Each one of the prophets is
the best commentary on his own teaching. If you want to know what is
meant by the doctrine of the New Testament, you go to Mr. So-and-so.
\[But\] read again and again \[the four Gospels and try to understand
their import in the light of the wonderful life of the Master as
depicted there\]. The great men think, and you and I \[also\] think. But
there is a difference. We think and our bodies do not follow. Our
actions do not harmonise with our thoughts. Our words have not the power
of the words that become Vedas. ... Whatever they think must be
accomplished. If they say, "I do this," the body does it. Perfect
obedience. This is the end. You can think yourself God in one minute,
but you cannot be \[God\]. That is the difficulty. They become what they
think. We will become \[only\] by \[degrees\].

You see, that was about Krishna and his time. In the next lecture we
will know more of his book.

</div>
