---
title: THE GITA III

---
<div>

[←](the_gita_ii.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [→](mohammed.htm)

  

## THE GITA III

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however,
Swamiji's speed was too great for her in her early days, dots are put in
the articles to indicate the omissions, while the words within square
brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts.

(*Delivered in San Francisco, on May 29, 1900*)

Arjuna asks: "You just advised action, and yet you uphold knowledge of
Brahman as the highest form of life. Krishna, if you think that
knowledge is better than action, why do you tell me to act?" (Gita III.
1.)

\[Shri Krishna\]: "From ancient times these two systems have come down
to us. The Sânkhya philosophers advance the theory of knowledge. The
Yogis advance the theory of work. But none can attain to peace by
renouncing actions. None in this life can stop activity even for a
moment. Nature's qualities \[Gunas\] will make him act. He who stops his
activities and at the same time is still thinking about them attains to
nothing; he only becomes a hypocrite. But he who by the power of his
mind gradually brings his sense-organs under control, employing them in
work, that man is better. Therefore do thou work." (Ibid. 2-8.) ...

"Even if you have known the secret that you have no duty, that you are
free, still you have to work for the good of others. Because whatever a
great man does, ordinary people will do also. (Ibid. 20-21.) If a great
man who has attained peace of mind and freedom ceases to work, then all
the rest without that knowledge and peace will try to imitate him, and
thus confusion would arise. (Ibid. 22-24.)

"Behold, Arjuna, there is nothing that I do not possess and nothing that
I want to acquire. And yet I continue to work. If I stopped work for a
moment, the whole universe would \[be destroyed\]. (Ibid. 22-24.) That
which the ignorant do with desire for results and gain, let the wise do
without any attachment and without any desire for results and gain."
(Ibid. 25.)

Even if you have knowledge, do not disturb the childlike faith of the
ignorant. On the other hand, go down to their level and gradually bring
them up. (Ibid. 26, 29.) That is a very powerful idea, and it has become
the ideal in India. That is why you can see a great philosopher going
into a temple and worshipping images. It is not hypocrisy.

Later on we read what Krishna says, "Even those who worship other
deities are really worshipping me." (Ibid. IX. 23.) It is God incarnate
whom man is worshipping. Would God be angry if you called Him by the
wrong name? He would be no God at all! Can't you understand that
whatever a man has in his own heart is God — even if he worships a
stone? What of that!

We will understand more clearly if we once get rid of the idea that
religion consists in doctrines. One idea of religion has been that the
whole world was born because Adam ate the apple, and there is no way of
escape. Believe in Jesus Christ — in a certain man's death! But in India
there is quite a different idea. \[There\] religion means realisation,
nothing else. It does not matter whether one approaches the destination
in a carriage with four horses, in an electric car, or rolling on the
ground. The goal is the same. For the \[Christians\] the problem is how
to escape the wrath of the terrible God. For the Indians it is how to
become what they really are, to regain their lost Selfhood. ...

Have you realised that you are spirit? When you say, "I do," what is
meant by that — this lump of flesh called the body or the spirit, the
infinite, ever blessed, effulgent, immortal? You may be the greatest
philosopher, but as long as you have the idea that you are the body, you
are no better than the little worm crawling under your foot! No excuse
for you! So much the worse for you that you know all the philosophies
and at the same time think you are the body! Body-gods, that is what you
are! Is that religion?

Religion is the realisation of spirit as spirit. What are we doing now?
Just the opposite, realising spirit as matter. Out of the immortal God
we manufacture death and matter, and out of dead dull matter we
manufacture spirit. ...

If you \[can realise Brahman\] by standing on your head, or on one foot,
or by worshipping five thousand gods with three heads each — welcome to
it! ... Do it any way you can! Nobody has any right to say anything.
Therefore, Krishna says, if your method is better and higher, you have
no business to say that another man's method is bad, however wicked you
may think it.

Again, we must consider, religion is a \[matter of\] growth, not a mass
of foolish words. Two thousand years ago a man saw God. Moses saw God in
a burning bush. Does what Moses did when he saw God save you? No man's
seeing God can help you the least bit except that it may excite you and
urge you to do the same thing. That is the whole value of the ancients'
examples. Nothing more. \[Just\] signposts on the way. No man's eating
can satisfy another man. No man's seeing God can save another man. You
have to see God yourself. All these people fighting about what God's
nature is — whether He has three heads in one body or five heads in six
bodies. Have you seen God? No. ... And they do not believe they can ever
see Him. What fools we mortals be! Sure, lunatics!

\[In India\] it has come down as a tradition that if there is a God, He
must be your God and my God. To whom does the sun belong! You say Uncle
Sam is everybody's uncle. If there is a God, you ought to be able to see
Him. If not, let Him go.

Each one thinks his method is best. Very good! But remember, it may be
good for you. One food which is very indigestible to one is very
digestible to another. Because it is good for you, do not jump to the
conclusion that your method is everybody's method, that Jack's coat fits
John and Mary. All the uneducated, uncultured, unthinking men and women
have been put into that sort of strait jacket! Think for yourselves.
Become atheists! Become materialists! That would be better. Exercises
the mind! ... What right have you to say that this man's method is
wrong? It may be wrong for you. That is to say, if you undertake the
method, you will be degraded; but that does not mean that he will be
degraded. Therefore, says Krishna, if you have knowledge and see a man
weak, do not condemn him. Go to his level and help him if you can. He
must grow. I can put five bucketfuls of knowledge into his head in five
hours. But what good will it do? He will be a little worse than before.

Whence comes all this bondage of action? Because we chain the soul with
action. According to our Indian system, there are two existences: nature
on the one side and the Self, the Atman, on the other. By the word
nature is meant not only all this external world, but also our bodies,
the mind, the will, even down to what says "I". Beyond all that is the
infinite life and light of the soul — the Self, the Atman. ... According
to this philosophy the Self is entirely separate from nature, always was
and always will be. ... There never was a time, when the spirit could be
identified even with the mind. ...

It is self-evident that the food you eat is manufacturing the mind all
the time. It is matter. The Self is above any connection with food.
Whether you eat or not does not matter. Whether you think or not ...
does not matter. It is infinite light. Its light is the same always. If
you put a blue or a green glass \[before a light\], what has that to do
with the light? Its colour is unchangeable. It is the mind which changes
and gives the different colours. The moment the spirit leaves the body,
the whole thing goes to pieces.

The reality in nature is spirit. Reality itself — the light of the
spirit — moves and speaks and does everything \[through our bodies,
minds, etc.\]. It is the energy and soul and life of the spirit that is
being worked upon in different ways by matter.... The spirit is the
cause of all our thoughts and body-action and everything, but it is
untouched by good or evil, pleasure or pain, heat or cold, and all the
dualism of nature, although it lends its light to everything.

"Therefore, Arjuna, all these actions are in nature. Nature ... is
working out her own laws in our bodies and minds. We identify ourselves
with nature and say, 'I am doing this.' This way delusion seizes us."
(Ibid. III. 27.)

We always act under some compulsion. When hunger compels me, I eat. And
suffering is still worse — slavery. That real "I" is eternally free.
What can compel it to do anything? The sufferer is in nature. It is only
when we identify ourselves with the body that we say, "I am suffering; I
am Mr. So and-so" — all such nonsense. But he who has known the truth,
holds himself aloof. Whatever his body does, whatever his mind does, he
does not care. But mind you, the vast majority of mankind are under this
delusion; and whenever they do any good, they feel that they are \[the
doers\]. They are not yet able to understand higher philosophy. Do not
disturb their faith! They are shunning evil and doing good. Great idea!
Let them have it! ... They are workers for good. By degrees they will
think that there is greater glory than that of doing good. They will
only witness, and things are done.... Gradually they will understand.
When they have shunned all evil and done all good, then they will begin
to realise that they are beyond all nature. They are not the doers. They
stand \[apart\]. They are the ... witness. They simply stand and look.
Nature is begetting all the universe.... They turn their backs. "In the
beginning, O beloved, there only existed that Existence. Nothing else
existed. And That \[brooding\], everything else was created."
(Chhândogya, VI. ii. 2-3.)

"Even those who know the path act impelled by their own nature. Everyone
acts according to his nature. He cannot transcend it."(Gita, III. 33.)
The atom cannot disobey the law. Whether it is the mental or the
physical atom, it must obey the law. "What is the use of \[external
restraint\]?" (Gita, III. 33.)

What makes the value of anything in life? Not enjoyment, not
possessions. Analyse everything. You will find there is no value except
in experience, to teach us something. And in many cases it is our
hardships that give us better experience than enjoyment. Many times
blows give us better experience than the caresses of nature.... Even
famine has its place and value....

According to Krishna, we are not new beings just come into existence.
Our minds are not new minds.... In modern times we all know that every
child brings \[with him\] all the past, not only of humanity, but of the
plant life. There are all the past chapters, and this present chapter,
and there are a whole lot of future chapters before him. Everyone has
his path mapped and sketched and planned out for him. And in spite of
all this darkness, there cannot be anything uncaused — no event, no
circumstance.... It is simply our ignorance. The whole infinite chain of
causation ... is bound one link to another back to nature. The whole
universe is bound by that sort of chain. It is the universal \[chain
of\] cause and effect, you receiving one link, one part, I another....
And that \[part\] is our own nature.

Now Shri Krishna says: "Better die in your own path than attempt the
path of another."(Ibid. 35.) This is my path, and I am down here. And
you are way up there, and I am always tempted to give up my path
thinking I will go there and be with you. And if I go up, I am neither
there nor here. We must not lose sight of this doctrine. It is all \[a
matter of\] growth. Wait and grow, and you attain everything; otherwise
there will be \[great spiritual danger\]. Here is the fundamental secret
of teaching religion.

What do you mean by "saving people" and all believing in the same
doctrine? It cannot be. There are the general ideas that can be taught
to mankind. The true teacher will be able to find out for you what your
own nature is. Maybe you do not know it. It is possible that what you
think is your own nature is all wrong. It has not developed to
consciousness. The teacher is the person who ought to know.... He ought
to know by a glance at your face and put you on \[your path\]. We grope
about and struggle here and there and do all sorts of things and make no
progress until the time comes when we fall into that life-current and
are carried on. The sign is that the moment we are in that stream we
will float. Then there is no more struggle. This is to be found out.
Then die in that \[path\] rather than giving it up and taking hold of
another.

Instead, we start a religion and make a set of dogmas and betray the
goal of mankind and treat everyone \[as having\] the same nature. No two
persons have the same mind or the same body. ... No two persons have the
same religion....

If you want to be religious, enter not the gate of any organised
religions. They do a hundred times more evil than good, because they
stop the growth of each one's individual development. Study everything,
but keep your own seat firm. If you take my advice, do not put your neck
into the trap. The moment they try to put their noose on you, get your
neck out and go somewhere else. \[As\] the bee culling honey from many
flowers remains free, not bound by any flower, be not bound.... Enter
not the door of any organised religion. \[Religion\] is only between you
and your God, and no third person must come between you. Think what
these organised religions have done! What Napoleon was more terrible
than those religious persecutions? . . . If you and I organise, we begin
to hate every person. It is better not to love, if loving only means
hating others. That is no love. That is hell! If loving your own people
means hating everybody else, it is the quintessence of selfishness and
brutality, and the effect is that it will make you brutes. Therefore,
better die working out your own natural religion than following
another's natural religion, however great it may appear to you. (Ibid.
35.)

"Beware, Arjuna, lust and anger are the great enemies. These are to be
controlled. These cover the knowledge even of those \[who are wise\].
This fire of lust is unquenchable. Its location is in the sense-organs
and in the mind. The Self desires nothing. (Ibid. 37, 40.)

"This Yoga I taught in ancient times \[to Vivaswân; Vivaswan taught it
to Manu\]. ... Thus it was that the knowledge descended from one thing
to another. But in time this great Yoga was destroyed. That is why I am
telling it to you again today." (Ibid. IV. 1-3.)

Then Arjuna asks, "Why do you speak thus? You are a man born only the
other day, and \[Vivaswan was born long before you\]. What do you mean
that you taught him?" (Ibid. 4.)

Then Krishna says, "O Arjuna, you and I have run the cycle of births and
deaths many times, but you are not conscious of them all. I am without
beginning, birthless, the absolute Lord of all creation. I through my
own nature take form. Whenever virtue subsides and wickedness prevails,
I come to help mankind. For the salvation of the good, for the
destruction of wickedness, for the establishment of spirituality I come
from time to time. Whosoever wants to reach me through whatsoever ways,
I reach him through that. But know, Arjuna, none can ever swerve from my
path." (Ibid. 5-8, 11.) None ever did. How can we? None swerves from His
path.

... All societies are based upon bad generalisation. The law can only be
formed upon perfect generalisation. What is the old saying: Every law
has its exception? ... If it is a law, it cannot be broken. None can
break it. Does the apple break the law of gravitation? The moment a law
is broken, no more universe exists. There will come a time when you will
break the law, and that moment your consciousness, mind, and body will
melt away.

There is a man stealing there. Why does he steal? You punish him. Why
can you not make room for him and put his energy to work? ... You say,
"You are a sinner," and many will say he has broken the law. All this
herd of mankind is forced \[into uniformity\] and hence all trouble,
sin, and weakness.... The world is not as bad as you think. It is we
fools who have made it evil. We manufacture our own ghosts and demons,
and then ... we cannot get rid of them. We put our hands before our eyes
and cry: "Somebody give us light." Fools! Take your hands from your
eyes! That is all there is to it.... We call upon the gods to save us
and nobody blames himself. That is the pity of it. Why is there so much
evil in society? What is it they say? Flesh and the devil and the woman.
Why make these things \[up\]? Nobody asks you to make them \[up\].
"None, O Arjuna, can swerve from my path." (Ibid. 11.) We are fools, and
our paths are foolish. We have to go through all this Mâyâ. God made the
heaven, and man made the hell for himself.

"No action can touch me. I have no desire for the results of action.
Whosoever knows me thus knows the secret and is not bound by action. The
ancient sages, knowing this secret \[could safely engage in action\]. Do
thou work in the same fashion. (Ibid. 14-15.)

"He who sees in the midst of intense activity, intense calm, and in the
midst of intensest peace is intensely active \[is wise indeed\]. (Ibid
18.) ... This is the question: With every sense and every organ active,
have you that tremendous peace \[so that\] nothing can disturb you?
Standing on Market Street, waiting for the car with all the rush ...
going on around you, are you in meditation — calm and peaceful? In the
cave, are you intensely active there with all quiet about you? If you
are, you are a Yogi, otherwise not.

"\[The seers call him wise\] whose every attempt is free, without any
desire for gain, without any selfishness." (Ibid. 19). Truth can never
come to us as long as we are selfish. We colour everything with our own
selves. Things come to us as they are. Not that they are hidden, not at
all! *We* hide them. We have the brush. A thing comes, and we do not
like it, and we brush a little and then look at it. ... We do not want
to know. We paint everything with ourselves. In all action the motive
power is selfishness. Everything is hidden by ourselves. We are like the
caterpillar which takes the thread out of his own body and of that makes
the cocoon, and behold, he is caught. By his own work he imprisons
himself. That is what we are doing. The moment I say "me" the thread
makes a turn. "I and mine," another turn. So it goes. ...

We cannot remain without action for a moment. Act! But just as when your
neighbour asks you, "Come and help me!" have you exactly the same idea
when you are helping yourself. No more. Your body is of no more value
than that of John. Don't do anything more for your body than you do for
John. That is religion.

"He whose efforts are bereft of all desire and selfishness has burnt all
this bondage of action with the fire of knowledge. He is wise." (Ibid.
19.) Reading books cannot do that. The ass can be burdened with the
whole library; that does not make him learned at all. What is the use of
reading many books? "Giving up all attachment to work, always satisfied,
not hoping for gain, the wise man acts and is beyond action." (Ibid.
20.) ...

Naked I came out of my mother's womb and naked I return. Helpless I came
and helpless I go. Helpless I am now. And we do not know \[the goal\].
It is terrible for us to think about it. We get such odd ideas! We go to
a medium and see if the ghost can help us. Think of the weakness!
Ghosts, devils, gods, anybody — come on! And all the priests, all the
charlatans! That is just the time they get hold of us, the moment we are
weak. Then they bring in all the gods.

I see in my country a man becomes strong, educated, becomes a
philosopher, and says, "All this praying and bathing is nonsense." ...
The man's father dies, and his mother dies. That is the most terrible
shock a Hindu can have. You will find him bathing in every dirty pool,
going into the temple, licking the dust. ... Help anyone! But we are
helpless. There is no help from anyone. That is the truth. There have
been more gods than human beings; and yet no help. We die like dogs — no
help. Everywhere beastliness, famine, disease, misery, evil! And all are
crying for help. But no help. And yet, hoping against hope, we are still
screaming for help. Oh, the miserable condition! Oh, the terror of it!
Look into your own heart! One half of \[the trouble\] is not our fault,
but the fault of our parents. Born with this weakness, more and more of
it was put into our heads. Step by step we go beyond it.

It is a tremendous error to feel helpless. Do not seek help from anyone.
We are our own help. If we cannot help ourselves, there is none to help
us. ... "Thou thyself art thy only friend, thou thyself thy only enemy.
There is no other enemy but this self of mine, no other friend but
myself." (Ibid. VI. 5.) This is the last and greatest lesson, and Oh,
what a time it takes to learn it! We seem to get hold of it, and the
next moment the old wave comes. The backbone breaks. We weaken and again
grasp for that superstition and help. Just think of that huge mass of
misery, and all caused by this false idea of going to seek for help!

Possibly the priest says his routine words and expects something. Sixty
thousand people look to the skies and pray and pay the priest. Month
after month they still look, still pay and pray. ... Think of that! Is
it not lunacy? What else is it? Who is responsible? You may preach
religion, but to excite the minds of undeveloped children... ! You will
have to suffer for that. In your heart of hearts, what are you? For
every weakening thought you have put into anybody's head you will have
to pay with compound interest. The law of Karma must have its pound of
flesh. ...

There is only one sin. That is weakness. When I was a boy I read
Milton's *Paradise Lost*. The only good man I had any respect for was
Satan. The only saint is that soul that never weakens, faces everything,
and determines to die game.

Stand up and die game! ... Do not add one lunacy to another. Do not add
your weakness to the evil that is going to come. That is all I have to
say to the world. Be strong! ... You talk of ghosts and devils. We are
the living devils. The sign of life is strength and growth. The sign of
death is weakness. Whatever is weak, avoid! It is death. If it is
strength, go down into hell and get hold of it! There is salvation only
for the brave. "None but the brave deserves the fair." None but the
bravest deserves salvation. Whose hell? Whose torture? Whose sin? Whose
weakness? Whose death? Whose disease?

You believe in God. If you do, believe in the real God. "Thou art the
man, thou the woman, thou the young man walking in the strength of
youth, ... thou the old man tottering with his stick." (Shvetâshvatara,
IV. 3.) Thou art weakness. Thou art fear. Thou art heaven, and Thou art
hell. Thou art the serpent that would sting. Come thou as fear! Come
thou as death! Come thou as misery! ...

All weakness, all bondage is imagination. Speak one word to it, it must
vanish. Do not weaken! There is no other way out.... Stand up and be
strong! No fear. No superstition. Face the truth as it is! If death
comes — that is the worst of our miseries — let it come! We are
determined to die game. That is all the religion I know. I have not
attained to it, but I am struggling to do it. I may not, but you may. Go
on!

Where one sees another, one hears another so long as there are two,
there must be fear, and fear is the mother of all \[misery\]. Where none
sees another, where it is all One, there is none to be miserable, none
to be unhappy. (Chhândogya, VII. xxiii-xxiv, (adapted)) \[There is
only\] the One without a second. Therefore be not afraid. Awake, arise,
and stop not till the goal is reached!

</div>
