---
title: MOHAMMED

---
<div>

[←](the_gita_iii.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](vilvamangala.htm)

  

## MOHAMMED

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however,
Swamiji's speed was too great for her in her early days, dots are put in
the articles to indicate the omissions, while the words within square
brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts.

(*Delivered on March 25, 1900, in the San Francisco Bay Area)*

The ancient message of Krishna is one harmonising three — Buddha's,
Christ's and Mohammed's. Each of the three started an idea and carried
it to its extreme. Krishna antedates all the other prophets. \[Yet, we
might say,\] Krishna takes the old ideas and synthesises them,
\[although\] his is the most ancient message. His message was for the
time being submerged by the advance wave of Buddhism. Today it is the
message peculiar to India. If you will have it so, this afternoon I will
take Mohammed and bring out the particular work of the great Arabian
prophet....

Mohammed \[as\] a young man ... did not \[seem to\] care much for
religion. He was inclined to make money. He was considered a nice young
man and very handsome. There was a rich widow. She fell in love with
this young man, and they married. When Mohammed had become emperor over
the larger part of the world, the Roman and Persian empires were all
under his feet, and he had a number of wives. When one day he was asked
which wife he liked best, he pointed to his first wife: "Because she
believed \[in\] me first." Women have faith.... Gain independence, gain
everything, but do not lose that characteristic of women! ...

Mohammed's heart was sick at the sin, idolatry and mock worship,
superstitions and human sacrifices, and so on. The Jews were degraded by
the Christians. On the other hand, the Christians were worse degraded
than his own countrymen.

We are always in a hurry. \[But\] if any great work is to be done, there
must be great preparation. ... After much praying, day and night,
Mohammed began to have dreams and visions. Gabriel appeared to him in a
dream and told him that he was the messenger of truth. He told him that
the message of Jesus, of Moses, and all the prophets would be lost and
asked him to go and preach. Seeing the Christians preaching politics in
the name of Jesus, seeing the Persians preaching dualism, Mohammed said:
"Our God is one God. He is the Lord of all that exists. There is no
comparison between Him and any other."

God is God. There is no philosophy, no complicated code of ethics. "Our
God is one without a second, and Mohammed is the Prophet." ... Mohammed
began to preach it in the streets of Mecca. ... They began to persecute
him, and he fled into the city of \[Medina\]. He began to fight, and the
whole race became united. \[Mohammedanism\] deluged the world in the
name of the Lord. The tremendous conquering power! ...

You ... people have very hard ideas and are so superstitious and
prejudiced! These messengers must have come from God, else how could
they have been so great? You look at every defect. Each one of us has
his defects. Who hasn't? I can point out many defects in the Jews. The
wicked are always looking for defects. ... Flies come and seek for the
\[ulcer\], and bees come only for the honey in the flower. Do not follow
the way of the fly but that of the bee....

Mohammed married quite a number of wives afterwards. Great men may marry
two hundred wives each. "Giants" like you, I would not allow to marry
one wife. The characters of the great souls are mysterious, their
methods past our finding out. We must not judge them. Christ may judge
Mohammed. Who are you and I? Little babies. What do we understand of
these great souls? ...

\[Mohammedanism\] came as a message for the masses. ... The first
message was equality. ... There is one religion — love. No more question
of race, colour, \[or\] anything else. Join it! That practical quality
carried the day. ... The great message was perfectly simple. Believe in
one God, the creator of heaven and earth. All was created out of nothing
by Him. Ask no questions. ...

Their temples are like Protestant churches. ... no music, no paintings,
no pictures. A pulpit in the corner; on that lies the Koran. The people
all stand in line. No priest, no person, no bishop. ... The man who
prays must stand at the side of the audience. Some parts are beautiful.
...

These old people were all messengers of God. I fall down and worship
them; I take the dust of their feet. But they are dead! ... And we are
alive. We must go ahead! ... Religion is not an imitation of Jesus or
Mohammed. Even if an imitation is good, it is never genuine. Be not an
imitation of Jesus, but be Jesus, You are quite as great as Jesus,
Buddha, or anybody else. If we are not ... we must struggle and be. I
would not be exactly like Jesus. It is unnecessary that I should be born
a Jew. ...

The greatest religion is to be true to your own nature. Have faith in
yourselves! If you do not exist, how can God exist, or anybody else?
Wherever you are, it is this mind that perceives even the Infinite. I
see God, therefore He exists. If I cannot think of God, He does not
exist \[for me\]. This is the grand march of our human progress.

These \[great souls\] are signposts on the way. That is all they are.
They say, "Onward, brothers!" We cling to them; we never want to move.
We do not want to think; we want others to think for us. The messengers
fulfil their mission. They ask to be up and doing. A hundred years later
we cling to the message and go to sleep.

Talking about faith and belief and doctrine is easy, but it is so
difficult to build character and to stem the tide of the senses. We
succumb. We become hypocrites. ...

\[Religion\] is not a doctrine, \[not\] a rule. It is a process. That is
all. \[Doctrines and rules\] are all for exercise. By that exercise we
get strong and at last break the bonds and become free. Doctrine is of
no use except for gymnastics. ... Through exercise the soul becomes
perfect. That exercise is stopped when you say, "I believe." ...

"Whenever virtue subsides and immorality abounds, I take human form. In
every age I come for the salvation of the good, for the destruction of
the wicked, for the establishment of spirituality." (Gita, IV. 7-8.)

\[Such\] are the great messengers of light. They are our great teachers,
our elder brothers. But we must go our own way!

</div>
