---
title: THE METHODS AND PURPOSE OF RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](../../volume_5/writings_prose_and_poems/the_east_and_the_west.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_nature_of_the_soul_and_its_goal.htm)

  

## THE METHODS AND PURPOSE OF RELIGION

In studying the religions of the world we generally find two methods of
procedure. The one is from God to man. That is to say, we have the
Semitic group of religions in which the idea of God comes almost from
the very first, and, strangely enough, without any idea of soul. It was
very remarkable amongst the ancient Hebrews that, until very recent
periods in their history, they never evolved any idea of a human soul.
Man was composed of certain mind and material particles, and that was
all. With death everything ended. But, on the other hand, there was a
most wonderful idea of God evolved by the same race. This is one of the
methods of procedure. The other is through man to God. The second is
peculiarly Aryan, and the first is peculiarly Semitic.

The Aryan first began with the soul. His ideas of God were hazy,
indistinguishable, not very clear; but, as his idea of the human soul
began to be clearer, his idea of God began to be clearer in the same
proportion. So the inquiry in the Vedas was always through the soul. All
the knowledge the Aryans got of God was through the human soul; and, as
such, the peculiar stamp that has been left upon their whole cycle of
philosophy is that introspective search after divinity. The Aryan man
was always seeking divinity inside his own self. It became, in course of
time, natural, characteristic. It is remarkable in their art and in
their commonest dealings. Even at the present time, if we take a
European picture of a man in a religious attitude, the painter always
makes his subject point his eyes upwards, looking outside of nature for
God, looking up into the skies. In India, on the other hand, the
religious attitude is always presented by making the subject close his
eyes. He is, as it were, looking inward.

These are the two subjects of study for man, external and internal
nature; and though at first these seem to be contradictory, yet external
nature must, to the ordinary man, be entirely composed of internal
nature, the world of thought. The majority of philosophies in every
country, especially in the West, have started with the assumption that
these two, matter and mind, are contradictory existences; but in the
long run we shall find that they converge towards each other and in the
end unite and form an infinite whole. So it is not that by this analysis
I mean a higher or lower standpoint with regard to the subject. I do not
mean that those who want to search after truth through external nature
are wrong, nor that those who want to search after truth through
internal nature are higher. These are the two modes of procedure. Both
of them must live; both of them must be studied; and in the end we shall
find that they meet. We shall see that neither is the body antagonistic
to the mind, nor the mind to the body, although we find, many persons
who think that this body is nothing. In old times, every country was
full of people who thought this body was only a disease, a sin, or
something of that kind. Later on, however, we see how, as it was taught
in the Vedas, this body melts into the mind, and the mind into the body.

You must remember the one theme that runs through all the Vedas: "Just
as by the knowledge of one lump of clay we know all the clay that is in
the universe, so what is that, knowing which we know everything else?"
This, expressed more or less clearly, is the theme of all human
knowledge. It is the finding of a unity towards which we are all going.
Every action of our lives — the most material, the grossest as well as
the finest, the highest, the most spiritual — is alike tending towards
this one ideal, the finding of unity. A man is single. He marries.
Apparently it may be a selfish act, but at the same time, the impulsion,
the motive power, is to find that unity. He has children, he has
friends, he loves his country, he loves the world, and ends by loving
the whole universe. Irresistibly we are impelled towards that perfection
which consists in finding the unity, killing this little self and making
ourselves broader and broader. This is the goal, the end towards which
the universe is rushing. Every atom is trying to go and join itself to
the next atom. Atoms after atoms combine, making huge balls, the earths,
the suns, the moons, the stars, the planets. They in their turn, are
trying to rush towards each other, and at last, we know that the whole
universe, mental and material, will be fused into one.

The process that is going on in the cosmos on a large scale, is the same
as that going on in the microcosm on a smaller scale. Just as this
universe has its existence in separation, in distinction, and all the
while is rushing towards unity, non-separation, so in our little worlds
each soul is born, as it were, cut off from the rest of the world. The
more ignorant, the more unenlightened the soul, the more it thinks that
it is separate from the rest of the universe. The more ignorant the
person, the more he thinks, he will die or will be born, and so forth —
ideas that are an expression of this separateness. But we find that, as
knowledge comes, man grows, morality is evolved and the idea of
non-separateness begins. Whether men understand it or not, they are
impelled by that power behind to become unselfish. That is the
foundation of all morality. It is the quintessence of all ethics,
preached in any language, or in any religion, or by any prophet in the
world. "Be thou unselfish", "Not 'I', but 'thou'" — that is the
background of all ethical codes. And what is meant by this is the
recognition of non-individuality — that you are a part of me, and I of
you; the recognition that in hurting you I hurt myself, and in helping
you I help myself; the recognition that there cannot possibly be death
for me when you live. When one worm lives in this universe, how can I
die? For my life is in the life of that worm. At the same time it will
teach us that we cannot leave one of our fellow-beings without helping
him, that in his good consists my good.

This is the theme that runs through the whole of Vedanta, and which runs
through every other religion. For, you must remember, religions divide
themselves generally into three parts. There is the first part,
consisting of the philosophy, the essence, the principles of every
religion. These principles find expression in mythology — lives of
saints or heroes, demi-gods, or gods, or divine beings; and the whole
idea of this mythology is that of power. And in the lower class of
mythologies — the primitive — the expression of this power is in the
muscles; their heroes are strong, gigantic. One hero conquers the whole
world. As man advances, he must find expression for his energy higher
than in the muscles; so his heroes also find expression in something
higher. The higher mythologies have heroes who are gigantic moral men.
Their strength is manifested in becoming moral and pure. They can stand
alone, they can beat back the surging tide of selfishness and
immorality. The third portion of all religions is symbolism, which you
call ceremonials and forms. Even the expression through mythology, the
lives of heroes, is not sufficient for all. There are minds still lower.
Like children they must have their kindergarten of religion, and these
symbologies are evolved — concrete examples which they can handle and
grasp and understand, which they can see and feel as material
somethings.

So in every religion you find there are the three stages: philosophy,
mythology, and ceremonial. There is one advantage which can be pleaded
for the Vedanta, that in India, fortunately, these three stages have
been sharply defined. In other religions the principles are so
interwoven with the mythology that it is very hard to distinguish one
from the other. The mythology stands supreme, swallowing up the
principles; and in course of centuries the principles are lost sight of.
The explanation, the illustration of the principle, swallows up the
principle, and the people see only the explanation, the prophet, the
preacher, while the principles have gone out of existence almost — so
much so that even today, if a man dares to preach the principles of
Christianity apart from Christ, they will try to attack him and think he
is wrong and dealing blows at Christianity. In the same way, if a man
wants to preach the principles of Mohammedanism, Mohammedans will think
the same; because concrete ideas, the lives of great men and prophets,
have entirely overshadowed the principles.

In Vedanta the chief advantage is that it was not the work of one single
man; and therefore, naturally, unlike Buddhism, or Christianity, or
Mohammedanism, the prophet or teacher did not entirely swallow up or
overshadow the principles. The principles live, and the prophets, as it
were, form a secondary group, unknown to Vedanta. The Upanishads speak
of no particular prophet, but they speak of various prophets and
prophetesses. The old Hebrews had something of that idea; yet we find
Moses occupying most of the space of the Hebrew literature. Of course I
do not mean that it is bad that these prophets should take religious
hold of a nation; but it certainly is very injurious if the whole field
of principles is lost sight of. We can very much agree as to principles,
but not very much as to persons. The persons appeal to our emotions; and
the principles, to something higher, to our calm judgement. Principles
must conquer in the long run, for that is the manhood of man. Emotions
many times drag us down to the level of animals. Emotions have more
connection with the senses than with the faculty of reason; and,
therefore, when principles are entirely lost sight of and emotions
prevail, religions degenerate into fanaticism and sectarianism. They are
no better than party politics and such things. The most horribly
ignorant notions will be taken up, and for these ideas thousands will be
ready to cut the throats of their brethren. This is the reason that,
though these great personalities and prophets are tremendous motive
powers for good, at the same time their lives are altogether dangerous
when they lead to the disregard of the principles they represent. That
has always led to fanaticism, and has deluged the world in blood.
Vedanta can avoid this difficulty, because it has not one special
prophet. It has many Seers, who are called Rishis or sages. Seers — that
is the literal translation — those who see these truths, the Mantras.

The word Mantra means "thought out", cogitated by the mind; and the
Rishi is the seer of these thoughts. They are neither the property of
particular persons, nor the exclusive property of any man or woman,
however great he or she may be; nor even the exclusive property of the
greatest spirits — the Buddhas or Christs — whom the world has produced.
They are as much the property of the lowest of the low, as they are the
property of a Buddha, and as much the property of the smallest worm that
crawls as of the Christ, because they are universal principles. They
were never created. These principles have existed throughout time; and
they will exist. They are non-create — uncreated by any laws which
science teaches us today. They remain covered and become discovered, but
are existing through all eternity in nature. If Newton had not been
born, the law of gravitation would have remained all the same and would
have worked all the same. It was Newton's genius which formulated it,
discovered it, brought it into consciousness, made it a conscious thing
to the human race. So are these religious laws, the grand truths of
spirituality. They are working all the time. If all the Vedas and the
Bibles and the Korans did not exist at all, if seers and prophets had
never been born, yet these laws would exist. They are only held in
abeyance, and slowly but surely would work to raise the human race, to
raise human nature. But they are the prophets who see them, discover
them, and such prophets are discoverers in the field of spirituality. As
Newton and Galileo were prophets of physical science, so are they
prophets of spirituality. They can claim no exclusive right to any one
of these laws; they are the common property of all nature.

The Vedas, as the Hindus say, are eternal. We now understand what they
mean by their being eternal, i.e. that the laws have neither beginning
nor end, just as nature has neither beginning nor end. Earth after
earth, system after system, will evolve, run for a certain time, and
then dissolve back again into chaos; but the universe remains the same.
Millions and millions of systems are being born, while millions are
being destroyed. The universe remains the same. The beginning and the
end of time can be told as regards a certain planet; but as regards the
universe, time has no meaning at all. So are the laws of nature, the
physical laws, the mental laws, the spiritual laws. Without beginning
and without end are they; and it is within a few years, comparatively
speaking, a few thousand years at best, that man has tried to reveal
them. The infinite mass remains before us. Therefore the one great
lesson that we learn from the Vedas, at the start, is that religion has
just begun. The infinite ocean of spiritual truth lies before us to be
worked on, to be discovered, to be brought into our lives. The world has
seen thousands of prophets, and the world has yet to see millions.

There were times in olden days when prophets were many in every society.
The time is to come when prophets will walk through every street in
every city in the world. In olden times, particular, peculiar persons
were, so to speak, selected by the operations of the laws of society to
become prophets. The time is coming when we shall understand that to
become religious means to become a prophet, that none can become
religious until he or she becomes a prophet. We shall come to understand
that the secret of religion is not being able to think and say all these
thoughts; but, as the Vedas teach, to realise them, to realise newer and
higher one than have ever been realised, to discover them, bring them to
society; and the study of religion should be the training to make
prophets. The schools and colleges should be training grounds for
prophets. The whole universe must become prophets; and until a man
becomes a prophet, religion is a mockery and a byword unto him. We must
see religion, feel it, realise it in a thousand times more intense a
sense than that in which we see the wall.

But there is one principle which underlies all these various
manifestations of religion and which has been already mapped out for us.
Every science must end where it finds a unity, because we cannot go any
further. When a perfect unity is reached, that science has nothing more
of principles to tell us. All the work that religions have to do is to
work out the details. Take any science, chemistry, for example. Suppose
we can find one element out of which we can manufacture all the other
elements. Then chemistry, as a science, will have become perfect. What
will remain for us is to discover every day new combinations of that one
material and the application of those combinations for all the purposes
of life. So with religion. The gigantic principles, the scope, the plan
of religion were already discovered ages ago when man found the last
words, as they are called, of the Vedas — "I am He" — that there is that
One in whom this whole universe of matter and mind finds its unity, whom
they call God, or Brahman, or Allah, or Jehovah, or any other name. We
cannot go beyond that. The grand principle has been already mapped out
for us. Our work lies in filling it in, working it out, applying it to
every part of our lives. We have to work now so that every one will
become a prophet. There is a great work before us.

In old times, many did not understand what a prophet meant. They thought
it was something by chance, that just by a fiat of will or some superior
intelligence, a man gained superior knowledge. In modern times, we are
prepared to demonstrate that this knowledge is the birthright of every
living being, whosoever and wheresoever he be, and that there is no
chance in this universe. Every man who, we think, gets something by
chance, has been working for it slowly and surely through ages. And the
whole question devolves upon us: "Do we want to be prophets?" If we
want, we shall be.

This, the training of prophets, is the great work that lies before us;
and, consciously or unconsciously, all the great systems of religion are
working toward this one great goal, only with this difference, that in
many religions you will find they declare that this direct perception of
spirituality is not to be had in this life, that man must die, and after
his death there will come a time in another world, when he will have
visions of spirituality, when he will realise things which now he must
believe. But Vedanta will ask all people who make such assertions, "Then
how do you know that spirituality exists?" And they will have to answer
that there must have been always certain particular people who, even in
this life, have got a glimpse of things which are unknown and
unknowable.

Even this makes a difficulty. If they were peculiar people, haling this
power simply by chance, we have no right to believe in them. It would be
a sin to believe in anything that is by chance, because we cannot know
it. What is meant by knowledge? Destruction of peculiarity. Suppose a
boy goes into a street or a menagerie, and sees a peculiarly shaped
animal. He does not know what it is. Then he goes to a country where
there are hundreds like that one, and he is satisfied, he knows what the
species is. Our knowledge is knowing the principle. Our non-knowledge is
finding the particular without reference to principle. When we find one
case or a few cases separate from the principle, without any reference
to the principle, we are in darkness and do not know. Now, if these
prophets, as they say, were peculiar persons who alone had the right to
catch a glimpse of that which is beyond and no one else has the right,
we should not believe in these prophets, because they are peculiar cases
without any reference to a principle. We can only believe in them if we
ourselves become prophets.

You, all of you, hear about the various jokes that get into the
newspapers about the sea-serpent; and why should it be so? Because a few
persons, at long intervals, came and told their stories about the
sea-serpent, and others never see it. They have no particular principle
to which to refer, and therefore the world does not believe. If a man
comes to me and says a prophet disappeared into the air and went through
it, I have the right to see that. I ask him, "Did your father or
grandfather see it?" "Oh, no," he replies, "but five thousand years ago
such a thing happened." And if I do not believe it, I have to be
barbecued through eternity!

What a mass of superstition this is! And its effect is to degrade man
from his divine nature to that of brutes. Why was reason given us if we
have to believe? Is it not tremendously blasphemous to believe against
reason? What right have we not to use the greatest gift that God has
given to us? I am sure God will pardon a man who will use his reason and
cannot believe, rather than a man who believes blindly instead of using
the faculties He has given him. He simply degrades his nature and goes
down to the level of the beasts — degrades his senses and dies. We must
reason; and when reason proves to us the truth of these prophets and
great men about whom the ancient books speak in every country, we shall
believe in them. We shall believe in them when we see such prophets
among ourselves. We shall then find that they were not peculiar men, but
only illustrations of certain principles. They worked, and that
principle expressed itself naturally, and we shall have to work to
express that principle in us. They were prophets, we shall believe, when
we become prophets. They were seers of things divine. They could go
beyond the bounds of senses and catch a glimpse of that which is beyond.
We shall believe that when we are able to do it ourselves and not
before.

That is the one principle of Vedanta. Vedanta declares that religion is
here and now, because the question of this life and that life, of life
and death, this world and that world, is merely one of superstition and
prejudice. There is no break in time beyond what we make. What
difference is there between ten and twelve o'clock, except what we make
by certain changes in nature? Time flows on the same. So what is meant
by this life or that life? It is only a question of time, and what is
lost in time may be made up by speed in work. So, says Vedanta, religion
is to be realised now. And for you to become religious means that you
will start without any religion work your way up and realise things, see
things for yourself; and when you have done that, then, and then alone,
you have religion. Before that you are no better than atheists, or
worse, because the atheist is sincere — he stands up and says, "I do not
know about these things — while those others do not know but go about
the world, saying, "We arc very religious people." What religion they
have no one knows, because they have swallowed some grandmother's story,
and priests have asked them to believe these things; if they do not,
then let them take care. That is how it is going.

Realisation of religion is the only way. Each one of us will have to
discover. Of what use are these books, then, these Bibles of the world?
They are of great use, just as maps are of a country. I have seen maps
of England all my life before I came here, and they were great helps to
me informing some sort of conception of England. Yet, when I arrived in
this country, what a difference between the maps and the country itself!
So is the difference between realisation and the scriptures. These books
are only the maps, the experiences of past men, as a motive power to us
to dare to make the same experiences and discover in the same way, if
not better.

This is the first principle of Vedanta, that realisation is religion,
and he who realises is the religious man; and he who does not is no
better than he who says, "I do not know", if not worse, because the
other says, "I do not know", and is sincere. In this realisation, again,
we shall be helped very much by these books, not only as guides, but as
giving instructions and exercises; for every science has its own
particular method of investigation. You will find many persons in this
world who will say. "I wanted to become religious, I wanted to realise
these things, but I have not been able, so I do not believe anything."
Even among the educated you will find these. Large numbers of people
will tell you, "I have tried to be religious all my life, but there is
nothing in it." At the same time you will find this phenomenon: Suppose
a man is a chemist, a great scientific man. He comes and tells you this.
If you say to him, "I do not believe anything about chemistry, because I
have all my life tried to become a chemist and do not find anything in
it", he will ask, "When did you try?" "When I went to bed, I repeated,
'O chemistry, come to me', and it never came." That is the very same
thing. The chemist laughs at you and says, "Oh, that is not the way. Why
did you not go to the laboratory and get all the acids and alkalis and
burn your hands from time to time? That alone would have taught you." Do
you take the same trouble with religion? Every science has its own
method of learning, and religion is to be learnt the same way. It has
its own methods, and here is something we can learn, and must learn,
from all the ancient prophets of the world, every one who has found
something, who has realised religion. They will give us the methods, the
particular methods, through which alone we shall be able to realise the
truths of religion. They struggled all their lives, discovered
particular methods of mental culture, bringing the mind to a certain
state, the finest perception, and through that they perceived the truths
of religion. To become religious, to perceive religion, feel it, to
become a prophet, we have to take these methods and practice them; and
then if we find nothing, we shall have the right to say, "There is
nothing in religion, for I have tried and failed."

This is the practical side of all religions. You will find it in every
Bible in the world. Not only do they teach principles and doctrines, but
in the lives of the saints you find practices; and when it is not
expressly laid down as a rule of conduct, you will always find in the
lives of these prophets that even they regulated their eating and
drinking sometimes. Their whole living, their practice, their method,
everything was different from the masses who surrounded them; and these
were the causes that gave them the higher light, the vision of the
Divine. And we, if we want to have this vision, must be ready to take up
these methods. It is practice, work, that will bring us up to that. The
plan of Vedanta, therefore, is: first, to lay down the principles, map
out for us the goal, and then to teach us the method by which to arrive
at the goal, to understand and realise religion.

Again, these methods must be various. Seeing that we are so various in
our natures, the same method can scarcely be applied to any two of us in
the same manner. We have idiosyncrasies in our minds, each one of us; so
the method ought to be varied. Some, you will find, are very emotional
in their nature; some very philosophical, rational; others cling to all
sorts of ritualistic forms — want things which are concrete. You will
find that one man does not care for any ceremony or form or anything of
the sort; they are like death to him. And another man carries a load of
amulets all over his body; he is so fond of these symbols! Another man
who is emotional in his nature wants to show acts of charity to
everyone; he weeps, he laughs, and so on. And all of these certainly
cannot have the same method. If there were only one method to arrive at
truth, it would be death for everyone else who is not similarly
constituted. Therefore the methods should be various. Vedanta
understands that and wants to lay before the world different methods
through which we can work. Take up any one you like; and if one does not
suit you, another may. From this standpoint we see how glorious it is
that there are so many religions in the world, how good it is that there
are so many teachers and prophets, instead of there being only one, as
many persons would like to have it. The Mohammedans want to have the
whole world Mohammedan; the Christians, Christian; and the Buddhists,
Buddhist; but Vedanta says, "Let each person in the world be separate,
if you will; the one principle, the units will be behind. The more
prophets there are, the more books, the more seers, the more methods, so
much the better for the world." Just as in social life the greater the
number of occupations in every society, the better for that society, the
more chance is there for everyone of that society to make a living; so
in the world of thought and of religion. How much better it is today
when we have so many divisions of science — how much more is it possible
for everyone to have great mental culture, with this great variety
before us! How much better it is, even on the physical plane, to have
the opportunity of so many various things spread before us, so that we
may choose any one we like, the one which suits us best! So it is with
the world of religions. It is a most glorious dispensation of the Lord
that there are so many religions in the world; and would to God that
these would increase every day, until every man had a religion unto
himself!

Vedanta understands that and therefore preaches the one principle and
admits various methods. It has nothing to say against anyone — whether
you are a Christian, or a Buddhist, or a Jew, or a Hindu, whatever
mythology you believe, whether you owe allegiance to the prophet of
Nazareth, or of Mecca, or of India, or of anywhere else, whether you
yourself are a prophet — it has nothing to say. It only preaches the
principle which is the background of every religion and of which all the
prophets and saints and seers are but illustrations and manifestations.
Multiply your prophets if you like; it has no objection. It only
preaches the principle, and the method it leaves to you. Take any path
you like; follow any prophet you like; but have only that method which
suits your own nature, so that you will be sure to progress.

</div>
