---
title: INTRODUCTION TO JNANA-YOGA

---
<div>

[←](concentration_and_breathing.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_vedanta_philosophy_and_christianity.htm)

  

## INTRODUCTION TO JNANA-YOGA

This is the rational and philosophic side of Yoga and very difficult,
but I will take you slowly through it.

Yoga means the method of joining man and God. When you understand this,
you can go on with your own definitions of man and God, and you will
find the term Yoga fits in with every definition. Remember always, there
are different Yogas for different minds, and that if one does not suit
you, another may. All religions are divided into theory and practice.
The Western mind has given itself up to the theory and only sees the
practical part of religion as good works. Yoga is the practical part of
religion and shows that religion is a practical power apart from good
works.

At the beginning of the nineteenth century man tried to find God through
reason, and Deism was the result. What little was left of God by this
process was destroyed by Darwinism and Millism. Men were then thrown
back upon historical and comparative religion. They thought, religion
was derived from element worship (see Max Müller on the sun myths etc.);
others thought that religion was derived from ancestor worship (see
Herbert Spencer). But taken as a whole, these methods have proved a
failure. Man cannot get at Truth by external methods.

"If I know one lump of clay, I know the whole mass of clay." The
universe is all built on the same plan. The individual is only a part,
like the lump of clay. If we know the human soul — which is one atom —
its beginning and general history, we know the whole of nature. Birth,
growth, development, decay, death — this is the sequence in all nature
and is the same in the plant and the man. The difference is only in
time. The whole cycle may be completed in one case in a day, in the
other in three score years and ten; the methods are the same. The only
way to reach a sure analysis of the universe is by the analysis of our
own minds. A proper psychology is essential to the understanding of
religion. To reach Truth by reason alone is impossible, because
imperfect reason cannot study its own fundamental basis. Therefore the
only way to study the mind is to get at facts, and then intellect will
arrange them and deduce the principles. The intellect has to build the
house; but it cannot do so without bricks and *it* cannot make bricks.
Jnana-Yoga is the surest way of arriving at facts.

First we have the physiology of mind. We have organs of the senses,
which are divided into organs of action and organs of perception. By
organs I do not mean the external sense-instruments. The ophthalmic
centre in the brain is the organ of sight, not the eye alone. So with
every organ, the function is internal. Only when the mind reacts, is the
object truly perceived. The sensory and motor nerves are necessary to
perception.

Then there is the mind itself. It is like a smooth lake which when
struck, say by a stone, vibrates. The vibrations gather together and
react on the stone, and all through the lake they will spread and be
felt. The mind is like the lake; it is constantly being set in
vibrations, which leave an impression on the mind; and the idea of the
Ego, or personal self, the "I", is the result of these impressions. This
"I" therefore is only the very rapid transmission of force and is in
itself no reality.

The mind-stuff is a very fine material instrument used for taking up the
Prâna. When a man dies, the body dies; but a little bit of the mind, the
seed, is left when all else is shattered; and this is the seed of the
new body called by St. Paul "the spiritual body". This theory of the
materiality of the mind accords with all modern theories. The idiot is
lacking in intelligence because his mind-stuff is injured. Intelligence
cannot be in matter nor can it be produced by any combinations of
matter. Where then is intelligence? It is behind matter; it is the Jiva,
the real Self, working through the instrument of matter. Transmission of
force is not possible without matter, and as the Jiva cannot travel
alone, some part of mind is left as a transmitting medium when all else
is shattered by death.

How are perceptions made? The wall opposite sends an impression to me,
but I do not see the wall until my mind reacts, that is to say, the mind
cannot know the wall by mere sight. The reaction that enables the mind
to get a perception of the wall is an intellectual process. In this way
the whole universe is seen through our eyes plus mind (or perceptive
faculty); it is necessarily coloured by our own individual tendencies.
The *real* wall, or the *real* universe, is outside the mind, and is
unknown and unknowable. Call this universe X, and our statement is that
the seen universe is X plus mind.

What is true of the external must also apply to the internal world. Mind
also wants to know itself, but this Self can only be known through the
medium of the mind and is, like the wall, unknown. This self we may call
Y. and the statement would then be, Y plus mind is the inner self. Kant
was the first to arrive at this analysis of mind, but it was long ago
stated in the Vedas. We have thus, as it were, mind standing between X
and Y and reacting on both.

If X is unknown, then any qualities we give to it are only derived from
our own mind. Time, space, and causation are the three conditions
through which mind perceives. Time is the condition for the transmission
of thought, and space for the vibration of grosser matter. Causation is
the sequence in which vibrations come. Mind can only cognise through
these. Anything therefore, beyond mind must be beyond time, space, and
causation.

To the blind man the world is perceived by touch and sound. To us with
five senses it is another world. If any of us developed an electric
sense and the faculty seeing electric waves, the world would appear
different. Yet the world, as the X to all of these, is still the same.
As each one brings his own mind, he sees his own world. There is X plus
one sense; X plus two senses, up to five, as we know humanity. The
result is constantly varied, yet X remains always unchanged. Y is also
beyond our minds and beyond time, space, and causation.

But, you may ask, "How do we know there are two things (X and Y) beyond
time, space, and causation?" Quite true, time makes differentiation, so
that, as both are really beyond time, they must be really one. When mind
sees this *one*, it calls it variously — X, when it is the outside
world, and Y, when it is the inside world. This unit exists and is
looked at through the lens of minds.

The Being of perfect nature, universally appearing to us, is God, is
Absolute. The undifferentiated is the perfect condition; all others must
be lower and not permanent.

What makes the undifferentiated appear differentiated to mind? This is
the same kind of question as what is the origin of evil and free will?
The question itself is contradictory and impossible, because the
question takes for granted cause and effect. There is no cause and
effect in the undifferentiated; the question assumes that the
undifferentiated is in the same condition as the differentiated. "Whys"
and "wherefores" are in mind only. The Self is beyond causation, and It
alone is free. Its light it is which percolates through every form of
mind. With every action I assert I am free, and yet every action proves
that I am bound. The real Self is free, yet when mixed with mind and
body, It is not free. The will is the first manifestation of the real
Self; the first limitation therefore of this real Self is the will. Will
is a compound of Self and mind. Now, no compound can be permanent, so
that when we will to live, we must die. Immortal life is a contradiction
in terms, for life, being a compound, cannot be immortal. True Being is
undifferentiated and *eternal*. How does this Perfect Being become mixed
up with will, mind, thought — all defective things? It never has become
mixed. You are the real you (the Y of our former statement); you never
were will; you never have changed; you as a person never existed; It is
illusion. Then on what, you will say, do the phenomena of illusion rest?
This is a bad question. Illusion never rests on Truth, but only on
illusion. Everything struggles to go back to what was before these
illusions, to be free in fact. What then is the value of life? It is to
give us experience. Does this view do away with evolution? On the
contrary, it explains it. It is really the process of refinement of
matter allowing the real Self to manifest Itself. It is as if a screen
or a veil were between us and some other object. The object becomes
clear as the screen is gradually withdrawn. The question is simply one
of manifestation of the higher Self.

</div>
