---
title: WORSHIPPER AND WORSHIPPED

---
<div>

[←](the_vedanta_philosophy_and_christianity.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](formal_worship.htm)

  

## WORSHIPPER AND WORSHIPPED

(This lecture is reproduced from the *Vedanta and the West*. [See Vol.
IV](../../volume_4/lectures_and_discourses/concentration.htm). )

(*Delivered in San Francisco area, April 9, 1900*)

We have been taking up the more analytical side of human nature. In this
course we \[shall\] study the emotional side. . . . The former deals
with man as unlimited being, \[as\] principle, the latter with man as
limited being. . . . The one has no time to stop for a few tear-drops or
pangs; the other cannot proceed without wiping the tear-drop, without
healing that misery. One is great, so great and grand that sometimes we
are staggered by the magnitude; the other \[is\] commonplace, and yet
most beautiful and dear to us. One gets hold of us, takes us up to the
heights where our lungs almost burst. We cannot breathe \[in\] that
atmosphere. The other leaves us where we are and tries to see the
objects of life, \[takes the limited\] view. One will accept nothing
until it has the shining seal of reason; the other has faith, and what
it cannot see it believes. Both are necessary. A bird cannot fly with
only one wing. . . .

What we want is to see the man who is harmoniously developed . . . great
in heart, great in mind, \[great in deed\] . . . . We want the man whose
heart feels intensely the miseries and sorrows of the world. . . . And
\[we want\] the man who not only can feel but can find the meaning of
things, who delves deeply into the heart of nature and understanding.
\[We want\] the man who will not even stop there, \[but\] who wants to
work out \[the feeling and meaning by actual deeds\]. Such a combination
of head, heart, and hand is what we want. There are many teachers in
this world, but you will find \[that most of them\] are one-sided.
\[One\] sees the glorious midday sun of intellect \[and\] sees nothing
else. Another hears the beautiful music of love and can hear nothing
else. Another is \[immersed\] in activity, and has neither time to feel
nor time to think. Why not \[have\] the giant who is equally active,
equally knowing, and equally loving? Is it impossible? Certainly not.
This is the man of the future, of whom there are \[only a\] few at
present. \[The number of such will increase\] until the whole world is
humanised.

I have been talking to you so long about intellect \[and\] reason. We
have heard the whole of Vedanta. The veil of Maya breaks: wintry clouds
vanish, and the sunlight shines on us. I have been trying to climb the
heights of the Himalayas, where the peaks disappear beyond the clouds. I
propose lip study with you the other side: the most beautiful valleys,
the most marvellous exquisiteness in nature. \[We shall study the\] love
that holds us here in spite of all the miseries of the world, \[the\]
love that has made us forge the chain of misery, this eternal martyrdom
which man is suffering willingly, of his own accord. We want to study
that for which man has forged the chain with his own hands, that for
which he suffers, that eternal love. We do not mean to forget the other.
The glacier of the Himalayas must join hands with the rice fields of
Kashmir. The thunderbolt must blend its base note with the warbling of
the birds.

This course will have to do with everything exquisite and beautiful.
Worship is everywhere, in every soul. Everyone worships God. Whatever be
the name, they are all worshipping God. The beginnings of worship — like
the beautiful lotus, like life itself — are in the dirt of the earth. .
. . There is the element of fear. There is the hungering for this
world's gain. There is the worship of the beggar. These are the
beginnings of \[the\] world worshipping, \[culminating in\] loving God
and worshipping God through man.

Is there any God? Is there anyone to be loved, any such one capable of
being loved? Loving the stone would not be much good. We only love that
which understands love, that which draws our love. So with worship.
Never say \[that\] there is a man in this world of ours who worshipped a
piece of stone \[as stone\]. He always worshipped \[the omnipresent
being in the stone\].

We find out that the omnipresent being is in us. \[But\] how can we
worship, unless that being is separate from us? I can only worship Thee,
and not me. I can only pray to Thee, and not me. Is there any "Thou"?

The One becomes many. When we see the One, any limitations reflected
through Maya disappear; but it is quite true that the manifold is not
valueless. It is through the many that we reach the one. . . .

Is there any Personal God — a God who thinks, who understands, a God who
guides us? There is. The Impersonal God cannot have any one of these
attributes. Each one of you is an individual: you think, you love,
\[you\] hate, \[you\] are angry, sorry, etc.; yet you are impersonal,
unlimited. \[You are\] personal and impersonal in one. You have the
personal and the impersonal aspects. That \[impersonal reality\] cannot
be angry, \[nor\] sorry, \[nor\] miserable — cannot even think misery.
It cannot think, cannot know. It is knowledge itself. But the personal
\[aspect\] knows, thinks, and dies, etc. Naturally the universal
Absolute must have two aspects; the one representing the infinite
reality of all things; the other, a personal aspect, the Soul of our
souls, Lord of all lords. \[It is\] He who creates this universe. Under
\[His\] guidance this universe exists. . . .

He, the Infinite, the Ever-Pure, the Ever-\[Free,\]. . . He is no judge,
God cannot be \[a\] judge. He does not sit upon a throne and judge
between the good and the wicked. . . . He is no magistrate, \[no\]
general, \[nor\] master. Infinitely merciful, infinitely loving is the
Personal \[God\].

Take it from another side. Every cell in your body has a soul conscious
of the cell. It is a separate entity. It has a little will of its own, a
little sphere of action of its own. All \[cells\] combined make up an
individual. \[In the same way,\] the Personal God of the universe is
made up of all these \[many individuals\].

Take it from another side. You, as I see you, are as much of your
absolute nature as has been limited and perceived by one. I have limited
you in order to see you through the power of my eyes, my senses. As much
of you as my eyes can see, I see. As much of you as my mind can grasp is
what I know to be you, and nothing more. In the same way, I am reading
the Absolute, the Impersonal \[and see Him as Personal\]. As long as we
have body and mind, we always see this triune being: God, nature, and
soul. There must always be the three in one, inseparable. . . . There is
nature. There are human souls. There is again That in which nature and
the human souls \[are contained\]

The universal soul has become embodied. My soul itself is a part of God.
He is the eye of our eves, the life of our life, the mind of our mind,
the soul of our soul. This is the highest ideal of the Personal God we
can have.

If you are not a dualist, \[but are\] a monist, you can still have the
Personal God. . . . There is the One without a second. That One wanted
to love Himself. Therefore, out of that One, He made \[many\]. . . . It
is the big Me, the real Me, that that little me is worshipping. Thus in
all systems you can have the Personal \[God\].

Some people are born under circumstances that make them happier than
others: why should this be in the reign of a just being? There is
mortality in this world. These are the difficulties in the way \[These
problems\] have never been answered. They cannot be answered from any
dualistic plane. We have to go back to philosophy to treat things as
they are. We are suffering from our own Karma. It is not the fault of
God. What we do is our own fault, nothing else. Why should God be
blamed?. . .

Why is there evil? The only way you can solve \[the problem\] is \[by
saying that God is\] the cause of both good and evil. The great
difficulty in the theory of the Personal God is that if you say He is
only good and not evil, you will be caught in the trap of your own
argument. How do you know there is \[a\] God? You say \[that He is\] the
Father of this universe, and you say He is good; and because there is
\[also\] evil in the world, God must be evil. . . . The same difficulty!

There is no good, and there is no evil. God is all there is . . . . How
do you know what is good? You feel \[it\]. \[How do you know what is
evil? If evil comes, you feel it. . . . We know good and evil by our
feelings. There is not one man who feels only good, happy feelings.
There is not one who feels only unhappy feelings. . . .

Want and anxiety are the causes of all unhappiness and happiness too. Is
want increasing or decreasing? Is life becoming simple or complex?
Certainly complex. Wants are being multiplied. Your great-grandfathers
did not want the same dress or the same amount of money \[you do\]. They
had no electric cars, \[nor\] railroads, etc. That is why they had to
work less. As soon as these things come, the want arises, and you have
to work harder. More and more anxiety, and more and more competition.

It is very hard work to get money. It is harder work to keep it. You
fight the whole world to get a little money together \[and\] fight all
your life to protect it. \[Therefore\] there is more anxiety for the
rich than for the poor. . . . This is the way it is. . . .

There are good and evil every where in this world. Sometimes evil
becomes good, true; but other times good becomes evil also. All our
senses produce evil some time or other. Let a man drink wine. It is not
bad \[at first\], but let him go on drinking, \[and\] it will produce
evil. . . . A man is born of rich parents; good enough. He becomes a
fool, never exercises his body or brain. That is good producing evil.
Think of this love of life: We go away and jump about and live a few
moments; we work hard. We are born babies, entirely incapable. It takes
us years to understand things again. At sixty or seventy we open our
eyes, and then comes the word, "Get out! " And there you are.

We have seen that good and evil are relative terms. The thing \[that
is\] good for me is bad for you. If you eat the dinner that I eat, you
will begin to weep, and I shall laugh. . . . We \[may\] both dance, but
I with joy and you with pain. . . . The same thing is good at one part
of our life and bad at another part. How can you say \[that\] good and
evil are all cut and dried — \[that\] this is all good and that is all
evil?

Now, who is responsible for all this good and evil, if God is ever the
good? The Christians and the Mohammedans say there is a gentleman called
Satan. How can you say there are two gentlemen working? There must be
one. . . . The fire that burns the child also cooks the meal. How can
you call the fire good or bad, and how can you say it was created by two
different persons? Who creates all \[so-called\] evil? God. There is no
other way out. He sends death and life, plague and epidemics, and
everything. If such is God, He is the good; He is the evil; He is the
beautiful; He is the terrible; He is life; and He is death.

How can such a God be worshipped? We shall come to \[understand\] how
the soul can really learn to worship the terrible; then that soul will
have peace. . . . Have you peace? Do you get rid of anxieties? Turn
around, first of all, and face the terrible. Tear aside the mask and
find the same \[God\]. He is the personal — all that is \[apparently\]
good and all that is \[apparently\] bad. There is none else. If there
were two Gods, nature could not stand a moment. There is not another one
in nature. It is all harmony. If God played one side and the devil the
other, the whole \[of\] nature would be \[in chaos\]. Who can break the
law? If I break this glass, it will fall down. If anyone succeeds in
throwing one atom out of place, every other atom will go out of balance.
. . . The law can never be broken. Each atom is kept in its place. Each
is weighed and measured and fulfils its \[purpose\] and place. Through
His command the winds blow, the sun shines. Through His rule the worlds
are kept in place. Through His orders death is sporting upon the earth.
Just think of two or three Gods having a wrestling match in this world!
It cannot be.

We now come to see that we can have the Personal God, the creator of
this universe, who is merciful and also cruel. . . . He is the good, He
is the evil. He smiles, and He frowns. And none can go beyond His law.
He is the creator of this universe.

What is meant by creation, something coming out of nothing? Six thousand
years ago God woke up from His dream and created the world \[and\]
before that there was nothing? What was God doing then, taking a good
nap? God is the cause of the universe, and we can know the cause through
the effect. If the effect is not present, the cause is not \[the\]
cause. The cause is always known in and through the effect. . . .
Creation is infinite. . . . You cannot think of the beginning in time or
in space.

Why does He create it? Because He likes to; because He is free. . . .
You and I are bound by law, because we can work \[only\] in certain ways
and not in others. "Without hands, He can grasp everything. Without
feet, \[He moves fast\]." Without body, He is omnipotent. "Whom no eyes
can see, but who is the cause of sight in every eye, know Him to be the
Lord." You cannot worship anything else. God is the omnipotent supporter
of this universe. What is called "law" is the manifestation of His will.
He rules the universe by His laws.

So far \[we have discussed\] God and nature, eternal God and eternal
nature. What about souls? They also are eternal. No soul was \[ever\]
created; neither can \[the\] soul die. Nobody can even imagine his own
death. The soul is infinite, eternal. How can it die? It changes bodies.
As a man takes off his old, worn-out garments and puts on new and fresh
ones, even so the worn-out body is thrown away and \[a\] fresh body is
taken.

What is the nature of the soul? The soul is also \[omnipotent\] and
omnipresent. Spirit has neither length, nor breadth, nor thickness. . .
. How can it be said to be here and there? This body falls; \[the soul\]
works \[through\] another body. The soul is a circle of which the
circumference is nowhere, but the centre is in the body. God is a circle
whose circumference is nowhere, but whose centre is everywhere. The soul
by its \[very\] nature is blessed, pure, and perfect; it could never be
pure if its nature was impure. . . . The soul's nature is purity; that
is why souls \[can\] become pure. It is blessed \[by nature\]; that is
why it \[can\] become blessed. It is peace; \[that is why it can become
peaceful\]. . . .

All of us who find ourselves in this plane, attracted to the body, work
hard for a living, with jealousies and quarrels and hardships, and then
death. That shows we are not what we should be. We are not free,
perfectly pure, and so on. The soul, as it were, has become degraded.
Then what the soul requires is expansion. . . .

How can you do it? Can you work it out yourself ? No. If a man's face is
dusty, can you wash it out with dust? If I put a seed in the ground, the
seed produces a tree, the tree produces a seed, the seed another tree,
etc. Hen and egg, egg and hen. If you do something good, you will have
to reap the result of that, be born again and be sorry. Once started in
this infinite chain, you cannot stop. You go on, . . . up and down,
\[to\] heavens and earths, and all these \[bodies\]. . . . There is no
way out.

Then how can you get out of all this, and what are you here for? One
idea is to get rid of misery. We are all struggling day and night to get
rid of misery. . . . We cannot do it by work. Work will produce more
work. It is only possible if there is someone who is free himself and
lends us a hand. "Hear, ye children of immortality, all those that
reside in this plane and all those that reside in the heavens above, I
have found the secret", says the great sage. "I have found Him who is
beyond all darkness. Through His mercy alone we cross this ocean of
life."

In India, the idea of the goal is this: There are heavens, there are
hells, there are earths, but they are not permanent. If I am sent to
hell, it is not permanent. The same struggle goes on and on wherever I
am. How to get beyond all this struggle is the problem. If I go to
heaven, perhaps there will be a little bit of rest. If I get punished
for my misdeeds, that cannot last \[for ever either\] . . . . The Indian
ideal is not to go to heaven. Get out of this earth, get out of hell,
and get out of heaven! What is the goal? It is freedom. You must all be
free. The glory of the soul is covered up. It has to be uncovered again.
The soul exists. It is everywhere. Where shall it go? . . . Where can it
go? It can only go where it is not. If you understand \[that\] it is
ever present, . . . \[there will be\] perfect happiness for ever
afterwards. No more births and deaths. . . . No more disease, no body.
\[The\] body itself is the biggest disease. . . .

The soul shall stand \[as\] soul. Spirit shall live as spirit. How is
this to be done? By worshipping \[the Lord in\] the soul, who, by his
\[very\] nature is ever present, pure, and perfect. There cannot be two
almighty beings in this world. \[Imagine having\] two or three Gods; one
will create the world, another says, "I will destroy the world." It
\[can\] never happen. There must be one God. The soul attains to
perfection; \[it becomes\] almost omnipotent \[and\] omniscient. This is
the worshipper. Who is the worshipped? He, the Lord God Himself, the
Omnipresent, the Omniscient, and so on. And above all, He is Love. How
is \[the soul\] to attain this perfection? By worship. 

(*Vedanta and the West*, July-Aug. 1955).

</div>
