---
title: THE NECESSITY OF RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](../bhakti_or_devotion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_real_nature_of_man.htm)

  

CHAPTER I

## THE NECESSITY OF RELIGION

(*Delivered in London*)

Of all the forces that have worked and are still working to mould the
destinies of the human race, none, certainly, is more potent than that,
the manifestation of which we call religion. All social organisations
have as a background, somewhere, the workings of that peculiar force,
and the greatest cohesive impulse ever brought into play amongst human
units has been derived from this power. It is obvious to all of us that
in very many cases the bonds of religion have proved stronger than the
bonds of race, or climate, or even of descent. It is a well-known fact
that persons worshipping the same God, believing in the same religion,
have stood by each other, with much greater strength and constancy, than
people of merely the same descent, or even brothers. Various attempts
have been made to trace the beginnings of religion. In all the ancient
religions which have come down to us at the present day, we find one
claim made — that they are all supernatural, that their genesis is not,
as it were, in the human brain, but that they have originated somewhere
outside of it.

Two theories have gained some acceptance amongst modern scholars. One is
the spirit theory of religion, the other the evolution of the idea of
the Infinite. One party maintains that ancestor worship is the beginning
of religious ideas; the other, that religion originates in the
personification of the powers of nature. Man wants to keep up the memory
of his dead relatives and thinks they are living even when the body is
dissolved, and he wants to place food for them and, in a certain sense,
to worship them. Out of that came the growth we call religion.

Studying the ancient religions of the Egyptians, Babylonians, Chinese,
and many other races in America and elsewhere, we find very clear traces
of this ancestor worship being the beginning of religion. With the
ancient Egyptians, the first idea of the soul was that of a double.
Every human body contained in it another being very similar to it; and
when a man died, this double went out of the body and yet lived on. But
the life of the double lasted only so long as the dead body remained
intact, and that is why we find among the Egyptians so much solicitude
to keep the body uninjured. And that is why they built those huge
pyramids in which they preserved the bodies. For, if any portion of the
external body was hurt, the double would be correspondingly injured.
This is clearly ancestor worship. With the ancient Babylonians we find
the same idea of the double, but with a variation. The double lost all
sense of love; it frightened the living to give it food and drink, and
to help it in various ways. It even lost all affection for its own
children and its own wife. Among the ancient Hindus also, we find traces
of this ancestor worship. Among the Chinese, the basis of their religion
may also be said to be ancestor worship, and it still permeates the
length and breadth of that vast country. In fact, the only religion that
can really be said to flourish in China is that of ancestor worship.
Thus it seems, on the one hand, a very good position is made out for
those who hold the theory of ancestor worship as the beginning of
religion.

On the other hand, there are scholars who from the ancient Aryan
literature show that religion originated in nature worship. Although in
India we find proofs of ancestor worship everywhere, yet in the oldest
records there is no trace of it whatsoever. In the Rig-Veda Samhitâ, the
most ancient record of the Aryan race, we do not find any trace of it.
Modern scholars think, it is the worship of nature that they find there.
The human mind seems to struggle to get a peep behind the scenes. The
dawn, the evening, the hurricane, the stupendous and gigantic forces of
nature, its beauties, these have exercised the human mind, and it
aspires to go beyond, to understand something about them. In the
struggle they endow these phenomena with personal attributes, giving
them souls and bodies, sometimes beautiful, sometimes transcendent.
Every attempt ends by these phenomena becoming abstractions whether
personalised or not. So also it is found with the ancient Greeks; their
whole mythology is simply this abstracted nature worship. So also with
the ancient Germans, the Scandinavians, and all the other Aryan races.
Thus, on this side, too, a very strong case has been made out, that
religion has its origin in the personification of the powers of nature.

These two views, though they seem to be contradictory, can be reconciled
on a third basis, which, to my mind, is the real germ of religion, and
that I propose to call the struggle to transcend the limitations of the
senses. Either, man goes to seek for the spirits of his ancestors, the
spirits of the dead, that is, he wants to get a glimpse of what there is
after the body is dissolved, or, he desires to understand the power
working behind the stupendous phenomena of nature. Whichever of these is
the case, one thing is certain, that he tries to transcend the
limitations of the senses. He cannot remain satisfied with his senses;
he wants to go beyond them. The explanation need not be mysterious. To
me it seems very natural that the first glimpse of religion should come
through dreams. The first idea of immortality man may well get through
dreams. Is that not a most wonderful state? And we know that children
and untutored minds find very little difference between dreaming and
their awakened state. What can be more natural than that they find, as
natural logic, that even during the sleep state when the body is
apparently dead, the mind goes on with all its intricate workings? What
wonder that men will at once come to the conclusion that when this body
is dissolved for ever, the same working will go on? This, to my mind,
would be a more natural explanation of the supernatural, and through
this dream idea the human mind rises to higher and higher conceptions.
Of course, in time, the vast majority of mankind found out that these
dreams are not verified by their waking states, and that during the
dream state it is not that man has a fresh existence, but simply that he
recapitulates the experiences of the awakened state.

But by this time the search had begun, and the search was inward, arid
man continued inquiring more deeply into the different stages of the
mind and discovered higher states than either the waking or the
dreaming. This state of things we find in all the organised religions of
the world, called either ecstasy or inspiration. In all organised
religions, their founders, prophets, and messengers are declared to have
gone into states of mind that were neither waking nor sleeping, in which
they came face to face with a new series of facts relating to what is
called the spiritual kingdom. They realised things there much more
intensely than we realise facts around us in our waking state. Take, for
instance, the religions of the Brahmins. The Vedas are said to be
written by Rishis. These Rishis were sages who realised certain facts.
The exact definition of the Sanskrit word Rishi is a Seer of Mantras —
of the thoughts conveyed in the Vedic hymns. These men declared that
they had realised — sensed, if that word can be used with regard to the
supersensuous — certain facts, and these facts they proceeded to put on
record. We find the same truth declared amongst both the Jews and the
Christians.

Some exceptions may be taken in the case of the Buddhists as represented
by the Southern sect. It may be asked — if the Buddhists do not believe
in any God or soul, how can their religion be derived from the
supersensuous state of existence? The answer to this is that even the
Buddhists find an eternal moral law, and that moral law was not reasoned
out in our sense of the word but Buddha found it, discovered it, in a
supersensuous state. Those of you who have studied the life of Buddha
even as briefly given in that beautiful poem, *The Light of Asia*, may
remember that Buddha is represented as sitting under the Bo-tree until
he reached that supersensuous state of mind. All his teachings came
through this, and not through intellectual cogitations.

Thus, a tremendous statement is made by all religions; that the human
mind, at certain moments, transcends not only the limitations of the
senses, but also the power of reasoning. It then comes face to face with
facts which it could never have sensed, could never have reasoned out.
These facts are the basis of all the religions of the world. Of course
we have the right to challenge these facts, to put them to the test of
reason. Nevertheless, all the existing religions of the world claim for
the human mind this peculiar power of transcending the limits of the
senses and the limits of reason; and this power they put forward as a
statement of fact.

Apart from the consideration of the question how far these facts claimed
by religions are true, we find one characteristic common to them all.
They are all abstractions as contrasted with the concrete discoveries of
physics, for instance; and in all the highly organised religions they
take the purest form of Unit Abstraction, either in the form of an
Abstracted Presence, as an Omnipresent Being, as an Abstract Personality
called God, as a Moral Law, or in the form of an Abstract Essence
underlying every existence. In modern times, too, the attempts made to
preach religions without appealing to the supersensuous state if the
mind have had to take up the old abstractions of the Ancients and give
different names to them as "Moral Law", the "Ideal Unity", and so forth,
thus showing that these abstractions are not in the senses. None of us
have yet seen an "Ideal Human Being", and yet we are told to believe in
it. None of us have yet seen an ideally perfect man, and yet without
that ideal we cannot progress. Thus, this one fact stands out from all
these different religions, that there is an Ideal Unit Abstraction,
which is put before us, either in the form of a Person or an Impersonal
Being, or a Law, or a Presence, or an Essence. We are always struggling
to raise ourselves up to that ideal. Every human being, whosoever and
wheresoever he may be, has an ideal of infinite power. Every human being
has an ideal of infinite pleasure. Most of the works that we find around
us, the activities displayed everywhere, are due to the struggle for
this infinite power or this infinite pleasure. But a few quickly
discover that although they are struggling for infinite power, it is not
through the senses that it can be reached. They find out very soon that
that infinite pleasure is not to be got through the senses, or, in other
words, the senses are too limited, and the body is too limited, to
express the Infinite. To manifest the Infinite through the finite is
impossible, and sooner or later, man learns to give up the attempt to
express the Infinite through the finite. This giving up, this
renunciation of the attempt, is the background of ethics. Renunciation
is the very basis upon which ethics stands. There never was an ethical
code preached which had not renunciation for its basis.

Ethics always says, "Not I, but thou." Its motto is, "Not self, but
non-self." The vain ideas of individualism, to which man clings when he
is trying to find that Infinite Power or that Infinite Pleasure through
the senses, have to be given up — say the laws of ethics. You have to
put *yourself* last, and others before you. The senses say, "Myself
first." Ethics says, "I must hold myself last." Thus, all codes of
ethics are based upon this renunciation; destruction, not construction,
of the individual on the material plane. That Infinite will never find
expression upon the material plane, nor is it possible or thinkable.

So, man has to give up the plane of matter and rise to other spheres to
seek a deeper expression of that Infinite. In this way the various
ethical laws are being moulded, but all have that one central idea,
eternal self-abnegation. Perfect self-annihilation is the ideal of
ethics. People are startled if they are asked not to think of their
individualities. They seem so very much afraid of losing what they call
their individuality. At the same time, the same men would declare the
highest ideals of ethics to be right, never for a moment thinking that
the scope, the goal, the idea of all ethics is the destruction, and not
the building up, of the individual.

Utilitarian standards cannot explain the ethical relations of men, for,
in the first place, we cannot derive any ethical laws from
considerations of utility. Without the supernatural sanction as it is
called, or the perception of the superconscious as I prefer to term it,
there can be no ethics. Without the struggle towards the Infinite there
can be no ideal. Any system that wants to bind men down to the limits of
their own societies is not able to find an explanation for the ethical
laws of mankind. The Utilitarian wants us to give up the struggle after
the Infinite, the reaching-out for the Supersensuous, as impracticable
and absurd, and, in the same breath, asks us to take up ethics and do
good to society. Why should we do good? Doing good is a secondary
consideration. We must have an ideal. Ethics itself is not the end, but
the means to the end. If the end is not there, why should we be ethical?
Why should I do good to other men, and not injure them? If happiness is
the goal of mankind, why should I not make myself happy and others
unhappy? What prevents me? In the second place, the basis of utility is
too narrow. All the current social forms and methods are derived from
society as it exists, but what right has the Utilitarian to assume that
society is eternal? Society did not exist ages ago, possibly will not
exist ages hence. Most probably it is one of the passing stages through
which we are going towards a higher evolution, and any law that is
derived from society alone cannot be eternal, cannot cover the whole
ground of man's nature. At best, therefore, Utilitarian theories can
only work under present social conditions. Beyond that they have no
value. But a morality an ethical code, derived from religion and
spirituality, has the whole of infinite man for its scope. It takes up
the individual, but its relations are to the Infinite, and it takes up
society also — because society is nothing but numbers of these
individuals grouped together; and as it applies to the individual and
*his* eternal relations, it must necessarily apply to the whole of
society, in whatever condition it may be at any given time. Thus we see
that there is always the necessity of spiritual religion for mankind.
Man cannot always think of matter, however pleasurable it may be.

It has been said that too much attention to things spiritual disturbs
our practical relations in this world. As far back as in the days of the
Chinese sage Confucius, it was said, "Let us take care of this world:
and then, when we have finished with this world, we will take care of
other world." It is very well that we should *take care* of this world.
But if too much attention to the spiritual may affect a little our
practical relations, too much attention to the so-called practical hurts
us here and hereafter. It makes us materialistic. For man is not to
regard *nature* as his goal, but something higher.

*Man is man so long as he is struggling to rise above nature*, and this
nature is both internal and external. Not only does it comprise the laws
that govern the particles of matter outside us and in our bodies, but
also the more subtle nature within, which is, in fact, the motive power
governing the external. It is good and very grand to conquer external
nature, but grander still to conquer our internal nature. It is grand
and good to know the laws that govern the stars and planets; it is
infinitely grander and better to know the laws that govern the passions,
the feelings, the will, of mankind. This conquering of the inner man,
understanding the secrets of the subtle workings that are within the
human mind, and knowing its wonderful secrets, belong entirely to
religion. Human nature — the ordinary human nature, I mean — wants to
see big material facts. The ordinary man cannot understand anything that
is subtle. Well has it been said that the masses admire the lion that
kills a thousand lambs, never for a moment thinking that it is death to
the lambs. Although a momentary triumph for the lion; because they find
pleasure only in manifestations of physical strength. Thus it is with
the ordinary run of mankind. They understand and find pleasure in
everything that is external. But in every society there is a section
whose pleasures are not in the senses, but beyond, and who now and then
catch glimpses of something higher than matter and struggle to reach it.
And if we read the history of nations between the lines, we shall always
find that the rise of a nation comes with an increase in the number of
such men; and the fall begins when this pursuit after the Infinite,
however vain Utilitarians may call it, has ceased. That is to say, the
mainspring of the strength of every race lies in its spirituality, and
the death of that race begins the day that spirituality wanes and
materialism gains ground.

Thus, apart from the solid facts and truths that we may learn from
religion, apart from the comforts that we may gain from it, religion, as
a science, as a study, is the greatest and healthiest exercise that the
human mind can have. This pursuit of the Infinite, this struggle to
grasp the Infinite, this effort to get beyond the limitations of the
senses — out of matter, as it were — and to evolve the spiritual man —
this striving day and night to make the Infinite one with our being —
this struggle itself is the grandest and most glorious that man can
make. Some persons find the greatest pleasure in eating. We have no
right to say that they should not. Others find the greatest pleasure in
possessing certain things. We have no right to say that they should not.
But they also have no right to say "no" to the man who finds his highest
pleasure in spiritual thought. The lower the organisation, the greater
the pleasure in the senses. Very few men can eat a meal with the same
gusto as a dog or a wolf. But all the pleasures of the dog or the wolf
have gone, as it were into the senses. The lower types of humanity in
all nations find pleasure in the senses, while the cultured and the
educated find it in thought, in philosophy, in arts and sciences.
Spirituality is a still higher plane. The subject being infinite, that
plane is the highest, and the pleasure there is the highest for those
who can appreciate it. So, even on the utilitarian ground that man is to
seek for pleasure, he should cultivate religious thought, for it is the
highest pleasure that exists. Thus religion, as a study, seems to me to
be absolutely necessary.

We can see it in its effects. It is the greatest motive power that moves
the human mind.. No other ideal can put into us the same mass of energy
as the spiritual. So far as human history goes, it is obvious to all of
us that this has been the case and that its powers are not dead. I do
not deny that men, on simply utilitarian grounds, can be very good and
moral. There have been many great men in this world perfectly sound,
moral, and good, simply on utilitarian grounds. But the world-movers,
men who bring, as It were, a mass of magnetism into the world whose
spirit works in hundreds and in thousands, whose life ignites others
with a spiritual fire — such men, we always find, have that spiritual
background. Their motive power came from religion. Religion is the
greatest motive power for realising that infinite energy which is the
birthright and nature of every man. In building up character in making
for everything that is good and great, in bringing peace to others and
peace to one's own self, religion is the highest motive power and,
therefore, ought to be studied from that standpoint. Religion must be
studied on a broader basis than formerly. All narrow limited, fighting
ideas of religion have to go. All sect ideas and tribal or national
ideas of religion must be given up. That each tribe or nation should
have its own particular God and think that every other is wrong is a
superstition that should belong to the past. All such ideas must be
abandoned.

As the human mind broadens, its spiritual steps broaden too. The time
has already come when a man cannot record a thought without its reaching
to all corners of the earth; by merely physical means, we have come into
touch with the whole world; so the future religions of the world have to
become as universal, as wide.

The religious ideals of the future must embrace all that exists in the
world and is good and great, and, at the same time, have infinite scope
for future development. All that was good in the past must be preserved;
and the doors must be kept open for future additions to the already
existing store. Religions must also be inclusive and not look down with
contempt upon one another because their particular ideals of God are
different. In my life I have seen a great many spiritual men, a great
many sensible persons, who did not believe in God at all that is to say,
not in our sense of the word. Perhaps they understood God better than we
can ever do. The Personal idea of God or the Impersonal, the Infinite,
Moral Law, or the Ideal Man — these all have to come under the
definition of religion. And when religions have become thus broadened,
their power for good will have increased a hundredfold. Religions,
having tremendous power in them, have often done more injury to the
world than good, simply on account of their narrowness and limitations.

Even at the present time we find many sects and societies, with almost
the same ideas, fighting each other, because one does not want to set
forth those ideas in precisely the same way as another. Therefore,
religions will have to broaden. Religious ideas will have to become
universal, vast, and infinite; and then alone we shall have the fullest
play of religion, for the power of religion has only just begun to
manifest in the world. It is sometimes said that religions are dying
out, that spiritual ideas are dying out of the world. To me it seems
that they have just begun to grow. The power of religion, broadened and
purified, is going to penetrate every part of human life. So long as
religion was in the hands of a chosen few or of a body of priests, it
was in temples, churches, books, dogmas, ceremonials, forms, and
rituals. But when we come to the real, spiritual, universal concept,
then, and then alone religion will become real and living; it will come
into our very nature, live in our every movement, penetrate every pore
of our society, and be infinitely more a power for good than it has ever
been before.

What is needed is a fellow-feeling between the different types of
religion, seeing that they all stand or fall together, a fellow-feeling
which springs from mutual esteem and mutual respect, and not the
condescending, patronising, niggardly expression of goodwill,
unfortunately in vogue at the present time with many. And above all,
this is needed between types of religious expression coming from the
study of mental phenomena — unfortunately, even now laying exclusive
claim to the name of religion — and those expressions of religion whose
heads, as it were, are penetrating more into the secrets of heaven
though their feet are clinging to earth, I mean the so-called
materialistic sciences.

To bring about this harmony, both will have to make concessions,
sometimes very large, nay more, sometimes painful, but each will find
itself the better for the sacrifice and more advanced in truth. And in
the end, the knowledge which is confined within the domain of time and
space will meet and become one with that which is beyond them both,
where the mind and senses cannot reach — the Absolute, the Infinite, the
One without a second.

</div>
