---
title: MAYA AND ILLUSION

---
<div>

[←](the_real_nature_of_man.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](maya_and_the_evolution_of_the_conception_of_god.htm)

  

CHAPTER III

## MAYA AND ILLUSION

(*Delivered in London*)

Almost all of you have heard of the word Mâyâ. Generally it is used,
though incorrectly, to denote illusion, or delusion, or some such thing.
But the theory of Maya forms one of the pillars upon which the Vedanta
rests; it is, therefore, necessary that it should be properly
understood. I ask a little patience of you, for there is a great danger
of its being misunderstood. The oldest idea of Maya that we find in
Vedic literature is the sense of delusion; but then the real theory had
not been reached. We find such passages as, "Indra through his Maya
assumed various forms." Here it is true the word Maya means something
like magic, and we find various other passages, always taking the same
meaning. The word Maya then dropped out of sight altogether. But in the
meantime the idea was developing. Later, the question was raised: "Why
can't we know this secret of the universe?" And the answer given was
very significant: "Because we talk in vain, and because we are satisfied
with the things of the senses, and because we are running after desires;
therefore, we, as it were, cover the Reality with a mist." Here the word
Maya is not used at all, but we get the idea that the cause of our
ignorance is a kind of mist that has come between us and the Truth. Much
later on, in one of the latest Upanishads, we find the word Maya
reappearing, but this time, a transformation has taken place in it, and
a mass of new meaning has attached itself to the word. Theories had been
propounded and repeated, others had been taken up, until at last the
idea of Maya became fixed. We read in the Shvetâshvatara Upanishad,
"Know nature to be Maya and the Ruler of this Maya is the Lord Himself."
Coming to our philosophers, we find that this word Maya has been
manipulated in various fashions, until we come to the great
Shankarâchârya. The theory of Maya was manipulated a little by the
Buddhists too, but in the hands of the Buddhists it became very much
like what is called Idealism, and that is the meaning that is now
generally given to the word Maya. When the Hindu says the world is Maya,
at once people get the idea that the world is an illusion. This
interpretation has some basis, as coming through the Buddhistic
philosophers, because there was one section of philosophers who did not
believe in the external world at all. But the Maya of the Vedanta, in
its last developed form, is neither Idealism nor Realism, nor is it a
theory. It is a simple statement of facts — what we are and what we see
around us.

As I have told you before, the minds of the people from whom the Vedas
came were intent upon following principles, discovering principles. They
had no time to work upon details or to wait for them; they wanted to go
deep into the heart of things. Something beyond was calling them, as it
were, and they could not wait. Scattered through the Upanishads, we find
that the details of subjects which we now call modern sciences are often
very erroneous, but, at the same time, their principles are correct. For
instance, the idea of ether, which is one of the latest theories of
modern science, is to be found in our ancient literature in forms much
more developed than is the modern scientific theory of ether today, but
it was in principle. When they tried to demonstrate the workings of that
principle, they made many mistakes. The theory of the all-pervading life
principle, of which all life in this universe is but a differing
manifestation, was understood in Vedic times; it is found in the
Brâhmanas. There is a long hymn in the Samhitâs in praise of Prâna of
which all life is but a manifestation. By the by, it may interest some
of you to know that there are theories in the Vedic philosophy about the
origin of life on this earth very similar to those which have been
advanced by some modern European scientists. You, of course, all know
that there is a theory that life came from other planets. It is a
settled doctrine with some Vedic philosophers that life comes in this
way from the moon.

Coming to the principles, we find these Vedic thinkers very courageous
and wonderfully bold in propounding large and generalised theories.
Their solution of the mystery of the universe, from the external world,
was as satisfactory as it could be. The detailed workings of modern
science do not bring the question one step nearer to solution, because
the principles have failed. If the theory of ether failed in ancient
times to give a solution of the mystery of the universe, working out the
details of that ether theory would not bring us much nearer to the
truth. If the theory of all-pervading life failed as a theory of this
universe, it would not mean anything more if worked out in detail, for
the details do not change the principle of the universe. What I mean is
that in their inquiry into the principle, the Hindu thinkers were as
bold, and in some cases, much bolder than the moderns. They made some of
the grandest generalizations that have yet been reached, and some still
remain as theories, which modern science has yet to get even as
theories. For instance, they not only arrived at the ether theory, but
went beyond and classified mind also as a still more rarefied ether.
Beyond that again, they found a still more rarefied ether. Yet that was
no solution, it did not solve the problem. No amount of knowledge of the
external world could solve the problem. "But", says the scientist, "we
are just beginning to know a little: wait a few thousand years and we
shall get the solution." "No," says the Vedantist, for he has proved
beyond all doubt that the mind is limited, that it cannot go beyond
certain limits — beyond time, space, and causation. As no man can jump
out of his own self, so no man can go beyond the limits that have been
put upon him by the laws of time and space. Every attempt to solve the
laws of causation, time, and space would be futile, because the very
attempt would have to be made by taking for granted the existence of
these three. What does the statement of the existence of the world mean,
then? "This world has no existence." What is meant by that? It means
that it has no absolute existence. It exists only in relation to my
mind, to your mind, and to the mind of everyone else. We see this world
with the five senses but if we had another sense, we would see in it
something more. If we had yet another sense, it would appear as
something still different. It has, therefore, no real existence; it has
no unchangeable, immovable, infinite existence. Nor can it be called
non-existence, seeing that it exists, and we slave to work in and
through it. It is a mixture of existence and non-existence.

Coming from abstractions to the common, everyday details of our lives,
we find that our whole life is a contradiction, a mixture of existence
and non-existence. There is this contradiction in knowledge. It seems
that man can know everything, if he only wants to know; but before he
has gone a few steps, he finds an adamantine wall which he cannot pass.
All his work is in a circle, and he cannot go beyond that circle. The
problems which are nearest and dearest to him are impelling him on and
calling, day and night, for a solution, but he cannot solve them,
because he cannot go beyond his intellect. And yet that desire is
implanted strongly in him. Still we know that the only good is to be
obtained by controlling and checking it. With every breath, every
impulse of our heart asks us to be selfish. At the same time, there is
some power beyond us which says that it is unselfishness alone which is
good. Every child is a born optimist; he dreams golden dreams. In youth
he becomes still more optimistic. It is hard for a young man to believe
that there is such a thing as death, such a thing as defeat or
degradation. Old age comes, and life is a mass of ruins. Dreams have
vanished into the air, and the man becomes a pessimist. Thus we go from
one extreme to another, buffeted by nature, without knowing where we are
going. It reminds me of a celebrated song in the *Lalita Vistara*, the
biography of Buddha. Buddha was born, says the book, as the saviour of
mankind, but he forgot himself in the luxuries of his palace. Some
angels came and sang a song to rouse him. And the burden of the whole
song is that we are floating down the river of life which is continually
changing with no stop and no rest. So are our lives, going on and on
without knowing any rest. What are we to do? The man who has enough to
eat and drink is an optimist, and he avoids all mention of misery, for
it frightens him. Tell not to him of the sorrows and the sufferings of
the world; go to him and tell that it is all good. "Yes, I am safe,"
says he. "Look at me! I have a nice house to live in. I do not fear cold
and hunger; therefore do not bring these horrible pictures before me."
But, on the other hand, there are others dying of cold and hunger. If
you go and teach *them* that it is all good, they will not hear you. How
can they wish others to be happy when they are miserable? Thus we are
oscillating between optimism and pessimism.

Then, there is the tremendous fact of death. The whole world is going
towards death; everything dies. All our progress, our vanities, our
reforms, our luxuries, our wealth, our knowledge, have that one end —
death. That is all that is certain. Cities come and go, empires rise and
fall, planets break into pieces and crumble into dust, to be blown about
by the atmospheres of other planets. Thus it has been going on from time
without beginning. Death is the end of everything. Death is the end of
life, of beauty, of wealth, of power, of virtue too. Saints die and
sinners die, kings die and beggars die. They are all going to death, and
yet this tremendous clinging on to life exists. Somehow, we do not know
why, we cling to life; we cannot give it up. And this is Maya.

The mother is nursing a child with great care; all her soul, her life,
is in that child. The child grows, becomes a man, and perchance becomes
a blackguard and a brute, kicks her and beats her every day; and yet the
mother clings to the child; and when her reason awakes, she covers it up
with the idea of love. She little thinks that it is not love, that it is
something which has got hold of her nerves, which she cannot shake off;
however she may try, she cannot shake off the bondage she is in. And
this is Maya.

We are all after the Golden Fleece. Every one of us thinks that this
will be his. Every reasonable man sees that his chance is, perhaps, one
in twenty millions, yet everyone struggles for it. And this is Maya.

Death is stalking day and night over this earth of ours, but at the same
time we think we shall live eternally. A question was once asked of King
Yudhishthira, "What is the most wonderful thing on this earth?" And the
king replied, "Every day people are dying around us, and yet men think
they will never die." And this is Maya.

These tremendous contradictions in our intellect, in our knowledge, yea,
in all the facts of our life face us on all sides. A reformer arises and
wants to remedy the evils that are existing in a certain nation; and
before they have been remedied, a thousand other evils arise in another
place. It is like an old house that is falling; you patch it up in one
place and the ruin extends to another. In India, our reformers cry and
preach against the evils of enforced widowhood. In the West, non-
marriage is the great evil. Help the unmarried on one side; they are
suffering. Help the widows on the other; they are suffering. It is like
chronic rheumatism: you drive from the head, and it goes to the body;
you drive it from there, and it goes to the feet. Reformers arise and
preach that learning, wealth, and culture should not be in the hands of
a select few; and they do their best to make them accessible to all.
These may bring more happiness to some, but, perhaps, as culture comes,
physical happiness lessens. The knowledge of happiness brings the
knowledge of unhappiness. Which way then shall we go? The least amount
of material prosperity that we enjoy is causing the same amount of
misery elsewhere. This is the law. The young, perhaps, do not see it
clearly, but those who have lived long enough and those who have
struggled enough will understand it. And this is Maya. These things are
going on, day and night, and to find a solution of this problem is
impossible. Why should it be so? It is impossible to answer this,
because the question cannot be logically formulated. There is neither
*how* nor *why* in fact; we only know that it *is* and that we cannot
help it. Even to grasp it, to draw an exact image of it in our own mind,
is beyond our power. How can we solve it then?

Maya is a statement of the fact of this universe, of how it is going on.
People generally get frightened when these things are told to them. But
bold we must be. Hiding facts is not the way to find a remedy. As you
all know, a hare hunted by dogs puts its head down and thinks itself
safe; so, when we run into optimism; we do just like the hare, but that
is no remedy. There are objections against this, but you may remark that
they are generally from people who possess many of the good things of
life. In this country (England) it is very difficult to become a
pessimist. Everyone tells me how wonderfully the world is going on, how
progressive; but what he himself is, is his own world. Old questions
arise: Christianity must be the only true religion of the world because
Christian nations are prosperous! But that assertion contradicts itself,
because the prosperity of the Christian nation depends on the misfortune
of non-Christian nations. There must be some to prey on. Suppose the
whole world were to become Christian, then the Christian nations would
become poor, because there would be no non-Christian nations for them to
prey upon. Thus the argument kills itself. Animals are living upon
plants, men upon animals and, worst of all, upon one another, the strong
upon the weak. This is going on everywhere. And this is Maya. What
solution do you find for this? We hear every day many explanations, and
are told that in the long run all will be good. Taking it for granted
that this is possible, why should there be this diabolical way of doing
good? Why cannot good be done through good, instead of through these
diabolical methods? The descendants of the human beings of today will be
happy; but why must there be all this suffering now? There is no
solution. This is Maya.

Again, we often hear that it is one of the features of evolution that it
eliminates evil, and this evil being continually eliminated from the
world, at last only good will remain. That is very nice to hear, and it
panders to the vanity of those who have enough of this world's goods,
who have not a hard struggle to face every day and are not being crushed
under the wheel of this so-called evolution. It is very good and
comforting indeed to such fortunate ones. The common herd may suffer,
but they do not care; let them die, they are of no consequence. Very
good, yet this argument is fallacious from beginning to end. It takes
for granted, in the first place, that manifested good and evil in this
world are two absolute realities. In the second place, it make, at still
worse assumption that the amount of good is an increasing quantity and
the amount of evil is a decreasing quantity. So, if evil is being
eliminated in this way by what they call evolution, there will come a
time when all this evil will be eliminated and what remains will be all
good. Very easy to say, but can it be proved that evil is a lessening
quantity? Take, for instance, the man who lives in a forest, who does
not know how to cultivate the mind, cannot read a book, has not heard of
such a thing as writing. If he is severely wounded, he is soon all right
again; while we die if we get a scratch. Machines are making things
cheap, making for progress and evolution, but millions are crushed, that
one may become rich; while one becomes rich, thousands at the same time
become poorer and poorer, and whole masses of human beings are made
slaves. That way it is going on. The animal man lives in the senses. If
he does not get enough to eat, he is miserable; or if something happens
to his body, he is miserable. In the senses both his misery and his
happiness begin and end. As soon as this man progresses, as soon as his
horizon of happiness increases, his horizon of unhappiness increases
proportionately. The man in the forest does not know what it is to be
jealous, to be in the law courts, to pay taxes, to be blamed by society,
to be ruled over day and night by the most tremendous tyranny that human
diabolism ever invented, which pries into the secrets of every human
heart. He does not know how man becomes a thousand times more diabolical
than any other animal, with all his vain knowledge and with all his
pride. Thus it is that, as we emerge out of the senses, we develop
higher powers of enjoyment, and at the same time we have to develop
higher powers of suffering too. The nerves become finer and capable off
more suffering. In every society, we often find that the ignorant,
common man, when abused, does not feel much, but he feels a good
thrashing. But the gentleman cannot bear a single word of abuse; he has
become so finely nerved. Misery has increased with his susceptibility to
happiness. This does not go much to prove the evolutionist's case. As we
increase our power to be happy, we also increase our power to suffer,
and sometimes I am inclined to think that if we increase our power to
become happy in arithmetical progression, we shall increase, on the
other hand, our power to become miserable in geometrical progression. We
who are progressing know that the more we progress, the more avenues are
opened to pain as well as to pleasure. And this is Maya.

Thus we find that Maya is not a theory for the explanation of the world;
it is simply a statement of facts as they exist, that the very basis of
our being is contradiction, that everywhere we have to move through this
tremendous contradiction, that wherever there is good, there must also
be evil, and wherever there is evil, there must be some good, wherever
there is life, death must follow as its shadow, and everyone who smiles
will have to weep, and vice versa. Nor can this state of things be
remedied. We may verily imagine that there will be a place where there
will be only good and no evil, where we shall only smile and never weep.
This is impossible in the very nature of things; for the conditions will
remain the same. Wherever there is the power of producing a smile in us,
there lurks the power of producing tears. Wherever there is the power of
producing happiness, there lurks somewhere the power of making us
miserable.

Thus the Vedanta philosophy is neither optimistic nor pessimistic. It
voices both these views and takes things as they are. It admits that
this world is a mixture of good and evil, happiness and misery, and that
to increase the one, one must of necessity increase the other. There
will never be a perfectly good or bad world, because the very idea is a
contradiction in terms. The great secret revealed by this analysis is
that good and bad are not two cut-and-dried, separate existences. There
is not one thing in this world of ours which you can label as good and
good alone, and there is not one thing in the universe which you can
label as bad and bad alone. The very same phenomenon which is appearing
to be good now, may appear to be bad tomorrow. The same thing which is
producing misery in one, may produce happiness in another. The fire that
burns the child, may cook a good meal for a starving man. The same
nerves that carry the sensations of misery carry also the sensations of
happiness. The only way to stop evil, therefore, is to stop good also;
there is no other way. To stop death, we shall have to stop life also.
Life without death and happiness without misery are contradictions, and
neither can be found alone, because each of them is but a different
manifestation of the same thing. What I thought to be good yesterday, I
do not think to be good now. When I look back upon my life and see what
were my ideals at different times, I final this to be so. At one time my
ideal was to drive a strong pair of horses; at another time I thought,
if I could make a certain kind of sweetmeat, I should be perfectly
happy; later I imagined that I should be entirely satisfied if I had a
wife and children and plenty of money. Today I laugh at all these ideals
as mere childish nonsense.

The Vedanta says, there must come a time when we shall look back and
laugh at the ideals which make us afraid of giving up our individuality.
Each one of us wants to keep this body for an indefinite time, thinking
we shall be very happy, but there will come a time when we shall laugh
at this idea. Now, if such be the truth, we are in a state of hopeless
contradiction — neither existence nor non-existence, neither misery nor
happiness, but a mixture of them. What, then, is the use of Vedanta and
all other philosophies and religions? And, above all, what is the use of
doing good work? This is a question that comes to the mind. If it is
true that you cannot do good without doing evil, and whenever you try to
create happiness there will always be misery, people will ask you, "What
is the use of doing good?" The answer is in the first place, that we
must work for lessening misery, for that is the only way to make
ourselves happy. Every one of us finds it out sooner or later in our
lives. The bright ones find it out a little earlier, and the dull ones a
little later. The dull ones pay very dearly for the discovery and the
bright ones less dearly. In the second place, we must do our part,
because that is the only way of getting out of this life of
contradiction. Both the forces of good and evil will keep the universe
alive for us, until we awake from our dreams and give up this building
of mud pies. That lesson we shall have to learn, and it will take a
long, long time to learn it.

Attempts have been made in Germany to build a system of philosophy on
the basis that the Infinite has become the finite. Such attempts are
also made in England. And the analysis of the position of these
philosophers is this, that the Infinite is trying to express itself in
this universe, and that there will come a time when the Infinite will
succeed in doing so. It is all very well, and we have used the words
*Infinite* and *manifestation* and *expression*, and so on, but
philosophers naturally ask for a logical fundamental basis for the
statement that the finite can fully express the Infinite. The Absolute
and the Infinite can become this universe only by limitation. Everything
must be limited that comes through the senses, or through the mind, or
through the intellect; and for the limited to be the unlimited is simply
absurd and can never be. The Vedanta, on the other hand, says that it is
true that the Absolute or the Infinite is trying to express itself in
the finite, but there will come a time when it will find that it is
impossible, and it will then have to beat a retreat, and this beating a
retreat means renunciation which is the real beginning of religion.
Nowadays it is very hard even to talk of renunciation. It was said of me
in America that I was a man who came out of a land that had been dead
and buried for five thousand years, and talked of renunciation. So says,
perhaps, the English philosopher. Yet it is true that that is the only
path to religion. Renounce and give up. What did Christ say? "He that
loseth his life for my sake shall find it." Again and again did he
preach renunciation as the only way to perfection. There comes a time
when the mind awakes from this long and dreary dream — the child gives
up its play and wants to go back to its mother. It finds the truth of
the statement, "Desire is never satisfied by the enjoyment of desires,
it only increases the more, as fire, when butter is poured upon it."

This is true of all sense-enjoyments, of all intellectual enjoyments,
and of all the enjoyments of which the human mind is capable. They are
nothing, they are within Maya, within this network beyond which we
cannot go. We may run therein through infinite time and find no end, and
whenever we struggle to get a little enjoyment, a mass of misery falls
upon us. How awful is this! And when I think of it, I cannot but
consider that this theory of Maya, this statement that it is all Maya,
is the best and only explanation. What an amount of misery there is in
this world; and if you travel among various nations you will find that
one nation attempts to cure its evils by one means, and another by
another. The very same evil has been taken up by various races, and
attempts have been made in various ways to check it, yet no nation has
succeeded. If it has been minimised at one point, a mass of evil has
been crowded at another point. Thus it goes. The Hindus, to keep up a
high standard of chastity in the race, have sanctioned child-marriage,
which in the long run has degraded the race. At the same time, I cannot
deny that this child-marriage makes the race more chaste. What would you
have? If you want the nation to be more chaste, you weaken men and women
physically by child-marriage. On the other hand, are you in England any
better off? No, because chastity is the life of a nation. Do you not
find in history that the first death-sign of a nation has been
unchastity? When that has entered, the end of the race is in sight.
Where shall we get a solution of these miseries then? If parents select
husbands and wives for their children, then this evil is minimised. The
daughters of India are more practical than sentimental. But very little
of poetry remains in their lives. Again, if people select their own
husbands and wives, that does not seem to bring much happiness. The
Indian woman is generally very happy; there are not many cases of
quarrelling between husband and wife. On the other hand in the United
States, where the greatest liberty obtains, the number of unhappy homes
and marriages is large. Unhappiness is here, there, and everywhere. What
does it show? That, after all, not much happiness has been gained by all
these ideals. We all struggle for happiness and as soon as we get a
little happiness on one side, on the other side there comes unhappiness.

Shall we not work to do good then? Yes, with more zest than ever, but
what this knowledge will do for us is to break down our fanaticism. The
Englishman will no more be a fanatic and curse the Hindu. He will learn
to respect the customs of different nations. There will be less of
fanaticism and more of real work. Fanatics cannot work, they waste
three-fourths of their energy. It is the level-headed, calm, practical
man who works. So, the power to work will increase from this idea.
Knowing that this is the state of things, there will be more patience.
The sight of misery or of evil will not be able to throw us off our
balance and make us run after shadows. Therefore, patience will come to
us, knowing that the world will have to go on in its own way. If, for
instance, all men have become good, the animals will have in the
meantime evolved into men, and will have to pass through the same state,
and so with the plants. But only one thing is certain; the mighty river
is rushing towards the ocean, and all the drops that constitute the
stream will in time be drawn into that boundless ocean. So, in this
life, with all its miseries and sorrows, its joys and smiles and tears,
one thing is certain, that all things are rushing towards their goal,
and it: is only a question of time when you and I, and plants and
animals, and every particles of life that exists must reach the Infinite
Ocean of Perfection, must attain to Freedom, to God.

Let me repeat, once more, that the Vedantic position is neither
pessimism nor optimism. It does not say that this world is all evil or
all good. It says that our evil is of no less value than our good, and
our good of no more value than our evil. They are bound together. This
is the world, and knowing this, you work with patience. What for? Why
should we work? If this is the state of things, what shall we do? Why
not become agnostics? The modern agnostics also know there is no
solution of this problem, no getting out of this evil of Maya, as we say
in our language; therefore they tell us to be satisfied and enjoy life.
Here, again, is a mistake, a tremendous mistake, a most illogical
mistake. And it is this. What do you mean by life? Do you mean only the
life of the senses? In this, every one of us differs only slightly from
the brutes. I am sure that no one is present here whose life is only in
the senses. Then, this present life means something more than that. Our
feelings, thoughts, and aspirations are all part and parcel of our life;
and is not the struggle towards the area, ideal, towards perfection, one
of the most important components of what we call life? According to the
agnostics, we must enjoy life as it is. But this life means, above all,
this search after the ideal; the essence of life is going towards
perfection. We must have that, and, therefore, we cannot be agnostics or
take the world as it appears. The agnostic position takes this life,
*minus* the ideal component, to be all that exists. And this, the
agnostic claims, cannot be reached, therefore he must give up the
search. This is what is called Maya — this nature, this universe.

All religions are more or less attempts to get beyond nature — the
crudest or the most developed, expressed through mythology or symbology,
stories of gods, angels or demons, or through stories of saints or
seers, great men or prophets, or through the abstractions of philosophy
— all have that one object, all are trying to get beyond these
limitations. In one word, they are all struggling towards freedom. Man
feels, consciously or unconsciously, that he is bound; he is not what he
wants to be. It was taught to him at the very moment he began to look
around. That very instant he learnt that he was bound, and be also found
that there was something in him which wanted to fly beyond, where the
body could not follow, but which was as yet chained down by this
limitation. Even in the lowest of religious ideas, where departed
ancestors and other spirits — mostly violent and cruel, lurking about
the houses of their friends, fond of bloodshed and strong drink — are
worshipped, even there we find that one common factor, that of freedom.
The man who wants to worship the gods sees in them, above all things,
greater freedom than in himself. If a door is closed, he thinks the gods
can get through it, and that walls have no limitations for them. This
idea of freedom increases until it comes to the ideal of a Personal God,
of which the central concept is that He is a Being beyond the limitation
of nature, of Maya. I see before me, as it were, that in some of those
forest retreats this question is being, discussed by those ancient sages
of India; and in one of them, where even the oldest and the holiest fail
to reach the solutions a young man stands up in the midst of them, and
declares, "Hear, ye children of immortality, hear, ye who live in the
highest places, I have found the way. By knowing Him who is beyond
darkness we can go beyond death."

This Maya is everywhere. It is terrible. Yet we have to work through it.
The man who says that he will work when the world has become all good
and then he will enjoy bliss is as likely to succeed as the man who sits
beside the Ganga and says, "I will ford the river when all the water has
run into the ocean." The way is not with Maya, but against it. This is
another fact to learn. We are not born as helpers of nature, but
competitors with nature. We are its bond-masters, but we bind ourselves
down. Why is this house here? Nature did not build it. Nature says, go
and live in the forest. Man says, I will build a house and fight with
nature, and he does so. The whole history of humanity is a continuous
fight against the so-called laws of nature, and man gains in the end.
Coming to the internal world, there too the same fight is going on, this
fight between the animal man and the spiritual man, between light and
darkness; and here too man becomes victorious. He, as it were, cuts his
way out of nature to freedom.

We see, then, that beyond this Maya the Vedantic philosophers find
something which is not bound by Maya; and if we can get there, we shall
not be bound by Maya. This idea is in some form or other the common
property of all religions. But, with the Vedanta, it is only the
beginning of religion and not the end. The idea of a Personal God, the
Ruler and Creator of this universe, as He has been styled, the Ruler of
Maya, or nature, is not the end of these Vedantic ideas; it is only the
beginning. The idea grows and grows until the Vedantist finds that He
who, he thought, was standing outside, is he himself and is in reality
within. He is the one who is free, but who through limitation thought he
was bound.

</div>
