---
title: UNITY IN DIVERSITY

---
<div>

[←](realisation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_freedom_of_the_soul.htm)

  

CHAPTER IX

## UNITY IN DIVERSITY

(*Delivered in London, 3rd November 1896*)

"The Self-existent One projected the senses outwards and, therefore, a
man looks outward, not within himself. A certain wise one, desiring
immortality, with inverted senses, perceived the Self within." As I have
already said, the first inquiry that we find in the Vedas was concerning
outward things, and then a new idea came that the reality of things is
not to be found in the external world; not by looking outwards, but by
turning the eyes, as it is literally expressed, inwards. And the word
used for the Soul is very significant: it is He who has gone inward, the
innermost reality of our being, the heart centre, the core, from which,
as it were, everything comes out; the central sun of which the mind, the
body, the sense-organs, and everything else we have are but rays going
outwards. "Men of childish intellect, ignorant persons, run after
desires which are external, and enter the trap of far-reaching death,
but the wise, understanding immortality, never seek for the Eternal in
this life of finite things." The same idea is here made clear that in
this external world, which is full of finite things, it is impossible to
see and find the Infinite. The Infinite must be sought in that alone
which is infinite, and the only thing infinite about us is that which is
within us, our own soul. Neither the body, nor the mind, not even our
thoughts, nor the world we see around us, are infinite. The Seer, He to
whom they all belong, the Soul of man, He who is awake in the internal
man, alone is infinite, and to seek for the Infinite Cause of this whole
universe we must go there. In the Infinite Soul alone we can find it.
"What is here is there too, and what is there is here also. He who sees
the manifold goes from death to death." We have seen how at first there
was the desire to go to heaven. When these ancient Aryans became
dissatisfied with the world around them, they naturally thought that
after death they would go to some place where there would be all
happiness without any misery; these places they multiplied and called
Svargas — the word may be translated as heavens — where there would be
joy for ever, the body would become perfect, and also the mind, and
there they would live with their forefathers. But as soon as philosophy
came, men found that this was impossible and absurd. The very idea of an
infinite in place would be a contradiction in terms, as a place must
begin and continue in time. Therefore they had to give up that idea.
They found out that the gods who lived in these heavens had once been
human beings on earth, who through their good works had become gods, and
the godhoods, as they call them, were different states, different
positions; none of the gods spoken of in the Vedas are permanent
individuals.

For instance, Indra and Varuna are not the names of certain persons, but
the names of positions as governors and so on. The Indra who had lived
before is not the same person as the Indra of the present day; he has
passed away, and another man from earth has filled his place. So with
all the other gods. These are certain positions, which are filled
successively by human souls who have raised themselves to the condition
of gods, and yet even they die. In the old Rig-Veda we find the word
"immortality" used with regard to these gods, but later on it is dropped
entirely, for they found that immortality which is beyond time and space
cannot be spoken of with regard to any physical form, however subtle it
may be. However fine it may be, it must have a beginning in time and
space, for the necessary factors that enter into the make-up of form are
in space. Try to think of a form without space: it is impossible. Space
is one of the materials, as it were, which make up the form, and this is
continually changing Space and time are in Maya, and this idea is
expressed in the line — "What is hole, that is there too." If there are
these gods, they must be bound by the same laws that apply here, and all
laws involve destruction and renewal again and again. These laws are
moulding matter into different forms, and crushing them out again.
Everything born must die; and so, if there are heavens, the same laws
must hold good there.

In this world we find that all happiness is followed by misery as its
shadow. Life has its shadow, death. They must go together, because they
are not contradictory, not two separate existences, but different
manifestations of the same unit, life and death, sorrow and happiness,
good and evil. The dualistic conception that good and evil are two
separate entities, and that they are both going on eternally is absurd
on the face of it. They are the diverse manifestations of one and the
same fact, one time appearing as bad, and at another time as good. The
difference does not exist in kind, but only in degree. They differ from
each other in degree of intensity. We find as a fact that the same nerve
systems carry good and bad sensations alike, and when the nerves are
injured, neither sensation comes to us. If a certain nerve is paralysed,
we do not get the pleasurable feelings that used to come along that
wires and at the same time we do not get the painful feelings either.
They are never two, but the same. Again, the same thing produces
pleasure and pain at different times of life. The same phenomenon will
produce pleasure in one, and pain in another. The eating of meat
produces pleasure to a man, but pain to the animal which is eaten. There
has never been anything which gives pleasure to all alike. Some are
pleased, others displeased. So on it will go. Therefore, this duality of
existence is denied. And what follows? I told you in my last lecture
that we can never have ultimately everything good on this earth and
nothing bad. It may have disappointed and frightened some of you, but I
cannot help it, and I am open to conviction when I am shown to the
contrary; but until that can be proved to me, and I can find that it is
true, I cannot say so.

The general argument against my statement, and apparently a very
convincing one, is this that in the course of evolution, all that is
evil in what we see around us is gradually being eliminated, and the
result is that if this elimination continues for millions of years, a
time will come when all the evil will have been extirpated, and the good
alone will remain. This is apparently a very sound argument. Would to
God it were true! But there is a fallacy in it, and it is this that it
takes for granted that both good and evil are things that are eternally
fixed. It takes for granted that there is a definite mass of evil, which
may be represented by a hundred, and likewise of good, and that this
mass of evil is being diminished every day, leaving only the good. But
is it so? The history of the world shows that evil is a continuously
increasing quantity, as well as good. Take the lowest man; he lives in
the forest. His sense of enjoyment is very small, and so also is his
power to suffer. His misery is entirely on the sense-plane. If he does
not get plenty of food, he is miserable; but give him plenty of food and
freedom to rove and to hunt, and he is perfectly happy. His happiness
consists only in the senses, and so does his misery also. But if that
man increases in knowledge, his happiness will increase, the intellect
will open to him, and his sense-enjoyment will evolve into intellectual
enjoyment. He will feel pleasure in reading a beautiful poem, and a
mathematical problem will be of absorbing interest to him. But, with
these, the inner nerves will become more and more susceptible to
miseries of mental pain, of which the savage does not think. Take a very
simple illustration. In Tibet there is no marriage, and there is no
jealousy, yet we know that marriage is a much higher state. The Tibetans
have not known the wonderful enjoyment, the blessing of chastity, the
happiness of having a chaste, virtuous wife, or a chaste, virtuous
husband. These people cannot feel that. And similarly they do not feel
the intense jealousy of the chaste wife or husband, or the misery caused
by unfaithfulness on either side, with all the heart-burnings and
sorrows which believers in chastity experience. On one side, the latter
gain happiness, but on the other, they suffer misery too.

Take your country which is the richest in the world, and which is more
luxurious than any other, and see how intense is the misery, how many
more lunatics you have, compared with other races, only because the
desires are so keen. A man must keep up a high standard of living, and
the amount of money he spends in one year would be a fortune to a man in
India. You cannot preach to him of simple living because society demands
so much of him. The wheel of society is rolling on; it stops not for the
widow's tears or the orphans' wails. This is the state of things
everywhere. Your sense of enjoyment is developed, your society is very
much more beautiful than some others. You have so many more things to
enjoy. But those who have fewer have much less misery. You can argue
thus throughout, the higher the ideal you have in the brain, the greater
is your enjoyment, and the more profound your misery. One is like the
shadow of the other. That the evils are being eliminated may be true,
but if so, the good also must be dying out. But are not evils
multiplying fast, and good diminishing, if I may so put it? If good
increases in arithmetical progression, evil increase in geometrical
progression. And this is Maya. This is neither optimism nor pessimism.
Vedanta does not take the position that this world is only a miserable
one. That would be untrue. At the same time, it is a mistake to say that
this world is full of happiness and blessings. So it is useless to tell
children that this world is all good, all flowers, all milk and honey.
That is what we have all dreamt. At the same time it is erroneous to
think, because one man has suffered more than another, that all is evil.
It is this duality, this play of good and evil that makes our world of
experiences. At the same time the Vedanta says, "Do not think that good
and evil are two, are two separate essences, for they are one and the
same thing, appearing in different degrees and in different guises and
producing differences of feeling in the same mind." So, the first
thought of the Vedanta is the finding of unity in the external; the One
Existence manifesting Itself, however different It may appear in
manifestation. Think of the old crude theory of the Persians — two gods
creating this world, the good god doing everything that is good, and the
bad one, everything bad. On the very face of it, you see the absurdity,
for if it be carried out, every law of nature must have two parts, one
of which is manipulated by one god, and then he goes away and the other
god manipulates the other part. There the difficulty comes that both are
working in the same world, and these two gods keep themselves in harmony
by injuring one portion and doing good to another. This is a crude case,
of course, the crudest way of expressing the duality of existence. But,
take the more advanced, the more abstract theory that this world is
partly good and partly bad. This also is absurd, arguing from the same
standpoint. It is the law of unity that gives us our food, and it is the
same law that kills many through accidents or misadventure.

We find, then, that this world is neither optimistic nor pessimistic; it
is a mixture of both, and as we go on we shall find that the whole blame
is taken away from nature and put upon our own shoulders. At the same
time the Vedanta shows the way out, but not by denial of evil, because
it analyses boldly the fact as it is and does not seek to conceal
anything. It is not hopeless; it is not agnostic. It finds out a remedy,
but it wants to place that remedy on adamantine foundations: not by
shutting the child's mouth and blinding its eyes with something which is
untrue, and which the child will find out in a few days. I remember when
I was young, a young man's father died and left him poorly off, with a
large family to support, and he found that his father's friends were
unwilling to help him. He had a conversation with a clergyman who
offered this consolation, "Oh, it is all good, all is sent for our
good." That is the old method of trying to put a piece of gold leaf on
an old sore. It is a confession of weakness, of absurdity. The young man
went away, and six months afterwards a son was born to the clergyman,
and he gave a thanksgiving party to which the young man was invited. The
clergyman prayed, "Thank God for His mercies." And the young man stood
up and said, "Stop, this is all misery." The clergyman asked, "Why?"
"Because when my father died you said it was good, though apparently
evil; so now, this is apparently good, but really evil." Is this the way
to cure the misery of the world? Be good and have mercy on those who
suffer. Do not try to patch it up, nothing will cure this world; go
beyond it.

This is a world of good and evil. Wherever there is good, evil follows,
but beyond and behind all these manifestations, all these
contradictions, the Vedanta finds out that Unity. It says, "Give up what
is evil and give up what is good." What remains then? Behind good and
evil stands something which is yours, the real you, beyond every evil,
and beyond every good too, and it is that which is manifesting itself as
good and bad. Know that first, and then and then alone you will be a
true optimist, and not before; for then you will be able to control
everything. Control these manifestations and you will be at liberty to
manifest the real "you". First be master of yourself, stand up and be
free, go beyond the pale of these laws, for these laws do not absolutely
govern you, they are only part of your being. First find out that you
are not the slave of nature, never were and never will be; that this
nature, infinite as you may think it, is only finite, a drop in the
ocean, and your Soul is the ocean; you are beyond the stars, the sun,
and the. They are like mere bubbles compared with your infinite being.
Know that, and you will control both good and evil. Then alone the whole
vision will change and you will stand up and say, "How beautiful is good
and how wonderful is evil!"

That is what the Vedanta teaches. It does not propose any slipshod
remedy by covering wounds with gold leaf and the more the wound festers,
putting on more gold leaf. This life is a hard fact; work your way
through it boldly, though it may be adamantine; no matter, the soul is
stronger. It lays no responsibility on little gods; for you are the
makers of your own fortunes. You make yourselves suffer, you make good
and evil, and it is you who put your hands before your eyes and say it
is dark. Take your hands away and see the light; you are effulgent, you
are perfect already, from the very beginning. We now understand the
verse: "He goes from death to death who sees the many here." See that
One and be free.

How are we to see it? This mind, so deluded, so weak, so easily led,
even this mind can be strong and may catch a glimpse of that knowledge,
that Oneness, which saves us from dying again and again. As rain falling
upon a mountain flows in various streams down the sides of the mountain,
so all the energies which you see here are from that one Unit. It has
become manifold falling upon Maya. Do not run after the manifold; go
towards the One. "He is in all that moves; He is in all that is pure; He
fills the universe; He is in the sacrifice; He is the guest in the
house; He is in man, in water, in animals, in truth; He is the Great
One. As fire coming into this world is manifesting itself in various
forms, even so, that one Soul of the universe is manifesting Himself in
all these various forms. As air coming into this universe manifests
itself in various forms, even so, the One Soul of all souls, of all
beings, is manifesting Himself in all forms." This is true for you when
you have understood this Unity, and not before. Then is all optimism,
because He is seen everywhere. The question is that if all this be true
that that Pure One — the Self, the Infinite — has entered all this, how
is it that He suffers, how is it that He becomes miserable, impure? He
does not, says the Upanishad. "As the sun is the cause of the eyesight
of every being, yet is not made defective by the defect in any eye, even
so the Self of all is not affected by the miseries of the body, or by
any misery that is around you." I may have some disease and see
everything yellow, but the sun is not affected by it. "He is the One,
the Creator of all, the Ruler of all, the Internal Soul of every being —
He who makes His Oneness manifold. Thus sages who realise Him as the
Soul of their souls, unto them belongs eternal peace; unto none else,
unto none else. He who in this world of evanescence finds Him who never
changes, he who in this universe of death finds that One Life, he who in
this manifold finds that Oneness, and all those who realise Him as the
Soul of their souls, to them belongs eternal peace; unto none else, unto
none else. Where to find Him in the external world, where to find Him in
the suns, and moons, and stars? There the sun cannot illumine, nor the
moon, nor the stars, the flash of lightning cannot illumine the place;
what to speak of this mortal fire? He shining, everything else shines.
It is His light that they have borrowed, and He is shining through
them." Here is another beautiful simile. Those of you who have been in
India and have seen how the banyan tree comes from one root and spreads
itself far around, will understand this. He is that banyan tree; He is
the root of all and has branched out until He has become this universe,
and however far He extends, every one of these trunks and branches is
connected.

Various heavens are spoken of in the Brâhmana portions of the Vedas, but
the philosophical teaching of the Upanishads gives up the idea of going
to heaven. Happiness is not in this heaven or in that heaven, it is in
the soul; places do not signify anything. Here is another passage which
shows the different states of realisation "In the heaven of the
forefathers, as a man sees things in a dream, so the Real Truth is
seen." As in dreams we see things hazy and not so distinct, so we see
the Reality there. There is another heaven called the Gandharva, in
which it is still less clear; as a man sees his own reflection in the
water, so is the Reality seen there. The highest heaven, of which the
Hindus conceive is called the Brahmaloka; and in this, the Truth is seen
much more clearly, like light and shade, but not yet quite distinctly.
But as a man sees his own face in a mirror, perfect, distinct, and
clear, so is the Truth shining in the soul of man. The highest heaven,
therefore, is in our own souls; the greatest temple of worship is the
human soul, greater than all heavens, says the Vedanta; for in no heaven
anywhere, can we understand the reality as distinctly and clearly as in
this life, in our own soul. Changing places does not help one much. I
thought while I was in India that the cave would give me clearer vision.
I found it was not so. Then I thought the forest would do so, then,
Varanasi. But the same difficulty existed everywhere, because we make
our own worlds. If I am evil, the whole world is evil to me. That is
what the Upanishad says. And the same thing applies to all worlds. If I
die and go to heaven, I should find the same, for until I am pure it is
no use going to caves, or forests, or to Varanasi, or to heaven, and if
I have polished my mirror, it does not matter where I live, I get the
Reality just as It is. So it is useless, running hither and thither, and
spending energy in vain, which should be spent only in polishing the
mirror. The same idea is expressed again: "None sees Him, none sees His
form with the eyes. It is in the mind, in the pure mind, that He is
seen, and this immortality is gained."

Those who were at the summer lectures on Râja-Yoga will be interested to
know that what was taught then was a different kind of Yoga. The Yoga
which we are now considering consists chiefly in controlling the senses.
When the senses are held as slaves by the human soul, when they can no
longer disturb the mind, then the Yogi has reached the goal. "When all
vain desires of the heart have been given up, then this very mortal
becomes immortal, then he becomes one with God even here. When all the
knots of the heart are cut asunder, then the mortal becomes immortal,
and he enjoys Brahman here." Here, on this earth, nowhere else.

A few words ought to be said here. You will generally hear that this
Vedanta, this philosophy and other Eastern systems, look only to
something beyond, letting go the enjoyments and struggle of this life.
This idea is entirely wrong. It is only ignorant people who do not know
anything of Eastern thought, and never had brain enough to understand
anything of its real teaching, that tell you so. On the contrary, we
read in our scriptures that our philosophers do not want to go to other
worlds, but depreciate them as places where people weep and laugh for a
little while only and then die. As long as we are weak we shall have to
go through these experiences; but whatever is true, is here, and that is
the human soul. And this also is insisted upon, that by committing
suicide, we cannot escape the inevitable; we cannot evade it. But the
right path is hard to find. The Hindu is just as practical as the
Western, only we differ in our views of life. The one says, build a good
house, let us have good clothes and food, intellectual culture, and so
on, for this is the whole of life; and in that he is immensely
practical. But the Hindu says, true knowledge of the world means
knowledge of the soul, metaphysics; and he wants to enjoy that life. In
America there was a great agnostic, a very noble man, a very good man,
and a very fine speaker. He lectured on religion, which he said was of
no use; why bother our heads about other worlds? He employed this
simile; we have an orange here, and we want to squeeze all the juice out
of it. I met him once and said, "I agree with you entirely. I have some
fruit, and I too want to squeeze out the juice. Our difference lies in
the choice of the fruit. You want an orange, and I prefer a mango. You
think it is enough to live here and eat and drink and have a little
scientific knowledge; but you have no right to say that that will suit
all tastes. Such a conception is nothing to me. If I had only to learn
how an apple falls to the ground, or how an electric current shakes my
nerves, I would commit suicide. I want to understand the heart of
things, the very kernel itself. Your study is the manifestation of life,
mine is the life itself. My philosophy says you must know that and drive
out from your mind all thoughts of heaven and hell and all other
superstitions, even though they exist in the same sense that this world
exists. I must know the heart of this life, its very essence, what it
is, not only how it works and what are its manifestations. I want the
*why* of everything, I leave the *how* to children. As one of your
countrymen said, 'While I am smoking a cigarette, if I were to write a
book, it would be the science of the cigarette.' It is good and great to
be scientific, God bless them in their search; but when a man says that
is all, he is talking foolishly, not caring to know the *raison d'être*
of life, never studying existence itself. I may argue that all your
knowledge is nonsense, without a basis. You are studying the
manifestations of life, and when I ask you what life is, you say you do
not know. You are welcome to your study, but leave me to mine."

I am practical, very practical, in my own way. So your idea that only
the West is practical is nonsense. You are practical in one way, and I
in another. There are different types of men and minds. If in the East a
man is told that he will find out the truth by standing on one leg all
his life, he will pursue that method. If in the West men hear that there
is a gold mine somewhere in an uncivilised country, thousands will face
the dangers there, in the hope of getting the gold; and, perhaps, only
one succeeds. The same men have heard that they have souls but are
content to leave the care of them to the church. The first man will not
go near the savages, he says it may be dangerous. But if we tell him
that on the top of a high mountain lives a wonderful sage who can give
him knowledge of the soul, he tries to climb up to him, even if he be
killed in the attempt. Both types of men are practical, but the mistake
lies in regarding this world as the whole of life. Yours is the
vanishing point of enjoyment of the senses — there is nothing permanent
in it, it only brings more and more misery — while mine brings eternal
peace.

I do not say your view is wrong, you are welcome to it. Great good and
blessing come out of it, but do not, therefore, condemn my view. Mine
also is practical in its own way. Let us all work on our own plans.
Would to God all of us were equally practical on both sides. I have seen
some scientists who were equally practical, both as scientists and as
spiritual men, and it is my great hope that in course of time the whole
of humanity will be efficient in the same manner. When a kettle of water
is coming to the boil, if you watch the phenomenon, you find first one
bubble rising, and then another and so on, until at last they all join,
and a tremendous commotion takes place. This world is very similar. Each
individual is like a bubble, and the nations, resemble many bubbles.
Gradually these nations are joining, and I am sure the day will come
when separation will vanish and that Oneness to which we are all going
will become manifest. A time must come when every man will be as
intensely practical in the scientific world as in the spiritual, and
then that Oneness, the harmony of Oneness, will pervade the whole world.
The whole of mankind will become Jivanmuktas — free whilst living. We
are all struggling towards that one end through our jealousies and
hatreds, through our love and co-operation. A tremendous stream is
flowing towards the ocean carrying us all along with it; and though like
straws and scraps of paper we may at times float aimlessly about, in the
long run we are sure to join the Ocean of Life and Bliss.

</div>
