---
title: THE FREEDOM OF THE SOUL

---
<div>

[←](unity_in_diversity.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_macrocosm.htm)

  

CHAPTER X

## THE FREEDOM OF THE SOUL

(*Delivered in London, 5th November 1896*)

The Katha Upanishad, which we have been studying, was written much later
than that to which we now turn — the Chhândogya. The language is more
modern, and the thought more organised. In the older Upanishads the
language is very archaic, like that of the hymn portion of the Vedas,
and one has to wade sometimes through quite a mass of unnecessary things
to get at the essential doctrines. The ritualistic literature about
which I told you which forms the second division of the Vedas, has left
a good deal of its mark upon this old Upanishad, so that more than half
of it is still ritualistic. There is, however, one great gain in
studying the very old Upanishads. You trace, as it were, the historical
growth of spiritual ideas. In the more recent Upanishads, the spiritual
ideas have been collected and brought into one place; as in the Bhagavad
Gitâ, for instance, which we may, perhaps, look upon as the last of the
Upanishads, you do not find any inkling of these ritualistic ideas. The
Gita is like a bouquet composed of the beautiful flowers of spiritual
truths collected from the Upanishads. But in the Gita you cannot study
the rise of the spiritual ideas, you cannot trace them to their source.
To do that, as has been pointed out by many, you must study the Vedas.
The great idea of holiness that has been attached to these books has
preserved them, more than any other book in the world, from mutilation.
In them, thoughts at their highest and at their lowest have all been
preserved, the essential and the non-essential, the most ennobling
teachings and the simplest matters of detail stand side by side; for
nobody has dared to touch them. Commentators came and tried to smooth
them down and to bring out wonderful new ideas from the old things; they
tried to find spiritual ideas in even the most ordinary statements, but
the texts remained, and as such, they are the most wonderful historical
study. We all know that in the scriptures of every religion changes were
made to suit the growing spirituality of later times; one word was
changed here and another put in there, and so on. This, probably, has
not been done with the Vedic literature, or if ever done, it is almost
imperceptible. So we have this great advantage, we are able to study
thoughts in their original significance, to note how they developed, how
from materialistic ideas finer and finer spiritual ideas are evolved,
until they attained their greatest height in the Vedanta. Descriptions
of some of the old manners and customs are also there, but they do not
appear much in the Upanishads. The language used is peculiar, terse,
mnemonic.

The writers of these books simply jotted down these lines as helps to
remember certain facts which they supposed were already well known. In a
narrative, perhaps, which they are telling, they take it for granted
that it is well known to everyone they are addressing. Thus a great
difficulty arises, we scarcely know the real meaning of any one of these
stories, because the traditions have nearly died out, and the little
that is left of them has been very much exaggerated. Many new
interpretations have been put upon them, so that when you find them in
the Purânas they have already become lyrical poems. Just as in the West,
we find this prominent fact in the political development of Western
races that they cannot bear absolute rule, that they are always trying
to prevent any one man from ruling over them, and are gradually
advancing to higher and higher democratic ideas, higher and higher ideas
of physical liberty, so, in Indian metaphysics, exactly the same
phenomenon appears in the development of spiritual life. The
multiplicity of gods gave place to one God of the universe, and in the
Upanishads there is a rebellion even against that one God. Not only was
the idea of many governors of the universe ruling their destinies
unbearable, but it was also intolerable that there should be one person
ruling this universe. This is the first thing that strikes us. The idea
grows and grows, until it attains its climax. In almost all of the
Upanishads, we find the climax coming at the last, and that is the
dethroning of this God of the universe. The personality of God vanishes,
the impersonality comes. God is no more a person, no more a human being,
however magnified and exaggerated, who rules this universe, but He has
become an embodied principle in every being, immanent in the whole
universe. It would be illogical to go from the Personal God to the
Impersonal, and at the same time to leave man as a person. So the
personal man is broken down, and man as principle is built up. The
person is only a phenomenon, the principle is behind it. Thus from both
sides, simultaneously, we find the breaking down of personalities and
the approach towards principles, the Personal God approaching the
Impersonal, the personal man approaching the Impersonal Man. Then come
the succeeding stages of the gradual convergence of the two advancing
lines of the Impersonal God and the Impersonal Man. And the Upanishads
embody the stages through which these two lines at last become one, and
the last word of each Upanishad is, "Thou art That". There is but One
Eternally Blissful Principle, and that One is manifesting Itself as all
this variety.

Then came the philosophers. The work of the Upanishads seems to have
ended at that point; the next was taken up by the philosophers. The
framework was given them by the Upanishads, and they had to fill in the
details. So, many questions would naturally arise. Taking for granted
that there is but One Impersonal Principle which is manifesting Itself
in all these manifold forms, how is it that the One becomes many? It is
another way of putting the same old question which in its crude form
comes into the human heart as the inquiry into the cause of evil and so
forth. Why does evil exist in the world, and what is its cause? But the
same question has now become refined, abstracted. No more is it asked
from the platform of the senses why we are unhappy, but from the
platform of philosophy. How is it that this One Principle becomes
manifold? And the answer, as we have seen, the best answer that India
has produced is the theory of Maya which says that It really has not
become manifold, that It really has not lost any of Its real nature.
Manifoldness is only apparent. Man is only apparently a person, but in
reality he is the Impersonal Being. God is a person only apparently, but
really He is the Impersonal Being.

Even in this answer there have been succeeding stages, and philosophers
have varied in their opinions. All Indian philosophers did not admit
this theory of Maya. Possibly most of them did not. There are dualists,
with a crude sort of dualism, who would not allow the question to be
asked, but stifled it at its very birth. They said, "You have no right
to ask such a question, you have no right to ask for an explanation; it
is simply the will of God, and we have to submit to it quietly. There is
no liberty for the human soul. Everything is predestined — what we shall
do, have, enjoy, and suffer; and when suffering comes, it is our duty to
endure it patiently; if we do not, we shall be punished all the more.
How do we know that? Because the Vedas say so." And thus they have their
texts and their meanings and they want to enforce them.

There are others who, though not admitting the Maya theory, stand
midway. They say that the whole of this creation forms, as it were, the
body of God. God is the Soul of all souls and of the whole of nature. In
the case of individual souls, contraction comes from evil doing. When a
man does anything evil, his soul begins to contract and his power is
diminished and goes on decreasing, until he does good works, when it
expands again. One idea seems to be common in all the Indian systems,
and I think, in every system in the world, whether they know it or not,
and that is what I should call the divinity of man. There is no one
system in the world, no real religion, which does not hold the idea that
the human soul, whatever it be, or whatever its relation to God, is
essentially pure and perfect, whether expressed in the language of
mythology, allegory, or philosophy. Its real nature is blessedness and
power, not weakness and misery. Somehow or other this misery has come.
The crude systems may call it a personified evil, a devil, or an
Ahriman, to explain how this misery came. Other systems may try to make
a God and a devil in one, who makes some people miserable and others
happy, without any reason whatever. Others again, more thoughtful, bring
in the theory of Maya and so forth. But one fact stands out clearly, and
it is with this that we have to deal. After all, these philosophical
ideas and systems are but gymnastics of the mind, intellectual
exercises. The one great idea that to me seems to be clear, and comes
out through masses of superstition in every country and in every
religion, is the one luminous idea that man is divine, that divinity is
our nature.

Whatever else comes is a mere superimposition, as the Vedanta calls it.
Something has been superimposed, but that divine nature never dies. In
the most degraded as well as in the most saintly it is ever present. It
has to be called out, and it will work itself out. We have to ask. and
it will manifest itself. The people of old knew that fire lived in the
flint and in dry wood, but friction was necessary to call it out. So
this fire of freedom and purity is the nature of every soul, and not a
quality, because qualities can be acquired and therefore can be lost.
The soul is one with Freedom, and the soul is one with Existence, and
the soul is one with Knowledge. The Sat-Chit-Ânanda —
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute — is the nature, the birthright of
the Soul, and all the manifestations that we see are Its expressions,
dimly or brightly manifesting Itself. Even death is but a manifestation
of that Real Existence. Birth and death, life and decay, degeneration
and regeneration — are all manifestations of that Oneness. So,
knowledge, however it manifests itself, either as ignorance or as
learning, is but the manifestation of that same Chit, the essence of
knowledge; the difference is only in degree, and not in kind. The
difference in knowledge between the lowest worm that crawls under our
feet and the highest genius that the world may produce is only one of
degree, and not of kind. The Vedantin thinker boldly says that the
enjoyments in this life, even the most degraded joys, are but
manifestations of that One Divine Bliss, the Essence of the Soul.

This idea seems to be the most prominent in Vedanta, and, as I have
said, it appears to me that every religion holds it. I have yet to know
the religion which does not. It is the one universal idea working
through all religions. Take the Bible for instance. You find there the
allegorical statement that the first man Adam was pure, and that his
purity was obliterated by his evil deeds afterwards. It is clear from
this allegory that they thought that the nature of the primitive man was
perfect. The impurities that we see, the weaknesses that we feel, are
but superimpositions on that nature, and the subsequent history of the
Christian religion shows that they also believe in the possibility, nay,
the certainty of regaining that old state. This is the whole history of
the Bible, Old and New Testaments together. So with the Mohammedans:
they also believed in Adam and the purity of Adam, and through Mohammed
the way was opened to regain that lost state. So with the Buddhists:
they believe in the state called Nirvana which is beyond this relative
world. It is exactly the same as the Brahman of the Vedantins, and the
whole system of the Buddhists is founded upon the idea of regaining that
lost state of Nirvana. In every system we find this doctrine present,
that you cannot get anything which is not yours already. You are
indebted to nobody in this universe. You claim your own birthright, as
it has been most poetically expressed by a great Vedantin philosopher,
in the title of one of his books — "The attainment of our own empire".
That empire is ours; we have lost it and we have to regain it. The
Mâyâvâdin, however, says that this losing of the empire was a
hallucination; you never lost it. This is the only difference.

Although all the systems agree so far that we had the empire, and that
we have lost it, they give us varied advice as to how to regain it. One
says that you must perform certain ceremonies, pay certain sums of money
to certain idols, eat certain sorts of food, live in a peculiar fashion
to regain that empire. Another says that if you weep and prostrate
yourselves and ask pardon of some Being beyond nature, you will regain
that empire. Again, another says if you love such a Being with all your
heart, you will regain that empire. All this varied advice is in the
Upanishads. As I go on, you will find it so. But the last and the
greatest counsel is that you need not weep at all. You need not go
through all these ceremonies, and need not take any notice of how to
regain your empire, because you never lost it. Why should you go to seek
for what you never lost? You are pure already, you are free already. If
you think you are free, free you are this moment, and if you think you
are bound, bound you will be. This is a very bold statement, and as I
told you at the beginning of this course, I shall have to speak to you
very boldly. It may frighten you now, but when you think over it, and
realise it in your own life, then you will come to know that what I say
is true. For, supposing that freedom is not your nature, by no manner of
means can you become free. Supposing you were free and in some way you
lost that freedom, that shows that you were not free to begin with. Had
you been free, what could have made you lose it? The independent can
never be made dependent; if it is really dependent, its independence was
a hallucination.

Of the two sides, then, which will you take? If you say that the soul
was by its own nature pure and free, it naturally follows that there was
nothing in this universe which could make it bound or limited. But if
there was anything in nature which could bind the soul, it naturally
follows that it was not free, and your statement that it was free is a
delusion. So if it is possible for us to attain to freedom, the
conclusion is inevitable that the soul is by its nature free. It cannot
be otherwise. Freedom means independence of anything outside, and that
means that nothing outside itself could work upon it as a cause. The
soul is causeless, and from this follow all the great ideas that we
have. You cannot establish the immortality of the soul, unless you grant
that it is by its nature free, or in other words, that it cannot be
acted upon by anything outside. For death is an effect produced by some
outside cause. I drink poison and I die, thus showing that my body can
be acted upon by something outside that is called poison. But if it be
true that the soul is free, it naturally follows that nothing can affect
it, and it can never die. Freedom, immortality, blessedness, all depend
upon the soul being beyond the law of causation, beyond this Maya. Of
these two which will you take? Either make the first a delusion, or make
the second a delusion. Certainly I will make the second a delusion. It
is more consonant with all my feelings and aspirations. I am perfectly
aware that I am free by nature, and I will not admit that this bondage
is true and my freedom a delusion.

This discussion goes on in all philosophies, in some form or other. Even
in the most modern philosophies you find the same discussion arising.
There are two parties. One says that there is no soul, that the idea of
soul is a delusion produced by the repeated transit of particles or
matter, bringing about the combination which you call the body or brain;
that the impression of freedom is the result of the vibrations and
motions and continuous transit of these particles. There were Buddhistic
sects who held the same view and illustrated it by this example: If
young take a torch and whirl it round rapidly, there will be a circle of
light. That circle does not really exist, because the torch is changing
place every moment. We are but bundles of little particles, which in
their rapid whirling produce the delusion of a permanent soul. The other
party states that in the rapid succession of thought, matter occurs as a
delusion, and does not really exist. So we see one side claiming that
spirit is a delusion and the other, that matter is a delusion. Which
side will you take? Of course, we will take the spirit and deny matter.
The arguments are similar for both, only on the spirit side the argument
is little stronger. For nobody has ever seen what matter is. We can only
feel ourselves. I never knew a man who could feel matter outside of
himself. Nobody was ever able to jump outside of himself. Therefore the
argument is a little stronger on the side of the spirit. Secondly, the
spirit theory explains the universe, whiles materialism does not. Hence
the materialistic explanation is illogical. If you boil down all the
philosophies and analyse them, you will find that they are reduced to
one; or the other of these two positions. So here, too, in a more
intricate form, in a more philosophical form, we find the same question
about natural purity and freedom. Ones side says that the first is a
delusion, and the other, that the second is a delusion. And, of course,
we side with the second, in believing that our bondage is a delusion.

The solution of the Vedanta is that we are not bound, we are free
already. Not only so, but to say or to think that we are bound is
dangerous — it is a mistake, it is self-hypnotism. As soon as you say,
"I am bound," "I am weak," "I am helpless," woe unto you; you rivet one
more chain upon yourself. Do not say it, do not think it. I have heard
of a man who lived in a forest and used to repeat day and night,
"Shivoham" — I am the Blessed One — and one day a tiger fell upon him
and dragged him away to kill him; people on the other side of the river
saw it, and heard the voice so long as voice remained in him, saying,
"Shivoham" — even in the very jaws of the tiger. There have been many
such men. There have been cases of men who, while being cut to pieces,
have blessed their enemies. "I am He, I am He; and so art thou. I am
pure and perfect and so are all my enemies. You are He, and so am I."
That is - the position of strength. Nevertheless, there are great and
wonderful things in the religions of the dualists; wonderful is the idea
of the Personal God apart from nature, whom we worship and love.
Sometimes this idea is very soothing. But, says the Vedanta, the
soothing is something like the effect that comes from an opiate, not
natural. It brings weakness in the long run, and what this world wants
today, more than it ever did before, is strength. It is weakness, says
the Vedanta, which is the cause of all misery in this world. Weakness is
the one cause of suffering. We become miserable because we are weak. We
lie, steal, kill, and commit other crimes, because we are weak. We
suffer because we are weak. We die because we are weak. Where there is
nothing to weaken us, there is no death nor sorrow. We are miserable
through delusion. Give up the delusion, and the whole thing vanishes. It
is plain and simple indeed. Through all these philosophical discussions
and tremendous mental gymnastics we come to this one religious idea, the
simplest in the whole world.

The monistic Vedanta is the simplest form in which you can put truth. To
teach dualism was a tremendous mistake made in India and elsewhere,
because people did not look at the ultimate principles, but only thought
of the process which is very intricate indeed. To many, these tremendous
philosophical and logical propositions were alarming. They thought these
things could not be made universal, could not be followed in everyday
practical life, and that under the guise of such a philosophy much
laxity of living would arise.

But I do not believe at all that monistic ideas preached to the world
would produce immorality and weakness. On the contrary, I have reason to
believe that it is the only remedy there is. If this be the truth, why
let people drink ditch water when the stream of life is flowing by? If
this be the truth, that they are all pure, why not at this moment teach
it to the whole world? Why not teach it with the voice of thunder to
every man that is born, to saints and sinners, men, women, and children,
to the man on the throne and to the man sweeping the streets?

It appears now a very big and a very great undertaking; to many it
appears very startling, but that is because of superstition, nothing
else. By eating all sorts of bad and indigestible food, or by starving
ourselves, we are incompetent to eat a good meal. We have listened to
words of weakness from our childhood. You hear people say that they do
not believe in ghosts, but at the same time, there are very few who do
not get a little creepy sensation in the dark. It is simply
superstition. So with all religious superstitions There are people in
this country who, if I told them there was no such being as the devil,
will think all religion is gone. Many people have said to me, how can
there be religion without a devil? How can there be religion without
someone to direct us? How can we live without being ruled by somebody?
We like to be so treated, because we have become used to it. We are not
happy until we feel we have been reprimanded by somebody every day. The
same superstition! But however terrible it may seem now, the time will
come when we shall look back, each one of us, and smile at every one of
those superstitions which covered the pure and eternal soul, and repeat
with gladness, with truth, and with strength, I am free, and was free,
and always will be free. This monistic idea will come out of Vedanta,
and it is the one idea that deserves to live. The scriptures may perish
tomorrow. Whether this idea first flashed into the brains of Hebrews or
of people living in the Arctic regions, nobody cares. For this is the
truth and truth is eternal; and truth itself teaches that it is not the
special property of any individual or nation. Men, animals, and gods are
all common recipients of this one truth. Let them all receive it. Why
make life miserable? Why let people fall into all sorts of
superstitions? I will give ten thousand lives, if twenty of them will
give up their superstition. Not only in this country, but in the land of
its very birth, if you tell people this truth, they are frightened. They
say, "This idea is for Sannyâsins who give up the world and live in
forests; for them it is all right. But for us poor householders, we must
all have some sort of fear, we must have ceremonies," and so on.

Dualistic ideas have ruled the world long enough, and this is the
result. Why not make a new experiment? It may take ages for all minds to
receive monism, but why not begin now? If we have told it to twenty
persons in our lives, we have done a great work.

There is one idea which often militates against it. It is this. It is
all very well to say, "I am the Pure, the Blessed," but I cannot show it
always in my life. That is true; the ideal is always very hard. Every
child that is born sees the sky overhead very far away, but is that any
reason why we should not look towards the sky? Would it mend matters to
go towards superstition? If we cannot get nectar, would it mend matters
for us to drink poison? Would it be any help for us, because we cannot
realise the truth immediately, to go into darkness and yield to weakness
and superstition?

I have no objection to dualism in many of its forms. I like most of
them, but I have objections to every form of teaching which inculcates
weakness. This is the one question I put to every man, woman, or child,
when they are in physical, mental, or spiritual training. Are you
strong? Do you feel strength? — for I know it is truth alone that gives
strength. I know that truth alone gives life, and nothing but going
towards reality will make us strong, and none will reach truth until he
is strong. Every system, therefore, which weakens the mind, makes one
superstitious, makes one mope, makes one desire all sorts of wild
impossibilities, mysteries, and superstitions, I do not like, because
its effect is dangerous. Such systems never bring any good; such things
create morbidity in the mind, make it weak, so weak that in course of
time it will be almost impossible to receive truth or live up to it.
Strength, therefore, is the one thing needful. Strength is the medicine
for the world's disease. Strength is the medicine which the poor must
have when tyrannised over by the rich. Strength is the medicine that the
ignorant must have when oppressed by the learned; and it is the medicine
that sinners must have when tyrannised over by other sinners; and
nothing gives such strength as this idea of monism. Nothing makes us so
moral as this idea of monism. Nothing makes us work so well at our best
and highest as when all the responsibility is thrown upon ourselves. I
challenge everyone of you. How will you behave if I put a little baby in
your hands? Your whole life will be changed for the moment; whatever you
may be, you must become selfless for the time being. You will give up
all your criminal ideas as soon as responsibility is thrown upon you —
your whole character will change. So if the whole responsibility is
thrown upon our own shoulders, we shall be at our highest and best; when
we have nobody to grope towards, no devil to lay our blame upon, no
Personal God to carry our burdens, when we are alone responsible, then
we shall rise to our highest and best. I am responsible for my fate, I
am the bringer of good unto myself, I am the bringer of evil. I am the
Pure and Blessed One. We must reject all thoughts that assert the
contrary. "I have neither death nor fear, I have neither caste nor
creed, I have neither father nor mother nor brother, neither friend nor
foe, for I am Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss Absolute; I am the
Blissful One, I am the Blissful One. I am not bound either by virtue or
vice, by happiness or misery. Pilgrimages and books and ceremonials can
never bind me. I have neither hunger nor thirst; the body is not mine,
nor am I subject to the superstitions and decay that come to the body, I
am Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss Absolute; I am the Blissful One, I am
the Blissful One."

This, says the Vedanta, is the only prayer that we should have. This is
the only way to reach the goal, to tell ourselves, and to tell everybody
else, that we are divine. And as we go on repeating this, strength
comes. He who falters at first will get stronger and stronger, and the
voice will increase in volume until the truth takes possession of our
hearts, and courses through our veins, and permeates our bodies.
Delusion will vanish as the light becomes more and more effulgent, load
after load of ignorance will vanish, and then will come a time when all
else has disappeared and the Sun alone shines.

</div>
