---
title: IMMORTALITY

---
<div>

[←](the_microcosm.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_atman.htm)

  

CHAPTER XII

## IMMORTALITY

(*Delivered in America*)

What question has been asked a greater number of times, what idea has
led men more to search the universe for an answer, what question is
nearer and dearer to the human heart, what question is more inseparably
connected with our existence, than this one, the immortality of the
human soul? It has been the theme of poets and sages, of priests and
prophets; kings on the throne have discussed it, beggars in the street
have dreamt of it. The best of humanity have approached it, and the
worst of men have hoped for it. The interest in the theme has not died
yet, nor will it die so long as human nature exists. Various answers
have been presented to the world by various minds. Thousands, again, in
every period of history have given up the discussion, and yet the
question remains fresh as ever. Often in the turmoil and struggle of our
lives we seem to forget it, but suddenly some one dies — one, perhaps,
whom we loved, one near and dear to our hearts is snatched away from us
— and the struggle, the din and turmoil of the world around us, cease
for a moment, and the soul asks the old questions "What after this?"
"What becomes of the soul?"

All human knowledge proceeds out of experience; we cannot know anything
except by experience. All our reasoning is based upon generalised
experience, all our knowledge is but harmonised experience. Looking
around us, what do we find? A continuous change. The plant comes out of
the seed, grows into the tree, completes the circle, and comes back to
the seed. The animal comes, lives a certain time, dies, and completes
the circle. So does man. The mountains slowly but surely crumble away,
the rivers slowly but surely dry up, rains come out of the sea, and go
back to the sea. Everywhere circles are being completed, birth, growth,
development, and decay following each other with mathematical precision.
This is our everyday experience. Inside of it all, behind all this vast
mass of what we call life, of millions of forms and shapes, millions
upon millions of varieties, beginning from the lowest atom to the
highest spiritualised man, we find existing a certain unity. Every day
we find that the wall that was thought to be dividing one thing and
another is being broken down, and all matter is coming to be recognised
by modern science as one substance, manifesting in different ways and in
various forms; the one life that runs through all like a continuous
chain, of which all these various forms represent the links, link after
link, extending almost infinitely, but of the same one chain. This is
what is called evolution. It is an old, old idea, as old as human
society, only it is getting fresher and fresher as human knowledge is
progressing. There is one thing more, which the ancients perceived, but
which in modern times is not yet so clearly perceived, and that is
involution. The seed is becoming the plant; a grain of sand never
becomes a plant. It is the father that becomes a child; a lump of clay
never becomes the child. From what does this evolution come, is the
question. What was the seed? It was the same as the tree. All the
possibilities of a future tree are in that seed; all the possibilities
of a future man are in the little baby; all the possibilities of any
future life are in the germ. What is this? The ancient philosophers of
India called it involution. We find then, that every evolution
presupposes an involution. Nothing can be evolved which is not already
there. Here, again, modern science comes to our help. You know by
mathematical reasoning that the sum total of the energy that is
displayed in the universe is the same throughout. You cannot take away
one atom of matter or one foot-pound of force. You cannot add to the
universe one atom of matter or one foot-pound of force. As such,
evolution does not come out of zero; then, where does it come from? From
previous involution. The child is the man involved, and the man is the
child evolved. The seed is the tree involved, and the tree is the seed
evolved. All the possibilities of life are in the germ. The problem
becomes a little clearer. Add to it the first idea of continuation of
life. From the lowest protoplasm to the most perfect human being there
is really but one life. Just as in one life we have so many various
phases of expression, the protoplasm developing into the baby, the
child, the young man, the old man, so, from that protoplasm up to the
most perfect man we get one continuous life, one chain. This is
evolution, but we have seen that each evolution presupposes an
involution. The whole of this life which slowly manifests itself evolves
itself from the protoplasm to the perfected human being — the
Incarnation of God on earth — the whole of this series is but one life,
and the whole of this manifestation must have been involved in that very
protoplasm. This whole life, this very God on earth, was involved in it
and slowly came out, manifesting itself slowly, slowly, slowly. The
highest expression must have been there in the germ state in minute
form; therefore this one force, this whole chain, is the involution of
that cosmic life which is everywhere. It is this one mass of
intelligence which, from the protoplasm up to the most perfected man, is
slowly and slowly uncoiling itself. Not that it grows. Take off all
ideas of growth from your mind. With the idea of growth is associated
something coming from outside, something extraneous, which would give
the lie to the truth that the Infinite which lies latent in every life
is independent of all external conditions. It can never grow; It was
always there, and only manifests Itself.

The effect is the cause manifested. There is no essential difference
between the effect and the cause. Take this glass, for instance. There
was the material, and the material plus the will of the manufacturer
made the glass and these two were its causes and are present in it. In
what form is the will present? As adhesion. If the force were not here,
each particle would fall away. What is the effect then? It is the same
as the cause, only taking; different form, a different composition. When
the cause is changed and limited for a time, it becomes the effect. We
must remember this. Applying it to our idea of life the whole of the
manifestation of this one series, from the protoplasm up to the most
perfect man, must be the very same thing as cosmic life. First it got
involved and became finer; and out of that fine something, which wet the
cause, it has gone on evolving, manifesting itself, and becoming
grosser.

But the question of immortality is not yet settled. We have seen that
everything in this universe is indestructible. There is nothing new;
there will be nothing new. The same series of manifestations are
presenting themselves alternately like a wheel, coming up and going
down. All motion in this universe is in the form of waves, successively
rising and falling. Systems after systems are coming out of fine forms,
evolving themselves, and taking grosser forms, again melting down, as it
were, and going back to the fine forms. Again they rise out of that,
evolving for a certain period and slowly going back to the cause. So
with all life. Each manifestation of life is coming up and then going
back again. What goes down? The form. The form breaks to pieces, but it
comes up again. In one sense bodies and forms even are eternal. How?
Suppose we take a number of dice and throw them, and they fall in this
ratio — 6 — 5 — 3 — 4. We take the dice up and throw them again and
again; there must be a time when the same numbers will come again; the
same combination must come. Now each particle, each atom, that is in
this universe, I take for such a die, and these are being thrown out and
combined again and again. All these forms before you are one
combination. Here are the forms of a glass, a table, a pitcher of water,
and so forth. This is one combination; in time, it will all break. But
there must come a time when exactly the same combination comes again,
when you will be here, and this form will be here, this subject will be
talked, and this pitcher will be here. An infinite number of times this
has been, and an infinite number of times this will be repeated. Thus
far with the physical forms. What do we find? That even the combination
of physical forms is eternally repeated.

A most interesting conclusion that follows from this theory is the
explanation of facts such as these: Some of you, perhaps, have seen a
man who can read the past life of others and foretell the future. How is
it possible for any one to see what the future will be, unless there is
a regulated future? Effects of the past will recur in the future, and we
see that it is so. You have seen the big Ferris Wheel[1](#fn1) in
Chicago. The wheel revolves, and the little rooms in the wheel are
regularly coming one after another; one set of persons gets into these,
and after they have gone round the circle, they get out, and a fresh
batch of people gets in. Each one of these batches is like one of these
manifestations, from the lowest animals to the highest man. Nature is
like the chain of the Ferris Wheel, endless and infinite, and these
little carriages are the bodies or forms in which fresh batches of souls
are riding, going up higher and higher until they become perfect and
come out of the wheel. But the wheel goes on. And so long as the bodies
are in the wheel, it can be absolutely and mathematically foretold where
they will go, but not so of the souls. Thus it is possible to read the
past and the future of nature with precision. We see, then, that there
is recurrence of the same material phenomena at certain periods, and
that the same combinations have been taking place through eternity. But
that is not the immortality of the soul. No force can die, no matter can
be annihilated. What becomes of it? It goes on changing, backwards and
forwards, until it returns to the source from which it came. There is no
motion in a straight line. Everything moves in a circle; a straight
line, infinitely produced, becomes a circle. If that is the case, there
cannot be eternal degeneration for any soul. It cannot be. Everything
must complete the circle, and come back to its source. What are you and
I and all these souls? In our discussion of evolution and involution, we
have seen that you and I must be part of the cosmic consciousness,
cosmic life, cosmic mind, which got involved and we must complete the
circle and go back to this cosmic intelligence which is God. This cosmic
intelligence is what people call Lord, or God, or Christ, or Buddha, or
Brahman, what the materialists perceive as force, and the agnostics as
that infinite, inexpressible beyond; and we are all parts of that.

This is the second idea, yet this is not sufficient; there will be still
more doubts. It is very good to say that there is no destruction for any
force. But all the forces and forms that we see are combinations. This
form before us is a composition of several component parts, and so every
force that we see is similarly composite. If you take the scientific
idea of force, and call it the sum total, the resultant of several
forces, what becomes of your individuality? Everything that is a
compound must sooner or later go back to its component parts. Whatever
in this universe is the result of the combination of matter or force
must sooner or later go back to its components. Whatever is the result
of certain causes must die, must be destroyed. It gets broken up,
dispersed, and resolved back into its components. Soul is not a force;
neither is it thought. It is the manufacturer of thought, but not
thought itself; it is the manufacturer of the body, but not the body.
Why so? We see that the body cannot be the soul. Why not? Because it is
not intelligent. A corpse is not intelligent, nor a piece of meat in a
butcher's shop. What do we mean by intelligence? Reactive power. We want
to go a little more deeply into this. Here is a pitcher; I see it. How?
Rays of light from the pitcher enter my eyes, and make a picture in my
retina, which is carried to the brain. Yet there is no vision. What the
physiologists call the sensory nerves carry this impression inwards. But
up to this there is no reaction. The nerve centre in the brain carries
the impression to the mind, and the mind reacts, and as soon as this
reaction comes, the pitcher flashes before it. Take a more commonplace
example. Suppose you are listening to me intently and a mosquito is
sitting on the tip of your nose and giving you that pleasant sensation
which mosquitoes can give; but you are so intent on hearing me that you
do not feel the mosquito at all. What has happened? The mosquito has
bitten a certain part of your skin, and certain nerves are there. They
have carried a certain sensation to the brain, and the impression is
there, but the mind, being otherwise occupied, does not react, so you
are not aware of the presence of the mosquito. When a new impression
comes, if the mind does not react, we shall not be conscious of it, but
when the reaction comes we feel, we see, we hear, and so forth. With
this reaction comes illumination, as the Sâmkhya philosophers call it.
We see that the body cannot illuminate, because in the absence of
attention no sensation is possible. Cases have been known where, under
peculiar conditions, a man who had never learnt a particular language
was found able to speak it. Subsequent inquiries proved that the man
had, when a child, lived among people who spoke that language and the
impressions were left in his brain. These impressions remained stored up
there, until through some cause the mind reacted, and illumination came,
and then the man was able to speak the language. This shows that the
mind alone is not sufficient, that the mind itself is an instrument in
the hands of someone. In the case of that boy the mind contained that
language, yet he did not know it, but later there came a time when he
did. It shows that there is someone besides the mind; and when the boy
was a baby, that someone did not use the power; but when the boy grew
up, he took advantage of it, and used it. First, here is the body,
second the mind, or instrument of thought, and third behind this mind is
the Self of man. The Sanskrit word is Atman. As modern philosophers have
identified thought with molecular changes in the brain, they do not know
how to explain such a case, and they generally deny it. The mind is
intimately connected with the brain which dies every time the body
changes. The Self is the illuminator, and the mind is the instrument in
Its hands, and through that instrument It gets hold of the external
instrument, and thus comes perception. The external instruments get hold
of the impressions and carry them to the organs, for you must remember
always, that the eyes and ears are only receivers — it is the internal
organs, the brain centres, which act. In Sanskrit these centres are
called Indriyas, and they carry sensations to the mind, and the mind
presents them further back to another state of the mind, which in
Sanskrit is called Chitta, and there they are organised into will, and
all these present them to the King of kings inside, the Ruler on His
throne, the Self of man. He then sees and gives His orders. Then the
mind immediately acts on the organs, and the organs on the external
body. The real Perceiver, the real Ruler, the Governor, the Creator, the
Manipulator of all this, is the Self of man.

We see, then, that the Self of man is not the body, neither is It
thought. It cannot be a compound. Why not? Because everything that is a
compound can be seen or imagined. That which we cannot imagine or
perceive, which we cannot bind together, is not force or matter, cause
or effect, and cannot be a compound. The domain of compounds is only so
far as our mental universe, our thought universe extends. Beyond this it
does not hold good; it is as far as law reigns, and if there is anything
beyond law, it cannot be a compound at all. The Self of man being beyond
the law of causation, is not a compound. It is ever free and is the
Ruler of everything that is within law. It will never die, because death
means going back to the component parts, and that which was never a
compound can never die. It is sheer nonsense to say It dies.

We are now treading on finer and finer ground, and some of you, perhaps,
will be frightened. We have seen that this Self, being beyond the little
universe of matter and force and thought, is a simple; and as a simple
It cannot die. That which does not die cannot live. For life and death
are the obverse and reverse of the same coin. Life is another name for
death, and death for life. One particular mode of manifestation is what
we call life; another particular mode of manifestation of the same thing
is what we call death. When the wave rises on the top it is life; and
when it falls into the hollow it is death. If anything is beyond death,
we naturally see it must also be beyond life. I must remind you of the
first conclusion that the soul of man is part of the cosmic energy that
exists, which is God. We now find that it is beyond life and death. You
were never born, and you will never die. What is this birth and death
that we see around us? This belongs to the body only, because the soul
is omnipresent. "How can that be?" you may ask. "So many people are
sitting here, and you say the soul is omnipresent?" What is there, I
ask, to limit anything that is beyond law, beyond causation? This glass
is limited; it is not omnipresent, because the surrounding matter forces
it to take that form, does not allow it to expand. It is conditioned be
everything around it, and is, therefore, limited. But that which is
beyond law, where there is nothing to act upon it, how can that be
limited? It must be omnipresent. You are everywhere in the universe. How
is it then that I am born and I am going to die, and all that? That is
the talk of ignorance, hallucination of the brain. You were neither
born, nor will you die. You have had neither birth, nor will have
rebirth, nor life, nor incarnation, nor anything. What do you mean by
coming and going? All shallow nonsense. You are everywhere. Then what is
this coming and going? It is the hallucination produced by the change of
this fine body which you call the mind. That is going on. Just a little
speck of cloud passing before the sky. As it moves on and on, it may
create the delusion that the sky moves. Sometimes you see a cloud moving
before the moon, and you think that the moon is moving. When you are in
a train you think the land is flying, or when you are in a boat, you
think the water moves. In reality you are neither going nor coming, you
are not being born, nor going to be reborn; you are infinite,
ever-present, beyond all causation, and ever-free. Such a question is
out of place, it is arrant nonsense. How could there be mortality when
there was no birth?

One step more we will have to take to come to a logical conclusion.
There is no half-way house. You are metaphysicians, and there is no
crying quarter. If then we are beyond all law, we must be omniscient,
ever-blessed; all knowledge must be in us and all power and blessedness.
Certainly. You are the omniscient. omnipresent being of the universe.
But of such beings can there be many? Can there be a hundred thousand
millions of omnipresent beings? Certainly not. Then, what becomes of us
all? You are only one; there is only one such Self, and that One Self is
you. Standing behind this little nature is what we call the Soul. There
is only One Being, One Existence, the ever-blessed, the omnipresent, the
omniscient, the birthless, deathless. "Through His control the sky
expands, through His control the air breathes, through His control the
sun shines, and through His control all live. He is the Reality in
nature, He is the Soul of your soul, nay, more, you are He, you are one
with Him." Wherever there are two, there is fear, there is danger, there
is conflict, there is strife. When it is all One, who is there to hate,
who is there to struggle with? When it is all He, with whom can you
fight? This explains the true nature of life; this explains the true
nature of being. This is perfection, and this is God. As long as you see
the many, you are under delusion. "In this world of many he who sees the
One, in this everchanging world he who sees Him who never changes, as
the Soul of his own soul, as his own Self, he is free, he is blessed, he
has reached the goal." Therefore know that thou art He; thou art the God
of this universe, "Tat Tvam Asi" (That thou art). All these various
ideas that I am a man or a woman, or sick or healthy, or strong or weak,
or that I hate or I love, or have a little power, are but
hallucinations. Away with them I What makes you weak? What makes you
fear? You are the One Being in the universe. What frightens you? Stand
up then and be free. Know that every thought and word that weakens you
in this world is the only evil that exists. Whatever makes men weak and
fear is the only evil that should be shunned. What can frighten you? If
the suns come down, and the moons crumble into dust, and systems after
systems are hurled into annihilation, what is that to you? Stand as a
rock; you are indestructible. You are the Self, the God of the universe.
Say — "I am Existence Absolute, Bliss Absolute, Knowledge Absolute, I am
He," and like a lion breaking its cage, break your chain and be free for
ever. What frightens you, what holds you down? Only ignorance and
delusion; nothing else can bind you. You are the Pure One, the
Ever-blessed.

Silly fools tell you that you are sinners, and you sit down in a corner
and weep. It is foolishness, wickedness, downright rascality to say that
you are sinners! You are all God. See you not God and call Him man?
Therefore, if you dare, stand on that — mould your whole life on that.
If a man cuts your throat, do not say no, for you are cutting your own
throat. When you help a poor man, do not feel the least pride. That is
worship for you, and not the cause of pride. Is not the whole universe
you? Where is there any one that is not you? You are the Soul of this
universe. You are the sun, moon, and stars, it is you that are shining
everywhere. The whole universe is you. Whom are you going to hate or to
fight? Know, then, that thou art He, and model your whole life
accordingly; and he who knows this and models his life accordingly will
no more grovel in darkness.

1.  [^](#txt1)An amusement device consisting of a giant power-driven
    steel wheel, revolvable on its stationary axle, and carrying a
    number of balanced passenger cars around its rim."—Webster, G. W. G.
    Ferris erected the first of its kind for the Chicago Exposition
    of 1893. In India we have a corresponding wooden device very common
    in fairs. — Ed.

</div>
