---
title: THE ATMAN

---
<div>

[←](immortality.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_atman_its_bondage_and_freedom.htm)

  

CHAPTER XIII

## THE ATMAN

(*Delivered in America*)

Many of you have read Max Müller's celebrated book, *Three Lectures on
the Vedanta Philosophy*, and some of you may, perhaps, have read, in
German, Professor Deussen's book on the same philosophy. In what is
being written and taught in the West about the religious thought of
India, one school of Indian thought is principally represented, that
which is called Advaitism, the monistic side of Indian religion; and
sometimes it is thought that all the teachings of the Vedas are
comprised in that one system of philosophy. There are, however, various
phases of Indian thought; and, perhaps, this non-dualistic form is in
the minority as compared with the other phases. From the most ancient
times there have been various sects of thought in India, and as there
never was a formulated or recognised church or any body of men to
designate the doctrines which should be believed by each school, people
were very free to choose their own form, make their own philosophy and
establish their own sects. We, therefore, find that from the most
ancient times India was full of religious sects. At the present time, I
do not know how many hundreds of sects we have in India, and several
fresh ones are coming into existence every year. It seems that the
religious activity of that nation is simply inexhaustible.

Of these various sects, in the first place, there can be made two main
divisions, the orthodox and the unorthodox. Those that believe in the
Hindu scriptures, the Vedas, as eternal revelations of truth, are called
orthodox, and those that stand on other authorities, rejecting the
Vedas, are the heterodox in India. The chief modern unorthodox Hindu
sects are the Jains and the Buddhists. Among the orthodox some declare
that the scriptures are of much higher authority than reason; others
again say that only that portion of the scriptures which is rational
should be taken and the rest rejected.

Of the three orthodox divisions, the Sânkhyas, the Naiyâyikas, and the
Mimâmsakas, the former two, although they existed as philosophical
schools, failed to form any sect. The one sect that now really covers
India is that of the later Mimamsakas or the Vedantists. Their
philosophy is called Vedantism. All the schools of Hindu philosophy
start from the Vedanta or Upanishads, but the monists took the name to
themselves as a speciality, because they wanted to base the whole of
their theology and philosophy upon the Vedanta and nothing else. In the
course of time the Vedanta prevailed, and all the various sects of India
that now exist can be referred to one or other of its schools. Yet these
schools are not unanimous in their opinions.

We find that there are three principal variations among the Vedantists.
On one point they all agree, and that is that they all believe in God.
All these Vedantists also believe the Vedas to be the revealed word of
God, not exactly in the same sense, perhaps, as the Christians or the
Mohammedans believe, but in a very peculiar sense. Their idea is that
the Vedas are an expression of the knowledge of God, and as God is
eternal, His knowledge is eternally with Him, and so are the Vedas
eternal. There is another common ground of belief: that of creation in
cycles, that the whole of creation appears and disappears; that it is
projected and becomes grosser and grosser, and at the end of an
incalculable period of time it becomes finer and finer, when it
dissolves and subsides, and then comes a period of rest. Again it:
begins to appear and goes through the same process. They postulate the
existence of a material which they call Âkâsha, which is something like
the ether of the scientists, and a power which they call Prâna. About
this Prana they declare that by its vibration the universe is produced.
When a cycle ends, all this manifestation of nature becomes finer and
finer and dissolves into that Akasha which cannot be seen or felt, yet
out of which everything is manufactured. All the forces that we see in
nature, such as gravitation, attraction, and repulsion, or as thought,
feeling, and nervous motion — all these various forces resolve into that
Prana, and the vibration of the Prana ceases. In that state it remains
until the beginning of the next cycle. Prana then begins to vibrate, and
that vibration acts upon the Akasha, and all these forms are thrown out
in regular succession.

The first school I will tell you about is styled the dualistic school.
The dualists believe that God, who is the creator of the universe and
its ruler, is eternally separate from nature, eternally separate from
the human soul. God is eternal; nature is eternal; so are all souls.
Nature and the souls become manifested and change, but God remains the
same. According to the dualists, again, this God is personal in that He
has qualities, not that He has a body. He has human attributes; He is
merciful, He is just, He is powerful, He is almighty, He can be
approached, He can be prayed to, He can be loved, He loves in return,
and so forth. In one word, He is a human God, only infinitely greater
than man; He has none of the evil qualities which men have. "He is the
repository of an infinite number of blessed qualities" — that is their
definition. He cannot create without materials, and nature is the
material out of which He creates the whole universe. There are some
non-Vedantic dualists, called "Atomists", who believe that nature is
nothing but an infinite number of atoms, and God's will, acting upon
these atoms, creates. The Vedantists deny the atomic theory; they say it
is perfectly illogical. The indivisible atoms are like geometrical
points without parts or magnitude; but something without parts or
magnitude, if multiplied an infinite number of times, will remain the
same. Anything that has no parts will never make something that has
parts; any number of zeros added together will not make one single whole
number. So, if these atoms are such that they have no parts or
magnitude, the creation of the universe is simply impossible out of such
atoms. Therefore, according to the Vedantic dualists, there is what they
call indiscrete or undifferentiated nature, and out of that God creates
the universe. The vast mass of Indian people are dualists. Human nature
ordinarily cannot conceive of anything higher. We find that ninety per
cent of the population of the earth who believe in any religion are
dualists. All the religions of Europe and Western Asia are dualistic;
they have to be. The ordinary man cannot think of anything which is not
concrete. He naturally likes to cling to that which his intellect can
grasp. That is to say, he can only conceive of higher spiritual ideas by
bringing them down to his own level. He can only grasp abstract thoughts
by making them concrete. This is the religion of the masses all over the
world. They believe in a God who is entirely separate from them, a great
king, a high, mighty monarch, as it were. At the same time they make Him
purer than the monarchs of the earth; they give Him all good qualities
and remove the evil qualities from Him. As if it were ever possible for
good to exist without evil; as if there could be any conception of light
without a conception of darkness!

With all dualistic theories the first difficulty is, how is it possible
that under the rule of a just and merciful God, the repository of an
infinite number of good qualities, there can be so many evils in this
world? This question arose in all dualistic religions, but the Hindus
never invented a Satan as an answer to it. The Hindus with one accord
laid the blame on man, and it was easy for them to do so. Why? Because,
as I have just now told you, they did not believe that souls were
created out of nothing. We see in this life that we can shape and form
our future every one of us, every day, is trying to shape the morrow;
today we fix the fate of the morrow; tomorrow we shall fix the fate of
the day after, and so on. It is quite logical that this reasoning can be
pushed backward too. If by our own deeds we shape our destiny in the
future why not apply the same rule to the past? If, in an infinite
chain, a certain number of links are alternately repeated then, if one
of these groups of links be explained, we can explain the whole chain.
So, in this infinite length of time, if we can cut off one portion and
explain that portion and understand it, then, if it be true that nature
is uniform, the same explanation must apply to the whole chain of time.
If it be true that we are working out our own destiny here within this
short space of time if it be true that everything must have a cause as
we see it now, it must also be true that that which we are now is the
effect of the whole of our past; therefore, no other person is necessary
to shape the destiny of mankind but man himself. The evils that are in
the world are caused by none else but ourselves. We have caused all this
evil; and just as we constantly see misery resulting from evil actions,
so can we also see that much of the existing misery in the world is the
effect of the past wickedness of man. Man alone, therefore, according to
this theory, is responsible. God is not to blame. He, the eternally
merciful Father, is not to blame at all. "We reap what we sow."

Another peculiar doctrine of the dualists is, that every soul must
eventually come to salvation. No one will be left out. Through various
vicissitudes, through various sufferings and enjoyments, each one of
them will come out in the end. Come out of what? The one common idea of
all Hindu sects is that all souls have to get out of this universe.
Neither the universe which we see and feel, nor even an imaginary one,
can be right, the real one, because both are mixed up with good and
evil. According to the dualists, there is beyond this universe a place
full of happiness and good only; and when that place is reached, there
will be no more necessity of being born and reborn, of living and dying;
and this idea is very dear to them. No more disease there, and no more
death. There will be eternal happiness, and they will be in the presence
of God for all time and enjoy Him for ever. They believe that all
beings, from the lowest worm up to the highest angels and gods, will
all, sooner or later, attain to that world where there will be no more
misery. But our world will never end; it goes on infinitely, although
moving in waves. Although moving in cycles it never ends. The number of
souls that are to be saved, that are to be perfected, is infinite. Some
are in plants, some are in the lower animals, some are in men, some are
in gods, but all of them, even the highest gods, are imperfect, are in
bondage. What is the bondage? The necessity of being born and the
necessity of dying. Even the highest gods die. What are these gods? They
mean certain states, certain offices. For instance, Indra the king of
gods, means a certain office; some soul which was very high has gone to
fill that post in this cycle, and after this cycle he will be born again
as man and come down to this earth, and the man who is very good in this
cycle will go and fill that post in the next cycle. So with all these
gods; they are certain offices which have been filled alternately by
millions and millions of souls, who, after filling those offices, came
down and became men. Those who do good works in this world and help
others, but with an eye to reward, hoping to reach heaven or to get the
praise of their fellow-men, must when they die, reap the benefit of
those good works — they become these gods. But that is not salvation;
salvation never will come through hope of reward. Whatever man desires
the Lord gives him. Men desire power, they desire prestige, they desire
enjoyments as gods, and they get these desires fulfilled, but no effect
of work can be eternal. The effect will be exhausted after a certain
length of time; it may be aeons, but after that it will be gone, and
these gods must come down again and become men and get another chance
for liberation. The lower animals will come up and become men, become
gods, perhaps, then become men again, or go back to animals, until the
time when they will get rid of all desire for enjoyment, the thirst for
life, this clinging on to the "me and mine". This "me and mine" is the
very root of all the evil in the world. If you ask a dualist, "Is your
child yours?" he will say, "It is God's. My property is not mine, it is
God's." Everything should be held as God's.

Now, these dualistic sects in India are great vegetarians, great
preachers of non-killing of animals. But their idea about it is quite
different from that of the Buddhist. If you ask a Buddhist, "Why do you
preach against killing any animal?" he will answer, "We have no right to
take any life;" and if you ask a dualist, "Why do you not kill any
animal?" he says, "Because it is the Lord's." So the dualist says that
this "me and mine" is to be applied to God and God alone; He is the only
"me" and everything is His. When a man has come to the state when he has
no "me and mine," when everything is given up to the Lord, when he loves
everybody and is ready even to give up his life for an animal, without
any desire for reward, then his heart will be purified, and when the
heart has been purified, into that heart will come the love of God. God
is the centre of attraction for every soul, and the dualist says, "A
needle covered up with clay will not be attracted by a magnet, but as
soon as the clay is washed off, it will be attracted." God is the magnet
and human soul is the needle, and its evil works, the dirt and dust that
cover it. As soon as the soul is pure it will by natural attraction come
to God and remain with Him for ever, but remain eternally separate. The
perfected soul, if it wishes, can take any form; it is able to take a
hundred bodies, if it wishes. or have none at all, if it so desires. It
becomes almost almighty, except that it cannot create; that power
belongs to God alone. None, however perfect, can manage the affairs of
the universe; that function belongs to God. But all souls, when they
become perfect, become happy for ever and live eternally with God. This
is the dualistic statement.

One other idea the dualists preach. They protest against the idea of
praying to God, "Lord, give me this and give me that." They think that
should not be done. If a man must ask some material gift, he should ask
inferior beings for it; ask one of these gods, or angels or a perfected
being for temporal things. God is only to be loved. It is almost a
blasphemy to pray to God, "Lord, give me this, and give me that."
According to the dualists, therefore, what a man wants, he will get
sooner or later, by praying to one of the gods; but if he wants
salvation, he must worship God. This is the religion of the masses of
India.

The real Vedanta philosophy begins with those known as the qualified
non-dualists. They make the statement that the effect is never different
from the cause; the effect is but the cause reproduced in another form.
If the universe is the effect and God the cause, it must be God Himself
— it cannot be anything but that. They start with the assertion that God
is both the efficient and the material cause of the universe; that He
Himself is the creator, and He Himself is the material out of which the
whole of nature is projected. The word "creation" in your language has
no equivalent in Sanskrit, because there is no sect in India which
believes in creation, as it is regarded in the West, as something coming
out of nothing. It seems that at one time there were a few that had some
such idea, but they were very quickly silenced. At the present time I do
not know of any sect that believes this. What we mean by creation is
projection of that which already existed. Now, the whole universe,
according to this sect, is God Himself. He is the material of the
universe. We read in the Vedas, "As the Urnanâbhi (spider) spins the
thread out of its own body, . . . even so the whole universe has come
out of the Being."

If the effect is the cause reproduced, the question is: "How is it that
we find this material, dull, unintelligent universe produced from a God,
who is not material, but who is eternal intelligence? How, if the cause
is pure and perfect, can the effect be quite different?" What do these
qualified non-dualists say? Theirs is a very peculiar theory. They say
that these three existences, God, nature, and the soul, are one. God is,
as it were, the Soul, and nature and souls are the body of God. Just as
I have a body and I have a soul, so the whole universe and all souls are
the body of God, and God is the Soul of souls. Thus, God is the material
cause of the universe. The body may be changed — may be young or old,
strong or weak — but that does not affect the soul at all. It is the
same eternal existence, manifesting through the body. Bodies come and
go, but the soul does not change. Even so the whole universe is the body
of God, and in that sense it is God. But the change in the universe does
not affect God. Out of this material He creates the universe, and at the
end of a cycle His body becomes finer, it contracts; at the beginning of
another cycle it becomes expanded again, and out of it evolve all these
different worlds.

Now both the dualists and the qualified non-dualists admit that the soul
is by its nature pure, but through its own deeds it becomes impure. The
qualified non-dualists express it more beautifully than the dualists, by
saving that the soul's purity and perfection become contracted and again
become manifest, and what we are now trying to do is to remanifest the
intelligence, the purity, the power which is natural to the soul. Souls
have a multitude of qualities, but not that of almightiness or
all-knowingness. Every wicked deed contracts the nature of the soul, and
every good deed expands it, and these souls, are all parts of God. "As
from a blazing fire fly millions of sparks of the same nature, even so
from this Infinite Being, God, these souls have come." Each has the same
goal. The God of the qualified non-dualists is also a Personal God, the
repository of an infinite number of blessed qualities, only He is
interpenetrating everything in the universe. He is immanent in
everything and everywhere; and when the scriptures say that God is
everything, it means that God is interpenetrating everything, not that
God has become the wall, but that God is in the wall. There is not a
particle, not an atom in the universe where He is not. Souls are all
limited; they are not omnipresent. When they get expansion of their
powers and become perfect, there is no more birth and death for them;
they live with God for ever.

Now we come to Advaitism, the last and, what we think, the fairest
flower of philosophy and religion that any country in any age has
produced, where human thought attains its highest expression and even
goes beyond the mystery which seems to be impenetrable. This is the
non-dualistic Vedantism. It is too abstruse, too elevated to be the
religion of the masses. Even in India, its birthplace, where it has been
ruling supreme for the last three thousand years, it has not been able
to permeate the masses. As we go on we shall find that it is difficult
for even the most thoughtful man and woman in any country to understand
Advaitism. We have made ourselves so weak; we have made ourselves so
low. We may make great claims, but naturally we want to lean on somebody
else. We are like little, weak plants, always wanting a support. How
many times I have been asked for a "comfortable religion!" Very few men
ask for the truth, fewer still dare to learn the truth, and fewest of
all dare to follow it in all its practical bearings. It is not their
fault; it is all weakness of the brain. Any new thought, especially of a
high kind, creates a disturbance, tries to make a new channel, as it
were, in the brain matter, and that unhinges the system, throws men off
their balance. They are used to certain surroundings, and have to
overcome a huge mass of ancient superstitions, ancestral superstition,
class superstition, city superstition, country superstition, and behind
all, the vast mass of superstition that is innate in every human being.
Yet there are a few brave souls in the world who dare to conceive the
truth, who dare to take it up, and who dare to follow it to the end.

What does the Advaitist declare? He says, if there is a God, that God
must be both the material and the efficient cause of the universe. Not
only is He the creator, but He is also the created. He Himself is this
universe. How can that be? God, the pure, the spirit, has become the
universe? Yes; apparently so. That which all ignorant people see as the
universe does not really exist. What are you and I and all these things
we see? Mere self-hypnotism; there is but one Existence, the Infinite,
the Ever-blessed One. In that Existence we dream all these various
dreams. It is the Atman, beyond all, the Infinite, beyond the known,
beyond the knowable; in and through That we see the universe. It is the
only Reality. It is this table; It is the audience before me; It is the
wall; It is everything, minus the name and form. Take away the form of
the table, take away the name; what remains is It. The Vedantist does
not call It either He or She — these are fictions, delusions of the
human brain — there is no sex in the soul. People who are under
illusion, who have become like animals, see a woman or a man; living
gods do not see men or women. How can they who are beyond everything
have any sex idea? Everyone and everything is the Atman — the Self — the
sexless, the pure, the ever-blessed. It is the name, the form, the body,
which are material, and they make all this difference. If you take away
these two differences of name and form, the whole universe is one; there
are no two, but one everywhere. You and I are one. There is neither
nature, nor God, nor the universe, only that one Infinite Existence, out
of which, through name and form, all these are manufactured. How to know
the Knower? It cannot be known. How can you see your own Self? You can
only reflect yourself. So all this universe is the reflection of that
One Eternal Being, the Atman, and as the reflection falls upon good or
bad reflectors, so good or bad images are cast up. Thus in the murderer,
the reflector is bad and not the Self. In the saint the reflector is
pure. The Self — the Atman — is by Its own nature pure. It is the same,
the one Existence of the universe that is reflecting Itself from the
lowest worm to the highest and most perfect being. The whole of this
universe is one Unity, one Existence, physically, mentally, morally and
spiritually. We are looking upon this one Existence in different forms
and creating all these images upon It. To the being who has limited
himself to the condition of man, It appears as the world of man. To the
being who is on a higher plane of existence, It may seem like heaven.
There is but one Soul in the universe, not two. It neither comes nor
goes. It is neither born, nor dies, nor reincarnates. How can It die?
Where can It go? All these heavens, all these earths, and all these
places are vain imaginations of the mind. They do not exist, never
existed in the past, and never will exist in the future.

I am omnipresent, eternal. Where can I go? Where am I not already? I am
reading this book of nature. Page after page I am finishing and turning
over, and one dream of life after another goes Away. Another page of
life is turned over; another dream of life comes, and it goes away,
rolling and rolling, and when I have finished my reading, I let it go
and stand aside, I throw away the book, and the whole thing is finished.
What does the Advaitist preach? He dethrones all the gods that ever
existed, or ever will exist in the universe and places on that throne
the Self of man, the Atman, higher than the sun and the moon, higher
than the heavens, greater than this great universe itself. No books, no
scriptures, no science can ever imagine the glory of the Self that
appears as man, the most glorious God that ever was, the only God that
ever existed, exists, or ever will exist. I am to worship, therefore,
none but myself. "I worship my Self," says the Advaitist. To whom shall
I bow down? I salute my Self. To whom shall I go for help? Who can help
me, the Infinite Being of the universe? These are foolish dreams,
hallucinations; who ever helped any one? None. Wherever you see a weak
man, a dualist, weeping and wailing for help from somewhere above the
skies, it is because he does not know that the skies also are in him. He
wants help from the skies, and the help comes. We see that it comes; but
it comes from within himself, and he mistakes it as coming from without.
Sometimes a sick man lying on his bed may hear a tap on the door. He
gets up and opens it and finds no one there. He goes back to bed, and
again he hears a tap. He gets up and opens the door. Nobody is there. At
last he finds that it was his own heartbeat which he fancied was a knock
at the door. Thus man, after this vain search after various gods outside
himself, completes the circle, and comes back to the point from which he
started — the human soul, and he finds that the God whom he was
searching in hill and dale, whom he was seeking in every brook, in every
temple, in churches and heavens, that God whom he was even imagining as
sitting in heaven and ruling the world, is his own Self. I am He, and He
is I. None but I was God, and this little I never existed.

Yet, how could that perfect God have been deluded? He never was. How
could a perfect God have been dreaming? He never dreamed. Truth never
dreams. The very question as to whence this illusion arose is absurd.
Illusion arises from illusion alone. There will be no illusion as soon
as the truth is seen. Illusion always rests upon illusion; it never
rests upon God, the Truth, the Atman. You are never in illusion; it is
illusion that is in you, before you. A cloud is here; another comes and
pushes it aside and takes its place. Still another comes and pushes that
one away. As before the eternal blue sky, clouds of various hue and
colour come, remain for a short time and disappear, leaving it the same
eternal blue, even so are you, eternally pure, eternally perfect. You
are the veritable Gods of the universe; nay, there are not two — there
is but One. It is a mistake to say, "you and I"; say "I". It is I who am
eating in millions of mouths; how can I be hungry? It is I who am
working through an infinite number of hands; how can I be inactive? It
is I who am living the life of the whole universe; where is death for
me? I am beyond all life, beyond all death. Where shall I seek for
freedom? I am free by my nature. Who can bind me — the God of this
universe? The scriptures of the world are but little maps, wanting to
delineate my glory, who am the only existence of the universe. Then what
are these books to me? Thus says the Advaitist.

"Know the truth and be free in a moment." All the darkness will then
vanish. When man has seen himself as one with the Infinite Being of the
universe, when all separateness has ceased, when all men and women, and
gods and angels, all animals and plants, and the whole universe have
melted into that Oneness, then all fear disappears. Can I hurt myself?
Can I kill myself? Can I injure myself? Whom to fear? Can you fear
yourself? Then will all sorrow disappear. What can cause me sorrow? I am
the One Existence of the universe. Then all jealousies will disappear;
of whom to be jealous? Of myself? Then all bad feelings disappear.
Against whom can I have bad feeling? Against myself? There is none in
the universe but I. And this is the one way, says the Vedantist, to
Knowledge. Kill out this differentiation, kill out this superstition
that there are many. "He who in this world of many sees that One, he who
in this mass of insentiency sees that one Sentient Being, he who in this
world of shadows catches that Reality, unto him belongs eternal peace,
unto none else, unto none else."

These are the salient points of the three steps which Indian religious
thought has taken in regard to God. We have seen that it began with the
Personal, the extra-cosmic God. It went from the external to the
internal cosmic body, God immanent in the universe, and ended in
identifying the soul itself with that God, and making one Soul, a unit
of all these various manifestations in the universe. This is the last
word of the Vedas. It begins with dualism, goes through a qualified
monism and ends in perfect monism. We know how very few in this world
can come to the last, or even dare believe in it, and fewer still dare
act according to it. Yet we know that therein lies the explanation of
all ethics, of all morality and all spirituality in the universe. Why is
it that every one says, "Do good to others?" Where is the explanation?
Why is it that all great men have preached the brotherhood of mankind,
and greater men the brotherhood of all lives? Because whether they were
conscious of it or not, behind all that, through all their irrational
and personal superstitions, was peering forth the eternal light of the
Self denying all manifoldness, and asserting that the whole universe is
but one.

Again, the last word gave us one universe, which through the senses we
see as matter, through the intellect as souls, and through the spirit as
God. To the man who throws upon himself veils, which the world calls
wickedness and evil, this very universe will change and become a hideous
place; to another man, who wants enjoyments, this very universe will
change its appearance and become a heaven, and to the perfect man the
whole thing will vanish and become his own Self.

Now, as society exists at the present time, all these three stages are
necessary; the one does not deny the other, one is simply the fulfilment
of the other. The Advaitist or the qualified Advaitist does not say that
dualism is wrong; it is a right view, but a lower one. It is on the way
to truth; therefore let everybody work out his own vision of this
universe, according to his own ideas. Injure none, deny the position of
none; take man where he stands and, if you can, lend him a helping hand
and put him on a higher platform, but do not injure and do not destroy.
All will come to truth in the long run. "When all the desires of the
heart will be vanquished, then this very mortal will become immortal" —
then the very man will become God.

</div>
