---
title: THE REAL AND THE APPARENT MAN

---
<div>

[←](the_atman_its_bondage_and_freedom.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Jnana-Yoga](jnana-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](../practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures/practical_vedanta_part_i.htm)

  

CHAPTER XV

## THE REAL AND THE APPARENT MAN

(*Delivered in New York*)

Here we stand, and our eyes look forward sometimes miles ahead. Man has
been doing that since he began to think. He is always looking forward,
looking ahead. He wants to know where he goes even after the dissolution
of his body. Various theories have been propounded, system after system
has been brought forward to suggest explanations. Some have been
rejected, while others have been accepted, and thus it will go on, so
long as man is here, so long as man thinks. There is some truth in each
of these systems. There is a good deal of what is not truth in all of
them. I shall try to place before you the sum and substance, the result,
of the inquiries in this line that have been made in India. I shall try
to harmonise the various thoughts on the subject, as they have come up
from time to time among Indian philosophers. I shall try to harmonise
the psychologists and the metaphysicians, and, if possible, I shall
harmonise them with modern scientific thinkers also.

The one theme of the Vedanta philosophy is the search after unity. The
Hindu mind does not care for the particular; it is always after the
general, nay, the universal. "What is that, by knowing which everything
else is to be known?" That is the one theme. "As through the knowledge
of one lump of clay all that is of clay is known, so, what is that, by
knowing which this whole universe itself will be known?" That is the one
search. The whole of this universe, according to the Hindu philosophers,
can be resolved into one material, which they call Âkâsha. Everything
that we see around us, feel, touch, taste, is simply a differentiated
manifestation of this Akasha. It is all-pervading, fine. All that we
call solids, liquids, or gases, figures, forms, or bodies, the earth,
sun, moon, and stars — everything is composed of this Akasha.

What force is it which acts upon this Akasha and manufactures this
universe out of it? Along with Akasha exists universal power; all that
is power in the universe, manifesting as force or attraction — nay, even
as thought — is but a different manifestation of that one power which
the Hindus call Prâna. This Prana, acting on Akasha, is creating the
whole of this universe. In the beginning of a cycle, this Prana, as it
were, sleeps in the infinite ocean of Akasha. It existed motionless in
the beginning. Then arises motion in this ocean of Akasha by the action
of this Prana, and as this Prana begins to move, to vibrate, out of this
ocean come the various celestial systems, suns, moons, stars, earth,
human beings, animals, plants, and the manifestations of all the various
forces and phenomena. Every manifestation of power, therefore, according
to them, is this Prana. Every material manifestation is Akasha. When
this cycle will end, all that we call solid will melt away into the next
form, the next finer or the liquid form; that will melt into the
gaseous, and that into finer and more uniform heat vibrations, and all
will melt back into the original Akasha, and what we now call
attraction, repulsion, and motion, will slowly resolve into the original
Prana. Then this Prana is said to sleep for a period, again to emerge
and to throw out all those forms; and when this period will end, the
whole thing will subside again. Thus this process of creation is going
down, and coming up, oscillating backwards and forwards. In the language
of modern science, it is becoming static during one period, and during
another period it is becoming dynamic. At one time it becomes potential,
and at the next period it becomes active. This alteration has gone on
through eternity.

Yet, this analysis is only partial. This much has been known even to
modern physical science. Beyond that, the research of physical science
cannot reach. But the inquiry does not stop in consequence. We have not
yet found that one, by knowing which everything else will be known. We
have resolved the whole universe into two components, into what are
called matter and energy, or what the ancient philosophers of India
called Akasha and Prana. The next step is to resolve this Akasha and the
Prana into their origin. Both can be resolved into the still higher
entity which is called mind. It is out of mind, the Mahat, the
universally existing thought-power, that these two have been produced.
Thought is a still finer manifestation of being than either Akasha or
Prana. It is thought that splits itself into these two. The universal
thought existed in the beginning, and that manifested, changed, evolved
itself into these two Akasha and Prana: and by the combination of these
two the whole universe has been produced.

We next come to psychology. I am looking at you. The external sensations
are brought to me by the eyes; they are carried by the sensory nerves to
the brain. The eyes are not the organs of vision. They are but the
external instruments, because if the real organ behind, that which
carries the sensation to the brain, is destroyed, I may have twenty
eyes, yet I cannot see you. The picture on the retina may be as complete
as possible, yet I shall not see you. Therefore, the organ is different
from its instruments; behind the instruments, the eyes, there must be
the organ So it is with all the sensations. The nose is not the sense of
smell; it is but the instrument, and behind it is the organ. With every
sense we have, there is first the external instrument in the physical
body; behind that in the same physical body, there is the organ; yet
these are not sufficient. Suppose I am talking to you, and you are
listening to me with close attention. Something happens, say, a bell
rings; you will not, perhaps, hear the bell ring. The pulsations of that
sound came to your ear, struck the tympanum, the impression was carried
by the nerve into the brain; if the whole process was complete up to
carrying the impulse to the brain, why did you not hear? Something else
was wanting — the mind was not attached to the organ. When the mind
detaches itself from the organ, the organ may bring any news to it, but
the mind will not receive it. When it attaches itself to the organ, then
alone is it possible for the mind to receive the news. Yet, even that
does not complete the whole. The instruments may bring the sensation
from outside, the organs may carry it inside, the mind may attach itself
to the organ, and yet the perception may not be complete. One more
factor is necessary; there must be a reaction within. With this reaction
comes knowledge. That which is outside sends, as it were, the current of
news into my brain. My mind takes it up, and presents it to the
intellect, which groups it in relation to pre-received impressions and
sends a current of reaction, and with that reaction comes perception.
Here, then, is the will. The state of mind which reacts is called
Buddhi, the intellect. Yet, even this does not complete the whole. One
step more is required. Suppose here is a camera and there is a sheet of
cloth, and I try to throw a picture on that sheet. What am I to do? I am
to guide various rays of light through the camera to fall upon the sheet
and become grouped there. Something is necessary to have the picture
thrown upon, which does not move. I cannot form a picture upon something
which is moving; that something must be stationary, because the rays of
light which I throw on it are moving, and these moving rays of light,
must be gathered, unified, co-ordinated, and completed upon something
which is stationary. Similar is the case with the sensations which these
organs of ours are carrying inside and presenting to the mind, and which
the mind in its turn is presenting to the intellect. This process will
not be complete unless there is something permanent in the background
upon which the picture, as it were, may be formed, upon which we may
unify all the different impressions. What is it that gives unity to the
changing whole of our being? What is it that keeps up the identity of
the moving thing moment after moment? What is it upon which all our
different impressions are pieced together, upon which the perceptions,
as it were, come together, reside, and form a united whole? We have
found that to serve this end there must be something, and we also see
that that something must be, relatively to the body and mind,
motionless. The sheet of cloth upon which the camera throws the picture
is, relatively to the rays of light, motionless, else there will be no
picture. That is to say, the perceiver must be an individual. This
something upon which the mind is painting all these pictures, this
something upon which our sensations, carried by the mind and intellect,
are placed and grouped and formed into a unity, is what is called the
soul of man.

We have seen that it is the universal cosmic mind that splits itself
into the Akasha and Prana, and beyond mind we have found the soul in us.
In the universe, behind the universal mind, there is a Soul that exists,
and it is called God. In the individual it is the soul of man. In this
universe, in the cosmos, just as the universal mind becomes evolved into
Akasha and Prana, even so, we may find that the Universal Soul Itself
becomes evolved as mind. Is it really so with the individual man? Is his
mind the creator of his body, and his soul the creator of his mind? That
is to say, are his body, his mind, and his soul three different
existences or are they three in one or, again, are they different states
of existence of the same unit being? We shall gradually try to find an
answer to this question. The first step that we have now gained is this:
here is this external body, behind this external body are the organs,
the mind, the intellect, and behind this is the soul. At the first step,
we have found, as it were, that the soul is separate from the body,
separate from the mind itself. Opinions in the religious world become
divided at this point, and the departure is this. All those religious
views which generally pass under the name of dualism hold that this soul
is qualified, that it is of various qualities, that all feelings of
enjoyment, pleasure, and pain really belong to the soul. The
non-dualists deny that the soul has any such qualities; they say it is
unqualified.

Let me first take up the dualists, and try to present to you their
position with regard to the soul and its destiny; next, the system that
contradicts them; and lastly, let us try to find the harmony which
non-dualism will bring to us. This soul of man, because it is separate
from the mind and body, because it is not composed of Akasha and Prana,
must be immortal. Why? What do we mean by mortality? Decomposition. And
that is only possible for things that are the result of composition;
anything that is made of two or three ingredients must become
decomposed. That alone which is not the result of composition can never
become decomposed, and, therefore, can never die. It is immortal. It has
been existing throughout eternity; it is uncreate. Every item of
creation is simply a composition; no one ever saw creation come out of
nothing. All that we know of creation is the combination of already
existing things into newer forms. That being so, this soul of man, being
simple, must have been existing for ever, and it will exist for ever.
When this body falls off, the soul lives on. According to the
Vedantists, when this body dissolves, the vital forces of the man go
back to his mind and the mind becomes dissolved, as it were, into the
Prana, and that Prana enters into the soul of man, and the soul of man
comes out, clothed, as it were, with what they call the fine body, the
mental body, or spiritual body, as you may like to call it. In this body
are the Samskâras of the man. What are the Samskaras? This mind is like
a lake, and every thought is like a wave upon that lake. Just as in the
lake waves rise and then fall down and disappear, so these thought-waves
are continually rising in the mind-stuff and then disappearing, but they
do not disappear for ever. They become finer and finer, but they are all
there, ready to start up at another time when called upon to do so.
Memory is simply calling back into waveform some of those thoughts which
have gone into that finer state of existence. Thus, everything that we
have thought, every action that we have done, is lodged in the mind; it
is all there in fine form, and when a man dies, the sum total of these
impressions is in the mind, which again works upon a little fine
material as a medium. The soul, clothed, as it were, with these
impressions and the fine body, passes out, and the destiny of the soul
is guided by the resultant of all the different forces represented by
the different impressions. According to us, there are three different
goals for the soul.

Those that are very spiritual, when they die, follow the solar rays and
reach what is called the solar sphere, through which they reach what is
called the lunar sphere, and through that they reach what is called the
sphere of lightning, and there they meet with another soul who is
already blessed, and he guides the new-comer forward to the highest of
all spheres, which is called the Brahmaloka, the sphere of Brahmâ. There
these souls attain to omniscience and omnipotence, become almost as
powerful and all-knowing as God Himself; and they reside there for ever,
according to the dualists, or, according to the non-dualists, they
become one with the Universal at the end of the cycle. The next class of
persons, who have been doing good work with selfish motives, are carried
by the results of their good works, when they die, to what is called
lunar sphere, where there are various heavens, and there they acquire
fine bodies, the bodies of gods. They become gods and live there and
enjoy the blessing of heaven for a long period; and after that period is
finished, the old Karma is again upon them, and so they fall back again
to the earth; they come down through the spheres of air and clouds and
all these various regions, and, at last, reach the earth through
raindrops. There on the earth they attach themselves to some cereal
which is eventually eaten by some man who is fit to supply them with
material to make a new body. The last class, namely, the wicked, when
they die, become ghosts or demons, and live somewhere midway between the
lunar sphere and this earth. Some try to disturb mankind, some are
friendly; and after living there for some time they also fall back to
the earth and become animals. After living for some time in an animal
body they get released, and come back, and become men again, and thus
get one more chance to work out their salvation. We see, then, that
those who have nearly attained to perfection, in whom only very little
of impurity remains, go to the Brahmaloka through the rays of the sun;
those who were a middling sort of people, who did some good work here
with the idea of going to heaven, go to the heavens in the lunar sphere
and there obtain god-bodies; but they have again to become men and so
have one more chance to become perfect. Those that are very wicked
become ghosts and demons, and then they may have to become animals;
after that they become men again and get another chance to perfect
themselves. This earth is called the Karma-Bhumi, the sphere of Karma.
Here alone man makes his good or bad Karma. When a man wants to go to
heaven and does good works for that purpose, he becomes as good and does
not as such store up any bad Karma. He just enjoys the effects of the
good work he did on earth; and when this good Karma is exhausted, there
come, upon him the resultant force of all the evil Karma he had
previously stored up in life, and that brings him down again to this
earth. In the same way, those that become ghosts remain in that state,
not giving rise to fresh Karma, but suffer the evil results of their
past misdeeds, and later on remain for a time in an animal body without
causing any fresh Karma. When that period is finished, they too become
men again. The states of reward and punishment due to good and bad
Karmas are devoid of the force generating fresh Karmas; they have only
to be enjoyed or suffered. If there is an extraordinarily good or an
extraordinarily evil Karma, it bears fruit very quickly. For instance,
if a man has been doing many evil things all his life, but does one good
act, the result of that good act will immediately appear, but when that
result has been gone through, all the evil acts must produce their
results also. All men who do certain good and great acts, but the
general tenor of whose lives has not been correct, will become gods; and
after living for some time in god-bodies, enjoying the powers of gods,
they will have again to become men; when the power of the good acts is
thus finished, the old evil comes up to be worked out. Those who do
extraordinarily evil acts have to put on ghost and devil bodies, and
when the effect of those evil actions is exhausted, the little good
action which remains associated with them, makes them again become men.
The way to Brahmaloka, from which there is no more fall or return, is
called the Devayâna, i.e. the way to God; the way to heaven is known as
Pitriyâna, i.e. the way to the fathers.

Man, therefore, according to the Vedanta philosophy, is the greatest
being that is in the universe, and this world of work the best place in
it, because only herein is the greatest and the best chance for him to
become perfect. Angels or gods, whatever you may call them, have all to
become men, if they want to become perfect. This is the great centre,
the wonderful poise, and the wonderful opportunity — this human life.

We come next to the other aspect of philosophy. There are Buddhists who
deny the whole theory of the soul that I have just now been propounding.
"What use is there," says the Buddhist, "to assume something as the
substratum, as the background of this body and mind? Why may we not
allow thoughts to run on? Why admit a third substance beyond this
organism, composed of mind and body, a third substance called the soul?
What is its use? Is not this organism sufficient to explain itself? Why
take anew a third something?" These arguments are very powerful. This
reasoning is very strong. So far as outside research goes, we see that
this organism is a sufficient explanation of itself — at least, many of
us see it in that light. Why then need there be a soul as substratum, as
a something which is neither mind nor body but stands as a background
for both mind and body? Let there be only mind and body. Body is the
name of a stream of matter continuously changing. Mind is the name of a
stream of consciousness or thought continuously changing. What produces
the apparent unity between these two? This unity does not really exist,
let us say. Take, for instance, a lighted torch, and whirl it rapidly
before you. You see a circle of fire. The circle does not really exist,
but because the torch is continually moving, it leaves the appearance of
a circle. So there is no unity in this life; it is a mass of matter
continually rushing down, and the whole of this matter you may call one
unity, but no more. So is mind; each thought is separate from every
other thought; it is only the rushing current that leaves behind the
illusion of unity; there is no need of a third substance. This universal
phenomenon of body and mind is all that really is; do not posit
something behind it. You will find that this Buddhist thought has been
taken up by certain sects and schools in modern times, and all of them
claim that it is new — their own invention. This has been the central
idea of most of the Buddhistic philosophies, that this world is itself
all-sufficient; that you need not ask for any background at all; all
that is, is this sense-universe: what is the use of thinking of
something as a support to this universe? Everything is the aggregate of
qualities; why should there be a hypothetical substance in which they
should inhere? The idea of substance comes from the rapid interchange of
qualities, not from something unchangeable which exists behind them. We
see how wonderful some of these arguments are, and they appeal easily to
the ordinary experience of humanity — in fact, not one in a million can
think of anything other than phenomena. To the vast majority of men
nature appears to be only a changing, whirling, combining, mingling mass
of change. Few of us ever have a glimpse of the calm sea behind. For us
it is always lashed into waves; this universe appears to us only as a
tossing mass of waves. Thus we find these two opinions. One is that
there is something behind both body and mind which is an unchangeable
and immovable substance; and the other is that there is no such thing as
immovability or unchangeability in the universe; it is all change and
nothing but change. The solution of this difference comes in the next
step of thought, namely, the non-dualistic.

It says that the dualists are right in finding something behind all, as
a background which does not change; we cannot conceive change without
there being something unchangeable. We can only conceive of anything
that is changeable, by knowing something which is less changeable, and
this also must appear more changeable in comparison with something else
which is less changeable, and so on and on, until we are bound to admit
that there must be something which never changes at all. The whole of
this manifestation must have been in a state of non-manifestation, calm
and silent, being the balance of opposing forces, so to say, when no
force operated, because force acts when a disturbance of the equilibrium
comes in. The universe is ever hurrying on to return to that state of
equilibrium again. If we are certain of any fact whatsoever, we are
certain of this. When the dualists claim that there is a something which
does not change, they are perfectly right, but their analysis that it is
an underlying something which is neither the body nor the mind, a
something separate from both, is wrong. So far as the Buddhists say that
the whole universe is a mass of change, they are perfectly right; so
long as I am separate from the universe, so long as I stand back and
look at something before me, so long as there are two things — the
looker-on and the thing looked upon — it will appear always that the
universe is one of change, continuously changing all the time. But the
reality is that there is both change and changelessness in this
universe. It is not that the soul and the mind and the body are three
separate existences, for this organism made of these three is really
one. It is the same thing which appears as the body, as the mind, and as
the thing beyond mind and body, but it is not at the same time all
these. He who sees the body does not see the mind even, he who sees the
mind does not see that which he calls the soul, and he who sees the soul
— for him the body and mind have vanished. He who sees only motion never
sees absolute calm, and he who sees absolute calm — for him motion has
vanished. A rope is taken for a snake. He who sees the rope as the
snake, for him the rope has vanished, and when the delusion ceases and
he looks at the rope, the snake has vanished.

There is then but one all-comprehending existence, and that one appears
as manifold. This Self or Soul or Substance is all that exists in the
universe. That Self or Substance or Soul is, in the language of
non-dualism, the Brahman appearing to be manifold by the interposition
of name and form. Look at the waves in the sea. Not one wave is really
different from the sea, but what makes the wave apparently different?
Name and form; the form of the wave and the name which we give to it,
"wave". This is what makes it different from the sea. When name and form
go, it is the same sea. Who can make any real difference between the
wave and the sea? So this whole universe is that one Unit Existence;
name and form have created all these various differences. As when the
sun shines upon millions of globules of water, upon each particle is
seen a most perfect representation of the sun, so the one Soul, the one
Self, the one Existence of the universe, being reflected on all these
numerous globules of varying names and forms, appears to be various. But
it is in reality only one. There is no "I" nor "you"; it is all one. It
is either all "I" or all "you". This idea of duality, calf two, is
entirely false, and the whole universe, as we ordinarily know it, is the
result of this false knowledge. When discrimination comes and man finds
there are not two but one, he finds that he is himself this universe.
"It is I who am this universe as it now exists, a continuous mass of
change. It is I who am beyond all changes, beyond all qualities, the
eternally perfect, the eternally blessed."

There is, therefore, but one Atman, one Self, eternally pure, eternally
perfect, unchangeable, unchanged; it has never changed; and all these
various changes in the universe are but appearances in that one Self.

Upon it name and form have painted all these dreams; it is the form that
makes the wave different from the sea. Suppose the wave subsides, will
the form remain? No, it will vanish. The existence of the wave was
entirely dependent upon the existence of the sea, but the existence of
the sea was not at all dependent upon the existence of the wave. The
form remains so long as the wave remains, but as soon as the wave leaves
it, it vanishes, it cannot remain. This name and form is the outcome of
what is called Maya. It is this Maya that is making individuals, making
one appear different from another. Yet it has no existence. Maya cannot
be said to exist. Form cannot be said to exist, because it depends upon
the existence of another thing. It cannot be said as not to exist,
seeing that it makes all this difference. According to the Advaita
philosophy, then, this Maya or ignorance — or name and form, or, as it
has been called in Europe, "time, space, and causality" — is out of this
one Infinite Existence showing us the manifoldness of the universe; in
substance, this universe is one. So long as any one thinks that there
are two ultimate realities, he is mistaken. When he has come to know
that there is but one, he is right. This is what is being proved to us
every day, on the physical plane, on the mental plane, and also on the
spiritual plane. Today it has been demonstrated that you and I, the sun,
the moon, and the stars are but the different names of different spots
in the same ocean of matter, and that this matter is continuously
changing in its configuration. This particle of energy that was in the
sun several months ago may be in the human being now; tomorrow it may be
in an animal, the day after tomorrow it may be in a plant. It is ever
coming and going. It is all one unbroken, infinite mass of matter, only
differentiated by names and forms. One point is called the sun; another,
the moon; another, the stars; another, man; another, animal; another,
plant; and so on. And all these names are fictitious; they have no
reality, because the whole is a continuously changing mass of matter.
This very same universe, from another standpoint, is an ocean of
thought, where each one of us is a point called a particular mind. You
are a mind, I am a mind, everyone is a mind; and the very same universe
viewed from the standpoint of knowledge, when the eyes have been cleared
of delusions, when the mind has become pure, appears to be the unbroken
Absolute Being, the ever pure, the unchangeable, the immortal.

What then becomes of all this threefold eschatology of the dualist, that
when a man dies he goes to heaven, or goes to this or that sphere, and
that the wicked persons become ghosts, and become animals, and so forth?
None comes and none goes, says the non-dualist. How can you come and go?
You are infinite; where is the place for you to go? In a certain school
a number of little children were being examined. The examiner had
foolishly put all sorts of difficult questions to the little children.
Among others there was this question: "Why does not the earth fall ?"
His intention was to bring out the idea of gravitation or some other
intricate scientific truth from these children. Most of them could not
even understand the question, and so they gave all sorts of wrong
answers. But one bright little girl answered it with another question:
"Where shall it fall?" The very question of the examiner was nonsense on
the face of it. There is no up and down in the universe; the idea is
only relative. So it is with regard to the soul; the very question of
birth and death in regard to it is utter nonsense. Who goes and who
comes? Where are you not? Where is the heaven that you are not in
already? Omnipresent is the Self of man. Where is it to go? Where is it
not to go? It is everywhere. So all this childish dream and puerile
illusion of birth and death, of heavens and higher heavens and lower
worlds, all vanish immediately for the perfect. For the nearly perfect
it vanishes after showing them the several scenes up to Brahmaloka. It
continues for the ignorant.

How is it that the whole world believes in going to heaven, and in dying
and being born? I am studying a book, page after page is being read and
turned over. Another page comes and is turned over. Who changes? Who
comes and goes? Not I, but the book. This whole nature is a book before
the soul, chapter after chapter is being read and turned over, and every
now and then a scene opens. That is read and turned over. A fresh one
comes, but the soul is ever the same — eternal. It is nature that is
changing, not the soul of man. This never changes. Birth and death are
in nature, not in you. Yet the ignorant are deluded; just as we under
delusion think that the sun is moving and not the earth, in exactly the
same way we think that we are dying, and not nature. These are all,
therefore, hallucinations. Just as it is a hallucination when we think
that the fields are moving and not the railway train, exactly in the
same manner is the hallucination of birth and death. When men are in a
certain frame of mind, they see this very existence as the earth, as the
sun, the moon, the stars; and all those who are in the same state of
mind see the same things. Between you and me there may be millions of
beings on different planes of existence. They will never see us, nor we
them; we only see those who are in the same state of mind and on the
same plane with us. Those musical instruments respond which have the
same attunement of vibration, as it were; if the state of vibration,
which they call "man-vibration", should be changed, no longer would men
be seen here; the whole "man-universe" would vanish, and instead of
that, other scenery would come before us, perhaps gods and the
god-universe, or perhaps, for the wicked man, devils and the diabolic
world; but all would be only different views of the one universe. It is
this universe which, from the human plane, is seen as the earth, the
sun, the moon, the stars, and all such things — it is this very universe
which, seen from the plane of wickedness, appears as a place of
punishment. And this very universe is seen as heaven by those who want
to see it as heaven. Those who have been dreaming of going to a God who
is sitting on a throne, and of standing there praising Him all their
lives, when they die, will simply see a vision of what they have in
their minds; this very universe will simply change into a vast heaven,
with all sorts of winged beings flying about and a God sitting on a
throne. These heavens are all of man's own making. So what the dualist
says is true, says the Advaitin, but it is all simply of his own making.
These spheres and devils and gods and reincarnations and transmigrations
are all mythology; so also is this human life. The great mistake that
men always make is to think that this life alone is true. They
understand it well enough when other things are called mythologies, but
are never willing to admit the same of their own position. The whole
thing as it appears is mere mythology, and the greatest of all lies is
that we are bodies, which we never were nor even can be. It is the
greatest of all lies that we are mere men; we are the God of the
universe. In worshipping God we have been always worshipping our own
hidden Self. The worst lie that you ever tell yourself is that you were
born a sinner or a wicked man. He alone is a sinner who sees a sinner in
another man. Suppose there is a baby here, and you place a bag of gold
on the table. Suppose a robber comes and takes the gold away. To the
baby it is all the same; because there is no robber inside, there is no
robber outside. To sinners and vile men, there is vileness outside, but
not to good men. So the wicked see this universe as a hell, and the
partially good see it as heaven, while the perfect beings realise it as
God Himself. Then alone the veil falls from the eyes, and the man,
purified and cleansed, finds his whole vision changed. The bad dreams
that have been torturing him for millions of years, all vanish, and he
who was thinking of himself either as a man, or a god, or a demon, he
who was thinking of himself as living in low places, in high places, on
earth, in heaven, and so on, finds that he is really omnipresent; that
all time is in him, and that he is not in time; that all the heavens are
in him, that he is not in any heaven; and that all the gods that man
ever worshipped are in him, and that he is not in any one of those gods.
He was the manufacturer of gods and demons, of men and plants and
animals and stones, and the real nature of man now stands unfolded to
him as being higher than heaven, more perfect than this universe of
ours, more infinite than infinite time, more omnipresent than the
omnipresent ether. Thus alone man becomes fearless, and becomes free.
Then all delusions cease, all miseries vanish, all fears come to an end
for ever. Birth goes away and with it death; pains fly, and with them
fly away pleasures; earths vanish, and with them vanish heavens; bodies
vanish, and with them vanishes the mind also. For that man disappears
the whole universe, as it were. This searching, moving, continuous
struggle of forces stops for ever, and that which was manifesting itself
as force and matter, as struggles of nature, as nature itself, as
heavens and earths and plants and animals and men and angels, all that
becomes transfigured into one infinite, unbreakable, unchangeable
existence, and the knowing man finds that he is one with that existence.
"Even as clouds of various colours come before the sky, remain there for
a second and then vanish away," even so before this soul are all these
visions coming, of earths and heavens, of the moon and the gods, of
pleasures and pains; but they all pass away leaving the one infinite,
blue, unchangeable sky. The sky never changes; it is the clouds that
change. It is a mistake to think that the sky is changed. It is a
mistake to think that we are impure, that we are limited, that we are
separate. The real man is the one Unit Existence.

Two questions now arise. The first is: "Is it possible to realise this?
So far it is doctrine, philosophy, but is it possible to realise it?" It
is. There are men still living in this world for whom delusion has
vanished for ever. Do they immediately die after such realisation? Not
so soon as we should think. Two wheels joined by one pole are running
together. If I get hold of one of the wheels and, with an axe, cut the
pole asunder, the wheel which I have got hold of stops, but upon the
other wheel is its past momentum, so it runs on a little and then falls
down. This pure and perfect being, the soul, is one wheel, and this
external hallucination of body and mind is the other wheel, joined
together by the pole of work, of Karma. Knowledge is the axe which will
sever the bond between the two, and the wheel of the soul will stop —
stop thinking that it is coming and going, living and dying, stop
thinking that it is nature and has wants and desires, and will find that
it is perfect, desireless. But upon the other wheel, that of the body
and mind, will be the momentum of past acts; so it will live for some
time, until that momentum of past work is exhausted, until that momentum
is worked away, and then the body and mind fall, and the soul becomes
free. No more is there any going to heaven and coming back, not even any
going to the Brahmaloka, or to any of the highest of the spheres, for
where is he to come from, or to go to? The man who has in this life
attained to this state, for whom, for a minute at least, the ordinary
vision of the world has changed and the reality has been apparent, he is
called the "Living Free". This is the goal of the Vedantin, to attain
freedom while living.

Once in Western India I was travelling in the desert country on the
coast of the Indian Ocean. For days and days I used to travel on foot
through the desert, but it was to my surprise that I saw every day
beautiful lakes, with trees all round them, and the shadows of the trees
upside down and vibrating there. "How wonderful it looks and they call
this a desert country!" I said to myself. Nearly a month I travelled,
seeing these wonderful lakes and trees and plants. One day I was very
thirsty and wanted to have a drink of water, so I started to go to one
of these clear, beautiful lakes, and as I approached, it vanished. And
with a flash it came to my brain, "This is the mirage about which I have
read all my life," and with that came also the idea that throughout the
whole of this month, every day, I had been seeing the mirage and did not
know it. The next morning I began my march. There was again the lake,
but with it came also the idea that it was the mirage and not a true
lake. So is it with this universe. We are all travelling in this mirage
of the world day after day, month after month, year after year, not
knowing that it is a mirage. One day it will break up, but it will come
back again; the body has to remain under the power of past Karma, and so
the mirage will come back. This world will come back upon us so long as
we are bound by Karma: men, women, animals, plants, our attachments and
duties, all will come back to us, but not with the same power. Under the
influence of the new knowledge the strength of Karma will be broken, its
poison will be lost. It becomes transformed, for along with it there
comes the idea that we know it now, that the sharp distinction between
the reality and the mirage has been known.

This world will not then be the same world as before. There is, however,
a danger here. We see in every country people taking up this philosophy
and saying, "I am beyond all virtue and vice; so I am not bound by any
moral laws; I may do anything I like." You may find many fools in this
country at the present time, saying, "I am not bound; I am God Himself;
let me do anything I like." This is not right, although it is true that
the soul is beyond all laws, physical, mental, or moral. Within law is
bondage; beyond law is freedom. It is also true that freedom is of the
nature of the soul, it is its birthright: that real freedom of the soul
shines through veils of matter in the form of the apparent freedom of
man. Every moment of your life you feel that you are free. We cannot
live, talk, or breathe for a moment without feeling that we are free;
but, at the same time, a little thought shows us that we are like
machines and not free. What is true then? Is this idea of freedom a
delusion? One party holds that the idea of freedom is a delusion;
another says that the idea of bondage is a delusion. How does this
happen? Man is really free, the real man cannot but be free. It is when
he comes into the world of Maya, into name and form, that he becomes
bound. Free will is a misnomer. Will can never be free. How can it be?
It is only when the real man has become bound that his will comes into
existence, and not before. The will of man is bound, but that which is
the foundation of that will is eternally free. So, even in the state of
bondage which we call human life or god-life, on earth or in heaven,
there yet remains to us that recollection of the freedom which is ours
by divine right. And consciously or unconsciously we are all struggling
towards it. When a man has attained his own freedom, how can he be bound
by any law? No law in this universe can bind him, for this universe
itself is his.

He is the whole universe. Either say he is the whole universe or say
that to him there is no universe. How can he have then all these little
ideas about sex and about country? How can he say, I am a man, I am a
woman I am a child? Are they not lies? He knows that they are. How can
he say that these are man's rights, and these others are woman's rights?
Nobody has rights; nobody separately exists. There is neither man nor
woman; the soul is sexless, eternally pure. It is a lie to say that I am
a man or a woman, or to say that I belong to this country or that. All
the world is my country, the whole universe is mine, because I have
clothed myself with it as my body. Yet we see that there are people in
this world who are ready to assert these doctrines, and at the same time
do things which we should call filthy; and if we ask them why they do
so, they tell us that it is our delusion and that they can do nothing
wrong. What is the test by which they are to be judged? The test is
here.

Though evil and good are both conditioned manifestations of the soul,
yet evil is the most external coating, and good is the nearer coating of
the real man, the Self. And unless a man cuts through the layer of evil
he cannot reach the layer of good, and unless he has passed through both
the layers of good and evil he cannot reach the Self. He who reaches the
Self, what remains attached to him? A little Karma, a little bit of the
momentum of past life, but it is all good momentum. Until the bad
momentum is entirely worked out and past impurities are entirely burnt,
it is impossible for any man to see and realise truth. So, what is left
attached to the man who has reached the Self and seen the truth is the
remnant of the good impressions of past life, the good momentum. Even if
he lives in the body and works incessantly, he works only to do good;
his lips speak only benediction to all; his hands do only good works;
his mind can only think good thoughts; his presence is a blessing
wherever he goes. He is himself a living blessing. Such a man will, by
his very presence, change even the most wicked persons into saints. Even
if he does not speak, his very presence will be a blessing to mankind.
Can such men do any evil; can they do wicked deeds? There is, you must
remember, all the difference of pole to pole between realisation and
mere talking. Any fool can talk. Even parrots talk. Talking is one
thing, and realising is another. Philosophies, and doctrines, and
arguments, and books, and theories, and churches, and sects, and all
these things are good in their own way; but when that realisation comes,
these things drop away. For instance, maps are good, but when you see
the country itself, and look again at the maps, what a great difference
you find! So those that have realised truth do not require the
ratiocinations of logic and all other gymnastics of the intellect to
make them understand the truth; it is to them the life of their lives,
concretised, made more than tangible. It is, as the sages of the Vedanta
say, "even as a fruit in your hand"; you can stand up and say, it is
here. So those that have realised the truth will stand up and say, "Here
is the Self". You may argue with them by the year, but they will smile
at you; they will regard it all as child's prattle; they will let the
child prattle on. They have realised the truth and are full. Suppose you
have seen a country, and another man comes to you and tries to argue
with you that that country never existed, he may go on arguing
indefinitely, but your only attitude of mind towards him must be to hold
that the man is fit for a lunatic asylum. So the man of realisation
says, "All this talk in the world about its little religions is but
prattle; realisation is the soul, the very essence of religion."
Religion can be realised. Are you ready? Do you want it? You will get
the realisation if you do, and then you will be truly religious. Until
you have attained realisation there is no difference between you and
atheists. The atheists are sincere, but the man who says that he
believes in religion and never attempts to realise it is not sincere.

The next question is to know what comes after realisation. Suppose we
have realised this oneness of the universe, that we are that one
Infinite Being, and suppose we have realised that this Self is the only
Existence and that it is the same Self which is manifesting in all these
various phenomenal forms, what becomes of us after that? Shall we become
inactive, get into a corner and sit down there and die away? "What good
will it do to the world?" That old question! In the first place, why
should it do good to the world? Is there any reason why it should? What
right has any one to ask the question, "What good will it do to the
world?" What is meant by that? A baby likes candies. Suppose you are
conducting investigations in connection with some subject of electricity
and the baby asks you, "Does it buy candies?" "No" you answer. "Then
what good will it do?" says the baby. So men stand up and say, "What
good will this do to the world; will it give us money?" "No." "Then what
good is there in it?" That is what men mean by doing good to the world.
Yet religious realisation does all the good to the world. People are
afraid that when they attain to it, when they realise that there is but
one, the fountains of love will be dried up, that everything in life
will go away, and that all they love will vanish for them, as it were,
in this life and in the life to come. People never stop to think that
those who bestowed the least thought on their own individualities have
been the greatest workers in the world. Then alone a man loves when he
finds that the object of his love is not any low, little, mortal thing.
Then alone a man loves when he finds that the object of his love is not
a clod of earth, but it is the veritable God Himself. The wife will love
the husband the more when she thinks that the husband is God Himself.
The husband will love the wife the more when he knows that the wife is
God Himself. That mother will love the children more who thinks that the
children are God Himself. That man will love his greatest enemy who
knows that that very enemy is God Himself. That man will love a holy man
who knows that the holy man is God Himself, and that very man will also
love the unholiest of men because he knows the background of that
unholiest of men is even He, the Lord. Such a man becomes a world-mover
for whom his little self is dead and God stands in its place. The whole
universe will become transfigured to him. That which is painful and
miserable will all vanish; struggles will all depart and go. Instead of
being a prison-house, where we every day struggle and fight and compete
for a morsel of bread, this universe will then be to us a playground.
Beautiful will be this universe then! Such a man alone has the right to
stand up and say, "How beautiful is this world!" He alone has the right
to say that it is all good. This will be the great good to the world
resulting from such realisation, that instead of this world going on
with all its friction and clashing, if all mankind today realise only a
bit of that great truth, the aspect of the whole world will be changed,
and, in place of fighting and quarrelling, there would be a reign of
peace. This indecent and brutal hurry which forces us to go ahead of
every one else will then vanish from the world. With it will vanish all
struggle, with it will vanish all hate, with it will vanish all
jealousy, and all evil will vanish away for ever. Gods will live then
upon this earth. This very earth will then become heaven, and what evil
can there be when gods are playing with gods, when gods are working with
gods, and gods are loving gods? That is the great utility of divine
realisation. Everything that you see in society will be changed and
transfigured then. No more will you think of man as evil; and that is
the first great gain. No more will you stand up and sneeringly cast a
glance at a poor man or woman who has made a mistake. No more, ladies,
will you look down with contempt upon the poor woman who walks the
street in the night, because you will see even there God Himself. No
more will you think of jealousy and punishments. They will all vanish;
and love, the great ideal of love, will be so powerful that no whip and
cord will be necessary to guide mankind aright.

If one millionth part of the men and women who live in this world simply
sit down and for a few minutes say, "You are all God, O ye men and O ye
animals and living beings, you are all the manifestations of the one
living Deity!" the whole world will be changed in half an hour. Instead
of throwing tremendous bomb-shells of hatred into every corner, instead
of projecting currents of jealousy and of evil thought, in every country
people will think that it is all He. He is all that you see and feel.
How can you see evil until there is evil in you? How can you see the
thief, unless he is there, sitting in the heart of your heart? How can
you see the murderer until you are yourself the murderer? Be good, and
evil will vanish for you. The whole universe will thus be changed. This
is the greatest gain to society. This is the great gain to the human
organism. These thoughts were thought out, worked out amongst
individuals in ancient times in India. For various reasons, such as the
exclusiveness of the teachers and foreign conquest, those thoughts were
not allowed to spread. Yet they are grand truths; and wherever they have
been working, man has become divine. My whole life has been changed by
the touch of one of these divine men, about whom I am going to speak to
you next Sunday; and the time is coming when these thoughts will be cast
abroad over the whole world. Instead of living in monasteries, instead
of being confined to books of philosophy to be studied only by the
learned, instead of being the exclusive possession of sects and of a few
of the learned, they will all be sown broadcast over the whole world, so
that they may become the common property of the saint and the sinner, of
men and women and children, of the learned and of the ignorant. They
will then permeate the atmosphere of the world, and the very air that we
breathe will say with every one of its pulsations, "Thou art That". And
the whole universe with its myriads of suns and moons, through
everything that speaks, with one voice will say, "Thou art That".

</div>
