---
title: PRACTICAL VEDANTA

---
<div>

[←](practical_vedanta_part_i.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](practical_vedanta_part_iii.htm)

  

## PRACTICAL VEDANTA

PART II

(*Delivered in London, 12th November 1896*)

I will relate to you a very ancient story from the Chhândogya Upanishad,
which tells how knowledge came to a boy. The form of the story is very
crude, but we shall find that it contains a principle. A young boy said
to his mother, "I am going to study the Vedas. Tell me the name of my
father and my caste." The mother was not a married woman, and in India
the child of a woman who has not been married is considered an outcast;
he is not recognised by society and is not entitled to study the Vedas.
So the poor mother said, "My child, I do not know your family name; I
was in service, and served in different places; I do not know who your
father is, but my name is Jabâlâ and your name is Satyakâma." The little
child went to a sage and asked to be taken as a student. The sage asked
him, "What is the name of your father, and what is your caste?" The boy
repeated to him what he had heard from his mother. The sage at once
said, "None but a Brâhmin could speak such a damaging truth about
himself. You are a Brahmin and I will teach you. You have not swerved
from truth." So he kept the boy with him and educated him.

Now come some of the peculiar methods of education in ancient India.
This teacher gave Satyakama four hundred lean, weak cows to take care
of, and sent him to the forest. There he went and lived for some time.
The teacher had told him to come back when the herd would increase to
the number of one thousand. After a few years, one day Satyakama heard a
big bull in the herd saying to him, "We are a thousand now; take us back
to your teacher. I will teach you a little of Brahman." "Say on, sir,"
said Satyakama. Then the bull said, "The East is a part of the Lord, so
is the West, so is the South, so is the North. The four cardinal points
are the four parts of Brahman. Fire will also teach you something of
Brahman." Fire was a great symbol in those days, and every student had
to procure fire and make offerings. So on the following day, Satyakama
started for his Guru's house, and when in the evening he had performed
his oblation, and worshipped at the fire, and was sitting near it, he
heard a voice come from the fire, "O Satyakama." "Speak, Lord," said
Satyakama. (Perhaps you may remember a very similar story in the Old
Testament, how Samuel heard a mysterious voice.) "O Satyakama, I am come
to teach you a little of Brahman. This earth is a portion of that
Brahman. The sky and the heaven are portions of It. The ocean is a part
of that Brahman." Then the fire said that a certain bird would also
teach him something. Satyakama continued his journey and on the next day
when he had performed his evening sacrifice a swan came to him and said,
"I will teach you something about Brahman. This fire which you worship,
O Satyakama, is a part of that Brahman. The sun is a part, the moon is a
part, the lightning is a part of that Brahman. A bird called Madgu will
tell you more about it." The next evening that bird came, and a similar
voice was heard by Satyakama, "I will tell you something about Brahman.
Breath is a part of Brahman, sight is a part, hearing is a part, the
mind is a part." Then the boy arrived at his teacher's place and
presented himself before him with due reverence. No sooner had the
teacher seen this disciple than he remarked: "Satyakama, thy face shines
like that of a knower of Brahman! Who then has taught thee?" "Beings
other than men," replied Satyakama. "But I wish that you should teach
me, sir. For I have heard from men like you that knowledge which is
learnt from a Guru alone leads to the supreme good." Then the sage
taught him the same knowledge which he had received from the gods. "And
nothing was left out, yea, nothing was left out."

Now, apart from the allegories of what the bull, the fire, and the birds
taught, we see the tendency of the thought and the direction in which it
was going in those days. The great idea of which we here see the germ is
that all these voices are inside ourselves. As we understand these
truths better, we find that the voice is in our own heart, and the
student understood that all the time he was hearing the truth; but his
explanation was not correct. He was interpreting the voice as coming
from the external world, while all the time, it was within him. The
second idea that we get is that of making the knowledge of the Brahman
practical. The world is always seeking the practical possibilities of
religion, and we find in these stories how it was becoming more and more
practical every day. The truth was shown through everything with which
the students were familiar. The fire they were worshipping was Brahman,
the earth was a part of Brahman, and so on.

The next story belongs to Upakosala Kâmalâyana, a disciple of this
Satyakama, who went to be taught by him and dwelt with him for some
time. Now Satyakama went away on a journey, and the student became very
downhearted; and when the teacher's wife came and asked him why he was
not eating, the boy said, "I am too unhappy to eat." Then a voice came
from the fire he was worshipping, saying "This life is Brahman, Brahman
is the ether, and Brahman is happiness. Know Brahman." "I know, sir,"
the boy replied, "that life is Brahman, but that It is ether and
happiness I do not know." Then it explained that the two words ether and
happiness signified one thing in reality, viz. the sentient ether (pure
intelligence) that resides in the heart. So, it taught him Brahman as
life and as the ether in the heart. Then the fire taught him, "This
earth, food, fire, and sun whom you worship, are forms of Brahman. The
person that is seen in the sun, I am He. He who knows this and meditates
on Him, all his sins vanish and he has long life and becomes happy. He
who lives in the cardinal points, the moon, the stars, and the water, I
am He. He who lives in this life, the ether, the heavens, and the
lightning, I am He." Here too we see the same idea of practical
religion. The things which they were worshipping, such as the fire, the
sun, the moon, and so forth, and the voice with which they were
familiar, form the subject of the stories which explain them and give
them a higher meaning. And this is the real, practical side of Vedanta.
It does not destroy the world, but it explains it; it does not destroy
the person, but explains him; it does not destroy the individuality, but
explains it by showing the real individuality. It does not show that
this world is vain and does not exist, but it says, "Understand what
this world is, so that it may not hurt you." The voice did not say to
Upakosala that the fire which he was worshipping, or the sun, or the
moon, or the lightning, or anything else, was all wrong, but it showed
him that the same spirit which was inside the sun, and moon, and
lightning, and the fire, and the earth, was in him, so that everything
became transformed, as it were, in the eyes of Upakosala. The fire which
was merely a material fire before, in which to make oblations, assumed a
new aspect and became the Lord. The earth became transformed, life
became transformed, the sun, the moon, the stars, the lightning,
everything became transformed and deified. Their real nature was known.
The theme of the Vedanta is to see the Lord in everything, to see things
in their real nature, not as they appear to be. Then another lesson is
taught in the Upanishads: "He who shines through the eyes is Brahman; He
is the Beautiful One, He is the Shining One. He shines in all these
worlds." A certain peculiar light, a commentator says, which comes to
the pure man, is what is meant by the light in the eyes, and it is said
that when a man is pure such a light will shine in his eyes, and that
light belongs really to the Soul within, which is everywhere. It is the
same light which shines in the planets, in the stars, and suns.

I will now read to you some other doctrine of these ancient Upanishads,
about birth and death and so on. Perhaps it will interest you.
Shvetaketu went to the king of the Panchâlas, and the king asked him,
"Do you know where people go when they die? Do you know how they come
back? Do you know why the other world does not become full?" The boy
replied that he did not know. Then he went to his father and asked him
the same questions. The father said, "I do not know," and he went to the
king. The king said that this knowledge was never known to the priests,
it was only with the kings, and that was the reason why kings ruled the
world. This man stayed with the king for some time, for the king said he
would teach him. "The other world, O Gautama, is the fire. The sun is
its fuel. The rays are the smoke. The day is the flame. The moon is the
embers. And the stars are the sparks. In this fire the gods pour
libation of faith and from this libation king Soma is born." So on he
goes. "You need not make oblation to that little fire: the whole world
is that fire, and this oblation, this worship, is continually going on.
The gods, and the angels, and everybody is worshipping it. Man is the
greatest symbol of fire, the body of man." Here also we see the ideal
becoming practical and Brahman is seen in everything. The principle that
underlies all these stories is that invented symbolism may be good and
helpful, but already better symbols exist than any we can invent. You
may invent an image through which to worship God, but a better image
already exists, the living man. You may build a temple in which to
worship God, and that may be good, but a better one, a much higher one,
already exists, the human body.

You remember that the Vedas have two parts, the ceremonial and the
knowledge portions. In time ceremonials had multiplied and become so
intricate that it was almost hopeless to disentangle them, and so in the
Upanishads we find that the ceremonials are almost done away with, but
gently, by explaining them. We see that in old times they had these
oblations and sacrifices, then the philosophers came, and instead of
snatching away the symbols from the hands of the ignorant, instead of
taking the negative position, which we unfortunately find so general in
modern reforms, they gave them something to take their place. "Here is
the symbol of fire," they said. "Very good! But here is another symbol,
the earth. What a grand, great symbol! Here is this little temple, but
the whole universe is a temple; a man can worship anywhere. There are
the peculiar figures that men draw on the earth, and there are the
altars, but here is the greatest of altars, the living, conscious human
body, and to worship at this altar is far higher than the worship of any
dead symbols."

We now come to a peculiar doctrine. I do not understand much of it
myself. If you can make something out of it, I will read it to you. When
a man dies, who has by meditation purified himself and got knowledge, he
first goes to light, then from light to day, from day to the light half
of the moon, from that to the six months when the sun goes to the north,
from that to the year, from the year to the sun, from the sun to the
moon, from the moon to the lightning, and when he comes to the sphere of
lightning, he meets a person who is not human, and that person leads him
to (the conditioned) Brahman. This is the way of the gods. When sages
and wise persons die, they go that way and they do not return. What is
meant by this month and year, and all these things, no one understands
clearly. Each one gives his own meaning, and some say it is all
nonsense. What is meant by going to the world of the moon and of the
sun, and this person who comes to help the soul after it has reached the
sphere of lightning, no one knows. There is an idea among the Hindus
that the moon is a place where life exists, and we shall see how life
has come from there. Those that have not attained to knowledge, but have
done good work in this life, first go, when they die, through smoke,
then to night, then to the dark fifteen days, then to the six months
when the sun goes to the south, and from that they go to the region of
their forefathers, then to ether, then to the region of the moon, and
there become the food of the gods, and later, are born as gods and live
there so long as their good works will permit. And when the effect of
the good work has been finished, they come back to earth by the same
route. They first become ether, and then air, and then smoke, and then
mist, then cloud, and then fall upon the earth as raindrops; then they
get into food, which is eaten up by human beings, and finally become
their children. Those whose works have been very good take birth in good
families, and those whose works have been bad take bad births, even in
animal bodies. Animals are continually coming to and going from this
earth. That is why the earth is neither full nor empty.

Several ideas we can get also from this, and later on, perhaps, we shall
be able to understand it better, and we can speculate a little upon what
it means. The last part which deals with how those who have been in
heaven return, is clearer, perhaps, than the first part; but the whole
idea seems to be this that there is no permanent heaven without
realising God. Now some people who have not realised God, but have done
good work in this world, with the view of enjoying the results, go, when
they die, through this and that place, until they reach heaven, and
there they are born in the same way as we are here, as children of the
gods, and they live there as long as their good works will permit. Out
of this comes one basic idea of the Vedanta that everything which has
name and form is transient. This earth is transient, because it has name
and form, and so the heavens must be transient, because there also name
and form remain. A heaven which is eternal will be contradictory in
terms, because everything that has name and form must begin in time,
exist in time, and end in time. These are settled doctrines of the
Vedanta, and as such the heavens are given up.

We have seen in the Samhitâ that the idea of heaven was that it was
eternal, much the same as is prevalent among Mohammedans and Christians.
The Mohammedans concretise it a little more. They say it is a place
where there are gardens, beneath which rivers run. In the desert of
Arabia water is very desirable, so the Mohammedan always conceives of
his heaven as containing much water. I was born in a country where there
are six months of rain every year. I should think of heaven, I suppose,
as a dry place, and so also would the English people. These heavens in
the Samhita are eternal, and the departed have beautiful bodies and live
with their forefathers, and are happy ever afterwards. There they meet
with their parents, children, and other relatives, and lead very much
the same sort of life as here, only much happier. All the difficulties
and obstructions to happiness in this life have vanished, and only its
good parts and enjoyments remain. But however comfortable mankind may
consider this state of things, truth is one thing and comfort is
another. There are cases where truth is not comfortable until we reach
its climax. Human nature is very conservative. It does something, and
having once done that, finds it hard to get out of it. The mind will not
receive new thoughts, because they bring discomfort.

In the Upanishads, we see a tremendous departure made. It is declared
that these heavens in which men live with the ancestors after death
cannot be permanent, seeing that everything which has name and form must
die. If there are heavens with forms, these heavens must vanish in
course of time; they may last millions of years, but there must come a
time when they will have to go. With this idea came another that these
souls must come back to earth, and that heavens are places where they
enjoy the results of their good works, and after these effects are
finished they come back into this earth life again. One thing is clear
from this that mankind had a perception of the philosophy of causation
even at the early time. Later on we shall see how our philosophers bring
that out in the language of philosophy and logic, but here it is almost
in the language of children. One thing you may remark in reading these
books that it is all internal perception. If you ask me if this can be
practical, my answer is, it has been practical first, and philosophical
next. You can see that first these things have been perceived and
realised and then written. This world spoke to the early thinkers. Birds
spoke to them, animals spoke to them, the sun and the moon spoke to
them; and little by little they realised things, and got into the heart
of nature. Not by cogitation not by the force of logic, not by picking
the brains of others and making a big book, as is the fashion in modern
times, not even as I do, by taking up one of their writings and making a
long lecture, but by patient investigation and discovery they found out
the truth. Its essential method was practice, and so it must be always.
Religion is ever a practical science, and there never was nor will be
any theological religion. It is practice first, and knowledge
afterwards. The idea that souls come back is already there. Those
persons who do good work with the idea of a result, get it, but the
result is not permanent. There we get the idea of causation very
beautifully put forward, that the effect is only commensurate with the
cause. As the cause is, so the effect will be. The cause being finite,
the effect must be finite. If the cause is eternal the effect can be
eternal, but all these causes, doing good work, and all other things,
are only finite causes, and as such cannot produce infinite result.

We now come to the other side of the question. As there cannot be an
eternal heaven, on the same grounds, there cannot be an eternal hell.
Suppose I am a very wicked man, doing evil every minute of my life.
Still, my whole life here, compared with my eternal life, is nothing. If
there be an eternal punishment, it will mean that there is an infinite
effect produced by a finite cause, which cannot be. If I do good all my
life, I cannot have an infinite heaven; it would be making the same
mistake. But there is a third course which applies to those who have
known the Truth, to those who have realised It. This is the only way to
get beyond this veil of Mâyâ — to realise what Truth is; and the
Upanishads indicate what is meant by realising the Truth.

It means recognising neither good nor bad, but knowing all as coming
from the Self; Self is in everything. It means denying the universe;
shutting your eyes to it; seeing the Lord in hell as well as in heaven;
seeing the Lord in death as well as in life. This is the line of thought
in the passage I have read to you; the earth is a symbol of the Lord,
the sky is the Lord, the place we fill is the Lord, everything is
Brahman. And this is to be seen, realised, not simply talked or thought
about. We can see as its logical consequence that when the soul has
realised that everything is full of the Lord, of Brahman, it will not
care whether it goes to heaven, or hell, or anywhere else; whether it be
born again on this earth or in heaven. These things have ceased to have
any meaning to that soul, because every place is the same, every place
is the temple of the Lord, every place has become holy and the presence
of the Lord is all that it sees in heaven, or hell, or anywhere else.
Neither good nor bad, neither life nor death — only the one infinite
Brahman exists.

According to the Vedanta, when a man has arrived at that perception, he
has become free, and he is the only man who is fit to live in this
world. Others are not. The man who sees evil, how can he live in this
world? His life is a mass of misery. The man who sees dangers, his life
is a misery; the man who sees death, his life is a misery. That man
alone can live in this world, he alone can say, "I enjoy this life, and
I am happy in this life", who has seen the Truth, and the Truth in
everything. By the by, I may tell you that the idea of hell does not
occur in the Vedas anywhere. It comes with the Purânas much later. The
worst punishment according to the Vedas is coming back to earth, having
another chance in this world. From the very first we see the idea is
taking the impersonal turn. The ideas of punishment and reward are very
material, and they are only consonant with the idea of a human God, who
loves one and hates another, just as we do. Punishment and reward are
only admissible with the existence of such a God. They had such a God in
the Samhita, and there we find the idea of fear entering, but as soon as
we come to the Upanishads, the idea of fear vanishes, and the impersonal
idea takes its place. It is naturally the hardest thing for man to
understand, this impersonal idea, for he is always clinging on to the
person. Even people who are thought to be great thinkers get disgusted
at the idea of the Impersonal God. But to me it seems so absurd to think
of God as an embodied man. Which is the higher idea, a living God, or a
dead God? A God whom nobody sees, nobody knows, or a God Known?

The Impersonal God is a living God, a principle. The difference between
personal and impersonal is this, that the personal is only a man, and
the impersonal idea is that He is the angel, the man, the animal, and
yet something more which we cannot see, because impersonality includes
all personalities, is the sum total of everything in the universe, and
infinitely more besides. "As the one fire coming into the world is
manifesting itself in so many forms, and yet is infinitely more
besides," so is the Impersonal.

We want to worship a living God. I have seen nothing but God all my
life, nor have you. To see this chair you first see God, and then the
chair in and through Him He is everywhere saying, "I am". The moment you
feel "I am", you are conscious of Existence. Where shall we go to find
God if we cannot see Him in our own hearts and in every living being?
"Thou art the man, Thou art the woman, Thou art the girl, and Thou art
the boy. Thou art the old man tottering with a stick. Thou art the young
man walking in the pride of his strength." Thou art all that exists, a
wonderful living God who is the only fact in the universe. This seems to
many to be a terrible contradiction to the traditional God who lives
behind a veil somewhere and whom nobody ever sees. The priests only give
us an assurance that if we follow them, listen to their admonitions, and
walk in the way they mark out for us — then when we die, they will give
us a passport to enable us to see the face of God! What are all these
heaven ideas but simply modifications of this nonsensical priestcraft?

Of course the impersonal idea is very destructive, it takes away all
trade from the priests, churches, and temples. In India there is a
famine now, but there are temples in each one of which there are jewels
worth a king's ransom! If the priests taught this Impersonal idea to the
people, their occupation would be gone. Yet we have to teach it
unselfishly, without priestcraft. You are God and so am I; who obeys
whom? Who worships whom? You are the highest temple of God; I would
rather worship you than any temple, image, or Bible. Why are some people
so contradictory in their thought? They are like fish slipping through
our fingers. They say they are hard-headed practical men. Very good. But
what is more practical than worshipping here, worshipping you? I see
you, feel you, and I know you are God. The Mohammedan says, there is no
God but Allah. The Vedanta says, there is nothing that is not God. It
may frighten many of you, but you will understand it by degrees. The
living God is within you, and yet you are building churches and temples
and believing all sorts of imaginary nonsense. The only God to worship
is the human soul in the human body. Of course all animals are temples
too, but man is the highest, the Taj Mahal of temples. If I cannot
worship in that, no other temple will be of any advantage. The moment I
have realised God sitting in the temple of every human body, the moment
I stand in reverence before every human being and see God in him — that
moment I am free from bondage, everything that binds vanishes, and I am
free.

This is the most practical of all worship. It has nothing to do with
theorising and speculation. Yet it frightens many. They say it is not
right. They go on theorising about old ideals told them by their
grandfathers, that a God somewhere in heaven had told some one that he
was God. Since that time we have only theories. This is practicality
according to them, and our ideas are impractical! No doubt, the Vedanta
says that each one must have his own path, but the path is not the goal.
The worship of a God in heaven and all these things are not bad, but
they are only steps towards the Truth and not the Truth itself. They are
good and beautiful, and some wonderful ideas are there, but the Vedanta
says at every point, "My friend, Him whom you are worshipping as
unknown, I worship as thee. He whom you are worshipping as unknown and
are seeking for, throughout the universe, has been with you all the
time. You are living through Him, and He is the Eternal Witness of the
universe" "He whom all the Vedas worship, nay, more, He who is always
present in the eternal 'I'. He existing, the whole universe exists. He
is the light and life of the universe. If the 'I' were not in you, you
would not see the sun, everything would be a dark mass. He shining, you
see the world."

One question is generally asked, and it is this that this may lead to a
tremendous amount of difficulty. Everyone of us will think, "I am God,
and whatever I do or think must be good, for God can do no evil." In the
first place, even taking this danger of misinterpretation for granted,
can it be proved that on the other side the same danger does not exist?
They have been worshipping a God in heaven separate from them, and of
whom they are much afraid. They have been born shaking with fear, and
all their life they will go on shaking. Has the world been made much
better by this? Those who have understood and worshipped a Personal God,
and those who have understood and worshipped an Impersonal God, on which
side have been the great workers of the world — gigantic workers,
gigantic moral powers? Certainly on the Impersonal. How can you expect
morality to be developed through fear? It can never be. "Where one sees
another, where one hears another, that is Maya. When one does not see
another, when one does not hear another, when everything has become the
Atman, who sees whom, who perceives whom?" It is all He, and all I, at
the same time. The soul has become pure. Then, and then alone we
understand what love is. Love cannot come through fear, its basis is
freedom. When we really begin to love the world, then we understand what
is meant by brotherhood or mankind, and not before.

So, it is not right to say that the Impersonal idea will lead to a
tremendous amount of evil in the world, as if the other doctrine never
lent itself to works of evil, as if it did not lead to sectarianism
deluging the world with blood and causing men to tear each other to
pieces. "My God is the greatest God, let us decide it by a free fight."
That is the outcome of dualism all over the world. Come out into the
broad open light of day, come out from the little narrow paths, for how
can the infinite soul rest content to live and die in small ruts? Come
out into the universe of Light. Everything in the universe is yours,
stretch out your arms and embrace it with love. If you ever felt you
wanted to do that, you have felt God.

You remember that passage in the sermon of Buddha, how he sent a thought
of love towards the south, the north, the east, and the west, above and
below, until the whole universe was filled with this lose, so grand,
great, and infinite. When you have that feeling, you have true
personality. The whole universe is one person; let go the little things.
Give up the small for the Infinite, give up small enjoyments for
infinite bliss. It is all yours, for the Impersonal includes the
Personal. So God is Personal and Impersonal at the same time. And Man,
the Infinite, Impersonal Man, is manifesting Himself as person. We the
infinite have limited ourselves, as it were, into small parts. The
Vedanta says that Infinity is our true nature; it will never vanish, it
will abide for ever. But we are limiting ourselves by our Karma, which
like a chain round our necks has dragged us into this limitation. Break
that chain and be free. Trample law under your feet. There is no law in
human nature, there is no destiny, no fate. How can there be law in
infinity? Freedom is its watchword. Freedom is its nature, its
birthright. Be free, and then have any number of personalities you like.
Then we will play like the actor who comes upon the stage and plays the
part of a beggar. Contrast him with the actual beggar walking in the
streets. The scene is, perhaps, the same in both cases, the words are,
perhaps, the same, but yet what difference! The one enjoys his beggary
while the other is suffering misery from it. And what makes this
difference? The one is free and the other is bound. The actor knows his
beggary is not true, but that he has assumed it for play, while the real
beggar thinks that it is his too familiar state and that he has to bear
it whether he wills it or not. This is the law. So long as we have no
knowledge of our real nature, we are beggars, jostled about by every
force in nature; and made slaves of by everything in nature; we cry all
over the world for help, but help never comes to us; we cry to imaginary
beings, and yet it never comes. But still we hope help will come, and
thus in weeping, wailing, and hoping, one life is passed, and the same
play goes on and on.

Be free; hope for nothing from anyone. I am sure if you look back upon
your lives you will find that you were always vainly trying to get help
from others which never came. All the help that has come was from within
yourselves. You only had the fruits of what you yourselves worked for,
and yet you were strangely hoping all the time for help. A rich man's
parlour is always full; but if you notice, you do not find the same
people there. The visitors are always hoping that they will get
something from those wealthy men, but they never do. So are our lives
spent in hoping, hoping, hoping, which never comes to an end. Give up
hope, says the Vedanta. Why should you hope? You have everything, nay,
you are everything. What are you hoping for? If a king goes mad, and
runs about trying to find the king of his country, he will never find
him, because he is the king himself. He may go through every village and
city in his own country, seeking in every house, weeping and wailing,
but he will never find him, because he is the king himself. It is better
that we know we are God and give up this fool's search after Him; and
knowing that we are God we become happy and contented. Give up all these
mad pursuits, and then play your part in the universe, as an actor on
the stage.

The whole vision is changed, and instead of an eternal prison this world
has become a playground; instead of a land of competition it is a land
of bliss, where there is perpetual spring, flowers bloom and butterflies
flit about. This very world becomes heaven, which formerly was hell. To
the eyes of the bound it is a tremendous place of torment, but to the
eyes of the free it is quite otherwise. This one life is the universal
life, heavens and all those places are here. All the gods are here, the
prototypes of man. The gods did not create man after their type, but man
created gods. And here are the prototypes, here is Indra, here is
Varuna, and all the gods of the universe. We have been projecting our
little doubles, and we are the originals of these gods, we are the real,
the only gods to be worshipped. This is the view of the Vedanta, and
this its practicality. When we have become free, we need not go mad and
throw up society and rush off to die in the forest or the cave; we shall
remain where we were, only we shall understand the whole thing. The same
phenomena will remain, but with a new meaning. We do not know the world
yet; it is only through freedom that we see what it is, and understand
its nature. We shall see then that this so-called law, or fate, or
destiny occupied only an infinitesimal part of our nature. It was only
one side, but on the other side there was freedom all the time. We did
not know this, and that is why we have been trying to save ourselves
from evil by hiding our faces in the ground, like the hunted hare.
Through delusion we have been trying to forget our nature, and yet we
could not; it was always calling upon us, and all our search after God
or gods, or external freedom, was a search after our real nature. We
mistook the voice. We thought it was from the fire, or from a god or the
sun, or moon, or stars, but at last we have found that it was from
within ourselves. Within ourselves is this eternal voice speaking of
eternal freedom; its music is eternally going on. Part of this music of
the Soul has become the earth, the law, this universe, but it was always
ours and always will be. In one word, the ideal of Vedanta is to know
man as he really is, and this is its message, that if you cannot worship
your brother man, the manifested God, how can you worship a God who is
unmanifested?

Do you not remember what the Bible says, "If you cannot love your
brother whom you have seen, how can you love God whom you have not
seen?" If you cannot see God in the human face, how can you see him in
the clouds, or in images made of dull, dead matter, or in mere
fictitious stories of our brain? I shall call you religious from the day
you begin to see God in men and women, and then you will understand what
is meant by turning the left cheek to the man who strikes you on the
right. When you see man as God, everything, even the tiger, will be
welcome. Whatever comes to you is but the Lord, the Eternal, the Blessed
One, appearing to us in various forms, as our father, and mother, and
friend, and child — they are our own soul playing with us.

As our human relationships can thus be made divine, so our relationship
with God may take any of these forms and we can look upon Him as our
father, or mother, or friend, or beloved. Calling God Mother is a higher
ideal than calling Him Father; and to call Him Friend is still higher;
but the highest is to regard Him as the Beloved. The highest point of
all is to see no difference between lover and beloved. You may remember,
perhaps, the old Persian story, of how a lover came and knocked at the
door of the beloved and was asked, "Who are you?" He answered, "It is
I", and there was no response. A second time he came, and exclaimed, "I
am here", but the door was not opened. The third time he came, and the
voice asked from inside, "Who is there?" He replied, "I am thyself, my
beloved", and the door opened. So is the relation between God and
ourselves. He is in everything, He is everything. Every man and woman is
the palpable, blissful, living God. Who says God is unknown? Who says He
is to be searched after? We have found God eternally. We have been
living in Him eternally; everywhere He is eternally known, eternally
worshipped.

Then comes another idea, that other forms of worship are not errors.
This is one of the great points to be remembered, that those who worship
God through ceremonials and forms, however crude we may think them to
be, are not in error. It is the journey from truth to truth, from lower
truth to higher truth. Darkness is less light; evil is less good;
impurity is less purity. It must always be borne in mind that we should
see others with eyes of love, with sympathy, knowing that they are going
along the same path that we have trodden. If you are free, you must know
that all will be so sooner or later, and if you are free, how can you
see the impermanent? If you are really pure, how do you see the impure?
For what is within, is without. We cannot see impurity without having it
inside ourselves. This is one of the practical sides of Vedanta, and I
hope that we shall all try to carry it into our lives. Our whole life
here is to carry this into practice, but the one great point we gain is
that we shall work with satisfaction and contentment, instead of with
discontent and dissatisfaction, for we know that Truth is within us, we
have It as our birthright, and we have only to manifest It, and make It
tangible.

</div>
