---
title: PRACTICAL VEDANTA

---
<div>

[←](practical_vedanta_part_ii.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](practical_vedanta_part_iv.htm)

  

## PRACTICAL VEDANTA

PART III

(*Delivered in London, 17th November 1896*)

In the Chhâdogya Upanishad we read that a sage called Nârada came to
another called Sanatkumâra, and asked him various questions, of which
one was, if religion was the cause of things as they are. And
Sanatkumara leads him, as it were, step by step, telling him that there
is something higher than this earth, and something higher than that, and
so on, till he comes to Âkâsha, ether. Ether is higher than light,
because in the ether are the sun and the moon, lightning and the stars;
in ether we live, and in ether we die. Then the question arises, if
there is anything higher than that, and Sanatkumara tells him of Prâna.
This Prana, according to the Vedanta, is the principle of life. It is
like ether, an omnipresent principle; and all motion, either in the body
or anywhere else, is the work of this Prana. It is greater than Akasha,
and through it everything lives. Prana is in the mother, in the father,
in the sister, in the teacher, Prana is the knower.

I will read another passage, where Shvetaketu asks his father about the
Truth, and the father teaches him different things, and concludes by
saying, "That which is the fine cause in all these things, of It are all
these things made. That is the All, that is Truth, thou art That, O
Shvetaketu." And then he gives various examples. "As a bee, O
Shvetaketu, gathers honey from different flowers, and as the different
honeys do not know that they are from various trees, and from various
flowers, so all of us, having come to that Existence, know not that we
have done so. Now, that which is that subtle essence, in It all that
exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self and thou, O
Shvetaketu, are That." He gives another example of the rivers running
down to the ocean. "As the rivers, when they are in the ocean, do not
know that they have been various rivers, even so when we come out of
that Existence, we do not know that we are That. O Shvetaketu, thou art
That." So on he goes with his teachings.

Now there are two principles of knowledge. The one principle is that we
know by referring the particular to the general, and the general to the
universal; and the second is that anything of which the explanation is
sought is to be explained so far as possible from its own nature. Taking
up the first principle, we see that all our knowledge really consists of
classifications, going higher and higher. When something happens singly,
we are, as it were, dissatisfied. When it can be shown that the same
thing happens again and again, we are satisfied and call it law. When we
find that one apple falls, we are dissatisfied; but when we find that
all apples fall, we call it the law of gravitation and are satisfied.
The fact is that from the particular we deduce the general.

When we want to study religion, we should apply this scientific process.
The same principle also holds good here, and as a fact we find that that
has been the method all through. In reading these books from which I
have been translating to you, the earliest idea that I can trace is this
principle of going from the particular to the general. We see how the
"bright ones" became merged into one principle; and likewise in the
ideas of the cosmos we find the ancient thinkers going higher and higher
— from the fine elements they go to finer and more embracing elements,
and from these particulars they come to one omnipresent ether, and from
that even they go to an all embracing force, or Prana; and through all
this runs the principle, that one is not separate from the others. It is
the very ether that exists in the higher form of Prana, or the higher
form of Prana concretes, so to say, and becomes ether; and that ether
becomes still grosser, and so on.

The generalization of the Personal God is another case in point. We have
seen how this generalization was reached, and was called the sum total
of all consciousness. But a difficulty arises — it is an incomplete
generalization. We take up only one side of the facts of nature, the
fact of consciousness, and upon that we generalise, but the other side
is left out. So, in the first place it is a defective generalization.
There is another insufficiency, and that relates to the second
principle. Everything should be explained from its own nature. There may
have been people who thought that every apple that fell to the ground
was dragged down by a ghost, but the explanation is the law of
gravitation; and although we know it is not a perfect explanation, yet
it is much better than the other, because it is derived from the nature
of the thing itself, while the other posits an extraneous cause. So
throughout the whole range of our knowledge; the explanation which is
based upon the nature of the thing itself is a scientific explanation,
and an explanation which brings in an outside agent is unscientific.

So the explanation of a Personal God as the creator of the universe has
to stand that test. If that God is outside of nature, having nothing to
do with nature, and this nature is the outcome of the command of that
God and produced from nothing, it is a very unscientific theory, and
this has been the weak point of every Theistic religion throughout the
ages. These two defects we find in what is generally called the theory
of monotheism, the theory of a Personal God, with all the qualities of a
human being multiplied very much, who, by His will, created this
universe out of nothing and yet is separate from it. This leads us into
two difficulties.

As we have seen, it is not a sufficient generalization, and secondly, it
is not an explanation of nature from nature. It holds that the effect is
not the cause, that the cause is entirely separate from the effect. Yet
all human knowledge shows that the effect is but the cause in another
form. To this idea the discoveries of modern science are tending every
day, and the latest theory that has been accepted on all sides is the
theory of evolution, the principle of which is that the effect is but
the cause in another form, a readjustment of the cause, and the cause
takes the form of the effect. The theory of creation out of nothing
would be laughed at by modern scientists.

Now, can religion stand these tests? If there be any religious theories
which can stand these two tests, they will be acceptable to the modern
mind, to the thinking mind. Any other theory which we ask the modern man
to believe, on the authority of priests, or churches, or books, he is
unable to accept, and the result is a hideous mass of unbelief. Even in
those in whom there is an external display of belief, in their hearts
there is a tremendous amount of unbelief. The rest shrink away from
religion, as it were, give it up, regarding it as priestcraft only.

Religion has been reduced to a sort of national form. It is one of our
very best social remnants; let it remain. But the real necessity which
the grandfather of the modern man felt for it is gone; he no longer
finds it satisfactory to his reason. The idea of such a Personal God,
and such a creation, the idea which is generally known as monotheism in
every religion, cannot hold its own any longer. In India it could not
hold its own because of the Buddhists, and that was the very point where
they gained their victory in ancient times. They showed that if we allow
that nature is possessed of infinite power, and that nature can work out
all its wants, it is simply unnecessary to insist that there is
something besides nature. Even the soul is unnecessary.

The discussion about substance and qualities is very old, and you will
sometimes find that the old superstition lives even at the present day.
Most of you have read how, during the Middle Ages, and, I am sorry to
say, even much later, this was one of the subjects of discussion,
whether qualities adhered to substance, whether length, breadth, and
thickness adhered to the substance which we call dead matter, whether,
the substance remaining, the qualities are there or not. To this our
Buddhist says, "You have no ground for maintaining the existence of such
a substance; the qualities are all that exist; you do not see beyond
them." This is just the position of most of our modern agnostics. For it
is this fight of the substance and qualities that, on a higher plane,
takes the form of the fight between noumenon and phenomenon. There is
the phenomenal world, the universe of continuous change, and there is
something behind which does not change; and this duality of existence,
noumenon and phenomenon, some hold, is true, and others with better
reason claim that you have no right to admit the two, for what we see,
feel, and think is only the phenomenon. You have no right to assert
there is anything beyond phenomenon; and there is no answer to this. The
only answer we get is from the monistic theory of the Vedanta. It is
true that only one exists, and that one is either phenomenon or
noumenon. It is not true that there are two — something changing, and,
in and through that, something which does not change; but it is the one
and the same thing which appears as changing, and which is in reality
unchangeable. We have come to think of the body, and mind, and soul as
many, but really there is only one; and that one is appearing in all
these various forms. Take the well-known illustration of the monists,
the rope appearing as the snake. Some people, in the dark or through
some other cause, mistake the rope for the snake, but when knowledge
comes, the snake vanishes and it is found to be a rope. By this
illustration we see that when the snake exists in the mind, the rope has
vanished, and when the rope exists, the snake has gone. When we see
phenomenon, and phenomenon only, around us, the noumenon has vanished,
but when we see the noumenon, the unchangeable, it naturally follows
that the phenomenon has vanished. Now, we understand better the position
of both the realist and the idealist. The realist sees the phenomenon
only, and the idealist looks to the noumenon. For the idealist, the
really genuine idealist, who has truly arrived at the power of
perception, whereby he can get away from all ideas of change, for him
the changeful universe has vanished, and he has the right to say it is
all delusion, there is no change. The realist at the same time looks at
the changeful. For him the unchangeable has vanished, and he has a right
to say this is all real.

What is the outcome of this philosophy? It is that the idea of Personal
God is not sufficient. We have to get to something higher, to the
Impersonal idea. It is the only logical step that we can take. Not that
the personal idea would be destroyed by that, not that we supply proof
that the Personal God does not exist, but we must go to the Impersonal
for the explanation of the personal, for the Impersonal is a much higher
generalization than the personal. The Impersonal only can be Infinite,
the personal is limited. Thus we preserve the personal and do not
destroy it. Often the doubt comes to us that if we arrive at the idea of
the Impersonal God, the personal will be destroyed, if we arrive at the
idea of the Impersonal man, the personal will be lost. But the Vedantic
idea is not the destruction of the individual, but its real
preservation. We cannot prove the individual by any other means but by
referring to the universal, by proving that this individual is really
the universal. If we think of the individual as separate from everything
else in the universe, it cannot stand a minute. Such a thing never
existed.

Secondly, by the application of the second principle, that the
explanation of everything must come out of the nature of the thing, we
are led to a still bolder idea, and one more difficult to understand. It
is nothing less than this, that the Impersonal Being, our highest
generalization, is in ourselves, and we are That. "O Shvetaketu, thou
art That." You are that Impersonal Being; that God for whom you have
been searching all over the universe is all the time yourself — yourself
not in the personal sense but in the Impersonal. The man we know now,
the manifested, is personalised, but the reality of this is the
Impersonal. To understand the personal we have to refer it to the
Impersonal, the particular must be referred to the general, and that
Impersonal is the Truth, the Self of man.

There will be various questions in connection with this, and I shall try
to answer them as we go on. Many difficulties will arise, but first let
us clearly understand the position of monism. As manifested beings we
appear to be separate, but our reality is one, and the less we think of
ourselves as separate from that One, the better for us. The more we
think of ourselves as separate from the Whole, the more miserable we
become. From this monistic principle we get at the basis of ethics, and
I venture to say that we cannot get any ethics from anywhere else. We
know that the oldest idea of ethics was the will of some particular
being or beings, but few are ready to accept that now, because it would
be only a partial generalization. The Hindus say we must not do this or
that because the Vedas say so, but the Christian is not going to obey
the authority of the Vedas. The Christian says you must do this and not
do that because the Bible says so. That will not be binding on those who
do not believe in the Bible. But we must have a theory which is large
enough to take in all these various grounds. Just as there are millions
of people who are ready to believe in a Personal Creator, there have
also been thousands of the brightest minds in this world who felt that
such ideas were not sufficient for them, and wanted something higher,
and wherever religion was not broad enough to include all these minds,
the result was that the brightest minds in society were always outside
of religion; and never was this so marked as at the present time,
especially in Europe.

To include these minds, therefore, religion must become broad enough.
Everything it claims must be judged from the standpoint of reason. Why
religions should claim that they are not bound to abide by the
standpoint of reason, no one knows. If one does not take the standard of
reason, there cannot be any true judgment, even in the case of
religions. One religion may ordain something very hideous. For instance,
the Mohammedan religion allows Mohammedans to kill all who are not of
their religion. It is clearly stated in the Koran, "Kill the infidels if
they do not become Mohammedans." They must be put to fire and sword. Now
if we tell a Mohammedan that this is wrong, he will naturally ask, "How
do you know that? How do you know it is not good? My book says it is."
If you say your book is older, there will come the Buddhist, and say, my
book is much older still. Then will come the Hindu, and say, my books
are the oldest of all. Therefore referring to books will not do. Where
is the standard by which you can compare? You will say, look at the
Sermon on the Mount, and the Mohammedan will reply, look at the Ethics
of the Koran. The Mohammedan will say, who is the arbiter as to which is
the better of the two? Neither the New Testament nor the Koran can be
the arbiter in a quarrel between them. There must be some independent
authority, and that cannot be any book, but something which is
universal; and what is more universal than reason? It has been said that
reason is not strong enough; it does not always help us to get at the
Truth; many times it makes mistakes, and, therefore, the conclusion is
that we must believe in the authority of a church! That was said to me
by a Roman Catholic, but I could not see the logic of it. On the other
hand I should say, if reason be so weak, a body of priests would be
weaker, and I am not going to accept their verdict, but I will abide by
my reason, because with all its weakness there is some chance of my
getting at truth through it; while, by the other means, there is no such
hope at all.

We should, therefore, follow reason and also sympathise with those who
do not come to any sort of belief, following reason. For it is better
that mankind should become atheist by following reason than blindly
believe in two hundred millions of gods on the authority of anybody.
What we want is progress, development, realisation. No theories ever
made men higher. No amount of books can help us to become purer. The
only power is in realisation, and that lies in ourselves and comes from
thinking. Let men think. A clod of earth never thinks; but it remains
only a lump of earth. The glory of man is that he is a thinking being.
It is the nature of man to think and therein he differs from animals. I
believe in reason and follow reason having seen enough of the evils of
authority, for I was born in a country where they have gone to the
extreme of authority.

The Hindus believe that creation has come out of the Vedas. How do you
know there is a cow? Because the word cow is in the Vedas. How do you
know there is a man outside? Because the word man is there. If it had
not been, there would have been no man outside. That is what they say.
Authority with a vengeance! And it is not studied as I have studied it,
but some of the most powerful minds have taken it up and spun out
wonderful logical theories round it. They have reasoned it out, and
there it stands — a whole system of philosophy; and thousands of the
brightest intellects have been dedicated through thousands of years to
the working out of this theory. Such has been the power of authority,
and great are the dangers thereof. It stunts the growth of humanity, and
we must not forget that we want growth. Even in all relative truth, more
than the truth itself, we want the exercise. That is our life.

The monistic theory has this merit that it is the most rational of all
the religious theories that we can conceive of. Every other theory,
every conception of God which is partial and little and personal is not
rational. And yet monism has this grandeur that it embraces all these
partial conceptions of God as being necessary for many. Some people say
that this personal explanation is irrational. But it is consoling; they
want a consoling religion and we understand that it is necessary for
them. The clear light of truth very few in this life can bear, much less
live up to. It is necessary, therefore, that this comfortable religion
should exist; it helps many souls to a better one. Small minds whose
circumference is very limited and which require little things to build
them up, never venture to soar high in thought. Their conceptions are
very good and helpful to them, even if only of little gods and symbols.
But you have to understand the Impersonal, for it is in and through that
alone that these others can be explained. Take, for instance, the idea
of a Personal God. A man who understands and believes in the Impersonal
— John Stuart Mill, for example — may say that a Personal God is
impossible, and cannot be proved. I admit with him that a Personal God
cannot be demonstrated. But He is the highest reading of the Impersonal
that can be reached by the human intellect, and what else is the
universe but various readings of the Absolute? It is like a book before
us, and each one has brought his intellect to read it, and each one has
to read it for himself. There is something which is common in the
intellect of all men; therefore certain things appear to be the same to
the intellect of mankind. That you and I see a chair proves that there
is something common to both our minds. Suppose a being comes with
another sense, he will not see the chair at all; but all beings
similarly constituted will see the same things. Thus this universe
itself is the Absolute, the unchangeable, the noumenon; and the
phenomenon constitutes the reading thereof. For you will first find that
all phenomena are finite. Every phenomenon that we can see, feel, or
think of, is finite, limited by our knowledge, and the Personal God as
we conceive of Him is in fact a phenomenon. The very idea of causation
exists only in the phenomenal world, and God as the cause of this
universe must naturally be thought of as limited, and yet He is the same
Impersonal God. This very universe, as we have seen, is the same
Impersonal Being read by our intellect. Whatever is reality in the
universe is that Impersonal Being, and the forms and conceptions are
given to it by our intellects. Whatever is real in this table is that
Being, and the table form and all other forms are given by our
intellects.

Now, motion, for instance, which is a necessary adjunct of the
phenomenal, cannot be predicated of the Universal. Every little bit,
every atom inside the universe, is in a constant state of change and
motion, but the universe as a whole is unchangeable, because motion or
change is a relative thing; we can only think of something in motion in
comparison with something which is not moving. There must be two things
in order to understand motion. The whole mass of the universe, taken as
a unit, cannot move. In regard to what will it move? It cannot be said
to change. With regard to what will it change? So the whole is the
Absolute; but within it every particle is in a constant state of flux
and change. It is unchangeable and changeable at the same time,
Impersonal and Personal in one. This is our conception of the universe,
of motion and of God, and that is what is meant by "Thou art That". Thus
we see that the Impersonal instead of doing away with the personal, the
Absolute instead of pulling down the relative, only explains it to the
full satisfaction of our reason and heart. The Personal God and all that
exists in the universe are the same Impersonal Being seen through our
minds. When we shall be rid of our minds, our little personalities, we
shall become one with It. This is what is meant by "Thou art That". For
we must know our true nature, the Absolute.

The finite, manifested man forgets his source and thinks himself to be
entirely separate. We, as personalised, differentiated beings, forget
our reality, and the teaching of monism is not that we shall give up
these differentiations, but we must learn to understand what they are.
We are in reality that Infinite Being, and our personalities represent
so many channels through which this Infinite Reality is manifesting
Itself; and the whole mass of changes which we call evolution is brought
about by the soul trying to manifest more and more of its infinite
energy. We cannot stop anywhere on this side of the Infinite; our power,
and blessedness, and wisdom, cannot but grow into the Infinite. Infinite
power and existence and blessedness are ours, and we have not to acquire
them; they are our own, and we have only to manifest them.

This is the central idea of monism, and one that is so hard to
understand. From my childhood everyone around me taught weakness; I have
been told ever since I was born that I was a weak thing. It is very
difficult for me now to realise my own strength, but by analysis and
reasoning I gain knowledge of my own strength, I realise it. All the
knowledge that we have in this world, where did it come from? It was
within us. What knowledge is outside? None. Knowledge was not in matter;
it was in man all the time. Nobody ever created knowledge; man brings it
from within. It is lying there. The whole of that big banyan tree which
covers acres of ground, was in the little seed which was, perhaps, no
bigger than one eighth of a mustard seed; all that mass of energy was
there confined. The gigantic intellect, we know, lies coiled up in the
protoplasmic cell, and why should not the infinite energy? We know that
it is so. It may seem like a paradox, but is true. Each one of us has
come out of one protoplasmic cell, and all the powers we possess were
coiled up there. You cannot say they came from food; for if you heap up
food mountains high, what power comes out of it? The energy was there,
potentially no doubt, but still there. So is infinite power in the soul
of man, whether he knows it or not. Its manifestation is only a question
of being conscious of it. Slowly this infinite giant is, as it were,
waking up, becoming conscious of his power, and arousing himself; and
with his growing consciousness, more and more of his bonds are breaking,
chains are bursting asunder, and the day is sure to come when, with the
full consciousness of his infinite power and wisdom, the giant will rise
to his feet and stand erect. Let us all help to hasten that glorious
consummation.

</div>
