---
title: 'THE WAY TO THE REALISATION OF

  A UNIVERSAL RELIGION'

---
<div>

[←](practical_vedanta_part_iv.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_ideal_of_a_universal_religion.htm)

  

## THE WAY TO THE REALISATION OF A UNIVERSAL RELIGION

(*Delivered in the Universalist Church, Pasadena,*

*California, 28th January 1900*)

No search has been dearer to the human heart than that which brings to
us light from God. No study has taken so much of human energy, whether
in times past or present, as the study of the soul, of God, and of human
destiny. However immersed we are in our daily occupations, in our
ambitions, in our work, in the midst of the greatest of our struggles,
sometimes there will come a pause; the mind stops and wants to know
something beyond this world. Sometimes it catches glimpses of a realm
beyond the senses, and a struggle to get at it is the result. Thus it
has been throughout the ages, in all countries. Man has wanted to look
beyond, wanted to expand himself; and all that we call progress,
evolution, has been always measured by that one search, the search for
human destiny, the search for God.

As our social struggles are represented amongst different nations by
different social organizations, so is man's spiritual struggle
represented by various religions; and as different social organizations
are constantly quarrelling, are constantly at war with one another, so
these spiritual organisations have been constantly at war with one
another, constantly quarrelling. Men belonging to a particular social
organisation claim that the right to live only belongs to them; and so
long as they can, they want to exercise that right at the cost of the
weak. We know that just now there is a fierce struggle of that sort
going on in South Africa. Similarly, each religious sect has claimed the
exclusive right to live. And thus we find that though there is nothing
that has brought to man more blessings than religion, yet at the same
time, there is nothing that has brought more horror than religion.
Nothing has made more for peace and love than religion; nothing has
engendered fiercer hatred than religion. Nothing has made the
brotherhood of man more tangible than religion; nothing has bred more
bitter enmity between man and man than religion. Nothing has built more
charitable institutions, more hospitals for men, and even for animals,
than religion; nothing has deluged the world with more blood than
religion. We know, at the same time, that there has always been an
undercurrent of thought; there have been always parties of men,
philosophers, students of comparative religion who have tried and are
still trying to bring about harmony in the midst of all these jarring
and discordant sects. As regards certain countries, these attempts have
succeeded, but as regards the whole world, they have failed.

There are some religions which have come down to us from the remotest
antiquity, which are imbued with the idea that all sects should be
allowed to live, that every sect has a meaning, a great idea, imbedded
within itself, and, therefore it is necessary for the good of the world
and ought to be helped. In modern times the same idea is prevailing and
attempts are made from time to time to reduce it to practice. These
attempts do not always come up to our expectations, up to the required
efficiency. Nay, to our great disappointment, we sometimes find that we
are quarrelling all the more.

Now, leaving aside dogmatic study, and taking a common-sense view of the
thing, we find at the start that there is a tremendous life-power in all
the great religions of the world. Some may say that they are ignorant of
this, but ignorance is no excuse. If a man says "I do not know what is
going on in the external world, therefore things that are going on in
the external world do not exist", that man is inexcusable. Now, those of
you that watch the movement of religious thought all over the world are
perfectly aware that not one of the great religions of the world has
died; not only so, each one of them is progressive. Christians are
multiplying, Mohammedans are multiplying, the Hindus are gaining ground,
and the Jews also are increasing, and by their spreading all over the
world and increasing rapidly, the fold of Judaism is constantly
expanding.

Only one religion of the world — an ancient, great religion — has
dwindled away, and that is the religion of Zoroastrianism, the religion
of the ancient Persians. Under the Mohammedan conquest of Persia about a
hundred thousand of these people came and took shelter in India and some
remained in ancient Persia. Those that were in Persia, under the
constant persecution of the Mohammedans, dwindled down till there are at
most only ten thousand; in India there are about eighty thousand of
them, but they do not increase. Of course, there is an initial
difficulty; they do not convert others to their religion. And then, this
handful of persons living in India, with the pernicious custom of cousin
marriage, do not multiply. With this single exception, all the great
religions are living, spreading, and increasing. We must remember that
all the great religions of the world are very ancient, not one has been
formed at the present time, and that every religion of the world owes
its origin to the country between the Ganga and the Euphrates; not one
great religion has arisen in Europe, not one in America, not one; every
religion is of Asiatic origin and belongs to that part of the world. If
what the modern scientists say is true, that the survival of the fittest
is the test, these religions prove by their still living that they are
yet fit for some people. There is a reason why they should live, they
bring good to many. Look at the Mohammedans, how they are spreading in
some places in Southern Asia, and spreading like fire in Africa. The
Buddhists are spreading all over Central Asia, all the time. The Hindus,
like the Jews, do not convert others; still gradually, other races are
coming within Hinduism and adopting the manners and customs of the
Hindus and falling into line with them. Christianity, you all know, is
spreading — though I am not sure that the results are equal to the
energy put forth. The Christians' attempt at propaganda has one
tremendous defect — and that is the defect of all Western institutions:
the machine consumes ninety per cent of the energy, there is too much
machinery. Preaching has always been the business of the Asiatics. The
Western people are grand in organisation, social institutions, armies,
governments, etc.; but when it comes to preaching religion, they cannot
come near the Asiatic, whose business it has been all the time, and he
knows it, and he does not use too much machinery.

This then is a fact in the present history of the human race, that all
these great religions exist and are spreading and multiplying. Now,
there is a meaning, certainly, to this; and had it been the will of an
All-wise and All-merciful Creator that one of these religions should
exist and the rest should die, it would have become a fact long, long
ago. If it were a fact that only one of these religions is true and all
the rest are false, by this time it would have covered the whole ground.
But this is not so; not one has gained all the ground. All religions
sometimes advance — sometimes decline. Now, just think of this: in your
own country there are more than sixty millions of people, and only
twenty-one millions professing religions of all sorts. So it is not
always progress. In every country, probably, if the statistics are
taken, you would find that religions are sometimes progressing and
sometimes going back. Sects are multiplying all the time. If the claims
of a religion that it has all the truth and God has given it all this
truth in a certain book were true, why are there so many sects? Fifty
years do not pass before there are twenty sects founded upon the same
book. If God has put all the truth in certain books, He does not give us
those books in order that we may quarrel over texts. That seems to be
the fact. Why is it? Even if a book were given by God which contained
all the truth about religion, it would not serve the purpose because
nobody could understand the book. Take the Bible, for instance, and all
the sects that exist amongst Christians; each one puts its own
interpretation upon the same text, and each says that it alone
understands that text and all the rest are wrong. So with every
religion. There are many sects among the Mohammedans and among the
Buddhists, and hundreds among the Hindus. Now, I bring these facts
before you in order to show you that any attempt to bring all humanity
to one method of thinking in spiritual things has been a failure and
always will be a failure. Every man that starts a theory, even at the
present day, finds that if he goes twenty miles away from his followers,
they will make twenty sects. You see that happening all the time. You
cannot make all conform to the same ideas: that is a fact, and I thank
God that it is so. I am not against any sect. I am glad that sects
exist, and I only wish they may go on multiplying more and more. Why?
Simply because of this: If you and I and all who are present here were
to think exactly the same thoughts, there would be no thoughts for us to
think. We know that two or more forces must come into collision in order
to produce motion. It is the clash of thought, the differentiation of
thought, that awakes thought. Now, if we all thought alike, we would be
like Egyptian mummies in a museum looking vacantly at one another's
faces — no more than that! Whirls and eddies occur only in a rushing,
living stream. There are no whirlpools in stagnant, dead water. When
religions are dead, there will be no more sects; it will be the perfect
peace and harmony of the grave. But so long as mankind thinks, there
will be sects. Variation is the sign of life, and it must be there. I
pray that they may multiply so that at last there will be as many sects
as human beings, and each one will have his own method, his individual
method of thought in religion.

But this thing exists already. Each one of us is thinking in his own
way, but his natural course has been obstructed all the time and is
still being obstructed. If the sword is not used directly, other means
will be used. Just hear what one of the best preachers in New York says:
he preaches that the Filipinos should be conquered because that is the
only way to teach Christianity to them! They are already Catholics; but
he wants to make them Presbyterians, and for this, he is ready to lay
all this terrible sin of bloodshed upon his race. How terrible! And this
man is one of the greatest preachers of this country, one of the best
informed men. Think of the state of the world when a man like that is
not ashamed to stand up and utter such arrant nonsense; and think of the
state of the world when an audience cheers him! Is this civilisation? It
is the old blood-thirstiness of the tiger, the cannibal, the savage,
coming out once more under new names, new circumstances. What else can
it be? If the state of things is such now, think of the horrors through
which the world passed in olden times, when every sect was trying by
every means in its power to tear to pieces the other sects. History
shows that. The tiger in us is only asleep; it is not dead. When
opportunities come, it jumps up and, as of old, uses its claws and
fangs. Apart from the sword, apart from material weapons, there are
weapons still more terrible — contempt, social hatred, and social
ostracism. Now, these are the most terrible of all inflictions that are
hurled against persons who do not think exactly in the same way as we
do. And why should everybody think just as we do? I do not see any
reason. If I am a rational man, I should be glad they do not think just
as I do. I do not want to live in a grave-like land; I want to be a man
in a world of men. Thinking beings must differ; difference is the first
sign of thought. If I am a thoughtful man, certainly I ought to like to
live amongst thoughtful persons where there are differences of opinion.

Then arises the question: How can all these varieties be true? If one
thing is true, its negation is false. How can contradictory opinions be
true at the same time? This is the question which I intend to answer.
But I will first ask you: Are all the religions of the world really
contradictory? I do not mean the external forms in which great thoughts
are clad. I do not mean the different buildings, languages, rituals,
books, etc. employed in various religions, but I mean the internal soul
of every religion. Every religion has a soul behind it, and that soul
may differ from the soul of another religion; but are they
contradictory? Do they contradict or supplement each other? — that is
the question. I took up the question when I was quite a boy, and have
been studying it all my life. Thinking that my conclusion may be of some
help to you, I place it before you. I believe that they are not
contradictory; they are supplementary. Each religion, as it were, takes
up one part of the great universal truth, and spends its whole force in
embodying and typifying that part of the great truth. It is, therefore,
addition; not exclusion. That is the idea. System after system arises,
each one embodying a great idea, and ideals must be added to ideals. And
this is the march of humanity. Man never progresses from error to truth,
but from truth to truth, from lesser truth to higher truth — but it is
never from error to truth. The child may develop more than the father,
but was the father inane? The child is the father plus something else.
If your present state of knowledge is much greater than it was when you
were a child, would you look down upon that stage now? Will you look
back and call it inanity? Why, your present stage is the knowledge of
the child plus something more.

Then, again, we also know that there may be almost contradictory points
of view of the same thing, but they will all indicate the same thing.
Suppose a man is journeying towards the sun, and as he advances he takes
a photograph of the sun at every stage. When he comes back, he has many
photographs of the sun, which he places before us. We see that not two
are alike, and yet, who will deny that all these are photographs of the
same sun, from different standpoints? Take four photographs of this
church from different corners: how different they would look, and yet
they would all represent this church. In the same way, we are all
looking at truth from different standpoints, which vary according to our
birth, education, surroundings, and so on. We are viewing truth, getting
as much of it as these circumstances will permit, colouring the truth
with our own heart, understanding it with our own intellect, and
grasping it with our own mind. We can only know as much of truth as is
related to us, as much of it as we are able to receive. This makes the
difference between man and man, and occasions sometimes even
contradictory ideas; yet we all belong to the same great universal
truth.

My idea, therefore, is that all these religions are different forces in
the economy of God, working for the good of mankind; and that not one
can become dead, not one can be killed. Just as you cannot kill any
force in nature, so you cannot kill any one of these spiritual forces.
You have seen that each religion is living. From time to time it may
retrograde or go forward. At one time, it may be shorn of a good many of
its trappings; at another time it may be covered with all sorts of
trappings; but all the same, the soul is ever there, it can never be
lost. The ideal which every religion represents is never lost, and so
every religion is intelligently on the march.

And that universal religion about which philosophers and others have
dreamed in every country already exists. It is here. As the universal
brotherhood of man is already existing, so also is universal religion.
Which of you, that have travelled far and wide, have not found brothers
and sisters in every nation? I have found them all over the world.
Brotherhood already exists; only there are numbers of persons who fail
to see this and only upset it by crying for new brotherhoods. Universal
religion, too, is already existing. If the priests and other people that
have taken upon themselves the task of preaching different religions
simply cease preaching for a few moments, we shall see it is there. They
are disturbing it all the time, because it is to their interest. You see
that priests in every country are very conservative. Why is it so? There
are very few priests who lead the people; most of them are led by the
people and are their slaves and servants. If you say it is dry, they say
it is so; if you say it is black, they say it is black. If the people
advance, the priests must advance. They cannot lag behind. So, before
blaming the priests — it is the fashion to blame the priest — you ought
to blame yourselves. You only get what you deserve. What would be the
fate of a priest who wants to give you new and advanced ideas and lead
you forward? His children would probably starve, and he would be clad in
rags. He is governed by the same worldly laws as you are. "If you go
on," he says, "let us march." Of course, there are exceptional souls,
not cowed down by public opinion. They see the truth and truth alone
they value. Truth has got hold of them, has got possession of them, as
it were, and they cannot but march ahead. They never look backward, and
for them there are no people. God alone exists for them, He is the Light
before them, and they are following that Light.

I met a Mormon gentleman in this country, who tried to persuade me to
his faith. I said, "I have great respect for your opinions, but in
certain points we do not agree — I belong to a monastic order, and you
believe in marrying many wives. But why don't you go to India to
preach?" Then he was astonished. He said, "Why, you don't believe in any
marriage at all, and we believe in polygamy, and yet you ask me to go to
your country!" I said, "Yes; my countrymen will hear every religious
thought wherever it may come from. I wish you would go to India, first,
because I am a great believer in sects. Secondly, there are many men in
India who are not at all satisfied with any of the existing sects, and
on account of this dissatisfaction, they will not have anything to do
with religion, and, possibly, you might get some of them." The greater
the number of sects, the more chance of people getting religion. In the
hotel, where there are all sorts of food, everyone has a chance to get
his appetite satisfied. So I want sects to multiply in every country,
that more people may have a chance to be spiritual. Do not think that
people do not like religion. I do not believe that. The preachers cannot
give them what they need. The same man that may have been branded as an
atheist, as a materialist, or what not, may meet a man who gives him the
truth needed by him, and he may turn out the most spiritual man in the
community. We can eat only in our own way. For instance, we Hindus eat
with our fingers. Our fingers are suppler than yours, you cannot use
your fingers the same way. Not only the food should be supplied, but it
should be taken in your own particular way. Not only must you have the
spiritual ideas, but they must come to you according to your own method.
They must speak your own language, the language of your soul, and then
alone they will satisfy you. When the man comes who speaks my language
and gives truth in my language, I at once understand it and receive it
for ever. This is a great fact.

Now from this we see that there are various grades and types of human
minds and what a task religions take upon them! A man brings forth two
or three doctrines and claims that his religion ought to satisfy all
humanity. He goes out into the world, God's menagerie, with a little
cage in hand, and says, "God and the elephant and everybody has to go
into this. Even if we have to cut the elephant into pieces, he must go
in." Again, there may be a sect with a few good ideas. Its followers
say, "All men must come in! " "But there is no room for them." "Never
mind! Cut them to pieces; get them in anyhow; if they don't get in, why,
they will be damned." No preacher, no sect, have I ever met that pauses
and asks, "Why is it that people do not listen to us?" Instead, they
curse the people and say, "The people are wicked." They never ask, "How
is it that people do not listen to my words? Why cannot I make them see
the truth? Why cannot I speak in their language? Why cannot I open their
eyes?" Surely, they ought to know better, and when they find people do
not listen to them, if they curse anybody, it should be themselves. But
it is always the people's fault! They never try to make their sect large
enough to embrace every one.

Therefore we at once see why there has been so much narrow-mindedness,
the part always claiming to be the whole; the little, finite unit always
laying claim to the infinite. Think of little sects, born within a few
hundred years out of fallible human brains, making this arrogant claim
of knowledge of the whole of God's infinite truth! Think of the
arrogance of it! If it shows anything, it is this, how vain human beings
are. And it is no wonder that such claims have always failed, and, by
the mercy of the Lord, are always destined to fail. In this line the
Mohammedans were the best off; every step forward was made with the
sword — the Koran in the one hand and the sword in the other: "Take the
Koran, or you must die; there is no alternative! " You know from history
how phenomenal was their success; for six hundred years nothing could
resist them, and then there came a time when they had to cry halt. So
will it be with other religions if they follow the same methods. We are
such babes! We always forget human nature. When we begin life, we think
that our fate will be something extraordinary, and nothing can make us
disbelieve that. But when we grow old, we think differently. So with
religions. In their early stages, when they spread a. little, they get
the idea that they can change the minds of the whole human race in a few
years, and go on killing and massacring to make converts by force; then
they fail, and begin to understand better. We see that these sects did
not succeed in what they started out to do, which was a great blessing.
Just think if one of those fanatical sects had succeeded all over the
world, where would man be today? Now, the Lord be blessed that they did
not succeed! Yet, each one represents a great truth; each religion
represents a particular excellence — something which is its soul. There
is an old story which comes to my mind: There were some ogresses who
used to kill people and do all sorts of mischief; but they themselves
could not be killed, until someone found out that their souls were in
certain birds, and so long as the birds were safe nothing could destroy
the ogresses. So, each one of us has, as it were, such a bird, where our
soul is; has an ideal, a mission to perform in life. Every human being
is an embodiment of such an ideal, such a mission. Whatever else you may
lose, so long as that ideal is not lost, and that mission is not hurt,
nothing can kill you. Wealth may come and go, misfortunes may pile
mountains high, but if you have kept the ideal entire, nothing can kill
you. You may have grown old, even a hundred years old, but if that
mission is fresh and young in your heart, what can kill you? But when
that ideal is lost and that mission is hurt, nothing can save you. All
the wealth, all the power of the world will not save you. And what are
nations but multiplied individuals? So, each nation has a mission of its
own to perform in this harmony of races; and so long as that nation
keeps to that ideal, that nation nothing can kill; but if that nation
gives up its mission in life and goes after something else, its life
becomes short, and it vanishes.

And so with religions. The fact that all these old religions are living
today proves that they must have kept that mission intact; in spite of
all their mistakes, in spite of all difficulties, in spite of all
quarrels, in spite of all the incrustation of forms and figures, the
heart of every one of them is sound — it is a throbbing, beating, living
heart. They have not lost, any one of them, the great mission they came
for. And it is splendid to study that mission. Take Mohammedanism, for
instance. Christian people hate no religion in the world so much as
Mohammedanism. They think it is the very worst form of religion that
ever existed. As soon as a man becomes a Mohammedan, the whole of Islam
receives him as a brother with open arms, without making any
distinction, which no other religion does. If one of your American
Indians becomes a Mohammedan, the Sultan of Turkey would have no
objection to dine with him. If he has brains, no position is barred to
him. In this country, I have never yet seen a church where the white man
and the negro can kneel side by side to pray. Just think of that: Islam
makes its followers all equal — so, that, you see, is the peculiar
excellence of Mohammedanism. In many places in the Koran you find very
sensual ideas of life. Never mind. What Mohammedanism comes to preach to
the world is this practical brotherhood of all belonging to their faith.
That is the essential part of the Mohammedan religion; and all the other
ideas about heaven and of life etc.. are not Mohammedanism. They are
accretions.

With the Hindus you will find one national idea — spirituality. In no
other religion, in no other sacred books of the world, will you find so
much energy spent in defining the idea of God. They tried to define the
ideal of soul so that no earthly touch might mar it. The spirit must be
divine; and spirit understood as spirit must not be made into a man. The
same idea of unity, of the realisation of God, the omnipresent, is
preached throughout. They think it is all nonsense to say that He lives
in heaven, and all that. It is a mere human, anthropomorphic idea. All
the heaven that ever existed is now and here. One moment in infinite
time is quite as good as any other moment. If you believe in a God, you
can see Him even now. We think religion begins when you have realised
something. It is not believing in doctrines, nor giving intellectual
assent, nor making declarations. If there is a God, have you seen Him?
If you say "no", then what right have you to believe in Him? If you are
in doubt whether there is a God, why do you not struggle to see Him? Why
do you not renounce the world and spend the whole of your life for this
one object? Renunciation and spirituality are the two great ideas of
India, and it is because India clings to these ideas that all her
mistakes count for so little.

With the Christians, the central idea that has been preached by them is
the same: "Watch and pray, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand" — which
means, purify your minds and be ready! And that spirit never dies. You
recollect that the Christians are, even in the darkest days, even in the
most superstitious Christian countries, always trying to prepare
themselves for the coming of the Lord, by trying to help others,
building hospitals, and so on. So long as the Christians keep to that
ideal, their religion lives.

Now an ideal presents itself to my mind. It may be only a dream. I do
not know whether it will ever be realised in this world, but sometimes
it is better to dream a dream, than die on hard facts. Great truths,
even in a dream are good, better than bad facts. So, let us dream a
dream.

You know that there are various grades of mind. You may be a
matter-of-fact, common-sense rationalist: you do not care for forms and
ceremonies; you want intellectual, hard, ringing facts, and they alone
will satisfy you. Then there are the Puritans, the Mohammedans, who will
not allow a picture or a statue in their place of worship. Very well!
But there is another man who is more artistic. He wants a great deal of
art — beauty of lines and curves, the colours, flowers, forms; he wants
candles, lights, and all the insignia and paraphernalia of ritual, that
he may see God. His mind takes God in those forms, as yours takes Him
through the intellect. Then, there is the devotional man, whose soul is
crying for God: he has no other idea but to worship God, and to praise
Him. Then again, there is the philosopher, standing outside all these,
mocking at them. He thinks, "What nonsense they are! What ideas about
God!"

They may laugh at one another, but each one has a place in this world.
All these various minds, all these various types are necessary. If there
ever is going to be an ideal religion, it must be broad and large enough
to supply food for all these minds. It must supply the strength of
philosophy to the philosopher, the devotee's heart to the worshipper; to
the ritualist, it will give all that the most marvellous symbolism can
convey; to the poet, it will give as much of heart as he can take in,
and other things besides. To make such a broad religion, we shall have
to go back to the time when religions began and take them all in.

Our watchword, then, will be acceptance, and not exclusion. Not only
toleration, for so-called toleration is often blasphemy, and I do not
believe in it. I believe in acceptance. Why should I tolerate?
Toleration means that I think that you are wrong and I am just allowing
you to live. Is it not a blasphemy to think that you and I are allowing
others to live? I accept all religions that were in the past, and
worship with them all; I worship God with every one of them, in whatever
form they worship Him. I shall go to the mosque of the Mohammedan; I
shall enter the Christian's church and kneel before the crucifix; I
shall enter the Buddhistic temple, where I shall take refuge in Buddha
and in his Law. I shall go into the forest and sit down in meditation
with the Hindu, who is trying to see the Light which enlightens the
heart of every one.

Not only shall I do all these, but I shall keep my heart open for all
that may come in the future. Is God's book finished? Or is it still a
continuous revelation going on? It is a marvellous book — these
spiritual revelations of the world. The Bible, the Vedas, the Koran, and
all other sacred books are but so many pages, and an infinite number of
pages remain yet to be unfolded. I would leave it open for all of them.
We stand in the present, but open ourselves to the infinite future. We
take in all that has been in the past, enjoy the light of the present,
and open every window of the heart for all that will come in the future.
Salutation to all the prophets of the past, to all the great ones of the
present, and to all that are to come in the future!

</div>
