---
title: THE IDEAL OF A UNIVERSAL RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](the_way_to_the_realisation_of_a_universal_religion.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_open_secret.htm)

  

## THE IDEAL OF A UNIVERSAL RELIGION

HOW IT MUST EMBRACE DIFFERENT TYPES OF MINDS AND METHODS

Wheresoever our senses reach, or whatsoever our minds imagine, we find
therein the action and reaction of two forces, the one counteracting the
other and causing the constant play of the mixed phenomena that we see
around us, and of those which we feel in our minds. In the external
world, the action of these opposite forces is expressing itself as
attraction and repulsion, or as centripetal and centrifugal forces; and
in the internal, as love and hatred, good and evil. We repel some
things, we attract others. We are attracted by one, we are repelled by
another. Many times in our lives we find that without any reason
whatsoever we are, as it were, attracted towards certain persons; at
other times, similarly, we are repelled by others. This is patent to
all, and the higher the field of action, the more potent, the more
remarkable, are the influences of these opposite forces. Religion is the
highest plane of human thought and life, and herein we find that the
workings of these two forces have been most marked. The intensest love
that humanity has ever known has come from religion, and the most
diabolical hatred that humanity has known has also come from religion.
The noblest words of peace that the world has ever heard have come from
men on the religious plane, and the bitterest denunciation that the
world has ever known has been uttered by religious men. The higher the
object of any religion and the finer its organisation, the more
remarkable are its activities. No other human motive has deluged the
world with blood so much as religion; at the same time, nothing has
brought into existence so many hospitals and asylums for the poor; no
other human influence has taken such care, not only of humanity, but
also of the lowest of animals, as religion has done. Nothing makes us so
cruel as religion, and nothing makes us so tender as religion. This has
been so in the past, and will also, in all probability, be so in the
future. Yet out of the midst of this din and turmoil, this strife and
struggle, this hatred and jealousy of religions and sects, there have
arisen, from time to time, potent voices, drowning all this noise —
making themselves heard from pole to pole, as it were — proclaiming
peace and harmony. Will it ever come?

Is it possible that there should ever reign unbroken harmony in this
plane of mighty religious struggle? The world is exercised in the latter
part of this century by the question of harmony; in society, various
plans are being proposed, and attempts are made to carry them into
practice; but we know how difficult it is to do so. People find that it
is almost impossible to mitigate the fury of the struggle of life, to
tone down the tremendous nervous tension that is in man. Now, if it is
so difficult to bring harmony and peace to the physical plane of life —
the external, gross, and outward side of it — then a thousand times more
difficult is it to bring peace and harmony to rule over the internal
nature of man. I would ask you for the time being to come out of the
network of words. We have all been hearing from childhood of such things
as love, peace, charity, equality, and universal brotherhood; but they
have become to us mere words without meaning, words which we repeat like
parrots, and it has become quite natural for us to do so. We cannot help
it. Great souls, who first felt these great ideas in their hearts,
manufactured these words; and at that time many understood their
meaning. Later on, ignorant people have taken up those words to play
with them and made religion a mere play upon words, and not a thing to
be carried into practice. It becomes "my father's religion", "our
nation's religion", "our country's religion", and so forth. It becomes
only a phase of patriotism to profess any religion, and patriotism is
always partial. To bring harmony into religion must always be difficult.
Yet we will consider this problem of the harmony of religions.

We see that in every religion there are three parts — I mean in every
great and recognised religion. First, there is the philosophy which
presents the whole scope of that religion, setting forth its basic
principles, the goal and the means of reaching it. The second part is
mythology, which is philosophy made concrete. It consists of legends
relating to the lives of men, or of supernatural beings, and so forth.
It is the abstractions of philosophy concretised in the more or less
imaginary lives of men and supernatural beings. The third part is the
ritual. This is still more concrete and is made up of forms and
ceremonies, various physical attitudes, flowers and incense, and many
other things, that appeal to the senses. In these consists the ritual.
You will find that all recognised religions have these three elements.
Some lay more stress on one, some on another. Let us now take into
consideration the first part, philosophy. Is there one universal
philosophy? Not yet. Each religion brings out its own doctrines and
insists upon them as being the only true ones. And not only does it do
that, but it thinks that he who does not believe in them must go to some
horrible place. Some will even draw the sword to compel others to
believe as they do. This is not through wickedness, but through a
particular disease of the human brain called fanaticism. They are very
sincere, these fanatics, the most sincere of human beings; but they are
quite as irresponsible as other lunatics in the world. This disease of
fanaticism is one of the most dangerous of all diseases. All the
wickedness of human nature is roused by it. Anger is stirred up, nerves
are strung high, and human beings become like tigers.

Is there any mythological similarity, is there any mythological harmony,
any universal mythology accepted by all religions? Certainly not. All
religions have their own mythology, only each of them says, "My stories
are not mere myths." Let us try to understand the question by
illustration. I simply mean to illustrate, I do not mean criticism of
any religion. The Christian believes that God took the shape of a dove
and came down to earth; to him this is history, and not mythology. The
Hindu believes that God is manifested in the cow. Christians say that to
believe so is mere mythology, and not history, that it is superstition.
The Jews think that if an image be made in the form of a box, or a
chest, with an angel on either side, then it may be placed in the Holy
of Holies; it is sacred to Jehovah; but if the image be made in the form
of a beautiful man or woman, they say, "This is a horrible idol; break
it down! " This is our unity in mythology! If a man stands up and says,
"My prophet did such and such a wonderful thing", others will say, "That
is only superstition", but at the same time they say that their own
prophet did still more wonderful things, which they hold to be
historical. Nobody in the world, as far as I have seen, is able to make
out the fine distinction between history and mythology, as it exists in
the brains of these persons. All such stories, to whatever religion they
may belong, are really mythological, mixed up occasionally, it may be
with, a little history.

Next come the rituals. One sect has one particular form of ritual and
thinks that that is holy, while the rituals of another sect are simply
arrant superstition. If one sect worships a peculiar sort of symbol,
another sect says, "Oh, it is horrible!" Take, for instance, a general
form of symbol. The phallus symbol is certainly a sexual symbol, but
gradually that aspect of it has been forgotten, and it stands now as a
symbol of the Creator. Those nations which have this as their symbol
never think of it as the phallus; it is just a symbol, and there it
ends. But a man from another race or creed sees in it nothing but the
phallus, and begins to condemn it; yet at the same time he may be doing
something which to the so-called phallic worshippers appears most
horrible. Let me take two points for illustration, the phallus symbol
and the sacrament of the Christians. To the Christians the phallus is
horrible, and to the Hindus the Christian sacrament is horrible. They
say that the Christian sacrament, the killing of a man and the eating of
his flesh and the drinking of his blood to get the good qualities of
that man, is cannibalism. This is what some of the savage tribes do; if
a man is brave, they kill him and eat his heart, because they think that
it will give them the qualities of courage and bravery possessed by that
man. Even such a devout Christian as Sir John Lubbock admits this and
says that the origin of this Christian symbol is in this savage idea.
The Christians, of course, do not admit this view of its origin; and
what it may imply never comes to their mind. It stands for holy things,
and that is all they want to know. So even in rituals there is no
universal symbol, which can command general recognition and acceptance.
Where then is any universality? How is it possible then to have a
universal form of religion? That, however, already exists. And let us
see what it is.

We all hear about universal brotherhood, and how societies stand up
especially to preach this. I remember an old story. In India, taking
wine is considered very bad. There were two brothers who wished, one
night, to drink wine secretly; and their uncle, who was a very orthodox
man was sleeping in a room quite close to theirs. So, before they began
to drink, they said to each other, "We must be very silent, or uncle
will wake up." When they were drinking, they continued repeating to each
other "Silence! Uncle will wake up", each trying to shout the other
down. And, as the shouting increased, the uncle woke up, came into the
room, and discovered the whole thing. Now, we all shout like these
drunken men," Universal brotherhood! We are all equal, therefore let us
make a sect." As soon as you make a sect you protest against equality,
and equality is no more. Mohammedans talk of universal brotherhood, but
what comes out of that in reality? Why, anybody who is not a Mohammedan
will not be admitted into the brotherhood; he will more likely have his
throat cut. Christians talk of universal brotherhood; but anyone who is
not a Christian must go to that place where he will be eternally
barbecued.

And so we go on in this world in our search after universal brotherhood
and equality. When you hear such talk in the world, I would ask you to
be a little reticent, to take care of yourselves, for, behind all this
talk is often the intensest selfishness. "In the winter sometimes a
thunder-cloud comes up; it roars and roars, but it does not rain; but in
the rainy season the clouds speak not, but deluge the world with water."
So those who are *really* workers, and *really* feel at heart the
universal brotherhood of man, do not talk much, do not make little sects
for universal brotherhood; but their acts, their movements, their whole
life, show out clearly that they in truth possess the feeling of
brotherhood for mankind, that they have love and sympathy for all. They
do not speak, they *do* and they *live*. This world is too full of
blustering talk. We want a little more earnest work, and less talk.

So far we see that it is hard to find any universal features in regard
to religion, and yet we know that they exist. We are all human beings,
but are we all equal? Certainly not. Who says we are equal? Only the
lunatic. Are we all equal in our brains, in our powers, in our bodies?
One man is stronger than another, one man has more brain power than
another. If we are all equal, why is there this inequality? Who made it?
We. Because we have more or less powers, more or less brain, more or
less physical strength, it must make a difference between us. Yet we
know that the doctrine of equality appeals to our heart. We are all
human beings; but some are men, and some are women. Here is a black man,
there is a white man; but all are men, all belong to one humanity.
Various are our faces; I see no two alike, yet we are all human beings.
Where is this one humanity? I find a man or a woman, either dark or
fair; and among all these faces I know that there is an abstract
humanity which is common to all. I may not find it when I try to grasp
it, to sense it, and to actualise it, yet I know for certain that it is
there. If I am sure of anything, it is of this humanity which is common
to us all. It is through this generalised entity that I see you as a man
or a woman. So it is with this universal religion, which runs through
all the various religions of the world in the form of God; it must and
does exist through eternity. "I am the thread that runs through all
these pearls," and each pearl is a religion or even a sect thereof. Such
are the different pearls, and the Lord is the thread that runs through
all of them; only the majority of mankind are entirely unconscious of
it.

Unity in variety is the plan of the universe. We are all men, and yet we
are all distinct from one another. As a part of humanity I am one with
you, and as Mr. So-and-so I am different from you. As a man you are
separate from the woman; as a human being you are one with the woman. As
a man you are separate from the animal, but as living beings, man,
woman, animal, and plant are all one; and as existence, you are one with
the whole universe. That universal existence is God, the ultimate Unity
in the universe. In Him we are all one. At the same time, in
manifestation, these differences must always remain. In our work, in our
energies, as they are being manifested outside, these differences must
always remain. We find then that if by the idea of a universal religion
it is meant that one set of doctrines should be believed in by all
mankind it is wholly impossible. It can never be, there can never be a
time when all faces will be the same. Again, if we expect that there
will be one universal mythology, that is also impossible; it cannot be.
Neither can there be one universal ritual. Such a state of things can
never come into existence; if it ever did, the world would be destroyed,
because variety is the first principle of life. What makes us formed
beings? Differentiation. Perfect balance would be our destruction.
Suppose the amount of heat in this room, the tendency of which is
towards equal and perfect diffusion, gets that kind of diffusion, then
for all practical purposes that heat will cease to be. What makes motion
possible in this universe? Lost balance. The unity of sameness can come
only when this universe is destroyed, otherwise such a thing is
impossible. Not only so, it would be dangerous to have it. We must not
wish that all of us should think alike. There would then be no thought
to think. We should be all alike, as the Egyptian mummies in a museum,
looking at each other without a thought to think. It is this difference,
this differentiation, this losing of the balance between us, which is
the very soul of our progress, the soul of all our thought. This must
always be.

What then do I mean by the ideal of a universal religion? I do not mean
any one universal philosophy, or any one universal mythology, or any one
universal ritual held alike by all; for I know that this world must go
on working, wheel within wheel, this intricate mass of machinery, most
complex, most wonderful. What can *we* do then? We can make it run
smoothly, we can lessen the friction, we can grease the wheels, as it
were. How? By recognising the natural necessity of variation. Just as we
have recognised unity by our very nature, so we must also recognise
variation. We must learn that truth may be expressed in a hundred
thousand ways, and that each of these ways is true as far as it goes. We
must learn that the same thing can be viewed from a hundred different
standpoints, and vet be the same thing. Take for instance the sun.
Suppose a man standing on the earth looks at the sun when it rises in
the morning; he sees a big ball. Suppose he starts on a journey towards
the sun and takes a camera with him, taking photographs at every stage
of his journey, until he reaches the sun. The photographs of each stage
will be seen to be different from those of the other stages; in fact,
when he gets back, he brings with him so many photographs of so many
different suns, as it would appear; and yet we know that the same sun
was photographed by the man at the different stages of his progress.
Even so is it with the Lord. Through high philosophy or low, through the
most exalted mythology or the grossest, through the most refined
ritualism or arrant fetishism, every sect, every soul, every nation,
every religion, consciously or unconsciously, is struggling upward,
towards God; every vision of truth that man has, is a vision of Him and
of none else. Suppose we all go with vessels in our hands to fetch water
from a lake. One has a cup, another a jar, another a bucket, and so
forth, and we all fill our vessels. The water in each case naturally
takes the form of the vessel carried by each of us. He who brought the
cup has the water in the form of a cup; he who brought the jar — his
water is in the shape of a jar, and so forth; but, in every case, water,
and nothing but water, is in the vessel. So it is in the case of
religion; our minds are like these vessels, and each one of us is trying
to arrive at the realisation of God. God is like that water filling
these different vessels, and in each vessel the vision of God comes in
the form of the vessel. Yet He is One. He is God in every case. This is
the only recognition of universality that we can get.

So far it is all right theoretically. But is there any way of
practically working out this harmony in religions? We find that this
recognition that all the various views of religion are true has been
very very old. Hundreds of attempts have been made in India, in
Alexandria, in Europe, in China, in Japan, in Tibet, and lastly in
America, to formulate a harmonious religious creed, to make all
religions come together in love. They have all failed, because they did
not adopt any practical plan. Many have admitted that all the religions
of the world are right, but they show no practical way of bringing them
together, so as to enable each of them to maintain its own individuality
in the conflux. That plan alone is practical, which does not destroy the
individuality of any man in religion and at the same time shows him a
point of union with all others. But so far, all the plans of religious
harmony that have been tried, while proposing to take in all the various
views of religion, have, in practice, tried to bind them all down to a
few doctrines, and so have produced more new sects, fighting,
struggling, and pushing against each other.

I have also my little plan. I do not know whether it will work or not,
and I want to present it to you for discussion. What is my plan? In the
first place I would ask mankind to recognise this maxim, "Do not
destroy". Iconoclastic reformers do no good to the world. Break not,
pull not anything down, but build. Help, if you can; if you cannot, fold
your hands and stand by and see things go on. Do not injure, if you
cannot render help. Say not a word against any man's convictions so far
as they are sincere. Secondly, take man where he stands, and from there
give him a lift. If it be true that God is the centre of all religions,
and that each of us is moving towards Him along one of these radii, then
it is certain that all of us *must* reach that centre. And at the
centre, where all the radii meet, all our differences will cease; but
until we reach there, differences there must be. All these radii
converge to the same centre. One, according to his nature, travels along
one of these lines, and another, along another; and if we all push
onward along our own lines, we shall surely come to the centre, because,
"All roads lead to Rome". Each of us is naturally growing and developing
according to his own nature; each will in time come to know the highest
truth for after all, men must teach themselves. What can you and I do?
Do you think you can teach even a child? You cannot. The child teaches
himself. Your duty is to afford opportunities and to remove obstacles. A
plant grows. Do *you* make the plant grow? Your duty is to put a hedge
round it and see that no animal eats up the plant, and there your duty
ends. The plant grows of itself. So it is in regard to the spiritual
growth of every man. None can teach you; none can make a spiritual man
of you. You have to teach yourself; your growth must come from inside.

What can an external teacher do? He can remove the obstructions a
little, and there his duty ends. Therefore help, if you can; but do not
destroy. Give up all ideas that *you* can make men spiritual. It is
impossible. There is no other teacher to you than your own soul.
Recognise this. What comes of it? In society we see so many different
natures. There are thousands and thousands of varieties of minds and
inclinations. A thorough generalisation of them is impossible, but for
our practical purpose it is sufficient to have them characterised into
four classes. First, there is the active man, the worker; he wants to
work, and there is tremendous energy in his muscles and his nerves. His
aim is to work — to build hospitals, do charitable deeds, make streets,
to plan and to organise. Then there is the emotional man who loves the
sublime and the beautiful to an excessive degree. He loves to think of
the beautiful, to enjoy the aesthetic side of nature, and adore Love and
the God of Love. He loves with his whole heart the great souls of all
times, the prophets of religions, and the Incarnations of God on earth;
he does not care whether reason can or cannot prove that Christ or
Buddha existed; he does not care for the exact date when the Sermon on
the Mount was preached, or for the exact moment of Krishna's birth; what
he cares for is their personalities, their lovable figures. Such is his
ideal. This is the nature of the lover, the emotional man. Then, there
is the mystic whose mind wants to analyse its own self, to understand
the workings of the human mind, what the forces are that are working
inside, and how to know, manipulate, and obtain control over them. This
is the mystical mind. Then, there is the philosopher who wants to weigh
everything and use his intellect even beyond the possibilities of all
human philosophy.

Now a religion, to satisfy the largest proportion of mankind, must be
able to supply food for all these various types of minds; and where this
capability is wanting, the existing sects all become one-sided. Suppose
you go to a sect which preaches love and emotion. They sing and weep,
and preach love. But as soon as you say, "My friend, that is all right,
but I want something stronger than this — a little reason and
philosophy; I want to understand things step by step and more
rationally", they say, "Get out"; and they not only ask you to get out
but would send you to the other place, if they could. The result is that
that sect can only help people of an emotional turn of mind. They not
only do not help others, but try to destroy them; and the most wicked
part of the whole thing is that they will not only *not* help others,
but do not believe in their sincerity. Again, there are philosophers who
talk of the wisdom of India and the East and use big psychological
terms, fifty syllables long, but if an ordinary man like me goes to them
and says, "Can you tell me anything to make me spiritual?", the first
thing they would do would be to smile and say, "Oh, you are too far
below us in your reason. What can you understand about spirituality?"
These are high-up philosophers. They simply show you the door. Then
there are the mystical sects who speak all sorts of things about
different planes of existence, different states of mind, and what the
power of the mind can do, and so on; and if you are an ordinary man and
say, "Show me anything good that I can do; I am not much given to
speculation; can you give me anything that will suit me?", they will
smile and say, "Listen to that fool; he knows nothing, his existence is
for nothing." And this is going on everywhere in the world. I would like
to get extreme exponents of all these different sects, and shut them up
in a room, and photograph their beautiful derisive smiles!

This is the existing condition of religion, the existing condition of
things. What I want to propagate is a religion that will be equally
acceptable to all minds; it must be equally philosophic, equally
emotional, equally mystic, and equally conducive to action. If
professors from the colleges come, scientific men and physicists, they
will court reason. Let them have it as much as they want. There will be
a point beyond which they will think they cannot go, without breaking
with reason. They will say, "These ideas of God and salvation are
superstitious, guise them up! " I say, "Mr. Philosopher, this body of
yours is a bigger superstition. Give *it* up, don't go home to dinner or
to your philosophic chair. Give up the body, and if you cannot, cry
quarter and sit down." For religion must be able to show how to realise
the philosophy that teaches us that this world is one, that there is but
one Existence in the universe. Similarly, if the mystic comes, we must
welcome him, be ready to give him the science of mental analysis, and
practically demonstrate it before him. And if emotional people come, we
must sit, laugh, and weep with them in the name of the Lord; we must
"drink the cup of love and become mad". If the energetic worker comes,
we must work with him, with all the energy that we have. And this
combination will be the ideal of the nearest approach to a universal
religion. Would to God that all men were so constituted that in their
minds *all* these elements of philosophy, mysticism, emotion, and of
work were equally present in full! That is the ideal, my ideal of a
perfect man. Everyone who has only one or two of these elements of
character, I consider "one-sided''; and this world is almost full of
such "one-sided" men, with knowledge of that one road only in which they
move; and anything else is dangerous and horrible to them. To become
harmoniously balanced in all these four directions is *my* ideal of
religion. And this religion is attained by what we, in India, call Yoga
— union. To the worker, it is union between men and the whole of
humanity; to the mystic, between his lower and Higher Self; to the
lover, union between himself and the God of Love; and to the
philosopher; it is the union of *all* existence. This is what is meant
by Yoga. This is a Sanskrit term, and these four divisions of Yoga have
in Sanskrit different names. The man who seeks after this kind of union
is called a Yogi. The worker is called the Karma-Yogi. He who seeks the
union through love is called the Bhakti-Yogi. He who seeks it through
mysticism is called the Râja-Yogi. And he who seeks it through
philosophy is called the Jnâna-Yogi So this word Yogi comprises them
all.

Now first of all let me take up Râja-Yoga. What is this Raja-Yoga, this
controlling of the mind? In this country you are associating all sorts
of hobgoblins with the word Yoga, I am afraid. Therefore, I must start
by telling you that it has nothing to do with such things. No one of
these Yogas gives up reason, no one of them asks you to be hoodwinked,
or to deliver your reason into the hands of priests of any type
whatsoever. No one of them asks that you should give your allegiance to
any superhuman messenger. Each one of them tells you to *cling* to your
reason to hold fast to it. We find in all beings three sorts of
instruments of knowledge. The first is instinct, which you find most
highly developed in animals; this is the lowest instrument of knowledge.
What is the second instrument of knowledge? Reasoning. You find that
most highly developed in man. Now in the first place, instinct is an
inadequate instrument; to animals, the sphere of action is very limited,
and within that limit instinct acts. When you come to man, you see it is
largely developed into reason. The sphere of action also has here become
enlarged. Yet even reason is still very insufficient. Reason can go only
a little way and then it stops, it cannot go any further; and if you try
to push it, the result is helpless confusion, reason itself becomes
unreasonable. Logic becomes argument in a circle. Take, for instance,
the very basis of our perception, matter and force. What is matter? That
which is acted upon by force. And force? That which acts upon matter.
You see the complication, what the logicians call see-saw, one idea
depending on the other, and this again depending on that. You find a
mighty barrier before reason, beyond which reasoning cannot go; yet it
always feels impatient to get into the region of the Infinite beyond.
This world, this universe which our senses feel, or our mind thinks, is
but one atom, so to say, of the Infinite, projected on to the plane of
consciousness; and within that narrow limit, defined by the network of
consciousness, works our reason, and not beyond. Therefore, there must
be some other instrument to take us beyond, and that instrument is
called inspiration. So instinct, reason, and inspiration are the three
instruments of knowledge. Instinct belongs to animals, reason to man,
and inspiration to God-men. But in all human beings are to be found, in
a more or less developed condition, the germs of all these three
instruments of knowledge. To have these mental instruments evolved, the
germs must be there. And this must also be remembered that one
instrument is a development of the other, and therefore does not
contradict it. It is reason that develops into inspiration, and
therefore inspiration does not contradict reason, but fulfils it. Things
which reason cannot get at are brought to light by inspiration; and they
do not contradict reason. The old man does not contradict the child, but
fulfils the child. Therefore you must always bear in mind that the great
danger lies in mistaking the lower form of instrument to be the higher.
Many times instinct is presented before the world as inspiration, and
then come all the spurious claims for the gift of prophecy. A fool or a
semi-lunatic thinks that the confusion going on in his brain is
inspiration, and he wants men to follow him. The most contradictory
irrational nonsense that has been preached in the world is simply the
instinctive jargon of confused lunatic brains trying to pass for the
language of inspiration.

The first test of true teaching must be, that the teaching should not
contradict reason. And you may see that such is the basis of all these
Yogas. We take the Raja-Yoga, the psychological Yoga, the psychological
way to union. It is a vast subject, and I can only point out to you now
the central idea of this Yoga. We have but one method of acquiring
knowledge. From the lowest man to the highest Yogi, all have to use the
same method; and that method is what is called concentration. The
chemist who works in his laboratory concentrates all the powers of his
mind, brings them into one focus, and throws them on the elements; and
the elements stand analysed, and thus his knowledge comes. The
astronomer has also concentrated the powers of his mind and brought them
into one focus; and he throws them on to objects through his telescope;
and stars and systems roll forward and give up their secrets to him. So
it is in every case — with the professor in his chair, the student with
his book — with every man who is working to know. You are hearing me,
and if my words interest you, your mind will become concentrated on
them; and then suppose a clock strikes, you will not hear it, on account
of this concentration; and the more you are able to concentrate your
mind, the better you will understand me; and the more I concentrate my
love and powers, the better I shall be able to give expression to what I
want to convey to you. The more this power of concentration, the more
knowledge is acquired, because this is the one and only method of
acquiring knowledge. Even the lowest shoeblack, if he gives more
concentration, will black shoes better; the cook with concentration will
cook a meal all the better. In making money, or in worshipping God, or
in doing anything, the stronger the power of concentration, the better
will that thing be done. This is the one call, the one knock, which
opens the gates of nature, and lets out floods of light. This, the power
of concentration, is the only key to the treasure-house of knowledge.
The system of Raja-Yoga deals almost exclusively with this. In the
present state of our body we are so much distracted, and the mind is
frittering away its energies upon a hundred sorts of things. As soon as
I try to calm my thoughts and concentrate my mind upon any one object of
knowledge, thousands of undesired impulses rush into the brain,
thousands of thoughts rush into the mind and disturb it. How to check it
and bring the mind under control is the whole subject of study in
Raja-Yoga.

Now take Karma-Yoga, the attainment of God through work. It is evident
that in society there are many persons who seem to be born for some sort
of activity or other, whose minds cannot be concentrated on the plane of
thought alone, and who have but one idea, concretised in work, visible
and tangible. There must be a science for this kind of life too. Each
one of us is engaged in some work, but the majority of us fritter away
the greater portion of our energies, because we do not know the secret
of work. Karma-Yoga explains this secret and teaches where and how to
work, how to employ to the greatest advantage the largest part of our
energies in the work that is before us. But with this secret we must
take into consideration the great objection against work, namely that it
causes pain. All misery and pain come from attachment. I want to do
work, I want to do good to a human being; and it is ninety to one that
that human being whom I have helped will prove ungrateful and go against
me; and the result to me is pain. Such things deter mankind from
working; and it spoils a good portion of the work and energy of mankind,
this fear of pain and misery. Karma-Yoga teaches us how to work for
work's sake, unattached, without caring who is helped, and what for. The
Karma-Yogi works because it is his nature, because he *feels* that it is
good for him to do so, and he has no object beyond that. His position in
this world is that of a giver, and he never cares to receive anything.
He knows that he is giving, and does not ask for anything in return and,
therefore, he eludes the grasp of misery. The grasp of pain, whenever it
comes, is the result of the reaction of "attachment".

There is then the Bhakti-Yoga for the man of emotional nature, the
lover. He wants to love God, he relies upon and uses all sorts of
rituals, flowers, incense, beautiful buildings, forms and all such
things. Do you mean to say they are wrong? One fact I must tell you. It
is good for you to remember, in this country especially, that the
world's great spiritual giants have all been produced only by those
religious sects which have been in possession of very rich mythology and
ritual. All sects that have attempted to worship God without any form or
ceremony have crushed without mercy everything that is beautiful and
sublime in religion. Their religion is a fanaticism at best, a dry
thing. The history of the world is a standing witness to this fact.
Therefore do not decry these rituals and mythologies. Let people have
them; let those who so desire have them. Do not exhibit that unworthy
derisive smile, and say, "They are fools; let them have it." Not so; the
greatest men I have seen in my life, the most wonderfully developed in
spirituality, have all come through the discipline of these rituals. I
do not hold myself worthy to sit at their feet, and for *me* to
criticise *them*! How do I know how these ideas act upon the human minds
which of them I am to accept and which to reject? We are apt to
criticise everything in the world: without sufficient warrant. Let
people have all the mythology they want, with its beautiful
inspirations; for you must always bear in mind that emotional natures do
not care for abstract definitions of the truth. God to them is something
tangible, the only thing that is real; they feel, hear, and see Him, and
love Him. Let them have their God. Your rationalist seems to them to be
like the fool who, when he saw a beautiful statue, wanted to break it to
find out of what material it was made. Bhakti-Yoga: teaches them how to
love, without any ulterior motives, loving God and loving the good
because it is good to do so, not for going to heaven, nor to get
children, wealth, or anything else. It teaches them that love itself is
the highest recompense of love --- that God Himself is love. It teaches
them to pay all kinds of tribute to God as the Creator, the Omnipresent,
Omniscient, Almighty Ruler, the Father and the Mother. The highest
phrase that can express Him, the highest idea that the human mind can
conceive of Him, is that He is the God of Love. Wherever there is love,
it is He. "Wherever there is any love, it is He, the Lord is present
there." Where the husband kisses the wife, He is there in the kiss;
where the mother kisses the child, He is there in the kiss; where
friends clasp hands, He, the Lord, is present as the God of Love. When a
great man loves and wishes to help mankind, He is there giving freely
His bounty out of His love to mankind. Wherever the heart expands, He is
there manifested. This is what the Bhakti-Yoga teaches.

We lastly come to the Jnana-Yogi, the philosopher, the thinker, he who
wants to go beyond the visible. He is the man who is not satisfied with
the little things of this world. His idea is to go beyond the daily
routine of eating, drinking, and so on; not even the teaching of
thousands of books will satisfy him. Not even all the sciences will
satisfy him; at the best, they only bring this little world before him.
What else will give him satisfaction? Not even myriads of systems of
worlds will satisfy him; they are to him but a drop in the ocean of
existence. His soul wants to go beyond all that into the very heart of
being, by seeing Reality as It is; by realising It, by being It, by
becoming one with that Universal Being. That is the philosopher. To say
that God is the Father or the Mother, the Creator of this universe, its
Protector and Guide, is to him quite inadequate to express Him. To him,
God is the life of his life, the soul of his soul. God is his own Self.
Nothing else remains which is other than God. All the mortal parts of
him become pounded by the weighty strokes of philosophy and are brushed
away. What at last truly remains is God Himself.

Upon the same tree there are two birds, one on the top, the other below.
The one on the top is calm, silent, and majestic, immersed in his own
glory; the one on the lower branches, eating sweet and bitter fruits by
turns, hopping from branch to branch, is becoming happy and miserable by
turns. After a time the lower bird eats an exceptionally bitter fruit
and gets disgustful and looks up and sees the other bird, that wondrous
one of golden plumage, who eats neither sweet nor bitter fruit, who is
neither happy nor miserable, but calm, Self-centred, and sees nothing
beyond his Self. The lower bird longs for this condition but soon
forgets it, and again begins to eat the fruits. In a little while, he
eats another exceptionally bitter fruit, which makes him feel miserable,
and he again looks up, and tries to get nearer to the upper bird. Once
more he forgets and after a time he looks up, and so on he goes again
and again, until he comes very near to the beautiful bird and sees the
reflection of light from his plumage playing around his own body, and he
feels a change and seems to melt away; still nearer he comes, and
everything about him melts away, and at last he understands this
wonderful change. The lower bird was, as it were, only the
substantial-looking shadow, the reflection of the higher; he himself was
in essence the upper bird all the time. This eating of fruits, sweet and
bitter, this lower, little bird, weeping and happy by turns, was a vain
chimera, a dream: all along, the real bird was there above, calm and
silent, glorious and majestic, beyond grief, beyond sorrow. The upper
bird is God, the Lord of this universe; and the lower bird is the human
soul, eating the sweet and bitter fruits of this world. Now and then
comes a heavy blow to the soul. For a time, he stops the eating and goes
towards the unknown God, and a flood of light comes. He thinks that this
world is a vain show. Yet again the senses drag hint down, and he begins
as before to eat the sweet and bitter fruits of the world. Again an
exceptionally hard blow comes. His heart becomes open again to divine
light; thus gradually he approaches God, and as he gets nearer and
nearer, he finds his old self melting away. When he has come near
enough, he sees that he is no other than God, and he exclaims, "He whom
I have described to you as the Life of this universe, as present in the
atom, and in suns and moons — He is the basis of our own life, the Soul
of our soul. Nay, thou art That." This is what this Jnana-Yoga teaches.
It tells man that he is essentially divine. It shows to mankind the real
unity of being, and that each one of us is the Lord God Himself,
manifested on earth. All of us, from the lowest worm that crawls under
our feet to the highest beings to whom we look up with wonder and awe —
all are manifestations of the same Lord.

Lastly, it is imperative that all these various Yogas should be carried
out in, practice; mere theories about them will not do any good. First
we have to hear about them, then we have to think about them. We have to
reason the thoughts out, impress them on our minds, and we have to
meditate on them, realise them, until at last they become our whole
life. No longer will religion remain a bundle of ideas or theories, nor
an intellectual assent; it will enter into our very self. By means of
intellectual assent we may today subscribe to many foolish things, and
change our minds altogether tomorrow. But true religion never changes.
Religion is realisation; not talk, nor doctrine, nor theories, however
beautiful they may be. It is being and becoming, not hearing or
acknowledging; it is the whole soul becoming changed into what it
believes. That is religion.

</div>
