---
title: SOUL, NATURE, AND GOD

---
<div>

[←](yajnavalkya_and_maitreyi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](cosmology.htm)

  

## SOUL, NATURE, AND GOD

According to the Vedanta philosophy, man consists of three substances,
so to say. The outermost is the body, the gross form of man, in which
are the instruments of sensation, such as the eyes, nose, ears, and so
forth. This eye is not the organ of vision; it is only the instrument.
Behind that is the organ. So, the ears are not the organs of hearing;
they are the instruments, and behind them is the organ, or what, in
modern physiology, is called the centre. The organs are called Indriyas
in Sanskrit. If the centre which governs the eyes be destroyed, the eyes
will not see; so with all our senses. The organs, again, cannot sense
anything by themselves, until there be something else attached to them.
That something is the mind. Many times you have observed that you were
deeply engaged in a certain thought, and the clock struck and you did
not hear it. Why? The ear was there; vibrations entered it and were
carried into the brain, yet you did not hear, because the mind was not
joined to the organ. The impressions of external objects are carried to
the organs, and when the mind is attached to them, it takes the
impressions and gives them, as it were, a colouring, which is called
egoism, "I". Take the case of a mosquito biting me on the finger when I
am engaged in some work. I do not feel it, because my mind is joined to
something else. Later, when my mind is joined to the impression conveyed
to the Indriyas, a reaction comes. With this reaction I become conscious
of the mosquito. So even the mind joining itself to the organs is not
sufficient; there must come the reaction in the form of will. This
faculty from which the reaction comes, the faculty of knowledge or
intellect, is called "Buddhi" First, there must be the external
instrument, next the organ, next the mind must join itself to the organ,
then must come the reaction of intellect, and when all these things are
complete, there immediately flashes the idea, "I and the external
object", and there is a perception, a concept, knowledge. The external
organ, which is only the instrument, is in the body, and behind that is
the internal organ which is finer; then there is the mind, then the
intellectual faculty, then egoism, which says, "I" — I see, I hear, and
so forth. The whole process is carried on by certain forces; you may
call them vital forces; in Sanskrit they are called Prâna. This gross
part of man, this body, in which are the external instruments, is called
in Sanskrit, Sthula Sharira, the gross body; behind it comes the series,
beginning with the organs, the mind, the intellect, the egoism. These
and the vital forces form a compound which is called the fine body, the
Sukshma Sharira. These forces are composed of very fine elements, so
fine that no amount of injury to this body can destroy them; they
survive all the shocks given to this body. The gross body we see is
composed of gross material, and as such it is always being renewed and
changing continuously. But the internal organs, the mind, the intellect,
and the egoism are composed of the finest material, so fine that they
will endure for aeons and aeons. They are so fine that they cannot be
resisted by anything; they can get through any obstruction. The gross
body is non-intelligent, so is the fine, being composed of fine matter.
Although one part is called mind, another the intellect, and the third
egoism, yet we see at a glance that no one of them can be the "Knower".
None of them can be the perceiver, the witness, the one for whom action
is made, and who is the seer of the action. All these movements in the
mind, or the faculty of intellection, or egoism, must be for some one
else. These being composed of fine matter cannot be self-effulgent.
Their luminosity cannot be in themselves. This manifestation of the
table, for instance, cannot be due to any material thing. Therefore
there must be some one behind them all, who is the real manifester, the
real seer, the real enjoyer and He in Sanskrit is called the Atman, the
Soul of man, the real Self of man. He it is who really sees things. The
external instruments and the organs catch the impressions and convey
them to the mind, and the mind to the intellect, and the intellect
reflects them as on a mirror, and back of it is the Soul that looks on
them and gives His orders and His directions. He is the ruler of all
these instruments, the master in the house, the enthroned king in the
body. The faculty of egoism, the faculty of intellection, the faculty of
cogitation, the organs, the instruments, the body, all of them obey His
commands. It is He who is manifesting all of these. This is the Atman of
man. Similarly, we can see that what is in a small part of the universe
must also be in the whole universe. If conformity is the law of the
universe, every part of the universe must have been built on the same
plan as the whole. So we naturally think that behind the gross material
form which we call this universe of ours, there must be a universe of
finer matter, which we call thought, and behind that there must be a
Soul, which makes all this thought possible, which commands, which is
the enthroned king of this universe. That soul which is behind each mind
and each body is called Pratyagâtman, the individual Atman, and that
Soul which is behind the universe as its guide, ruler, and governor, is
God.

The next thing to consider is whence all these things come. The answer
is: What is meant by coming? If it means that something can be produced
out of nothing, it is impossible. All this creation, manifestation,
cannot be produced out of zero. Nothing can be produced without a cause,
and the effect is but the cause reproduced. Here is a glass. Suppose we
break it to pieces, and pulverise it, and by means of chemicals almost
annihilate it. Will it go back to zero? Certainly not. The form will
break, but the particles of which it is made will be there; they will go
beyond our senses, but they remain, and it is quite possible that out of
these materials another glass may be made. If this is true in one case,
it will be so in every case. Something cannot be made out of nothing.
Nor can something be made to go back to nothing. It may become finer and
finer, and then again grosser and grosser. The raindrop is drawn from
the ocean in the form of vapour, and drifts away through the air to the
mountains; there it changes again into water and flows back through
hundreds of miles down to the mother ocean. The seed produces the tree.
The tree dies, leaving only the seed. Again it comes up as another tree,
which again ends in the seed, and so on. Look at a bird, how from; the
egg it springs, becomes a beautiful bird, lives its life and then dies,
leaving only other eggs, containing germs of future birds. So with the
animals; so with men. Everything begins, as it were, from certain seeds,
certain rudiments, certain fine forms, and becomes grosser and grosser
as it develops; and then again it goes back to that fine form and
subsides. The whole universe is going on in this way. There comes a time
when this whole universe melts down and becomes finer and at last
disappears entirely, as it were, but remains as superfine matter. We
know through modern science and astronomy that this earth is cooling
down, and in course of time it will become very cold, and then it will
break to pieces and become finer and finer until it becomes ether once
more. Yet the particles will all remain to form the material out of
which another earth will be projected. Again that will disappear, and
another will come out. So this universe will go back to its causes, and
again its materials will come together and take form, like the wave that
goes down, rises again, and takes shape. The acts of going back to
causes and coming out again, taking form, are called in Sanskrit
Sankocha and Vikâsha, which mean shrinking and expanding. The whole
universe, as it were, shrinks, and then it expands again. To use the
more accepted words of modern science, they are involved and evolved.
You hear about evolution, how all forms grow from lower ones, slowly
growing up and up. This is very true, but each evolution presupposes an
involution. We know that the sum total of energy that is displayed in
the universe is the same at all times, and that matter is
indestructible. By no means can you take away one particle of matter.
You cannot take away a foot-pound of energy or add one. The sum total is
the same always. Only the manifestation varies, being involved and
evolved. So this cycle is the evolution out of the involution of the
previous cycle, and this cycle will again be involved, getting finer and
finer, and out of that will come the next cycle. The whole universe is
going on in this fashion. Thus we find that there is no creation in the
sense that something is created out of nothing. To use a better word,
there is manifestation, and God is the manifester of the universe. The
universe, as it were, is being breathed out of Him, and again it shrinks
into Him, and again He throws it out. A most beautiful simile is given
in the Vedas — "That eternal One breathes out this universe and breathes
it in." Just as we can breathe out a little particle of dust and breathe
it in again. That is all very good, but the question may be asked: How
we, it at the first cycle? The answer is: What is the meaning of a first
cycle? There was none. If you can give a beginning to time, the whole
concept of time will be destroyed. Try to think of a limit where time
began, you have to think of time beyond that limit. Try to think where
space begins, you will have to think of space beyond that. Time and
space are infinite, and therefore have neither beginning nor end. This
is a better idea than that God created the universe in five minutes and
then went to sleep, and since then has been sleeping. On the other hand,
this idea will give us God as the Eternal Creator. Here is a series of
waves rising and falling, and God is directing this eternal process. As
the universe is without beginning and without end, so is God. We see
that it must necessarily be so, because if we say there was a time when
there was no creation, either in a gross or a fine form, then there was
no God, because God is known to us as Sâkshi, the Witness of the
universe. When the universe did not exist, neither did He. One concept
follows the other. The idea of the cause we get from the idea of the
effect, and if there is no effect, there will be no cause. It naturally
follows that as the universe is eternal, God is eternal.

The soul must also be eternal. Why? In the first place we see that the
soul is not matter. It is neither a gross body, nor a fine body, which
we call mind or thought. It is neither a physical body, nor what in
Christianity is called a spiritual body. It is the gross body and the
spiritual body that are liable to change. The gross body is liable to
change almost every minute and dies, but the spiritual body endures
through long periods, until one becomes free, when it also falls away.
When a man becomes free, the spiritual body disperses. The gross body
disintegrates every time a man dies. The soul not being made of any
particles must be indestructible. What do we mean by destruction?
Destruction is disintegration of the materials out of which anything is
composed. If this glass is broken into pieces, the materials will
disintegrate, and that will be the destruction of the glass.
Disintegration of particles is what we mean by destruction. It naturally
follows that nothing that is not composed of particles can be destroyed,
can ever be disintegrated. The soul is not composed of any materials. It
is unity indivisible. Therefore it must be indestructible. For the same
reasons it must also be without any beginning. So the soul is without
any beginning and end.

We have three entities. Here is nature which is infinite, but changeful.
The whole of nature is without beginning and end, but within it are
multifarious changes. It is like a river that runs down to the sea for
thousands of years. It is the same river always, but it is changing
every minute, the particles of water are changing their position
constantly. Then there is God, unchangeable, the ruler; and there is the
soul unchangeable as God, eternal but under the ruler. One is the
master, the other the servant, and the third one is nature.

God being the cause of the projection, the continuance, and the
dissolution of the universe, the cause must be present to produce the
effect. Not only so, the cause becomes the effect. Glass is produced out
of certain materials and certain forces used by the manufacturer. In the
glass there are those forces plus the materials. The forces used have
become the force of adhesion, and if that force goes the glass will fall
to pieces; the materials also are undoubtedly in the glass. Only their
form is changed. The cause has become the effect. Wherever you see an
effect you can always analyze it into a cause, the cause  
manifests itself as the effect. It follows, if God is the cause of the
universe, and the universe is the effect, that God has become the
universe. If souls are the effect, and God the cause, God has become the
souls. Each soul, therefore, is a part of God. "As from a mass of fire
an infinite number of sparks fly, even so from the Eternal One all this
universe of souls has come out."

We have seen that there is the eternal God, and there is eternal nature.
And there is also an infinite number of eternal souls. This is the first
stage in religion, it is called dualism, the stage when man sees himself
and God eternally separate, when God is a separate entity by Him, self
and man is a separate entity by himself and nature is a separate entity
by itself. This is dualism, which holds that the subject and the object
are opposed to each other in everything. When man looks at nature, he is
the subject and nature the object. He sees the dualism between subject
and object. When he looks at God, he sees God as object and himself as
the subject. They are entirely separate. This is the dualism between man
and God. This is generally the first view of religion.

Then comes another view which I have just shown to you. Man begins to
find out that if God is the cause of the universe and the universe the
effect, God Himself must have become the universe and the souls, and he
is but a particle of which God is the whole. We are but little beings,
sparks of that mass of fire, and the whole universe is a manifestation
of God Himself. This is the next step. In Sanskrit, it is called
Vishishtâdvaita. Just as I have this body and this body covers the soul,
and the soul is in and through this body, so this whole universe of
infinite souls and nature forms, as it were, the body of God. When the
period of involution comes, the universe becomes finer and finer, yet
remains the body of God. When the gross manifestation comes, then also
the universe remains the body of God. Just as the human soul is the soul
of the human body and minds so God is the Soul of our souls. All of you
have heard this expression in every religion, "Soul of our souls". That
is what is meant by it. He, as it were, resides in them, guides them, is
the ruler of them all. In the first view, that of dualism, each one of
us is an individual, eternally separate from God and nature. In the
second view, we are individuals, but not separate from God. We are like
little particles floating in one mass, and that mass is God. We are
individuals but one in God. We are all in Him. We are all parts of Him,
and therefore we are One. And yet between man and man, man and God there
is a strict individuality, separate and yet not separate.

Then comes a still finer question. The question is: Can infinity have
parts? What is meant by parts of infinity? If you reason it out, you
will find that it is impossible. Infinity cannot be divided, it always
remains infinite. If it could be divided, each part would be infinite.
And there cannot be two infinites. Suppose there were, one would limit
the other, and both would be finite. Infinity can only be one,
undivided. Thus the conclusion will be reached that the infinite is one
and not many, and that one Infinite Soul is reflecting itself through
thousands and thousands of mirrors, appearing as so many different
souls. It is the same Infinite Soul, which is the background of the
universe, that we call God. The same Infinite Soul also is the
background of the human mind which we call the human soul.

</div>
