---
title: A STUDY OF THE SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY

---
<div>

[←](cosmology.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](sankhya_and_vedanta.htm)

  

## A STUDY OF THE SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY

Prakriti is called by the Sânkhya philosophers indiscrete, and defined
as the perfect balance of the materials in it; and it naturally follows
that in perfect balance there cannot be any motion. In the primal state
before any manifestation, when there was no motion but perfect balance,
this Prakriti was indestructible, because decomposition or death comes
from instability or change. Again, according to the Sankhya, atoms are
not the primal state. This universe does not come out of atoms: they may
be the secondary or the tertiary state. The primordial material may form
into atoms and become grosser and bigger things; and as far as modern
investigations go, they rather point towards the same conclusion. For
instance, in the modern theory of ether, if you say ether is atomic, it
will not solve anything. To make it clearer, say that air is composed of
atoms, and we know that ether is everywhere, interpenetrating,
omnipresent, and that these air atoms are floating, as it were, in
ether. If ether again be composed of atoms, there will still be spaces
between every two atoms of ether. What fills up these? If you suppose
that there is another ether still finer which does this, there will
again be other spaces between the atoms of that finer ether which
require filling up, and so it will be *regressus ad infinitum*, what the
Sankhya philosophers call the "cause leading to nothing" So the atomic
theory cannot be final. According to Sankhya, nature is omnipresent, one
omnipresent mass of nature, in which are the causes of everything that
exists. What is meant by cause? Cause is the fine state of the
manifested state; the unmanifested state of that which becomes
manifested. What do you mean by destruction? It is reverting to the
cause If you have a piece of pottery and give it a blow, it is
destroyed. What is meant by this is that the effects go back to their
own nature, they materials out of which the pottery was created go back
into their original state. Beyond this idea of destruction, any idea
such as annihilation is on the face of it absurd. According to modern
physical science, it can be demonstrated that all destruction means that
which Kapila said ages ago — simply reverting to the cause. Going back
to the finer form is all that is meant by destruction. You know how it
can be demonstrated in a laboratory that matter is indestructible. At
this present stage of our knowledge, if any man stands up and says that
matter or this soul becomes annihilated, he is only making himself,
ridiculous; it is only uneducated, silly people who would advance such a
proposition; and it is curious that modern knowledge coincides with what
those old philosophers taught. It must be so, and that is the proof of
truth. They proceeded in their inquiry, taking up mind as the basis;
they analysed the mental part of this universe and came to certain
conclusions, which we, analysing the physical part, must come to, for
they both must lead to the same centre.

You must remember that the first manifestation of this Prakriti in the
cosmos is what the Sankhya calls "Mahat". We may call it intelligence —
the great principle, its literal meaning. The first change in Prakriti
is this intelligence; I would not translate it by self-consciousness,
because that would be wrong. Consciousness is only a part of this
intelligence. Mahat is universal. It covers all the grounds of
sub-consciousness, consciousness, and super-consciousness; so any one
state of consciousness, as applied to this Mahat, would not be
sufficient. In nature, for instance, you note certain changes going on
before your eyes which you see and understand, but there are other
changes, so much finer, that no human perception can catch them. They
are from the same cause, the same Mahat is making these changes. Out of
Mahat comes universal egoism. These are all substance. There is no
difference between matter and mind, except in degree. The substance is
the same in finer or grosser form; one changes into the other, and this
exactly coincides with the conclusions of modern physiological research.
By believing in the teaching that the mind is not separate from the
brain, you will be saved from much fighting and struggling. Egoism again
changes into two varieties. In one variety it changes into the organs.
Organs are of two kinds, organs of sensation and organs of reaction.
They are not the eyes or the ears, but back of those are what you call
brain-centres, and nerve-centres, and so on. This egoism, this matter or
substance, becomes changed, and out of this material are manufactured
these centres. Of the same substance is manufactured the other variety,
the Tanmatras, fine particles of matter, which strike our organs of
perception and bring about sensations. You cannot perceive them but only
know they are there. Out of the Tanmatras is manufactured the gross
matter — earth, water, and all the things that we see and feel. I want
to impress this on your mind. It is very, hard to grasp it, because in
Western countries the ideas are so queer about mind and matter. It is
hard to get those impressions out of our brains. I myself had a
tremendous difficulty, being educated in Western philosophy in my
boyhood. These are all cosmic things. Think of this universal extension
of matter, unbroken, one substance, undifferentiated, which is the first
state of everything, and which begins to change in the same way as milk
becomes curd. This first change is called Mahat. The substance Mahat
changes into the grosser matter called egoism. The third change is
manifested as universal sense-organs, and universal fine particles, and
these last again combine and become this gross universe which with eyes,
nose, and ears, we see, smell, and hear. This is the cosmic plan
according to the Sankhya, and what is in the cosmos must also be
microcosmic. Take an individual man. He has first a part of
undifferentiated nature in him, and that material nature in him becomes
changed into this Mahat, a small particle of this universal
intelligence, and this particle of universal intelligence in him becomes
changed into egoism, and then into the sense-organs and the fine
particles of matter which combine and manufacture his body. I want this
to be clear, because it is the stepping-stone to Sankhya, and it is
absolutely necessary for you to understand it, because this is the basis
of the philosophy of the whole world. There is no philosophy in the
world that is not indebted to Kapila. Pythagoras came to India and
studied this philosophy, and that was the beginning of the philosophy of
the Greeks. Later, it formed the Alexandrian school, and still later,
the Gnostic. It became divided into two; one part went to Europe and
Alexandria, and the other remained in India; and out of this, the system
of Vyasa was developed. The Sankhya philosophy of Kapila was the first
rational system that the world ever saw. Every metaphysician in the
world must pay homage to him. I want to impress on your mind that we are
bound to listen to him as the great father of philosophy. This wonderful
man, the most ancient of philosophers, is mentioned even in the Shruti:
"O Lord, Thou who produced the sage Kapila in the Beginning." How
wonderful his perceptions were, and if there is any proof required of
the extraordinary power of the perception of Yogis, such men are the
proof. They had no microscopes or telescopes. Yet how fine their
perception was, how perfect and wonderful their analysis of things!

I will here point out the difference between Schopenhauer and the Indian
philosophy. Schopenhauer says that desire, or will, is the cause of
everything. It is the will to exist that make us manifest, but we deny
this. The will is identical with the motor nerves. When I see an object
there is no will; when its sensations are carried to the brain, there
comes the reaction, which says "Do this", or "Do not do this", and this
state of the ego-substance is what is called will. There cannot be a
single particle of will which is not a reaction. So many things precede
will. It is only a manufactured something out of the ego, and the ego is
a manufacture of something still higher — the intelligence — and that
again is a modification of the indiscrete nature. That was the
Buddhistic idea, that whatever we see is the will. It is psychologically
entirely wrong, because will can only be identified with the motor
nerves. If you take out the motor nerves, a man has no will whatever.
This fact, as is perhaps well known to you, has been found out after a
long series of experiments made with the lower animals.

We will take up this question. It is very important to understand this
question of Mahat in man, the great principle, the intelligence. This
intelligence itself is modified into what we call egoism, and this
intelligence is the cause of all the powers in the body. It covers the
whole ground, sub-consciousness, consciousness, and super-consciousness.
What are these three states? The sub-conscious state we find in animals,
which we call instinct. This is almost infallible, but very limited.
Instinct rarely fails. An animal almost instinctively knows a poisonous
herb from an edible one, but its instinct is very limited. As soon as
something new comes, it is blind. It works like a machine. Then comes a
higher state of knowledge which is fallible and makes mistakes often,
but has a larger scope, although it is slow, and this you call reason.
It is much larger than instinct, but instinct is surer than reason.
There are more chances of mistakes in reasoning than in instinct. There
is a still higher state of the mind, the super-conscious, which belongs
only to Yogis, to men who have cultivated it. This is infallible and
much more unlimited in its scope than reason. This is the highest state.
So we must remember, this Mahat is the real cause of all that is here,
that which manifests itself in various ways, covers the whole ground of
sub-conscious, conscious, and super-conscious, the three states in which
knowledge exists.

Now comes a delicate question which is being always asked. If a perfect
God created the universe, why is there imperfection in it? What we call
the universe is what we see, and that is only this little plane of
consciousness and reason; beyond that we do not see at all. Now the very
question is an impossible one. If I take only a small portion out of a
mass of something and look at it, it seems to be inharmonious.
Naturally. The universe is inharmonious because we make it so. How? What
is reason? What is knowledge? Knowledge is finding the association about
things. You go into the street and see a man and say, I know this is a
man; because you remember the impressions on your mind, the marks on the
Chitta. You have seen many men, and each one has made an impression on
your mind; and as you see this man, you refer this to your store and see
many similar pictures there; and when you see them, you are satisfied,
and you put this new one with the rest. When a new impression comes and
it has associations in your mind, you are satisfied; and this state of
association is called knowledge. Knowledge is, therefore, pigeon-holing
one experience with the already existing fund of experience, and this is
one of the great proofs of the fact that you cannot have any knowledge
until you have already a fund in existence. If you are without
experience, as some European philosophers think, and that your mind is a
*tabula rasa* to begin with, you cannot get any knowledge, because the
very fact of knowledge is the recognition of the new by means of
associations already existing in the mind. There must be a store at hand
to which to refer a new impression. Suppose a child is born into this
world without such a fund, it would be impossible for him ever to get
any knowledge. Therefore, the child must have been previously in a state
in which he had a fund, and so knowledge is eternally increasing. Slow
me a way of getting round this argument. It is a mathematical fact. Some
Western schools of philosophy also hold that there cannot be any
knowledge without a fund of past knowledge. They have framed the idea
that the child is born with knowledge. These Western philosophers say
that the impressions with which the child comes into the world are not
due to the child's past, but to the experiences of his forefathers: it
is only hereditary transmission. Soon they will find out that this idea
is all wrong; some German philosophers are now giving hard blows to
these heredity ideas. Heredity is very good, but incomplete, it only
explains the physical side. How do you explain the environments
influencing us? Many causes produce one effect. Environment is one of
the modifying effects. We make our own environment: as our past is, so
we find the present environment. A drunken man naturally gravitates to
the lowest slums of the city.

You understand what is meant by knowledge. Knowledge is pigeon-holing a
new impression with old ones, recognising a new impression. What is
meant by recognition? Finding associations with similar impressions that
one already has. Nothing further is meant by knowledge. If that is the
case, if knowledge means finding the associations, then it must be that
to know anything we have to set the whole series of its similars. Is it
not so? Suppose you take a pebble; to find the association, you have to
see the whole series of pebbles similes to it. But with our perception
of the universe as a whole we cannot do that, because in the pigeon-hole
of our mind there is only one single record of the perception, we have
no other perception of the same nature or class, we cannot compare it
with any other. We cannot refer it to its associations. This bit of the
universe, cut off by our consciousness, is a startling new thing,
because we have not been able to find its associations. Therefore, we
are struggling with it, and thinking it horrible, wicked, and bad; we
may sometimes think it is good, but we always think it is imperfect. It
is only when we find its associations that the universe can be known. We
shall recognise it when we go beyond the universe and consciousness, and
then the universe will stand explained. Until we can do that, all the
knocking of our heads against a wall will never explain the universe,
because knowledge is the finding of similars, and this conscious plane
only gives us one single perception of it. So with our idea of God. All
that we see of God is only a part just as we see only one portion of the
universe, and all the rest is beyond human cognition. "I, the universal;
so great am I that even this universe is but a part of Me." That is why
we see God as imperfect, and do not understand Him. The only way to
understand Him and the universe is to go beyond reason, beyond
consciousness. "When thou goest beyond the heard and the hearing, the
thought and the thinking, then alone wilt thou come to Truth." "Go thou
beyond the scriptures, because they teach only up to nature, up to the
three qualities." When we go beyond them, we find the harmony, and not
before.

The microcosm and the macrocosm are built on exactly the same plan, and
in the microcosm we know only one part, the middle part. We know neither
the sub-conscious, nor the super-conscious. We know the conscious only.
If a man stands up and says, "I am a sinner", he makes an untrue
statement because he does not know himself. He is the most ignorant of
men; of himself he knows only one part, because his knowledge covers
only a part of the ground he is on. So with this universe, it is
possible to know only a part of it with the reason, not the whole of it;
for the sub-conscious, the conscious and the super-conscious, the
individual Mahat and the universal Mahat, and all the subsequent
modifications, constitute the universe.

What makes nature (Prakriti) change? We see so far that everything, all
Prakriti, is Jada, insentient. It is all compound and insentient.
Wherever there is law, it is proof that the region of its play is
insentient. Mind, intelligence, will, and everything else is insentient.
But they are all reflecting the sentiency, the "Chit" of some being who
is beyond all this, whom the Sankhya philosophers call "Purusha". The
Purusha is the unwitting cause of all the changes in the universe. That
is to say, this Purusha, taking Him in the universal sense, is the God
of the universe. It is said that the will of the Lord created the
universe. It is very good as a common expression, but we see it cannot
be true. How could it be will? Will is the third or fourth manifestation
in nature. Many things exist before it, *and what created them*? Will is
a compound, and everything that is a compound is a product of nature.
Will, therefore, could not create nature. So, to say that the will of
the Lord created the universe is meaningless. Our will only covers a
little portion of self-consciousness and moves our brain. It is not will
that is working your body or that is working the universe. This body is
being moved by a power of which will is only a manifestation in one
part. Likewise in the universe there is will, but that is only one part
of the universe. The whole of the universe is not guided by will; that
is why we cannot explain it by the will theory. Suppose I take it for
granted that it is will moving the body, then, when I find I cannot work
it at will, I begin to fret and fume. It is my fault, because I had no
right to take the will theory for granted. In the same way, if I take
the universe and think it is will that moves it and find things which do
not coincide, it is my fault. So the Purusha is not will; neither can it
be intelligence, because intelligence itself is a compound. There cannot
be any intelligence without some sort of matter corresponding to the
brain. Wherever there is intelligence, there must be something akin to
that matter which we call brain which becomes lumped together into a
particular form and serves the purpose of the brain. Wherever there is
intelligence, there must be that matter in some form or other. But
intelligence itself is a compound. What then is this Purusha? It is
neither intelligence nor will, but it is the cause of all these. It is
its presence that sets them all going and combining. It does not mix
with nature; it is not intelligence, or Mahat; but the Self, the pure,
is Purusha. "I am the witness, and through my witnessing, nature is
producing; all that is sentient and all that is insentient."

What is this sentiency in nature? We find intelligence is this sentiency
which is called Chit. The basis of sentiency is in the Purusha, it is
the nature of Purusha. It is that which cannot be explained but which is
the cause of all that we call knowledge. Purusha is not consciousness,
because consciousness is a compound; buts whatever is light and good in
consciousness belongs to Purusha. Purusha is not conscious, but whatever
is light in intelligence belongs to Purusha. Sentiency is in the
Purusha, but the Purusha is not intelligent, not knowing. The Chit in
the Purusha plus Prakriti is what we see around us. Whatever is pleasure
and happiness and light in the universe belongs to Purusha; but it is a
compound, because it is Purusha plus Prakriti. "Wherever there is any
happiness, wherever there is any bliss, there is a spark of that
immortality which is God." "Purusha is the; great attraction of the
universe; though untouched by and unconnected with the universe, yet it
attracts the whole; universe." You see a man going after gold, because
behind it is a spark of the Purusha though mixed up with a good deal of
dirt. When a man loves his children or a woman her husband, what is the
attracting power? A spark of Purusha behind them. It is there, only
mixed up with "dirt". Nothing else can attract. "In this world of
insentiency the Purusha alone is sentient." This is the Purusha of the
Sankhya. As such, it necessarily follows that the Purusha must be
omnipresent. That which is not omnipresent must be limited. All
limitations are caused; that which is caused must have a beginning and
end. If the Purusha is limited, it will die, will not be free, will not
be final, but must have some cause. Therefore it is omnipresent.
According to Kapila, there are many Purushas; not one, but an infinite
number of them. You and I have each of us one, and so has everyone else;
an infinite number of circles, each one infinite, running through this
universe. The Purusha is neither mind nor matter, the reflex from it is
all that we know. We are sure if it is omnipresent it has neither death
nor birth. Nature is casting her shadow upon it, the shadow of birth and
death, but it is by its nature pure. So far we have found the philosophy
of the Sankhya wonderful.

Next we shall take up the proofs against it. So far the analysis is
perfect, the psychology incontrovertible. We find by the division of the
senses into organs and instruments that they are not simple, but
compound; by dividing egoism into sense and matter, we find that this is
also material and that Mahat is also a state of matter, and finally we
find the Purusha. So far there is no objection. But if we ask the
Sankhya the question, "Who created nature?" — the Sankhya says that the
Purusha and the Prakriti are uncreate and omnipresent, and that of this
Purusha there is an infinite number. We shall have to controvert these
propositions, and find a better solution, and by so doing we shall come
to Advaitism. Our first objection is, how can there be these *two*
infinites? Then our argument will be that the Sankhya is not a perfect
generalization, and that we have not found in it a perfect solution. And
then we shall see how the Vedantists grope out of all these difficulties
and reach a perfect solution, and yet all the glory really belongs to
the Sankhya. It is very easy to give a finishing touch to a building
when it is constructed.

</div>
