---
title: SANKHYA AND VEDANTA

---
<div>

[←](a_study_of_the_sankhya_philosophy.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_goal.htm)

  

## SANKHYA AND VEDANTA

I shall give you a résumé of the Sânkhya philosophy, through which we
have been going. We, in this lecture, want to find where its defects
are, and where Vedanta comes in and supplements it. You must remember
that according to Sankhya philosophy, nature is the cause of all these
manifestations which we call thought, intellect, reason, love, hatred,
touch, taste, and matter. Everything is from nature. This nature
consists of three sorts of elements, called Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas.
These are not qualities, but elements, the materials out of which the
whole universe is evolved. In the beginning of a cycle these remain in
equilibrium; and when creation comes, they begin to combine and
recombine and manifest as the universe. The first manifestation is what
the Sankhya calls the Mahat or Intelligence, and out of that comes
consciousness. According to Sankhya, this is an element (Tattva). And
out of consciousness are evolved Manas or mind, the organs of the
senses, and the Tanmâtras (particles of sound, touch, etc.). All the
fine particles are evolved from consciousness, and out of these fine
particles come the gross elements which we call matter. The Tanmatras
cannot be perceived; but when they become gross particles, we can feel
and sense them.

The Chitta, in its threefold function of intelligence, consciousness,
and mind, works and manufactures the forces called Prâna. You must at
once get rid of the idea that Prana is breath. Breath is one effect of
Prana. By Prana are meant the nervous forces governing and moving the
whole body, which also manifest themselves as thought. The foremost and
most obvious manifestation of Prana is the breathing motion. Prana acts
upon air, and not air upon it. Controlling the breathing motion is
prânâyâma. Pranayama is practised to get mastery over this motion; the
end is not merely to control the breath or to make the lungs strong.
That is Delsarte, not Pranayama. These Pranas are the vital forces which
manipulate the whole body, while they in their turn are manipulated by
other organs in the body, which are called mind or internal organs. So
far so good. The psychology is very clear and most precise; and yet it
is the oldest rational thought in the world! Wherever there is any
philosophy or rational thought, it owes something or other to Kapila.
Pythagoras learnt it in India, and taught it in Greece. Later on Plato
got an inkling of it; and still later the Gnostics carried the thought
to Alexandria, and from there it came to Europe. So wherever there is
any attempt at psychology or philosophy, the great father of it is this
man, Kapila. So far we see that his psychology is wonderful; but we
shall have to differ with him on some points, as we go on. We find that
the basic principle on which Kapila works, is evolution. He makes one
thing evolve out of another, because his very definition of causation is
"the cause reproduced in another form," and because the whole universe,
so far as we see it, is progressive and evolving. We see clay; in
another form, we call it a pitcher. Clay was the cause and the pitcher
the effect. Beyond this we cannot have any idea of causation. Thus this
whole universe is evolved out of a material, out of Prakriti or nature.
Therefore, the universe cannot be essentially different from its cause.
According to Kapila, from undifferentiated nature to thought or
intellect, not one of them is what he calls the "Enjoyer" or
"Enlightener". Just as is a lump of clay, so is a lump of mind. By
itself the mind has no light; but ate see it reasons. Therefore there
must be some one behind it, whose light is percolating through Mahat and
consciousness, and subsequent modifications, and this is what Kapila
calls the Purusha, the Self of the Vedantin. According to Kapila, the
Purusha is a simple entity, not a compound; he is immaterial, the only
one who is immaterial, and all these various manifestations are
material. I see a black-board. First, the external instruments will
bring that sensation to the nerve-centre, to the Indriya according to
Kapila; from the centre it will go to the mind and make an impression;
the mind will present it to the Buddhi, but Buddhi cannot act; the
action comes, as it were, from the Purusha behind. These, so to speak,
are all his servants, bringing the sensations to him, and he, as it
were, gives the orders, reacts, is the enjoyer, the perceiver, the real
One, the King on his throne, the Self of man, who is immaterial. Because
he is immaterial, it necessarily follows that he must be infinite, he
cannot have any limitation whatever. Each one of the Purushas is
omnipresent; each one of us is omnipresent, but we can act only through
the Linga Sharira, the fine body. The mind, the self-consciousness, the
organs, and the vital forces compose the fine body or sheath, what in
Christian philosophy is called the spiritual body of man. It is this
body that gets salvation, or punishment, or heaven, that incarnates and
reincarnates, because we see from the very beginning that the going and
the coming of the Purusha or soul are impossible. Motion means going or
coming, and what goes or comes from one place to another cannot be
omnipresent. Thus far we see from Kapila's psychology that the soul is
infinite, and that the soul is the only thing which is not composed of
nature. He is the only one that is outside of nature, but he has got
bound by nature, apparently. Nature is around him, and he has identified
himself with it. He thinks, "I am the Linga Sharira", "I am the gross
matter, the gross body", and as such he enjoys pleasure and pain, but
they do not really belong to him, they belong to this Linga Sharira or
the fine body.

The meditative state is called always the highest state by the Yogi,
when it is neither a passive nor an active state; in it you approach
nearest to the Purusha. The soul has neither pleasure nor pain; it is
the witness of everything, the eternal witness of all work, but it takes
no fruits from any work. As the sun is the cause of sight of every eye,
but is not itself affected by any defects in the eye or as when a
crystal has red or blue flowers placed before it, the crystal looks red
or blue, and yet it is neither; so, the soul is neither passive nor
active, it is beyond both. The nearest way of expressing this state of
the soul is that it is meditation. This is Sankhya philosophy.

Next, Sankhya says, that the manifestation of nature is for the soul;
all combinations are for some third person. The combinations which you
call nature, these constant changes are going on for the enjoyment of
the soul, for its liberation, that it may gain all this experience from
the lowest to the highest. When it has gained it, the soul finds it was
never in nature, that it was entirely separate, that it is
indestructible, that it cannot go and come; that going to heaven and
being born again were in nature, and not in the soul. Thus the soul
becomes free. All nature is working for the enjoyment and experience of
the soul. It is getting this experience in order to reach the goal, and
that goal is freedom. But the souls are many according to the Sankhya
philosophy. There is an infinite number of souls. The other conclusion
of Kapila is that there is no God as the Creator of the universe. Nature
is quite sufficient by itself to account for everything. God is not
necessary, says the Sankhya.

The Vedanta says that the Soul is in its nature Existence absolute,
Knowledge absolute, Bliss absolute. But these are not qualities of the
Soul: they are one, not three, the essence of the Soul; and it agrees
with the Sankhya in thinking that intelligence belongs to nature,
inasmuch as it comes through nature. The Vedanta also shows that what is
called intelligence is a compound. For instance, let us examine our
perceptions. I see a black-board. How does the knowledge come? What the
German philosophers call "the thing-in-itself" of the blackboard is
unknown, I can never know it. Let us call it *x*. The black-board *x*
acts on my mind, and the mind reacts. The mind is like a lake. Throw a
stone in a lake and a reactionary wave comes towards the stone; this
wave is not like the stone at all, it is a wave. The black-board *x* is
like a stone which strikes the mind and the mind throws up a wave
towards it, and this wave is what we call the black-board. I see you.
You as reality are unknown and unknowable. You are *x* and you act upon
my mind, and the mind throws a wave in the direction from which the
impact comes, and that wave is what I call Mr. or Mrs. So-and-so. There
are two elements in the perception, one coming from outside and the
other from inside, and the combination of these two, *x* + mind, is our
external universe. All knowledge is by reaction. In the case of a whale
it has been determined by calculation how long after its tail is struck,
its mind reacts and the whale feels the pain. Similar is the case with
internal perception. The real self within me is also unknown and
unknowable. Let us call it *y*. When I know myself as so-and-so, it is
*y* + the mind. That *y* strikes a blow on the mind. So our whole world
is *x* + mind (external), and *y* + mind (internal), *x* and *y*
standing for the thing-in-itself behind the external and the internal
worlds respectively.

According to Vedanta, the three fundamental factors of consciousness
are, I exist, I know, and I am blessed The idea that I have no want,
that I am restful, peaceful, that nothing can disturb me, which comes
from time to time, is the central fact of our being, the basic principle
of our life; and when it becomes limited, and becomes a compound, it
manifests itself as existence phenomenal, knowledge phenomenal, and
love. Every man exists, and every man must know, and every man is mad
for love. He cannot help loving. Through all existence, from the lowest
to the highest, all must love. The *y*, the internal thing-in-itself,
which, combining with mind, manufactures existence, knowledge, and love,
is called by the Vedantists. Existence absolute, Knowledge absolute,
Bliss absolute. That real existence is limitless, unmixed, uncombined,
knows no change, is the free soul; when it gets mixed up, muddled up, as
it were, with the mind, it becomes what we call individual existence. It
is plant life, animal life, human life, just as universal space is cut
off in a room, in a jar, and so on. And that real knowledge is not what
we know, not intuition, nor reason, nor instinct. When that degenerates
and is confused, we call it intuition; when it degenerates more, we call
it reason; and when it degenerates still more, we call it instinct. That
knowledge itself is Vijnâna, neither intuition, nor reason nor instinct.
The nearest expression for it is all-knowingness. There is no limit to
it, no combination in it. That bliss, when it gets clouded over, we call
love, attraction for gross bodies or fine bodies, or for ideas. This is
only a distorted manifestation of that blessedness. Absolute Existence,
absolute Knowledge, and absolute Blessedness are not qualities of the
soul, but the essence; there is no difference between them and the soul.
And the three are one; we see the one thing in three different aspects.
They are beyond all relative knowledge. That eternal knowledge of the
Self percolating through the brain of man becomes his intuition, reason,
and so on. Its manifestation varies according to the medium through
which it shines. As soul, there is no difference between man and the
lowest animal, only the latter's brain is less developed and the
manifestation through it which we call instinct is very dull. In a man
the brain is much finer, so the manifestation is much clearer, and in
the highest man it becomes entirely clear. So with existence; the
existence which we know, the limited sphere of existence, is simply a
reflection of that real existence which is the nature of the soul. So
with bliss; that which we call love or attraction is but the rejection
of the eternal blessedness of the Self. With manifestation comes
limitation, but the unmanifested, the essential nature of the soul, is
unlimited; to that blessedness there is no limit. But in love there is
limitation. I love you one day, I hate you the next. My love increases
one day and decreases the next, because it is only a manifestation.

The first point we will contend with Kapila is his idea of God. Just as
the series of modifications of Prakriti, beginning with the individual
intellect and ending with the individual body, require a Purusha behind,
as the ruler and governor, so, in the Cosmos, the universal intellect,
the universal egoism, the universal mind, all universal fine and gross
materials, must have a ruler and governor. How will the cosmic series
become complete without the universal Purusha behind them all as the
ruler and governor? If you deny a universal Purusha behind the cosmic
series, we deny your Purusha behind the individual series. If it be true
that behind the series of graded, evolved individual manifestations,
there stands One that is beyond them all, the Purusha who is not
composed of matter, the very same logic will apply to the case of
universal manifestations. This Universal Self which is beyond the
universal modifications of Prakriti is what is called Ishwara, the
Supreme Ruler, God.

Now comes the more important point of difference. Can there be more than
one Purusha? The Purusha, we have seen, is omnipresent and infinite. The
omnipresent, the infinite, cannot be two. If there are two infinites A
and B, the infinite A would limit the infinite B, because the infinite B
is not the infinite A, and the infinite A is not the infinite B.
Difference in identity means exclusion, and exclusion means limitation.
Therefore, A and B, limiting each other, cease to be infinites. Hence,
there can be but one infinite, that is, one Purusha.

Now we will take up our *x* and *y* and show they are one. We have shown
how what we call the external world is *x* + mind, and the internal
world *y* + mind; *x* and *y* are both quantities unknown and
unknowable. All difference is due to time, space, and causation. These
are the constituent elements of the mind. No mentality is possible
without them. You can never think without time, you can never imagine
anything without space, and you can never have anything without
causation. These are the forms of the mind. Take them away, and the mind
itself does not exist. All difference is, therefore, due to the mind.
According to Vedanta, it is the mind, its forms, that have limited *x*
and *y* apparently and made them appear as external and internal worlds.
But *x* and *y*, being both beyond the mind, are without difference and
hence one. We cannot attribute any quality to them, because qualities
are born of the mind. That which is qualityless must be one; *x* is
without qualities, it only takes qualities of the mind; so does *y*;
therefore these *x* and *y* are one. The whole universe is one. There is
only one Self in the universe, only One Existence, and that One
Existence, when it passes through the forms of time, space, and
causation, is called by different names, Buddhi, fine matter, gross
matter, all mental and physical forms. Everything in the universe is
that One, appearing in various forms. When a little part of it comes, as
it were, into this network of time, space, and causation, it takes
forms; take off the network, and it is all one. Therefore in the Advaita
philosophy, the whole universe is all one in the Self which is called
Brahman. That Self when it appears behind the universe is called God.
The same Self when it appears behind this little universe, the body, is
the soul. This very soul, therefore, is the Self in man. There is only
one Purusha, the Brahman of the Vedanta; God and man, analysed, are one
in It. The universe is you yourself, the unbroken you; you are
throughout the universe. "In all hands you work, through all mouths you
eat, through all nostrils you breathe through all minds you think." The
whole universe is you; the universe is your body; you are the universe
both formed and unformed. You are the soul of the universe and its body
also. You are God, you are the angels, you are man, you are animals, you
are the plants, you are the minerals, you are everything; the
manifestation of everything is you. Whatever exists is you. You are the
Infinite. The Infinite cannot be divided. It can have no parts, for each
part would be infinite, and then the part would be identical with the
whole, which is absurd. Therefore the idea that you are Mr. So-and-so
can never be true; it is a day-dream. Know this and be free. This is the
Advaita conclusion. "I am neither the body, nor the organs, nor am I the
mind; I am Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss absolute; I am He." This is
true knowledge; all reason and intellect, and everything else is
ignorance. Where is knowledge for me, for I am knowledge itself! Where
is life for me, for I am life itself! I am sure I live, for I am life,
the One Being, and nothing exists except through me, and in me, and as
me. I am manifested through the elements, but I am the free One. Who
seeks freedom? Nobody. If you think that you are bound, you remain
bound; you make your own bondage. If you know that you are free, you are
free this moment. This is knowledge, knowledge of freedom. Freedom is
the goal of all nature.

</div>
