---
title: THE GOAL

---
<div>

[←](sankhya_and_vedanta.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](../reports_in_american_newspapers/note.htm)

  

## THE GOAL

(*Delivered in San Francisco, March 27, 1900*)

(Reprinted from the *Vedanta and the West*, May-June 1958. The editors
of the Magazine published it as it was recorded, adding certain words
(in square brackets) to maintain the continuity of thought, and periods
to indicate omissions that might have occurred in recording. — Ed.)

We find that man, as it were, is always surrounded by something greater
than himself, and he is trying to grasp the meaning of this. Man will
ever \[seek\] the highest ideal. He knows that it exists and that
religion is the search after the highest ideal. At first all his
searches were in the external plane — placed in heaven, in different
places — just according to \[his grasp\] of the total nature of man.

\[Later,\] man began to look at himself a little closer and began to
find out that the real "me" was not the "me" that he stands for
ordinarily. As he appears to the senses is not the same as he really is.
He began to \[search\] inside of himself, and found out that . . . the
same ideal he \[had placed\] outside of himself is all the time within;
what he was worshipping outside was his own real inner nature. The
difference between dualism and monism is that when the ideal is put
outside \[of oneself\], it is dualism. When God is \[sought\] within, it
is monism.

First, the old question of why and wherefore . . . How is it that man
became limited? How did the Infinite become finite, the pure become
impure? In the first place, you must never forget that this question can
never be answered \[by\] any dualistic hypothesis.

Why did God create the impure universe? Why is man so miserable, made by
a perfect, infinite, merciful Father? Why this heaven and earth, looking
at which we get our conception of law? Nobody can imagine anything that
he has not seen.

All the tortures we feel in this life, we put in another place and that
is our hell . . . .

Why did the infinite God make this world? \[The dualist says:\] Just as
the potter makes pots. God the potter; we the pots. . . . In more
philosophical language the question is: How is it taken for granted that
the real nature of man is pure, perfect, and infinite? This is the one
difficulty found in any system of monism. Everything else is clean and
clear. This question cannot be answered. The monists say the question
itself is a contradiction.

Take the system of dualism — the question is asked why God created the
world. This is contradictory. Why? Because — what is the idea of God? He
is a being who cannot be acted upon by anything outside.

You and I are not free. I am thirsty. There is something called thirst,
over which I have no control, \[which\] forces me to drink water. Every
action of my body and even every thought of my mind is forced out of me.
I have got to do it. That is why I am bound . . . . I am forced to *do*
this, to *have* this, and so on . . . . And what is meant by why and
wherefore? \[Being subject to external forces.\] Why do you drink water?
Because thirst forces you. You are a slave. You never do anything of
your own will because you are *forced* to do everything. Your only
motive for action is some force. . . .

The earth, by itself, would never move unless something forced it. Why
does the light burn? It does not burn unless somebody comes and strikes
a match. Throughout nature, everything is bound. Slavery, slavery! To be
in harmony with nature is \[slavery\]. What is there in being the slave
of nature and living in a golden cage? The greatest law and order is in
the \[knowledge that man is essentially free and divine\] Now we see
that the question why and wherefore can only be asked \[in ignorance\].
I can only be forced to do something through something else.

\[You say\] God is free. Again you ask the question why God creates the
world. You contradict yourself. The meaning of God is entirely free
will. The question put in logical language is this: What forced Him, who
can never be forced by anybody, to create the world? You say in the same
question, What forced Him? The question is nonsense. He is infinite by
His very nature; He is free. We shall answer questions when you can ask
them in logical language. Reason will tell you that there is only one
Reality, nothing else. Wherever dualism has risen, monism came to a head
and drove it out.

There is only one difficulty in understanding this. Religion is a
common-sense, everyday thing. The man in the street knows it if you put
it in his language and not \[if it is put\] in a philosopher's language.
It is a common thing in human nature to \[project itself\]. Think of
your feeling with the child. \[You identify yourself with it. Then\] you
have two bodies. \[Similarly\] you can feel through your husband's mind
Where can you stop? You can feel in infinite bodies.

Nature is conquered by man every day. As a race, man is manifesting his
power. Try in imagination to put a limit to this power in man. You admit
that man as a race has infinite power, has \[an\] infinite body. The
only question is what you are. Are you the race or one \[individual\]?
The moment you isolate yourself, everything hurts you. The moment you
expand and feel for others, you gain help. The selfish man is the most
miserable in the world. The happiest is the man who is not at all
selfish. He has become the whole creation, the whole race and God \[is\]
within him. . . . So in dualism — Christian, Hindu, and all religions —
the code of ethics . . . . is: Do not be selfish . . . . things for
others! Expand! . . . .

The ignorant can be made to understand \[this\] very easily, and the
learned can be made to understand still more easily. But the man who has
just got a speck of learning, him God himself cannot make understand.
\[The truth is,\] you are not separate \[from this universe\]; Just as
your Spirit\] is \[not\] separate from the rest of you. If \[not\] so,
you could not see anything, could not feel anything. Our bodies are
simply little whirlpools in the ocean of matter. Life is taking a turn
and passing on, in another form . . . . The sun, the moon, the stars,
you and I are mere whirlpools. Why did I select \[a particular mind as
mine? It is\] simply a mental whirlpool in the ocean of mind.

How else is it possible that my vibration reaches you just now? If you
throw a stone in the lake, it raises a vibration and \[that stirs\] the
water into vibration. I throw my mind into the state of bliss and the
tendency is to raise the same bliss in your mind. How often in your mind
or heart \[you have thought something\] and without \[verbal\]
communication, \[others have got your thought\]? Everywhere we are one.
. . . That is what we never understand. The whole \[universe\] is
composed of time, space, and causation. And God \[appears as this
universe\]. . . . When did nature begin? When you \[forgot your true
nature and\] became \[bound by time, space, and causation\].

This is the \[rotating\] circle of your bodies and yet that is your
infinite nature. . . . That is certainly nature — time, space, and
causation. That is all that is meant by nature. Time began when you
began to think. Space began when you got the body; otherwise there
cannot be any space. Causation began when you became limited. We have to
have some sort of answer. There is the answer. \[Our limitation\] is
play. Just for the fun of it. Nothing binds you; nothing forces \[you.
You were\] never bound. We are all acting our parts in this \[play\] of
our own invention.

But let us bring another question about individuality. Some people are
so afraid of losing their individuality. Wouldn't it be better for the
pig to lose his pig-individuality if he can become God? Yes. But the
poor pig does not think so at the time. Which state is my individuality?
When I was a baby sprawling on the floor trying to swallow my thumb? Was
that the individuality I should be sorry to lose? Fifty years hence I
shall look upon this present state and laugh, just as I \[now\] look
upon the baby state. Which of these individualities shall I keep ? . . .

We are to understand what is meant by this individuality. . . . \[There
are two opposite tendencies:\] one is the protection of the
individuality, the other is the intense desire to sacrifice the
individuality. . . . The mother sacrifices all her own will for the
needy baby. . . . When she carries the baby in her arms, the call of
individuality, of self-preservation is no more heard. She will eat the
worst food, but her children will have the best. So for all the people
we love we are ready to die.

\[On the one hand\] we are struggling hard to keep up this
individuality; on the other hand, trying to kill it. With what result?
Tom Brown may struggle hard. He is \[fighting\] for his individuality.
Tom dies and there is not a ripple anywhere upon the surface of the
earth. There was a Jew born nineteen hundred years ago, and he never
moved a finger to keep his individuality. . . . Think of that! That Jew
never struggled to protect his individuality. That is why he became the
greatest in the world. This is what the world does not know.

In time we are to be individuals. But in what sense? What is the
individuality of man? Not Tom Brown, but God in man. That is the
\[true\] individuality. The more man has approached that, the more he
has given up his false individuality. The more he tries to collect and
gain everything \[for himself\], the less he is an individual. The less
he has thought of \[himself\], the more he has sacrificed all
individuality during his lifetime, . . . the more he is an individual.
This is one secret the world does not understand.

We must first understand what is meant by individuality. It is attaining
the ideal. You are man now, \[or\] you are woman. You will change all
the time. Can you stop? Do you want to keep your minds as they are now 
—  the angels, hatreds, jealousies, quarrels, all the thousand and one
things in the mind? Do you mean to say that you will keep them? . . .
You cannot stop anywhere . . . until perfect conquest has been achieved,
until you are pure and you are perfect.

You have no more anger when you are all love, bliss, infinite existence.
. . . Which of your bodies will you keep? You cannot stop anywhere until
you come to life that never ends. Infinite life! You stop there. You
have a little knowledge now and are always trying to get more. Where
will you stop? Nowhere, until you become one with life itself. . . .

Many want pleasure \[as\] the goal. For that pleasure they seek only the
senses. On the higher planes much pleasure is to be sought. Then on
spiritual planes. Then in himself  —  God within him. The man whose
pleasure is outside of \[himself\] becomes unhappy when that outside
thing goes. You cannot depend for this pleasure upon anything in this
universe. If all my pleasures are in myself, I must have pleasure there
all the time because I can never lose my Self. . . . Mother, father,
child, wife, body, wealth — everything I can lose except my self . . .
bliss in the Self All desire is contained in the Self. . . . This. is
individuality which never changes, and this is perfect.

. . . And how to get it? They find what the great souls of this world —
all great men and women — found \[through sustained discrimination\]. .
. . What of these dualistic theories of twenty gods, thirty gods? It
does not matter. They all had the one truth, that this false
individuality must go. . . . So this ego — the less there is of it, the
nearer I am to that which I really am: the universal body. The less I
think of my own individual mind, the nearer I am to that universal mind.
The less I think of my own soul, the nearer I am to the universal soul.

We live in one body. We have some pain, some pleasure. Just for this
little pleasure we have by living in this body, we are ready to kill
everything in the universe to preserve ourselves. If we had two bodies.
would not that be much better? So on and on to bliss. I am in everybody.
Through all hands I work; through all feet I walk. I speak through every
mouth; I live in every body. Infinite my bodies, infinite my minds. I
lived in Jesus of Nazareth, in Buddha, in Mohammed — in all the great
and good of the past, of the present. I am going to live in all that
\[may\] come afterwards. Is that theory \[No, it is the truth.\]

If you can realise this, how infinitely more pleasurable that will be.
What an ecstasy of joy! Which one body is so great that we need here
anything \[of\] the body. . . After living in all the bodies of others,
all the bodies there are in this world, what becomes of us? \[We become
one with the Infinite. And\] that is the goal. That is the only way. One
\[man\] says, "If I know the truth, I shall be melted away like butter."
I wish people would be, but they are too tough to be melted so quickly!

What are we to do to be free? Free you are already. . . . How could the
free ever be bound? It is a lie. \[You were\] never bound. How could the
unlimited ever be limited by anything? Infinite divided by infinite,
added to infinite, multiplied by infinite \[remains\] infinite. You are
infinite; God is infinite. You are all infinite. There cannot be two
existences, only one. The Infinite can never be made finite. You are
never bound. That is all. . . . You are free already. You have reached
the goal — all there is to reach. Never allow the mind to think that you
have not reached the goal. . . .

Whatever we \[think\] that we become. If you think you are poor sinners
you hypnotise yourselves: "I am a miserable, crawling worm." Those who
believe in hell are in hell when they die; those who say that they will
go to heaven \[go to heaven\].

It is all play. . . . \[You may say,\] "We have to do something; let us
do good." \[But\] who cares for good and evil? Play! God Almighty plays.
That is all. . . .You are the almighty God playing. If you want to play
on the side and take the part of a beggar, you are not \[to blame
someone else for making that choice\]. You enjoy being the beggar. You
know your real nature \[to be divine\]. You are the king and play you
are a beggar. . . . It is all fun. Know it and play. That is all there
is to it. Then practice it. The whole universe is a vast play. All is
good because all is fun. This star comes and crashes with our earth, and
we are all dead. \[That too is fun.\] You only think fun the little
things that delight your senses! . . .

\[We are told that there is\] one good god here, and one bad god there
always on the watch to grab me the moment I make a mistake. . . . When I
was a child I was told by someone that God watches everything. I went to
bed and looked up and expected the ceiling of the room to open.
\[Nothing happened.\] Nobody is watching us except ourselves. No Lord
except our \[own Self\]; no nature but what we feel. Habit is second
nature; it is first nature also. It is all there is of nature. I repeat
\[something\] two or three times; it becomes my nature. Do not be
miserable! Do not repent! What is done is done. If you burn yourself,
\[take the consequences\].

. . . Be sensible. We make mistakes; what of that? That is all in fun.
They go so crazy over their past sins, moaning and weeping and all that.
Do not repent! After having done work, do not think of it. Go on! Stop
not! Don't look back! What will you gain by looking back? You lose
nothing, gain nothing. You are not going to be melted like butter.
Heavens and hells and incarnations — all nonsense!

Who is born and who dies? You are having fun, playing with worlds and
all that. You keep this body as long as you like. If you do not like it,
do not have it. The Infinite is the real; the finite is the play. You
are the infinite body and the finite body in one. Know it! But knowledge
will not make any difference; the play will go on. . . . Two words —
soul and body — have been joined. \[Partial\] knowledge is the cause.
Know that you are always free. The fire of knowledge burns down all the
\[impurities and limitations\]. I am that Infinite. . . .

You are as free as you were in the beginning, are now, and always will
be. He who knows that he is free is free; he who knows that he is bound
is bound.

What becomes of God and worship and all that? They have their place. I
have divided myself into God and me; I become the worshipped and I
worship myself. Why not? God is I. Why not worship my Self? The
universal God — He is also my Self. It is all fun. There is no other
purpose.

What is the end and aim of life? None, because I \[know that I am the
Infinite\]. If you are beggars, you can have aims. I have no aims, no
want, no purpose. I come to your country, and lecture — just for fun. No
other meaning. What meaning can be there? Only slaves do actions for
somebody else. You do actions for nobody else. When it suits you, you
worship. You can join the Christians, the Mohammedans, the Chinese, the
Japanese. You can worship all the gods that ever were and are ever going
to be. . . .

I am in the sun, the moon, and the stars. I am with God and I am in all
the gods. I worship my Self.

There is another side to it. I have kept it in reserve. I am the man
that is going to be hanged. I am all the wicked. I am getting punished
in hells. That \[also\] is fun. This is the goal of philosophy \[to know
that I am the Infinite\]. Aims, motives, purposes, and duties live in
the background. . . .

This truth is first to be listened to then to be thought about. Reason,
argue it out by all manner of means. The enlightened know no more than
that. Know it for certain that you are in everything. That is why you
should not hurt anybody, because in hurting them you hurt yourself. . .
. \[Lastly,\] this is to be meditated upon. Think upon it. Can you
realise there will come a time when everything will crumble in the dust
and you will stand alone? That moment of ecstatic joy will never leave
you. You will actually find that you are without bodies. You never had
bodies.

I am One, alone, through all eternity. Whom shall I fear? It is all my
Self. This is continuously to be meditated upon. Through that comes
realisation. It is through realisation that you become a \[blessing\] to
others. . . .

"Thy face shines like \[that of\] one who has known God." (Chhândogya.
IV. ix. 2.) That is the goal. This is not to be preached as I am doing.
"Under a tree I saw a teacher, a boy of sixteen; the disciple was an old
man of eighty. The teacher was teaching in silence, and the doubts of
the disciple vanished." (*Dakshinâmurtistotram*, 12.) And who speaks?
Who lights a candle to see the sun? When the truth \[dawns\], no witness
is necessary. You know it . . . . That is what you are going to do: . .
. realise it. \[first think of it. Reason it out. Satisfy your
curiosity. Then \[think\] of nothing else. I wish we never read
anything. Lord help us all! Just see what \[a learned\] man becomes.

"This is said, and that is said. . . ."

"What do *you* say, my friend?"

"I say nothing.'' \[He quotes\] everybody else's thought; but he thinks
nothing. If this is education, what is lunacy? Look at all the men who
wrote! . . . These modern writers, not two sentences their own! All
quotations. . . .

There is not much value in books, and in \[secondhand\] religion there
is no value whatsoever. It is like eating. Your religion would not
satisfy me Jesus saw God and Buddha saw God. If you have not seen God,
you are no better than the atheist. Only he is quiet, and you talk much
and disturb the world with your talk. Books and bibles and scriptures
are of no use. I met an old man when I was a boy; \[he did not study any
scripture, but he transmitted the truth of God by a touch\].

Silence ye teachers of the world. Silence ye books. Lord, Thou alone
speak and Thy servant listeneth. . . . If truth is not there, what is
the use of this life? We all think we will catch it, but we do not. Most
of us catch only dust. God is not there. If no God, what is the use of
life? Is there any resting-place in the universe? \[It is up to us to
find it\]; only we do not \[search for it intensely. We are\] like a
little piece of maw carried on in the current.

If there is this truth, if there is God, it must be within us. . . . \[I
must be able to say,\] "I have seen Him with my eyes," Otherwise I have
no religion. Beliefs, doctrines, sermons do not make religion. It is
realisation, perception of God \[which alone is religion\]. What is the
glory of all these men whom the world worships? God was no more a
doctrine \[for them. Did they believe\] because their grandfather
believed it? No. It was the realisation of the Infinite, higher than
their own bodies, minds, and everything. This world is real inasmuch as
it contains a little bit \[of\] the reflection of that God. We love the
good man because in his face shines the reflection a little more. We
must catch it ourselves. There is no other way.

That is the goal. Struggle for it! Have your own Bible. Have your own
Christ. Otherwise you are not religious. Do not talk religion. Men talk
and talk. "Some of them, steeped in darkness, in the pride of their
hearts think that they have the light. And not only \[that\], they offer
to take others upon their shoulders and both fall into the pit." (Katha,
I. ii. 5.) . . .

No church ever saved by itself. It is good to be born in a temple, but
woe unto the person who dies in a temple or church. Out of it! . . . It
was a good beginning, but leave it! It was the childhood place . . . but
let it be! . . . Go to God directly. No theories, no doctrines. Then
alone will all doubts vanish. Then alone will all crookedness be made
straight. . . .

In the midst of the manifold, he who sees that One; in the midst of this
infinite death, he who sees that one life; in the midst of the manifold,
he who sees that which never changes in his own soul — unto him belongs
eternal peace.

</div>
