---
title: THE BHAKTA'S RENUNCIATION RESULTS FROM LOVE

---
<div>

[←](the_preparatory_renunciation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Para-Bhakti or Supreme
Devotion](para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_naturalness_of_bhakti-yoga.htm)

  

CHAPTER II

## THE BHAKTA'S RENUNCIATION RESULTS FROM LOVE

We see love everywhere in nature. Whatever in society is good and great
and sublime is the working out of that love; whatever in society is very
bad, nay diabolical, is also the ill-directed working out of the same
emotion of love. It is this same emotion that gives us the pure and holy
conjugal love between husband and wife as well as the sort of love which
goes to satisfy the lowest forms of animal passion. The emotion is the
same, but its manifestation is different in different cases. It is the
same feeling of love, well or ill directed, that impels one man to do
good and to give all he has to the poor, while it makes another man cut
the throats of his brethren and take away all their possessions. The
former loves others as much as the latter loves himself. The direction
of the love is bad in the case of the latter, but it is right and proper
in the other case. The same fire that cooks a meal for us may burn a
child, and it is no fault of the fire if it does so; the difference lies
in the way in which it is used. Therefore love, the intense longing for
association, the strong desire on the part of two to become one — and it
may be, after all, of all to become merged in one — is being manifested
everywhere in higher or lower forms as the case may be.

Bhakti-Yoga is the science of higher love. It shows us how to direct it;
it shows us how to control it, how to manage it, how to use it, how to
give it a new aim, as it were, and from it obtain the highest and most
glorious results, that is, how to make it lead us to spiritual
blessedness. Bhakti-Yoga does not say, "Give up"; it only says, "Love;
love the Highest!" — and everything low naturally falls off from him,
the object of whose love is the Highest.

"I cannot tell anything about Thee except that Thou art my love. Thou
art beautiful, Oh, Thou art beautiful! Thou art beauty itself." What is
after all really required of us in this Yoga is that our thirst after
the beautiful should be directed to God. What is the beauty in the human
face, in the sky, in the stars, and in the moon? It is only the partial
apprehension of the real all-embracing Divine Beauty. "He shining,
everything shines. It is through His light that all things shine." Take
this high position of Bhakti which makes you forget at once all your
little personalities. Take yourself away from all the world's little
selfish clingings. Do not look upon humanity as the centre of all your
human and higher interests. Stand as a witness, as a student, and
observe the phenomena of nature. Have the feeling of personal
non-attachment with regard to man, and see how this mighty feeling of
love is working itself out in the world. Sometimes a little friction is
produced, but that is only in the course of the struggle to attain the
higher real love. Sometimes there is a little fight or a little fall;
but it is all only by the way. Stand aside, and freely let these
frictions come. You feel the frictions only when you are in the current
of the world, but when you are outside of it simply as a witness and as
a student, you will be able to see that there are millions and millions
of channels in which God is manifesting Himself as Love.

"Wherever there is any bliss, even though in the most sensual of things,
there is a spark of that Eternal Bliss which is the Lord Himself." Even
in the lowest kinds of attraction there is the germ of divine love. One
of the names of the Lord in Sanskrit is Hari, and this means that He
attracts all things to Himself. His is in fact the only attraction
worthy of human hearts. Who can attract a soul really? Only He! Do you
think dead matter can truly attract the soul? It never did, and never
will. When you see a man going after a beautiful face, do you think that
it is the handful of arranged material molecules which really attracts
the man? Not at all. Behind those material particles there must be and
is the play of divine influence and divine love. The ignorant man does
not know it, but yet, consciously or unconsciously, he is attracted by
it and it alone. So even the lowest forms of attraction derive their
power from God Himself. "None, O beloved, ever loved the husband for the
husband's sake; it is the Âtman, the Lord who is within, for whose sake
the husband is loved." Loving wives may know this or they may not; it is
true all the same. "None, O beloved, ever loved the wife for the wife's
sake, but it is the Self in the wife that is loved." Similarly, no one
loves a child or anything else in the world except on account of Him who
is within. The Lord is the great magnet, and we are all like iron
filings; we are being constantly attracted by Him, and all of us are
struggling to reach Him. All this struggling of ours in this world is
surely not intended for selfish ends. Fools do not know what they are
doing: the work of their life is, after all, to approach the great
magnet. All the tremendous struggling and fighting in life is intended
to make us go to Him ultimately and be one with Him.

The Bhakti-Yogi, however, knows the meaning of life's struggles; he
understands it. He has passed through a long series of these struggles
and knows what they mean and earnestly desires to be free from the
friction thereof; he wants to avoid the clash and go direct to the
centre of all attraction, the great Hari This is the renunciation of the
Bhakta. This mighty attraction in the direction of God makes all other
attractions vanish for him. This mighty infinite love of God which
enters his heart leaves no place for any other love to live there. How
can it be otherwise" Bhakti fills his heart with the divine waters of
the ocean of love, which is God Himself; there is no place there for
little loves. That is to say, the Bhakta's renunciation is that Vairâgya
or non-attachment for all things that are not God which results from
Anurâga or great attachment to God.

This is the ideal preparation for the attainment of the supreme Bhakti.
When this renunciation comes, the gate opens for the soul to pass
through and reach the lofty regions of supreme devotion or Para-Bhakti.
Then it is that we begin to understand what Para-Bhakti is; and the man
who has entered into the inner shrine of the Para-Bhakti alone has the
right to say that all forms and symbols are useless to him as aids to
religious realisation. He alone has attained that supreme state of love
commonly called the brotherhood of man; the rest only talk. He sees no
distinctions; the mighty ocean of love has entered into him, and he sees
not man in man, but beholds his Beloved everywhere. Through every face
shines to him his Hari. The light in the sun or the moon is all His
manifestation. Wherever there is beauty or sublimity, to him it is all
His. Such Bhaktas are still living; the world is never without them.
Such, though bitten by a serpent, only say that a messenger came to them
from their Beloved. Such men alone have the right to talk of universal
brotherhood. They feel no resentment; their minds never react in the
form of hatred or jealousy. The external, the sensuous, has vanished
from them for ever. How can they be angry, when, through their love,
they are always able to see the Reality behind the scenes?

</div>
