---
title: THE FORMS OF LOVE — MANIFESTATION

---
<div>

[←](the_naturalness_of_bhakti-yoga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Para-Bhakti or Supreme
Devotion](para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion_contents.htm)
/ [→](universal_love_and_how_it_leads_to_self-surrender.htm)

  

CHAPTER IV

## THE FORMS OF LOVE — MANIFESTATION

Here are some of the forms in which love manifests itself. First there
is reverence. Why do people show reverence to temples and holy places?
Because He is worshipped there, and His presence is associated with all
such places. Why do people in every country pay reverence to teachers of
religion? It is natural for the human heart to do so, because all such
teachers preach the Lord. At bottom, reverence is a growth out of love;
we can none of us revere him whom we do not love. Then comes Priti —
pleasure in God. What an immense pleasure men take in the objects of the
senses. They go anywhere, run through any danger, to get the thing which
they love, the thing which their senses like. What is wanted of the
Bhakta is this very kind of intense love which has, however, to be
directed to God. Then there is the sweetest of pains, Viraha, the
intense misery due to the absence of the beloved. When a man feels
intense misery because he has not attained to God, has not known that
which is the only thing worthy to be known, and becomes in consequence
very dissatisfied and almost mad — then there is Viraha; and this state
of the mind makes him feel disturbed in the presence of anything other
than the beloved (Ekarativichikitsâ). In earthly love we see how often
this Viraha comes. Again, when men are really and intensely in love with
women or women with men, they feel a kind of natural annoyance in the
presence of all those whom they do not love. Exactly the same state of
impatience in regard to things that are not loved comes to the mind when
Para-Bhakti holds sway over it; even to talk about things other than God
becomes distasteful then. "Think of Him, think of Him alone, and give up
all other vain words" अन्या वाचो विमुंचथ। — Those who talk of Him alone,
the Bhakta finds to be friendly to him; while those who talk of anything
else appear to him to be unfriendly. A still higher stage of love is
reached when life itself is maintained for the sake of the one Ideal of
Love, when life itself is considered beautiful and worth living only on
account of that Love (तदर्थप्राणसंस्थानं). Without it, such a life would
not remain even for a moment. Life is sweet, because it thinks of the
Beloved. Tadiyatâ (*His-ness*) comes when a man becomes perfect
according to Bhakti — when he has become blessed, when he has attained
God, when he has touched the feet of God, as it were. Then his whole
nature is purified and completely changed. All his purpose in life then
becomes fulfilled. Yet many such Bhaktas live on just to worship Him.
That is the bliss, the only pleasure in life which they will not give
up. "O king, such is the blessed quality of Hari that even those who
have become satisfied with everything, all the knots of whose hearts
have been cut asunder, even they love the Lord for love's sake" — the
Lord "Whom all the gods worship — all the lovers of liberation, and all
the knowers of the Brahman" — यं सर्वे देवा नमन्ति मुमुक्षवो
ब्रह्मवादिनश्चेति (*Nri*. *Tap*. *Up*.). Such is the power of love. When
a man has forgotten himself altogether, and does not feel that anything
belongs to him, then he acquires the state of Tadiyata; everything is
sacred to him, because it belongs to the Beloved. Even in regard to
earthly love, the lover thinks that everything belonging to his beloved
is sacred and so dear to him. He loves even a piece of cloth belonging
to the darling of his heart In the same way, when a person loves the
Lord, the whole universe becomes dear to him, because it is all His.

</div>
