---
title: UNIVERSAL LOVE AND HOW IT LEADS TO SELF-SURRENDER

---
<div>

[←](the_forms_of_love-manifestation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Para-Bhakti or Supreme
Devotion](para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_higher_knowledge.htm)

  

CHAPTER V

## UNIVERSAL LOVE AND HOW IT LEADS TO SELF-SURRENDER

How can we love the Vyashti, the particular, without first loving the
Samashti, the universal? God is the Samashti, the generalised and the
abstract universal whole; and the universe that we see is the Vyashti,
the particularised thing. To love the whole universe is possible only by
way of loving the Samashti — the universal — which is, as it were, the
one unity in which are to be found millions and millions of smaller
unities. The philosophers of India do not stop at the particulars; they
cast a hurried glance at the particulars and immediately start to find
the generalised forms which will include all the particulars. The search
after the universal is the one search of Indian philosophy and religion.
The Jnâni aims at the wholeness of things, at that one absolute and;
generalised Being, knowing which he knows everything. The Bhakta wishes
to realise that one generalised abstract Person, in loving whom he loves
the whole universe. The Yogi wishes to have possession of that one
generalised form of power, by controlling which he controls this whole
universe. The Indian mind, throughout its history, has been directed to
this kind of singular search after the universal in everything — in
science, in psychology, in love, in philosophy. So the conclusion to
which the Bhakta comes is that, if you go on merely loving one, person
after another, you may go on loving them so for an infinite length of
time, without being in the least able to love the world as a whole.
When, at last, the central idea is, however, arrived at that the sum
total of all love is God, that the sum total of the aspirations of all
the souls in the universe, whether they be free, or bound, or struggling
towards liberation, is God, then alone it becomes possible for any one
to put forth universal love. God is the Samashti, and this visible
universe is God differentiated and made manifest. If we love this sum
total, we love everything. Loving the world doing it good will all come
easily then; we have to obtain this power only by loving God first;
otherwise it is no joke to do good to the world. "Everything is His and
He is my Lover; I love Him," says the Bhakta. In this way everything
becomes sacred to the Bhakta, because all things are His. All are His
children, His body, His manifestation. How then may we hurt any one? How
then may we not love any one? With the love of God will come, as a sure
effect, the love of every one in the universe. The nearer we approach
God, the more do we begin to see that all things are in Him. When the
soul succeeds in appropriating the bliss of this supreme love, it also
begins to see Him in everything. Our heart will thus become an eternal
fountain of love. And when we reach even higher states of this love, all
the little differences between the things of the world are entirely
lost; man is seen no more as man, but only as God; the animal is seen no
more as animal, but as God; even the tiger is no more a tiger, but a
manifestation of God. Thus in this intense state of Bhakti, worship is
offered to every one, to every life, and to every being. एवं सर्वेषु
भूतेषु भक्तिरव्यभिचारिणी। कर्तव्या पण्डितैर्ज्ञात्वा सर्वभूतमयं हरिम्॥ —
"Knowing that Hari, the Lord, is in every being, the wise have thus to
manifest unswerving love towards all beings."

As a result of this kind of intense all-absorbing love, comes the
feeling of perfect self-surrender, the conviction that nothing that
happens is against us, Aprâtikulya. Then the loving soul is able to say,
if pain comes, "Welcome pain." If misery comes, it will say, "Welcome
misery, you are also from the Beloved." If a serpent comes, it will say,
"Welcome serpent." If death comes, such a Bhakta will welcome it with a
smile. "Blessed am I that they all come to me; they are all welcome."
The Bhakta in this state of perfect resignation, arising out of intense
love to God and to all that are His, ceases to distinguish between
pleasure and pain in so far as they affect him. He does not know what it
is to complain of pain or misery; and this kind of uncomplaining
resignation to the will of God, who is all love, is indeed a worthier
acquisition than all the glory of grand and heroic performances.

To the vast majority of mankind, the body is everything; the body is all
the universe to them; bodily enjoyment is their all in all. This demon
of the worship of the body and of the things of the body has entered
into us all. We may indulge in tall talk and take very high flights, but
we are like vultures all the same; our mind is directed to the piece of
carrion down below. Why should our body be saved, say, from the tiger?
Why may we not give it over to the tiger? The tiger will thereby be
pleased, and that is not altogether so very far from self-sacrifice and
worship. Can you reach the realization of such an idea in which all
sense of self is completely lost? It is a very dizzy height on the
pinnacle of the religion of love, and few in this world have ever
climbed up to it; but until a man reaches that highest point of
ever-ready and ever-willing self-sacrifice, he cannot become a perfect
Bhakta. We may all manage to maintain our bodies more or less
satisfactorily and for longer or shorter intervals of time.
Nevertheless, our bodies have to go; there is no permanence about them.
Blessed are they whose bodies get destroyed in the service of others.
"Wealth, and even life itself, the sage always holds ready for the
service of others. In this world, there being one thing certain, viz
death, it is far better that this body dies in a good cause than in a
bad one." We may drag our life on for fifty years or a hundred years;
but after that, what is it that happens? Everything that is the result
of combination must get dissolved and die. There must and will come a
time for it to be decomposed. Jesus and Buddha and Mohammed are all
dead; all the great Prophets and Teachers of the world are dead.

"In this evanescent world, where everything is falling to pieces, we
have to make the highest use of what time we have," says the Bhakta; and
really the highest use of life is to hold it at the service of all
beings. It is the horrible body-idea that breeds all the selfishness in
the world, just this one delusion that we are wholly the body we own,
and that we must by all possible means try our very best to preserve and
to please it. If you know that you are positively other than your body,
you have then none to fight with or struggle against; you are dead to
all ideas of selfishness. So the Bhakta declares that we have to hold
ourselves as if we are altogether dead to all the things of the world;
and that is indeed self-surrender. Let things come as they may. This is
the meaning of "Thy will be done" — not going about fighting and
struggling and thinking all the while that God wills all our own
weaknesses and worldly ambitions. It may be that good comes even out of
our selfish struggles; that is, however, God's look-out. The perfected
Bhakta's idea must be never to will and work for himself. "Lord, they
build high temples in Your name; they make large gifts in Your name; I
am poor; I have nothing; so I take this body of mine and place it at
Your feet. Do not give me up, O Lord." Such is the prayer proceeding out
of the depths of the Bhakta's heart. To him who has experienced it, this
eternal sacrifice of the self unto the Beloved Lord is higher by far
than all wealth and power, than even all soaring thoughts of renown and
enjoyment. The peace of the Bhakta's calm resignation is a peace that
passeth all understanding and is of incomparable value. His Apratikulya
is a state of the mind in which it has no interests and naturally knows
nothing that is opposed to it. In this state of sublime resignation
everything in the shape of attachment goes away completely, except that
one all-absorbing love to Him in whom all things live and move and have
their being. This attachment of love to God is indeed one that does not
bind the soul but effectively breaks all its bondages.

</div>
