---
title: HUMAN REPRESENTATIONS OF THE DIVINE IDEAL OF LOVE

---
<div>

[←](the_god_of_love_is_his_own_proof.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Para-Bhakti or Supreme
Devotion](para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion_contents.htm)
/ [→](conclusion.htm)

  

CHAPTER IX

## HUMAN REPRESENTATIONS OF THE DIVINE IDEAL OF LOVE

It is impossible to express the nature of this supreme and absolute
ideal of love in human language. Even the highest flight of human
imagination is incapable of comprehending it in all its infinite
perfection and beauty. Nevertheless, the followers of the religion of
love, in its higher as well as its lower forms, in all countries, have
all along had to use the inadequate human language to comprehend and to
define their own ideal of love. Nay more, human love itself, in all its
varied forms has been made to typify this inexpressible divine love. Man
can think of divine things only in his own human way, to us the Absolute
can be expressed only in our relative language. The whole universe is to
us a writing of the Infinite in the language of the finite. Therefore
Bhaktas make use of all the common terms associated with the common love
of humanity in relation to God and His worship through love.

Some of the great writers on Para-Bhakti have tried to understand and
experience this divine love in so many different ways. The lowest form
in which this love is apprehended is what they call the peaceful — the
Shânta. When a man worships God without the fire of love in him, without
its madness in his brain, when his love is just the calm commonplace
love, a little higher than mere forms and ceremonies and symbols, but
not at all characterized by the madness of intensely active love, it is
said to be Shanta. We see some people in the world who like to move on
slowly, and others who come and go like the whirlwind. The Shânta-Bhakta
is calm, peaceful, gentle.

The next higher type is that of Dâsya, i.e. servantship; it comes when a
man thinks he is the servant of the Lord. The attachment of the faithful
servant unto the master is his ideal.

The next type of love is Sakhya, friendship — "Thou art our beloved
friend." Just as a man opens his heart to his friend and knows that the
friend will never chide him for his faults but will always try to help
him, just as there is the idea of equality between him and his friend,
so equal love flows in and out between the worshipper and his friendly
God. Thus God becomes our friend, the friend who is near, the friend to
whom we may freely tell all the tales of our lives. The innermost
secrets of our hearts we may place before Him with the great assurance
of safety and support. He is the friend whom the devotee accepts as an
equal. God is viewed here as our playmate. We may well say that we are
all playing in this universe. Just as children play their games, just as
the most glorious kings and emperors play their own games, so is the
Beloved Lord Himself in sport with this universe. He is perfect; He does
not want anything. Why should He create? Activity is always with us for
the fulfilment of a certain want, and want always presupposes
imperfection. God is perfect; He has no wants. Why should He go on with
this work of an ever-active creation? What purpose has He in view? The
stories about God creating this world for some end or other that we
imagine are good as stories, but not otherwise. It is all really in
sport; the universe is His play going on. The whole universe must after
all be a big piece of pleasing fun to Him. If you are poor, enjoy that
as fun; if you are rich, enjoy the fun of being rich; if dangers come,
it is also good fun; if happiness comes, there is more good fun. The
world is just a playground, and we are here having good fun, having a
game; and God is with us playing all the while, and we are with Him
playing. God is our eternal playmate. How beautifully He is playing! The
play is finished when the cycle: comes to an end. There is rest for a
shorter or longer time; again all come out and play. It is only when you
forget that it is all play and that you are also helping in the play, it
is only then that misery and sorrows come. Then the heart becomes heavy,
then the world weighs upon you with tremendous power. But as soon as you
give up the serious idea of reality as the characteristic of the
changing incidents of the three minutes of life and know it to be but a
stage on which we are playing, helping Him to play, at once misery
ceases for you. He plays in every atom; He is playing when He is
building up earths, and suns, and moons; He is playing with the human
heart, with animals, with plants. We are His chessmen; He puts the
chessmen on the board and shakes them up. He arranges us first in one
way and then in another, and we are consciously or unconsciously helping
in His play. And, oh, bliss! we are His playmates!

The next is what is known as Vâtsalya, loving God not as our Father but
as our Child. This may look peculiar, but it is a discipline to enable
us to detach all ideas of power from the concept of God. The idea of
power brings with it awe. There should be no awe in love. The ideas of
reverence and obedience are necessary for the formation of character;
but when character is formed, when the lover has tasted the calm,
peaceful love and tasted also a little of its intense madness, then he
need talk no more of ethics and discipline. To conceive God as mighty,
majestic, and glorious, as the Lord of the universe, or as the God of
gods, the lover says he does not care. It is to avoid this association
with God of the fear-creating sense of power that he worships God as his
own child. The mother and the father are not moved by awe in relation to
the child; they cannot have any reverence for the child. They cannot
think of asking any favour from the child. The child's position is
always that of the receiver, and out of love for the child the parents
will give up their bodies a hundred times over. A thousand lives they
will sacrifice for that one child of theirs, and, therefore, God is
loved as a child. This idea of loving God as a child comes into
existence and grows naturally among those religious sects which believe
in the incarnation of God. For the Mohammedans it is impossible to have
this idea of God as a child; they will shrink from it with a kind of
horror. But the Christian and the Hindu can realise it easily, because
they have the baby Jesus and the baby Krishna. The women in India often
look upon themselves as Krishna's mother; Christian mothers also may
take up the idea that they are Christ's mothers, and it will bring to
the West the knowledge of God's Divine Motherhood which they so much
need. The superstitions of awe and reverence in relation to God are
deeply rooted in the bears of our hearts, and it takes long years to
sink entirely in love our ideas of reverence and veneration, of awe and
majesty and glory with regard to God.

There is one more human representation of the divine ideal of love. It
is known as Madhura, sweet, and is the highest of all such
representations. It is indeed based on the highest manifestation of love
in this world, and this love is also the strongest known to man. What
love shakes the whole nature of man, what love runs through every atom
of his being — makes him mad, makes him forget his own nature,
transforms him, makes him either a God or a demon — as the love between
man and woman. In this sweet representation of divine love God is our
husband. We are all women; there are no men in this world; there is but
One man, and this is He, our Beloved. All that love which man gives to
woman, or woman to man, has her to be given up to the Lord.

All the different kinds of love which we see in the world, and with
which we are more or less playing merely, have God as the one goal; but
unfortunately, man does not know the infinite ocean into which this
mighty river of love is constantly flowing, and so, foolishly, he often
tries to direct it to little dolls of human beings. The tremendous love
for the child that is in human nature is not for the little doll of a
child; if you bestow it blindly and exclusively on the child, you will
suffer in consequence. But through such suffering will come the
awakening by which you are sure to find out that the love which is in
you, if it is given to any human being, will sooner or later bring pain
and sorrow as the result. Our love must, therefore, be given to the
Highest One who never dies and never changes, to Him in the ocean of
whose love there is neither ebb nor flow. Love must get to its right
destination, it must go unto Him who is really the infinite ocean of
love. All rivers flow into the ocean. Even the drop of water coming down
from the mountain side cannot stop its course after reaching a brook or
a river, however big it may be; at last even that drop somehow does find
its way to the ocean. God is the one goal of all our passions and
emotions. If you want to be angry, be angry with Him. Chide your
Beloved, chide your Friend. Whom else can you safely chide? Mortal man
will not patiently put up with your anger; there will be a reaction. If
you are angry with me I am sure quickly to react, because I cannot
patiently put up with your anger. Say unto the Beloved, "Why do You not
come to me; why do You leave me thus alone?" Where is there any
enjoyment but in Him? What enjoyment can there be in little clods of
earth? It is the crystallised essence of infinite enjoyment that we have
to seek, and that is in God. Let all our passions and emotions go up
unto Him. They are meant for Him, for if they miss their mark and go
lower, they become vile; and when they go straight to the mark, to the
Lord, even the lowest of them becomes transfigured. All the energies of
the human body and mind, howsoever they may express themselves, have the
Lord as their one goal, as their Ekâyana. All loves and all passions of
the human heart must go to God. He is the Beloved. Whom else can this
heart love? He is the most beautiful, the most sublime, He is beauty
itself, sublimity itself. Who in this universe is more beautiful than
He? Who in this universe is more fit to become the husband than He? Who
in this universe is fitter to be loved than He? So let Him be the
husband, let Him be the Beloved.

Often it so happens that divine lovers who sing of this divine love
accept the language of human love in all its aspects as adequate to
describe it. Fools do not understand this; they never will. They look at
it only with the physical eye. They do not understand the mad throes of
this spiritual love. How can they? "For one kiss of Thy lips, O Beloved!
One who has been kissed by Thee, has his thirst for Thee increasing for
ever, all his sorrows vanish, and he forgets all things except Thee
alone." Aspire after that kiss of the Beloved, that touch of His lips
which makes the Bhakta mad, which makes of man a god. To him, who has
been blessed with such a kiss, the whole of nature changes, worlds
vanish, suns and moons die out, and the universe itself melts away into
that one infinite ocean of love. That is the perfection of the madness
of love

Ay, the true spiritual lover does not rest even there; even the love of
husband and wife is not mad enough for him. The Bhaktas take up also the
idea of illegitimate love, because it is so strong; the impropriety of
it is not at all the thing they have in view. The nature if this love is
such that the more obstructions there are for its free play, the more
passionate it becomes. The love between husband and wife is smooth,
there are no obstructions there. So the Bhaktas take up the idea of a
girl who is in love with her own beloved, and her mother or father or
husband objects to such love; and the more anybody obstructs the course
of her love, so much the more is her love tending to grow in strength.
Human language cannot describe how Krishna in the groves of Vrindâ was
madly loved, how at the sound of his voice the ever-blessed Gopis rushed
out to meet him, forgetting everything, forgetting this world and its
ties, its duties, its joys, and its sorrows. Man, O man, you speak of
divine love and at the same time are able to attend to all the vanities
of this world — are you sincere? "Where Râma is, there is no room for
any desire — where desire is, there is no room for Rama; these never
coexist — like light and darkness they are never together."

</div>
