---
title: CONCLUSION

---
<div>

[←](human_representations_of_the_divine_ideal_of_love.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Para-Bhakti or Supreme
Devotion](para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion_contents.htm) [→](../lectures_from_colombo_to_almora/first_public_lecture_in_the_east_%28colombo%29.htm)

  

CHAPTER X

## CONCLUSION

When this highest ideal of love is reached, philosophy is thrown away;
who will then care for it? Freedom, Salvation, Nirvâna — all are thrown
away; who cares to become free while in the enjoyment of divine love?
"Lord, I do not want wealth, nor friends, nor beauty, nor learning, nor
even freedom; let me be born again and again, and be Thou ever my Love.
Be Thou ever and ever my Love." "Who cares to become sugar?" says the
Bhakta, "I want to taste sugar." Who will then desire to become free and
one with God? "I may know that I am He; yet will I take myself away from
Him and become different, so that I may enjoy the Beloved." That is what
the Bhakta says. Love for love's sake is his highest enjoyment. Who will
not be bound hand and foot a thousand times over to enjoy the Beloved?
No Bhakta cares for anything except love, except to love and to be
loved. His unworldly love is like the tide rushing up the river; this
lover goes up the river against the current. The world calls him mad. I
know one whom the world used to call mad, and this was his answer: "My
friends, the whole world is a lunatic asylum. Some are mad after worldly
love, some after name, some after fame, some after money, some after
salvation and going to heaven. In this big lunatic asylum I am also mad,
I am mad after God. If you are mad after money, I am mad after God. You
are mad; so am I. I think my madness is after all the best." The true
Bhakta's love is this burning madness before which everything else
vanishes for him. The whole universe is to him full of love and love
alone; that is how it seems to the lover. So when a man has this love in
him, he becomes eternally blessed, eternally happy. This blessed madness
of divine love alone can cure for ever the disease of the world that is
in us. With desire, selfishness has vanished. He has drawn near to God,
he has thrown off all those vain desires of which he was full before.

We all have to begin as dualists in the religion of love. God is to us a
separate Being, and we feel ourselves to be separate beings also. Love
then comes in the middle, and man begins to approach God, and God also
comes nearer and nearer to man. Man takes up all the various
relationships of life, as father, as mother, as son, as friend, as
master, as lover, and projects them on his ideal of love, on his God. To
him God exists as all these, and the last point of his progress is
reached when he feels that he has become absolutely merged in the object
of his worship. We all begin with love for ourselves, and the unfair
claims of the little self make even love selfish. At last, however,
comes the full blaze of light, in which this little self is seen to have
become one with the Infinite. Man himself is transfigured in the
presence of this Light of Love, and he realises at last the beautiful
and inspiring truth that Love, the Lover, and the Beloved are One.

</div>
