---
title: unpublishedindianmirror 01211897

---
<div>

[←](nyt_03201896.htm) [Home](../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) /
[Unpublished](unpublished_contents.htm) / [→](nyt_05311897.htm)

  

### (*Indian Mirror* January 21, 1897)

Swami Vivekananda was accorded a most enthusiastic reception at Colombo,
where he landed on the 15th instant. All classes of the Colombo
community, whether Hindus or Buddhists, forgot their differences, and
went to work together to render fitting honour, where honour was so
eminently due. The appreciation of his splendid record of work in the
West is by no means confined to his brethren in the faith, for the fact
of the Buddhists having co-operated with the Hindus in acknowledging the
debt of gratitude, under which he has laid all followers of the several
Eastern creeds, is a proof positive of his services having been
estimated at their true worth, outside the ranks of Hinduism. The Swami
stayed only for four days at Colombo, and then started for Madras, where
arrangements are being made on a magnificent scale to extend to him an
impressive and enthusiastic welcome. We learn from a letter from the
Southern Presidency that the Hindu community there to a man is animated
by a sincere desire to celebrate, in a fitting manner, the return of the
“conquering hero,” and, on this behalf, it has set about its work in
sober earnest. It is but in the fitness of things that the Province,
which was the first to recognise the Swami's genius, and which paid the
greater portion of the expenses of his voyage, should also be the first
to welcome him with open arms on his return to the country of his birth.
The Swami, after stopping in Madras for a few days, will leave for
Calcutta -- his native city -- where he is expected to arrive by the
middle of February. A prophet, they say, is not honored in his own
country, but, we hope, that, in this case, there will be a departure
from this rule, and that all sections of our community will combine to
welcome the Swami home in a right royal fashion. He may not be a Roman
hero, returning from the field of battle with the laurels of many
victories on his brow. But peace hath her victories no less than war,
and, in the bloodless battle that he has fought on behalf of a religion,
which teaches the highest doctrines of peace and brotherhood amongst
mankind, entitles him to the eternal gratitude of his fellow-believers.
He has raised the Hindu nation in the estimation of the Western world,
and has created for the Hindu faith an interest, which will last through
all time. It is impossible to over-estimate the value of his services in
America to the cause of Hinduism. Hundreds of men and women have
enlisted themselves under the standard, which he unfolded in America,
and some of them have even taken to the bowl and the yellow-robes. The
work, that he had to do, speedily assumed such proportions as to
necessitate the despatch of fresh re-inforcements from India to keep it
live in America. Swami Saradananda is busy in Boston in watering the
seeds, which were sown there by Swami Vivekananda. The classes opened in
several places in America, and even in England , for the teaching of
Hinduism in its purer form, are a sufficient token of the leaning
towards Vedantism, which the West has begun to manifest under the
inspiring and soul-stirring eloquence of Swami Vivekananda. Those that
attended the lectures, delivered the other day at the Emerald Theatre by
Mr. Turnbull of Chicago, must have been thoroughly impressed with the
magnitude of the change, which has been wrought by Swami Vivekananda in
the hearts and convictions of the American people. The Swami delivered
his first memorable address on Hinduism in the Parliament of Religions,
which was held in Chicago, in September, 1893. He made a tour of almost
all the principal places in the United States, and wherever he went, he
won

</div>
