+++
title = "The mother of all battles"

+++
The ruffians of Southern Saxony had always held the Indian armies in
contempt. In one of the greatest battles of all times the princes of the
Andhra and the Karnata country had destroyed the Saxon pride that had
swelled in the great invasion of India in the year of 2001 under Emperor
of all Saxony, Slit-Eyes. In the battle of Chennai the prince of Mumbai
had put to sword the Southern Saxon army. Then there had been the
African raids where the power of Saxony had demolished the Hindus in the
final skirmish. That was followed by skirmishes in India where the
Saxons had prevailed again.

Then came the great Indian invasion of the Southern continent. General
Hayden had already sounded his bugle and shown his ferocity in the
conquest of the renegade African principality of Saxons. He issued many
an ominous warning to the invading Indian force. As the first skirmishes
occurred the Indian advance pickets were routinely repulsed by ordinary
Saxon scouts. Then the first great battle was joined. Gen. Hayden fired
his heavy artillery and the aerial bombardment from the Emperor of
Saxony, Slit-eyes was heavy. The rain and the mire confused the Indian
ranks further, but the weak Indian Raja from Vanga suddenly flared up
gunning away on the Saxon ranks and repulsing them decisively. The two
armies then retreated to avoid further damage and reserve their fury for
more decisive encounter in the Southern tip of the Southern continent.

The great battle began with a ferocious charge of Prince Ponting almost
sinking the Indian ranks for good. With the great prince of Mumbai
tottering under the bombardment and the Vanga Raja falling shortly
thereafter we believed that the Indian invasion had been terminated
prematurely. But what followed was an unbelievable assault from the
Hindu ranks rallying under the Princes of Bangalore and Hyderabad.
Together with the Maharatta auxillaries that were fleeing from the fall
of the Bombay ruler, they axed Slit-eyes, Gen. Hayden and Prince
Ponting. Finally, they prevailed in the death struggle which was fought
with bare hands and strangled the Saxon thugs. With that the saffron
Hindu flag flew over the bleak wastes of the Southern Continent. The
final frontier had finally been crossed. It laid to rest the myths of
Saxon mint.
