+++
title = "The wonder house"

+++
It was late summer or early autumn in the year of dvAdashAnta. R and I
went to that house in the afternoon. Our acquaintences were busy trying
to prepare for some exam, which at least to us seemed distant. They were
chattering about text books, tuitions and other quintessentially Indian
fascinations. We suddenly broke away from the chatter of the plebeians.
The dark one who tended to be with me decided to go away to immerse
himself in this more mundane business. So R and I set up the microscope
and observed the drop of water we had obtained from the Hydra pond.
There was a large Euglenozoan flagellate going its way that caught our
attention. There was the usual crowd of Bodoid flagellates and the
occasional ciliate. That large Eugelenozoa with its starch granules
continues to fascinate us after many years. This went on for a while.
Then we walked out of the house moved over the curving road with our
scooters. We stopped at high point. Then we walked past the temples of
The god’s fierce son and wife on the hill facing the setting sun. We
came to a circlet of stones laid there by the megalithic mourners of
yore. We looked at the yonder mists and could faintly discern the dark
outline left behind from Tughlaq’s invasion. To match the ambience R
narrated to me Conan Doyle’s tale about the Roman woman and the
barbarian in England. I asked her if she felt something like that may
happen. She did not want to confess it but seemed to tacitly admit
belief in such things. We sat on stones of the megalithic cairn and to
my mind came the thought of auvvaiyAr’s poem to the dead tamil warlord
adiyamAn neDuman anchi after he was placed under such a vIra kallu. We
then returned to seeing leafhoppers and salticids and the like.

Then we descended and returned to the house. We were filled with a great
sense of delight and many stories parallel to Conan Doyle’s creation
flowed through our mind. We regaled each other with those flowing tales.
Of those we only remember “The death of vidruM” and “The vIrabhadra
temple” that came to me. We then decided to go the other house on
another day. The Sunday sleep and the tale of Limbya Shinde will be
revisited.
