---
title: THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS JNANA1

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) /

[←](the_women_of_india.htm)

## THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS JNANA[1](#fn1)

  

*\[A Jnâna-Yoga class delivered in New York, Wednesday, December 11,
1895, and recorded by Swami Kripananda\]*

The word *Jnâna* means knowledge. It is derived from the root *Jnâ* — to
know — the same word from which your English word to *know* is derived.
Jnana-Yoga is Yoga by means of knowledge. What is the object of the
Jnana-Yoga? Freedom. Freedom from what? Freedom from our imperfections,
freedom from the misery of life. Why are we miserable? We are miserable
because we are bound. What is the bondage? The bondage is of nature. Who
is it that binds us? We, ourselves.

The whole universe is bound by the law of causation. There cannot be
anything, any fact — either in the internal or in the external world —
that is uncaused; and every cause must produce an effect.

Now this bondage in which we are is a fact. It need not be proved that
we are in bondage. For instance: I would be very glad to get out of this
room through this wall, but I cannot; I would be very glad if I never
became sick, but I cannot prevent it; I would be very glad not to die,
but I have to; I would be very glad to do millions of things that I
cannot do. The will is there, but we do not succeed in accomplishing the
desire. When we have any desire and not the means of fulfilling it, we
get that peculiar reaction called misery. Who is the cause of desire? I,
myself. Therefore, I myself am the cause of all the miseries I am in.

Misery begins with the birth of the child. Weak and helpless, he enters
the world. The first sign of life is weeping. Now, how could we be the
cause of misery when we find it at the very beginning? We have caused it
in the past. \[Here Swami Viveka nanda entered into a fairly long
discussion of "the very interesting theory called Reincarnation". He
continued:\]

To understand reincarnation, we have first to know that in this universe
something can never be produced out of nothing. If there is such a thing
as a human soul, it cannot be produced out of nothing. If something can
be produced out of nothing, then something would disappear into nothing
also. If we are produced out of nothing, then we will also go back into
nothing. That which has a beginning must have an end. Therefore, as
souls we could not have had any beginning. We have been existing all the
time.

Then again, if we did not exist previously, there is no explanation of
our present existence. The child is born with a bundle of causes. How
many things we see in a child which can never be explained until we
grant that the child has had past experience — for instance, fear of
death and a great number of innate tendencies. Who taught the baby to
drink milk and to do so in a peculiar fashion? Where did it acquire this
knowledge? We know that there cannot be any knowledge without
experience, for to say that knowledge is intuitive in the child, or
instinctive, is what the logicians would call a "petitio
principii".[2](#fn2)

It would be the same \[logic\] as when a man asks me why light comes
through a glass, and I answer him, "Because it is transparent". That
would be really no answer at all because I am simply translating his
word into a bigger one. The word "transparent" means "that through which
light comes" — and that was the question. The question was why light
comes through the glass, and I answered him, "Because it comes through
the glass".

In the same way, the question was why these tendencies are in the child.
Why should it have fear of death if it never saw death? If this is the
first time it was ever born, how did it know to suck the mother's milk?
If the answer is "Oh, it was instinct", that is simply returning the
question. If a man stands up and says, "I do not know", he is in a
better position than the man who says, "It is instinct" and all such
nonsense.

There is no such thing as instinct; there is no such thing as nature
separate from habit. Habit is one's second nature, and habit is one's
first nature too. All that is in your nature is the result of habit, and
habit is the result of experience. There cannot be any knowledge but
from experience.

So this baby must have had some experience too. This fact is granted
even by modern materialistic science. It proves beyond doubt that the
baby brings with it a fund of experience. It does not enter into this
world with a "tabula rasa" — a blank mind upon which nothing is written
— as some of the old philosophers believed, but ready equipped with a
bundle of knowledge. So far so good.

But while modern science grants that this bundle of knowledge which the
child brings with it was acquired through experience, it asserts, at the
same time, that it is not its own — but its father's and its
grandfather's and its great-grandfather's. Knowledge comes, they say,
through hereditary transmission.

Now this is one step in advance of that old theory of "instinct", that
is fit only for babies and idiots. This "instinct" theory is a mere pun
upon words and has no meaning whatsoever. A man with the least thinking
power and the least insight into the logical precision of words would
never dare to explain innate tendencies by "instinct", a term which is
equivalent to saying that something came out of nothing. But the modern
theory of transmission through experience — though, no doubt, a step in
advance of the old one — is not sufficient at all. Why not? We can
understand a physical transmission, but a mental transmission is
impossible to understand.

What causes me — who am a soul — to be born with a father who has
transmitted certain qualities? What makes me come back? The father,
having certain qualities, may be one binding cause. Taking for granted
that I am a distinct soul that was existing before and wants to
reincarnate — what makes my soul go into the body of a particular man?
For the explanation to be sufficient, we have to assume a hereditary
transmission of energies and such a thing as my own previous experience.
This is what is called Karma, or, in English, the Law of Causation, the
law of fitness.

For instance, if my previous actions have all been towards drunkenness,
I will naturally gravitate towards persons who are transmitting a
drunkard's character. I can only take advantage of the organism produced
by those parents who have been transmitting a certain peculiar influence
for which I am fit by my previous actions. Thus we see that it is true
that a certain hereditary experience is transmitted from father to son,
and so on. At the same time, it is my past experience that joins me to
the particular cause of hereditary transmission.

A simply hereditary transmission theory will only touch the physical man
and would be perfectly insufficient for the internal soul of man. Even
when looking upon the matter from the purest materialistic standpoint —
viz. that there is no such thing as a soul in man, and man is nothing
but a bundle of atoms acted upon by certain physical forces and works
like an automaton — even taking that for granted, the mere transmission
theory would be quite insufficient.

The greatest difficulties regarding the simple hypothesis of mere
physical transmission will be here: If there be no such thing as a soul
in man, if he be nothing more than a bundle of atoms acted upon by
certain forces, then, in the case of transmission, the soul of the
father would decrease in ratio to the number of his children; and the
man who has five, six or eight children must, in the end, become an
idiot. India and China — where men breed like rats — would then be full
of idiots. But, on the contrary, we find that the least amount of lunacy
is in India and China.

The question is, What do we mean by the word *transmission*? It is a big
word, but, like so many other impossible and nonsensical terms of the
same kind, it has come into use without people understanding it. If I
were to ask you what *transmission* is, you would find that you have no
real conception of its meaning because there is no idea attached to it.

Let us look a little closer into the matter. Say, for instance, here is
a father. A child is born to him. We see that the same qualities \[which
the father possesses\] have entered into his child. Very good. Now how
did the qualities of the father come to be in the child? Nobody knows.
So this gap the modern physicists want to fill with the big word
*transmission*. And what does this *transmission* mean? Nobody knows.

How can mental qualities of experience be condensed and made to live in
one single cell of protoplasm? There is no difference between the
protoplasm of a bird and that of a human brain. All we can say with
regard to physical transmission is that it consists of the two or three
protoplasmic cells cut from the father's body. That is all. But what
nonsense to assume that ages and ages of past human experience got
compressed into a few protoplasmic cells! It is too tremendous a pill
they ask you to swallow with this little word *transmission*.

In olden times the churches had prestige, but today science has got it.
And just as in olden times people never inquired for themselves — never
studied the Bible, and so the priests had a very good opportunity to
teach whatever they liked — so even now the majority of people do not
study for themselves and, at the same time, have a tremendous awe and
fear before anything called scientific. You ought to remember that there
is a worse popery coming than ever existed in the church — the so-called
scientific popery, which has become so successful that it dictates to us
with more authority than religious popery.

These popes of modern science are great popes indeed, but sometimes they
ask us to believe more wonderful things than any priest or any religion
ever did. And one of those wonderful things is that transmission theory,
which I could never understand. If I ask, "What do you mean by
*transmission*?" they only make it a little easier by saying, "It is
hereditary transmission". And if I tell them, "That is rather Greek to
me", they make it still easier by saying, "It is the adherence of
paternal qualities in the protoplasmic cells". In that way it becomes
easier and easier, until my mind becomes muddled and disgusted with the
whole thing.

Now one thing we see: we produce thought. I am talking to you this
evening and it is producing thought in your brain. By this act of
transmission we understand that my thoughts are being transmitted into
your brain and your mind, and producing other thoughts. This is an
everyday fact.

It is always rational to take the side of things which you can
understand — to take the side of fact. Transmission of thought is
perfectly understandable. Therefore we are able to take up the \[concept
of\] transmission of thought, and not of hereditary impressions of
protoplasmic cells alone. We need not brush aside the theory, but the
main stress must be laid upon the transmission of thought.

Now a father does not transmit thought. It is thought alone that
transmits thought. The child that is born existed previously as thought.
We all existed eternally as thought and will go on existing as thought.

What we think, that our body becomes. Everything is manufactured by
thought, and thus we are the manufacturers of our own lives. We alone
are responsible for whatever we do. It is foolish to cry out: "Why am I
unhappy?" I made my own unhappiness. It is not the fault of the Lord at
all.

Someone takes advantage of the light of the sun to break into your house
and rob you. And then when he is caught by the policeman, he may cry:
"Oh sun, why did you make me steal?" It was not the sun's fault at all,
because there are thousands of other people who did much good to their
fellow beings under the light of the same sun. The sun did not tell this
man to go about stealing and robbing.

Each one of us reaps what we ourselves have sown. These miseries under
which we suffer, these bondages under which we struggle, have been
caused by ourselves, and none else in the universe is to blame. God is
the least to blame for it.

"Why did God create this evil world?" He did not create this evil world
at all. We have made it evil, and we have to make it good. "Why did God
create me so miserable?" He did not. He gave me the same powers as \[He
did\] to every being. I brought myself to this pass.

Is God to blame for what I myself have done? His mercy is always the
same. His sun shines on the wicked and the good alike. His air, His
water, His earth give the same chances to the wicked and the good. God
is always the same eternal, merciful Father. The only thing for us to do
is to bear the results of our own acts.

We learn that, in the first place, we have been existing eternally; in
the second place that we are the makers of our own lives. There is no
such thing as fate. Our lives are the result of our previous actions,
our Karma. And it naturally follows that having been ourselves the
makers of our Karma, we must also be able to unmake it.

The whole gist of Jnana-Yoga is to show humanity the method of undoing
this Karma. A caterpillar spins a little cocoon around itself out of the
substance of its own body and at last finds itself imprisoned. It may
cry and weep and howl there; nobody will come to its rescue until it
becomes wise and then comes out, a beautiful butterfly. So with these
our bondages. We are going around and around ourselves through countless
ages. And now we feel miserable and cry and lament over our bondage. But
crying and weeping will be of no avail. We must set ourselves to cutting
these bondages.

The main cause of all bondage is ignorance. Man is not wicked by his own
nature — not at all. His nature is pure, perfectly holy. Each man is
divine. Each man that you see is a God by his very nature. This nature
is covered by ignorance, and it is ignorance that binds us down.
Ignorance is the cause of all misery. Ignorance is the cause of all
wickedness; and knowledge will make the world good. Knowledge will
remove all misery. Knowledge will make us free. This is the idea of
Jnana-Yoga: knowledge will make us free! What knowledge? Chemistry?
Physics? Astronomy? Geology? They help us a little, just a little. But
the chief knowledge is that of your own nature. "Know thyself." You must
know what you are, what your real nature is. You must become conscious
of that infinite nature within. Then your bondages will burst.

Studying the external alone, man begins to feel himself to be nothing.
These vast powers of nature, these tremendous changes occurring — whole
communities wiped off the face of the earth in a twinkling of time, one
volcanic eruption shattering to pieces whole continents — perceiving and
studying these things, man begins to feel himself weak. Therefore, it is
not the study of external nature that makes \[one\] strong. But there is
the internal nature of man—a million times more powerful than any
volcanic eruption or any law of nature — which conquers nature, triumphs
over all its laws. And that alone teaches man what he is.

"Knowledge is power", says the proverb, does it not? It is through
knowledge that power comes. Man has got to know. Here is a man of
infinite power and strength. He himself is by his own nature potent and
omniscient. And this he must know. And the more he becomes conscious of
his own Self, the more he manifests this power, and his bonds break and
at last he becomes free.

How to know ourselves? the question remains now. There are various ways
to know this Self, but in Jnana-Yoga it takes the help of nothing but
sheer intellectual reasoning. Reason alone, intellect alone, rising to
spiritual perception, shows what we are.

There is no question of believing. Disbelieve everything — that is the
idea of the Jnani. Believe nothing and disbelieve everything — that is
the first step. Dare to be a rationalist. Dare to follow reason wherever
it leads you.

We hear everyday people saying all around us: "I dare to reason". It is,
however, a very difficult thing to do. I would go two hundred miles to
look at the face of the man who dares to reason and to follow reason.
Nothing is easier to say, and nothing is more difficult to do. We are
bound to follow superstitions all the time — old, hoary superstitions,
either national or belonging to humanity in general — superstitions
belonging to family, to friends, to country, to fashion, to books, to
sex and to what-not.

Talk of reason! Very few people reason, indeed. You hear a man say, "Oh,
I don't like to believe in anything; I don't like to grope through
darkness. I must reason". And so he reasons. But when reason smashes to
pieces things that he hugs unto his breast, he says, "No more! This
reasoning is all right until it breaks my ideals. Stop there!" That man
would never be a Jnani. That man will carry his bondage all his life and
his lives to come. Again and again he will come under the power of
death. Such men are not made for Jnana. There are other methods for them
— such as bhakti-yoga, Karma-Yoga, or Râja-Yoga — but not Jnana-Yoga.

I want to prepare you by saying that this method can be followed only by
the boldest. Do not think that the man who believes in no church or
belongs to no sect, or the man who boasts of his unbelief, is a
rationalist. Not at all. In modern times it is rather bravado to do
anything like that.

To be a rationalist requires more than unbelief. You must be able not
only to reason, but also to follow the dictates of your reason. If
reason tells you that this body is an illusion, are you ready to give it
up? Reason tells you that heat and cold are mere illusions of your
senses; are you ready to brave these things? If reason tells you that
nothing that the senses convey to your mind is true, are you ready to
deny your sense perception? If you dare, you are a rationalist.

It is very hard to believe in reason and follow truth. This whole world
is full either of the superstitious or of half-hearted hypocrites. I
would rather side with superstition and ignorance than stand with these
half-hearted hypocrites. They are no good. They stand on both sides of
the river.

Take anything up, fix your ideal and follow it out boldly unto death.
That is the way to salvation. Half-heartedness never led to anything. Be
superstitious, be a fanatic if you please, but be something. Be
something, show that you have something; but be not like these
shilly-shallyers with truth — these jacks-of-all-trades who just want to
get a sort of nervous titillation, a dose of opium, until this desire
after the sensational becomes a habit.

The world is getting too full of such people. Contrary to the apostles
who, according to Christ, were the salt of the earth, these fellows are
the ashes, the dirt of the earth. So let us first clear the ground and
understand what is meant by following reason, and then we will try to
understand what the obstructions are to our following reason.

The first obstruction to our following reason is our unwillingness to go
to truth. We want truth to come to us. In all my travels, most people
told me: "Oh, that is not a comfortable religion you talk about. Give us
a comfortable religion!"

I do not understand what they mean by this "comfortable religion". I was
never taught any comfortable religion in my life. I want truth for my
religion. Whether it be comfortable or not, I do not care. Why should
truth be comfortable always? Truth many times hits hard — as we all know
by our experience. Gradually, after a long intercourse with such
persons, I came to find out what they meant by their stereotypical
phrase. These people have got into a rut, and they do not dare to get
out of it. Truth must apologize to them.

I once met a lady who was very fond of her children and her money and
her everything. When I began to preach to her that the only way to God
is by giving up everything, she stopped coming the next day. One day she
came and told me that the reason for her staying away was because the
religion I preached was very uncomfortable. "What sort of religion would
be comfortable to you?" I asked in order to test her. She said: "I want
to see God in my children, in my money, in my diamonds".

"Very good, madam", I replied. "You have now got all these things. And
you will have to see these things millions of years yet. Then you will
be bumped somewhere and come to reason. Until that time comes, you will
never come to God. In the meantime, go on seeing God in your children
and in your money and your diamonds and your dances."

It is difficult, almost impossible, for such people to give up sense
enjoyment. It has grown upon them from birth to birth. If you ask a pig
to give up his sty and to go into your most beautiful parlour, why it
will be death to the pig. "Let go, I must live there", says the pig.

\[Here Swami Vivekananda explained the story of the fishwife: "Once a
fishwife was a guest in the house of a gardener who raised flowers. She
came there with her empty basket, after selling fish in the market, and
was asked to sleep in a room where flowers were kept. But, because of
the fragrance of the flowers, she couldn't get to sleep for a long time.
Her hostess saw her condition and said, 'Hello! Why are you tossing from
side to side so restlessly?' The fishwife said: 'I don't know, friend.
Perhaps the smell of the flowers has been disturbing my sleep. Can you
give me my fish-basket? Perhaps that will put me to sleep'."\][3](#fn3)

So with us. The majority of mankind delights in this fish smell — this
world, this enjoyment of the senses, this money and wealth and chattel
and wife and children. All this nonsense of the world — this fishy smell
— has grown upon us. We can hear nothing beyond it, can see nothing
beyond it; nothing goes beyond it. This is the whole universe.

All this talk about heaven and God and soul means nothing to an ordinary
man. He has heaven already here. He has no other idea beyond this world.
When you tell him of something higher, he says, "That is not a
comfortable religion. Give us something comfortable". That is to say
that religion is nothing but what he is doing.

If he is a thief and you tell him that stealing is the highest thing we
can do, he will say, "That is a comfortable religion". If he is
cheating, you have to tell him that what he is doing is all right; then
he will accept your teaching as a "comfortable religion". The whole
trouble is that people never want to get out of their ruts — never want
to get rid of the old fish-basket and smell, in order to live. If they
say, "I want the truth", that simply means that they want the
fish-basket.

When have you reached knowledge? When you are equipped with those four
disciplines \[i.e. the four qualifications for attainment discussed in
Vedantic literature: discrimination between the real and the unreal,
renunciation, the six treasures of virtue beginning with tranquillity,
and longing for liberation\]. You must give up all desire of enjoyment,
either in this life or the next. All enjoyments of this life are vain.
Let them come and go as they will.

What you have earned by your past actions none can take away from you.
If you have deserved wealth, you can bury yourself in the forest and it
will come to you. If you have deserved good food and clothing, you may
go to the north pole and they will be brought to you. The polar bear
will bring them. If you have not deserved them, you may conquer the
world and will die of starvation. So, why do you bother about these
things? And, after all, what is the use of them?

As children we all think that the world is made so very nice, and that
masses of pleasures are simply waiting for our going out to them. That
is every schoolboy's dream. And when he goes out into the world, the
everyday world, very soon his dreams vanish. So with nations. When they
see how every city is built upon ruins — every forest stands upon a city
— then they become convinced of the vanity of this world.

All the power of knowledge and wealth once made has passed away — all
the sciences of the ancients, lost, lost forever. Nobody knows how. That
teaches us a grand lesson. Vanity of vanities; all is vanity and
vexation of the spirit. If we have seen all this, then we become
disgusted with this world and all it offers us. This is called Vairâgya,
non-attachment, and is the first step towards knowledge.

The natural desire of man is to go towards the senses. Turning away from
the senses takes him back to God. So the first lesson we have to learn
is to turn away from the vanities of the world.

How long will you go on sinking and diving down and going up for five
minutes, to again sink down, again come up and sink, and so on — tossed
up and down? How long will you be whirled on this wheel of Karma — up
and down, up and down? How many thousands of times have you been kings
and rulers? How many times have you been surrounded by wealth and
plunged into poverty? How many thousands of times have you been
possessed of the greatest powers? But again you had to become men,
rolling down on this mad rush of Karma's waters. This tremendous wheel
of Karma stops neither for the widow's tears nor the orphan's cry.

How long will you go on? How long? Will you be like that old man who had
spent all his life in prison and, when let out, begged to be brought
back into his dark and filthy dungeon cell? This is the case with us
all! We cling with all our might to this low, dark, filthy cell called
this world — to this hideous, chimerical existence where we are kicked
about like a football by every wind that blows.

We are slaves in the hands of nature — slaves to a bit of bread, slaves
to praise, slaves to blame, slaves to wife, to husband, to child, slaves
to everything. Why, I go about all over the world — beg, steal, rob, do
anything — to make happy a boy who is, perhaps, hump-backed or
ugly-looking. I will do every wicked thing to make him happy. Why?
Because I am his father. And, at the same time, there are millions and
millions of boys in this world dying of starvation — boys beautiful in
body and in mind. But they are nothing to me. Let them all die. I am apt
to kill them all to save this one rascal to whom I have given birth.
This is what you call love. Not I. Not I. This is brutality.

There are millions of women — beautiful in body and mind, good, gentle,
virtuous — dying of starvation this minute. I do not care for them at
all. But that Jennie who is mine — who beats me three times a day, and
scolds me the whole day — for that Jennie I am going to beg, borrow,
cheat and steal so that she will have a nice gown.

Do you call that love? Not I. This is mere desire, animal desire —
nothing more. Turn away from these things. Is there no end to these
hideous dreams? Put a stop to them.

When the mind comes to that state of disgust with all the vanities of
life, it is called turning away from nature. This is the first step. All
desires must be given up — even the desire of getting heaven.

What are these heavens anyhow? Places where to sing psalms all the time.
What for? To live there and have a nice healthy body with phosphorescent
light or something of this kind coming out of every part, with a halo
around the head, and with wings and the power to penetrate the wall?

If there be powers, they must pass away sooner or later. If there is a
heaven — as there may be many heavens with various grades of enjoyment —
there cannot be a body that lives forever. Death will overtake us, even
there.

Every conjunction must have a disjunction. No body, finer or coarser,
can be manufactured without particles of matter coming together.
Whenever two particles come together, they are held by a certain
attraction; and there will come a time when those particles will
separate. This is the eternal law. So, wherever there is a body — either
grosser or finer, either in heaven or on earth — death will overcome it.

Therefore, all desires of enjoyment in this life, or in a life to come,
should be given up. People have a natural desire to enjoy; and when they
do not find their selfish enjoyments in this life, they think that after
death they will have a lot of enjoyment somewhere else. If these
enjoyments do not take us towards knowledge in this life, in this world,
how can they bring us knowledge in another life?

Which is the goal of man? Enjoyment or knowledge? Certainly not
enjoyment. Man is not born to have pleasure or to suffer pain. Knowledge
is the goal. Knowledge is the only pleasure we can have.

All the sense pleasures belong to the brute. And the more the pleasure
in knowledge comes, these sense pleasures fall down. The more animal a
man is, the more he enjoys the pleasures of the senses. No man can eat
with the same gusto as a famished dog. No man was ever born who could
feel the same pleasure in eating as an ordinary bull. See how their
whole soul is in that eating. Why, your millionaires would give millions
for that enjoyment in eating — but they cannot have it.

This universe is like a perfectly balanced ocean. You cannot raise a
wave in one place without making a hollow in another one. The sum total
of energy in the universe is the same throughout. You spend it in some
place, you lose it in another. The brute has got it, but he spent it on
his senses; and each of his senses is a hundred times stronger than that
of man.

How the dog smells at a distance! How he traces a footstep! We cannot do
that. So, in the savage man. His senses are less keen than the animal's,
but keener than the civilized man's.

The lower classes in every country intensely enjoy everything physical.
Their senses are stronger than those of the cultured. But as you go
higher and higher in the scale, you see the power of thought increasing
and the powers of the senses decreasing, in the same ratio.

Take a \[brute\], cut him \[as it were\] to pieces, and in five days he
is all right. But if I scratch you, it is ten to one you will suffer for
weeks or months. That energy of life which he displays — you have it
too. But with you, it is used in making up your brain, in the
manufacture of thought. So with all enjoyments and all pleasures. Either
enjoy the pleasure of the senses — live like the brute and become a
brute — or renounce these things and become free.

The great civilizations — what have they died of? They went for
pleasure. And they went further down and down until, under the mercy of
God, savages came to exterminate them, lest we would see human brutes
growling about. Savages killed off those nations that became brutalized
through sense enjoyment, lest Darwin's missing link would be found.

True civilization does not mean congregating in cities and living a
foolish life, but going Godward, controlling the senses, and thus
becoming the ruler in this house of the Self.

Think of the slavery in which we are \[bound\]. Every beautiful form I
see, every sound of praise I hear, immediately attracts me; every word
of blame I hear immediately repels me. Every fool has an influence over
my mind. Every little movement in the world makes an impression upon me.
Is this a life worth living?

So when you have realized the misery of this physical existence — when
you have become convinced that such a life is not worth living — you
have made the first step towards Jnana.

[→](bhakti-yoga.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)The Vedanta Society of Northern California archives. Vide
    New Discoveries, Vol. 3, pp. 358-63. The title of this class has
    been provided by the Publisher.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)"Petitio principii" refers to a logical fallacy in which
    a conclusion is taken for granted in the premise.  
3.  [^](#fn3_1)M., The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, trans. Swami
    Nikhilananda (New York: Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Center, 1952), p.
    433.
