---
title: THE MUNDAKA UPANISHAD

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) /

[←](bhakti-yoga.htm)

## THE MUNDAKA UPANISHAD

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 3, pp. 557-68)

*\[A Jnâna-Yoga class delivered in New York, January 29, 1896, and
recorded by Mr. Josiah J. Goodwin\]*

In the last Jnana-Yoga (*Vide [Complete
Works](../../volume_2/practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures/the_way_to_blessedness.htm)*,
II.) lecture, we read one of the Upanishads; we will read another \[the
Mundaka Upanishad\]. Brahmâ was the first of the Devas, the Lord of this
cycle and its protector. He gave this knowledge of Brahman, which is the
essence of all knowledge, to his son Atharvan. The latter handed it over
to his son Angiras, he to his son, Bharadvâja, and so on.

There was a man called Shaunaka, a very rich man, who went to this
Angiras as a learner. He approached the teacher and asked him a
question. "Tell me, sir, what is that which, being known, everything
else is known?"

One \[knowledge\] is supreme and the other is inferior. The Rig-Veda is
the name of one of the different parts of the Vedas. Shikshâ is the name
of another part. All different sciences are inferior. What is the
supreme science? That is the only science, the supreme science, by which
we reach the Unchangeable One. But that cannot be seen, cannot be
sensed, cannot be specified. Without colour, without eyes, without ears,
without nose, without feet — the Eternal, the Omnipresent, the
"Omnipenetrating", the Absolute — He from whom everything comes. The
sages see Him, and that is the supreme knowledge.

Just as the *Urnanâbhi*, a species of spider, creates a thread out of
his own body and takes it back, just as the plants grow by their own
nature, and all these things are yet separate and apparently different
(the hair is, as it were, different from the other parts of a man's
body; the plants are different from the earth; the thread is different
from the spider — yet they \[the earth, the spider and so on\] were the
causes, and in them these things act), so from this Unchangeable One has
come this universe.

First, out of Brahman comes the knowledge of desire and from that comes
the manifestation of Creator, or the Golden Womb. From that comes
intelligence, from that, matter and all these different worlds. 

This is the truth — that for those who want to come to salvation or
attain to other enjoyments, various ways are told in the Vedas.

Then it \[the Mundaka Upanishad\] goes on to say how they will reach
these blessings. When they die they will go through the sun's rays to
places which are very beautiful, where after death they will go to
heaven and live for some time, but from there they will again fall. 

Here are two words — *Ishtam* and *Purtam*. Sacrificial and other
rituals are called Ishtam, and Purtam is making roads, building
hospitals and so on. "Fools are they who think that rituals and doing
good work are high and that there is nothing higher." They get what they
desire and go to heaven, but every enjoyment and every sorrow must have
an end. And so that ends, and they fall back and back and become men
again, or still lower. Those that give up the world and learn to control
the senses live in a forest. Through the rays of the sun they reach that
immortality where lives He who is the Absolute.

Thus the sage, examining all desires of good or evil works, throws away
all duties and wants to know that, getting which there is no more
return, no more change. And to know that, he goes to the Guru, the
teacher, with fuel in his hand. 

There is a myth in our country about going to the Guru with fuel in
one's hands as a sign of helping him in making sacrifices, as he will
not take presents.

Who is a teacher? He who knows the secrets of the scriptures, he whose
soul has gone unto Brahman, who does not care for works or going to
heaven or all these things.

Unto such a disciple, who has controlled his mind, has become peaceful
and calm, has given up all this tremendous wave that rises in the mind
by desire ("I will do this and that" and all those desires which are at
best only disturbing, such as name and fame, which impel mankind to do
all sorts of things) — to that disciple in whom all these vexatious
desires have been calmed down, the teacher teaches the way which is the
science of Brahman, by which he can know that One who never changes and
who is the Truth.

Then comes what he \[Angiras\] taught:

This is the truth, O gentle one, as from a mass of burning flame myriads
of sparks come out of the same nature as the fire, even so from this
Unchangeable One all these forms, all these ideas, all this creation,
come out; and unto Him it \[the creation\] goes back.

But the Eternal One is everlasting, formless, without beginning, inside
and outside of every being — beyond all life, beyond all mind, the Pure
One, beyond even the unchangeable, beyond everything.

From Him is born the vital principle. From Him comes the mind. From Him
come all organs of the senses. From Him are air, light, water and this
earth which holds all beings. These heavens are, as it were, His head;
His eyes, the sun and moon. The cardinal points are, as it were, His
ears. The eternal knowledge of the Vedas is, as it were, His manifested
speech. His life is the air. His heart is this universe; His feet, this
world. He is the Eternal Self of every being.

From Him have come the different Vedas. From Him have come the gods of
the Sâdhyas. The latter are superior men, much higher than ordinary men
and very much like the gods.

From Him are all men. From Him are all animals. From Him is all life;
from Him, all the forces in the mind; from Him all truth, all chastity.

The seven organs are all from Him. The seven objects of perception are
from him; the seven actions of perception are from Him.

From Him are the seven worlds in which the life currents flow. From Him
are all these seas and oceans. From Him are all rivers that roll into
the sea; from Him are all plants and all liquids.

He is the inside. He is the inner Soul of every being. This great
Purusha, this great One — He is this universe, He is the work, He is the
sacrifice. He is Brahman, and He is the trinity. He who knows Him frees
his own soul from the bond of ignorance and becomes free.

He is the bright one. He is inside every human soul. From Him are all
name and form; all the animals and men are from Him. He is the one
Supreme. He who knows Him becomes free.

How to know Him? Take this bow, which is the Upanishad, the knowledge of
the Vedanta; place upon that bow the sharpened rod \[arrow\] of worship;
stretch that bow by what? — by making the mind of the same form as He,
by knowing that you are He. Thus strike at it; strike at that Brahman
with this rod.

This One is the bow. This human mind is the rod \[arrow\]. Brahman is
the object which we want to hit. This object is to be hit by
concentrating the mind. And just when the rod has hit \[its mark\], the
rod penetrates into the object and becomes one with it — a unity. Even
so, this soul, the rod, is to be thrown upon the object so that it will
become one with It — in Whom are the heavens, this earth and the skies,
in Whom are the mind and all that lives.

In the Upanishads there are certain passages which are called the great
words,[1](#fn1) which are always quoted and referred to.

In Him, that One — in Him alone, the Atman — exist all other worlds.
What is the use of all other talk? Know Him alone. This is the bridge
over this life to reach universality.

He \[Angiras\] goes on to show a practical way. So far it is very
figurative.

Just as all the spokes of a wheel meet at the axle, even so in this body
is that place from which all the arteries flow and at which they all
meet. There, meditate upon the Om that is in the heart. May thou
succeed.

May the gentle one with success attain the goal. May you go beyond all
darkness to Him who is omniscient, the All-Knowing. His glory is in
heaven, on earth and everywhere.

He who has become the mind, the Prânâ, He who is the leader in the body,
He who is established in the food, the energy of life. By supreme
knowledge the sages see Him whose nature is bliss, who shines as
immortality.( Mundaka Upanishad 2.2.8.) (This is another of the
sentences very much quoted.)

There are two words: one is *Jnâna*, the other *Vijnâna*. Jnana may be
translated as science — this means intellectual \[knowledge\] only — and
Vijnana as realization. God cannot be perceived by intellectual
knowledge. He who has realized \[the Self\] by that supreme knowledge —
what will become of that man?

All the knots of the heart will be cut asunder. All darkness will vanish
forever when you have seen the Truth.

How can you doubt? How foolish and childish you will think these fights
and quarrels of different sciences and different philosophies and all
this. You will smile at them. All doubts will vanish, and all work will
go away. All work will vanish.

Beyond, the golden sheath is there — without any impurity, without parts
\[indivisible\] — He, the Brahman. His is the brightness, the Light of
all light — the knowers of the Atman realize Him as such.

And when you have done that, the sun cannot illumine, nor the moon, nor
the stars. A flash of lightning cannot illumine the place; it is mental
— away, deep in the mind. He shining, everything else shines; when He
shines within, the whole man shines. This universe shines through His
light.

Take such passages \[for memorizing\] later on, when studying the
Upanishads.

The difference between the Hindu mind and the European mind is that
whereas in the West truths are arrived at by examining the particular,
the Hindu takes the opposite course. There is no \[such\] metaphysical
sublimity as in the Upanishads.

It \[the Mundaka Upanishad\] leads you on, beyond the senses —
infinitely more sublime than the suns and stars. First Angiras tried to
describe God by sense sublimities — that His feet are the earth, His
head the heavens. But that did not express what he wanted to say. It was
in a sense sublime. He first gave that idea to the student and then
slowly took him beyond, until he gave him the highest idea — the
negative — too high to describe.

He is immortal, He is before us, He is behind us, He is on the right
side, He is on the left, He is above, He is beneath.

Upon the same tree there are two birds with most beautiful wings, and
the two birds always go together — always live together. Of these, one
is eating the fruits of the tree; the other, without eating, is looking
on.

So in this body are the two birds always going together. Both have the
same form and beautiful wings. One is the human soul, eating the fruits;
the other is God Himself, of the same nature. He is also in this body,
the Soul of our soul. He eats neither good nor evil fruits, but stands
and looks on.

But the lower bird knows that he is weak and small and humble, and tells
all sorts of lies. He says he is a woman, or he is a man or a boy. He
says he will do good or do bad; he will go to heaven and will do a
hundred sorts of things. In delirium he talks and works, and the central
idea of his delirium is that he is weak.

Thus he gets all the misery because he thinks he is nobody. He is a
created little being. He is a slave to somebody; he is governed by some
god or gods, and so is unhappy.

But when he becomes joined with God, when he becomes a Yogi, he sees
that the other bird, the Lord, is his own glory. "Why, it was my own
glory whom I called God, and this little "I", this misery, was all
hallucination; it never existed. I was never a woman, never a man, never
any one of these things." Then he gives up all his sorrow.

When this Golden One, who is to be seen, is seen — the Creator, the
Lord, the Purusha, the God of this universe — then the sage has washed
off all stains of good and bad deeds. (Good deeds are as much stains as
bad deeds.) Then he attains to total sameness with the Pure One.

The sage knows that He who is the Soul of all souls — this Atman —
shines through all.

He is the man, the woman, the cow, the dog — in all animals, in the sin
and in the sinner. He is the Sannyâsin, He is in the ruler, He is
everywhere.

Knowing this the sage speaks not. (He gives up criticizing anyone,
scolding anyone, thinking evil of anyone.) His desires have gone into
the Atman. This is the sign of the greatest knowers of Brahman — that
they see nothing else but Him.

He is playing through all these things. Various forms — from the highest
gods to the lowest worms — are all He. The ideas want to be illustrated.

First of all the writer showed us the idea that if we want to get to
heaven and all these places, we will get there. That is to say, in the
language of the Vedas, whatever one desires that he sees.

As I have told you in previous lectures, the Atman neither comes nor
goes. It has neither birth nor death. You are all omnipresent, you are
the Atman. You are at this moment in heaven and in the darkest places
too. You are everywhere. Where are you not? Therefore how can you go
anywhere? These comings and goings are all fictions — the Atman can
never come nor go.

These visions change. When the mind is in a particular condition it sees
a certain vision, dreams a certain dream. So in this condition, we are
all seeing this world and man and animals and all these things. But in
this very place, this condition will change. And the very thing we are
seeing as earth, we shall see as heaven, or we may see it as the
opposite place or as any place we like.

All this depends on our desires. But this dream cannot be permanent,
just as we know that any dream in the night must break. Not one of these
dreams will be permanent. We dream that which we think we will do. So
these people who are always thinking in this life of going to heaven and
meeting their friends, will have that as soon as their dream of this
life is ended. And they will be compelled by their desires of this life
to see these other dreams. And those who are superstitious and are
frightened into all such ideas as hell will dream that they are in the
hot place. Those whose ideas in this life are brutal — when they die,
will become pigs and hogs and all these things. With each one, what he
desires he finds.

This book starts by telling us that those who know nothing better than a
little road-making or hospital-building and such good works will have a
good dream when they die. They will dream that they are in a place where
they will have god-bodies and can eat anything they like, jump about, go
through walls and so on, and sometimes come down and startle someone.

In our mythology there are the Devas, who live in heaven, and the
Devakas, who are very much the same but a little more wicked. The Devas
are like your angels, only some of them from time to time become wicked
and find that the daughters of men are good. Our deities are celebrated
for this sort of thing. What can you expect of them? They are here —
simply hospital-makers — and have no more knowledge than other men. They
do some good work with the result that they become Devas. They do their
good work for fame or name or some reward and get this reward, dreaming
that they are in heaven and doing all these things.

Then there are demons who have done evil in this life. But our books say
that these dreams will not last very long, and then they will either
come back and take the old dream again as human beings, or still worse.
Therefore, according to these books, it behooves every sensible,
right-thinking man, once and for all, to brush aside all such foolish
ideas as heavens and hells.

Two things exist in the world — dream and reality. What we call life is
a succession of dreams — dream within dream. One dream is called heaven,
another earth, another hell, and so on. One dream is called the human
body, another the animal body, and so on — all are dreams. The reality
is what is called Brahman, that Being who is Existence, Knowledge,
Bliss.

He is the Guru — the sage who wants to get rid of all these dreams, to
stand aside and know his own nature — who wants to go beyond this
self-hypnotism.

When we desire, we are hypnotizing ourselves. Just as I desire "I will
go to heaven", that hypnotizes me, and I begin to find I am in heaven
directly I die, and will see angels and all sorts of things. I have seen
about fifty people who have come from death's door, and they all have
told me stories about being in heaven. These are the mythologies of our
country, and it shows that it is all hypnotism.

Where Western people make a great mistake is here. So far as you have
these ideas of heaven and hell, we agree with you. But you say this
earth is real. That cannot be. If this is real, heavens and hells are
real, because the proof of each of these is the same. If one is a
hypnotic condition, the whole of it must be so.

Vedantists say that not only are heavens hypnotic, but so is this life
and everything here. Some people want to go from one hypnotic condition
to another, and these are what we call the fools of the world — the
Samsârins, the travellers who go from dream to dream, from one hypnotic
trance to another. For fifty years they are under the idea that they are
men and women.

What nonsense is \[this — \] a man or a woman in the soul? It is
terrible hypnotism. How can the soul have any sex? It is self-hypnotism.
You have hypnotized yourself and think you are men and women. If we are
fools, we will again hypnotize ourselves and want to go to heaven, and
hear all this trash of gods and goddesses and all sorts of humbug, and
will kneel down and pray, and have god-bodies by the millions to worship
on thrones. At the end, we have to hypnotize ourselves again.

We are all in the same boat here, and all who are in the same boat see
each other. Stand aside — free, beyond dream and hypnotism. Some fools
have hypnotized themselves that they have bodies and wives and all these
things. I also am a fool and have hypnotized myself that I have senses
and all these things. So we are all in the same boat and see each other.
Millions of people may be here whom we do not see, touch or feel. Just
as in hypnotism there may be three books before you, but you are
hypnotized and are told that one of them does not exist. And you may
live for a year in that condition and never see it. Suppose thirty men
are under the same hypnotic influence and are told that this book does
not exist. Those who are in this condition will all fail to see the
book. Men, women, animals are all hypnotized, and all see this dream
because they are all in the same boat.

The Vedanta philosophy says that this whole universe — mental, physical,
moral — is hypnotic. Who is the cause of this hypnotism? You yourself
are to blame. This weeping and wailing and knocking your heads into
corners \[against brick walls, as it were\] will not do you the least
good.

However, knocking everything \[that is hypnotic\] on the head \[leads
to\] what is called non-attachment; and clinging to more and more
hypnotism is attachment. That is why in all religions you will find they
wanted to give up the world, although many of them do not understand it.
These fellows used to starve themselves in a forest and see the devil
coming to them.

You have heard those wonderful stories of India — of how those magicians
can make a man see a rope rise from the ground to the skies. I have not
seen any of them. One of the Mogul emperors, Jahangir, mentions it. He
says, "Allah, what do these devils do? They take a rope or a chain, and
the chain is thrown up and up until it becomes firm — as if it were
stuck to something. Then they let a cat go up the chain — then a dog,
then a wolf, then a tiger, then a lion. All walk up the chain and
vanish. Sometimes they will send men up the chain. Two men will go up
and begin to fight, and then both of them vanish. And after a while you
hear a noise of fighting — and \[then\] a head, a hand, and a foot fall.
And, mind you, there are two or three thousand people present. The
fellow showing it has only a loincloth on". They say this is hypnotism —
throwing a net over the audience.

That is what they call their science. It exists within a certain limit.
But if you go beyond this limit or come within it, you do not see it.
The man who is playing does not see anything. So if you stand near him,
you do not see anything. Such is the hypnotism here.

So we have first to get beyond the circle (Jnana) or stand within the
circle of the hypnotism (Bhakti) with God, the great Player who is
playing all these things — the whole universe He projects.

Chapter after chapter comes and goes. This is called Mâyâ, the power
which creates all these tremendous things. He who is the ruler of this
Maya, is God; and he who is ruled by Maya \[is the soul\]. Just as in
the case of that chain — so the man who was standing in the centre had
the power and was not deluded, but all that audience was governed by
Maya. So that portion of Atman which rules Maya is called God, and the
little bits of the Atman deluded by it are called souls — you and I.

The Bhakta says, Crawl nearer and nearer to the hypnotist, and when you
get to the centre you do not see anything. You get clear of it.

The Jnâni does not care to undergo all this trouble — it is a dangerous
way. Unless a man becomes a lunatic, when he finds himself covered with
mud, will he take more mud to wash himself? So why increase the
hypnotism? Get out of the circle; cut it off and be free. When you are
free you will be able to play, even without being caught yourself. Now
you are caught, then you will catch — that will be all the difference.

Therefore in the first part of this book, we are told that we must give
up all this idea of heaven and of birth and death and so on. It is all
nonsense; no man was ever born or ever died. They are all in hypnotism.
So is eternal life and all this nonsense. Heaven is hypnotism and so is
earth.

It is not as materialists say: that heaven is a superstition and God is
a superstition, but he himself is not a superstition. If one is
superstition — if one link is nonexistent — the whole chain is
nonexistent. The existence of the whole chain depends on the existence
of one link — and that of one link, on the whole.

If there is no heaven, there is no earth; and if there is no God, there
is no man. You are under this hypnotism; and as long as you are under
it, you will have to see God and nature and the soul. And when you are
beyond this hypnotism, God will vanish[2](#fn2) — so will nature, and so
will the soul.

Therefore, first of all, we will have to give up all these ideas of God
and heaven and enjoying the fruits of these; and all that going to
heaven will be one more dream.

Next, after showing these things, the book goes on to tell us how to get
out of this hypnotism. And the one idea that is brought out through all
these ideas is to be one with that Universal Being. The thing manifested
— the Universal Being — is not anything of these; these are all nonsense
— Maya. (The Swami has been discussing the two aspects of Maya. On the
previous page, ([a few paragraphs earlier](#maya)) he described Maya as
the power of Brahman; here he is referring to Maya as the
world-appearance.) But that upon which all these things are being played
— the background upon which all this picture is written — \[is we
ourselves\]; we are one with Him \[that Universal Being\]. You know you
are one with Him, only you must realize it.

He gave us two words: one is *intellectual knowledge*, and the other is
*realization*. That is to say, intellectual assent is within this
realization, and realization is beyond it. Therefore intellectual assent
is not sufficient.

Every man can say this theory is right, but that is not realization; he
must realize it. We can all say we understand that this is hypnotism,
but that is not realization. That will be when the hypnotism will break
— even for a moment. It will come in a flash; it must come. If you
struggle it will come.

When it does vanish, all idea of body will go along with it — that you
have sex or body — just as a lamp blows out. Then what will become of
you? If some part of your Karma remains, this world will come back again
— but not with the same force. You have known that it is what it is; you
will know no more bondage. So long as you have eyes you will have to
see; or ears \[you will have to\] hear — but not with the same force.

I had read all sorts of things about the mirage, but had never seen it
before until about four years ago when I was travelling in western
India. Of course, as a Sannyasin I was travelling on foot, making my
slow marches. So it took me about a month to travel through that
country. Every day I saw such beautiful lakes and the shadows of trees
on the shores of those lakes, and the whole thing was quivering in the
breeze — and birds flying, and animals. Every day I saw this and thought
what a beautiful country it was. But when I reached some village, I
found it was all sand. I said, How is it?

One day I was very thirsty and thought I would drink a little water at
the lake. But when I approached, it disappeared, and with a flash \[the
thought\] came into my mind: "This is the mirage about which I read all
my life". But the strange thing is that I was travelling for a month and
could never recognize that it was a mirage — and in one moment it
vanished. I was very glad to know this was the mirage about which I had
read all my life.

Next morning I saw the lake again, and along with it came the idea:
"That is the mirage". All that month I had been seeing the mirage and
could not distinguish between reality and mirage. But in that one moment
I caught the idea.

From that time, when I see a mirage, I will say, "That is a mirage", and
never feel it. Such will it be with this world when the whole thing will
vanish once; and after that, if you have to live out your past work, you
will not be deceived.

Take a carriage with two wheels. Suppose I cut one of the wheels from
the axle. The other wheel will run for some time by its past momentum
and will then fall. The body is one wheel, and the soul another; and
they are joined by the axle of delusion. Knowledge is the axe which will
cut the axle, and the soul will stop immediately — will give up all
these vain dreams.

But upon the body is that past momentum, and it will run a little, doing
this and that, and then it will fall down. But only good momentum will
be left, and that body can only do good. This is to warn you not to
mistake a rascal for a free man. It will be impossible for that \[free\]
man to do evil. So you must not be cheated.

When you become free the whole hypnotism has vanished and you know the
distinction between the reality and the mirage. \[The mirage\] will no
more be a bondage. The most terrible things will not be able to daunt
you. A mountain \[could\] fall upon you, but you will not care. You will
know it for a mirage.

[→](history_of_the_aryan_race.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#txt1)In each of the four Vedas there is one such "great word",
    or great utterance, called Mahâvâkya: "Prajnânam Brahma"
    ("Consciousness is Brahman"); "Aham Brahmâsmi" ("I am Brahman");
    "Tat Twam Asi" ("That thou art"); and "Ayam Atmâ Brahma" ("This Self
    is Brahman").
2.  [^](#txt2)Here Swami Vivekananda is referring to Ishvara, or the
    Personal God.
