+++
title = "Some trivia concering the Adi-shruti"

+++
Students of the veda often question each other on trivia to test their
knowledge of the shruti. We have always believed that graphically
depicting some of these produce a clear effect on the student. This
presentation of trivia might be viewed in conjunction with an [earlier
presentation](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/10/27/the-mandala-graph-for-rishi-sharing/)
that we had produced when we were in the mouth of kR^ityA.

[![rvstats1](https://i0.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3486/3262607608_65182ed3d6.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3262607608/ "rvstats1 by somasushma, on Flickr")

This is a basic summary of the RV by maNDala. The height of the bar is
the number of sUkta-s while width is scaled as per the median sUkta
length in terms of number of R^ik-s. One can note that shAkala
(shAkalya), the last redactor of the surviving text aimed at symmetry of
maNDala 1 and 10 between which the maNDala follow a stepwise pattern in
terms of length by number of sUkta-s. But what is striking is that the
median length of a sUkta in terms of number of R^ik-s is noticeably
different between different maNDala-s. We look at this below in greater
detail.

[![RVStats2](https://i1.wp.com/farm2.static.flickr.com/1387/3264672495_7c17f1dce5.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3264672495/ "RVStats2 by somasushma, on Flickr")

This is a standard box-plot of the length distribution in terms of
number of R^ik-s of sUkta-s in each of the 10 maNDala-s of the RV. The
median length is the point in the box, while the lower and upper
quartiles bound the box and the whiskers give the complete range. The
horizontal line is the median sUkta length across the 10 maNDala-s.

Some interesting points:

\-The two dramatic differences from the general trend are seen in the
kANva maNDala(RV 8) and the pavmAna soma maNDala (RV 9). The former has
the greatest median sUkta length and the latter the least median sUkta
length. Both are the top two most-densely connected maNDala-s in the
[R^iShi-sharing
graph](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/10/27/the-mandala-graph-for-rishi-sharing/),
yet they are antipodes in terms of sUkta length. Clearly, the 8th
dominated by a kANva core is different from all other maNDala-s in with
respect to length, including their A\~Ngirasa cousins like the gotama-s
and the bharadvAja-s. The soma maNDala is particularly striking because
it contains the longest sUkta and a few other particularly long sUkta-s,
yet the median length of a sUkta in it is the shortest.

\-The gR^isamada-s, vishvAmitra-s, vAmadeva gotama and atri-s never
composed too long sUkta-s (\>25) though the first 3 had sUkta-s of
greater than or equal to overall median length. In contrast, the
bharadvAja-s and vasiShTha-s composed sUkta-s some sUkta-s of great
length thought their median sUkta length tended to be less than the
overall median.

\-The maNDala 1 and 10 despite having the same number of sUkta-s differ
in median sUkta length, with RV 1 clearly exceeding the overall median.

The shortest sUkta: RV 1.99 (1 R^ik) This is supposed to be the locus of
the insertion of the [secret shredhI-vidyA (or mysterious expansion
R^ik-s in the form of an arithmetic
series)](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/03/11/jatavedase-and-shredhi-vyavahara/).  
Longest sUkta= RV 9.97(58 R^ik-s)  
Median sUkta length for RV across the 10 maNDala-s=9

These features have implications for the nature of the old ritual and
the tradition of redaction of the RV text. Clearly the tendency
reasonable clustering of most books close to the overall median
distribution suggest that the old Indo-Aryan ritual was centered around
the recitation of sUkta-s of about 7-9 R^iks along with fire oblations.
This might have also defined the preferred length that an extempore kavi
could compose at a rite. The longer hymns in family books other than the
kANva-s are always related to specialized issues: e.g. the ashvamedha
ritual hymns in RV1, the astronomical and philosophical hymn of
dIrghatamas in RV 1, the medical toxin hymn of agastya in RV 1, the
philosophical vaishvadeva hymns of prajApati vishvAmitra in RV 3, the
fire kindling and installation hymns of the bharadvAja-s in RV 6 or
vasiShThaâ€™s hymn of yatudhAna-s etc in RV 7 are examples of such. This
again supports the issue that the observed median length is a reflection
of the extempore composition at the more archaic form of the shrauta
ritual, whereas the longer hymns are for specialized purposes. Again,
the notably shorter median length of the soma maNDala indicates that the
liturgy specifically used in the archaic soma rite typically featured
shorter compositions centered on a size of 6 R^ik-s. Thus there appears
to have been a distinction between the compositions used in the fire
ritual and those in the soma ritual. However, the soma maNDala contains
the longest sUkta and some other long sUkta-s that are clearly outliers.
These sUkta-s upon examination are clearly later redaction efforts that
combine sUkta-s or their fragments from different authors into a single
long sUkta. For example the longest sUkta is a compilation of the
sUkta-s of short length by 11 vasiShTha-s and a single A\~Ngirasa. These
later redactions appear to mark the beginning of the move from the
archaic short soma-specific composition to the classic shrauta liturgy
of a draw-out soma recitation.

The kANva-s who are exception, are also characterized by unusual meters
and guru/laghu distributions in common meters like gAyatrI. This
observation, taken together with the multiple features suggesting a
closeness of the kANva-s to the Iranian zone, implies that the kANva-s
probably had a distinct system of ritual performance. They organized
compositions into longer sUkta-s, which were possibly an archaic version
of the longer shastra-recitation seen in the classical shrauta ritual,
where multiple shorter sUkta-s are strung together. Finally the
difference between maNDala 1 and 10 is reflected in fact that while
maNDala 1 is largely a collection of short family books, the terminal
part of RV 10 is a collection of several short sUkta-s of unclear
provenance that probably formed a floating mass of tradition.

[![rvstats3](https://i0.wp.com/farm2.static.flickr.com/1206/3264794055_a938f3d251.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3264794055/ "rvstats3 by somasushma, on Flickr")

The frequency distribution of sUkta-s by length in number of R^ik-s
across all 10 maNDala-s. Note across all maNDala-s a length of 5 R^ik-s
appears to be most common. The blue vertical line is the median sUkta
length across the entire RV saMhitA.

[![rvstats4](https://i1.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3523/3267448529_a66e4eeb24.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3267448529/ "rvstats4 by somasushma, on Flickr")  
[Click here to
magnify](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3523/3267448529_a66e4eeb24_b.jpg)  
The frequency distribution of sUkta-s by length in number of R^ik-s in
each of the 10 maNDala-s.The the most frequent sUkta size and the median
sUkta size are indicated for each maNDala. A most frequent sUkta length
of 5 R^ik-s appears to be most common individual maNDala-s too. However,
note the dramatic difference in the vAmadeva(RV 4) and kANva (RV 8)
maNDala-s.
