+++
title = "Non-existent books"

+++
Two books on arthropods have set standards for me that in a sense
inspire but also cause despair. These are the “For Love of Insects” by
the great Thomas Eisner and “Evolution of the Insects” by Grimaldi and
Engel. If I were to live long enough, production of analogs of these
works would mean that the janma has been completed as a Hindu’s would
say. But each of these has its own challenges: An Eisnerian tome implies
the ability to write engaging prose in some language, which given my
relatively under-developed faculty of language, seems a daunting climb.
Grimaldi and Engel’s volume is characterized by the clarity of
illustrations – something I believe to be essential for any biological
work. The illustrations here are not only beautiful but also clear.
Recently Holtz and Rey produced a comprehensive book on the Dinosauria.
This book while having pretty pictures is not necessarily matched by
clarity of the scientific illustrations, like those seen in Paul’s works
on dinosaurs. Who will be my illustrator, especially given my aesthetic
obsessions? In any case, Grimaldi and Engel is a good model for my own
imagined tome, because it too would deal with evolution and abound in
phylogenetic depictions and illustrations of the diversity of the
objects of my life’s study. A book I realized should inspire at first
sight – just like a strI with the right endowments can instantly inspire
kAma even in a self-controlled man. However, unlike the majority of such
strI-s who turn into rAkShasI-s upon saMyoga, the book upon samyoga
should inspire even greater thoughts. This is precisely what these two
entomological tomes achieve.

Of course that is not all – there is also the wish that we produce a
work on the evolution of the mantra shAstra. For this there is no model
yet. However, scanning publications on Sanskritic material over the ages
good ideas and standards that are worthy of emulation come up: 1) The
sthAlipAka by Kolhatkar and Tachikawa, following the model of Staal’s
first volume of agni, and the yaj\~na pAtra-s produced by the Tilak
vaidika saMshodana maNDala (good model) in the city of my youth are
models for depicting actual rites and ritual material photographically.
H.G. Ranade’s glossary of the shrauta ritual is also a decent model for
the glossary at the end of the book. 2) The works on tantric texts, like
the dissertation publications of S.Vasudeva and E.English are good
models in terms of presentation. The former sets high standards
technical soundness, which would be hard to achieve for most. The latter
does a good job at illustrating mantra-deities (as an aside I would
recommend E.English’s work on the nAstika tantra-s for I was surprised
to see that it discusses vilAsinI in the nAstika tantrika tradition.
That account can be compared with my own study of the same presented
here). Illustrations are very important even here in the proposed tome
on the mantra-shAstra – one needs a good artist to produce images of the
mantra deities, yantra-s and mudra-s. A pop book “The tantric way” by
Mookherji and Khanna has good illustrations but is pretty unsound in its
text.

How can all this be achieved? This was the question we kept pondering
about.
