---
title: II

---
<div>

[←](001_fakir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](003_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/009_diwanji_saheb.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/010_haripada.htm)  

## II

BOMBAY,  
*20th September, 1892*.

DEAR PANDITJI MAHÂRÂJ, (Pandit Shankarlal of Khetri.)

Your letter has reached me duly. I do not know why I should be
undeservingly praised. "None is good, save One, that is, God", as the
Lord Jesus hath said. The rest are only tools in His hands. "Gloria in
Excelsis", "Glory unto God in the highest", and unto men that deserve,
but not to such an undeserving one like me. Here "the servant is *not*
worthy of the hire"; and a Fakir, especially, has no right to any praise
whatsoever, for would you praise your servant for simply doing his duty?

. . . My unbounded gratitude to Pandit Sundarlalji, and to my Professor
(With whom he read the Mahâ-Bhâshya on Pânini.) for this kind
remembrance of me.

Now I would tell you something else. The Hindu mind was ever deductive
and never synthetic or inductive. In all our philosophies, we always
find hair-splitting arguments, taking for granted some general
proposition, but the proposition itself may be as childish as possible.
Nobody ever asked or searched the truth of these general propositions.
Therefore independent thought we have almost none to speak of, and hence
the dearth of those sciences which are the results of observation and
generalization. And why was it thus? — From two causes: The tremendous
heat of the climate forcing us to love rest and contemplation better
than activity, and the Brâhmins as priests never undertaking journeys or
voyages to distant lands. There were voyagers and people who travelled
far; but they were almost always traders, i.e. people from whom
priestcraft and their own sole love for gain had taken away all capacity
for intellectual development. So their observations, instead of adding
to the store of human knowledge, rather degenerated it; for their
observations were bad and their accounts exaggerated and tortured into
fantastical shapes, until they passed all recognition.

So you see, we must travel, we must go to foreign parts. We must see how
the engine of society works in other countries, and keep free and open
communication with what is going on in the minds of other nations, if we
really want to be a nation again. And over and above all, we must cease
to tyrannise. To what a ludicrous state are we brought! If a Bhângi
comes to anybody as a Bhangi, he would be shunned as the plague; but no
sooner does he get a cupful of water poured upon his head with some
mutterings of prayers by a Pâdri, and get a coat on his back, no matter
how threadbare, and come into the room of the most orthodox Hindu — I
don't see the man who then dare refuse him a chair and a hearty shake of
the hands! Irony can go no further. And come and see what they, the
Pâdris, are doing here in the Dakshin (south). They are converting the
lower classes by lakhs; and in Travancore, the most priestridden country
in India — where every bit of land is owned by the Brahmins . . . nearly
one-fourth has become Christian! And I cannot blame them; what part have
they in David and what in Jesse? When, when, O Lords shall man be
brother to man?

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
