---
title: V

---
<div>

[←](004_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](006_haripada.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/12_adhyapakji.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/13_mrs_woods.htm)  
[«](004_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](008_alasinga.htm)

## V

CHICAGO,  
*2nd November, 1893*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

I am so sorry that a moment's weakness on my part should cause you so
much trouble; I was out of pocket at that time. Since then the Lord sent
me friends. At a village near Boston I made the acquaintance of Dr.
Wright, Professor of Greek in the Harvard University. He sympathised
with me very much and urged upon me the necessity of going to the
Parliament of Religions, which he thought would give me an introduction
to the nation. As I was not acquainted with anybody, the Professor
undertook to arrange everything for me, and eventually I came back to
Chicago. Here I, together with the oriental and occidental delegates to
the Parliament of Religions, were all lodged in the house of a
gentleman.

On the morning of the opening of the Parliament, we all assembled in a
building called the Art Palace, where one huge and other smaller
temporary halls were erected for the sittings of the Parliament. Men
from all nations were there. From India were Mazoomdar of the Brâhmo
Samâj, and Nagarkar of Bombay, Mr. Gandhi representing the Jains, and
Mr. Chakravarti representing Theosophy with Mrs. Annie Besant. Of these,
Mazoomdar and I were, of course, old friends, and Chakravarti knew me by
name. There was a grand procession, and we were all marshalled on to the
platform. Imagine a hall below and a huge gallery above, packed with six
or seven thousand men and women representing the best culture of the
country, and on the platform learned men of all the nations of the
earth. And I, who never spoke in public in my life, to address this
august assemblage!! It was opened in great form with music and ceremony
and speeches; then the delegates were introduced one by one, and they
stepped up and spoke. Of course my heart was fluttering, and my tongue
nearly dried up; I was so nervous and could not venture to speak in the
morning. Mazoomdar made a nice speech, Chakravarti a nicer one, and they
were much applauded. They were all prepared and came with ready-made
speeches. I was a fool and had none, but bowed down to Devi Sarasvati
and stepped up, and Dr. Barrows introduced me. I made a short speech. I
addressed the assembly as "Sisters and Brothers of America", a deafening
applause of two minutes followed, and then I proceeded; and when it was
finished, I sat down, almost exhausted with emotion. The next day all
the papers announced that my speech was the hit of the day, and I became
known to the whole of America. Truly has it been said by the great
commentator Shridhara — "मूकं करोति वाचालं — Who maketh the dumb a
fluent speaker." His name be praised! From that day I became a
celebrity, and the day I read my paper on Hinduism, the hall was packed
as it had never been before. I quote to you from one of the papers:
"Ladies, ladies, ladies packing every place — filling every corner, they
patiently waited and waited while the papers that separated them from
Vivekananda were read", etc. You would be astonished if I sent over to
you the newspaper cuttings, but you already know that I am a hater of
celebrity. Suffice it to say, that whenever I went on the platform, a
deafening applause would be raised for me. Nearly all the papers paid
high tributes to me, and even the most bigoted had to admit that "This
man with his handsome face and magnetic presence and wonderful oratory
is the most prominent figure in the Parliament", etc., etc. Sufficient
for you to know that never before did an Oriental make such an
impression on American society.

And how to speak of their kindness? I have no more wants now, I am well
off, and all the money that I require to visit Europe I shall get from
here. . . . A boy called Narasimhâchârya has cropped up in our midst. He
has been loafing about the city for the last three years. Loafing or no
loafing, I like him; but please write to me all about him if you know
anything. He knows you. He came in the year of the Paris Exhibition to
Europe. . . .

I am now out of want. Many of the handsomest houses in this city are
open to me. All the time I am living as a guest of somebody or other.
There is a curiosity in this nation, such as you meet with nowhere else.
They want to know everything, and their women — they are the most
advanced in the world. The average American woman is far more cultivated
than the average American man. The men slave all their life for money,
and the women snatch every opportunity to improve themselves. And they
are a very kind-hearted, frank people. Everybody who has a fad to preach
comes here, and I am sorry to say that most of these are not sound. The
Americans have their faults too, and what nation has not? But this is my
summing up: Asia laid the germs of civilization, Europe developed man,
and America is developing the woman and the masses. It is the paradise
of the woman and the labourer. Now contrast the American masses and
women with ours, and you get the idea at once. The Americans are fast
becoming liberal. Judge them not by the specimens of *hard-shelled
Christians* (it is their own phrase) that you see in India. There are
those here too, but their number is decreasing rapidly, and this great
nation is progressing fast towards that spirituality which is the
standard boast of the Hindu.

The Hindu must not give up his religion, but must keep religion within
its proper limits end give freedom to society to grow. All the reformers
in India made the serious mistake of holding religion accountable for
all the horrors of priestcraft and degeneration and went forth with to
pull down the indestructible structure, and what was the result?
Failure! Beginning from Buddha down to Ram Mohan Roy, everyone made the
mistake of holding caste to be a religious institution and tried to pull
down religion and caste all together, and failed. But in spite of all
the ravings of the priests, caste is simply a crystallised social
institution, which after doing its service is now filling the atmosphere
of India with its stench, and it can only be removed by giving back to
the people their lost social individuality. Every man born here knows
that he is a *man*. Every man born in India knows that he is a slave of
society. Now, freedom is the only condition of growth; take that off,
the result is degeneration. With the introduction of modern competition,
see how caste is disappearing fast! No religion is now necessary to kill
it. The Brâhmana shopkeeper, shoemaker, and wine-distiller are common in
Northern India. And why? Because of competition. No man is prohibited
from doing anything he pleases for his livelihood under the present
Government, and the result is neck and neck competition, and thus
thousands are seeking and finding the highest level they were born for,
instead of vegetating at the bottom.

I must remain in this country at least through the winter, and then go
to Europe. The Lord will provide everything for me. You need not disturb
yourself about it. I cannot express my gratitude for your love.

Day by day I am feeling that the Lord is with me, and I am trying to
follow His direction. His will be done. . . . We will do great things
for the world, and that for the sake of doing good and not for name and
fame.

"Ours not to reason why, ours but to do and die." Be of good cheer and
believe that we are selected by the Lord to do great things, and we will
do them. Hold yourself in readiness, i.e. be pure and holy, and love for
love's sake. Love the poor, the miserable, the downtrodden, and the Lord
will bless you.

See the Raja of Ramnad and others from time to time and urge them to
sympathise with the masses of India. Tell them how they are standing on
the neck of the poor, and that they are not fit to be called men if they
do not try to raise them up. Be fearless, the Lord is with you, and He
will yet raise the starving and ignorant millions of India. A railway
porter here is better educated than many of your young men and most of
your princes. Every American woman has far better education than can be
conceived of by the majority of Hindu women. Why cannot we have the same
education? We must.

Think not that you are poor; money is not power, but goodness, holiness.
Come and see how it is so all over the world.

Yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. By the bye, your uncle's paper was the most curious phenomenon I
ever saw. It was like a tradesman's catalogue, and it was not thought
fit to be read in the Parliament. So Narasimhacharya read a few extracts
from it in a side hall, and nobody understood a word of it. Do not tell
him of it. It is a great art to press the largest amount of thought into
the smallest number of words. Even Manilal Dvivedi's paper had to be cut
very short. More than a thousand papers were read, and there was no time
to give to such wild perorations. I had a good long time given to me
over the ordinary half hour, . . . because the most popular speakers
were always put down last, to hold the audience. And Lord bless them,
what sympathy they have, and what patience! They would sit from ten
o'clock in the morning to ten o'clock at night — only a recess of half
an hour for a meal, and paper after paper read, most of them very
trivial, but they would wait and wait to hear their favourites.

Dharmapâla of Ceylon was one of the favourites But unfortunately he was
not a good speaker. He had only quotations from Max Müller and Rhys
Davids to give them. He is a very sweet man, and we became very intimate
during the Parliament.

A Christian lady from Poona, Miss Sorabji, and the Jain representative,
Mr. Gandhi, are going to remain longer in the country and make lecture
tours. I hope they will succeed. Lecturing is a very profitable
occupation in this country and sometimes pays well.

Mr. Ingersoll gets five to six hundred dollars a lecture. He is the most
celebrated lecturer in this country. Do not publish this letter. After
reading, send it to the Maharaja (of Khetri). I have sent him my
photograph in America.

V

</div>
