---
title: VI

---
<div>

[←](005_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](007_friends.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/008_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](007_friends.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/010_haripada.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/105_haripada.htm)

## VI

(Translated from [Bengali](b6076e5006.htm) )

C/O GEORGE W. HALE ESQ.,  
541 DEARBORN AVENUE, CHICAGO,  
*28th December, 1893*.

DEAR HARIPADA, (Haripada Mitra)

It is very strange that news of my Chicago lectures has appeared in the
Indian papers; for whatever I do, I try my best to avoid publicity. Many
things strike me here. It may be fairly said that there is no poverty in
this country. I have never seen women elsewhere as cultured and educated
as they are here. Well-educated men there are in our country, but you
will scarcely find anywhere women like those here. It is indeed true,
that "the Goddess Herself lives in the houses of virtuous men as
Lakshmi".  I have seen thousands of women here whose hearts are as pure
and stainless as snow. Oh, how free they are! It is they who control
social and civic duties Schools and colleges are full of women, and in
our country women cannot be safely allowed to walk in the streets! Their
kindness to me is immeasurable. Since I came here, I have been welcomed
by them to their houses. They are providing me with food, arranging for
my lectures, taking me to market, and doing everything for my comfort
and convenience. I shall never be able to repay in the least the deep
debt of gratitude I owe to them.

Do you know who is the real "Shakti-worshipper"? It is he who knows that
God is the omnipresent force in the universe and sees in women the
manifestation of that Force. Many men here look upon their women in this
light. Manu, again, has said that gods bless those families where women
are happy and well treated. Here men treat their women as well as can be
desired, and hence they are so prosperous, so learned, so free, and so
energetic. But why is it that we are slavish, miserable, and dead? The
answer is obvious.

And how pure and chaste are they here! Few women are married before
twenty or twenty-five, and they are as free as the birds in the air.
They go to market, school, and college, earn money, and do all kinds of
work. Those who are well-to-do devote themselves to doing good to the
poor. And what are we doing? We are very regular in marrying our girls
at eleven years of age lest they should become corrupt and immoral. What
does our Manu enjoin? "Daughters should be supported and educated with
as much care and attention as the sons." As sons should be married after
observing Brahmacharya up to the thirtieth year, so daughters also must
observe Brahmacharya and be educated by their parents. But what are we
actually doing? Can you better the condition of your women? Then there
will be hope for your well-being. Otherwise you will remain as backward
as you are now.

If anybody is born of a low caste in our country, he is gone for ever,
there is no hope for him. Why? What a tyranny it is! There are
possibilities, opportunities, and hope for every individual in this
country. Today he is poor, tomorrow he may become rich and learned and
respected. Here everyone is anxious to help the poor. In India there is
a howling cry that we are very poor, but how many charitable
associations are there for the well-being of the poor? How many people
really weep for the sorrows and sufferings of the millions of poor in
India? Are we *men*? What are we doing for their livelihood, for their
improvement? We do not touch them, we avoid their company! Are we men?
Those thousands of Brâhmanas — what are they doing for the low,
downtrodden masses of India? "Don't touch", "Don't touch", is the only
phrase that plays upon their lips! How mean and degraded has our eternal
religion become at their hands! Wherein does our religion lie now? In
"Don't-touchism" alone, and nowhere else!

I came to this country not to satisfy my curiosity, nor for name or
fame, but to see if I could find any means for the support of the poor
in India. If God helps me, you will know gradually what those means are.

As regards spirituality, the Americans are far inferior to us, but their
society is far superior to ours. We will teach them our spirituality and
assimilate what is best in their society.

With love and best wishes,

Yours,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
