---
title: XXI

---
<div>

[←](020_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](022_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/041_miss_thursby.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/050_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](018_alasinga.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_4/writings_prose/to_my_brave_boys.htm)

## XXI

WASHINGTON,  
*27th October, 1894*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED, (Alasinga Perumal)

By this time you must have received my other letters. You must excuse me
for certain harshness of tone sometimes, and you know full well how I
love you. You have asked me often to send over to you all about my
movements in this country and all my lecture reports. I am doing exactly
here what I used to do in India. Always depending on the Lord and making
no plans ahead.... Moreover you must remember that I have to work
incessantly in this country, and that I have no time to put together my
thoughts in the form of a book, so much so, that this constant rush has
worn my nerves, and I am feeling it. I cannot express my obligation to
you, G. G., and all my friends in Madras, for the most unselfish and
heroic work you did for me. But it was not at all meant to blazon me,
but to make you conscious of your own strength. I am not an organiser,
my nature tends towards scholarship and meditation. I think I have
worked enough, now I want rest and to teach a little to those that have
come to me from my Gurudeva (venerable Guru). You have known now what
you can do, for it is really you, young men of Madras, that have done
all; I am only the figurehead. I am a Tyâgi (detached) monk. I only want
one thing. I do not believe in a God or religion which cannot wipe the
widow's tears or bring a piece of bread to the orphan's mouth. However
sublime be the theories, however well-spun may be the philosophy — I do
not call it religion so long as it is confined to books and dogmas. The
eye is in the forehead and not in the back. Move onward and carry into
practice that which you are very proud to call your religion, and God
bless you!

Look not at me, look to yourselves. I am happy to have been the occasion
of rousing an enthusiasm. Take advantage of it, float along with it, and
everything will come right. Love never fails, my son; today or tomorrow
or ages after, truth will conquer. Love shall win the victory. Do you
love your fellow men? Where should you go to seek for God — are not all
the poor, the miserable, the weak, Gods? Why not worship them first? Why
go to dig a well on the shores of the Gangâ? Believe in the omnipotent
power of love. Who cares for these tinsel puffs of name? I never keep
watch of what the newspapers are saying. Have you love? — You are
omnipotent. Are you perfectly unselfish? If so, you are irresistible. It
is character that pays everywhere. It is the Lord who protects His
children in the depths of the sea. Your country requires heroes; be
heroes! God bless you!

Everybody wants me to come over to India. They think we shall be able to
do more if I come over. They are mistaken, my friend. The present
enthusiasm is only a little patriotism, it means nothing. If it is true
and genuine, you will find in a short time hundreds of heroes coming
forward and carrying on the work. Therefore know that you have really
done all, and go on. Look not for me. Akshoy Kumar Ghosh is in London.
He sent a beautiful invitation from London to come to Miss Müller's. And
I hope I am going in January or February next. Bhattacharya writes me to
come over. Here is a grand field. What have I to do with this "ism" or
that "ism"? I am the servant of the Lord, and where on earth is there a
better field than here for propagating all high ideas? Here, where if
one man is against me, a hundred hands are ready to help me; here, where
man feels for man, weeps for his fellow-men and women are goddesses!
Even idiots may stand up to hear themselves praised, and cowards assume
the attitude of the brave when everything is sure to turn out well, but
the true hero works in silence. How many Buddhas die before one finds
expression! My son, I believe in God, and I believe in man. I believe in
helping the miserable. I believe in going even to hell to save others.
Talk of the Westerners? They have given me food, shelter, friendship,
protection — even the most orthodox Christians! What do our people do
when any of their priests go to India? You do not touch them even, they
are MLECHCHHAS! No man, no nation, my son, can hate others and live;
India's doom was sealed the very day they invented the word MLECHCHHA
and stopped from communion with others. Take care how you foster that
idea. It is good to talk glibly about the Vedanta, but how hard to carry
out even its least precepts!

Ever yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Take care of these two things — love of power and jealousy.
Cultivate always "faith in yourself".

</div>
