---
title: XXIV

---
<div>

[←](023_kidi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](025_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/046_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](025_alasinga.htm)  
[«](022_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](025_alasinga.htm)

## XXIV

U. S. A.,  
*26th December, 1894*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED, (Alasinga Perumal)

. . . In reference to me every now and then attacks are made in
missionary papers (so I hear), but I never care to see them. If you send
any of those made in India, I should throw them into the waste-paper
basket. A little agitation was necessary for our work. We have had
enough. Pay no more attention to what people say about me, whether good
or bad. You go on with your work and remember that "Never one meets with
evil who tries to do good" (Gita, VI. 40).

Every day the people here are appreciating me. And between you and me, I
am more of an influence here than you dream of. Everything must proceed
slowly . . . I have written to you before, and I write again, that I
shall not pay heed to any criticism or praise in the newspapers. They
are consigned to the fire. Do you do the same. Pay no attention
whatsoever to newspaper nonsense or criticism. Be sincere and do your
duty. Everything will come all right Truth must triumph. . .

Missionary misrepresentations should be beneath sour notice.... Perfect
silence is the best refutation to them and I wish you to maintain the
same. . . . Make Mr. Subrahmanya Iyer the President of your Society. He
is one of the sincerest and noblest men I know; and in him intellect and
emotion are beautifully blended. Push on in your work, without counting
much on me; work on your own account. . . . As for me, I do not know
when I shall go back; I am working here and in India as well. . . .

With my love to you all, 

Yours ever with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
