---
title: XXVI

---
<div>

[←](025_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](027_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](025_alasinga.htm) Chronology [»](027_alasinga.htm)

## XXVI

U. S. A.,  
*1894*.

DEAR DHARMAPALA,

I have forgotten your address in Calcutta; so I direct this to the Math.
I heard about your speeches in Calcutta and how wonderful was the effect
produced by them. A certain retired missionary here wrote me a letter
addressing me as brother and then hastily went to publish my short
answer and make a show. But you know what people here think of such
gentlemen. Moreover, the same missionary went privately to some of my
friends to ask them not to befriend me. Of course he met with universal
contempt. I am quite astonished at this man's behaviour — a preacher of
religion to take to such underhand dealings! Unfortunately too much of
that in every country and in every religion. Last winter I travelled a
good deal in this country although the weather was very severe. I
thought it would be dreadful, but I did not find it so after all. You
remember Col. Neggenson, President of the Free Religious Society. He
makes very kind inquiries about you. I met Dr. Carpenter of Oxford
(England) the other day. He delivered an address on the ethics of
Buddhism at Plymouth. It was very sympathetic and scholarly. He made
inquiries about you and your paper. Hope, your noble work will succeed.
You are a worthy servant of Him who came Bahujana Hitâya Bahujana
Sukhâya (for the good of the many, for the happiness of the many).

. . . The Christianity that is preached in India is quite different from
what one sees here; you will be astonished to hear, Dharmapala, that I
have friends in this country amongst the clergy of the Episcopal and
even Presbyterian churches, who are as broad, as liberal, and as sincere
as you are in your own religion. The real spiritual man is broad
everywhere. His love forces him to be so. Those to whom religion is a
trade are forced to become narrow and mischievous by their introduction
into religion of the competitive, fighting, and selfish methods of the
world.

Yours ever in brotherly love,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
