---
title: XXVII

---
<div>

[←](026_dharmapala.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](028_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](026_dharmapala.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/057_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](025_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](030_alasinga.htm)

## XXVII

U. S. A.,  
*1894*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

Listen to an old story. A lazy tramp sauntering along the road saw an
old man sitting at the door of his house and stopped to inquire of him
the whereabouts of a certain place. "How far is such and such a
village?" he asked. The old man remained silent. The man repeated his
query several times. Still there was no answer. Disgusted at this, the
traveller turned to go away. The old man then stood up and said, "The
village of — is only a mile from here." "What!" said the tramp, "Why did
you not speak when I asked you before?" "Because then", said the old
man, "you seemed so halting and careless about proceeding, but now you
are starting off in good earnest, and you have a right to an answer."

Will you remember this story, my son? Go to work, the rest will come:
"Whosoever not trusting in anything else but Me, rests on Me, I supply
him with everything he needs" (Gitâ, IX. 22). This is no dream.

. . . The work should be in the line of preaching and serving, at the
present time. Choose a place of meeting where you can assemble every
week holding a service and reading the Upanishads with the commentaries,
and so slowly go on learning and working. Every thing will come to you
if you put your shoulders to the wheel. . .

Now, go to work! G. G.'s nature is of the emotional type, you have a
level head; so work together; plunge in; this is only the beginning.
Every nation must save itself; we must not depend upon funds from
America for the revival of Hinduism, for that is a delusion. To have a
centre is a great thing; try to secure such a place in a large town like
Madras, end go on radiating a living force in all directions. Begin
slowly. Start with a few lay missionaries; gradually others will come
who will devote their whole lives to the work. Do not try to be a ruler.
He is the best ruler who can serve well. Be true unto death. The work we
want — we do not seek wealth, name or fame. . . . Be brave. . . .
Endeavour to interest the people of Madras in collecting funds for the
purpose, and then make a beginning. . . . Be perfectly unselfish and you
will be sure to succeed. . . . Without losing the independence in work,
show all regards to your superiors. Work in harmony. . . . My children
must be ready to jump into fire, if needed, to accomplish their work.
Now work, work, work! We will stop and compare notes later on. Have
patience, perseverance, and purity.

I am writing no book on Hinduism just now. I am simply jotting down my
thoughts. I do not know if I shall publish them. What is in books? The
world is too full of foolish things already. If you could start a
magazine on Vedantic lines, it would further our object. Be positive; do
not criticise others. Give your message, teach what you have to teach,
and there stop. The Lord knows the rest. . . .

Do not send me any more newspapers, as I do not notice the missionary
criticisms on myself; and here the public estimation of me is better for
that reason.

. . . If you are really my children, you will fear nothing, stop at
nothing. You will be like lions. We must rouse India and the whole
world. No cowardice. I will take no nay. Do you understand? Be true unto
death! . . . The secret of this is Guru-Bhakti — faith in the Guru unto
death! Have you that? I believe with all my heart that you have, and you
know that I have confidence in you — so go to work. You must succeed. My
prayers and benedictions follow every step you take. Work in harmony. Be
patient with everybody. Every one has my love. I am watching you.
Onward! Onward! This is just the beginning. My little work here makes a
big echo in India, do you know? So I shall not return there in a hurry.
My intention is to do something permanent here, and with that object I
am working day by day. I am every day gaining the confidence of the
American people. . . . Expand your hearts and hopes, as wide as the
world. Study Sanskrit, especially the three Bhâshyas (commentaries) on
the Vedanta. Be ready, for I have many plans for the future. Try to be a
magnetic speaker. Electrify the people. Everything will come to you if
you have faith. So tell Kidi, in fact, tell all my children there. In
time they will do great things at which the world will wonder. Take
heart and work. Show me something you have done. Show me a temple, a
press, a paper, a home for me. Where shall I come to if you cannot make
a home for me in Madras? Electrify people. Raise funds and preach. Be
true to your mission. Thus far you promise well, so go on and do better
and better still.

. . .Do not fight with people; do not antagonise anyone. Why should we
mind if Jack and John become Christians? Let them follow whatever
religion suits them. Why should you mix in controversies? Bear with the
various opinions of everybody. Patience, purity, and perseverance will
prevail. 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
