---
title: XXIX

---
<div>

[←](028_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](030_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_4/writings_prose/a_plan_of_work_for_india.htm)
Chronology [»](030_alasinga.htm)

## XXIX

CHICAGO,  
*11th January, 1895*.

DEAR G. G, (G. G. Narasimhachariar)

Your letter just to hand. . . . The Parliament of Religions was
organised with the intention of proving the superiority of the Christian
religion over other forms of faith, but the philosophic religion of
Hinduism was able to maintain its position notwithstanding. Dr. Barrows
and the men of that ilk are very orthodox, and I do not look to them for
help. . . . The Lord has sent me many friends in this country, and they
are always on the increase. The Lord bless those who have tried to
injure me. . . . I have been running all the time between Boston and New
York, two great centres of this country, of which Boston may be called
the brain and New York, the purse. In both, my success is more than
ordinary. I am indifferent to the newspaper reports, and you must not
expect me to send any of them to you. A little boom was necessary to
begin work. We have had more than enough of that.

I have written to Mani Iyer, and I have given you my directions already.
*Now show me what you can do*. No foolish talk now, but actual work; the
Hindus must back their talk with real work; if they cannot they do not
deserve anything; that is all. America is not going to give you money
for your fads. And why should they? As for me, I want to teach the
truth; I do not care whether here or elsewhere.

In future do not pay any heed to what people say either for or against
you or me. Work on, be lions; and the Lord will bless you. I shall work
incessantly until I die, and even after death I shall work for the good
of the world. Truth is infinitely more weighty than untruth; so is
goodness. If you possess these, they will make their way by sheer
gravity.

I have no connection with the Theosophists. And Judge will help me —
pooh! . . . Thousands of the best men *do* care for me; you know this,
and have faith in the Lord. I am slowly exercising an influence in this
land greater than all the newspaper blazoning of me can do. The orthodox
feel it, but they cannot help it. It is the force of character, of
purity, and of truth — of personality. So long as I have these things,
you can feel easy; no one will be able to injure a hair of my head. If
they try, they will fail, saith the Lord. . . . Enough of books and
theories. It is the *life* that is the highest and the only way to stir
the hearts of people; it carries the personal magnetism. . . . The Lord
is giving me a deeper and deeper insight every day. Work, work, work. .
. . Truce to foolish talk; talk of the Lord. Life is too short to be
spent in talking about frauds and cranks

You must always remember that every nation must save itself; so must
every man; do not look to others for help. Through hard work here, I
shall be able now and then to send you a little money for your work; but
that is all. If you have to look forward to that, better stop work. Know
also that this is a grand field for my ideas, and that I do not care
whether they are Hindus or Mohammedans or Christians, but those that
love the Lord will always command my service.

. . . I like to work on calmly and silently, and the Lord is always with
me. Follow me, if you will, by being intensely sincere, perfectly
unselfish, and, above all, by being perfectly pure. My blessings go with
you. In this short life there is no time for the exchange of
compliments. We can compare notes and compliment each other to our
hearts' content after the battle is finished. Now, do not talk; work,
work! work! I do not see anything permanent you have done in India — I
do not see any centre you have made — I do not see any temple or hall
you have erected — I do not see anybody joining hands with you. There is
too much talk, talk, talk! We are great, we are great! Nonsense! We are
imbeciles; that is what we are! This hankering after name and fame and
all other humbugs — what are they to me? What do I care about them? I
should like to see hundreds coming to the Lord! Where are they? I want
them, I want to see them. You must seek them out. You only give me name
and fame. Have done with name and fame; to work, my brave men, to work!
You have not caught my fire yet — you do not understand me! You run in
the old ruts of sloth and enjoyments. Down with all sloth, down with all
enjoyments here or hereafter. Plunge into the fire and bring the people
towards the Lord.

That you may catch my fire, that you may be intensely sincere, that you
may die the heroes' death on the field of battle — is the constant
prayer of

VIVEKANANDA.

 

PS. Tell Alasinga, Kidi, Dr. Balaji, and all the others not to pin their
faith on what Tom, Dick, and Harry say for or against us, but to
concentrate all their energy on work.

</div>
