---
title: XXX

---
<div>

[←](029_gg.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](031_ole_bull.htm)

  

[«](029_gg.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/058_sarada.htm)  
[«](027_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](033_alasinga.htm)

## XXX

U.S.A.,  
*12th January, 1895*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

I am sorry you still continue to send me pamphlets and newspapers, which
I have written you several times not to do. I have no time to peruse
them and take notice of them. Please send them *no more*. I do not care
a fig for what the missionaries or the Theosophists say about me. Let
them do as they please. The very taking notice of them will be to give
them importance. Besides, you know, the missionaries only abuse and
never argue.

Now know once and for all that I do not care for name or fame, or any
humbug of that type. I want to preach my ideas for the good of the
world. You have done a great work; but so far as it goes, it has only
given me name and fame. My life is more precious than spending it in
getting the admiration of the world. I have no time for such foolery.
What work have you done in the way of advancing the ideas and organising
in India? *None, none, none*!

An organisation that will teach the Hindus mutual help and appreciation
is absolutely necessary. Five thousand people attended that meeting that
was held in Calcutta, and hundreds did the same in other places, to
express an appreciation of my work here — well and good! But if you
asked them each to give an anna, would they do it? The whole national
character is one of childish dependence. They are all ready to enjoy
food if it is brought to their mouth, and even some want it pushed down.
. . . You do not deserve to live if you cannot help yourselves.

I have given up at present my plan for the education of the masses. It
will come by degrees. What I now want is a band of fiery missionaries.
We must have a *College* in Madras to teach comparative religions,
Sanskrit, the different schools of Vedanta, and some European languages;
we must have a press, and papers printed in English and in the
Vernaculars. When this is done, then I shall know that you have
accomplished something. Let the nation show that they are ready to *do*.
If you cannot do anything of the kind in India, then let me alone. I
have a message to give, let me give it to the people who appreciate it
and who will work it out. What care I who takes it? "He who doeth the
will of my Father," is my own. . . .

My name should not be made prominent; it is my ideas that I want to see
realised. The disciples of all the prophets have always inextricably
mixed up the ideas of the Master with the *person*, and at last killed
the ideas for the *person*. The disciples of Shri Ramakrishna must guard
against doing the same thing. Work for the *idea*, not the person. The
Lord bless you.

Yours ever with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
