---
title: XXXII

---
<div>

[←](031_ole_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](033_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/038_miss_bell.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/048_adhyapakji.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/025_sisters.htm) Both Sisters
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/042_babies.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/037_sister.htm) Mary or
Harriet Hale [»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/042_babies.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/025_sisters.htm) Harriet Hale
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/042_babies.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/037_sister.htm) Mary Hale
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/042_babies.htm)

## XXXII

54 W. 33RD STREET, N.Y.,  
*1st February, 1895*.

DEAR SISTER (Miss Mary Hale)

I just received your beautiful note.... Well, sometimes it is a good
discipline to be forced to work for work's sake, even to the length of
not being allowed to enjoy the fruits of one's labour.... I am very glad
of your criticisms and am not sorry at all. The other day at Miss
Thursby's I had an excited argument with a Presbyterian gentleman, who,
as usual, got very hot, angry, and abusive. However, I was afterwards
severely reprimanded by Mrs. Bull for this, as such things hinder my
work. So, it seems, is your opinion.

I am glad you write about it just now, because I have been giving a good
deal of thought to it. In the first place, I am not at all sorry for
these things — perhaps that may disgust you — it may. I know full well
how good it is for one's worldly prospects to be *sweet*. I do
everything to be *sweet*, but when it comes to a horrible compromise
with the truth within, then I stop. I do not believe in humility. I
believe in *Samadarshitva* — same state of mind with regard to all. The
duty of the ordinary man is to obey the commands of his "God", society;
but the children of light never do so. This is an eternal law. One
accommodates himself to surroundings and social opinion and gets all
good things from society, the giver of all good to such. The other
stands alone and draws society up towards him. The accommodating man
finds a path of roses; the non-accommodating, one of thorns. But the
worshippers of "Vox populi" go to annihilation in a moment; the children
of truth *live for ever*.

I will compare truth to a corrosive substance of infinite power. It
burns its way in wherever it falls — in soft substance at once, hard
granite slowly, but it must. What is writ is writ. I am so, so sorry,
Sister, that I cannot make myself sweet and accommodating to every black
falsehood. But I cannot. I have suffered for it all my life. But I
cannot. I have essayed and essayed. But I cannot. At last I have given
it up. The Lord is great. He will not allow me to become a hypocrite.
Now let what is in come out. I have not found a way that will please
all, and I cannot but be what I am, true to my own self. "Youth and
beauty vanish, life and wealth vanish, name and fame vanish, even the
mountains crumble into dust. Friendship and love vanish. Truth alone
abides." God of Truth, be Thou alone my guide! I am too old to change
now into milk and honey. Allow me to remain as I am. "Without fear —
without shopkeeping, caring neither for friend nor foe, do thou hold on
to Truth, Sannyâsin, and from this moment give up this world and the
next and all that are to come — their enjoyments and their vanities.
Truth, be thou alone my guide." I have no desire for wealth or name or
fame or enjoyments, Sister — they are dust unto me. I wanted to help my
brethren. I have not the *tact to earn money*, bless the Lord. What
reason is there for me to conform to the vagaries of the world around me
and not obey the voice of Truth within? The mind is still weak, Sister,
it sometimes mechanically clutches at earthly help. But I am not afraid.
Fear is the greatest sin my religion teaches.

The last fight with the Presbyterian priest and the long fight
afterwards with Mrs. Bull showed me in a clear light what Manu says to
the Sannyasin, "Live alone, walk alone." All friendship, all love, is
only limitation. There never was a friendship, especially of women,
which was not exacting. O great sages! You were right. One cannot serve
the God of Truth who leans upon somebody. Be still, my soul! Be alone!
and the Lord is with you. Life is nothing! Death is a delusion! All this
is not, God alone is! Fear not, my soul! Be alone. Sister, the way is
long, the time is short, evening is approaching. I have to go home soon.
I have no time to give my manners a finish. I cannot find time to
deliver my message. You are good, you are so kind, I will do anything
for you; and do not be angry, I see you all are mere children.

Dream no more! Oh, dream no more, my soul! In one word, I have a message
to give, I have no time to be sweet to the world, and every attempt at
sweetness makes me a hypocrite. I will die a thousand deaths rather than
lead a jelly-fish existence and yield to every requirement of this
foolish world, no matter whether it be my own country or a foreign
country. You are mistaken, utterly mistaken, if you think I have a
*work*, as Mrs. Bull thinks; I have no *work* under or beyond the sun. I
have a message, and I will give it after my own fashion. I will neither
Hinduise my message, nor Christianise it, nor make it any "ise" in the
world. I will only my-ise it and that is all. *Liberty*, Mukti, is all
my religion, and everything that tries to curb it, I will avoid by fight
or flight. Pooh! I try to pacify the priests!! Sister, do not take this
amiss. But you are babies and babies must submit to be taught. You have
not yet drunk of that fountain which makes "reason unreason, mortal
immortal, this world a zero, and of man a God". Come out if you can of
this network of foolishness they call this *world*. Then I will call you
indeed brave and free. If you cannot, cheer those that dare dash this
false God, society, to the ground and trample on its unmitigated
hypocrisy; if you cannot cheer them, pray, be silent, but do not try to
drag them down again into the mire with such false nonsense as
*compromise* and becoming nice and sweet.

I hate this world, this dream, this horrible nightmare with its churches
and chicaneries, its books and blackguardisms, its fair faces and false
hearts, its howling righteousness on the surface and utter hollowness
beneath, and, above all, its sanctified shopkeeping. What! measure any
soul according to what the bond-slaves of the world say? — Pooh! Sister,
you do not know the Sannyasin. "He stands on the heads of the Vedas!"
say the Vedas, because he is free from churches and sects and religions
and prophets and books and all of that ilk! Missionary or no missionary,
let them howl and attack me with all they can, I take them as
Bhartrihari says, "Go thou thy ways, Sannyasin! Some will say, 'Who is
this mad man?' Others, 'Who is this Chandâla?' Others will know thee to
be a sage. Be glad at the prattle of the worldlings." But when they
attack, know that, ''The elephant passing through the market-place is
always beset by curs, but he cares not. He goes straight on *his own
way*. So it is always, when a great soul appears there will be numbers
to bark after him." (Tulasidasa)

I am living with Landsberg at 54 W. 33rd Street. He is a brave and noble
soul, Lord bless him. Sometimes I go to the Guernseys' to sleep.

Lord bless you all ever and ever — and may He lead you quickly out of
this big humbug, the world! May you never be enchanted by this old
witch, the world! May Shankara help you! May Umâ open the door of truth
for you and take away all your delusions!

Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
