---
title: XXXVI

---
<div>

[←](035_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](037_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/061_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/27_alasinga.htm)  
[«](034_sister.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/072_mckindley.htm)

## XXXVI

54 W., 33 NEW YORK,  
*27th March, 1895*.

DEAR SISTER (Isabelle McKindley)

Your kind note gave me pleasure inexpressible. I was also able to read
it through very easily. I have at last hit upon the orange and have got
a coat, but could not as yet get any in summer material. If you get any,
kindly inform me. I will have it made here in New York. Your wonderful
Dearborn Ave. misfit tailor is too much even for a *monk*.

Sister Locke writes me a long letter and perhaps wondering at my delay
in reply. She is apt to be carried away by enthusiasm; so I am waiting,
and again I do not know what to answer. Kindly tell her from me that it
is impossible for me to fix any place just now. Mrs. Peake though noble,
grand, and very spiritual, is as much clever in worldly matter as I, yet
I am getting cleverer every day. Mrs. Peake has been offered, by some
one whom she knows only hazily in Washington, a place for summer.

Who knows that she will not be played upon? This is a wonderful country
for cheating, and 99.9 per cent have some *motive* in the background to
take advantage of others. If any one just but closes his eyes for a
moment, he is *gone*!! Sister Josephine is fiery. Mrs. Peake is a simple
good woman. I have been so well handled by the people here that I look
round me for hours before I take a step. Everything will come to right.
Ask Sister Josephine to have a little patience.

You are every day finding kindergarten better than running an old man's
home I am sure. You saw Mrs. Bull, and I am sure you were quite
surprised to find her so tame and gentle. Do you see Mrs. Adams now and
then? Mrs. Bull has been greatly benefited by her lessons. I also took a
few, but no use; the ever increasing load in front does not allow me to
bend forward as Mrs. Adams wants it. If I try to bend forward in
walking, the centre of gravity comes to the surface of the stomach, and
so I go cutting front somersaults.

No millionaire coming? Not even a few hundred thousands? Sorry, very
sorry!!! I am trying my best; what I can do? My classes are full of
women. You of course cannot marry a woman. Well, have patience. I will
keep my eyes open and never let go an opportunity. If you do not get
one, it would not be owing to any laziness at least on my part.

Life goes on the same old ruts. Sometimes I get disgusted with eternal
lecturings and talkings, want to be silent for days and days.

Hoping you the best dreams (for that is the only way to be happy).

I remain ever your loving bro.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
