---
title: XXXVIII

---
<div>

[←](037_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](039_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/054_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/055_friend.htm)  

## XXXVIII

U. S. A.,  
*2nd May, 1895*.

DEAR S— ,

So you have made up your mind to renounce the world. I have sympathy
with your desire. There is nothing so high as renunciation of self. But
you must not forget that to forgo your own favourite desire for the
welfare of those that depend upon you is no small sacrifice. Follow the
spotless life and teachings of Shri Ramakrishna and look after the
comforts of your family. You do your own duty, and leave the rest to
Him.

Love makes no distinction between man and man, between an Aryan and a
Mlechchha, between a Brâhmana and a Pariah, nor even between a man and a
woman. Love makes the whole universe as one's own home. True progress is
slow but sure. Work among those young men who can devote heart and soul
to this one duty — the duty of raising the masses of India. Awake them,
unite them, and inspire them with this spirit of renunciation; it
depends wholly on the young people of India.

Cultivate the virtue of obedience, but you must not sacrifice your own
faith. No centralization is possible unless there is obedience to
superiors. No great work can be done without this centralization of
individual forces. The Calcutta Math is the main centre; the members of
all other branches must act in unity and conformity with the rules of
that centre.

Give up jealousy and conceit. Learn to work unitedly for others. This is
the great need of our country.

Yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
