---
title: XXXIX

---
<div>

[←](038_s.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](040_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/042_babies.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/065_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](037_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](040_alasinga.htm)

## XXXIX

U. S. A.,  
*6th May, 1895*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

This morning I received your last letter and that first volume of the
Bhâshya of Râmânujâcharya. A few days ago I received another letter from
you. Also I received a letter from Mr. Mani Iyer. I am doing well and
going on in the same old rate. You mention about the lectures of Mr.
Lund. I do not know who he is or where he is. He may be some one
lecturing in Churches; for had he big platforms, we would have heard of
him. Maybe, he gets them reported in some newspapers and sends them to
India; and the missionaries may be making trade out of it. Well, so far
I guess from the tone of your letters. It is no public affair here to
call forth any defence from us; for in that case I will have to fight
hundreds of them here every day. For India is now in the air, and the
orthodox, including Dr. Barrows and all the rest, are struggling hard to
put out the fire. In the second place, every one of these orthodox
lectures against India must have a good deal of abuse hurled against me.
If you hear some of the filthy stories the orthodox men and women invent
against me, you will be astonished. Now, do you mean to say that a
Sannyâsin should go about defending himself against the brutal and
cowardly attacks of these self-seeking men and women? I have some very
influential friends here who, now and then, give them their quietus.
Again, why should I waste my energies defending Hinduism if the Hindus
all go to sleep? What are you three hundred millions of people doing
there, especially those that are so proud of their learning etc.? Why do
you not take up the fighting and leave me to teach and preach? Here am I
struggling day and night in the midst of strangers.... What help does
India send? Did the world ever see a nation with less patriotism than
the Indian? If you could send and maintain for a few years a dozen
well-educated strong men to preach in Europe and America, you would do
immense service to India, both morally and politically. Every man who
morally sympathises with India becomes a political friend. Many of the
Western people think of you as a nation of half-naked savages, and
therefore only fit to be whipped into civilization. If you three hundred
millions become cowed by the missionaries — you cowards — and dare not
say a word, what can one man do in a far distant land? Even what I have
done, you do not deserve.

Why do you not send your defences to the American magazines? What
prevents you? You race of cowards — physical, moral, and spiritual! You
animals fit to be treated as you are with two ideas before you — lust
and money — you want to prod a Sannyasin to a life of constant fighting,
and you are afraid of the "Saheb logs", even missionaries! And you will
do great things, pish! Why not some of you write a beautiful defence and
send it to the Arena Publishing Company of Boston? The *Arena* is a
magazine which will gladly publish it and perhaps pay you hard money. So
far it ends. Think of this when you will be tempted to be a fool. Think
that up to date every blackguard of a Hindu that had hitherto come to
western lands had too often criticised his own faith and country in
order to get praise or money. You know that I did not come to seek name
and fame; it was forced upon me. Why shall I go back to India? Who will
help me? . . . You are children, you prattle you do not know what. Where
are the men in Madras who will give up the world to preach religion?
Worldliness and realization of God cannot go together. I am the one man
who dared defend his country, and I have given them such ideas as they
never expected from a Hindu. There are many who are against me, but I
will never be a coward like you. There are also thousands in the country
who are my friends, and hundreds who would follow me unto death; every
year they will increase, and if I live and work with them, my ideals of
life and religion will be fulfilled. Do you see?

I do not hear much now about the Temple Universal that was to be built
in America; yet I have a firm footing in New York, the very centre of
American life, and so my work will go on. I am taking several of my
disciples to a summer retreat to finish their training in Yoga and
Bhakti and Jnâna, and then they will be able to help carry the work on.
Now my boys, go to work.

Within a month I shall be in a position to send some money for the
paper. Do not go about begging from the Hindu beggars. I will do it all
*myself* with my own brain and strong right hand. I do not want the help
of any man here or in India. . . . Do not press too much the Ramakrishna
Avatâra.

Now I will tell you my discovery. All of religion is contained in the
Vedanta, that is, in the three stages of the Vedanta philosophy, the
Dvaita, Vishishtâdvaita and Advaita; one comes after the other. These
are the three stages of spiritual growth in man. Each one is necessary.
This is the essential of religion: the Vedanta, applied to the various
ethnic customs and creeds of India, is Hinduism. The first stage, i.e.
Dvaita, applied to the ideas of the ethnic groups of Europe, is
Christianity; as applied to the Semitic groups, Mohammedanism. The
Advaita, as applied in its Yoga-perception form, is Buddhism etc. Now by
religion is meant the Vedanta; the applications must vary according to
the different needs, surroundings, and other circumstances of different
nations. You will find that although the philosophy is the same, the
Shâktas, Shaivas, etc. apply it each to their own special cult and
*forms*. Now, in your journal write article after article on these three
systems, showing their harmony as one following after the other, and at
the same time keeping off the ceremonial forms altogether. That is,
preach the philosophy, the spiritual part, and let people suit it to
their own forms. I wish to write a book on this subject, therefore I
wanted the three Bhashyas; but only one volume of the Ramanuja (Bhashya)
has reached me as yet.

The American Theosophists have seceded from the others, and now they
hate India. Poor things! And Sturdy of England who has lately been in
India and met my brother Shivananda wrote me a letter wanting to know
when I go over to England. I wrote him a nice letter. What about Babu
Akshay Kumar Ghosh? I do not hear anything from him more. Give the
missionaries and others their dues. Get up some of our very strong men
and write a nice, strong, but good-toned article on the present
religious revival in India and send it to some American magazine. I am
acquainted with only one or two of them. You know I am not much of a
writer. I am not in the habit of going from door to door begging. I sit
quiet and let things come to me. . . . Now, my children, I could have
made a grand success in the way of organising here, if I were a worldly
hypocrite. Alas! That is all of religion here; money and name = priest,
money and lust = layman. I am to create a new order of humanity here who
are sincere believers in God and care nothing for the world. This must
be slow, very slow. In the meantime you go on with your work, and I
shall steer my boat straight ahead. The journal must not be flippant but
steady, calm, and high-toned. . . . Get hold of a band of fine, steady
writers. . . . Be perfectly unselfish, be steady and work on. We will do
great things; do not fear. . . . One thing more. Be the servant of all,
and do not try in the least to govern others. That will excite jealousy
and destroy everything. . . . Go on. You have worked wonderfully well.
We do not wait for help, we will work it out, my boy, be self-reliant,
faithful and patient. Do not antagonise my other friends, live in
harmony with all. My eternal love to all.

Ever yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Nobody will come to help you if you put yourself forward as a
leader. . . . Kill self first if you want to succeed.

</div>
