---
title: XLVI

---
<div>

[←](045_mother.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](047_maharaja_of_khetri.htm)

  

[«](045_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/070_alberta.htm)  
[«](041_friend.htm) Addressee [»](048_friend.htm)

## XLVI

C/O MISS DUTCHER,  
THOUSAND ISLAND PARK, N. Y.  
*7th July, 1895*.

DEAR FRIEND, (Mr. F. Leggett)

I see you are enjoying New York very much, so excuse my breaking into
your reverie with a letter.

I had two beautiful letters from Miss MacLeod and Mrs. Sturges. Also
they sent over two pretty birch bark books. I have filled them with
Sanskrit texts and translations, and they go by today's post.

Mrs. Dora[1](#fn1) is giving, I hear, some startling performances in the
Mahatma line.

Since leaving Percy[2](#fn2) I have invitations to come over to London
from unexpected quarters, and that I look forward to with great
expectations.

I do not want to lose this opportunity of working in London. And so your
invitation, coupled with the London one, is, I know, a divine call for
further work.

I shall be here all this month and only have to go to Chicago for a few
days sometime in August.

Don't fret, Father Leggett, this is the best time for expectation — when
sure in love.

Lord bless you ever and ever, and may all happiness be yours for ever,
as you richly deserve it.

Ever yours in love and affection,

VIVEKANANDA.

1.  [^](#txt1)Mrs. Dora Rosthlesberger, an occultist who had introduced
    Miss MacLeod and Mrs. Sturges to Swami Vivekananda.
2.  [^](#txt2)Mr. Leggett's camp in New Hampshire. From here Swami
    Vivekananda went to Thousand Island Park.

</div>
