---
title: LII

---
<div>

[←](051_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](053_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/051_friend.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/071_rakhal.htm)  
[«](049_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](053_alasinga.htm)

## LII

PARIS,  
*9th September, 1895*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

. . . I am surprised you take so seriously the missionaries' nonsense. .
. . If the people in India want me to keep strictly to my Hindu diet,
please tell them to send me a cook and money enough to keep him. This
silly *bossism* without a mite of real help makes me laugh. On the other
hand, if the missionaries tell you that I have ever broken the two great
vows of the Sannyâsin — chastity and poverty — tell them that they are
*big liars*. Please write to the missionary Hume asking him
categorically to write you what misdemeanour he saw in me, or give you
the names of his informants, and whether the information was *first-hand
or not*; that will settle the question and expose the whole thing. . . .

As for me, mind you, I stand at nobody's dictation. I know my mission in
life, and no chauvinism about me; I belong as much to India as to the
world, no humbug about that. I have helped you all I could. You must now
help yourselves. What country has any special claim on me? Am I any
nation's slave? Don't talk any more silly nonsense, you faithless
atheists.

I have worked hard and sent all the money I got to Calcutta and Madras,
and then after doing all this, stand their silly dictation! Are you not
ashamed? What do I owe to them? Do I care a fig for their praise or fear
their blame? I am a singular man, my son, not even you can understand me
yet. Do your work; if you cannot, stop; but do not try to "boss" me with
your nonsense. I *see* a greater Power than man, or God, or devil at my
back. I require nobody's help. I have been all my life helping others. .
. . They cannot raise a few rupees to help the work of the greatest man
their country ever produced — Ramakrishna Paramahamsa; and they talk
nonsense and want to dictate to the man for whom they did nothing, find
who did everything he could for them! Such is the ungrateful world!

Do you mean to say I am born to live and die one of those caste-ridden,
superstitious, merciless, hypocritical, atheistic *cowards* that you
find only amongst the educated Hindus? I hate cowardice; I will have
nothing to do with cowards or political nonsense. I do not believe in
any politics. God and truth are the only politics in the world,
everything else is trash.

I am going to London tomorrow. . . .

Yours with blessings

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
