---
title: LIV

---
<div>

[←](053_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](055_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/085_akhandananda.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/086_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](053_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](055_alasinga.htm)

## LIV

LONDON,  
*18th November, 1895*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

. . . In England my work is really splendid, I am astonished myself at
it. The English people do not: talk much in the newspapers, but they
work silently. I am sure of more work in England than in America. Bands
and bands come, and I have no room for so many; so they squat on the
floor, ladies and all. I tell them to imagine that they are under the
sky of India, under a spreading banyan, and they like the idea. I shall
have to go away next week, and they are so sorry. Some think my work
here will be hurt a little if I go away so soon. I do not think so. I do
not depend on men or things. The Lord alone I depend upon — and He works
through me.

. . . Please everybody without becoming a hypocrite and without being a
coward. Hold on to your own ideas with strength and purity, and whatever
obstructions may now be in your way, the world is bound to listen to you
in the long run. . . .

I have no time even to die, as the Bengalis say. I work, work, work, and
earn my own bread and help my country, and this all alone, and then get
only criticism from friends and foes for all that! Well, you are but
children, I shall have to bear everything. I have sent for a Sannyâsin
from Calcutta and shall leave him to work in London. I want one more for
America — I want my *own man*. Guru-Bhakti is the foundation of all
spiritual development.

. . . I am really tired from incessant work. Any other Hindu would have
died if he had to work as hard as I have to. . . . I want to go to India
for a long rest. . . .

Ever yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
