---
title: LVII

---
<div>

[←](056_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](058_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](056_sister.htm) Chronology [»](058_alasinga.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/068_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/070_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

## LVII

228 W. 39TH STREET, NEW YORK,  
*13th February, 1896*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED, (E. T. Sturdy)

About the Sannyâsin coming over from India, I am sure he will help you
in the translation work, also in other work. Later on, when I come, I
may send him over to America. Today another Sannyasin has been added to
the list. This time it is a man who is a genuine American and a
religious teacher of some standing in the country. He was Dr. Street. He
is now Yogananda, as his leaning is all towards Yoga.

I have been sending regular reports to the *Brahmavâdin* from here. They
will be published soon. It takes such a long time for things to reach
India! Things are growing nobly in India. As there was no hocus-pocus
from the beginning, the Vedanta is drawing the attention of the highest
classes in American society. Sarah Bernhardt, the French actress, has
been playing "Iziel" here. It is a sort of Frenchified life of Buddha,
where a courtesan "Iziel" wants to seduce the Buddha, under the banyan -
and the Buddha preaches to her the vanity of the world, whilst she is
sitting all the time in Buddha's lap. However, all is well that ends
well — the courtesan fails. Madame Bernhardt acts the courtesan. I went
to see the Buddha business — and Madame spying me in the audience wanted
to have an interview with me. A swell family of my acquaintance arranged
the affair. There were besides Madame M. Morrel, the celebrated singer,
also the great electrician Tesla. Madame is a very scholarly lady and
has studied up the metaphysics a good deal. M. Morrel was being
interested, but Mr. Tesla was charmed to hear about the Vedantic Prâna
and Âkâsha and the Kalpas, which according to him are the only theories
modern science can entertain. Now both Akasha and Prana again are
produced from the cosmic Mahat, the Universal Mind, the Brahmâ or
Ishvara. Mr. Tesla thinks he can demonstrate mathematically that force
and matter are reducible to potential energy. I am to go and see him
next week, to get this new mathematical demonstration.

In that case, the Vedantic cosmology will be placed on the surest of
foundations. I am working a good deal now upon the cosmology and
eschatology (That is, doctrine of the last things — death, judgement,
etc.) of the Vedanta. I clearly see their perfect unison with modern
science, and the elucidation of the one will be followed by that of the
other. I intend to write a book later on in the form of questions and
answers. (This was never done. But from his lectures in London in 1896,
it is easy to see that his mind was still working on these ideas. (See
also Vol. VIII [Sayings and
Utterances](../../volume_8/sayings_and_utterances.htm#v5_epi_057) &
[Letter to Mr.
Sturdy](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/068_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
.)). The first chapter will be on cosmology, showing the harmony between
Vedantic theories and modern science.  
![](057_diagram.jpg)  
The eschatology will be explained from the Advaitic standpoint only.
That is to say, the dualist claims that the soul after death passes on
to the Solar sphere, thence to the Lunar sphere, thence to the Electric
sphere. Thence he is accompanied by a Purusha to Brahmaloka. (Thence,
says the Advaitist, he goes to Nirvâna.)

Now on the Advaitic side, it is held that the soul neither comes nor
goes, and that all these spheres or layers of the universe are only so
many varying products of Akasha and Prana. That is to say, the lowest or
most condensed is the Solar sphere, consisting of the visible universe,
in which Prana appears as physical force, and Akasha as sensible matter.
The next is called the Lunar sphere, which surrounds the Solar sphere.
This is not the moon at all, but the habitation of the gods, that is to
say, Prana appears in it as psychic forces, and Akasha as Tanmâtras or
fine particles. Beyond this is the Electric sphere, that is to say, a
condition in which the Prana is almost inseparable from Akasha, and you
can hardly tell whether Electricity is force or matter. Next is the
Brahmaloka. where there is neither Prana nor Akasha, but both are merged
in the *mind stuff*, the primal energy. And here — there big neither
Prana nor Akasha — the Jiva contemplates the whole universe as Samashti
or the sum total of Mahat or mind. This appears as a Purusha, an
abstract universal *soul*, yet not the Absolute, for still there is
multiplicity. From this the Jiva finds at last that Unity which is the
end. Advaitism says that these are the visions which rise in succession
before the Jiva, who himself neither goes nor comes, and that in the
same way this present vision has been projected. The projection
(Srishti) and dissolution must take place in the same order, only one
means going backward, and the other coming out.

Now as each individual can only see *his own* universe, that universe is
created with his bondage and goes away with his liberation, although it
remains for others who are in bondage. Now name and form constitute the
universe. A wave in the ocean is a wave, only in so far as it is bound
by name and form. If the wave subsides, it is the ocean, but those name
and form have immediately vanished for ever. So though the name and form
of wave could never be without *water* that was fashioned into the wave
by them, yet the name and form themselves were not the wave. They die as
soon as ever it returns to water. But other names and forms live in
relation to other waves. This name-and-form is called Mâyâ, and the
water is Brahman. The wave was nothing but water all the time, yet as a
wave it had the name and form. Again this name and form cannot remain
for one moment separated from the wave, although the *wave* as water can
remain eternally separate from name and form. But because the name and
form can never he *separated*, they can never be said to *exist*. Yet
they are not *zero*. This is called Maya.

I want to work; all this out carefully, but you will see at a glance
that I am on the right track. It will take more study in physiology, on
the relations between the higher and lower centres, to fill out the
psychology of mind Chitta (mind-stuff), and Buddhi (intellect), and so
on. But I have clear light now, free of all hocus-pocus. I want to give
them dry, hard reason, softened in the sweetest syrup of love and made
spicy with intense work, and cooked in the kitchen of Yoga, so that even
a baby can easily digest it.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
