---
title: LXIII

---
<div>

[←](062_dr_nanjunda_rao.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](064_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/098_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Chronology [»](064_alasinga.htm)  
[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/31_alasinga.htm) Addressee
[»](064_alasinga.htm)

## LXIII

SWITZERLAND,  
*6th August, 1896*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

I learnt from your letter the bad financial state the *Brahmavâdin* is
in. I will try to help you when I go back to London. You must not lower
the tone. Keep up the paper. Very soon I will be able to help you in
such a manner as to make you free of this nonsense teacher business. Do
not be afraid. Great things are going to be done, my child. Take heart.
The *Brahmavadin* is a jewel — it must not perish. Of course, such a
paper has to be kept up by private help always, and *we will do it*.
Hold on a few months more.

Max Müller's article on Shri Ramakrishna has been published in the
*Nineteenth Century*. I will send you a copy as soon as I get it. He
writes me very nice letters and wants material for a big work on
Ramakrishna's life. Write to Calcutta to send all the material they can
to Max Müller.

I have received the communication to the American paper before. You must
not publish it in India. Enough of this newspaper blazoning, I am tired
of it anyhow. Let us go our own way, and let fools talk. Nothing can
resist truth.

I am, as you see, now in Switzerland and am always on the move. I cannot
and must not do anything in the way of writing, nor much reading either.
There is a big London work waiting for me from next month. In winter I
am going back to India and will try to set things on their feet there.

My love to all. Work on, brave hearts, fail not — no saying nay; work on
— the Lord is behind the work. Mahâshakti is with you.

Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Do not be afraid, money and everything will come soon.

V.

</div>
