---
title: LXVI

---
<div>

[←](065_blessed_and_beloved.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](067_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/107_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/084_friend.htm)  
[«](062_dr_nanjunda_rao.htm) Addressee

## LXVI

SWITZERLAND,  
*26th August, 1896*.

DEAR NANJUNDA RAO,

I have just now got your letter. I am on the move. I have been doing a
great deal of mountain-climbing and glacier-crossing in the Alps. Now I
am going to Germany. I have an invitation from Prof. Deussen to visit
him at Kiel. From thence I go back to England. Possibly I will return to
India this winter.

What I objected to in the design for the *Prabuddha Bhârata* was not
only its tawdriness, but the crowding in of a number of figures without
any purpose. A design should be simple, symbolical, and condensed. I
will try to make a design for *Prabuddha* *Bharata* in London and send
it over to you. . . .

The work is going on beautifully, I am very glad to say. . . . I will
give you one advice however. All combined efforts in India sink under
the weight of one iniquity — we have not yet developed strict business
principles. Business is business, in the highest sense, and no
friendship — or as the Hindu proverb says "eye-shame" — should be there.
One should keep the clearest account of everything in one's charge — and
never, never apply the funds intended for one thing to any other use
whatsoever — even if one starves the next moment. This is business
integrity. Next, energy unfailing. Whatever you do let that be your
worship for the time. Let this paper be your God for the time, and you
will succeed.

When you have succeeded in this paper, start vernacular ones on the same
lines in Tamil, Telugu, Canarese, etc. We must reach the masses. The
Madrasis are good, energetic, and all that, but the land of
Shankarâchârya has lost the spirit of renunciation, it seems.

My children must plunge into the breach, must renounce the world — then
the firm foundation will be laid.

Go on bravely — never mind about designs and other details at present —
"With the horse will come the reins". Work unto death — I am with you,
and when I am gone, my spirit will work with you. This life comes and
goes — wealth, fame, enjoyments are only of a few days. It is better,
far better to die on the field of duty, preaching the truth, than to die
like a worldly worm. Advance!

Yours with all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
