---
title: LXVIII

---
<div>

[←](067_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](069_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/111_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](069_alasinga.htm)  
[«](067_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](069_alasinga.htm)

## LXVIII

14 GREY COAT GARDENS,  
WESTMINSTER, LONDON.  
*1896*

DEAR ALASINGA,

I have returned about three weeks from Switzerland but could not write
you further before. I have sent you by last mail a paper on Paul Deussen
of Kiel. Sturdy's plan about the magazine is still hanging fire. As you
see, I have left the St. George's Road place. We have a lecture hall at
39 Victoria Street. C/o E. T. Sturdy will always reach me for a year to
come. The rooms at Grey Coat Gardens are only lodgings for self and the
other Swami taken for three mouths only. The work in London is growing
apace, the classes are becoming bigger as they go on. I have no doubt
this will go on increasing at this rate and the English people are
steady and loyal. Of course, as soon as I leave, most of this fabric
will tumble down. Something will happen. Some strong man will arise to
take it up. The Lord knows what is good. In America there is room for
twenty preachers on the Vedanta and Yoga. Where to get these preachers
and where also the money to bring them? Half the United States can be
conquered in ten years, given a number of strong and genuine men. Where
are they? We are all boobies over there! Selfish cowards, with our
nonsense of lip-patriotism, orthodoxy, and boasted religious feeling!
The Madrasis have more of go and steadiness, but every fool is married.
Marriage! Marriage! Marriage! . . . Then the way our boys are married
nowadays! . . . It is very good to aspire to be a nonattached
householder; but what we want in Madras is not that just now — but
non-marriage. . . .

My child, what I want is muscles of iron and nerves of steel, inside
which dwells a mind of the same material as that of which the
thunderbolt is made. Strength, manhood, Kshatra-Virya + Brahma-Teja. Our
beautiful hopeful boys — they have everything, only if they are not
slaughtered by the millions at the altar of this brutality they call
marriage. O Lord, hear my wails! Madras will then awake when at least
one hundred of its very heart's blood, in the form of its educated young
men, will stand aside from the world, gird their loins, and be ready to
fight the battle of truth, marching on from country to country. One blow
struck outside of India is equal to a hundred thousand struck within.
Well, all will come if the Lord wills it.

Miss Müller was the person who offered that money I promised. I have
told her about your new proposal. She is thinking about it. In the
meanwhile I think it is better to give her some work. She has consented
to be the agent for the *Brahmavadin* and *Awakened India*. Will you
write to her about it? Her address is Airlie Lodge, Ridgeway Gardens,
Wimbledon, England. I was living with her over there for the last few
weeks. But the London work cannot go on without my living in London. As
such I have changed quarters. I am sorry it has chagrined Miss Müller a
bit. Cannot help. Her full name is Miss Henrietta Müller. Max Müller is
getting very friendly. I am soon going to deliver two lectures at
Oxford.

I am busy writing something big on the Vedanta philosophy. I am busy
collecting passages from the various Vedas bearing on the Vedanta in its
threefold aspect. You can help me by getting someone to collect passages
bearing on, first the Advaitic idea, then the Vishishtâdvaitic, and the
Dvaitic from the Samhitâs, the Brâhmanas, the Upanishads, and the
Purânas. They should be classified and very legibly written with the
name and chapter of the book, in each case. It would be a pity to leave
the West without leaving something of the philosophy in book form.

There was a book published in Mysore in Tamil characters, comprising all
the one hundred and eight Upanishads; I saw it in Professor Deussen's
library. Is there a reprint of the same in Devanâgari? If so, send me a
copy. If not, send me the Tamil edition, and also write on a sheet the
Tamil letters and compounds, and all juxtaposed with its Nagari
equivalents, so that I may learn the Tamil letters.

Mr. Satyanathan, whom I met in London the other day, said that there has
been a friendly review of my Râja-Yoga book in the *Madras Mail*, the
chief Anglo-Indian paper in Madras. The leading physiologist in America,
I hear, has been charmed with my speculations. At the same time, there
have been some in England, who ridiculed my ideas. Good! My speculations
of course are awfully bold; a good deal of them will ever remain
meaningless; but there are hints in it which the physiologists had
better taken up earlier. Nevertheless, I am quite satisfied with the
result. "Let them talk badly of me if they please, but let them talk",
is my motto.

In England, of course, they are gentlemen and never talk the rot I had
in America. Then again the English missionaries you see over there are
nearly all of them from the dissenters. They are not from the gentleman
class in England. The gentlemen here, who are religious; all belong to
the English Church. The dissenters have very little voice in England and
no education. I never hear of those people here against whom you time to
time warn me. They are unknown here and dare not talk nonsense. I hope
Ram K. Naidu is already in Madras, and you are enjoying good health.

Persevere on, my brave lads. We have only just begun. Never despond!
Never say enough! . . . As soon as a man comes over to the West and sees
different nations, his eyes open. This way I get strong workers — not by
talking, but by practically showing what we have in India and what we
have not. I wish at least that a million Hindus had travelled all over
the world!

Yours ever with love,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
