---
title: LXX

---
<div>

[←](069_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](071_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](069_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/100_miss_noble.htm)

## LXX

LONDON,  
*28th October, 1896*.

(On the eve of the lecture-tour of Dr. Barrows in India at the end of
1896, Swami Vivekananda in a letter to the *Indian Mirror*, Calcutta,
introduced the distinguished visitor to his countrymen and advised them
to give him a fitting reception. He wrote among other things as
follows:)

Dr. Barrows was the ablest lieutenant Mr. C. Boney could have selected
to carry out successfully his great plan of the Congresses at the
World's Fair, and it is now a matter of history how one of these
Congresses scored a unique distinction under the leadership of Dr.
Barrows.

It was the great courage, untiring industry, unruffled patience, and
never-failing courtesy of Dr. Barrows that made the Parliament a grand
success.

India, its people, and their thoughts have been brought more prominently
before the world than ever before by that wonderful gathering at
Chicago, and that national benefit we certainly owe to Dr. Barrows more
than to any other man at that meeting.

Moreover, he comes to us in the sacred name of religion, in the name of
one of the great teachers of mankind, and I am sure, his exposition of
the system of the Prophet of Nazareth would be extremely liberal and
elevating. The Christ-power this man intends to bring to India is not
that of the intolerant, dominant superior, with heart full of contempt
for everything else but its own self, but that of a brother who craves
for a brother's place as a co-worker of the various powers already
working in India. Above all, we must remember that gratitude and
hospitality are the peculiar characteristics of Indian humanity; and as
such, I would beg my countrymen to behave in such a manner that this
stranger from the other side of the globe may find that in the midst of
all our misery, our poverty, and degradation, the heart beats as warm as
of yore, when the "wealth of Ind" was the proverb of nations and India
was the land of the "Aryas".

</div>
