---
title: LXXIV

---
<div>

[←](073_madam.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](075_doctor_shashi.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/108_miss_noble.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/109_lalajee.htm)  
Addressee
[»](../../volume_4/translation_prose/the_education_that_india_needs.htm)

## LXXIV

(Translated from [Bengali](b7331e5074.htm) )

ॐ तत् सत्

ROSE BANK,  
THE MAHARAJA OF BURDWAN'S HOUSE,  
DARJEELING,  
*6th April, 1897*.

HONOURED MADAM, (Shrimati Sarala Ghoshal — Editor, *Bharati*)

I feel much obliged for the *Bhârati* sent by you, and consider myself
fortunate that the cause, to which my humble life has been dedicated,
has been able to win the approbation off highly talented ladies like
you.

In this battle of life, men are rare who encourage the initiator off new
thought, not to speak of women who would offer him encouragement,
particularly in our unfortunate land. It is therefore that the
approbation of an educated Bengali lady is more valuable than the loud
applause of all the men of India.

May the Lord grant that many women like you be born in this country, and
devote their lives to the betterment of their motherland!

I have something to say in regard to the article you have written about
me in the *Bharati*. It is this. It has been for the good of India that
religious preaching in the West has been and will be done. It has ever
been my conviction that we shall not be able to rise unless the Western
people come to our help. In this country no appreciation of merit can
yet be found, no financial strength, and what is most lamentable of all,
there is not a bit of practicality.

There are many things to be done, but means are wanting in this country.
We have brains, but no hands. We have the doctrine of Vedanta, but we
have not the power to reduce it into practice. In our books there is the
doctrine of universal equality, but in work we make great distinctions.
It was in India that unselfish and disinterested work of the most
exalted type was preached but in practice *we* are awfully cruel,
awfully heartless — unable to think of anything besides our own
mass-of-flesh bodies.

Yet it is only through the present state of things that it is possible
to proceed to work. There is no other way. Every one has the power to
judge of good end evil, but he is the hero who undaunted by the waves of
Samsâra — which is full of errors, delusions, and miseries — with one
hand wipes the tears, and with the other, unshaken, shows the path of
deliverance. On the one hand there is the conservative society, like a
mass of inert matter; on the other the restless, impatient, fire-darting
reformer; the way to good lies between the two. I heard in Japan that it
was the belief of the girls of that country that their dolls would be
animated if they were loved with all their heart. The Japanese girl
never breaks her doll. O you of great fortune! I too believe that India
will awake again if anyone could love with all his heart the people of
the country — bereft of the grace of affluence, of blasted fortune,
their discretion totally lost, downtrodden, ever-starved, quarrelsome,
and envious. Then only will India awake, when hundreds of large-hearted
men and women, giving up all desires of enjoying the luxuries of life,
will long and exert themselves to their utmost for the well-being of the
millions of their countrymen who are gradually sinking lower and lower
in the vortex of destitution and ignorance. I have experienced even in
my insignificant life that good motives, sincerity, and infinite love
can conquer the world. One single soul possessed of these virtues can
destroy the dark designs of millions of hypocrites and brutes.

My going to the West again is yet uncertain; if I go, know that too will
be for India. Where is the strength of men in this country? Where is the
strength of money? Many men and women of the West are ready to do good
to India by serving even the lowest Chandâlas, in the Indian way, and
through the Indian religion. How many such are there in this country?
And financial strength! To meet the expenses or my reception, the people
of Calcutta made me deliver a lecture and sold tickets! . . . I do not
blame nor censure anybody for this, I only want to show that our
well-being is impossible without men and money coming from the West.

Ever grateful and ever praying to the Lord for your welfare,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
