---
title: LXXV

---
<div>

[←](074_honoured_madam.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](076_mr_.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/093_sudhir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/124_sir.htm)

## LXXV

ALMORA,  
*29th May, 1897*.

MY DEAR DOCTOR SHASHI (BHUSHAN GHOSH),

Your letter and the two bottles containing the medicines were duly
received. I have begun from last evening a trial of your medicines. Hope
the combination will have a better effect than the one alone.

I began to take a lot of exercise on horseback, both morning and
evening. Since that I am very much better indeed. I was so much better
the first week of my gymnastics that I have scarcely felt so well since
I was a boy and used to have *kusti* (wrestling) exercises. I really
began to feel that it was a pleasure to have a body. Every movement made
me conscious of strength — every movement of the muscles was
pleasurable. That exhilarating feeling has subsided somewhat, yet I feel
very strong. In a trial of strength I could make both G. G. and Niranjan
go down before me in a minute. In Darjeeling I always felt that I was
not the same man. Here I feel that I have no disease whatsoever, but
there is one marked change. I never in my life could sleep as soon as I
got into bed. I must toss for at least two hours. Only from Madras to
Darjeeling (during the first month) I would sleep as soon as my head
touched the pillow. That ready disposition to sleep is gone now
entirely, and my old tossing habit and feeling hot after the evening
meal have come back. I do not feel any heat after the day meal. There
being an orchard here, I began to take more fruit than usual as soon as
I came. But the only fruit to be got here now is the apricot. I am
trying to get more varieties from Naini Tâl. There has not been any
thirst even though the days are fearfully hot. . . . On the whole my own
feeling is one of revival of great strength and cheerfulness, and a
feeling of exuberant health, only I am afraid I am getting fat on a too
much milk diet. Don't you listen to what Yogen writes. He is a
hypochondriac himself and wants to make everybody so. I ate
one-sixteenth of a *barphi* (sweetmeat) in Lucknow, and that according
to Yogen was what put me out of sorts in Almora! Yogen is expected here
in a few days. I am going to take him in hand. By the by, I am very
susceptible to malarious influences. The first week's indisposition at
Almora might have been caused to a certain extent by my passage through
the *Terai*. Anyhow I feel very, very strong now. You ought to see me,
Doctor, when I sit meditating in front of the beautiful snow-peaks and
repeat from the Upanishads: "न तस्य रोगो न जरा न मृत्युः प्राप्तस्य
योगाग्निमयं शरीरम् — He has neither disease, nor decay, nor death; for,
verily, he has obtained a body full of the fire of Yoga."

I am very glad to learn of the success of the meetings of the
Ramakrishna Mission at Calcutta. All blessings attend those that help in
the great work. . . .

With all love,

Yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
