---
title: LXXVIII

---
<div>

[←](077_sharat_chandra.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles — First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](079_mother.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/096_miss_noble.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/114_shivananda.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/123_mary.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/123_mary.htm)

## LXXVIII

ALMORA,  
*9th July, 1897*.

DEAR SISTER, (Miss Mary Hale.)

I am very sorry to read between the lines the desponding tone of your
letter, and I understand the cause; thank you for your warning, I
understand your motive perfectly. I had arranged to go with Ajit Singh
to England; but the doctors not allowing, it fell through. I shall be so
happy to learn that Harriet has met him. He will be only too glad to
meet any of you.

I had also a lot of cuttings from different American papers fearfully
criticising my utterances about American women and furnishing me with
the strange news that I had been outcasted! As if I had any caste to
lose, being a Sannyâsin!

Not only no caste has been lost, but it has considerably shattered the
opposition to sea-voyage — my going to the West. If I should have to be
outcasted, it would be with half the ruling princes of India and almost
all of educated India. On the other hand, a leading Raja of the caste to
which I belonged before my entering the order got up a banquet in my
honour, at which were most of the *big bugs* of that caste. The
Sannyasins, on the other hand, may not dine with any one in India, as it
would be beneath the dignity of gods to dine with mere mortals. They are
regarded as Nârâyanas, while the others are mere men. And dear Mary,
these feet have been washed and wiped and worshipped by the descendants
of kings, and there has been a progress through the country which none
ever commanded in India.

It will suffice to say that the police were necessary to keep order if I
ventured out into the street! That is outcasting indeed! Of course, that
took the starch out of the missionaries, and who are they here? —
Nobodies. We are in blissful ignorance of their existence all the time.
I had in a lecture said something about the missionaries and the origin
of that species except the English Church gentlemen, and in that
connection had to refer to the very churchy women of America and their
power of inventing scandals. This the missionaries are parading as an
attack on American women *en masse* to undo my work there, as they well
know that anything said against themselves will rather please the U.S.
people. My dear Mary, supposing I had said all sorts of fearful things
against the "Yanks" — would that be paying off a millionth part of what
they say of our *mothers* and *sisters*? "Neptune's waters" would be
perfectly useless to wash off the hatred the Christian "Yanks" of both
sexes bear to us "heathens of India" — and what harm have we done them?
Let the "Yanks" learn to be patient under criticism and then criticise
others. It is a well-known psychological fact that those who are ever
ready to abuse others cannot bear the slightest touch of criticism from
others. Then again, what do I owe them? Except your family, Mrs. Bull,
the Leggetts, and a few other kind persons, who else has been kind to
me? Who came forward to help me work out my ideas? I had to work till I
am at death's door and had to spend nearly the whole of that energy in
America, so that the Americans may learn to be broader and more
spiritual. In England I worked only six months. There was not a breath
of scandal save one, and that was the working of an American woman,
which greatly relieved my English friends — not only no attacks but many
of the best English Church clergymen became my firm friends, and without
asking I got much help for my work, and I am sure to get much more.
There is a society watching my work and getting help for it, and four
respectable persons followed me to India to help my work, and dozens
were ready, and the next time I go, hundreds will be.

Dear, dear Mary, do not be afraid for me. . . The world is big, very
big, and there must be some place for me even if the "Yankees" rage.
Anyhow, I am quite satisfied with my work. I never planned anything. I
have taken things as they came. Only one idea was burning in my brain —
to start the machine for elevating the Indian masses — and that I have
succeeded in doing to a certain extent. It would have made your heart
glad to see how my boys are working in the midst of famine and disease
and misery — nursing by the mat-bed of the cholera-stricken Pariah and
feeding the starving Chandâla — and the Lord sends help to me and to
them all. "What are men?" He is with me, the Beloved, He was when I was
in America, in England, when I was roaming about unknown from place to
place in India. What do I care about what they talk — the babies, they
do not know any better. What! I, who have realised the Spirit and the
vanity of all earthly nonsense, to be swerved from my path by babies'
prattle! Do I look like that?

I had to talk a lot about myself because I owned that to you. I feel my
task is done — at most three or four years more of life are left. I have
lost all wish for my salvation. I never wanted earthly enjoyments. I
must see my machine in strong working order, and then knowing sure that
I have put in a lever for the good of humanity, in India at least, which
no power can drive back, I will sleep, without caring what will be next;
and may I be born again and again, and suffer thousands of miseries so
that I may worship the only God that exists, the only God I believe in,
the sum total of all souls — and above all, my God the wicked, my God
the miserable, my God the poor of all races, of all species, is the
special object of my worship.

"He who is in you and is outside of you, who works through every hand,
who walks through every foot, whose body you are, Him worship, and break
all other idols.

"He who is the high and the low, the saint and the sinner, the god and
the worm, Him worship, the visible, the knowable, the real, the
omnipresent, break all other idols.

"In whom there is neither past life nor future birth, nor death nor
going or coming, in whom we always have been and always will be one, Him
worship, break all other idols.

"Ay, fools, neglecting the living Gods and His infinite reflection with
which the world is full, and running after imaginary shadows! Him
worship, the only visible, and break all other idols."

My time is short. I have got to unbreast whatever I have to say, without
caring if it smarts some or irritates others. Therefore, my dear Mary,
do not be frightened at whatever drops from my lips, for the power
behind me is not Vivekananda but He the Lord, and He knows best. If I
have to please the world, that will be injuring the world; the voice of
the majority is wrong, seeing that they govern and make the sad state of
the world. Every new thought must create opposition — in the civilised a
polite sneer, in the vulgar savage howls and filthy scandals.

Even these earthworms must stand erect, even children must see light.
The Americans are drunk with new wine. A hundred waves of prosperity
have come and gone over my country. We have learned the lesson which no
child can yet understand. It is vanity. This hideous world is Maya.
Renounce and be happy. Give up the idea of sex and possessions. There is
no other bond. Marriage and sex and money are the only living devils.
All earthly love proceeds from the body. No sex, no possessions; as
these fall off, the eyes open to spiritual vision. The soul regains its
own infinite power. How I wish I were in England to see Harriet. I have
one wish left — to see you four sisters before I die, and that must
happen.

Yours ever affly.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
