---
title: LXXXIX

---
<div>

[←](088_your_highness.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](090_joe.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/131_nivedita.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/132_christina.htm)  
[«](../../volume_4/translation_prose/our_present_social_problems.htm)
Addressee

## LXXXIX

(Translated from [Bengali](b8394e5089.htm) )

DEOGHAR, VAIDYANATH.  
*3rd January, 1899*.

DEAR MOTHER, (Shrimati Mrinalini Bose)

Some very important questions have been raised in your letter. It is not
possible to answer them fully in a short note, still I reply to them as
briefly as possible.

\(1\) Rishi, Muni, or God — none has power to force an institution on
society. When the needs of the times press hard on it, society adopts
certain customs for self-preservation. Rishis have only recorded those
customs As a man often resorts even to such means as are good for
immediate self-protection but which are very injurious in the future,
similarly society also not unfrequently saves itself for the time being,
but these immediate means which contributed to its preservation turn out
to be terrible in the long run.

For example, take the prohibition of widow-marriage in our country.
Don't think that Rishis or wicked men introduced the law pertaining to
it. Notwithstanding the desire of men to keep women completely under
their control, they never could succeed in introducing those laws
without betaking themselves to the aid of a social necessity of the
time. Of this custom two points should be specially observed:

\(a\) Widow-marriage takes place among the lower classes.

\(b\) Among the higher classes the number of women is greater than that
of men.

Now, if it be the rule to marry every girl, it is difficult enough to
get one husband apiece; then how to get, in succession, two or three for
each? Therefore has society put one party under disadvantage, i.e. it
does not let her have a second husband, who has had one; if it did, one
maid would have to go without a husband. On the other hand,
widow-marriage obtains in communities having a greater number of men
than women, as in their case the objection stated above does not exist.
It is becoming more and more difficult in the West, too, for unmarried
girls to get husbands.

Similar is the case with the caste system and other social customs.

So, if it be necessary to change any social custom the *necessity*
underlying it should be found out first of all, and by altering it, the
custom will die of itself. Otherwise no good will be done by
condemnation or praise.

\(2\) Now the question is: Is it for the good of the public at large
that social rules are framed or society is formed? Many reply to this in
the affirmative; some, again, may hold that it is not so. Some men,
being comparatively powerful, slowly bring all others under their
control and by stratagem, force, or adroitness gain their own objects.
If this be true, what can be the meaning of the statement that there is
danger in giving liberty to the ignorant? What, again, is the meaning of
liberty?

Liberty does not certainly mean the absence of obstacles in the path of
misappropriation of wealth etc. by you and me, but it is our natural
right to be allowed to use our own body, intelligence, or wealth
according to our will, without doing any harm to others; and all the
members of a society ought to have the same opportunity for obtaining
wealth, education, or knowledge. The second question is: Those who say
that if the ignorant and the poor be given liberty, i.e. full right to
their body, wealth, etc., and if their children have the same
opportunity to better their condition and acquire knowledge as those of
the rich and the highly situated, they would become perverse — do they
say this for the good of society or blinded by their selfishness? In
England too I have heard, "Who will serve us if the lower classes get
education?"

For the luxury of a handful of the rich, let millions of men and women
remain submerged in the hell of want and abysmal depth of ignorance, for
if they get wealth and education, society will be upset!

Who constitute society? The millions — or you, I, and a few others of
the upper classes?

Again, even if the latter be true, what ground is there for our vanity
that we lead others? Are we omniscient? उद्धरेदात्मनात्मानं — One should
raise the self by the self." Let each one work out one's own salvation.
Freedom in all matters, i.e. advance towards Mukti is the worthiest gain
of man. To advance oneself towards freedom — physical, mental, and
spiritual — and help others to do so, is the supreme prize of man. Those
social rules which stand in the way of the unfoldment of this freedom
are injurious, and steps should be taken to destroy them speedily. Those
institutions should be encouraged by which men advance in the path of
freedom.

That in this life we feel a deep love at first sight towards a
particular person who may not be endowed with extraordinary qualities,
is explained by the thinkers of our country as due to the associations
of a past incarnation.

Your question regarding the will is very interesting: it is the subject
to know. The essence of all religions is the annihilation of desire,
along with which comes, of a certainty, the annihilation of the will as
well, for desire is only the name of a particular mode of the will. Why,
again, is this world? Or why are these manifestations of the will? Some
religions hold that the evil will should be destroyed and not the good.
The denial of desire here would be compensated by enjoyments hereafter.
This reply does not of course satisfy the wise. The Buddhists, on the
other hand, say that desire is the cause of misery, its annihilation is
quite desirable. But like killing a man in the effort to kill the
mosquito on his cheek, they have gone to the length of annihilating
their own selves in their efforts to destroy misery according to the
Buddhistic doctrine.

The fact is, what we call will is an inferior modification of something
higher. Desirelessness means the disappearance of the inferior
modification in the form of will and the appearance of that superior
state. That state is beyond the range of mind and intellect. But though
the look of the gold mohur is quite different from that of the rupee and
the pice, yet as we know for certain that the gold mohur is greater than
either, so, that highest state — Mukti, or Nirvâna, call it what you
like — though out of the reach of the mind and intellect, is greater
than the will and all other powers. It is no power, but power is its
modification, therefore it is higher. Now you will see that the result
of the proper exercise of the will, first with motive for an object and
then without motive, is that the will-power will attain a much higher
state.

In the preliminary state, the form of the Guru is to be meditated upon
by the disciple. Gradually it is to be merged in the Ishta. By Ishta is
meant the object of love and devotion. . . . It is very difficult to
superimpose divinity on man, but one is sure to succeed by repeated
efforts. God is in every man, whether man knows it or not; your loving
devotion is bound to call up the divinity in him.

Ever your well-wisher,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
