---
title: XC

---
<div>

[←](089_mother.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](091_friend.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/132_christina.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/133_raja.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/135_joe.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/139_miss_macleod.htm)

## XC

THE MATH, BELUR,  
HOWRAH, BENGAL,  
*2nd February, 1899*.

MY DEAR JOE, (Miss Josephine MacLeod.)

You must have reached N.Y. by this time and are in the midst of your own
after a long absence. Fortune has favoured you at every step of this
journey — even the sea was smooth and calm, and the ship nearly empty of
undesirable company. Well, with me it is doing otherwise. I am almost
desperate I could not accompany you. Neither did the change at
Vaidyanath do me any good. I nearly died there, was suffocating for
eight days and nights!! I was brought back to Calcutta more dead than
alive, and here I am struggling to get back to life again.

Dr. Sarkar is treating me now.

I am not so despondent now as I was. I am reconciled to my fate. This
year seems to be very hard for us. Yogananda, who used to live in
Mother's house, is suffering for the last month and every day is at
death's door. Mother knows best. I am roused to work again, though not
personally but am sending the boys all over India to make a stir once
more. Above all, as you know, the chief difficulty is of funds. Now that
you are in America, Joe, try to raise some funds for our work over here.

I hope to rally again by March, and by April I start for Europe. Again
Mother knows best.

I have suffered mentally and physically all my life, but Mother's
kindness has been immense. The joy and blessings I had infinitely more
than I deserve. And I am struggling not to fail Mother, but that she
will always find me fighting, end my last breath will be on the
battlefield.

My best love and blessings for you ever and ever.

Ever yours in the Truth,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
