---
title: XCIV

---
<div>

[←](093_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](095_sturdy.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/167_joe.htm) Chronology
[»](095_sturdy.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/197_mother.htm) Addressee
[»](096_mother.htm)

## XCIV

PRABUDDHA BHARATA OFFICE,  
ADVAITA ASHRAMA,

MAYAVATI (VIA ALMORA),  
KUMAON, HIMALAYAS,  
*6th January, 1901*.

MY DEAR MOTHER, (Mrs. Ole Bull.)

I send you forthwith a translation of the *Nâsadiya* Hymn sent by Dr.
Bose through you. I have tried to make it as literal as possible.

I hope Dr. Bose has recovered his health perfectly by this time.

Mrs. Sevier is a strong woman, and has borne her loss quietly and
bravely. She is coming over to England in April, and I am going over
with her.

I ought to come to England as early as I can this summer; and as she
must go to attend to her husband's affairs, I accompany her.

This place is very, very beautiful, and they have made it simply
exquisite. It is a huge place several acres in area, and is very well
kept. I hope Mrs. Sevier will be in a position to keep it up in the
future. She wishes it ever so much, of course.

My last letter from Joe informed me that she was going up the . . . with
Mme Calvé.

I am very glad to learn that Margot is leaving her lore for future use.
Her book has been very much appreciated here, but the publishers do not
seem to make any effort at sale.

The first day's touch of Calcutta brought the asthma back; and every
night I used to get a fit during the two weeks I was there. I am,
however, very well in the Himalayas.

It is snowing heavily here, and I was caught in a blizzard on the way;
but it is not very cold, and all this exposure to the snows for two days
on my way here seems to have done me a world of good.

Today I walked over the snow uphill about a mile, seeing Mrs. Sevier's
lands; she has made beautiful roads all over. Plenty of gardens, fields,
orchards, and large forests, all in her land. The living houses are so
simple, so clean, and so pretty, and above all so suited for the
purpose.

Are you going to America soon? If not, I hope to see you in London in
three months.

Kindly give my best wishes to Miss Olcock and kindly convey my undying
love to Miss Müller the next time you see her; so to Sturdy. I have seen
my mother, my cousin, and all my people in Calcutta.

Kindly send the remittance you send my cousin to me — in my name so that
I shall cash the cheque and give her the money. Saradananda and
Brahmananda and the rest were well in the Math when I last left them.

All here send love.

Ever your loving son,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Kali has taken two sacrifices; the cause has already two European
martyrs. Now, it is going to rise up splendidly.

V.

My love to Alberta and Mrs. Vaughan.

The snow is lying all round six inches deep, the sun is bright and
glorious, and now in the middle of the day we are sitting outside,
reading. And the snow all about us! The winter here is very mild in
spite of the snow. The air is dry and balmy, and the water beyond all
praise.

V.

</div>
