---
title: XCVI

---
<div>

[←](095_sturdy.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](097_shashi.htm)

  

[«](095_sturdy.htm) Chronology [»](097_shashi.htm)  
[«](094_mother.htm) Addressee [»](098_mother.htm)

## XCVI

THE MATH, BELUR,  
HOWRAH DIST.,  
BENGAL,  
*26th January, 1901*.

MY DEAR MOTHER, (Mrs. Ole Bull)

Many thanks for your very encouraging words. I needed them very much
just now. The gloom has not lifted with the advent of the new century,
it is visibly thickening. I went to see Mrs. Sevier at Mayavati. On my
way I learnt of the sudden death of the Raja of Khetri. It appears he
was restoring some old architectural monument at Agra, at his own
expense, and was up some tower on inspection. Part of the tower came
down, and he was instantly killed.

The three cheques have arrived. They will reach my cousin when next I
see her.

Joe is here, but I have not seen her yet.

The moment I touch Bengal, especially the Math, the asthmatic fits
return! The moment I leave, I recover!

I am going to take my mother on pilgrimage next week. It may take months
to make the complete round of pilgrimages. This is the one great wish of
a Hindu widow. I have brought only misery to my people all my life. I am
trying at least to fulfil this one wish of hers.

I am so glad to learn all that about Margot; everybody here is eager to
welcome her back.

I hope Dr. Bose has completely recovered by this time.

I had a beautiful letter also from Mrs. Hammond. She is a great soul.

However, I am very calm and self-possessed this time and find everything
better than I ever expected.

With all love,

Ever your son,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
