---
title: CI

---
<div>

[←](100_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](102_swarup.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/191_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/192_sir.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/191_mother.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/197_mother.htm)

## CI

DACCA,  
*29th March, 1901*.

MY DEAR MOTHER, (Mrs. Ole Bull.)

By this time you must have received my other note from Dacca.
Saradananda has been suffering badly from fever in Calcutta, which has
become simply a hell of demons this year. He has recovered and is now in
the Math which, thank God, is one of the healthiest places in our
Bengal.

I do not know what conversation took place between you and my mother; I
was not present. I suppose it was only an eager desire on her part to
see Margot, nothing else.

My advice to Margot would be to mature her plans in England and work
them out a good length before she comes back. Good solid work must wait.

Saradananda expects to go to Darjeeling to Mrs. Banerji, who has been in
Calcutta for a few days, as soon as he is strong enough.

I have no news yet of Joe from Japan. Mrs. Sevier expects to sail soon.
My mother, aunt, and cousin came over five days ago to Dacca, as there
was a great sacred bath in the Brahmaputra river. Whenever a particular
conjunction of planets takes place, which is very rare, a huge concourse
of people gather on the river on a particular spot. This year there has
been more than a hundred thousand people; for miles the river was
covered with boats.

The river, though nearly a mile broad at the place, was one mass of mud!
But it was firm enough, so we had our bath and Pujâ (worship), and all
that.

I am rather enjoying Dacca. I am going to take my mother and the other
ladies to Chandranath, a holy place at the easternmost corner of Bengal.

I am rather well and hope you and your daughter and Margot are also
enjoying splendid health.

With everlasting love,

Ever your son,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. My cousin and mother send you and Margot their love.

PS. I do not know the date.

V.

</div>
