---
title: CIV

---
<div>

[←](103_mary.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](105_joe.htm)

  

[«](103_mary.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/198_mrs_hansbrough.htm)  
[«](097_shashi.htm) Addressee

## CIV

(Translated from [Bengali](b8530e5104.pdf) )

MATH, BELUR,  
DIST., HOWRAH,  
*3rd June, 1901*.

MY DEAR SHASHI, (Swami Ramakrishnanada)

Reading your letter I felt like laughing, and also rather sorry. The
cause of the laughter is that you had a dream through indigestion and
made yourself miserable, taking it to be real. The cause of my sorrow is
that it is clear from this that your health is not good, and that your
nerves require rest very badly.

Never have I laid a curse on you, and why should I do so now? All your
life you have known my love for you, and today are you doubting it?
True, my temper was ever bad, and nowadays owing to illness it
occasionally becomes terrible — but know this for certain that my love
can never cease.

My health nowadays is becoming a little better. Have the rains started
in Madras? When the rains begin a little in the South, I may go to
Madras via Bombay and Poona. With the onset of the rains the terrible
heat of the South will perhaps subside.

My great love to you and all others. Yesterday Sharat returned to the
Math from Darjeeling — his health is much better than it was before. I
have come here after a tour of East Bengal and Assam. All work has its
ups and downs, its periods of intensity and slackness. Again it will
rise up. What fear? . . . .

Whatever that may be, I say that you stop your work for some time and
come straight back to the Math. After you have taken a month's rest
here, you and I together will make a grand tour via Gujarat, Bombay,
Poona, Hyderabad, Mysore to Madras. Would not that be grand? If you
cannot do this, stop your lectures in Madras for a month. Take a little
good food and sleep well. Within two or three months I shall go there.
In any case, reply immediately as to what you decide to do.

Yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
