---
title: CV

---
<div>

[←](104_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](106_joe.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/198_mrs_hansbrough.htm)
Chronology [»](106_joe.htm)  
[«](100_joe.htm) Addressee [»](106_joe.htm)

## CV

THE MATH, BELUR,  
HOWRAH DIST.,  
*14th June, 1901*.

DEAR JOE, (Miss Josephine MacLeod.)

I am so glad you are enjoying Japan — especially Japanese art. You are
perfectly correct in saying that we will have to learn many things from
Japan. The help that Japan will give us will be with great sympathy and
respect, whereas that from the West unsympathetic and destructive.
Certainly it is very desirable to establish a connection between India
and Japan.

As for me, I was thrown *hors de combat* in Assam. The climate of the
Math is just reviving me a bit. At Shillong — the hill sanatorium of
Assam — I had fever, asthma, increase of albumen, and my body swelled to
almost twice its normal size. These symptoms subsided, however, as soon
as I reached the Math. It is dreadfully hot this year; but a bit of rain
has commenced, and I hope we will soon have the monsoon in full force. I
have no plans just now, except that the Bombay Presidency wants me so
badly that I think of going there soon. We are thinking of starting
touring through Bombay in a week or so.

The 300 dollars you speak of sent by Lady Betty have not reached me yet,
nor have I any intimation of its arrival from General Patterson.

He, poor man, was rather miserable, after his wife and children sailed
for Europe and asked me to come and see him, but unfortunately I was so
ill, and am so afraid of going into the City that I must wait till the
rains have set in.

Now, Joe dear, if I am to go to Japan, this time it is necessary that I
take Saradananda with me to carry on the work. Also I must have the
promised letter to Li Huang Chang from Mr. Maxim; but Mother knows the
rest. I am still undecided.

So you went to Alanquinan to see the foreteller? Did he convince you of
his powers? What did he say? Write particular *s’il vous plait*.

Jules Bois went as far as Lahore, being prevented from entering Nepal. I
learn from the papers that he could not bear the heat and fell ill; then
he took ship *et bon voyage*. He did not write me a single line since we
met in the Math. You also are determined to drag Mrs. Bull down to Japan
from Norway all the way — *bien, Mademoiselle, vous êtes use puissante
magicienne, sans doute*. (Well, Miss, you are undoubtedly a powerful
magician.). Well, Joe, keep health and spirits up; the Alanquinan man's
words come out true most of them; and *glorie et honneur* await you —
and Mukti. The natural ambition of woman is through marriage to climb
up, leaning upon a man; but those days are gone. You shall be great
without the help of any man, just as you are, plain, dear Joe — our Joe,
everlasting Joe. . . .

We have seen enough of this life to care for any of its bubbles have we
not Joe? For months I have been practicing to drive away all sentiments;
therefore I stop here, and good-bye just now. It is ordained by Mother
we work together; it has been already for the good of many; it shall be
for the good of many more; so let it be. It is useless planning, useless
high flights; Mother will find Her own way; . . . rest assured.

Ever yours with love and heart's blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Just now came a cheque for Rs. 300 from Mr. Okakura, and the
invitation. It is very tempting, but Mother knows all the same.

V.

</div>
