---
title: CVIII

---
<div>

[←](107_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](109_christine.htm)

  

[«](107_joe.htm) Chronology [»](109_christine.htm)  
[«](103_mary.htm) Mary Hale [»](110_mary.htm)

## CVIII

THE MATH,  
*5th July, 1901*.

MY DEAR MARY, (Miss Mary Hale.)

I am very thankful for your very long and nice letter, especially as I
needed just such a one to cheer me up a bit. My health has been and is
very bad. I recover for a few days only; then comes the inevitable
collapse. Well, this is the nature of the disease anyway.

I have been touring of late in Eastern Bengal and Assam. Assam is, next
to Kashmir, the most beautiful country in India, but very unhealthy. The
huge Brahmaputra winding in and out of mountains and hills, studded with
islands, is of course worth one's while to see.

My country is, as you know, the land of waters. But never did I realise
before what that meant. The rivers of East Bengal are oceans of rolling
fresh water, not rivers, and so long that steamers work on them for
weeks. Miss MacLeod is in Japan. She is of course charmed with the
country and asked me to come over, but my health not permitting such a
long voyage, I desisted. I have seen Japan before.

So you are enjoying Venice. The old man must be delicious; only Venice
was the home of old Shylock, was it not?

Sam is with you this year — I am so glad! He must be enjoying the good
things of Europe after his dreary experience in the North. I have not
made any interesting friends of late, and the old ones that you knew of,
have nearly all passed away, even the Raja of Khetri. He died of a fall
from a high tower at Secundra, the tomb of Emperor Akbar. He was
repairing this old grand piece of architecture at his own expense at
Agra, and one day while on inspection, he missed his footing, and it was
a sheer fall of several hundred feet. Thus we sometimes come to grief on
account of our zeal for antiquity. Take care, Mary, don't be too zealous
for your piece of Indian antiquity.

In the Mission Seal, the snake represents mysticism; the sun knowledge;
the worked up waters activity; the lotus love; the swan the soul in the
midst of all.

With love to Sam and to mother,

Ever with love,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. My letter had to be short; I am out of sorts all the time; it is the
body!

</div>
