---
title: CXII

---
<div>

[←](111_blessed_and_beloved.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](113_joe.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/203_christine.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/168_nivedita.htm)  
[«](111_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Addressee

## CXII

THE MATH, BELUR,  
HOWRAH DIST.,  
*7th September, 1901*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED, (Shri M. N. Banerji.)

I had to consult Brahmananda and others, and they were everyone in
Calcutta, hence the delay in replying to your last.

The idea of taking a house for a whole year must be worked out with
deliberation. As on the one hand there is some risk of catching malaria
in Belur this month, in Calcutta on the other hand there is the danger
of plague. Then again one is sure to avoid fever if one takes good care
not to go into the interior of this village, the immediate bank of the
river being entirely free from fever. Plague has not come to the river
yet, and all the available places in this village are filled with
Marwaris during the plague season.

Then again you ought to mention the maximum rent you can pay, and we
seek the house accordingly. The quarter in the city is another
suggestion. For myself, I have almost become a foreigner to Calcutta.
But others will soon find a house after your mind. The sooner you decide
these two points: (1) Whether mother stays at Belur or Calcutta, (2) If
Calcutta, what rent and quarter, the better, as it can be done in a
trice after receiving your reply.

Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. We are all right here. Moti has returned after his week's stay in
Calcutta. It is raining here day and night last three days. Two of our
cows have calved.

V.

</div>
