---
title: CXIV

---
<div>

[←](113_joe.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](115_mrs_ole_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/215_joe.htm) Chronology
[»](115_mrs_ole_bull.htm)  
[«](102_swarup.htm) Addressee

## CXIV

GOPAL LAL VILLA,  
BENARES (VARANASI) CANTONMENT,  
*9th February, 1902*.

MY DEAR SWARUP(ÂNANDA),

. . . In answer to Châru's letter, tell him to study the *Brahma-Sutras*
himself. What does he mean by the *Brahma-Sutras* containing references
to Buddhism? He means the Bhâshyas, of course, or rather ought to mean,
and Shankara was only the last Bhâshyakâra (commentator). There are
references, though in Buddhistic literature, to Vedanta, and the
Mahâyâna school of Buddhism is even Advaitistic. Why does Amara Singha,
a Buddhist, give as one of the names of Buddha — Advayavâdi ? Charu
writes, the word Brahman does not occur in the Upanishads! *Quelle
bêtise*!

I hold the Mahayana to be the older of the two schools of Buddhism.

The theory of Mâyâ is as old as the Rik-Samhitâ. The Shvetâshvatara
Upanishad contains the word "Maya" which is developed out of Prakriti. I
hold that Upanishad to be at least older than Buddhism.

I have had much light of late about Buddhism, and I am ready to prove:

\(1\) That Shiva-worship, in various forms, antedated the Buddhists,
that the Buddhists tried to get hold of the sacred places of the Shaivas
but, failing in that, made new places in the precincts just as you find
now at Bodh-Gayâ and Sârnâth (Varanasi).

\(2\) The story in the Agni Purâna about Gayâsura does not refer to
Buddha at all — as Dr. Rajendralal will have it — but simply to a
pre-existing story.

\(3\) That Buddha went to live on Gayâshirsha mountain proves the
pre-existence of the place.

\(4\) Gaya was a place of ancestor-worship already, and the
footprint-worship the Buddhists copied from the Hindus.

\(5\) About Varanasi, even the oldest records go to prove it as the
great place of Shiva-worship; etc., etc.

Many are the new facts I have gathered in Bodh-Gaya and from Buddhist
literature. Tell Charu to read for himself, and not be swayed by foolish
opinions.

I am rather well here, in Varanasi, and if I go on improving in this
way, it will be a great gain.

A total revolution has occurred in my mind about the relation of
Buddhism and Neo-Hinduism. I may not live to work out the glimpses, but
I shall leave the lines of work indicated, and you and your brethren
will have to work it out.

Yours with all blessings and love,

VIVEKANANDA

</div>
