---
title: CXV

---
<div>

[←](114_swarup.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](116_sister_nivedita.htm)

  

[«](114_swarup.htm) Chronology [»](116_sister_nivedita.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/197_mother.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/220_mother.htm)

## CXV

GOPAL LAL VILLA,  
BENARES (VARANASI) CANTONMENT,  
*10th February, 1902*.

  
Welcome to India once more, dear mother (Mrs. Ole Bull) and daughter. A
copy of a Madras journal that I received through the kindness of Joe
delighted me exceedingly, as the reception Niveditâ had in Madras was
for the good of both Nivedita and Madras. Her speech was indeed
beautiful.

I hope you are resting well after your long journey, and so is Nivedita.
I wish it so much that you should go for a few hours to a few villages
west of Calcutta to see the old Bengali structures made of wood, bamboo,
cane, mica, and grass.

These are the bungalows, most artistic. Alas! the name is travestied
nowadays by every pigsty appropriating the name.

In old days a man who built a palace still built a bungalow for the
reception of guests. The art is dying out. I wish I could build the
whole of Nivedita's School in that style. Yet it is good to see the few
that yet remained, at least one.

Brahmananda will arrange for it, and you have only to take a journey of
a few hours.

Mr. Okakura has started on his short tour. He intends to visit Agra,
Gwalior, Ajanta, Ellora, Chittore, Udaipur, Jaipur, and Delhi.

A very well-educated rich young man of Varanasi, with whose father we
had a long-standing friendship, came back to this city yesterday. He is
especially interested in art, and spending purposely a lot of money in
his attempts to revive dying Indian arts. He came to see me only a few
hours after Mr. Okakura left. He is just the man to show him artistic
India (i.e. what little is left), and I am sure he will be much
benefited by Okakura's suggestions. Okakura just found a common
terracotta water-vessel here used by the servants. The shape and the
embossed work on it simply charmed him, but as it is common earthenware
and would not bear the journey, he left a request with me to have it
reproduced in brass. I was at my wit's end as to what to do. My young
friend comes a few hours after, and not only undertakes to have it done
but offers to show a few hundreds of embossed designs in terracotta
infinitely superior to the one Okakura fancied.

He also offers to show us old paintings in that wonderful old style.
Only one family is left in Varanasi who can paint after the old style
yet. One of them has painted a whole hunting scene on a pea, perfect in
detail and action!

I hope Okakura will come to this city on his return and be this
gentleman's guest and see a bit of what is left.

Niranjan has gone with Mr. Okakura, and as he is a Japanese, they don't
object to his going into any temple. It seems that the Tibetans and the
other Northern Buddhists have been coming here to worship Shiva all
along.

They allowed him to touch the sign of Shiva and worship. Mrs. Annie
Besant tried once, but, poor woman, although she bared her feet, put on
a Sari, and humiliated herself to the dust before the priests, she was
not admitted even into the compound of the temple. The Buddhists are not
considered non-Hindus in any of our great temples. My plans are not
settled; I may shift from this place very soon.

Shivananda and the boys send you all their welcome, regards, and love.

I am, as ever, your most affectionate son.

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
