---
title: CXVIII

---
<div>

[←](117_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](119_rakhal.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/217_mrs_hansbrough.htm)
Chronology [»](119_rakhal.htm)  
[«](117_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](119_rakhal.htm)

## CXVIII

(Translated from [Bengali](b8547e5118.pdf) )

GOPAL LAL VILLA,  
BENARES (VARANASI) CANTONMENT,  
*18th February, 1902*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL, (Swami Brahmananda.)

You must have received by this time my letter of yesterday containing an
acknowledgment of the money. The main object of this letter is to write
about ——. You should go and meet him as soon as you get this letter. . .
. Get a competent doctor and have the disease diagnosed properly. Now
where is Vishnu Mohini, the eldest daughter of Ram Babu (Ram Chandra
Datta, a disciple of Shri Ramakrishna)? She has recently been widowed. .
. .

Anxiety is worse than the disease. Give a little money — whatever is
needed. If in this hell of a world one can bring a little joy and peace
even for a day into the heart of a single person, that much alone is
true; this I have learnt after suffering all my life; all else is mere
moonshine. . . .

Reply very soon. "Uncle" (Mr. Okakura was emdearingly so called. "Kura"
approximating to "Khurhâ" in Bengali which means uncle; Swamiji out of
fun calls him uncle.) and Niranjan have written a letter from Gwalior. .
. Here it is now becoming hot gradually. This place was cooler than
Bodh-Gaya. . . . I was very pleased to hear that the Saraswati-Puja was
celebrated by Nivedita with great success. If she wants to open the
school soon, let her do so. Readings from the sacred books, worship,
study — see that all these are being maintained. My love to all.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
