+++
title = "The first responders and the paradox of Maoism"

+++
We have to admit that there is nothing very new in these episodic
geopolitical musings; nevertheless, we engage in revisiting these themes
for it is perhaps away of registering the connection between history
which is being made and history which has gone by.

Sometime back we were in the desh on a visit. There we met a marAThA
gentlemen, whom we have been meeting rather sporadically since the days
of our youth. However, on each occasion we have ended up having long
conversations – typically on a rather narrow area of biology, but also,
at times, extending to other matters of more general interest. On that
visit, just before leaving home to meet him, I was leafing through the
newspaper while having breakfast. Incited by its contents I remarked to
my parents that Hazare was not exactly what he seemed to be but someone
who had been co-opted by a rather dark force, the Anglosphere and its
allies, for fomenting trouble in bhArata. They responded by asking what
I thought about Kejriwal, who was still relatively low in his profile.
Based on the data streaming in via the internet, it was not hard for me
to reply that he was something more sinister – not merely a Gandhian who
was drawn into committing Gandhian blunders but a full-fledged “first
responder” who was way more dangerous for bhArata than the bumbling
Anna. We then met the said marAThA and discoursed on the usual topic.
Thereafter, he spontaneously remarked that there was great change taking
place in bhAratavarSha and said with some excitement that Kejriwal
promised to bring a whole new system in place that will make parties
like the Kangress and the BJP irrelevant. We were aghast, for we knew
him to be a sensible and generally sharp man otherwise. For a moment we
wondered whether we should rebut the claim and try to bring him to
light, or simply let it pass and let him learn the reality the hard way.
For some unknown reason, we adopted the former path and after one more
hour of conversation we had sowed sufficient doubt in this mind that we
felt a cure was likely. We just heard from him out of the blue that he
is not buying any of Kejriwal’s wares anymore and fears that the nation
is being brought to dire straits by this man and his gang. He declared
that it was an attempt at bringing a Maoist coup to bhArata – indeed, he
recalled us saying that democracy and Marxism usually come gift-wrapped;
so the receiving nation usually does not know of the horror of what is
lurking within the package until the wrapper unravels.

This prompted us to put down a note on the varieties of first responders
and the paradox of the thing called Maoism. First responders might be
defined as individuals who react to any event in a distant nation to
create situations that are ultimately in the interest of the
Anglosphere, in particular its current overlord. They might be: 1)
“native levies” who, similar to their equivalents in the colonial era,
would voluntarily fight on behalf of the “masters” (here the Anglosphere
and allies) against their coethnics; 2) They could be agents of various
types from the Anglosphere itself operating either within the target
nation or in one of the Anglospheric countries. 3) They could be local
rabble-rousers and mobsters who have their own agenda but are purchased
or co-opted for unwittingly doing dirty work for the Anglosphere. One
may ask: If these are the first responders are there any other tiers of
responders? Certainly – there are the external attack dogs, primarily
Islamic forces, which are often deployed quite independently of
particular events. There are also the internal violent forces, like
leftists (most important ones being Naxalites in India), and Christian
missionaries who act on a different schedule. Finally, there are the
mlechCha armies themselves primarily lead by and mostly composed of
white fighters who only rarely deployed for direct action (e.g. in
Central America).

Looking at history, one can see how this strategy of first responders
was developed by the Anglosphere. As is always the case in such matters,
the pioneers were the English and their activities took a more
contemporary shape during the height of the WWII (We are of course not
describing earlier precursors such as the sepoy army of India and the
Indian police force of the British Raj in this note, though there is no
doubt that these mechanisms are related). As the imperial Japanese
forces started their conquest of Singapore the English were badly
beaten. However, they had built a force of first responders who would
delay the objective of the Japanese military and do their best to uphold
the English rule. These constituted the Singapore Overseas Chinese
Volunteer Army of Han fighters who put up a strong resistance against
the Japanese force on behalf of the English. The important point to note
regarding the SOCVA was that they were not fighting for an independent
Chinese state against Japanese hegemony. Nor were they native levies for
the English force or paramilitary defense personnel in British payroll.
Rather they were a new type of force who acted as seemingly independent
native responders but whose real job was to act to uphold English
interests. As the Japanese conquering force advanced into the Malay
peninsula the English set up yet another such force first responders,
this time constituted from the Malayan Communist Party and they were
given the new name, the Malayan Peoples’ Anti-Japanese Army. These were
trained by the English in subversive activities and let lose all over
Malaysia to act on behalf of British interests (A detailed account of
this might be found in the excellent book by Bayly and Harper; Forgotten
Wars: Freedom and Revolution in Southeast Asia). In this tangled web we
also see a connection between Chinese MPAJA fighters, like Lai Lai Fuk
(his English interlocutors called him “a very likeable guy with an
incisive brain”; his head was summarily chopped off by the Japanese when
they caught him) and Chin Peng, and the new emperor of all chIna-s, Mao
Zedong. This connection is of importance to understand the underpinnings
of the chIna-mlechCha alignment against the Hindus which played out over
the subsequent decades. Thus, there is ample precedence for such action
mediated by the first responders coming straight from the mouths of
English themselves. Yet, if a Hindu were to propose that such things
also happened in India, where the English were forced to quit against
their wishes, he would be tarred as a conspiracy theorist (for instance
we as we were penning this essay, the generally pro-Hindu author K Elst
wrote a tract claiming that all Hindu claims for Anglospheric
intervention were merely figments of their conspiratorial thinking).

Anyone aware of these events would realize that they offer sufficient
probabilistic priors in the Bayesian sense to indicate that the
Anglosphere was involved in similar mischief in India. This becomes
especially relevant given the fact that the English knew fully well that
the mainstay of the struggle against them were the forward caste Hindus:
brAhmaNa-s and kAyastha-s forming the vanguard backed by kShatriya-s or
functionally equivalent jAti-s, vaNija-s and service castes. The English
elite had a deep-seated hatred against them, which was accentuated by
their being heathens and resisting Christianity by virtue of their
civilizational moorings. The English had a long tradition of allying
with Islamic powers against their rivals: in India against the Hindus,
and also against Russia and France. But the First war of Independence of
1857 CE had shown that there could be an alignment of Hindu and
Mohammedan interests when it came to the English. Hence, they worked
assiduously to cultivate useful Islamic forces who could act as a
counterbalance against Hindus. In the earlier phases of the struggle,
Hindu savarNa leaders had managed to mobilize both lower strata of Hindu
society and the tribal forest peoples against the English. The latter
were hence targeted for subversion and were set up as a counterbalance
for the forward caste Hindus. The English also tried to create a rift
among the forward castes by classifying the particularly restive
kAyastha-s as shUdra-s contrary to Hindu tradition. These well-known
actions of the English left them with a sufficient raw material in the
form of the Mohammedans and the people of the lower social strata as
potential first responders. Additionally, after the emergence of fiery
nationalist leaders like Tilak (a brAhmaNa) and Aurobindo (a kAyastha of
the bomb in Bengal movement) and subsequently the armed struggle, the
English closely “managed” the liberation movement by eliminating such
dangerous leaders and attempting to channelize the Indian expression via
more non-threatening leaders epitomized by the Gandhi-Nehru clique.
These activities also gave the English further opportunities to plant
first responders. The aftermath of WWII, however, left the English power
in a disarray. Their initial defeat at the hands of Japan had smashed
their image of invincibility in the eyes of Indians. The subsequent
trial of the Indian National Army of Subhas Chandra Bose and the Indian
reaction to it showed that the Indians were unlikely to be suppressed
for much longer and the days of the British empire were numbered. This
realization seems to have led to concerted action by the English to have
their first responders in place to give the Indians long-lasting pain
from a parting sting, even as the imperial scorpion was forced to scurry
out of the subcontinent of jaMbudvIpa.

After the defeat of Japan in WWII, the French oppressors tried to
reoccupy their territory in Indochina but they were repulsed in the
fierce struggle for freedom by the Vietnamese. In a parallel situation,
in Korea, forces of the Han chIna-s and the Americans, the new hegemon
of the Anglosphere, clashed. Subsequently, the Americans waded into
Vietnam to reinforce the white domination over Asian states. In these
battles the Americans imitated the English strategy of setting up first
responders. An important facet of the first responders set up by the
Americans was the more blatant use of Christianity: Being less tempered
by Charles Darwin than the English, the Americans were way more ready to
use this viral West Asian memeplex to mentally subvert people there by
creating large masses of first responders as well as sleeper cells. The
strategy worked wonders in Korea and early on in Vietnam. However, these
efforts were less successful during their occupation of Japan due to the
earlier extensive immunization program against Christianity by the
Japanese elite and the private protection of Shinto and bauddha ritual
despite its public restriction. The Americans got their first taste of
the subcontinent when they aided the English in repulsing the Japanese
thrust along with the INA towards India. We suspect that it was during
this event the Americans seem to have formulated their basic concept of
Northeastern India as a foothold to reach China. Around the time of
WWII, the Americans supported Indian independence against the wishes of
their imperial cousins. However, once independence was achieved the
Americans hoped the Indians would attach themselves to the US as a
humble client state. Luckily, the Indians, fresh from the battering at
the hands of the previous overlords of the Anglosphere, were in no mood
to play along with the American wishes. Moreover, uncle Nehru, who was
now the ruler of India, did not appreciate the significance of the
leadership change within the Anglosphere. He thought of the Americans as
not being the real thing, unlike the English with whom he was close,
both culturally and socially (e.g. his relationship with Mountbatten’s
left-leaning wife), and consequently dismissed the former. Given a
certain vindictiveness, which is characteristic of the US foreign
policy, this inauspicious start of the relationship meant that the
Americans were going to act vengefully like a scorned lover, and
reactivate the English first responders for harming the Indian state. In
addition, they had developed their own white indological brigade under
Norman Brown as part of the OSS (the predecessor of the CIA) and
deployed them to create a new generation of first responders.

In the second half of the 1900s the Indians moved close to the Soviets
with whom the American were locked in the Cold War. In India two major
anti-government and also anti-Hindu forces emerged over this period –
the Maoist socialists (Naxalites) and violent Mohammedan groups, a
continuation of millennial enemies of the Hindus, who remained behind
due to the blunder of secularism imposed on the Hindus by the
Nehru-Gandhi clique. The Americans at that point were not too sanguine
about overtly supporting either. If the former became powerful they
would be worse than the “Non-aligned” government and could join the
other socialist forces in creating a further anti-American front. The
Mohammedans were not too happy with the support given to Israel against
the founders of their religion, the Arabs; hence the Americans were not
too sure if strengthening them within India would be the best strategy,
especially for their ultimate project of infiltrating Christianity. So
they spent greater effort in propping up the terrorist state of Pakistan
as an external handle to contain the rise of India keeping with the
well-known American policy of not letting any large territory be
dominated by a single power. In the later stages of this period, with
the help of Pakistan, they also set up the violent Sikh insurrection in
the Panjab. The Anglosphere also received unexpected help for more long
term subversion from the secular Nehru as he did nothing to prevent
American missionary activity in the Northeastern states. Rather than arm
the great heathen leader Rani Gaidinliu to uproot the Christian evil in
those regions and restore the old heathen tradition the Kangress
government ended up disarming her. Thus, they were able to create a
suitable foundation for their strategy of using the Northeast of India
as foothold to reach China. Likewise, they used the laxity of the
secular Indian system vis-a-vis Christianity to infiltrate vast swaths
of the Indian population (e.g. Andhra) and create assets that were to
come of use later (e.g. YSR Reddy).

As the Americans emerged victorious in the Cold War, they were buoyed by
further by wins against weaklings in Central America and Iraq. This
freed them to set rolling the internal actions in India with greater
force. The end of the 1900s also saw the upwelling of the true spirit of
India, the Hindu spirit, and this expressed itself first in the form of
the rAma-janmabhUmI incident and then the election of a nationalist
government headed by the BJP. The subsequent testing of nuclear weapons
by this government was perhaps the key event that goaded the Americans
to deploy the first responder strategy in full force. We noticed the
first major wave of such deployments after the nuclear tests – suddenly
a whole group of Indians and American commentators on Indian emerged
like termites from the wood work to deride and condemn the tests in
various media. These were still early days of the internet and we
remember actively engaging in battling such entities both in real life
and on online fora in the stupidity of our youth. The same repeated
itself when Hindus forcefully responded to the arsonist violence of the
Mohammedans in Gujarat. Here, the rising BJP leader, the chief minister
of Gujarat, who had handled the Mohammedan violence pretty well was
singled out for character assassination by the first responders. A key
factor was the insertion of such agents into the India media right under
nose of the NDA government (despite the fact they had people like A
Shourie who were well aware of this). Moreover, the action of these
first responders in the media influenced BJP to adopt a non-Hindutva
line of electoral campaigning leading to their failure to achieve a
majority in the subsequent elections. They also fought hard to build the
image for the anti-national UPA government by covering up every event
which showed their incompetence and tried particularly hard to prop up
our Helena and her son. However, it soon became apparent that the
eternally tongue-tied, anglophone Sikh prime minister of the UPA was an
inveterate blunderer, and the son of our Helena was no Constantine but a
bumbling bonehead. Realizing the failure of this experiment, and the
growing frustration of the normally apathetic Hindu masses, the
mlechCha-s knew they needed a new trick. They realized that the chief of
the lATAnarta provinces was not limp like the aging, weak-kneed, false
vAjapeyin or self-centered as the declining saindhava octogenarian.
Above all he had shown that not only could he put the Abrahamistic
rioters and subversionists in place but also show good development for
his state. If he were to do this for bhArata, then the Anglosphere’s
primary principle of not allowing a single power to be become dominant
in any major world territory would be plainly nullified. To counter this
scenario, they worked out a clever plan to exploit the brewing
discontent in urban India stemming from UPA misrule as a catapult for
propelling their first responders into the government itself. Thus, was
born the fellowship of the broom, which deftly stole the thunder from
the haThayoga/Ayurveda proponent Baba Ramdev with the help of the
preexisting first responders in the media. Given this link, it is not
surprising to see that a large number of these very media people are now
members of the fellowship of the broom. After having brought chaos to
Delhi, by cunningly taking power just as the UPA had done after the NDA
called elections, the fellowship of the broom revealed its more sinister
links, much as we had predicted: the Naxalites whose sole objective is
to destroy the Indian nation-state were now an integral part of this
fellowship.

This final aspect puzzled some of our compatriots. Most Indian thinkers
thought that the Naxalites as leftists are part of the sinosphere (after
all they go by the name of Mao Zedong). They reasoned that being part of
the Sinosphere the Naxalites should be natural enemies of the US – so
how could it be that they are allying with the first responder system
set up by the Anglosphere, including the Christian missionaries. In this
regard, critical factors of the Sino-Anglospheric interaction are not
understood by most Hindu thinkers. The Anglosphere and the Sinosphere
while locked in conflict, have a certain mutual admiration for each
other going back to the days of the statistician Francis Galton who
believed that the chIna-s were superior in IQ to the Hindus and possess
a superior civilization that could potentially resonate with the
Anglosphere. He even felt that Africa should be gifted to the chIna-s at
the expense of the black Africans (something the chIna-s are indeed
pursuing today). Several western authors having reinforced this line of
thinking have given it a certain mainstream respectability in the
Anglosphere, such that to an extant the chIna-s are considered a valid
civilization (whereas Hindus are not, being rank heathens). In part this
was achieved by chIna-s adopting the outer coat of western “socialism”
(a highly respected construct in white academia of the Anglosphere)
suffused with Confucian “rationality” (rationality is another construct
deeply beloved to white academics) while keeping the inner legalism
intact drawing its nutrients from Confucianism. Thus, Mao Zedong was not
like any other socialist leader from the Soviet world, or Latin American
or India. The allegiances of these latter socialists is not towards
their nation rather towards the utopian Marxian realm – the comrades are
much like the Mohammedan brothers of the pan-Islamic Ummah. Thus, they
are anti-national by definition and adopt a transnational Marxian
identity. After initially displaying such an facade, Mao Zedong unveiled
his real nature – he was the new Han emperor – the ultimate Han
nationalist who ruled as the center of the legalist system even as the
wall-building lord of the Chin founded that state. Hence, Maoism in
China is ultimately the same legalist system by which the great chIna
emperors held their sway. But what is Maoism elsewhere, like say in
India, is actually an imitation by fools, which is very distinct from
its Chinese cognomen. It is just the shell which acts against the
nation-state without the inner ruling force of legalism that most
aggressively upholds the Chinese nation. Once, the Anglosphere realized
this, it became a tool to amplify and cloak their first responders.
This, combined with the “acceptance” of the chIna-s as a great power,
also meant that their interests vis-a-vis bhArata could align. Thus, in
the territory which the Anglosphere defines as south Asia the chIna-s
are seen as a legitimate force to prevent India from rising to be a
dominant power. As a corollary it is not surprising to see that they
accept a chIna role in Afghanistan after their retreat while trying hard
to deny one for India in its own natural sphere of influence.
