+++
title = "Fourier’s spells blocked"

+++
Mr. Engineer of Mangalagrama (We shall call him Fourier after his
fascination for illustrating Fourier transforms) had become a vairi of
our clansmen on account of his daughter. His friend had controlled the
bhuta that the board had and gave it to Fourier. He laid many an
incantation on some our clansmen. J, was seized and broken up by his
charms. J’ mother was harrassed immensely by one of those spells. J’s
father, who rode roughshod on all and sundry with an air of superiority
was shattered by Fourier’s mantras. Our own PM was struck down to a
pitiful condition by another of those spells. We too were scorched but
by them, but indra and varuNa, sarasvatI and the maruts and the
ashvinau, bore us aid and we overcame those charms finally. However,
they had drained us so much that we were left vulnerable on the other
fronts. We needed to invoke medholka so that we removed the vighnas that
were preventing us from performing the rahoyAgas to attend to those
fronts.

We had alluded to our lesser aunt H of the clan of the kauNDinyas. When
me and my cousin had plied her planchette we heard some strange things
from the visitor in the coin:  
For A the elder: You will see gold at some distance but you cannot
afford it. You might be able to buy copper though. In a pellucid glass
case you will see a gold goblet. You will constantly pursue that but it
will break and the goblet will vanish.  
For A the younger: You will also see gold at a distance. You can easily
afford a lot of gold. But each time you touch it you will get a shock.

Fourier’s spell became his shock. A the younger was the last of the
victims.  
The glass case broke and A the elder is fast watching the goblet vanish
as a physical entity.

We realized we can make things with copper that we cannot make with
gold. Like a yogi we were standing above pain and pleasure, as
chinnamastA we stood above kAmA and rati, and continued to drink blood.
