+++
title = "The Platonic culmination of Euclid and the pentagon-hexagon-decagon identity"

+++
Why did great sage Pāṇini compose the Aṣṭādhyāyī? There were probably
multiple reasons but often you hear people say that he wanted to give a
complete description of the Sanskrit language. That was probably one of
his reasons but was it the central reason or the most important driver
of his endeavor. From his own language and the evolution of the language
to his times we can see that the Vedic register of Sanskrit was well
known but already largely a thing of history in terms of being a spoke
language. Yet, Pāṇini devotes an enormous amount of effort in describing
it accurately and it still forms the foundation of our effort to
understand the earliest words of our ārya ancestors. Thus, understanding
the Vedic language so that we can properly understand the religion of
our ārya ancestors and perform rituals as enjoined in the śruti was the
major reason for Pāṇini-s effort. This indeed is acknowledged by his
great commentator Patañjali. One who is well-acquainted with the śruti
also realizes that the ārya-s conceived this linguistic framework for
understanding the śruti and performing the rituals enjoined by it as
having a deeper significance — it offered an means of apprehending the
nature of the deva-s and understanding the universe. Hence, the great
Aṅgiras Dirghatamas auccāthya states in the śruti:

ṛco akṣare parame vyoman  
yasmin devā adhi viśve niṣeduḥ |  
yas tan na veda kim ṛcā kariṣyati  
ya it tad vidus ta ime sam āsate || RV1.164.39

In the syllable of the ṛc set in the highest world,  
therein all the gods have taken residence,  
he who doesn’t know that what can he do with the ṛc?  
verily only they who know can sit together \[in this ritual session\].

It was with such considerations in mind that the sages Pāṇini and
Patañjali composed their works. Thus, their works, which aimed at
developing a certain comprehensiveness of the framework from as small as
set of foundational axioms and with as much internal consistency as
possible, never lost focus on its relationship with the “root”, i.e. the
śruti.

Just as Pāṇini is for the ārya-s, Euclid is to their yavana cousins. His
geometric system was in many ways parallel to the vyākaraṇa of Pāṇini.
Like the work of Pāṇini it served as the framework of knowledge at large
among the yavana-s, but what was the central reason for its composition?
In the modern Occident which considers Euclid as one of the elements of
their intellectual undergirding this is either completely ignored or
wrongly stated as being the need to compose a comprehensive secular
geometric text. However, we hear from Euclid’s great commentator, a sage
in his own right, Proclus, that the reason was to ultimately develop a
geometric framework to understand the “roots” (rhizomata) of existence.
These were first expounded by Empedocles in his verse:

And first the fourfold root of all things hear\!–  
White gleaming Zeus, life-bringing Hera, Aidoneus,  
And Nestis whose tears bedew mortality.

Empedocles identified the “roots” with the four deities Zeus (the fiery
element= Skt: agni), Hera (the gaseous element= Skt:vāyu), Aidoneus (the
solid element= Skt: pṛthivī) and Nestis (the liquid element= Skt:ap).
One may compare the initial part of the Empedoclean system with the
proto-Sāṃkhya system described in the upaniṣat of the Taittirīya-s.

Plato, who came after Empedocles, incorporated these “roots” into his
theory of knowledge as “stoicheia”, which literally mean letters of the
alphabet. This hints a parallel to the ārya usage that might lurk behind
Plato’s stoicheia because indeed the akṣara-s, the Sanskrit equivalent
of stoicheia, are at the foundation of the Hindu system as encapsulated
by Pānini in his Māheśvara-sūtrāṇi. However, the sense in which Plato
constructed his stoicheia was not by using linguistic analogs but by
using geometric ones. He chose for this purpose the only regular solids
that can be inscribed in a sphere — i.e [the 5 Platonic
solids](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/04/15/from-plato-to-euler-and-back/).
Plato is said to have learned of these from his predecessors like
Pythagoras and his mathematical interlocutor Theaetetus. He incorporated
them into an elaborate geometric “atomism” wherein the the fiery element
was the tetrahedron, the solid element was the cube, the gaseous element
was the octahedron, the stuff of the universe as a whole was the
dodecahedron and the liquid element was the icosahedron. However, as his
polyhedral system had 5 solids his system ultimately had to break away
from the 4 element system of the old yavana-s and converge towards the 5
element system of the ārya-s.

Plato’s polyhedra may be seen as “molecules” because beneath them there
lay his true atomic entities namely the
![30-60-90](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=30-60-90&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"30-60-90") and the
![45-45-90](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=45-45-90&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"45-45-90") right triangles (the 3 angles of this triangle are given in
degrees). Two of these combined to give the equilateral triangle and the
square which in turn constituted the four elemental polyhedra (sort of
like the dvayāṇu theory of Akṣapāda Gautama). So in a process like the
boiling of water into the gaseous state under the influence of the fire
tetrahedron Plato saw the water icosahedron break down into equilateral
triangles and reconstitute gaseous octahedra. In his system the solid
cube had to keep out of these of inter-conversions. Aristotle was
uncomfortable with this but the later Platonists including Proclus saw
this a genuine feature of the solid element. Proclus explained it by
stating that the solid element might be subdivided in interaction with
the other two but does not ultimately transform.

In any case, for Proclus the foundation of understanding was based in
mathematics. Indeed, he says that it “purifies and elevates the soul
even as the goddess Athena dispersed mist obscuring the intellectual
light of understanding.” Hence, it was critical to have a complete
theory from few starting axioms to construct the 5 Platonic solids that
form the basis of existence. This, he says, is the ultimate objective of
Euclid — a complete theory from axioms to construct the Platonic solids.
In support of this understanding one may note that the key constructions
of the Platonic solids come in the last book of the *Elements* of
Euclid. As per Proclus, Euclid was a Platonist who had studied with
associates and students of Plato such as Philippus and Theaetetus before
composing his treatise. Now the tetrahedron and cube are easy to
construct from equilateral triangles and squares. The octahedron is
slightly more involved by is also quite easily achieved as a equilateral
bipyramid on a square base. However, the dodecahedron and the
icosahedron are much more of a challenge. It is this context we
encounter the “culmination of Euclid” in the form of the famous
pentagon-hexagon-decagon identity of Euclidean geometry. Below we shall
journey through this identity, and note its proof and how it specifies
the icosahedron. Once, we have an icosahedron we can construct the
dodecahedron as its dual.

[![penta\_hexa\_deca](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca.png)Figure
1

Consider a regular pentagon, hexagon and decagon inscribed within the
same circle (Figure 1). Let their sides be ![P, H,
D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P%2C+H%2C+D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P, H, D"). Then, what is the relationship between their sides? The
answer to this is provide by Euclid in his *Elements*, Book 13,
Proposition 10:

**The pentagon-hexagon-decagon identity(
![P.H.D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P.H.D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P.H.D"))**: *If an equilateral pentagon is inscribed in a circle, then
the square on the side of the pentagon equals the sum of the squares on
the sides of the hexagon and the decagon inscribed in the same circle.*

[![penta\_hexa\_deca\_BKH](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca_bkh.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca_bkh.png)Figure
2

Alternatively, if the sides of a regular pentagon, hexagon and decagon
respectively form the hypotenuse, greater and smaller legs of a right
triangle then their circumcircles are congruent (Figure 2).

Now, the the proof for this as given by Euclid is not entirely obvious
and, at least to us, it is unclear if he even gave a complete proof for
it. Nevertheless, we can prove it using all the material he has
described up to that point and the commentary of Proclus. For the proof
one needs to first define that special ratio known as the Golden ratio
![\\phi](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cphi&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\phi"):  
![\\phi^2=\\phi+1](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cphi%5E2%3D%5Cphi%2B1&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\phi^2=\\phi+1")  
Since this is a quadratic equation it has two roots. We call the larger
one of these ![\\phi \\approx
1.618...](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cphi+%5Capprox+1.618...&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\phi \\approx 1.618...") and by definition the smaller one is
![\\tfrac{1}{\\phi}=\\phi-1](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctfrac%7B1%7D%7B%5Cphi%7D%3D%5Cphi-1&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\tfrac{1}{\\phi}=\\phi-1"). Proclus tells us that it was revealed to
the Pythagoreans by the Muse goddess who came to them. He then says that
Plato recognized its importance and made conjectures on them which his
mathematician student Eudoxus then proved using geometry. It is
evidently this material of Eudoxus that is presented by Euclid — for
example, he provides a means to construct
![\\phi](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cphi&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\phi") without calling it that in Book 2 of his *Elements*. Now this
ratio has a special relationship to the isosceles triangle with angles
![\\tfrac{2\\pi}{5}, \\tfrac{2\\pi}{5},
\\tfrac{\\pi}{5}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctfrac%7B2%5Cpi%7D%7B5%7D%2C+%5Ctfrac%7B2%5Cpi%7D%7B5%7D%2C+%5Ctfrac%7B%5Cpi%7D%7B5%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\tfrac{2\\pi}{5}, \\tfrac{2\\pi}{5}, \\tfrac{\\pi}{5}"): in such a
triangle the ratio of either of the congruent sides to its base is
![\\phi](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cphi&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\phi"). This Golden ratio triangle is central to the proof of the
![P.H.D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P.H.D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P.H.D") identity.

[![penta\_hexa\_deca.proof](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca.proof_.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca.proof_.png)Figure
3

Figure 3 depicts the construction required for our proof. We observe
that the said pentagon of our identity is in green, the hexagon in blue
dotted segments and the decagon in red. The radius of their circumcircle
is the same as the side of the hexagon
![H](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=H&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "H").
From the construction we see two instances of the above-mentioned Golden
ratio triangles: One with sides ![H, H,
D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=H%2C+H%2C+D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"H, H, D") and another with sides ![D, D,
2x](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=D%2C+D%2C+2x&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"D, D, 2x"). From those triangles we can write the below:

![\\dfrac{P^2}{4}=D^2-x^2\\\\\[10 pt\]
\\dfrac{P^2}{4}=H^2-(H-x)^2=2Hx-x^2\\\\\[10 pt\]
\\dfrac{P^2}{2}=D^2+2Hx-2x^2\\\\\[10 pt\]
\\dfrac{H}{D}=\\dfrac{D}{2x}=\\phi \\\\\[10 pt\]
x=\\dfrac{D^2}{2H}\\\\\[10 pt\] P^2=2D^2+4Hx-4x^2 =
4D^2-\\dfrac{D^4}{H^2}\\\\\[10 pt\]
P^2=D^2(4-\\dfrac{1}{\\phi^2})=D^2\\left(4-(\\phi-1)^2\\right)\\\\\[10
pt\] P^2=D^2\\left(4-\\phi^2+2\\phi-1
\\right)=D^2\\left(3-1-\\phi+2\\phi \\right)\\\\\[10 pt\]
P^2=D^2\\left(2+\\phi \\right)=D^2\\left(1+1+\\phi
\\right)=D^2\\left(1+\\phi^2 \\right)\\\\\[10 pt\]
P^2=D^2+\\phi^2D^2=D^2+H^2 \\quad
\_{\\blacksquare}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cdfrac%7BP%5E2%7D%7B4%7D%3DD%5E2-x%5E2%5C%5C%5B10+pt%5D+%5Cdfrac%7BP%5E2%7D%7B4%7D%3DH%5E2-%28H-x%29%5E2%3D2Hx-x%5E2%5C%5C%5B10+pt%5D+%5Cdfrac%7BP%5E2%7D%7B2%7D%3DD%5E2%2B2Hx-2x%5E2%5C%5C%5B10+pt%5D+%5Cdfrac%7BH%7D%7BD%7D%3D%5Cdfrac%7BD%7D%7B2x%7D%3D%5Cphi+%5C%5C%5B10+pt%5D+x%3D%5Cdfrac%7BD%5E2%7D%7B2H%7D%5C%5C%5B10+pt%5D+P%5E2%3D2D%5E2%2B4Hx-4x%5E2+%3D+4D%5E2-%5Cdfrac%7BD%5E4%7D%7BH%5E2%7D%5C%5C%5B10+pt%5D+P%5E2%3DD%5E2%284-%5Cdfrac%7B1%7D%7B%5Cphi%5E2%7D%29%3DD%5E2%5Cleft%284-%28%5Cphi-1%29%5E2%5Cright%29%5C%5C%5B10+pt%5D+P%5E2%3DD%5E2%5Cleft%284-%5Cphi%5E2%2B2%5Cphi-1+%5Cright%29%3DD%5E2%5Cleft%283-1-%5Cphi%2B2%5Cphi+%5Cright%29%5C%5C%5B10+pt%5D+P%5E2%3DD%5E2%5Cleft%282%2B%5Cphi+%5Cright%29%3DD%5E2%5Cleft%281%2B1%2B%5Cphi+%5Cright%29%3DD%5E2%5Cleft%281%2B%5Cphi%5E2+%5Cright%29%5C%5C%5B10+pt%5D+P%5E2%3DD%5E2%2B%5Cphi%5E2D%5E2%3DD%5E2%2BH%5E2+%5Cquad+_%7B%5Cblacksquare%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\dfrac{P^2}{4}=D^2-x^2\\\\[10 pt] \\dfrac{P^2}{4}=H^2-(H-x)^2=2Hx-x^2\\\\[10 pt] \\dfrac{P^2}{2}=D^2+2Hx-2x^2\\\\[10 pt] \\dfrac{H}{D}=\\dfrac{D}{2x}=\\phi \\\\[10 pt] x=\\dfrac{D^2}{2H}\\\\[10 pt] P^2=2D^2+4Hx-4x^2 = 4D^2-\\dfrac{D^4}{H^2}\\\\[10 pt] P^2=D^2(4-\\dfrac{1}{\\phi^2})=D^2\\left(4-(\\phi-1)^2\\right)\\\\[10 pt] P^2=D^2\\left(4-\\phi^2+2\\phi-1 \\right)=D^2\\left(3-1-\\phi+2\\phi \\right)\\\\[10 pt] P^2=D^2\\left(2+\\phi \\right)=D^2\\left(1+1+\\phi \\right)=D^2\\left(1+\\phi^2 \\right)\\\\[10 pt] P^2=D^2+\\phi^2D^2=D^2+H^2 \\quad _{\\blacksquare}")

If one were to assume the theorem of Brahmagupta or Ptolemaios regarding
the diagonals and sides of a cyclic quadrilaterals one can prove it by
an alternative path. We leave this for the geometrically inclined reader
to work out.

[![icosahedron\_P\_H\_D](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/icosahedron_p_h_d.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/icosahedron_p_h_d.png)Figure
4

The remarkable discovery of the yavana-s was the relationship of this
![P.H.D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P.H.D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P.H.D") identity to the icosahedron. Consider the icosahedron in Figure
4. By definition all edges of the icosahedron are equal and all faces
are equilateral triangles. Now, the edges of the icosahedron are
congruent to the sides of the pentagon
![P](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "P") in
the
![P.H.D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P.H.D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P.H.D") identity. Thus, if one constructs the circle as in Figure 4 we
get the circumcircle as in Figure 3. With this circle we can construct
the sides of the decagon
![D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "D") as
above, e.g.
![\\overline{PQ}=D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BPQ%7D%3DD&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{PQ}=D") in Figure 4. Then, the relationship it has to the
icosahedron is that
![\\overline{AB}=\\overline{PQ}=D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BAB%7D%3D%5Coverline%7BPQ%7D%3DD&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{AB}=\\overline{PQ}=D"). The 5 faces of an icosahedron each
of which share a common edge constitute a pentagonal pyramid. The height
of this pyramid is
![D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "D")
(Figure 4). Now, by construction the radius of the circumcircle of the
pentagonal bases of such pyramids in the icosahedron is of length
![H](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=H&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "H"),
i.e. the side of the hexagon in the
![P.H.D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P.H.D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P.H.D") identity (Figure 4;
![\\overline{BC}=H](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BBC%7D%3DH&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{BC}=H")). Interestingly, if we visualize the icosahedron as
being made up of two pentagonal pyramids stuck to a central band of 10
facets then the distance between the pentagonal bases of the two
pyramids is
![H](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=H&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0 "H")
(Figure 4;
![\\overline{QR}=H](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BQR%7D%3DH&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{QR}=H")). Thus, the planar
![P.H.D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P.H.D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P.H.D") identity is able to describe the icosahedron in 3D space and we
can use it to construct this non-obvious Platonic solid. In order to
prove this relationship between the
![P.H.D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P.H.D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P.H.D") identity and the above landmarks of the icosahedron we have to
effectively prove that ![\\triangle{ABC} \\cong
\\triangle{PQR}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle%7BABC%7D+%5Ccong+%5Ctriangle%7BPQR%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\triangle{ABC} \\cong \\triangle{PQR}") (Figure 4). They are right
triangles and their hypotenuse and legs are respectively ![P, H,
D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P%2C+H%2C+D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P, H, D").

[![penta\_hexa\_deca.GRD\_icosa](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca.grd_icosa-1.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca.grd_icosa-1.png)Figure
5

In order to prove that we have first construct rectangles inside the
icosahedron like the one shown in Figure 5. From the above Golden
triangle (Figure 3) and its relationship to the pentagon (used in the
compass and straight-edge construction of the pentagon; [see this
note](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2016/08/23/some-meanderings-among-golden-stuff/))
we can see that such an internal rectangle of the icosahedron will be a
Golden rectangle, i.e. ratio of its non-equal sides would be
![\\phi](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cphi&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\phi").

[![penta\_hexa\_deca\_icosahedro](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca_icosahedro.png?w=640)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/penta_hexa_deca_icosahedro.png)Figure
6

We then use this rectangle to make an orthographic projection of the
icosahedral construction in Figure 4 on to a plane (Figure 6). In the
right panel of Figure 6 we see how this Golden rectangle is placed with
respect to key landmarks of the icosahedron. In the left panel we see
the actual projection of icosahedral construction in Figure 4. This
preserves the mutual relationships of ![\\triangle{ABC},
\\triangle{PQR}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle%7BABC%7D%2C+%5Ctriangle%7BPQR%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\triangle{ABC}, \\triangle{PQR}") between 3D construction and the
planar projection. We construct
![\\overline{XY}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BXY%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{XY}"). By examining this figure we observe ![\\overline{XY}
||
\\overline{AC}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BXY%7D+%7C%7C+%5Coverline%7BAC%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{XY} || \\overline{AC}"). Thus, ![\\angle{ACB} \\cong
\\angle{XYP}=\\theta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%7BACB%7D+%5Ccong+%5Cangle%7BXYP%7D%3D%5Ctheta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\angle{ACB} \\cong \\angle{XYP}=\\theta"). From this, one can show
that
![\\angle{PRQ}=\\theta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%7BPRQ%7D%3D%5Ctheta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\angle{PRQ}=\\theta"). By the nature of the projection we preserve the
equivalence of the edges of the icosahedron such that ![\\overline{AC}
\\cong
\\overline{PR}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverline%7BAC%7D+%5Ccong+%5Coverline%7BPR%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overline{AC} \\cong \\overline{PR}"). Thus, by Side-Angle-Angle test
we can show ![\\triangle{ABC} \\cong \\triangle{PQR} \\quad
\_\\blacksquare](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctriangle%7BABC%7D+%5Ccong+%5Ctriangle%7BPQR%7D+%5Cquad+_%5Cblacksquare&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\triangle{ABC} \\cong \\triangle{PQR} \\quad _\\blacksquare")

Thus, we complete our journey through one of the profound aspects of
Euclidean space — a thread passing through its defining feature the
bhujā-koṭi-karṇa-nyāya, the three regular polygons and the regular
polyhedron, the icosahedron. When we were young, on account of our
fascination for viral capsid structures, we closely studied the geometry
of polyhedra by practical means, i.e. making them out of paper. It was
in course of this we learnt of the
![P.H.D](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P.H.D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"P.H.D") identity. We were able to practically confirm that for
ourselves based on our models. However, it took us some time before we
actually apprehended the proof.
