---
title: PRACTICAL VEDANTA

---
<div>

[←](../jnana-yoga/the_real_and_the_apparent_man.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](practical_vedanta_part_ii.htm)

  

## PRACTICAL VEDANTA

PART I

(*Delivered in London, 10th November 1896*)

I have been asked to say something about the practical position of the
Vedanta philosophy. As I have told you, theory is very good indeed, but
how are we to carry it into practice? If it be absolutely impracticable,
no theory is of any value whatever, except as intellectual gymnastics.
The Vedanta, therefore, as a religion must be intensely practical. We
must be able to carry it out in every part of our lives. And not only
this, the fictitious differentiation between religion and the life of
the world must vanish, for the Vedanta teaches oneness — one life
throughout. The ideals of religion must cover the whole field of life,
they must enter into all our thoughts, and more and more into practice.
I will enter gradually on the practical side as we proceed. But this
series of lectures is intended to be a basis, and so we must first apply
ourselves to theories and understand how they are worked out, proceeding
from forest caves to busy streets and cities; and one peculiar feature
we find is that many of these thoughts have been the outcome, not of
retirement into forests, but have emanated from persons whom we expect
to lead the busiest lives — from ruling monarchs.

Shvetaketu was the son of Âruni, a sage, most probably a recluse. He was
brought up in the forest, but he went to the city of the Panchâlas and
appeared at the court of the king, Pravâhana Jaivali. The king asked
him, "Do you know how beings depart hence at death?" "No, sir." "Do you
know how they return hither?" "No, sir." "Do you know the way of the
fathers and the way of the gods?" "No, sir." Then the king asked other
questions. Shvetaketu could not answer them. So the king told him that
he knew nothing. The boy went back to his father, and the father
admitted that he himself could not answer these questions. It was not
that he was unwilling to answer these questions. It was not that he was
unwilling to teach the boy, but he did not know these things. So he went
to the king and asked to be taught these secrets. The king said that
these things had been hitherto known only among kings; the priests never
knew them. He, however, proceeded to teach him what he desired to know.
In various Upanishads we find that this Vedanta philosophy is not the
outcome of meditation in the forests only, but that the very best parts
of it were thought out and expressed by brains which were busiest in the
everyday affairs of life. We cannot conceive any man busier than an
absolute monarch, a man who is ruling over millions of people, and yet,
some of these rulers were deep thinkers.

Everything goes to show that this philosophy must be very practical; and
later on, when we come to the Bhagavad-Gita — most of you, perhaps, have
read it, it is the best commentary we have on the Vedanta philosophy —
curiously enough the scene is laid on the battlefield, where Krishna
teaches this philosophy to Arjuna; and the doctrine which stands out
luminously in every page of the Gita is intense activity, but in the
midst of it, eternal calmness. This is the secret of work, to attain
which is the goal of the Vedanta. Inactivity, as we understand it in the
sense of passivity, certainly cannot be the goal. Were it so, then the
walls around us would be the most intelligent; they are inactive. Clods
of earth, stumps of trees, would be the greatest sages in the world;
they are inactive. Nor does inactivity become activity when it is
combined with passion. Real activity, which is the goal of Vedanta, is
combined with eternal calmness, the calmness which cannot be ruffled,
the balance of mind which is never disturbed, whatever happens. And we
all know from our experience in life that that is the best attitude for
work.

I have been asked many times how we can work if we do not have the
passion which we generally feel for work. I also thought in that way
years ago, but as I am growing older, getting more experience, I find it
is not true. The less passion there is, the better we work. The calmer
we are, the better for us, and the more the amount of work we can do.
When we let loose our feelings, we waste so much energy, shatter our
nerves, disturb our minds, and accomplish very little work. The energy
which ought to have gone out as work is spent as mere feeling, which
counts for nothing. It is only when the mind is very calm and collected
that the whole of its energy is spent in doing good work. And if you
read the lives of the great workers which the world has produced, you
will find that they were wonderfully calm men. Nothing, as it were,
could throw them off their balance. That is why the man who becomes
angry never does a great amount of work, and the man whom nothing can
make angry accomplishes so much. The man who gives way to anger, or
hatred, or any other passion, cannot work; he only breaks himself to
pieces, and does nothing practical. It is the calm, forgiving, equable,
well-balanced mind that does the greatest amount of work.

The Vedanta preaches the ideal; and the ideal, as we know, is always far
ahead of the real, of the practical, as we may call it. There are two
tendencies in human nature: one to harmonise the ideal with the life,
and the other to elevate the life to the ideal. It is a great thing to
understand this, for the former tendency is the temptation of our lives.
I think that I can only do a certain class of work. Most of it, perhaps,
is bad; most of it, perhaps, has a motive power of passion behind it,
anger, or greed, or selfishness. Now if any man comes to preach to me a
certain ideal, the first step towards which is to give up selfishness,
to give up self-enjoyment, I think that is impractical. But when a man
brings an ideal which can be reconciled with my selfishness, I am glad
at once and jump at it. That is the ideal for me. As the word "orthodox"
has been manipulated into various forms, so has been the word
"practical". "My doxy is orthodoxy; your doxy is heterodoxy." So with
practicality. What I think is practical, is to me the only practicality
in the world. If I am a shopkeeper, I think shopkeeping the only
practical pursuit in the world. If I am a thief, I think stealing is the
best means of being practical; others are not practical. You see how we
all use this word practical for things *we* like and can do. Therefore I
will ask you to understand that Vedanta, though it is intensely
practical, is always so in the sense of the ideal. It does not preach an
impossible ideal, however high it be, and it is high enough for an
ideal. In one word, this ideal is that you are divine, "Thou art That".
This is the essence of Vedanta; after all its ramifications and
intellectual gymnastics, you know the human soul to be pure and
omniscient, you see that such superstitions as birth and death would be
entire nonsense when spoken of in connection with the soul. The soul was
never born and will never die, and all these ideas that we are going to
die and are afraid to die are mere superstitions. And all such ideas as
that we can do this or cannot do that are superstitions. We can do
everything. The Vedanta teaches men to have faith in themselves first.
As certain religions of the world say that a man who does not believe in
a Personal God outside of himself is an atheist, so the Vedanta says, a
man who does not believe in himself is an atheist. Not believing in the
glory of our own soul is what the Vedanta calls atheism. To many this
is, no doubt, a terrible idea; and most of us think that this ideal can
never be reached; but the Vedanta insists that it can be realised by
every one. There is neither man nor woman or child, nor difference of
race or sex, nor anything that stands as a bar to the realisation of the
ideal, because Vedanta shows that it is realised already, it is already
there.

All the powers in the universe are already ours. It is we who have put
our hands before our eyes and cry that it is dark. Know that there is no
darkness around us. Take the hands away and there is the light which was
from the beginning. Darkness never existed, weakness never existed. We
who are fools cry that we are weak; we who are fools cry that we are
impure. Thus Vedanta not only insists that the ideal is practical, but
that it has been so all the time; and this Ideal, this Reality, is our
own nature. Everything else that you see is false, untrue. As soon as
you say, "I am a little mortal being," you are saying something which is
not true, you are giving the lie to yourselves, you are hypnotising
yourselves into something vile and weak and wretched.

The Vedanta recognises no sin, it only recognises error. And the
greatest error, says the Vedanta, is to say that you are weak, that you
are a sinner, a miserable creature, and that you have no power and you
cannot do this and that. Every time you think in that way, you, as it
were, rivet one more link in the chain that binds you down, you add one
more layer of hypnotism on to your own soul. Therefore, whosoever thinks
he is weak is wrong, whosoever thinks he is impure is wrong, and is
throwing a bad thought into the world. This we must always bear in mind
that in the Vedanta there is no attempt at reconciling the present life
— the hypnotised life, this false life which we have assumed — with the
ideal; but this false life must go, and the real life which is always
existing must manifest itself, must shine out. No man becomes purer and
purer, it is a matter of greater manifestation. The veil drops away, and
the native purity of the soul begins to manifest itself. Everything is
ours already — infinite purity, freedom, love, and power.

The Vedanta also says that not only can this be realised in the depths
of forests or caves, but by men in all possible conditions of life. We
have seen that the people who discovered these truths were neither
living in caves nor forests, nor following the ordinary vocations of
life, but men who, we have every reason to believe, led the busiest of
lives, men who had to command armies, to sit on thrones, and look to the
welfare of millions — and all these, in the days of absolute monarchy,
and not as in these days when a king is to a great extent a mere
figurehead. Yet they could find time to think out all these thoughts, to
realise them, and to teach them to humanity. How much more then should
it be practical for us whose lives, compared with theirs, are lives of
leisure? That we cannot realise them is a shame to us, seeing that we
are comparatively free all the time, having very little to do. My
requirements are as nothing compared with those of an ancient absolute
monarch. My wants are as nothing compared with the demands of Arjuna on
the battlefield of Kurukshetra, commanding a huge army; and yet he could
find time in the midst of the din and turmoil of battle to talk the
highest philosophy and to carry it into his life also. Surely we ought
to be able to do as much in this life of ours — comparatively free,
easy, and comfortable. Most of us here have more time than we think we
have, if we really want to use it for good. With the amount of freedom
we have we can attain to two hundred ideals in this life, if we will,
but we must not degrade the ideal to the actual. One of the most
insinuating things comes to us in the shape of persons who apologise for
our mistakes and teach us how to make special excuses for all our
foolish wants and foolish desires; and we think that their ideal is the
only ideal we need have. But it is not so. The Vedanta teaches no such
thing. The actual should be reconciled to the ideal, the present life
should be made to coincide with life eternal.

For you must always remember that the one central ideal of Vedanta is
this oneness. There are no two in anything, no two lives, nor even two
different kinds of life for the two worlds. You will find the Vedas
speaking of heavens and things like that at first; but later on, when
they come to the highest ideals of their philosophy, they brush away all
these things. There is but one life, one world, one existence.
Everything is that One, the difference is in degree and not in kind. The
difference between our lives is not in kind. The Vedanta entirely denies
such ideas as that animals are separate from men, and that they were
made and created by God to be used for our food.

Some people have been kind enough to start an antivivisection society. I
asked a member, "Why do you think, my friend, that it is quite lawful to
kill animals for food, and not to kill one or two for scientific
experiments?" He replied, "Vivisection is most horrible, but animals
have been given to us for food." Oneness includes all animals. If man's
life is immortal, so also is the animal's. The difference is only in
degree and not in kind. The amoeba and I are the same, the difference is
only in degree; and from the standpoint of the highest life, all these
differences vanish. A man may see a great deal of difference between
grass and a little tree, but if you mount very high, the grass and the
biggest tree will appear much the same. So, from the standpoint of the
highest ideal, the lowest animal and the highest man are the same. If
you believe there is a God, the animals and the highest creatures must
be the same. A God who is partial to his children called men, and cruel
to his children called brute beasts, is worse than a demon. I would
rather die a hundred times than worship such a God. My whole life would
be a fight with such a God. But there is no difference, and those who
say there is, are irresponsible, heartless people who do not know. Here
is a case of the word practical used in a wrong sense. I myself may not
be a very strict vegetarian, but I understand the ideal. When I eat meat
I know it is wrong. Even if I am bound to eat it under certain
circumstances, I know it is cruel. I must not drag my ideal down to the
actual and apologise for my weak conduct in this way. The ideal is not
to eat flesh, not to injure any being, for all animals are my brothers.
If you can think of them as your brothers, you have made a little
headway towards the brotherhood of all souls, not to speak of the
brotherhood of man! That is child's play. You generally find that this
is not very acceptable to many, because it teaches them to give up the
actual, and go higher up to the ideal. But if you bring out a theory
which is reconciled with their present conduct, they regard it as
entirely practical.

There is this strongly conservative tendency in human nature: we do not
like to move one step forward. I think of mankind just as I read of
persons who become frozen in snow; all such, they say, want to go to
sleep, and if you try to drag them up, they say, "Let me sleep; it is so
beautiful to sleep in the snow", and they die there in that sleep. So is
our nature. That is what we are doing all our life, getting frozen from
the feet upwards, and yet wanting to sleep. Therefore you must struggle
towards the ideal, and if a man comes who wants to bring that ideal down
to your level, and teach a religion that does not carry that highest
ideal, do not listen to him. To me that is an impracticable religion.
But if a man teaches a religion which presents the highest ideal, I am
ready for him. Beware when anyone is trying to apologise for sense
vanities and sense weaknesses. If anyone wants to preach that way to us,
poor, sense-bound clods of earth as we have made ourselves by following
that teaching, we shall never progress. I have seen many of these
things, have had some experience of the world, and my country is the
land where religious sects grow like mushrooms. Every year new sects
arise. But one thing I have marked, that it is only those that never
want to reconcile the man of flesh with the man of truth that make
progress. Wherever there is this false idea of reconciling fleshly
vanities with the highest ideals, of dragging down God to the level of
man, there comes decay. Man should not be degraded to worldly slavery,
but should be raised up to God.

At the same time, there is another side to the question. We must not
look down with contempt on others. All of us are going towards the same
goal. The difference between weakness and strength is one of degree; the
difference between virtue and vice is one of degree, the difference
between heaven and hell is one of degree, the difference between life
and death is one of degree, all differences in this world are of degree,
and not of kind, because oneness is the secret of everything. All is
One, which manifests Itself, either as thought, or life, or soul, or
body, and the difference is only in degree. As such, we have no right to
look down with contempt upon those who are not developed exactly in the
same degree as we are. Condemn none; if you can stretch out a helping
hand, do so. If you cannot, fold your hands, bless your brothers, and
let them go their own way. Dragging down and condemning is not the way
to work. Never is work accomplished in that way. We spend our energies
in condemning others. Criticism and condemnation is a vain way of
spending our energies, for in the long run we come to learn that all are
seeing the same thing, are more or less approaching the same ideal, and
that most of our differences are merely differences of expression.

Take the idea of sin. I was telling you just now the Vedantic idea of
it, and the other idea is that man is a sinner. They are practically the
same, only the one takes the positive and the other the negative side.
One shows to man his strength and the other his weakness. There may be
weakness, says the Vedanta, but never mind, we want to grow. Disease was
found out as soon as man was born. Everyone knows his disease; it
requires no one to tell us what our diseases are. But thinking all the
time that we are diseased will not cure us — medicine is necessary. We
may forget anything outside, we may try to become hypocrites to the
external world, but in our heart of hearts we all know our weaknesses.
But, says the Vedanta, being reminded of weakness does not help much;
give strength, and strength does not come by thinking of weakness all
the time. The remedy for weakness is not brooding over weakness, but
thinking of strength. Teach men of the strength that is already within
them. Instead of telling them they are sinners, the Vedanta takes the
opposite position, and says, "You are pure and perfect, and what you
call sin does not belong to you." Sins are very low degrees of
Self-manifestation; manifest your Self in a high degree. That is the one
thing to remember; all of us can do that. Never say, "No", never say, "I
cannot", for you are infinite. Even time and space are as nothing
compared with your nature. You can do anything and everything, you are
almighty.

These are the principles of ethics, but we shall now come down lower and
work out the details. We shall see how this Vedanta can be carried into
our everyday life, the city life, the country life, the national life,
and the home life of every nation. For, if a religion cannot help man
wherever he may be, wherever he stands, it is not of much use; it will
remain only a theory for the chosen few. Religion, to help mankind, must
be ready and able to help him in whatever condition he is, in servitude
or in freedom, in the depths of degradation or on the heights of purity;
everywhere, equally, it should be able to come to his aid. The
principles of Vedanta, or the ideal of religion, or whatever you may
call it, will be fulfilled by its capacity for performing this great
function.

The ideal of faith in ourselves is of the greatest help to us. If faith
in ourselves had been more extensively taught and practiced, I am sure a
very large portion of the evils and miseries that we have would have
vanished. Throughout the history of mankind, if any motive power has
been more potent than another in the lives of all great men and women,
it is that of faith in themselves. Born with the consciousness that they
were to be great, they became great. Let a man go down as low as
possible; there must come a time when out of sheer desperation he will
take an upward curve and will learn to have faith in himself. But it is
better for us that we should know it from the very first. Why should we
have all these bitter experiences in order to gain faith in ourselves?
We can see that all the difference between man and man is owing to the
existence or non-existence of faith in himself. Faith in ourselves will
do everything. I have experienced it in my own life, and am still doing
so; and as I grow older that faith is becoming stronger and stronger. He
is an atheist who does not believe in himself. The old religions said
that he was an atheist who did not believe in God. The new religion says
that he is the atheist who does not believe in himself. But it is not
selfish faith because the Vedanta, again, is the doctrine of oneness. It
means faith in all, because you are all. Love for yourselves means love
for all, love for animals, love for everything, for you are all one. It
is the great faith which will make the world better. I am sure of that.
He is the highest man who can say with truth, "I know all about myself."
Do you know how much energy, how many powers, how many forces are still
lurking behind that frame of yours? What scientist has known all that is
in man? Millions of years have passed since man first came here, and yet
but one infinitesimal part of his powers has been manifested. Therefore,
you must not say that you are weak. How do you know what possibilities
lie behind that degradation on the surface? You know but little of that
which is within you. For behind you is the ocean of infinite power and
blessedness.

"This Âtman is first to be heard of." Hear day and night that you are
that Soul. Repeat it to yourselves day and night till it enters into
your very veins, till it tingles in every drop of blood, till it is in
your flesh and bone. Let the whole body be full of that one ideal, "I am
the birthless, the deathless, the blissful, the omniscient, the
omnipotent, ever-glorious Soul." Think on it day and night; think on it
till it becomes part and parcel of your life. Meditate upon it, and out
of that will come work. "Out of the fullness of the heart the mouth
speaketh," and out of the fullness of the heart the hand worketh also.
Action will come. Fill yourselves with the ideal; whatever you do, think
well on it. All your actions will be magnified, transformed, deified, by
the very power of the thought. If matter is powerful, thought is
omnipotent. Bring this thought to bear upon your life, fill yourselves
with the thought of your almightiness, your majesty, and your glory.
Would to God no superstitions had been put into your head! Would to God
we had not been surrounded from our birth by all these superstitious
influences and paralysing ideas of our weakness and vileness! Would to
God that mankind had had an easier path through which to attain to the
noblest and highest truths! But man had to pass through all this; do not
make the path more difficult for those who are coming after you.

These are sometimes terrible doctrines to teach. I know people who get
frightened at these ideas, but for those who want to be practical, this
is the first thing to learn. Never tell yourselves or others that you
are weak. Do good if you can, but do not injure the world. You know in
your inmost heart that many of your limited ideas, this humbling of
yourself and praying and weeping to imaginary beings are superstitions.
Tell me one case where these prayers have been answered. All the answers
that came were from your own hearts. You know there are no ghosts, but
no sooner are you in the dark than you feel a little creepy sensation.
That is so because in our childhood we have had all these fearful ideas
put into our heads. But do not teach these things to others through fear
of society and public opinion, through fear of incurring the hatred of
friends, or for fear of losing cherished superstitions. Be masters of
all these. What is there to be taught more in religion than the oneness
of the universe and faith in one's self? All the works of mankind for
thousands of years past have been towards this one goal, and mankind is
yet working it out. It is your turn now and you already know the truth.
For it has been taught on all sides. Not only philosophy and psychology,
but materialistic sciences have declared it. Where is the scientific man
today who fears to acknowledge the truth of this oneness of the
universe? Who is there who dares talk of many worlds? All these are
superstitions. There is only one life and one world, and this one life
and one world is appearing to us as manifold. This manifoldness is like
a dream. When you dream, one dream passes away and another comes. You do
not live in your dreams. The dreams come one after another, scene after
scene unfolds before you. So it is in this world of ninety per cent
misery and ten per cent happiness. Perhaps after a while it will appear
as ninety per cent happiness, and we shall call it heaven, but a time
comes to the sage when the whole thing vanishes, and this world appears
as God Himself, and his own soul as God. It is not therefore that there
are many worlds, it is not that there are many lives. All this
manifoldness is the manifestation of that One. That One is manifesting
Himself as many, as matter, spirit, mind, thought, and everything else.
It is that One, manifesting Himself as many. Therefore the first step
for us to take is to teach the truth to ourselves and to others.

Let the world resound with this ideal, and let superstitions vanish.
Tell it to men who are weak and persist in telling it. You are the Pure
One; awake and arise, O mighty one, this sleep does not become you.
Awake and arise, it does not befit you. Think not that you are weak and
miserable. Almighty, arise and awake, and manifest your own nature. It
is not fitting that you think yourself a sinner. It is not fitting that
you think yourself weak. Say that to the world, say it to yourselves,
and see what a practical result comes, see how with an electric flash
everything is manifested, how everything is changed. Tell that to
mankind, and show them their power. Then we shall learn how to apply it
in our daily lives.

To be able to use what we call Viveka (discrimination), to learn how in
every moment of our lives, in every one of our actions, to discriminate
between what is right and wrong, true and false, we shall have to know
the test of truth, which is purity, oneness. Everything that makes for
oneness is truth. Love is truth, and hatred is false, because hatred
makes for multiplicity. It is hatred that separates man from man;
therefore it is wrong and false. It is a disintegrating power; it
separates and destroys.

Love binds, love makes for that oneness. You become one, the mother with
the child, families with the city, the whole world becomes one with the
animals. For love is Existence, God Himself; and all this is the
manifestation of that One Love, more or less expressed. The difference
is only in degree, but it is the manifestation of that One Love
throughout. Therefore in all our actions we have to judge whether it is
making for diversity or for oneness. If for diversity we have to give it
up, but if it makes for oneness we are sure it is good. So with our
thoughts; we have to decide whether they make for disintegration,
multiplicity, or for oneness, binding soul to soul and bringing one
influence to bear. If they do this, we will take them up, and if not, we
will throw them off as criminal.

The whole idea of ethics is that it does not depend on anything
unknowable, it does not teach anything unknown, but in the language of
the Upanishad, "The God whom you worship as an unknown God, the same I
preach unto thee." It is through the Self that you know anything. I see
the chair; but to see the chair, I have first to perceive myself and
then the chair. It is in and through the Self that the chair is
perceived. It is in and through the Self that you are known to me, that
the whole world is known to me; and therefore to say this Self is
unknown is sheer nonsense. Take off the Self and the whole universe
vanishes. In and through the Self all knowledge comes. Therefore it is
the best known of all. It is yourself, that which you call I. You may
wonder how this I of me can be the I of you. You may wonder how this
limited I can be the unlimited Infinite, but it is so. The limited is a
mere fiction. The Infinite has been covered up, as it were, and a little
of It is manifesting as the I. Limitation can never come upon the
unlimited; it is a fiction. The Self is known, therefore, to every one
of us — man, woman, or child — and even to animals. Without knowing Him
we can neither live nor move, nor have our being; without knowing this
Lord of all, we cannot breathe or live a second. The God of the Vedanta
is the most known of all and is not the outcome of imagination.

If this is not preaching a practical God, how else could you teach a
practical God? Where is there a more practical God than He whom I see
before me — a God omnipresent, in every being, more real than our
senses? For you are He, the Omnipresent God Almighty, the Soul of your
souls, and if I say you are not, I tell an untruth. I know it, whether
at all times I realise it or not. He is the Oneness, the Unity of all,
the Reality of all life and all existence.

These ideas of the ethics of Vedanta have to be worked out in detail,
and, therefore, you must have patience. As I have told you, we want to
take the subject in detail and work it up thoroughly, to see how the
ideas grow from very low ideals, and how the one great Ideal of oneness
has developed and become shaped into the universal love; and we ought to
study these in order to avoid dangers. The world cannot find time to
work it up from the lowest steps. But what is the use of our standing on
higher steps if we cannot give the truth to others coming afterwards?
Therefore, it is better to study it in all its workings; and first, it
is absolutely necessary to clear the intellectual portion, although we
know that intellectuality is almost nothing; for it is the heart that is
of most importance. It is through the heart that the Lord is seen, and
not through the intellect. The intellect is only the street-cleaner,
cleansing the path for us, a secondary worker, the policeman; but the
policeman is not a positive necessity for the workings of society. He is
only to stop disturbances, to check wrong-doing, and that is all the
work required of the intellect. When you read intellectual books, you
think when you have mastered them, "Bless the Lord that I am out of
them", because the intellect is blind and cannot move of itself, it has
neither hands nor feet. It is feeling that works, that moves with speed
infinitely superior to that of electricity or anything else. Do you
feel? — that is the question. If you do, you will see the Lord: It is
the feeling that you have today that will be intensified, deified,
raised to the highest platform, until it feels everything, the oneness
in everything, till it feels God in itself and in others. The intellect
can never do that. "Different methods of speaking words, different
methods of explaining the texts of books, these are for the enjoyment of
the learned, not for the salvation of the soul" (*Vivekachudâmani,* 58).

Those of you who have read Thomas a Kempis know how in every page he
insists on this, and almost every holy man in the world has insisted on
it. Intellect is necessary, for without it we fall into crude errors and
make all sorts of mistakes. Intellect checks these; but beyond that, do
not try to build anything upon it. It is an inactive, secondary help;
the real help is feeling, love. Do you feel for others? If you do, you
are growing in oneness. If you do not feel for others, you may be the
most intellectual giant ever born, but you will be nothing; you are but
dry intellect, and you will remain so. And if you feel, even if you
cannot read any book and do not know any language, you are in the right
way. The Lord is yours.

Do you not know from the history of the world where the power of the
prophets lay? Where was it? In the intellect? Did any of them write a
fine book on philosophy, on the most intricate ratiocinations of logic?
Not one of them. They only spoke a few words. Feel like Christ and you
will be a Christ; feel like Buddha and you will be a Buddha. It is
feeling that is the life, the strength, the vitality, without which no
amount of intellectual activity can reach God. Intellect is like limbs
without the power of locomotion. It is only when feeling enters and
gives them motion that they move and work on others. That is so all over
the world, and it is a thing which you must always remember. It is one
of the most practical things in Vedantic morality, for it is the
teaching of the Vedanta that you are all prophets, and all must be
prophets. The book is not the proof of your conduct, but you are the
proof of the book. How do you know that a book teaches truth? Because
you are truth and feel it. That is what the Vedanta says. What is the
proof of the Christs and Buddhas of the world? That you and I feel like
them. That is how you and I understand that they were true. Our
prophet-soul is the proof of their prophet-soul. Your godhead is the
proof of God Himself. If you are not a prophet, there never has been
anything true of God. If you are not God, there never was any God, and
never will be. This, says the Vedanta, is the ideal to follow. Every one
of us will have to become a prophet, and you are that already. Only
*know* it. Never think there is anything impossible for the soul. It is
the greatest heresy to think so. If there is sin, this is the only sin —
to say that you are weak, or others are weak.

</div>
