---
title: PRACTICAL VEDANTA

---
<div>

[←](practical_vedanta_part_iii.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_way_to_the_realisation_of_a_universal_religion.htm)

  

## PRACTICAL VEDANTA

PART IV

(*Delivered in London, 18th November 1896*)

We have been dealing more with the universal so far. This morning I
shall try to place before you the Vedantic ideas of the relation of the
particular to the universal. As we have seen, in the dualistic form of
Vedic doctrines, the earlier forms, there was a clearly defined
particular and limited soul for every being. There have been a great
many theories about this particular soul in each individual, but the
main discussion was between the ancient Vedantists and the ancient
Buddhists, the former believing in the individual soul as complete in
itself, the latter denying *in toto* the existence of such an individual
soul. As I told you the other day, it is pretty much the same discussion
you have in Europe as to substance and quality, one set holding that
behind the qualities there is something as substance, in which the
qualities inhere; and the other denying the existence of such a
substance as being unnecessary, for the qualities may live by
themselves. The most ancient theory of the soul, of course, is based
upon the argument of self-identity — "I am I" — that the I of yesterday
is the I of today, and the I of today will be the I of tomorrow; that in
spite of all the changes that are happening to the body, I yet believe
that I am the same I. This seems to have been the central argument with
those who believed in a limited, and yet perfectly complete, individual
soul.

On the other hand, the ancient Buddhists denied the necessity of such an
assumption. They brought forward the argument that all that we know, and
all that we possibly can know, are simply these changes. The positing of
an unchangeable and unchanging substance is simply superfluous, and even
if there were any such unchangeable thing, we could never understand it,
nor should we ever be able to cognise it in any sense of the word. The
same discussion you will find at the present time going on in Europe
between the religionists and the idealists on the one side, and the
modern positivists and agnostics on the other; one set believing there
is something which does not change (of whom the latest representative is
your Herbert Spencer), that we catch a glimpse of something which is
unchangeable. And the other is represented by the modern Comtists and
modern Agnostics. Those of you who were interested a few years ago in
the discussions between Herbert Spencer and Frederick Harrison might
have noticed that it was the same old difficulty, the one party standing
for a substance behind the changeful, and the other party denying the
necessity for such an assumption. One party says we cannot conceive of
changes without conceiving of something which does not change; the other
party brings out the argument that this is superfluous; we can only
conceive of something which is changing, and as to the unchanging, we
can neither know, feel, nor sense it.

In India this great question did not find its solution in very ancient
times, because we have seen that the assumption of a substance which is
behind the qualities, and which is not the qualities, can never be
substantiated; nay, even the argument from self-identity, from memory, —
that I am the I of yesterday because I remember it, and therefore I have
been a continuous something — cannot be substantiated. The other quibble
that is generally put forward is a mere delusion of words. For instance,
a man may take a long series of such sentences as "I do", "I go", "I
dream", "I sleep", "I move", and here you will find it claimed that the
doing, going, dreaming etc., have been changing, but what remained
constant was that "I". As such they conclude that the "I" is something
which is constant and an individual in itself, but all these changes
belong to the body. This, though apparently very convincing and clear,
is based upon the mere play on words. The "I" and the doing, going, and
dreaming may be separate in black and white, but no one can separate
them in his mind.

When I eat, I think of myself as eating — am identified with eating.
When I run, I and the running are not two separate things. Thus the
argument from personal identity does not seem to be very strong. The
other argument from memory is also weak. If the identity of my being is
represented by my memory, many things which I have forgotten are lost
from that identity. And we know that people under certain conditions
forget their whole past. In many cases of lunacy a man will think of
himself as made of glass, or as being an animal. If the existence of
that man depends on memory, he has become glass, which not being the
case we cannot make the identity of the Self depend on such a flimsy
substance as memory. Thus we see that the soul as a limited yet complete
and continuing identity cannot be established as separate from the
qualities. We cannot establish a narrowed-down, limited existence to
which is attached a bunch of qualities.

On the other hand, the argument of the ancient Buddhists seems to be
stronger — that we do not know, and cannot know, anything that is beyond
the bunch of qualities. According to them, the soul consists of a bundle
of qualities called sensations and feelings. A mass of such is what is
called the soul, and this mass is continually changing.

The Advaitist theory of the soul reconciles both these positions. The
position of the Advaitist is that it is true that we cannot think of the
substance as separate from the qualities, we cannot think of change and
not-change at the same time; it would be impossible. But the very thing
which is the substance is the quality; substance and quality are not two
things. It is the unchangeable that is appearing as the changeable. The
unchangeable substance of the universe is not something separate from
it. The noumenon is not something different from the phenomena, but it
is the very noumenon which has become the phenomena. There is a soul
which is unchanging, and what we call feelings and perceptions, nay,
even the body, are the very soul, seen from another point of view. We
have got into the habit of thinking that we have bodies and souls and so
forth, but really speaking, there is only one.

When I think of myself as the body, I am only a body; it is meaningless
to say I am something else. And when I think of myself as the soul, the
body vanishes, and the perception of the body does not remain. None can
get the perception of the Self without his perception of the body having
vanished, none can get perception of the substance without his
perception of the qualities having vanished.

The ancient illustration of Advaita, of the rope being taken for a
snake, may elucidate the point a little more. When a man mistakes the
rope for a snake, the rope has vanished, and when he takes it for a
rope, the snake has vanished, and the rope only remains. The ideas of
dual or treble existence come from reasoning on insufficient data, and
we read them in books or hear about them, until we come under the
delusion that we really have a dual perception of the soul and the body;
but such a perception never really exists. The perception is either of
the body or of the soul. It requires no arguments to prove it, you can
verify it in your own minds.

Try to think of yourself as a soul, as a disembodied something. You will
find it to be almost impossible, and those few who are able to do so
will find that at the time when they realise themselves as a soul they
have no idea of the body. You have heard of, or perhaps have seen,
persons who on particular occasions had been in peculiar states of mind,
brought about by deep meditation, self-hypnotism, hysteria, or drugs.
From their experience you may gather that when they were perceiving the
internal something, the external had vanished for them. This shows that
whatever exists is one. That one is appearing in these various forms,
and all these various forms give rise to the relation of cause and
effect. The relation of cause and effect is one of evolution — the one
becomes the other, and so on. Sometimes the cause vanishes, as it were,
and in its place leaves the effect. If the soul is the cause of the
body, the soul, as it were vanishes for the time being, and the body
remains; and when the body vanishes, the soul remains. This theory fits
the arguments of the Buddhists that were levelled against the assumption
of the dualism of body and soul, by denying the duality, and showing
that the substance and the qualities are one and the same thing
appearing in various forms.

We have seen also that this idea of the unchangeable can be established
only as regards the whole, but never as regards the part. The very idea
of part comes from the idea of change or motion. Everything that is
limited we can understand and know, because it is changeable; and the
whole must be unchangeable, because there is no other thing besides it
in relation to which change would be possible. Change is always in
regard to something which does not change, or which changes relatively
less.

According to Advaita, therefore, the idea of the soul as universal,
unchangeable, and immortal can be demonstrated as far as possible. The
difficulty would be as regards the particular. What shall we do with the
old dualistic theories which have such a hold upon us, and which we have
all to pass through — these beliefs in limited, little, individual
souls?

We have seen that we are immortal with regard to the whole; but the
difficulty is, we desire so much to be immortal as *parts* of the whole.
We have seen that we are Infinite, and that that is our real
individuality. But we want so much to make these little souls
individual. What becomes of them when we find in our everyday experience
that these little souls are individuals, with only this reservation that
they are continuously growing individuals? They are the same, yet not
the same. The I of yesterday is the I of today, and yet not so, it is
changed somewhat. Now, by getting rid of the dualistic conception, that
in the midst of all these changes there is something that does not
change, and taking the most modern of conceptions, that of evolution, we
find that the "I" is a continuously changing, expanding entity.

If it be true that man is the evolution of a mollusc, the mollusc
individual is the same as the man, only it has to become expanded a
great deal. From mollusc to man it has been a continuous expansion
towards infinity. Therefore the limited soul can be styled an individual
which is continuously expanding towards the Infinite Individual. Perfect
individuality will only be reached when it has reached the Infinite, but
on this side of the Infinite it is a continuously changing, growing
personality. One of the remarkable features of the Advaitist system of
Vedanta is to harmonise the preceding systems. In many cases it helped
the philosophy very much; in some cases it hurt it. Our ancient
philosophers knew what you call the theory of evolution; that growth is
gradual, step by step, and the recognition of this led them to harmonise
all the preceding systems. Thus not one of these preceding ideas was
rejected. The fault of the Buddhistic faith was that it had neither the
faculty nor the perception of this continual, expansive growth, and for
this reason it never even made an attempt to harmonise itself with the
preexisting steps towards the ideal. They were rejected as useless and
harmful.

This tendency in religion is most harmful. A man gets a new and better
idea, and then he looks back on those he has given up, and forthwith
decides that they were mischievous and unnecessary. He never thinks
that, however crude they may appear from his present point of view, they
were very useful to him, that they were necessary for him to reach his
present state, and that everyone of us has to grow in a similar fashion,
living first on crude ideas, taking benefit from them, and then arriving
at a higher standard. With the oldest theories, therefore, the Advaita
is friendly. Dualism and all systems that had preceded it are accepted
by the Advaita not in a patronising way, but with the conviction that
they are true manifestations of the same truth, and that they all lead
to the same conclusions as the Advaita has reached.

With blessing, and not with cursing, should be preserved all these
various steps through which humanity has to pass. Therefore all these
dualistic systems have never been rejected or thrown out, but have been
kept intact in the Vedanta; and the dualistic conception of an
individual soul, limited yet complete in itself, finds its place in the
Vedanta.

According to dualism, man dies and goes to other worlds, and so forth;
and these ideas are kept in the Vedanta in their entirety. For with the
recognition of growth in the Advaitist system, these theories are given
their proper place by admitting that they represent only a partial view
of the Truth.

From the dualistic standpoint this universe can only be looked upon as a
creation of matter or force, can only be looked upon as the play of a
certain will, and that will again can only be looked upon as separate
from the universe. Thus a man from such a standpoint has to see himself
as composed of a dual nature, body and soul, and this soul, though
limited, is individually complete in itself. Such a man's ideas of
immortality and of the future life would necessarily accord with his
idea of soul. These phases have been kept in the Vedanta, and it is,
therefore, necessary for me to present to you a few of the popular ideas
of dualism. According to this theory, we have a body, of course, and
behind the body there is what they call a fine body. This fine body is
also made of matter, only very fine. It is the receptacle of all our
Karma, of all our actions and impressions, which are ready to spring up
into visible forms. Every thought that we think, every deed that we do,
after a certain time becomes fine, goes into seed form, so to speak, and
lives in the fine body in a potential form, and after a time it emerges
again and bears its results. These results condition the life of man.
Thus he moulds his own life. Man is not bound by any other laws
excepting those which he makes for himself. Our thoughts, our words and
deeds are the threads of the net which we throw round ourselves, for
good or for evil. Once we set in motion a certain power, we have to take
the full consequences of it. This is the law of Karma. Behind the subtle
body, lives Jiva or the individual soul of man. There are various
discussions about the form and the size of this individual soul.
According to some, it is very small like an atom; according to others,
it is not so small as that; according to others, it is very big, and so
on. This Jiva is a part of that universal substance, and it is also
eternal; without beginning it is existing, and without end it will
exist. It is passing through all these forms in order to manifest its
real nature which is purity. Every action that retards this
manifestation is called an evil action; so with thoughts. And every
action and every thought that helps the Jiva to expand, to manifest its
real nature, is good. One theory that is held in common in India by the
crudest dualists as well as by the most advanced non-dualists is that
all the possibilities and powers of the soul are within it, and do not
come from any external source. They are in the soul in potential form,
and the whole work of life is simply directed towards manifesting those
potentialities.

They have also the theory of reincarnation which says that after the
dissolution of this body, the Jiva will have another, and after that has
been dissolved, it will again have another, and so on, either here or in
some other worlds; but this world is given the preference, as it is
considered the best of all worlds for our purpose. Other worlds are
conceived of as worlds where there is very little misery, but for that
very reason, they argue, there is less chance of thinking of higher
things there. As this world contains some happiness and a good deal of
misery, the Jiva some time or other gets awakened, as it were, and
thinks of freeing itself. But just as very rich persons in this world
have the least chance of thinking of higher things, so the Jiva in
heaven has little chance of progress, for its condition is the same as
that of a rich man, only more intensified; it has a very fine body which
knows no disease, and is under no necessity of eating or drinking, and
all its desires are fulfilled. The Jiva lives there, having enjoyment
after enjoyment, and so forgets all about its real nature. Still there
are some higher worlds, where in spite of all enjoyments, its further
evolution is possible. Some dualists conceive of the goal as the highest
heaven, where souls will live with God for ever. They will have
beautiful bodies and will know neither disease nor death, nor any other
evil, and all their desires will be fulfilled. From time to time some of
them will come back to this earth and take another body to teach human
beings the way to God; and the great teachers of the world have been
such. They were already free, and were living with God in the highest
sphere; but their love and sympathy for suffering humanity was so great
that they came and incarnated again to teach mankind the way to heaven.

Of course we know that the Advaita holds that this cannot be the goal or
the ideal; bodilessness must be the ideal. The ideal cannot be finite.
Anything short of the Infinite cannot be the ideal, and there cannot be
an infinite body. That would be impossible, as body comes from
limitation. There cannot be infinite thought, because thought comes from
limitation. We have to go beyond the body, and beyond thought too, says
the Advaita. And we have also seen that, according to Advaita, this
freedom is not to be attained, it is already ours. We only forget it and
deny it. Perfection is not to be attained, it is already within us.
Immortality and bliss are not to be acquired, we possess them already;
they have been ours all the time.

If you dare declare that you are free, free you are this moment. If you
say you are bound, bound you will remain. This is what Advaita boldly
declares. I have told you the ideas of the dualists. You can take
whichever you like.

The highest ideal of the Vedanta is very difficult to understand, and
people are always quarrelling about it, and the greatest difficulty is
that when they get hold of certain ideas, they deny and fight other
ideas. Take up what suits you, and let others take up what they need. If
you are desirous of clinging to this little individuality, to this
limited manhood, remain in it, have all these desires, and be content
and pleased with them. If your experience of manhood has been very good
and nice, retain it as long as you like; and you can do so, for you are
the makers of your own fortunes; none can compel you to give up your
manhood. You will be men as long as you like; none can prevent you. If
you want to be angels, you will be angels, that is the law. But there
may be others who do not want to be angels even. What right have you to
think that theirs is a horrible notion? You may be frightened to lose a
hundred pounds, but there may be others who would not even wink if they
lost all the money they had in the world. There have been such men and
still there are. Why do you dare to judge them according to your
standard? You cling on to your limitations, and these little worldly
ideas may be your highest ideal. You are welcome to them. It will be to
you as you wish. But there are others who have seen the truth and cannot
rest in these limitations, who have done with these things and want to
get beyond. The world with all its enjoyments is a mere mud-puddle for
them. Why do you want to bind them down to your ideas? You must get rid
of this tendency once for all. Accord a place to everyone.

I once read a story about some ships that were caught in a cyclone in
the South Sea Islands, and there was a picture of it in the *Illustrated
London News*. All of them were wrecked except one English vessel, which
weathered the storm. The picture showed the men who were going to be
drowned, standing on the decks and cheering the people who were sailing
through the storm (H.M.S. Calliope and the American men-of-war at
Samoa.[1](#fn1) — Ed). Be brave and generous like that. Do not drag
others down to where you are. Another foolish notion is that if we lose
our little individuality, there will be no morality, no hope for
humanity. As if everybody had been dying for humanity all the time! God
bless you! If in every country there were two hundred men and women
really wanting to do good to humanity, the millennium would come in five
days. We know how we are dying for humanity! These are all tall talks,
and nothing else. The history of the world shows that those who never
thought of their little individuality were the greatest benefactors of
the human race, and that the more men and women think of themselves, the
less are they able to do for others. One is unselfishness, and the other
selfishness. Clinging on to little enjoyments, and to desire the
continuation and repetition of this state of things is utter
selfishness. It arises not from any desire for truth, its genesis is not
in kindness for other beings, but in the utter selfishness of the human
heart, in the idea, "I will have everything, and do not care for anyone
else." This is as it appears to me. I would like to see more moral men
in the world like some of those grand old prophets and sages of ancient
times who would have given up a hundred lives if they could by so doing
benefit one little animal! Talk of morality and doing good to others!
Silly talk of the present time!

I would like to see moral men like Gautama Buddha, who did not believe
in a Personal God or a personal soul, never asked about them, but was a
perfect agnostic, and yet was ready to lay down his life for anyone, and
worked all his life for the good of all, and thought only of the good of
all. Well has it been said by his biographer, in describing his birth,
that he was born for the good of the many, as a blessing to the many. He
did not go to the forest to meditate for his own salvation; he felt that
the world was burning, and that he must find a way out. "Why is there so
much misery in the world?" — was the one question that dominated his
whole life. Do you think we are so moral as the Buddha?

The more selfish a man, the more immoral he is. And so also with the
race. That race which is bound down to itself has been the most cruel
and the most wicked in the whole world. There has not been a religion
that has clung to this dualism more than that founded by the Prophet of
Arabia, and there has not been a religion which has shed so much blood
and been so cruel to other men. In the Koran there is the doctrine that
a man who does not believe these teachings should be killed; it is a
mercy to kill him! And the surest way to get to heaven, where there are
beautiful houris and all sorts of sense-enjoyments, is by killing these
unbelievers. Think of the bloodshed there has been in consequence of
such beliefs!

In the religion of Christ there was little of crudeness; there is very
little difference between the pure religion of Christ and that of the
Vedanta. You find there the idea of oneness; but Christ also preached
dualistic ideas to the people in order to give them something tangible
to take hold of, to lead them up to the highest ideal. The same Prophet
who preached, "Our Father which art in heaven", also preached, "I and my
Father are one", and the same Prophet knew that through the "Father in
heaven" lies the way to the "I and my Father are one". There was only
blessing and love in the religion of Christ; but as soon as crudeness
crept in, it was degraded into something not much better than the
religion of the Prophet of Arabia. It was crudeness indeed — this fight
for the little self, this clinging on to the "I", not only in this life,
but also in the desire for its continuance even after death. This they
declare to be unselfishness; this the foundation of morality! Lord help
us, if this be the foundation of morality! And strangely enough, men and
women who ought to know better think all morality will be destroyed if
these little selves go and stand aghast at the idea that morality can
only stand upon their destruction. The watchword of all well-being, of
all moral good is not "I" but "thou". Who cares whether there is a
heaven or a hell, who cares if there is a soul or not, who cares if
there is an unchangeable or not? Here is the world, and it is full of
misery. Go out into it as Buddha did, and struggle to lessen it or die
in the attempt. Forget yourselves; this is the first lesson to be
learnt, whether you are a theist or an atheist, whether you are an
agnostic or a Vedantist, a Christian or a Mohammedan. The one lesson
obvious to all is the destruction of the little self and the building up
of the Real Self.

Two forces have been working side by side in parallel lines. The one
says "I", the other says "not I". Their manifestation is not only in man
but in animals, not only in animals but in the smallest worms. The
tigress that plunges her fangs into the warm blood of a human being
would give up her own life to protect her young. The most depraved man
who thinks nothing of taking the lives of his brother men will, perhaps,
sacrifice himself without any hesitation to save his starving wife and
children. Thus throughout creation these two forces are working side by
side; where you find the one, you find the other too. The one is
selfishness, the other is unselfishness. The one is acquisition, the
other is renunciation. The one takes, the other gives. From the lowest
to the highest, the whole universe is the playground of these two
forces. It does not require any demonstration; it is obvious to all.

What right has any section of the community to base the whole work and
evolution of the universe upon one of these two factors alone, upon
competition and struggle? What right has it to base the whole working of
the universe upon passion and fight, upon competition and struggle? That
these exist we do not deny; but what right has anyone to deny the
working of the other force? Can any man deny that love, this "not I",
this renunciation is the only positive power in the universe? That other
is only the misguided employment of the power of love; the power of love
brings competition, the real genesis of competition is in love. The real
genesis of evil is in unselfishness. The creator of evil is good, and
the end is also good. It is only misdirection of the power of good. A
man who murders another is, perhaps, moved to do so by the love of his
own child. His love has become limited to that one little baby, to the
exclusion of the millions of other human beings in the universe. Yet,
limited or unlimited, it is the same love.

Thus the motive power of the whole universe, in what ever way it
manifests itself, is that one wonderful thing, unselfishness,
renunciation, love, the real, the only living force in existence.
Therefore the Vedantist insists upon that oneness. We insist upon this
explanation because we cannot admit two causes of the universe. If we
simply hold that by limitation the same beautiful, wonderful love
appears to be evil or vile, we find the whole universe explained by the
one force of love. If not, two causes of the universe have to be taken
for granted, one good and the other evil, one love and the other hatred.
Which is more logical? Certainly the one-force theory.

Let us now pass on to things which do not possibly belong to dualism. I
cannot stay longer with the dualists. I am afraid. My idea is to show
that the highest ideal of morality and unselfishness goes hand in hand
with the highest metaphysical conception, and that you need not lower
your conception to get ethics and morality, but, on the other hand, to
reach a real basis of morality and ethics you must have the highest
philosophical and scientific conceptions. Human knowledge is not
antagonistic to human well-being. On the contrary, it is knowledge alone
that will save us in every department of life — in knowledge is worship.
The more we know the better for us. The Vedantist says, the cause of all
that is apparently evil is the limitation of the unlimited. The love
which gets limited into little channels and seems to be evil eventually
comes out at the other end and manifests itself as God. The Vedanta also
says that the cause of all this apparent evil is in ourselves. Do not
blame any supernatural being, neither be hopeless and despondent, nor
think we are in a place from which we can never escape unless someone
comes and lends us a helping hand. That cannot be, says the Vedanta. We
are like silkworms; we make the thread out of our own substance and spin
the cocoon, and in course of time are imprisoned inside. But this is not
for ever. In that cocoon we shall develop spiritual realisation, and
like the butterfly come out free. This network of Karma we have woven
around ourselves; and in our ignorance we feel as if we are bound, and
weep and wail for help. But help does not come from without; it comes
from within ourselves. Cry to all the gods in the universe. I cried for
years, and in the end I found that I was helped. But help came from
within. And I had to undo what I had done by mistake. That is the only
way. I had to cut the net which I had thrown round myself, and the power
to do this is within. Of this I am certain that not one aspiration,
well-guided or ill-guided in my life, has been in vain, but that I am
the resultant of all my past, both good and evil. I have committed many
mistakes in my life; but mark you, I am sure of this that without every
one of those mistakes I should not be what I am today, and so am quite
satisfied to have made them. I do not mean that you are to go home and
wilfully commit mistakes; do not misunderstand me in that way. But do
not mope because of the mistakes you have committed, but know that in
the end all will come out straight. It cannot be otherwise, because
goodness is our nature, purity is our nature, and that nature can never
be destroyed. Our essential nature always remains the same.

What we are to understand is this, that what we call mistakes or evil,
we commit because we are weak, and we are weak because we are ignorant.
I prefer to call them mistakes. The word sin, although originally a very
good word, has got a certain flavour about it that frightens me. Who
makes us ignorant? We ourselves. We put our hands over our eyes and weep
that it is dark. Take the hands away and there is light; the light
exists always for us, the self-effulgent nature of the human soul. Do
you not hear what your modern scientific men say? What is the cause of
evolution? Desire. The animal wants to do something, but does not find
the environment favourable, and therefore develops a new body. Who
develops it? The animal itself, its will. You have developed from the
lowest amoeba. Continue to exercise your will and it will take you
higher still. The will is almighty. If it is almighty, you may say, why
cannot I do everything? But you are thinking only of your little self.
Look back on yourselves from the state of the amoeba to the human being;
who made all that? Your own will. Can you deny then that it is almighty?
That which has made you come up so high can make you go higher still.
What you want is character, strengthening of the will.

If I teach you, therefore, that your nature is evil, that you should go
home and sit in sackcloth and ashes and weep your lives out because you
took certain false steps, it will not help you, but will weaken you all
the more, and I shall be showing you the road to more evil than good. If
this room is full of darkness for thousands of years and you come in and
begin to weep and wail, "Oh the darkness", will the darkness vanish?
Strike a match and light comes in a moment. What good will it do you to
think all your lives, "Oh, I have done evil, I have made many mistakes"?
It requires no ghost to tell us that. Bring in the light and the evil
goes in a moment. Build up your character, and manifest your real
nature, the Effulgent, the Resplendent, the Ever-Pure, and call It up in
everyone that you see. I wish that everyone of us had come to such a
state that even in the vilest of human beings we could see the Real Self
within, and instead of condemning them, say, "Rise thou effulgent one,
rise thou who art always pure, rise thou birthless and deathless, rise
almighty, and manifest thy true nature. These little manifestations do
not befit thee." This is the highest prayer that the Advaita teaches.
This is the one prayer, to remember our true nature, the God who is
always within us, thinking of it always as infinite, almighty,
ever-good, ever-beneficent, selfless, bereft of all limitations. And
because that nature is selfless, it is strong and fearless; for only to
selfishness comes fear. He who has nothing to desire for himself, whom
does he fear, and what can frighten him? What fear has death for him?
What fear has evil for him? So if we are Advaitists, we must think from
this moment that our old self is dead and gone. The old Mr., Mrs., and
Miss So-and-so are gone, they were mere superstitions, and what remains
is the ever-pure, the ever-strong, the almighty, the all-knowing — that
alone remains for us, and then all fear vanishes from us. Who can injure
us, the omnipresent? All weakness has vanished from us, and our only
work is to arouse this knowledge in our fellow beings. We see that they
too are the same pure self, only they do not know it; we must teach
them, we must help them to rouse up their infinite nature. This is what
I feel to be absolutely necessary all over the world. These doctrines
are old, older than many mountains possibly. All truth is eternal. Truth
is nobody's property; no race, no individual can lay any exclusive claim
to it. Truth is the nature of all souls. Who can lay an, special claim
to it? But it has to be made practical, to be made simple (for the
highest truths are always simple), so that it may penetrate every pore
of human society, and become the property of the highest intellects and
the commonest minds, of the man, woman, and child at the same time. All
these ratiocinations of logic, all these bundles of metaphysics, all
these theologies and ceremonies may have been good in their own time,
but let us try to make things simpler and bring about the golden days
when every man will be a worshipper, and the Reality in every man will
be the object of worship.

1.  [^](#txt1)![](practical_vedanta_part_iv.jpg)

</div>
