---
title: THE OPEN SECRET

---
<div>

[←](the_ideal_of_a_universal_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_way_to_blessedness.htm)

  

## THE OPEN SECRET

(*Delivered at Los Angeles, Calif., 5th January 1900*)

Whichever way we turn in trying to understand things in their reality,
if we analyse far enough, we find that at last we come to a peculiar
state of things, seemingly a contradiction: something which our reason
cannot grasp and yet is a fact. We take up something — we know it is
finite; but as soon as we begin to analyse it, it leads us beyond our
reason, and we never find an end to all its qualities, its
possibilities, its powers, its relations. It has become infinite. Take
even a common flower, that is finite enough; but who is there that can
say he knows all about the flower? There is no possibility of anyone's
getting to the end of the knowledge about that one flower. The flower
has become infinite — the flower which was finite to begin with. Take a
grain of sand. Analyse it. We start with the assumption that it is
finite, and at last we find that it is not, it is infinite; all the
same, we have looked upon it as finite. The flower is similarly treated
as a finite something.

So with all our thoughts and experiences, physical and mental. We begin,
we may think, on a small scale, and grasp them as little things; but
very soon they elude our knowledge and plunge into the abyss of the
infinite. And the greatest and the first thing perceived is ourselves.
We are also in the same dilemma about existence. We exist. We see we are
finite beings. We live and die. Our horizon is narrow. We are here,
limited, confronted by the universe all around. Nature can crush us out
of existence in a moment. Our little bodies are just held together,
ready to go to pieces at a moment's notice. We know that. In the region
of action how powerless we are! Our will is being thwarted at every
turn. So many things we want to do, and how few we can do! There is no
limit to our willing. We can will everything, want everything, we can
desire to go to the dogstar. But how few of our desires can be
accomplished! The body will not allow it. Well, nature is against the
accomplishment of our will. We are weak. What is true of the flower, of
the grain of sand, of the physical world, and of every thought, is a
hundredfold more true of ourselves. We are also in the same dilemma of
existence, being finite and infinite at the same time. We are like waves
in the ocean; the wave is the ocean and yet not the ocean. There is not
any part of the wave of which you cannot say, "It is the ocean." The
name "ocean" applies to the wave and equally to every other part of the
ocean, and yet it is separate from the ocean. So in this infinite ocean
of existence we are like wavelets. At the same time, when we want really
to grasp ourselves, we cannot — we have become the infinite.

We seem to be walking in dreams. Dreams are all right in a dream-mind;
but as soon as you want to grasp one of them, it is gone. Why? Not that
it was false, but because it is beyond the power of reason, the power of
the intellect to comprehend it. Everything in this life is so vast that
the intellect is nothing in comparison with it. It refuses to be bound
by the laws of the intellect! It laughs at the bondage the intellect
wants to spread around it. And a thousandfold more so is this the case
with the human soul. "We ourselves" — this is the greatest mystery of
the universe.

How wonderful it all is! Look at the human eye. How easily it can be
destroyed, and yet the biggest suns exist only because your eyes see
them. The world exists because your eyes certify that it exists. Think
of that mystery! These poor little eyes! A strong light, or a pin, can
destroy them. Yet the most powerful engines of destruction, the most
powerful cataclysms, the most wonderful of existences, millions of suns
and stars and moons and earth — all depend for their existence upon, and
have to be certified by, these two little things! They say, "Nature, you
exist", and we believe nature exists. So with all our senses.

What is this? Where is weakness? Who is strong? What is great and what
is small? What is high and what is low in this marvellous
interdependence of existence where the smallest atom is necessary for
the existence of the whole? Who is great and who is small? It is past
finding out! And why? Because none is great and none is small. All
things are interpenetrated by that infinite ocean; their reality is that
infinite; and whatever there is on the surface is but that infinite. The
tree is infinite; so is everything that you see or feel — every grain of
sand, every thought, every soul, everything that exists, is infinite.
Infinite is finite and finite infinite. This is our existence.

Now, that may be all true, but all this feeling after the Infinite is at
present mostly unconscious. It is not that we have forgotten that
infinite nature of ours: none can ever do that. Who can ever think that
he can be annihilated? Who can think that he will die? None can. All our
relation to the Infinite works in us unconsciously. In a manner,
therefore, we forget our real being, and hence all this misery comes.

In practical daily life we are hurt by small things; we are enslaved by
little beings. Misery comes because we think we are finite — we are
little beings. And yet, how difficult it is to believe that we are
infinite beings! In the midst of all this misery and trouble, when a
little thing may throw me off my balance, it must be my care to believe
that I am infinite. And the fact is that we are, and that consciously or
unconsciously we are all searching after that something which is
infinite; we are always seeking for something that is free.

There was never a human race which did not have a religion and worship
some sort of God or gods. Whether the God or gods existed or not is no
question; but what is the analysis of this psychological phenomenon? Why
is all the world trying to find, or seeking for, a God? Why? Because in
spite of all this bondage, in spite of nature and this tremendous energy
of law grinding us down, never allowing us to turn to any side —
wherever we go, whatever we want to do, we are thwarted by this law,
which is everywhere — in spite of all this, the human soul never forgets
its freedom and is ever seeking it. The search for freedom is the search
of all religions; whether they know it or not, whether they can
formulate it well or ill, the idea is there. Even the lowest man, the
most ignorant, seeks for something which has power over nature's laws.
He wants to see a demon, a ghost, a god — somebody who can subdue
nature, for whom nature is not almighty, for whom there is no law. "Oh,
for somebody who can break the law!" That is the cry coming from the
human heart. We are always seeking for someone who breaks the law. The
rushing engine speeds along the railway track; the little worm crawls
out of its way. We at once say, "The engine is dead matter, a machine;
and the worm is alive," because the worm attempted to break the law. The
engine, with all its power and might, can never break the law. It is
made to go in any direction man wants, and it cannot do otherwise; but
the worm, small and little though it was, attempted to break the law and
avoid the danger. It tried to assert itself against law, assert its
freedom; and there was the sign of the future God in it.

Everywhere we see this assertion of freedom, this freedom of the soul.
It is reflected in every religion in the shape of God or gods; but it is
all external yet — for those who only see the gods outside. Man decided
that he was nothing. He was afraid that he could never be free; so he
went to seek for someone outside of nature who was free. Then he thought
that there were many and many such free beings, and gradually he merged
them all into one God of gods and Lord of lords. Even that did not
satisfy him. He came a little closer to truth, a little nearer; and then
gradually found that whatever he was, he was in some way connected with
the God of gods and Lord of lords; that he, though he thought himself
bound and low and weak, was somehow connected with that God of gods.
Then visions came to him; thought arose and knowledge advanced. And he
began to come nearer and nearer to that God, and at last found out that
God and all the gods, this whole psychological phenomenon connected with
the search for an all-powerful free soul, was but a reflection of his
own idea of himself. And then at last he discovered that it was not only
true that "God made man after His own image", but that it was also true
that man made God after his own image. That brought out the idea of
divine freedom. The Divine Being was always within, the nearest of the
near. Him we had ever been seeking outside, and at last found that He is
in the heart of our hearts. You may know the story of the man who
mistook his own heartbeat for somebody knocking at the door, and went to
the door and opened it, but found nobody there, so he went back. Again
he seemed to hear a knocking at the door, but nobody was there. Then he
understood that it was his own heartbeat, and he had misinterpreted it
as a knocking at the door. Similarly, man after his search finds out
that this infinite freedom that he was placing in imagination all the
time in the nature outside is the internal subject, the eternal Soul of
souls; this Reality, he himself.

Thus at last he comes to recognise this marvellous duality of existence:
the subject, infinite and finite in one — the Infinite Being is also the
same finite soul. The Infinite is caught, as it were, in the meshes of
the intellect and apparently manifests as finite beings, but the reality
remains unchanged.

This is, therefore, true knowledge: that the Soul of our souls, the
Reality that is within us, is That which is unchangeable, eternal,
ever-blessed, ever-free. This is the only solid ground for us to stand
upon.

This, then, is the end of all death, the advent of all immortality, the
end of all misery. And he who sees that One among the many, that One
unchangeable in the universe of change, he who sees Him as the Soul of
his soul, unto him belongs eternal peace — unto none else.

And in the midst of the depths of misery and degradation, the Soul sends
a ray of light, and man wakes up and finds that what is really his, he
can never lose. No, we can never lose what is really ours. Who can lose
his being? Who can lose his very existence? If I am good, it is the
existence first, and then that becomes coloured with the quality of
goodness. If I am evil, it is the existence first, and that becomes
coloured with the quality of badness. That existence is first, last, and
always; it is never lost, but ever present.

Therefore, there is hope for all. None can die; none can be degraded for
ever. Life is but a playground, however gross the play may be. However
we may receive blows, and however knocked about we may be, the Soul is
there and is never injured. We are that Infinite.

Thus sang a Vedantin, "I never had fear nor doubt. Death never came to
me. I never had father or mother: for I was never born. Where are my
foes? — for I am All. I am the Existence and Knowledge and Bliss
Absolute. I am It. I am It. Anger and lust and jealousy, evil thoughts
and all these things, never came to me; for I am the Existence, the
Knowledge, the Bliss Absolute. I am It. I am It."

That is the remedy for all disease, the nectar that cures death. Here we
are in this world, and our nature rebels against it. But let us repeat,
"I am It; I am It. I have no fear, nor doubt, nor death. I have no sex,
nor creed, nor colour. What creed can I have? What sect is there to
which I should belong? What sect can hold me? I am in every sect!"

However much the body rebels, however much the mind rebels, in the midst
of the uttermost darkness, in the midst of agonising tortures, in the
uttermost despair, repeat this, once, twice, thrice, ever more. Light
comes gently, slowly, but surely it comes.

Many times I have been in the jaws of death, starving, footsore, and
weary; for days and days I had had no food, and often could walk no
farther; I would sink down under a tree, and life would seem ebbing
away. I could not speak, I could scarcely think, but at last the mind
reverted to the idea: "I have no fear nor death; I never hunger nor
thirst. I am It! I am It! The whole of nature cannot crush me; it is my
servant. Assert thy strength, thou Lord of lords and God of gods! Regain
thy lost empire! Arise and walk and stop not!" And I would rise up,
reinvigorated, and here am I, living, today. Thus, whenever darkness
comes, assert the reality and everything adverse must vanish. For, after
all, it is but a dream. Mountain-high though the difficulties appear,
terrible and gloomy though all things seem, they are but Mâyâ. Fear not
— it is banished. Crush it, and it vanishes. Stamp upon it, and it dies.
Be not afraid. Think not how many times you fail. Never mind. Time is
infinite. Go forward: assert yourself again and again, and light must
come. You may pray to everyone that was ever born, but who will come to
help you? And what of the way of death from which none knows escape?
Help thyself out by thyself. None else can help thee, friend. For thou
alone art thy greatest enemy, thou alone art thy greatest friend. Get
hold of the Self, then. Stand up. Don't be afraid. In the midst of all
miseries and all weakness, let the Self come out, faint and
imperceptible though it be at first. You will gain courage, and at last
like a lion you will roar out, "I am It! I am It!" "I am neither a man,
nor a woman, nor a god, nor a demon; no, nor any of the animals, plants,
or trees. I am neither poor nor rich, neither learned nor ignorant. All
these things are very little compared with what I am: for I am It! I am
It! Behold the sun and the moon and the stars: I am the light that is
shining in them! I am the beauty of the fire! I am the power in the
universe! For, I am It! I am It!

"Whoever thinks that I am little makes a mistake, for the Self is all
that exists. The sun exists because I declare it does, the world exists
because I declare it does. Without me they cannot remain, for I am
Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss Absolute — ever happy, ever pure, ever
beautiful. Behold, the sun is the cause of our vision, but is not itself
ever affected by any defect in the eyes of any one; even so I am. I am
working through all organs, working through everything, but never does
the good and evil of work attach to me. For me there is no law, nor
Karma. I own the laws of Karma. I ever was and ever am.

"My real pleasure was never in earthly things — in husband, wife,
children, and other things. For I am like the infinite blue sky: clouds
of many colours pass over it and play for a second; they move off, and
there is the same unchangeable blue. Happiness and misery, good and
evil, may envelop me for a moment, veiling the Self; but I am still
there. They pass away because they are changeable. I shine, because I am
unchangeable. If misery comes, I know it is finite, therefore it must
die. If evil comes, I know it is finite, it must go. I alone am infinite
and untouched by anything. For I am the Infinite, that Eternal,
Changeless Self." — So sings one of our poets.

Let us drink of this cup, this cup that leads to everything that is
immortal, everything that is unchangeable. Fear not. Believe not that we
are evil, that we are finite,. that we can ever die. It is not true.

"This is to be heard of, then to be thought upon, and then to be
meditated upon." When the hands work,. the mind should repeat, "I am It.
I am It." Think of it, dream of it, until it becomes bone of your bones
and; flesh of your flesh, until all the hideous dreams of littleness, of
weakness, of misery, and of evil, have entirely vanished, and no more
then can the Truth be hidden from you even for a moment.

</div>
