---
title: THE WAY TO BLESSEDNESS

---
<div>

[←](the_open_secret.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](yajnavalkya_and_maitreyi.htm)

  

## THE WAY TO BLESSEDNESS

I shall tell you a story from the Vedas tonight. The Vedas are the
sacred scriptures of the Hindus and are a vast collection of literature,
of which the last part is called the Vedanta, meaning the end of the
Vedas. It deals with the theories contained in them, and more especially
the philosophy with which we are concerned. It is written in archaic
Sanskrit, and you must remember it was written thousands of years ago.
There was a certain man who wanted to make a big sacrifice. In the
religion of the Hindus, sacrifice plays a great part. There are various
sorts of sacrifices. They make altars and pour oblations into the fire,
and repeat various hymns and so forth; and at the end of the sacrifice
they make a gift to the Brahmins and the poor. Each sacrifice has its
peculiar gift. There was one sacrifice, where everything a man possessed
had to be given up. Now this man, though rich, was miserly, and at the
same time wanted to get a great name for having done this most difficult
sacrifice. And when he did this sacrifice, instead of giving up
everything he had, he gave away only his blind, lame, and old cows that
would never more give milk. But he had a son called Nachiketas, a bright
young boy, who, observing the poor gifts made by his father, and
pondering on the demerit that was sure to accrue to him thereby,
resolved to make amends for them by making a gift of himself. So he went
to his father and said, "And to whom will you give me?" The father did
not answer the boy, and the boy asked a second and a third time, when
the father got vexed and said, "Thee I give unto Yama, thee I give unto
Death." And the boy went straight to the kingdom of Yama. Yama was not
at home, so he waited there. After three days Yama came and said to him,
"O Brahmin, thou art my guest, and thou hast been here for three days
without any food. I salute thee, and in order to repay thee for this
trouble, I will grant thee three boons." Then the boy asked the first
boon, "May my father's anger against me get calmed down," and the second
boon was that he wanted to know about a certain sacrifice. And then came
the third boon. "When a man dies, the question arises: What becomes of
him: Some people say he ceases to exist. Others say that he exists.
Please tell me what the answer is. This is the third boon that I want."
Then Death answered, "The gods in ancient times tried to unravel the
mystery; this mystery is so fine that it is hard to know. Ask for some
other boon: do not ask this one. Ask for a long life of a hundred years.
Ask for cattle and horses, ask for great kingdoms. Do not press me to
answer this. Whatever man desires for his enjoyment, ask all that and I
will fulfil it, but do not want to know this secret." "No sir," said the
boy, ''man is not to be satisfied with wealth; if wealth were wanted, we
should get it, if we have only seen you. We shall also live so long as
you rule. What decaying mortal, living in the world below and possessed
of knowledge, having gained the company of the undecaying and the
immortal, will delight in long life, knowing the nature of the pleasure
produced by song and sport? Therefore, tell me this secret about the
great hereafter, I do not want anything else; that is what Nachiketas
wants, the mystery of death." Then the God of death was pleased. We have
been saying in the last two or three lectures that this Jnâna prepares
the mind. So you see here that the first preparation is that a man must
desire nothing else but the truth, and truth for truth's sake. See how
this boy rejected all these gifts which Death offered him; possessions,
property, wealth, long life, and everything he was ready to sacrifice
for this one idea, knowledge only, the truth. Thus alone can truth come.
The God of death became pleased. "Here are two ways," he said, "one of
enjoyment, the other of blessedness. These two in various ways draw
mankind. He becomes a sage who, of these two, takes up that which leads
to blessedness, and he degenerates who takes up the road to enjoyment. I
praise you, Nachiketas; you have not asked for desire. In various ways I
tempted you towards the path of enjoyment; you resisted them all, you
have known that knowledge is much higher than a life of enjoyment.

"You have understood that the man who lives in ignorance and enjoys, is
not different from the brute beast. Yet there are many who, though
steeped in ignorance, in the pride of their hearts, think that they are
great sages and go round and round in many crooked ways, like the blind
led by the blind. This truth, Nachiketas, never shines in the heart of
those who are like ignorant children, deluded by a few lumps of earth.
They do not understand this world, nor the other world. They deny this
and the other one, and thus again and again come under my control. Many
have not even the opportunity to hear about it; and many, though
hearing, cannot know it, because the teacher must be wonderful; so must
he be wonderful too unto whom the knowledge is carried. If the speaker
is a man who is not highly advanced, then even a hundred times heard,
and a hundred times taught, the truth never illumines the soul. Do not
disturb your mind by vain arguments, Nachiketas; this truth only becomes
effulgent in the heart which has been made pure. He who cannot be seen
without the greatest difficulty, He who is hidden, He who has entered
the cave of the heart of hearts — the Ancient One — cannot be seen with
the external eyes; seeing Him with the eyes of the soul, one gives up
both pleasure and pain. He who knows this secret gives up all his vain
desires, and attains this superfine perception, and thus becomes ever
blessed. Nachiketas, that is the way to blessedness. He is beyond all
virtue, beyond all vice, beyond all duties, beyond all non-duties,
beyond all existence, beyond all that is to be; he who knows this, alone
knows. He whom all the Vedas seek, to see whom men undergo all sorts of
asceticism, I will tell you His name: It is Om. This eternal Om is the
Brahman, this is the immortal One; he who knows the secret of this —
whatever he desires is his. This Self of man, Nachiketas, about which
you seek to know, is never born, and never dies. Without beginning, ever
existing, this Ancient One is not destroyed, when the body is destroyed.
If the slayer thinks that he can slay, and if the slain man thinks he is
slain, both are mistaken, for neither can the Self kill, nor can It be
killed. Infinitely smaller than the smallest particle, infinitely
greater than the greatest existence, the Lord of all lives in the cave
of the heart of every being. He who has become sinless sees Him in all
His glory, through the mercy of the same Lord. (We find that the mercy
of God is one of the causes of God-realisation.) Sitting He goes far,
lying He goes everywhere; who else but men of purified and subtle
understanding are qualified to know the God in whom all conflicting
attributes meet? Without body, yet living in the body, untouched, yet
seemingly in contact, omnipresent — knowing the Âtman to be such, the
sage gives up all misery. This Atman is not to be attained by the study
of the Vedas, nor by the highest intellect, nor by much learning. Whom
the Atman seeks, he gets the Atman; unto him He discloses His glory. He
who is continuously doing evil deeds, he whose mind is not calm, he who
cannot meditates he who is always disturbed and fickle — he cannot
understand and realise this Atman who has entered the cave of the heart.
This body, O Nachiketas, is the chariot, the organs of the senses are
the horses, the mind is the reins, the intellect is the charioteer, and
the soul is the rider in the chariot. When the soul joins himself with
the charioteer, Buddhi or intellect, and then through it with the mind,
the reins, and through it again with the organs, the horses, he is said
to be the enjoyer; he perceives, he works, he acts. He whose mind is not
under control, and who has no discrimination, his senses are not
controllable like vicious horses in the hands of a driver. But he who
has discrimination, whose mind is controlled, his organs are always
controllable like good horses in the hands of a driver. He who has
discrimination, whose mind is always in the way to understand truth, who
is always pure — he receives that truth, attaining which there is no
rebirth. This, O Nachiketas, is very difficult, the way is long, and it
is hard to attain. It is only those who have attained the finest
perception that can see it, that can understand it. Yet do not be
frightened. Awake, be up and doing. Do not stop till you have reached
the goal. For the sages say that the task is very difficult, like
walking on the edge of a razor. He who is beyond the senses, beyond all
touch, beyond all form, beyond all taste, the Unchangeable, the
Infinite, beyond even intelligence, the Indestructible — knowing Him
alone, we are safe from the jaws of death."

So far, we see that Yama describes the goal that is to be attained. The
first idea that we get is that birth, death, misery, and the various
tossings about to which we are subject in the world can only be overcome
by knowing that which is real. What is real? That which never changes,
the Self of man, the Self behind the universe. Then, again, it is said
that it is very difficult to know Him. Knowing does not mean simply
intellectual assent, it means realisation. Again and again we have read
that this Self is to be seen, to be perceived. We cannot see it with the
eyes; the perception for it has to become superfine. It is gross
perception by which the walls and books are perceived, but the
perception to discern the truth has to be made very fine, and that is
the whole secret of this knowledge. Then Yama says that one must be very
pure. That is the way to making the perception superfine; and then he
goes on to tell us other ways. That self-existent One is far removed
from the organs. The organs or instruments see outwards, but the
self-existing One, the Self, is seen inwards. You must remember the
qualification that is required: the desire to know this Self by turning
the eyes inwards. All these beautiful things that we see in nature are
very good, but that is not the way to see God. We must learn how to turn
the eyes inwards. The eagerness of the eyes to see outwards should be
restricted. When you walk in a busy street, it is difficult to hear the
man speak with whom you are walking, because of the noise of the passing
carriages. He cannot hear you because there is so much noise. The mind
is going outwards, and you cannot hear the man who is next to you. In
the same way, this world around us is making such a noise that it draws
the mind outwards. How can we see the Self? This going outwards must be
stopped. That is what is meant by turning the eyes inwards, and then
alone the glory of the Lord within will be seen.

What is this Self? We have seen that It is even beyond the intellect. We
learn from the same Upanishad that this Self is eternal and omnipresent,
that you and I and all of us are omnipresent beings, and that the Self
is changeless. Now this omnipresent Being can be only one. There cannot
be two beings who are equally omnipresent — how could that be? There
cannot be two beings who are infinite, and the result is, there is
really only one Self, and you, I, and the whole universe are but one,
appearing as many. "As the one fire entering into the world manifests
itself in various ways, even so that one Self, the Self of all,
manifests Itself in every form." But the question is: If this Self is
perfect and pure, and the One Being of the universe, what becomes of It
when It goes into the impure body, the wicked body, the good body, and
so on? How can It remain perfect? "The one sun is the cause of vision in
every eye, yet it is not touched by the defects in the eyes of any." If
a man has jaundice he sees everything as yellow; the cause of his vision
is the sun, but his seeing everything as yellow does not touch the sun.
Even so this One Being, though the Self of every one, is not touched by
the purities or impurities outside. "In this world where everything is
evanescent, he who knows Him who never changes, in this world of
insentience, he who knows the one sentient Being, in this world of many,
he who knows this One and sees Him in his own soul, unto him belongs
eternal bliss, to none else, to none else. There the sun shines not, nor
the stars, nor the lightning flashes, what to speak of fire? He shining,
everything shines; through His light everything becomes effulgent. When
all the desires that trouble the heart cease, then the mortal becomes
immortal, and here one attains Brahman. When all the crookedness of the
heart disappears, when all its knots are cut asunder, then alone the
mortal becomes immortal. This is the way. May this study bless us; may
it maintain us; may it give us strength, may it become energy in us; may
we not hate each other; peace unto all!"

This is the line of thought that you will find in the Vedanta
philosophy. We see first that here is a thought entirely different from
what you see anywhere else in the world. In the oldest parts of the
Vedas the search was the same as in other books, the search was outside.
In some of the old, old books, the question was raised, "What was in the
beginning? When there was neither aught nor naught, when darkness was
covering darkness, who created all this?" So the search began. And they
began to talk about the angels, the Devas, and all sorts of things, and
later on we find that they gave it up as hopeless. In their day the
search was outside and they could find nothing; but in later days, as we
read in the Vedas, they had to look inside for the self-existent One.
This Is the one fundamental idea in the Vedas, that our search in the
stars, the nebulae, the Milky Way, in the whole of this external
universe leads to nothing, never solves the problem of life and death.
The wonderful mechanism inside had to be analysed, and it revealed to
them the secret of the universe; nor star or sun could do it. Man had to
be anatomised; not the body, but the soul of man. In that soul they
found the answer. What was the answer they found? That behind the body,
behind even the mind, there is the self-existent One. He dies not, nor
is He born. The self-existent One it omnipresent, because He has no
form. That which has no form or shape, that which is not limited by
space or time, cannot live in a certain place. How can it? It is
everywhere, omnipresent, equally present through all of us.

What is the soul of man? There was one party who held that there is a
Being, God, and an infinite number of souls besides, who are eternally
separate from God in essence, and form, and everything. This is dualism.
This is the old, old crude idea. The answer given by another party was
that the soul was a part of the infinite Divine Existence. Just as this
body is a little world by itself, and behind it is the mind or thought,
and behind that is the individual soul, similarly, the whole world is a
body, and behind that is the universal mind, and behind that is the
universal Soul. Just as this body is a portion of the universal body, so
this mind is a portion of the universal mind, and the soul of man a
portion of the universal Soul. This is what is called the
Vishishtâdvaita, qualified monism. Now, we know that the universal Soul
is infinite. How can infinity have parts? How can it be broken up,
divided? It may be very poetic to say that I am a spark of the Infinite,
but it is absurd to the thinking mind. What is meant by dividing
Infinity? Is it something material that you can part or separate it into
pieces? Infinite can never be divided. If that were possible, it would
be no more Infinite. What is the conclusion then? The answer is, that
Soul which is the universal is you; you are not a part but the whole of
It. You are the whole of God. Then what are all these varieties? We find
so many millions of individual souls. What are they? If the sun reflects
upon millions of globules of water, in each globule is the form, the
perfect image of the sun; but they are only images, and the real sun is
only one. So this apparent soul that is in every one of us is only the
image of God, nothing beyond that. The real Being who is behind, is that
one God. We are all one there. As Self, there is only one in the
universe. It is in me and you, and is only one; and that one Self has
been reflected in all these various bodies as various different selves.
But we do not know this; we think we are separate from each other and
separate from Him. And so long as we think this, misery will be in the
world. This is hallucination.

Then the other great source of misery is fear. Why does one man injure
another? Because he fears he will not have enough enjoyment. One man
fears that, perhaps, he will not have enough money, and that fear causes
him to injure others and rob them. How can there be fear if there is
only one existence? If a thunderbolt falls on my head, it was I who was
the thunderbolt, because I am the only existence. If a plague comes, it
is I; if a tiger comes, it is I. If death comes, it is I. I am both
death and life. We see that fear comes with the idea that there are two
in the universe. We have always heard it preached, "Love one another".
What for? That doctrine was preached, but the explanation is here. Why
should I love every one? Because they and I are one. Why should I love
my brother? Because he and I are one. There is this oneness; this
solidarity of the whole universe. From the lowest worm that crawls under
our feet to the highest beings that ever lived — all have various
bodies, but are the one Soul. Through all mouths, you eat; through all
hands, you work; through all eyes, you see. You enjoy health in millions
of bodies, you are suffering from disease in millions of bodies. When
this idea comes, and we realise it, see it, feel it, then will misery
cease, and fear with it. How can I die? There is nothing beyond me. Fear
ceases, and then alone comes perfect happiness and perfect love. That
universal sympathy, universal love, universal bliss, that never changes,
raises man above everything. It has no reactions and no misery can touch
it; but this little eating and drinking of the world always brings a
reaction. The whole cause of it is this dualism, the idea that I am
separate from the universe, separate from God. But as soon as we have
realised that "I am He, I am the Self of the universe, I am eternally
blessed, eternally free" — then will come real love, fear will vanish,
and all misery cease.

</div>
