---
title: YAJNAVALKYA AND MAITREYI

---
<div>

[←](the_way_to_blessedness.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](soul_nature_and_god.htm)

  

## YAJNAVALKYA AND MAITREYI

We say, "That day is indeed a bad day on which you do not hear the name
of the Lord, but a cloudy day is not a bad day at all." Yâjnavalkya was
a great sage. You know, the Shastras in India enjoin that every man
should give up the world when he becomes old. So Yajnavalkya said to his
wife, "My beloved, here is all my money, and my possessions, and I am
going away." She replied, "Sir, if I had this whole earth full of
wealth, would that give me immortality?" Yajnavalkya said, "No, it will
not. You will be rich, and that will be all, but wealth cannot give us
immortality." She replied, "what shall I do to gain that through which I
shall become immortal? If you know, tell me." Yajnavalkya replied, "You
have been always my beloved; you are more beloved now by this question.
Come, take your seat, and I will tell you; and when you have heard,
meditate upon it." He said, "It is not for the sake of the husband that
the wife loves the husband, but for the sake of the Âtman that she loves
the husband, because she loves the Self. None loves the wife for the
sake of the wife; but it is because one loves the Self that one loves
the wife. None loves the children for the children; but because one
loves the Self, therefore one loves the children. None loves wealth on
account of the wealth; but because one loves the Self, therefore one
loves wealth. None loves the Brâhmin for the sake of the Brahmin; but
because one loves the Self, one loves the Brahmin. So, none loves the
Kshatriya for the sake of the Kshatriya, but because one loves the Self.
Neither does any one love the world on account of the world, but because
one loves the Self. None, similarly, loves the gods on account of the
gods, but because one loves the Self. None loves a thing for that
thing's sake; but it is for the Self that one loves it. This Self,
therefore, is to be heard, reasoned about, and meditated upon. O my
Maitreyi, when that Self has been heard, when that Self has been seen,
when that Self has been realised, then, all this becomes known." What do
we get then? Before us we find a curious philosophy. The statement has
been made that every love is selfishness in the lowest sense of the
word: because I love myself, therefore I love another; it cannot be.
There have been philosophers in modern times who have said that self is
the only motive power in the world. That is true, and yet it is wrong.
But this self is but the shadow of that real Self which is behind. It
appears wrong and evil because it is small. That infinite love for the
Self, which is the universe, appears to be evil, appears to be small,
because it appears through a small part. Even when the wife loves the
husband, whether she knows it or not, she loves the husband for that
Self. It is selfishness as it is manifested in the world, but that
selfishness is really but a small part of that Self-ness. Whenever one
loves, one has to love in and through the Self. This Self has to be
known. What is the difference? Those that love the Self without knowing
what It is, their love is selfishness. Those that love, knowing what
that Self is, their love is free; they are sages. "Him the Brahmin gives
up who sees the Brahmin anywhere else but in the Self. Him the Kshatriya
gives up who sees the Kshatriya anywhere else but in the Self. The world
gives him up who sees this world anywhere but in that Atman. The gods
give him up who loves the gods knowing them to be anywhere else but in
the Atman. Everything goes away from him who knows everything as
something else except the Atman. These Brahmins, these Kshatriyas, this
world, these gods, whatever exists, everything is that Atman". Thus he
explains what he means by love.

Every time we particularise an object, we differentiate it from the
Self. I am trying to love a woman; as soon as that woman is
particularised, she is separated from the Atman, and my love for her
will not be eternal, but will end in grief. But as soon as I see that
woman as the Atman, that love becomes perfect, and will never suffer. So
with everything; as soon as you are attached to anything in the
universe, detaching it from the universe as a whole, from the Atman,
there comes a reaction. With everything that we love outside the Self,
grief and misery will be the result. If we enjoy everything in the Self,
and as the Self, no misery or reaction will come. This is perfect bliss.
How to come to this ideal? Yajnavalkya goes on to tell us the process by
which to reach that state. The universe is infinite: how can we take
every particular thing and look at it as the Atman, without knowing the
Atman? "As with a drum when we are at a distance we cannot catch the
sound, we cannot conquer the sound; but as soon as we come to the drum
and put our hand on it, the sound is conquered. When the conch-shell is
being blown, we cannot catch or conquer the sound, until we come near
and get hold of the shell, and then it is conquered. When the Vina is
being played, when we have come to the Vina, we get to the centre whence
the sound is proceeding. As when some one is burning damp fuel, smoke
and sparks of various kinds come, even so, from this great One has been
breathed out knowledge; everything has come out of Him. He breathed out,
as it were, all knowledge. As to all water, the one goal is the ocean;
as to all touch, the skin is the one centre; as of all smell, the nose
is the one centre; as of all taste, the tongue is the one goal; as of
all form, the eyes are the one goal; as of all sounds, the ears are the
one goal; as of all thought, the mind is the one goal; as of all
knowledge, the heart is the one goal; as of all work, the hands are the
one goal; as a morsel of salt put into the sea-water melts away, and we
cannot take it back, even so, Maitreyi, is this Universal Being
eternally infinite; all knowledge is in Him. The whole universe rises
from Him, and again goes down into Him. No more is there any knowledge,
dying, or death." We get the idea that we have all come just like sparks
from Him, and when you know Him, then you go back and become one with
Him again. We are the Universal.

Maitreyi became frightened, just as everywhere people become frightened.
Said she, "Sir, here is exactly where you have thrown a delusion over
me. You have frightened me by saying there will be no more gods; all
individuality will be lost. There will be no one to recognise, no one to
love, no one to hate. What will become of us?" "Maitreyi, I do not mean
to puzzle you, or rather let it rest here. You may be frightened. Where
there are two, one sees another, one hears another, one welcomes
another, one thinks of another, one knows another. But when the whole
has become that Atman, who is seen by whom, who is to be heard by whom,
who is to be welcomed by whom, who is to be known by whom?" That one
idea was taken up by Schopenhauer and echoed in his philosophy. Through
whom we know this universe, through what to know Him? How to know the
knower? By what means can we know the knower? How can that be? Because
in and through that we know everything. By what means can we know Him?
By no means, for He is that means.

So far the idea is that it is all One Infinite Being. That is the real
individuality, when there is no more division, and no more parts; these
little ideas are very low, illusive. But yet in and through every spark
of the individuality is shining that Infinite. Everything is a
manifestation of the Atman. How to reach that? First you make the
statement, just as Yajnavalkya himself tells us: "This Atman is first to
be heard of." So he stated the case; then he argued it out, and the last
demonstration was how to know That, through which all knowledge is
possible. Then, last, it is to be meditated upon. He takes the contrast,
the microcosm and the macrocosm, and shows how they are rolling on in
particular lines, and how it is all beautiful. "This earth is so
blissful, so helpful to every being; and all beings are so helpful to
this earth: all these are manifestations of that Self-effulgent One, the
Atman." All that is bliss, even in the lowest sense, is but the
reflection of Him. All that is good is His reflection, and when that
reflection is a shadow it is called evil. There are no two Gods. When He
is less manifested, it is called darkness, evil; and when He is more
manifested, it is called light. That is all. Good and evil are only a
question of degree: more manifested or less manifested. Just take the
example of our own lives. How many things we see in our childhood which
we think to be good, but which really are evil, and how many things seem
to be evil which are good! How the ideas change! How an idea goes up and
up! What we thought very good at one time we do not think so good now.
So good and evil are but superstitions, and do not exist. The difference
is only in degree. It is all a manifestation of that Atman; He is being
manifested in everything; only, when the manifestation is very thick we
call it evil; and when it is very thin, we call it good. It is the best,
when all covering goes away. So everything that is in the universe is to
be meditated upon in that sense alone, that we can see it as all good,
because it is the best. There is evil and there is good; and the apex,
the centre, is the Reality. He is neither evil nor good; He is the best.
The best can be only one, the good can be many and the evil many. There
will be degrees of variation between the good and the evil, but the best
is only one, and that best, when seen through thin coverings, we call
different sorts of good, and when through thick covers, we call evil.
Good and evil are different forms of superstition. They have gone
through all sorts of dualistic delusion and all sorts of ideas, and the
words have sunk into the hearts of human beings, terrorising men and
women and living there as terrible tyrants. They make us become tigers.
All the hatred with which we hate others is caused by these foolish
ideas which we have imbibed since our childhood — good and evil. Our
judgment of humanity becomes entirely false; we make this beautiful
earth a hell; but as soon as we can give up good and evil, it becomes a
heaven.

"This earth is blissful ('sweet' is the literal translation) to all
beings and all beings are sweet to this earth; they all help each other.
And all the sweetness is the Atman, that effulgent, immortal One who is
inside this earth." Whose is this sweetness? How can there be any
sweetness but He? That one sweetness is manifesting itself in various
ways. Wherever there is any love, any sweetness in any human being,
either in a saint or a sinner, either in an angel or a murderer, either
in the body, mind, or the senses, it is He. Physical enjoyments are but
He, mental enjoyments are but He, spiritual enjoyments are but He. How
can there be anything but He? How can there be twenty thousand gods and
devils fighting with each other? Childish dreams! Whatever is the lowest
physical enjoyment is He, and the highest spiritual enjoyment is He.
There is no sweetness but He. Thus says Yajnavalkya. When you come to
that state and look upon all things with the same eye, when you see even
in the drunkard's pleasure in drink only that sweetness, then you have
got the truth, and then alone you will know what happiness means, what
peace means, what love means; and so long as toll make these vain
distinctions, silly, childish, foolish superstitions, all sorts of
misery will come. But that immortal One, the effulgent One, He is inside
the earth, it is all His sweetness, and the same sweetness is in the
body. This body is the earth, as it were, and inside all the powers of
the body, all the enjoyments of the body, is He; the eyes see, the skin
touches; what are all these enjoyments? That Self-effulgent One who is
in the body, He is the Atman. This world, so sweet to all beings, and
every being so sweet to it, is but the Self-effulgent; the Immortal is
the bliss in that world. In us also, He is that bliss. He is the
Brahman. "This air is so sweet to all beings, and all beings are so
sweet to it. But He who is that Self-effulgent Immortal Being in the air
— is also in this body. He is expressing Himself as the life of all
beings. This sun is so sweet to all beings. All beings are so sweet to
this sun. He who is the Self-effulgent Being in the sun, we reflect Him
as the smaller light. What can be there but His reflection? He is in the
body, and it is His reflection which makes us see the light. This moon
is so sweet to all, and every one is so sweet to the moon, but that
Self-effulgent and Immortal One who is the soul of that moon, He is in
us expressing Himself as mind. This lightning is so beautiful, every one
is so sweet to the lightning, but the Self-effulgent and Immortal One is
the soul of this lightning, and is also in us, because all is that
Brahman. The Atman, the Self, is the king of all beings." These ideas
are very helpful to men; they are for meditation. For instance, meditate
on the earth; think of the earth and at the same time know that we have
*That* which is in the earth, that both are the same. Identify the body
with the earth, and identify the soul with the Soul behind. Identify the
air with the soul that is in the air and that is in me. They are all
one, manifested in different forms. To realise this unity is the end and
aim of all meditation, and this is what Yajnavalkya was trying to
explain to Maitreyi.

</div>
