---
title: COSMOLOGY

---
<div>

[←](soul_nature_and_god.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Practical Vedanta and other
lectures](practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](a_study_of_the_sankhya_philosophy.htm)

  

## COSMOLOGY

There are two worlds, the microcosm, and the macrocosm, the internal and
the external. We get truth from both of these by means of experience.
The truth gathered from internal experience is psychology, metaphysics,
and religion; from external experience, the physical sciences. Now a
perfect truth should be in harmony with experiences in both these
worlds. The microcosm must bear testimony to the macrocosm, and the
macrocosm to the microcosm; physical truth must have its counterpart in
the internal world, and the internal world must have its verification
outside. Yet, as a rule, we find that many of these truths are in
conflict. At one period of the world's history, the internals become
supreme, and they begin to fight the externals. At the present time the
externals, the physicists, have become supreme, and they have put down
many claims of psychologists and metaphysicians. So far as my knowledge
goes, I find that the real, essential parts of psychology are in perfect
accord with the essential parts of modern physical knowledge. It is not
given to one individual to be great in every respect; it is not given to
one race or nation to be equally strong in the research of all fields of
knowledge. The modern European nations are very strong in their research
of external physical knowledge, but they are not so strong in their
study of the inner nature of man. On the other hand, the Orientals have
not been very strong in their researches of the external physical world,
but very strong in their researches of the internal. Therefore we find
that Oriental physics and other sciences are not in accordance with
Occidental Sciences; nor is Occidental psychology in harmony with
Oriental psychology. The Oriental physicists have been routed by
Occidental scientists. At the same time, each claims to rest on truth;
and as we stated before, real truth in any field of knowledge will not
contradict itself; the truths internal are in harmony with the truths
external.

We all know the theories of the cosmos according to the modern
astronomers and physicists; and at the same time we all know how
woefully they undermine the theology of Europe, how these scientific
discoveries that are made act as a bomb thrown at its stronghold; and we
know how theologians have in all times attempted to put down these
researches.

I want here to go over the psychological ideas of the Orientals about
cosmology and all that pertains to it, and you will find how wonderfully
they are in accordance with the latest discoveries of modern science;
and where there is disharmony, you will find that it is modern science
which lacks and not they. We all use the word nature. The old Sânkhya
philosophers called it by two different names, Prakriti, which is very
much the same as the word nature, and the more scientific name, Avyakta,
undifferentiated, from which everything proceeds, such as atoms,
molecules, and forces, mind, thought, and intelligence. It is startling
to find that the philosophers and metaphysicians of India stated ages
ago that mind is material. What are our present materialists trying to
do, but to show that mind is as much a product of nature as the body?
And so is thought, and, we shall find by and by, intelligence also: all
issue from that nature which is called Avyakta, the undifferentiated.
The Sankhyas define it as the *equilibrium* of three forces, one of
which is called Sattva, another Rajas, and the third Tamas. Tamas, the
lowest force, is that of attraction; a little higher is Rajas, that of
repulsion; and the highest is the balance of these two, Sattva; so that
when these two forces, attraction and repulsion, are held in perfect
control by the Sattva there is no creation, no movement in the world. As
soon as this equilibrium is lost, the balance is disturbed, and one of
these forces gets stronger than the other, motion sets in, and creation
begins. This state of things goes on cyclically, periodically. That is
to say, there is a period of disturbance of the balance, when forces
begin to combine and recombine, and things project outwards. At the same
time, everything has a tendency to go back to the primal state of
equilibrium, and the time comes when that total annihilation of all
manifestation is reached. Again, after a period, the whole thing is
disturbed, projected outwards, and again it slowly goes down — like
waves. All motion, everything in this universe, can be likened to waves
undergoing successive rise and fall. Some of these philosophers hold
that the whole universe quiets down for a period. Others hold that this
quieting down applies only to systems; that is to say, that while our
system here, this solar system, will quiet down and go back into the
undifferentiated state, millions of other systems will go the other way,
and will project outwards. I should rather favour the second opinion,
that this quieting down is not simultaneous over the whole of the
universe, and that in different parts different things go on. But the
principle remains the same, that all we see — that is, nature herself —
is progressing in successive rises and falls. The one stage, falling
down, going back to balance, the perfect equilibrium, is called Pralaya,
the end of a cycle. The projection and the Pralaya of the universe have
been compared by theistical writers in India to the outbreathing and
inbreathing of God; God, as it were, breathes out the universe, and it
comes into Him again. When it quiets down, what becomes of the universe?
It exists, only in finer forms, in the form of cause, as it is called in
the Sankhya philosophy. It does not get rid of causation, time, and
space; they are there, only it comes to very fine and minute forms.
Supposing that this whole universe begins to shrink, till every one of
us becomes just a little molecule, we should not feel the change at all,
because everything relating to us would be shrinking at the same time.
The whole thing goes down, and again projects out, the cause brings out
the effect, and so it goes on.

What we call matter in modern times was called by; the ancient
psychologists Bhutas, the external elements. There is one element which,
according to them, is eternal ; every other element is produced out of
this one. It is called Âkâsha. It is somewhat similar to the idea of
ether of the moderns, though not exactly similar. Along with this
element, there is the primal energy called Prâna. Prana and Akasha
combine and recombine and form the elements out of them. Then at the end
of the Kalpa; everything subsides, and goes back to Akasha and Prana.
There is in the Rig-Veda, the oldest human writing in existence, a
beautiful passage describing creation, and it is most poetical — "When
there was neither aught nor naught, when darkness was rolling over
darkness, what existed?" and the answer is given, "It then existed
without vibration". This Prana existed then, but there was no motion in
it; Ânidavâtam means "existed without vibration". Vibration had stopped.
Then when the Kalpa begins, after an immense interval, the Anidavatam
(unvibrating atom) commences to vibrate, and blow after blow is given by
Prana to Akasha. The atoms become condensed, and as they are condensed
different elements are formed. We generally find these things very
curiously translated; people do not go to the philosophers or the
commentators for their translation, and have not the brains to
understand them themselves. A silly man reads three letters of Sanskrit
and translates a whole book. They translate the, elements as air, fire,
and so on; if they would go to the commentators, they would find they do
not mean air or anything of the sort.

The Akasha, acted upon by the repeated blows of Prana, produces Vâyu or
vibrations. This Vayu vibrates, and the vibrations growing more and more
rapid result in friction giving rise to heat, Tejas. Then this heat ends
in liquefaction, Âpah. Then that liquid becomes solid. We had ether, and
motion, then came heat, then it became liquefied, and then it condensed
into gross matter; and it goes back in exactly the reverse way. The
solid will be liquefied and will then be converted into a mass of heat,
and that will slowly get back into motion; that motion will stop, and
this Kalpa will be destroyed. Then, again it will come back and again
dissolve into ether. Prana cannot work alone without the help of Akasha.
All that we know in the form of motion, vibration, or thought is a
modification of the Prana, and everything that we know in the shape of
matter, either as form or as resistance, is a modification of the
Akasha. The Prana cannot live alone, or act without a medium; when it is
pure Prana, it has the Akasha itself to live in, and when it changes
into forces of nature, say gravitation, or centrifugal force, it must
have matter. You have never seen force without matter or matter without
force; what we call force and matter are simply the gross manifestations
of these same things, which, when superfine, are called Prana and
Akasha. Prana you can call in English life, the vital force; but you
must not restrict it to the life of man; at the same time you must not
identify it with Spirit, Atman. So this goes on. Creation cannot have
either a beginning or an end; it is an eternal on-going.

We shall state another position of these old psychologists, which is
that all gross things are the results of fine ones. Everything that is
gross is composed of fine things, which they call the Tanmâtras, the
fine particles. I smell a flower. To smell, something must come in
contact with my nose; the flower is there, but I do not see it move
towards me. That which comes from the flower and in contact with my nose
is called the Tanmatra, fine molecules of that flower. So with heat,
light and everything. These Tanmatras can again be subdivided into
atoms. Different philosophers have different theories, and we know these
are only theories. It is sufficient for our purpose to know that
everything gross is composed of things that are very, very fine. We
first get the gross elements which we feel externally, and then come the
fine elements with which the nose, eyes, and ears come in contact. Ether
waves touch my eyes; I cannot see them, yet I know they must come in
contact with my eyes before I can see light.

Here are the eyes, but the eyes do not see. Take away the brain centre;
the eyes will still be there, as also the picture of the outside world
complete on the retinae; yet the eyes will not see. So the eyes are only
a secondary instrument, not the organ of vision. The organ of vision is
the nerve-centre in the brain. Likewise the nose is an instrument, and
there is an organ behind it. The senses are simply the external
instruments. It may be said that these different organs, Indriyas, as
they are called in Sanskrit, are the real seats of perception.

It is necessary for the mind to be joined to an organ to perceive. It is
a common experience that we do not hear the clock strike when we happen
to be buried in study. Why? The ear was there, the sound was carried
through it to the brain; yet it was not heard, because the mind did not
attach itself to the organ of hearing.

There is a different organ for each different instrument. For, if one
served for all, we should find that when the mind joined itself to it,
all the senses would be equally active. But it is not so, as we have
seen from the instance of the clock. If there was only one organ for all
the instruments, the mind would see and hear at the same time, would see
and hear and smell at the same time, and it would be impossible for it
not to do all these at one and the same time. Therefore it is necessary
that there should be a separate organ for each sense. This has been
borne out by modern physiology. It is certainly possible for us to hear
and see at the same time, but that is because the mind attaches itself
partially to the two centres.

What are the organs made of? We see that the instruments — eyes, nose,
and ears — are made of gross materials. The organs are also made of
matter. Just as the body is composed of gross materials, and
manufactures Prana into different gross forces, so the organs are
composed of the fine elements, Akasha, Vayu, Tejas, etc., and
manufacture Prana into the finer forces of perception. The organs, the
Prana functions, the mind and the Buddhi combined, are called the finer
body of man — the Linga or Sukshma Sharira. The Linga Sharira has a real
form because everything material must have a form.

The mind is called the Manas, the Chitta in Vritti or vibrating, the
unsettled state. If you throw a stone in a lake, first there will be
vibration, and then resistance. For a moment the water will vibrate and
then it will react on the stone. So when any impression comes on the
Chitta, it first vibrates a little. That is called the Manas. The mind
carries the impression farther in, and presents it to the determinative
faculty, Buddhi, which reacts. Behind Buddhi is Ahamkâra, egoism, the
self-consciousness which says, "I am". Behind Ahamkara is Mahat,
intelligence, the highest form of nature's existence. Each one is the
effect of the succeeding one. In the case of the lake, every blow that
comes to it is from the external world, while in the case of the mind,
the blow may come either from the external or the internal world. Behind
the intelligence is the Self of man, the Purusha, the Atman, the pure,
the perfect, who alone is the seer, and for whom is all this change.

Man looks on all these changes; he himself is never impure; but through
what the Vedantists call Adhyâsa, by reflection, by implication, he
seems to be impure. It is like the appearance of a crystal when a red or
a blue flower is brought before it: the colour is reflected on it, but
the crystal itself is pure. We shall take it for granted that there are
many selves, and each self is pure and perfect; various kinds of gross
and fine matter superimpose themselves on the self and make it
multicoloured. Why does nature do all this? Nature is undergoing all
these changes for the development of the soul; all this creation is for
the benefit of the soul, so that it may be free. This immense book which
we call the universe is stretched out before man so that he may read;
and he discovers eventually that he is an omniscient and omnipotent
being. I must here tell you that some of our best psychologists do not
believe in God in the sense in which you believe in Him. The father of
our psychology, Kapila, denies the existence of God. His idea is that a
Personal God is quite unnecessary; nature itself is sufficient to work
out the whole of creation. What is called the Design Theory, he knocked
on the head, and said that a more childish theory was never advanced.
But he admits a peculiar kind of God. He says we are all struggling to
get free; and when we become free, we can, as it were, melt away into
nature, only to come out at the beginning of the next cycle and be its
ruler. We come out omniscient and omnipotent beings. In that sense we
can be called Gods; you and I and the humblest beings can be Gods in
different cycles. He says such a God will be temporal; but an eternal
God, eternally omnipotent and ruler of the universe cannot be. If there
was such a God, there would be this difficulty: He must be either a
bound spirit or a free one. A God who is perfectly free would not
create: there is no necessity for it. If He were bound, He would not
create, because He could not: He would be powerless. In either case,
there cannot be any omniscient or omnipotent eternal ruler. In our
scriptures, wherever the word God is mentioned, he says, it means those
human beings who have become free.

Kapila does not believe in the unity of all souls. His analysis, so far
as it goes, is simply marvellous. He is the father of Indian thinkers;
Buddhism and other systems are the outcome of his thought.

According to his psychology, all souls can regain their freedom and
their natural rights, which are omnipotence and omniscience. But the
question arises: Where is this bondage? Kapila says it is without
beginning. But if it is without beginning, it must be without end, and
we shall never be free. He says that though bondage is without
beginning, it is not of that constant uniform character as the soul is.
In other words, nature (the cause of bondage) is without beginning and
end, but not in the same sense as soul, because nature has no
individuality; it is like a river which gets a fresh body of water every
moment; the sum total of these bodies of water is the river, but the
river is not a constant quantity. Everything in nature is constantly
changing, but the soul never changes; so, as nature is always changing,
it is possible for the soul to come out of its bondage.

The whole of the universe is built upon the same plan as a part of it.
So, just as I have a mind, there is a cosmic mind. As in the individual,
so in the universal. There is the universal gross body; behind that, a
universal fine body; behind that, a universal mind; behind that, a
universal egoism, or consciousness; and behind that, a universal
intelligence. And all this is in nature, the manifestation of nature,
not outside of it.

We have the gross bodies from our parents, as also our consciousness.
Strict heredity says my body is a part of my parents' bodies, the
material of my consciousness and egoism is a part of my parents'. We can
add to the little portion inherited from our parents by drawing upon the
universal consciousness. There is an infinite store house of
intelligence out of which we draw what we require; there is an infinite
storehouse of mental force in the universe out of which we are drawing
eternally; but the seed must come from the parents. Our theory is
heredity coupled with reincarnation. By the law of heredity, the
reincarnating soul receives from parents the material out of which to
manufacture a man.

Some of the European philosophers have asserted that this world exists
because I exist; and if I do not exist, the world will not exist.
Sometimes it is stated thus: If all the people in the world were to die,
and there were no more human beings, and no animals with powers of
perception and intelligence, all these manifestations would disappear.
But these European philosophers do not know the psychology of it,
although they know the principle; modern philosophy has got only a
glimpse of it. This becomes easy of understanding when looked at from
the Sankhya point of view. According to Sankhya, it is impossible for
anything to be, which has not as its material, some portion of my mind.
I do not know this table as it is. An impression from it comes to the
eyes, then to, the Indriya, and then to the mind; and the mind reacts,
and that reaction is what I call the table. It is just the same as
throwing a stone in a lake; the lake throws a wave towards the stone;
this wave is what we know. What is external nobody knows; when I try to
know it, it has to become that material which I furnish. I, with my own
mind, have furnished the material for my eyes. There is something which
is outside, which is only, the occasion, the suggestion, and upon that
suggestion I project my mind; and it takes the form that I see. How do
we all see the same things? Because we all have; similar parts of the
cosmic mind. Those who have like minds will see like things, and those
who have not will not see alike.

</div>
