---
title: ON SHRI RAMAKRISHNA AND HIS VIEWS

---
<div>

[←](shri_ramakrishna_the_significance.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm)
/ [Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm) / [Notes of
Class Talks](notes_of_class_talks_contents.htm)
/ [→](shri_ramakrishna_the_nations.htm)

  

## ON SHRI RAMAKRISHNA AND HIS VIEWS

By force, think of one thing at least as Brahman. Of course it is easier
to think of Ramakrishna as God, but the danger is that we cannot form
Ishvara-buddhi (vision of Divinity) in others. God is eternal, without
any form, omnipresent. To think of Him as possessing any form is
blasphemy. But the secret of image-worship is that you are trying to
develop your vision of Divinity in one thing.

Shri Ramakrishna used to consider himself as an Incarnation in the
ordinary sense of the term, though I could not understand it. I used to
say that he was Brahman in the Vedantic sense; but just before his
passing away, when he was suffering from the characteristic difficulty
in breathing, he said to me as I was cogitating in my mind whether he
could even in that pain say that he was an Incarnation, "He who was Râma
and Krishna has now actually become Ramakrishna — but not in your
Vedantic sense!" He used to love me intensely, which made many quite
jealous of me. He knew one's character by sight, and never changed his
opinion. He could perceive, as it were, supersensual things, while we
try to know one's character by reason, with the result that our
judgments are often fallacious. He called some persons his Antarangas or
'belonging to the inner circle', and he used to teach them the secrets
of his own nature and those of Yoga. To the outsiders or Bahirangas he
taught those parables now known as "Sayings". He used to prepare those
young men (the former class) for his work, and though many complained to
him about them, he paid no heed. I may have perhaps a better opinion of
a Bahiranga than an Antaranga through his actions, but I have a
superstitious regard for the latter. "Love me, love my dog", as they
say. I love that Brahmin priest intensely, and therefore, love whatever
he used to love, whatever he used to regard! He was afraid about me that
I might create a sect, if left to myself.

He used to say to some, "You will not attain spirituality in this life."
He sensed everything, and this will explain his apparent partiality to
some. He, as a scientist, used to see that different people required
different treatment. None except those of the "inner circle" were
allowed to sleep in his room. It is not true that those who have not
seen him will not attain salvation; neither is it true that a man who
has seen him thrice will attain Mukti (liberation).

Devotion as taught by Nârada, he used to preach to the masses, those who
were incapable of any higher training.

He used generally to teach dualism. As a rule, he never taught
Advaitism. But he taught it to me. I had been a dualist before.

</div>
