---
title: THE STORY OF JADA BHARATA

---
<div>

[←](thoughts_on_the_gita.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_story_of_prahlada.htm)

  

## THE STORY OF JADA BHARATA

(*Delivered in California*)

There was a great monarch named Bharata. The land which is called India
by foreigners is known to her children as Bhârata Varsha. Now, it is
enjoined on every Hindu when he becomes old, to give up all worldly
pursuits — to leave the cares of the world, its wealth, happiness, and
enjoyments to his son — and retire into the forest, there to meditate
upon the Self which is the only reality in him, and thus break the bonds
which bind him to life. King or priest, peasant or servant, man or
woman, none is exempt from this duty: for all the duties of the
householder — of the son, the brother, the husband, the father, the
wife, the daughter, the mother, the sister — are but preparations
towards that one stage, when all the bonds which bind the soul to matter
are severed asunder for ever.

The great king Bharata in his old age gave over his throne to his son,
and retired into the forest. He who had been ruler over millions and
millions of subjects, who had lived in marble palaces, inlaid with gold
and silver, who had drunk out of jewelled cups — this king built a
little cottage with his own hands, made of reeds and grass, on the banks
of a river in the Himalayan forests. There he lived on roots and wild
herbs, collected by his own hands, and constantly meditated upon Him who
is always present in the soul of man. Days, months, and years passed.
One day, a deer came to drink water near by where the royal sage was
meditating. At the same moment, a lion roared at a little distance off.
The deer was so terrified that she, without satisfying her thirst, made
a big jump to cross the river. The deer was with young, and this extreme
exertion and sudden fright made her give birth to a little fawn, and
immediately after she fell dead. The fawn fell into the water and was
being carried rapidly away by the foaming stream, when it caught the
eyes of the king. The king rose from his position of meditation and
rescuing the fawn from the water, took it to his cottage, made a fire,
and with care and attention fondled the little thing back to life. Then
the kindly sage took the fawn under his protection, bringing it up on
soft grass and fruits. The fawn thrived under the paternal care of the
retired monarch, and grew into a beautiful deer. Then, he whose mind had
been strong enough to break away from lifelong attachment to power,
position, and family, became attached to the deer which he had saved
from the stream. And as he became fonder and fonder of the deer, the
less and less he could concentrate his mind upon the Lord. When the deer
went out to graze in the forest, if it were late in returning, the mind
of the royal sage would become anxious and worried. He would think,
"Perhaps my little one has been attacked by some tiger — or perhaps some
other danger has befallen it; otherwise, why is it late?"

Some years passed in this way, but one day death came, and the royal
sage laid himself down to die. But his mind, instead of being intent
upon the Self, was thinking about the deer; and with his eyes fixed upon
the sad looks of his beloved deer, his soul left the body. As the result
of this, in the next birth he was born as a deer. But no Karma is lost,
and all the great and good deeds done by him as a king and sage bore
their fruit. This deer was a born Jâtismara, and remembered his past
birth, though he was bereft of speech and was living in an animal body.
He always left his companions and was instinctively drawn to graze near
hermitages where oblations were offered and the Upanishads were
preached.

After the usual years of a deer's life had been spent, it died and was
next born as the youngest son of a rich Brahmin. And in that life also,
he remembered all his past, and even in his childhood was determined no
more to get entangled in the good and evil of life. The child, as it
grew up, was strong and healthy, but would not speak a word, and lived
as one inert and insane, for fear of getting mixed up with worldly
affairs. His thoughts were always on the Infinite, and he lived only to
wear out his past Prârabdha Karma. In course of time the father died,
and the sons divided the property among themselves; and thinking that
the youngest was a dumb, good-for-nothing man, they seized his share.
Their charity, however, extended only so far as to give him enough food
to live upon. The wives of the brothers were often very harsh to him,
putting him to do all the hard work; and if he was unable to do
everything they wanted, they would treat him very unkindly. But he
showed neither vexation nor fear, and neither did he speak a word. When
they persecuted him very much, he would stroll out of the house and sit
under a tree, by the hour, until their wrath was appeased, and then he
would quietly go home again.

One day; when the wives of the brothers had treated him with more than
usual unkindness, Bharata went out of the house, seated himself under
the shadow of a tree and rested. Now it happened that the king of the
country was passing by, carried in a palanquin on the shoulders of
bearers. One of the bearers had unexpectedly fallen ill, and so his
attendants were looking about for a man to replace him. They came upon
Bharata seated under a tree; and seeing he was a strong young man, they
asked him if he would take the place of the sick man in bearing the
king's palanquin. But Bharata did not reply. Seeing that he was so
able-bodied, the king's servants caught hold of him and placed the pole
on his shoulders. Without speaking a word, Bharata went on. Very soon
after this, the king remarked that the palanquin was not being evenly
carried, and looking out of the palanquin addressed the new bearer,
saying "Fool, rest a while; if thy shoulders pain thee, rest a while."
Then Bharata laying the pole of the palanquin down, opened his lips for
the first time in his life, and spoke, "Whom dost thou, O King, call a
fool? Whom dost thou ask to lay down the palanquin? Who dost thou say is
weary? Whom dost thou address as 'thou'? If thou meanest, O King, by the
word 'thee' this mass of flesh, it is composed of the same matter as
thine; it is unconscious, and it knoweth no weariness, it knoweth no
pain. If it is the mind, the mind is the same as thine; it is universal.
But if the word 'thee' is applied to something beyond that, then it is
the Self, the Reality in me, which is the same as in thee, and it is the
One in the universe. Dost thou mean, O King, that the Self can ever be
weary, that It can ever be tired, that It can ever be hurt? I did not
want, O King — this body did not want — to trample upon the poor worms
crawling on the road, and therefore, in trying to avoid them, the
palanquin moved unevenly. But the Self was never tired; It was never
weak; It never bore the pole of the palanquin: for It is omnipotent and
omnipresent." And so he dwelt eloquently on the nature of the soul, and
on the highest knowledge, etc. The king, who was proud of his learning,
knowledge, and philosophy, alighted from the palanquin, and fell at the
feet of Bharata, saying, "I ask thy pardon, O mighty one, I did not know
that thou wast a sage, when I asked thee to carry me." Bharata blessed
him and departed. He then resumed the even tenor of his previous life.
When Bharata left the body, he was freed for ever from the bondage of
birth.

</div>
