---
title: INDIAN RELIGIOUS THOUGHT

---
<div>

[←](my_master.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_basis_for_psychic_or_spiritual_research.htm)

  

## INDIAN RELIGIOUS THOUGHT

(*Delivered under the auspices of the Brooklyn Ethical Society, in the
Art Gallery of the Pouch Mansion, Clinton Avenue, Brooklyn, U.S.A.*)

India, although only half the size of the United States, contains a
population of over two hundred and ninety millions, and there are three
religions which hold sway over them — the Mohammedan, the Buddhist
(including the Jain), and the Hindu. The adherents of the first
mentioned number about sixty millions, of the second about nine
millions, while the last embrace nearly two hundred and six millions.
The cardinal features of the Hindu religion are founded on the
meditative and speculative philosophy and on the ethical teachings
contained in the various books of the Vedas, which assert that the
universe is infinite in space and eternal in duration. It never had a
beginning, and it never will have an end. Innumerable have been the
manifestations of the power of the spirit in the realm of matter, of the
force of the Infinite in the domain of the finite; but the Infinite
Spirit Itself is self-existent, eternal, and unchangeable. The passage
of time makes no mark whatever on the dial of eternity. In its
supersensuous region which cannot be comprehended at all by the human
understanding, there is no past, and there is no future. The Vedas teach
that the soul of man is immortal. The body is subject to the law of
growth and decay, what grows must of necessity decay. But the in
dwelling spirit is related to the infinite and eternal life; it never
had a beginning and it never will have an end, One of the chief
distinctions between the Hindu and the Christian religions is that the
Christian religion teaches that each human soul had its beginning at its
birth into this world, whereas the Hindu religion asserts that the
spirit of man is an emanation of the Eternal Being, and had no more a
beginning than God Himself. Innumerable have been and will be its
manifestations in its passage from one personality to another, subject
to the great law of spiritual evolution, until it reaches perfection,
when there is no more change.

It has been often asked: If this be so, why is it we do not remember
anything of our past lives? This is our explanation: Consciousness is
the name of the surface only of the mental ocean, but within its depths
are stored up all our experiences, both pleasant and painful. The desire
of the human soul is to find out something that is stable. The mind and
the body, in fact all the various phenomena of nature, are in a
condition of incessant change. But the highest aspiration of our spirit
is to find out something that does not change, that has reached a state
of permanent perfection. And this is the aspiration of the human soul
after the Infinite! The finer our moral and intellectual development,
the stronger will become this aspiration after the Eternal that changes
not.

The modern Buddhists teach that everything that cannot be known by the
five senses is non-existent, and that it is a delusion to suppose that
man is an independent entity. The idealists, on the contrary, claim that
each individual is an independent entity, and the external world does
not exist outside of his mental conception. But the sure solution of
this problem is that nature is a mixture of independence and dependence,
of reality and idealism. Our mind and bodies are dependent on the
external world, and this dependence varies according to the nature of
their relation to it; but the indwelling spirit is free, as God is free,
and is able to direct in a greater or lesser degree, according to the
state of their development, the movements of our minds and bodies.

Death is but a change of condition. We remain in the same universe, and
are subject to the same laws as before. Those who have passed beyond and
have attained high planes of development in beauty and wisdom are but
the advance-guard of a universal army who are following after them. The
spirit of the highest is related to the spirit of the lowest, and the
germ of infinite perfection exists in all. We should cultivate the
optimistic temperament, and endeavour to see the good that dwells in
everything. If we sit down and lament over the imperfection of our
bodies and minds, we profit nothing; it is the heroic endeavour to
subdue adverse circumstances that carries our spirit upwards. The object
of life is to learn the laws of spiritual progress. Christians can learn
from Hindus, and Hindus can learn from Christians. Each has made a
contribution of value to the wisdom of the world.

Impress upon your children that true religion is positive and not
negative, that it does not consist in merely refraining from evil, but
in a persistent performance of noble decals. True religion comes not
from the teaching of men or the reading of books; it is the awakening of
the spirit within us, consequent upon pure and heroic action. Every
child born into the world brings with it a certain accumulated
experience from previous incarnations; and the impress of this
experience is seen in the structure of its mind and body. But the
feeling of independence which possesses us all shows there is something
in us besides mind and body. The soul that reigns within is independent
stud creates the desire for freedom. If we are not free, how can we hope
to make the world better? We hold that human progress is the result of
the action of the human spirit. What the world is, and what we ourselves
are, are the fruits of the freedom of the spirit.

We believe in one God, the Father of us all, who is omnipresent and
omnipotent, and who guides and preserves His children with infinite
love.  We believe in a Personal God as the Christians do, but we go
further: we below that we are He! That His personality is manifested in
us, that God is in us, and that we are in God We believe there is a germ
of truth in all religions, and the Hindu bows down to them all; for in
this world, truth is to be found not in subtraction but in addition. We
would offer God a bouquet of the most beautiful flowers of all the
diverse faiths. We must love God for love's sake, not for the hope of
reward. We must do our duty for duty's sake not for the hope of reward.
We must worship the beautiful for beauty's sake, not for the hope of
reward. Thus in the purity of our hearts shall we see God. Sacrifices
genuflexions, mumblings, and mutterings are not religion. They are only
good if they stimulate us to the brave performance of beautiful and
heroic deeds and lift our thoughts to the apprehension of the divine
perfection

What good is it, if we acknowledge in our prayers that God is the Father
of us all, and in our daily lives do not treat every man as our brother?
Books are only made so that they may point the way to a higher life; but
no good results unless the path is trodden with unflinching steps! Every
human personality may be compared to a glass globe. There is the same
pure white light — an emission of the divine Being — in the centre of
each, but the glass being of different colours and thickness, the rays
assume diverse aspects in the transmission. The equality and beauty of
each central flame is the same, and the apparent inequality is only in
the imperfection of the temporal instrument of its expression. As we
rise higher and higher in the scale of being, the medium becomes more
and more translucent.

</div>
