---
title: CONCENTRATION

---
<div>

[←](the_claims_of_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [→](meditation.htm)

  

## CONCENTRATION

(*Delivered at the Washington Hall, San Francisco, on March 16, 1900*)

\[This and the following two lectures ([Meditation](meditation.htm) and
[The Practice of Religion](the_practice_of_religion.htm)) are reproduced
here from the *Vedanta and the West* with the kind permission of the
Vedanta Society of Southern California, by whom is reserved the
copyright for America. The lectures were recorded by Ida Ansell under
circumstances which she herself relates thus:

"Swami Vivekananda's second trip to the West occurred in 1899-1900.
During the first half of 1900 he worked in and around San Francisco,
California. I was a resident of that city, twenty-two years old at the
time. ... I heard him lecture perhaps a score of times from March to May
of 1900, and recorded seventeen of his talks. …

"The lectures were given in San Francisco, Oakland, and Alameda, in
churches, in the Alameda and San Francisco Homes of Truth, and in rented
halls. ... Altogether Swamiji gave, besides nearly daily interviews and
informal classes, at least thirty or forty major addresses in March,
April, and May. ...

"I was long hesitant about transcribing and releasing these lectures
because of the imperfectness of my notes. I was just an amateur
stenographer, at the time I took them. ... One would have needed a speed
of at least three hundred words per minute to capture all of Swamiji's
torrents of eloquence. I possessed less than half the required speed,
and at the time I had no idea that the material would have value to
anyone but myself. In addition to his fast speaking pace, Swamiji was a
superb actor. His stories and imitations absolutely forced one to stop
writing, to enjoy watching him. ... Even though my notes were somewhat
fragmentary, I have yielded to the opinion that their contents are
precious and must be given for publication.

Swamiji's speaking style was colloquial, fresh, and forceful. No
alterations have been made in it; no adjusting or smoothing out of his
spontaneous flow for purposes of publication has been done. Where
omissions were made because of some obscurity in the meaning, they have
been indicated by three dots. Anything inserted for purposes of
clarification has been placed in square brackets. With these
qualifications, the words are exactly as Swamiji spoke them.

Everything Swamiji said had tremendous power. These lectures have slept
in my old stenographer's notebook for more than fifty years. Now as they
emerge, one feels that the power is still there."\]

All knowledge that we have, either of the external or internal world, is
obtained through only one method — by the concentration of the mind. No
knowledge can be had of any science unless we can concentrate our minds
upon the subject. The astronomer concentrates his mind through the
telescope... and so on. If you want to study your own mind, it will be
the same process. You will have to concentrate your mind and turn it
back upon itself. The difference in this world between mind and mind is
simply the fact of concentration. One, more concentrated than the other,
gets more knowledge.

In the lives of all great men, past and present, we find this tremendous
power of concentration. Those are men of genius, you say. The science of
Yoga tells us that we are all geniuses if we try hard to be. Some will
come into this life better fitted and will do it quicker perhaps. We can
all do the same. The same power is in everyone. The subject of the
present lecture is how to concentrate the mind in order to study the
mind itself. Yogis have laid down certain rules and this night I am
going to give you a sketch of some of these rules.

Concentration, of course, comes from various sources. Through the senses
you can get concentration. Some get it when they hear beautiful music,
others when they see beautiful scenery. ... Some get concentrated by
lying upon beds of spikes, sharp iron spikes, others by sitting upon
sharp pebbles. These are extraordinary cases \[using\] most unscientific
procedure. Scientific procedure is gradually training the mind.

One gets concentrated by holding his arm up. Torture gives him the
concentration he wants. But all these are extraordinary.

Universal methods have been organised according to different
philosophers. Some say the state we want to attain is superconsciousness
of the mind — going beyond the limitations the body has made for us. The
value of ethics to the Yogi lies in that it makes the mind pure. The
purer the mind, the easier it is to control it. The mind takes every
thought that rises and works it out. The grosser the mind, the more
difficult \[it is\] to control \[it\]. The immoral man will never be
able to concentrate his mind to study psychology. He may get a little
control as he begins, get a little power of hearing. ... and even those
powers will go from him. The difficulty is that if you study closely,
you see how \[the\] extraordinary power arrived at was not attained by
regular scientific training. The men who, by the power of magic, control
serpents will be killed by serpents. ... The man who attains any
extraordinary powers will in the long run succumb to those powers. There
are millions \[who\] receive power through all sorts of ways in India.
The vast majority of them die raving lunatics. Quite a number commit
suicide, the mind \[being\] unbalanced.

The study must be put on the safe side: scientific, slow, peaceful. The
first requisite is to be moral. Such a man wants the gods to come down,
and they will come down and manifest themselves to him. That is our
psychology and philosophy in essence, \[to be\] perfectly moral. Just
think what that means! No injury, perfect purity, perfect austerity!
These are absolutely necessary. Just think, if a man can attain all
these in perfection! What more do you want? If he is free from all
enmity towards any being, ... all animals will give up their enmity \[in
his presence\]. The Yogis lay down very strict laws... so that one
cannot pass off for a charitable man without; being charitable. ...

If you believe me, I have seen a man \[The reference is evidently to
Pavhari Baba (see [Sketch *of the Life of Pavhari
Baba*](../writings_prose/sketch_of_the_life_of_pavhari_baba.htm) in this
volume)\] who used to live in a hole and there were cobras and frogs
living with him. ... Sometimes he would fast for \[days and months\] and
then come out. He was always silent. One day there came a robber. ...

My old master used to say, "When the lotus of the heart has bloomed, the
bees will come by themselves." Men like that are there yet. They need
not talk. ... When the man is perfect from his heart, without a thought
of hatred, all animals will give up their hatred \[before him\]. So with
purity. These are necessary for our dealings with our fellow beings. We
must love all. ... We have no business to look at the faults of others:
it does no good We must not even think of them. Our business is with the
good. We are not here to deal with faults. Our business is to be good.

Here comes Miss So-and-so. She says, "I am going to be a Yogi." She
tells the news twenty times, meditates fifty days, then she says, "There
is nothing in this religion. I have tried it. There is nothing in it."

The very basis \[of spiritual life\] is not there. The foundation \[must
be\] this perfect morality. That is the great difficulty. ...

In our country there are vegetarian sects. They will take in the early
morning pounds of sugar and place it on the ground for ants, and the
story is, when one of them was putting sugar on the ground for ants, a
man placed his foot upon the ants. The former said, "Wretch, you have
killed the animals!" And he gave him such a blow, that it killed the
man.

External purity is very easy and all the world rushes towards \[it\]. If
a certain kind of dress is the kind of morality \[to be observed\], any
fool can do that. When it is grappling with the mind itself, it is hard
work.

The people who do external, superficial things are so self-righteous! I
remember, when I was a boy I had great regard for the character of Jesus
Christ. \[Then I read about the wedding feast in the Bible.\] I closed
the book and said, "He ate meat and drank wine! He cannot be a good
man."

We are always losing sight of the real meaning of things. The little
eating and dress! Every fool can see that. Who sees that which is
beyond? It is culture of the heart that we want. ... One mass of people
in India we see bathing twenty times a day sometimes, making themselves
very pure. And they do not touch anyone. ... The coarse facts, the
external things! \[If by bathing one could be pure,\] fish are the
purest beings.

Bathing, and dress, and food regulation — all these have their proper
value when they are complementary to the spiritual. .... That first, and
these all help. But without it, no amount of eating grass... is any good
at all. They are helps if properly understood. But improperly
understood, they are derogatory. ...

This is the reason why I am explaining these things: First, because in
all religions everything degenerates upon being practiced by \[the
ignorant\]. The camphor in the bottle evaporated, and they are fighting
over the bottle.

Another thing: ... \[Spirituality\] evaporates when they say, "This is
right, and that is wrong." All quarrels are \[with forms and creeds\]
never in the spirit. The Buddhist offered for years glorious preaching;
gradually, this spirituality evaporated. ... \[Similarly with
Christianity.\] And then began the quarrel whether it is three gods in
one or one in three, when nobody wants to go to God Himself and know
what He is. We have to go to God Himself to know whether He is three in
one or one in three.

Now, with this explanation, the posture. Trying to control the mind, a
certain posture is necessary. Any posture in which the person can sit
easily — that is the posture for that person. As a rule, you will find
that the spinal column must be left free. It is not intended to bear the
weight of the body. ... The only thing to remember in the sitting
posture: \[use\] any posture in which the spine is perfectly free of the
weight of the body.

Next \[Prânâyâma\] ... the breathing exercises. A great deal of stress
is laid upon breathing. ... What I am telling you is not something
gleaned from some sect in India. It is universally true. Just as in this
country you teach your children certain prayers, \[in India\] they get
the children and give them certain facts etc.

Children are not taught any religion in India except one or two prayers.
Then they begin to seek for somebody with whom they can get *en
rapport*. They go to different persons and find that "This man is the
man for me", and get initiation. If I am married, my wife may possibly
get another man teacher and my son will get somebody else, and that is
always my secret between me and my teacher. The wife's religion the
husband need not know, and he would not dare ask her what her religion
is. It is well known that they would never say. It is only known to that
person and the teacher. ... Sometimes you will find that what would be
quite ludicrous to one will be just teaching for another. ... Each is
carry ing his own burden and is to be helped according to his particular
mind. It is the business of every individual, between him, his teacher,
and God. But there are certain general methods which all these teachers
preach. Breathing \[and\] meditating are universal. That is the worship
in India.

On the banks of the Gangâ, we will see men, women, and children all
\[practicing\] breathing and then meditating. Of course, they have other
things to do. They cannot devote much time to this. But those who have
taken this as the study of life, they practice various methods. There
are eighty-four different Âsanas (postures). Those that take it up under
some person, they always feel the breath and the movements in all the
different parts of the body. ...

Next comes Dhâranâ \[concentration\]. ... Dharana is holding the mind in
certain spots.

The Hindu boy or girl ... gets initiation. He gets from his Guru a word.
This is called the root word. This word is given to the Guru \[by his
Guru\], and he gives it to his disciple. One such word is OM. All these
symbols have a great deal of meaning, and they hold it secret, never
write it. They must receive it through the ear — not through writing —
from the teacher, and then hold it as God himself. Then they meditate on
the word. ...

I used to pray like that at one time, all through the rainy season, four
months. I used to get up and take a plunge in the river, and with all my
wet clothes on repeat \[the Mantra\] till the sun set. Then I ate
something — a little rice or something. Four months in the rainy season!

The Indian mind believes that there is nothing in the world that cannot
be obtained. If a man wants money in this country, he goes to work and
earns money. There, he gets a formula and sits under a tree and believes
that money must come. Everything must come by the power of his
\[thought\]. You make money here. It is the same thing. You put forth
your whole energy upon money making.

There are some sects called Hatha-Yogis. ... They say the greatest good
is to keep the body from dying. ... Their whole process is clinging to
the body. Twelve years training! And they begin with little children,
others wise it is impossible. ... One thing \[is\] very curious about
the Hatha-Yogi: When he first becomes a disciple, he goes into the
wilderness and lives alone forty days exactly. All they have they learn
within those forty days. ...

A man in Calcutta claims to have lived five hundred years. The people
all tell me that their grandfathers saw him. ... He takes a
constitutional twenty miles, never walks, he runs. Goes into the water,
covers himself \[from\] top to toe with mud. After that he plunges again
into the water, again sticks himself with mud. ... I do not see any good
in that. (Snakes, they say, live two hundred years.) He must be very
old, because I have travelled fourteen years in India and wherever I
went everybody knew him. He has been travelling all his life. ... \[The
Hatha-Yogi\] will swallow a piece of rubber eighty inches long and take
it out again. Four times a day he has to wash every part of his body,
internal and external parts. ...

The walls can keep their bodies thousands of years. ... What of that? I
would not want to live so long. "Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof." One little body, with all its delusions and limitations, is
enough.

There are other sects. ... They give you a drop of the elixir of life
and you remain young. ... It will take me months to enumerate \[all the
sects\]. All their activity is on this side \[in the material world\].
Every day a new sect. ...

The power of all those sects is in the mind. Their idea is to hold the
mind. First concentrate it and hold it at a certain place. They
generally say, at certain parts of the body along the spinal column or
upon the nerve centres. By holding the mind at the nerve centres, \[the
Yogi\] gets power over the body. The body is the great cause of
disturbance to his peace, is opposite of his highest ideal, so he wants
control: \[to\] keep the body as servant.

Then comes meditation. That is the highest state. ... When \[the mind\]
is doubtful that is not its great state. Its great state is meditation.
It looks upon things and sees things, not identifying itself with
anything else. As long as I feel pain, I have identified myself with the
body. When I feel joy or pleasure, I have identified myself with the
body. But the high state will look with the same pleasure or
blissfulness upon pleasure or upon pain. ... Every meditation is direct
superconsciousness. In perfect concentration the soul becomes actually
free from the bonds of the gross body and knows itself as it is.
Whatever one wants, that comes to him. Power and knowledge are already
there. The soul identifies itself with that which is powerless matter
and thus weeps. It identifies itself with mortal shapes. ... But if that
free soul wants to exercise any power, it will have it. If it does not,
it does not come. He who has known God has become God. There is nothing
impossible to such a free soul. No more birth and death for him. He is
free for ever.

</div>
