---
title: MEDITATION

---
<div>

[←](concentration.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_practice_of_religion.htm)

  

## MEDITATION

(*Delivered at the Washington Hall, San Francisco, April 3,
1900[\*](concentration.htm)*)

Meditation has been laid stress upon by all religions. The meditative
state of mind is declared by the Yogis to be the highest state in which
the mind exists. When the mind is studying the external object, it gets
identified with it, loses itself. To use the simile of the old Indian
philosopher: the soul of man is like a piece of crystal, but it takes
the colour of whatever is near it. Whatever the soul touches ... it has
to take its colour. That is the difficulty. That constitutes the
bondage. The colour is so strong, the crystal forgets itself and
identifies itself with the colour. Suppose a red flower is near the
crystal and the crystal takes the colour and forgets itself, thinks it
is red. We have taken the colour of the body and have forgotten what we
are. All the difficulties that follow come from that one dead body. All
our fears, all worries, anxieties, troubles, mistakes, weakness, evil,
are front that one great blunder — that we are bodies. This is the
ordinary person. It is the person taking the colour of the flower near
to it. We are no more bodies than the crystal is the red flower.

The practice of meditation is pursued. The crystal knows what it is,
takes its own colour. It is meditation that brings us nearer to truth
than anything else. ...

In India two persons meet. In English they say, "How do you do?" The
Indian greeting is, "Are you upon yourself?" The moment you stand upon
something else, you run the risk of being miserable. This is what I mean
by meditation — the soul trying to stand upon itself. That state must
surely be the healthiest state of the soul, when it is thinking of
itself, residing in its own glory. No, all the other methods that we
have — by exciting emotions, prayers, and all that — really have that
one end in view. In deep emotional excitement the soul tries to stand
upon itself. Although the emotion may arise from anything external,
there is concentration of mind.

There are three stages in meditation. The first is what is called
\[Dhâranâ\], concentrating the mind upon an object. I try to concentrate
my mind upon this glass, excluding every other object from my mind
except this glass. But the mind is wavering . . . When it has become
strong and does not waver so much, it is called \[Dhyâna\], meditation.
And then there is a still higher state when the differentiation between
the glass and myself is lost — \[Samâdhi or absorption\]. The mind and
the glass are identical. I do not see any difference. All the senses
stop and all powers that have been working through other channels of
other senses \[are focused in the mind\]. Then this glass is under the
power of the mind entirely. This is to be realised. It is a tremendous
play played by the Yogis. ... Take for granted, the external object
exists. Then that which is really outside of us is not what we see. The
glass that I see is not the external object certainly. That external
something which is the glass I do not know and will never know.

Something produces an impression upon me. Immediately I send the
reaction towards that, and the glass is the result of the combination of
these two. Action from outside — X. Action from inside — Y. The glass is
XY. When you look at X, call it external world — at Y, internal world .
. . If you try to distinguish which is your mind and which is the world
— there is no such distinction. The world is the combination of you and
something else. ...

Let us take another example. You are dropping stones upon the smooth
surface of a lake. Every stone you drop is followed by a reaction. The
stone is covered by the little waves in the lake. Similarly, external
things are like the stones dropping into the lake of the mind. So we do
not really see the external . . .; we see the wave only. . . .

These waves that rise in the mind have caused many things outside. We
are not discussing the \[merits of\] idealism and realism. We take for
granted that things exist outside, but what we see is different from
things that exist outside, as we see what exists outside plus ourselves.

Suppose I take my contribution out of the glass. What remains? Almost
nothing. The glass will disappear. If I take my contribution from the
table, what would remain of the table? Certainly not this table, because
it was a mixture of the outside plus my contribution. The poor lake has
got to throw the wave towards the stone whenever \[the stone\] is thrown
in it. The mind must create the wave towards any sensation. Suppose . .
. we can withhold the mind. At once we are masters. We refuse to
contribute our share to all these phenomena.... If I do not contribute
my share, it has got to stop.

You are creating this bondage all the time. How? By putting in your
share. We are all making our own beds, forging our own chains.... When
the identifying ceases between this external object and myself, then I
will be able to take my contribution off, and this thing will disappear.
Then I will say, "Here is the glass", and then take my mind off, and it
disappears.... If you can take away your share, you can walk upon water.
Why should it drown you any more? What of poison? No more difficulties.
In every phenomenon in nature you contribute at least half, and nature
brings half. If your half is taken off, the thing must stop.

... To every action there is equal reaction.... If  a man strikes me and
wounds me it is that man's actions and my body's reaction. ... Suppose I
have so much power over the body that I can resist even that automatic
action. Can such power be attained? The books say it can. ... If you
stumble on \[it\], it is a miracle. If you learn it scientifically, it
is Yoga.

I have seen people healed by the power of mind. There is the miracle
worker. We say he prays and the man is healed. Another man says, "Not at
all. It is just the power of the mind. The man is scientific. He knows
what he is about."

The power of meditation gets us everything. If you want to get power
over nature, \[you can have it through meditation\]. It is through the
power of meditation all scientific facts are discovered today. They
study the subject and forget everything, their own identity and
everything, and then the great fact comes like a flash. Some people
think that is inspiration. There is no more inspiration than there is
expiration; and never was anything got for nothing.

The highest so-called inspiration was the work of Jesus. He worked hard
for ages in previous births. That was the result of his previous work —
hard work. ... It is all nonsense to talk about inspiration. Had it
been, it would have fallen like rain. Inspired people in any line of
thought only come among nations who have general education and
\[culture\]. There is no inspiration. . . . Whatever passes for
inspiration is the result that comes from causes already in the mind.
One day, flash comes the result! Their past work was the \[cause\].

Therein also you see the power of meditation — intensity of thought.
These men churn up their own souls. Great truths come to the surface and
become manifest. Therefore the practice of meditation is the great
scientific method of knowledge. There is no knowledge without the power
of meditation. From ignorance, superstition, etc. we can get cured by
meditation for the time being and no more. \[Suppose\] a man has told me
that if you drink such a poison you will be killed, and another man
comes in the night and says, "Go drink the poison!" and I am not killed,
\[what happens is this: \] my mind cut out from the meditation the
identity between the poison and myself just for the time being. In
another case of \[drinking\] the poison, I will be killed.

If I know the reason and scientifically raise myself up to that \[state
of meditation\], I can save anyone. That is what the books say; but how
far it is correct you must appraise.

I am asked, "Why do you Indian people not conquer these things? You
claim all the time to be superior to all other people. You practice Yoga
and do it quicker than anybody else. You are fitter. Carry it out! If
you are a great people, you ought to have a great system. You will have
to say good-bye to all the gods. Let them go to sleep as you take up the
great philosophers. You are mere babies, as superstitious as the rest of
the world. And all your claims are failures. If you have the claims,
stand up and be bold, and all the heaven that ever existed is yours.
There is the musk deer with fragrance inside, and he does not know where
the fragrance \[comes from\]. Then after days and days he finds it in
himself. All these gods and demons are within them. Find out, by the
powers of reason, education, and culture that it is all in yourself. No
more gods and superstitions. You want to be rational, to be Yogis,
really spiritual."

\[My reply is: With you too\] everything is material What is more
material than God sitting on a throne? You look down upon the poor man
who is worshipping the image. You are no better. And you, gold
worshippers, what are you? The image worshipper worships his god,
something that he can see. But you do not even do that. You do not
worship the spirit nor something that you can understand. ... Word
worshippers! "God is spirit!" God *is* spirit and should be worshipped
in spirit and faith. Where does the spirit reside? On a tree? On a
cloud? What do you mean by God being *ours*? *You are* the spirit. That
is the first fundamental belief you must never give up. I am the
spiritual being. It is there. All this skill of Yoga and this system of
meditation and everything is just to find Him there.

Why am I saying all this just now? Until you fix the location, you
cannot talk. You fix it up in heaven and all the world ever except in
the right place. I am spirit, and therefore the spirit of all spirits
must be in my soul. Those who think it anywhere else are ignorant.
Therefore it is to be sought here in this heaven; all the heaven that
ever existed \[is within myself\]. There are some sages who, knowing
this, turn their eyes inward and find the spirit of all spirits in their
own spirit. That is the scope of meditation. Find out the truth about
God and about your own soul and thus attain to liberation. ...

You are all running after life, and we find that is foolishness. There
is something much higher than life even. This life is inferior,
material. Why should I live at all? I am something higher than life.
Living is always slavery. We always get mixed up. ... Everything is a
continuous chain of slavery.

You get something, and no man can teach another. It is through
experience \[we learn\]. ... That young man cannot be persuaded that
there are any difficulties in life. You cannot persuade the *old* man
that life is all smooth. He has had many experiences. That is the
difference.

By the power of meditation we have got to control, step by step, all
these things. We have seen philosophically that all these
differentiations — spirit, mind, matter, etc. — \[have no real
existences. ... Whatever exists is one. There cannot be many. That is
what is meant by science and knowledge. Ignorance sees manifold.
Knowledge realises one. ... Reducing the many into one is science. ...
The whole of the universe has been demonstrated into one. That science
is called the science of Vedanta. The whole universe is one. The one
runs through all this seeming variety. ...

We have all these variations now and we see them — what we call the five
elements: solid, liquid, gaseous, luminous, ethereal. After that the
state of existence is mental and beyond that spiritual. Not that spirit
is one and mind is another, ether another, and so on. It is the one
existence appearing in all these variations. To go back, the solid must
become liquid. The way \[the elements evolved\] they must go back. The
solids will become liquid, etherised. This is the idea of the macrocosm
— and universal. There is the external universe and universal spirit,
mind, ether, gas, luminosity, liquid, solid.

The same with the mind. I am just exactly the same in the microcosm. I
am the spirit; I am mind; I am the ether, solid, liquid, gas. What I
want to do is to go back to my spiritual state. It is for the individual
to live the life of the universe in one short life. Thus man can be free
in this life. He in his own short lifetime shall have the power to live
the whole extent of life....

We all struggle. . . . If we cannot reach the Absolute, we will get
somewhere, and it will be better than we are now.

Meditation consists in this practice \[of dissolving every thing into
the ultimate Reality — spirit\]. The solid melts into liquid, that into
gas, gas into ether, then mind, and mind will melt away. All is spirit.

Some of the Yogis claim that this body will become liquid etc. You will
be able to do any thing with it — make it little, or gas pass through
this wall — they claim. I do not know. I have never seen anybody do it.
But it is in the books. We have no reason to disbelieve the books.

Possibly, some of us will be able to do it in this life. Like a flash it
comes, as the result of our past work. Who knows but some here are old
Yogis with just a little to do to finish the whole work. Practice!

Meditation, you know, comes by a process imagination. You go through all
these processes purification of the elements — making the one melt the
other, that into the next higher, that into mind, that into spirit, and
then you are spirit.[1](#fn1)

Spirit is always free, omnipotent, omniscient. Of course, under God.
There cannot be many Gods. These liberated souls are wonderfully
powerful, almost omnipotent. \[But\] none can be as powerful as God. If
one \[liberated soul\] said, "I will make this planet go this way", and
another said, "I will make it go that way", \[there would be
confusion\].

Don't you make this mistake! When I say in English, "I am God!" it is
because I have no better word. In Sanskrit, God means absolute
existence, knowledge, and wisdom, infinite self-luminous consciousness.
No person. It is impersonal. ...

I am never Râma \[never one with Ishvara, the personal aspect of God\],
but I am \[one with Brahman, the impersonal, all-pervading existence\].
Here is a huge mass of clay. Out of that clay I made a little \[mouse\]
and you made a little \[elephant\]. Both are clay. Melt both down They
are essentially one. "I and my Father are one." \[But the clay mouse can
never be one with the clay elephant.\]

I stop somewhere; I have a little knowledge. You a little more; you stop
somewhere. There is one soul which is the greatest of all. This is
Ishvara, Lord of Yoga \[God as Creator, with attributes\]. He is the
individual. He is omnipotent. He resides in every heart. There is no
body. He does not need a body. All you get by the practice of meditation
etc., you can get by meditation upon Ishvara, Lord of Yogis. ...

The same can be attained by meditating upon a great soul; or upon the
harmony of life. These are called objective meditations. So you begin to
meditate upon certain external things, objective things, either outside
or inside. If you take a long sentence, that is no meditation at all.
That is simply trying to get the mind collected by repetition.
Meditation means the mind is turned back upon itself. The mind stops all
the \[thought-waves\] and the world stops. Your consciousness expands.
Every time you meditate you will keep your growth. ... Work a little
harder, more and more, and meditation comes. You do not feel the body or
anything else. When you come out of it after the hour, you have had the
most beautiful rest you ever had in your life. That is the only way you
ever give rest to your system. Not even the deepest sleep will give you
such rest as that. The mind goes on jumping even in deepest sleep. Just
those few minutes \[in meditation\] your brain has almost stopped. Just
a little vitality is kept up. You forget the body. You may be cut to
pieces and not feel it at all. You feel such pleasure in it. You become
so light. This perfect rest we will get in meditation.

Then, meditation upon different objects. There are meditations upon
different centres of the spine. \[According to the Yogis, there are two
nerves in the spinal column, called Idâ and Pingalâ.They are the main
channels through which the afferent and efferent currents travel.\] The
hollow \[canal called Sushumnâ\] runs through the middle of the spinal
column. The Yogis claim this cord is closed, but by the power of
meditation it has to be opened. The energy has to be sent down to \[the
base of the spine\], and the Kundalini rises. The world will be changed.
... (See [*Complete Works*, Vol.
I](../../volume_1/raja-yoga/the_psychic_prana.htm))

Thousands of divine beings are standing about you. You do not see them
because our world is determined by our senses. We can only see this
outside. Let us call it X. We see that X according to our mental state.
Let us take the tree standing outside. A thief came and what did he see
in the stump? A policeman. The child saw a huge ghost. The young man was
waiting for his sweetheart, and what did he see? His sweetheart. But the
stump of the tree had not changed. It remained the same. This is God
Himself, and with our foolishness we see Him to be man, to be dust, to
be dumb, miserable.

Those who are similarly constituted will group together naturally and
live in the same world. Otherwise stated, you live in the same place.
All the heavens and all the hells are right here. For example: \[take
planes in the form of\] big circles cutting each other at certain
points. . . . On this plane in one circle we can be in touch with a
certain point in another \[circle\]. If the mind gets to the centre, you
begin to be conscious on all planes. In meditation sometimes you touch
another plane, and you see other beings, disembodied spirits, and so on.
You get there by the power of meditation. This power is changing our
senses, you see, refining our senses. If you begin to practise
meditation five days, you will feel the pain from within these centres
\[of conciousness\] and hearing \[becomes finer\]. ... (See [*Complete
Works*, Vol. I](../../volume_1/raja-yoga/pratyahara_and_dharana.htm)).
That is why all the Indian gods have three eyes. That is the psychic eye
that opens out and shows you spiritual things.

As this power of Kundalini rises from one centre to the other in the
spine, it changes the senses and you begin to see this world another. It
is heaven. You cannot talk. Then the Kundalini goes down to the lower
centres. You are again man until the Kundalini reaches the brain, all
the centres have been passed, and the whole vision vanishes and you
\[perceive\] . . . nothing but the one existence. You are God. All
heavens you make out of Him, all worlds out of Him. He is the one
existence. Nothing else exists.

1.  [^](#txt1)This purification of the elements, known as Bhuta-shuddhi,
    is part of the ritualistic worship. The worshipper tries to feel
    that he is dissolving earth, water, fire, air, and ether with their
    subtle essences, and the sense-organs into mind. Mind, intellect,
    and sense of individual ego are merged into Mahat, the cosmic ego;
    Mahat is dissolved into Prakriti, the power of Brahman, and Prakriti
    merges into Brahman, the ultimate Reality. The Kundalini, the
    coiled-up power at the base of the spine, in his thoughts is led to
    the highest centre of consciousness in the brain, where he meditates
    on his oneness with the supreme Spirit.

</div>
