+++
title = "Pandemic days: Galtonism hitsxa0India"
date = "2021-04-26"

+++
At some point last year, we stopped writing any further dispatches
regarding the pandemic catastrophe from the ![\\omega \\upsilon o
\\nu](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Comega+%5Cupsilon+o+%5Cnu&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
disease because everything was playing out more or less as laid out in
the earlier notes. There was the whole public drama around the
“lab-leak” hypothesis that was widely disseminated by the Jewish
American intellectual Weinstein and his wife Heying. While they and
their cohort made some good points, there were specific counterpoints
that nobody in those academic circles was able to bring to the
discussion. Having studied this virus closely and having discovered
multiple new things about its evolution, we had laid those out in our
[earlier
dispatches](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2020/05/17/pandemic-days-4-viruses-get-new-hosts/).
So, we were not too disposed towards reiterating it.

The effects of the pandemic reached far beyond the human disaster — it
played with the internal stability and politics of several nations
across the world. It fueled the explosive growth of the American mental
disease,
[navyonmāda](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2020/06/08/pandemic-days-the-fizz-is-out-of-the-bottle/),
following incidents of police brutality, typical of the Mahāmleccha. As
a result, among the Mahāmleccha, Vijaya-nāma-vyāpārī was overthrown by
the navyonmatta activists in Big (primarily imaginary)-Tech and Media
and replaced by their candidate Vṛddha-piṇḍaka and the sūtradhāriṇī
Ardhā, who works the former like a putalikā on behalf of the operators
in the deep-state and Big-Tech. Now in the driver’s seat, they moved
quickly to impose the navyonmāda religion on the population of America —
the full extant of the steps taken for its imposition are striking
(supported by statistics and raw data) but cannot be narrated for now.
Indeed, in retrospect, it now appears that the Nāriṅgapuruṣa was the
last line of defense against dam-burst of navyonmāda. Its capture of a
serious fraction of the Mahāmleccha elite is evidenced in nearly all the
ejaculations of Piṇḍaka’s courtiers; now, they even intend flying the
dhvaja of navyonmāda at their dūtya-s. In essence, the Piṇḍaka-śāsana is
giving a taste of how it might have been for the heathens when the
second and third unmāda-s were taking over West Asia and Europe.

If this had remained restricted to the Mahāmleccha, then the rest of the
world might not be too bothered about it. In fact, rival powers would
have rejoiced at it because it will eventually weaken the Mahāmleccha
(at least temporarily). But like any physical infectious disease, this
memetic one is also infectious. Just like the overt unmāda-s,
[navyonmāda too has a natural enmity towards the
deva-dharma](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2021/02/08/huntington-and-the-clash-21-years-later/).
Hence, it will act in similar ways to destabilize any political party or
arrangement that might even marginally help H growth. It is brought into
India via the first responders and mleccha-trained academics, and is
also casually dispersed to the young urban population by the occidental
media. During the Kangress era, the judiciary too was subverted by
several crypto-proponents of sympathizers of this neo-religion. This is
perhaps one of the most imminent dangers of navyonmāda given the power
the court holds in the Indian political arrangement. It has also taken a
deep root in centers of higher science and technology education such as
the IITs, IISERs, and TIFRs, where several academics mimic their
left-liberal counterparts in the west and engage in anti-Hindu action
guided by navyonmāda. Thus, when navyonmatta-s from a scientific
tabloid, like the Nature magazine, interview people for something
regarding India, they goes to their co-religionists (i.e.,
navyonmatta-s) in Indian academia. These will invariably paint an anti-H
picture. To give a concrete example, I know a senior academic who had
served at the IISERs and Ashoka University (a navyonmāda nest) who
wanted to give his students “a balanced view” that the great rājan
Śivajī was a bandit. This means a whole crop of young H, especially
those in the crucial research and technology fields, are being
indoctrinated into the neo-religion. Given this situation, the rise of
Piṇḍaka meant that this wing of internal navyonmatta-s would be
strengthened in the deśa.

This is how it indeed played out. An uṣnīṣin rebellion passing off as a
kīnāśakopa was fomented in the Pāñcanada, that too during an ongoing
pandemic. The discerning clearly saw the pattern, as it followed along
the lines of the earlier CAA riots, the Bhim riots, and the Patel riots.
However, in this case, they were conclusively outed as a Swedish
front-end for navyonmatta, who is on the Asperger’s spectrum, spilled
the “toolkit” of the first responders leading to the quick arrest of
some of their agents. Their subsequent interrogation revealed even more
of their intent. The Indian government was rather mild with and gave a
long rope to these rioters. This puzzled many nationalistic observers
who were hoping for firm action that the śādhu was reputedly capable of.
Our reading is that the H are relatively weak in their ground state and
the security apparatus knows that. Moreover, they also feared opening of
a border front with the Cīna-s while tackling internal rebellions.
Hence, for good optics with the mleccha-s the H leadership did not act
firmly. Thus, unlike the Cīna-s dealing with their rebels, the H have to
go soft as they cannot take on the Mahāmleccha under Piṇḍaka, who will
back the rioters, unlike the overthrown Nāriṅgapuruṣa. Our prediction
from a little over a month back was that the Mahāmleccha would continue
such action until at least the end of the year or till the possible
event of their king Piṇḍaka falling prey to jara resulting in some
internal turmoil.

Returning to the ![\\omega \\upsilon o
\\nu](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Comega+%5Cupsilon+o+%5Cnu&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
disease, the first wave in India was bad, but the nation as a whole
fared much better than most other hard-hit countries. By the end of the
civil year 2020 CE, it was coming down even as it was exploding in the
USA. By the first two months of 2021, it looked as though India was on
top of the pandemic and the vaccination program was initiated. It was
going well by early March even though a lot of eligible people were not
taking it. The corresponding program was doing much worse at that point
in the US — some people were driving a long way to neighboring towns and
cities to get their shots. A Pakistan physician was arrested by the
mleccha-s for giving the vaccine that would be otherwise wasted to
“people with Indian-sounding names!” because of their kṛṣṇa-rudhira sham
policy. Unfortunately, on the H side a basic lesson of epidemiology was
forgotten. Infectious respiratory disease epidemics show wave dynamics.
The classic precedent of the Spanish flu of 1918 CE shows that the
second wave can be worse than the first because more infectious and/or
more virulent mutants can emerge, especially with the effective
population size of the virus being large along with a large as yet
uninfected population. The same dynamic was seen with the milder H1N1
epidemic in the USA. Even the limited SARS outbreak showed waves.
Several countries had already experienced two waves of SARS-CoV-2, with
the second being worse than the first. In several instances, like in UK,
Brazil and Iran, we have seen SARS-CoV-2 variants with greater
infectivity or virulence emerge and drive a new wave. This meant that
India had to be ready for wave 2, potentially driven by a more
infectious or virulent strain. It is in this regard the Health Ministry
largely failed in it is messaging and warning of the public. However,
nations do not fail or succeed based on their leadership alone. A much
bigger part is played by the people’s social responsibility, deep state,
and institutions. Modern H have been strikingly weak on each of these
counts, especially when compared to the East Asians. At the times of
non-crisis, the accumulated civilizational capital of the H nation could
take them through, but any discerning observer knows that this could
break in bad times.

Those bad times came with the entirely expected wave 2. While wave 2 was
expected, the above H weaknesses poured more ghee into it, making it a
conflagration of sa Devaḥ (The god). In our opinion, there were several
deep failures beyond the Health Ministry’s negligence regarding the
imminence of wave 2: 1) The people acted as though it was back to
normal. There was no masking or social distancing, crowding at indoor
entertainment spaces. 2) Wearing flimsy cloth or fashion masks in the
name of comfort, frequent removal of the mask to speak and interact at
close quarters, and improper use of the mask. 3) Poorly governed states
like Maharashtra and Kerala let the outbreak remain bad, offering
opportunities for the emergence and selection of new mutants. We suspect
both the B.1.351 and B1.617 variants are major drivers of wave 2. The
latter seems more infectious and clearly appears to break past any
natural immunity or that acquired during wave 1. There are reliable
reports of reinfection in wave 2 and might be cases of B1.617. 4)
Crowded election rallies with no or improper masking in certain states
and religious assemblies. While the Anti-H constituency and eventually
also the Dillīśvara tend to emphasize the last one (e.g., the Kumbha),
the data shows that massive outbreaks were building up far from the
centers of these open-air gatherings. Hence, while such crowds might
have played a role in local transmission, we do not think they were by
any means the primary factor in the explosive second wave in India. 5)
Many eligible people simply failed to take the opportunity to get
vaccinated. 6) The weak research culture (traditionally disparaged and
neglected by the rising urban middle class and in part addled with
navyonmāda) in the country meant that study of the mutants, the efficacy
of treatment, search for new drugs, epidemiology, bio-, and chemical
technology for were all not up to mark to face a crisis. 7) Unlike some
countries like the USA, India is a densely populated country where
people live in close proximity with extensive casual social interaction.
While the latter can be advantageous in some situations, in this
situation, it is a disaster, especially when people with the illness do
not self-quarantine responsibly. In the end, from all we have seen, the
biggest failure was the first point — people simply not taking the
threat seriously. Looking at the exponential phase of its growth, we can
say that the plot was probably lost between March 15-20th when the
tangent to the curve moved past
![45^\\circ](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=45%5E%5Ccirc&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
The result is an unprecedented public health crisis that the already
weak institutions cannot bear. Reports on the ground mention an unending
stream of cremations with people simply dying before they can even get
access to supplemental oxygen.

When a nation is in crisis, its enemies and haters will try to make the
most of it. With the precision of a Dutch clock, the mleccha haters from
Big Media and navyonmāda-addled occidental academia who are big
Piṇḍakānuyāyin-s (e.g., a Harvard University physician of Chinese
ancestry who is vociferous on SM) aided by their marūnmatta allies came
out like beetle-grubs from the wood-works peddling “cremation
sensationalism” (aimed at their fire-hating Abrahamistic audience who
mostly don’t know that H cremate), blaming it on H religious assemblies.
The foreign policy of the Mahāmleccha state has a simple sūtra: Weaken,
destabilize or destroy any non-pañcanetra state. To add to this, the
national religion of the current regime is navyonmāda, which has a
svabhāva-vairam with dharma and any political assembly that might even
indirectly support it. Then there is predatory American Big Pharma which
has always sought to profit off human misery (incidentally of their own
people, including the śvetatvak-s). Hence, they saw a golden opportunity
for 1) Playing the anger in the Indian middle class from the high death
toll to engineer a janakopa against the Lāṭeśvara and his court; 2) Send
a clear message to the Lāṭeśvara for being pally with their internal
arch-enemy, the Nāriṅgapuruṣa; 3) Use the opportunity to aid
dvitīyonmatta-s and navyonmatta-s by NGO channels by providing direct
“aid” bypassing the Indian government headed by the Lāṭeśvara.

They executed this program reason fairly well until today: 1) They
embargoed key ingredients for vaccine production and withheld the
AstraZeneca vaccines that they are not even using. 2) They amplified the
noise about the Indian failure via their usual Big Media outlets aided
by navyonmatta academics (e.g., the said Harvard University academic of
Cīna ancestry) to facilitate the Indian public opinion turning against
the Lāṭeśvara’s court. 3) Once the situation was desperate in the deśa,
over the current weekend, they suddenly got active and presented
themselves as saviors (much like the English during the piṇḍāri wars).
Their NSA and Secretary of State, in thinly veiled messages, talked of
“working with their friends and partners” in India. Every discerning H
knows who their friends and partners are and how much they work for the
downfall of the H. Now everyone from the above courtiers to Piṇḍaka
claimed that they would help by allowing the supply of materials to
India. However, one notable point in all this was how for most part they
(Piṇḍaka included) avoided directly mentioning the Indian government or
leaders. This shows that, like the English tyrants of the past, they are
attempting to use the dire situation to present themselves as saviors
while discrediting the Indian leadership.

But why did they relent at all, especially on a weekend when they are
normally relaxing? In part, they saw that the H in India were not buying
their first-responder messages and were seriously angry against their
blockade of material flow. Not only that, they saw that there was
widespread public opinion against their actions even among the
śvetatvak-s (barring some like the evil queen of the Śūlapuruṣa-s).
Americans of H origin were pressing on them to release the blockade. It
also appears that there was some straight-talking by the Indian NSA with
his counterpart (speculation). Consequently, Piṇḍaka changed his line
and claimed that he would open channels for raw material flow. As soon
as he announced it, his deśī sepoys in Big Tech, Big Media, tinpot think
tanks started amplifying Piṇḍaka’s announcement as a noble action of the
great savior.

We do not know what exactly happened, but definitely, something hurried
happened behind the scenes. One can never trust the Mahāmleccha —
everyone who has done so has paid dearly. Hence, one can only hope that
in this desperate situation, the Lāṭeśvara did not promise them
something that could come to bite the H and him in the rear in the near
future. This is a once-in-century pandemic, so there are bound to be
failures, but that is no excuse for being unprepared, given all the
precedence — this is analogous to the unpreparedness of the H rulers to
Shihab al-dīn over 800 years ago despite the precedence of Mahmud of
Ghazna. Some political setups will be better prepared for situations
like this, e.g., the Cīna-s, who, unlike H, need not fear “death by
democracy or judiciary” allowing them to play the long game without the
wastage of time and money on constant elections, let alone the
significant risks from the rallies \[note, we are not per say advocating
a Cīna form of government as the solution but simply stating a fact\].
One can only hope this wakes up the H to the need for a way more
comprehensive reform of the crappy “jugāḍ” mentality that they pat
themselves on the back for, along with serious and unbiased cultivation
of a more robust basic research culture. So far, the H have only
mimicked the broken western system — often importing just the navyonmāda
and marrying it with vicious regionalistic politics rather than bringing
actual research excellence from the west into their premier institutes.
This cannot change overnight, but without doing so, it is not going to
be easy to meet the challenges of the current order. An example germane
to the current situation is the modified nucleotide mRNA vaccines
deployed in the USA. This needs an extensive biochemical knowledge base
that cannot be developed without serious basic research. While along
with the journey to Mars, the mRNA vaccines could very well be among the
last great American achievements in the penumbra of their power being
eclipsed by navyonmāda, it still has shown the gulf between their
technological prowess and that of the rest of the world. While this
pandemic will resolve eventually, it will be at high human cost and also
we do not know for sure what it will leave behind. In the worst case
scenario, there will be long term health issues (e.g. neurological and
respiratory) that could hamper the work force. If the Lāṭeśvara is
overthrown by the Indian democracy, as the Piṇḍaka-śāsana wants, the
country will essentially be overtaken by agents of the mleccha-s and
marūnmatta-s and greatly decline. But then who can predict the future?
