+++
title = "Some considerations on the tantric path"

+++
I decided to put down some matters arising in the discourse with R
during the winding train journey.

The following are listed as authoritative tantras by the great trika
tantrics:  
1\) kAmika 2) kiraNa 3) niHshvAsa 4) pauShkara 5) raurava 6) svAyambhuva
7) pArameshvara.  
These may be termed the proper shaivAgamas  
(some of these contain important details concerning the pa\~nchAkShari
of mahAdeva, of which another aspirant had made some recent enquiries to
me).

The trika tantrics also mention the following tantras, many of which are
far more obscure. 1) The rudra yAmala of which only fragments survive
and the parAtrishikA is of particular interest to the trika savant
abhinava. 2) nirmaryAda tantra- an obscure “left-handed” tantra of which
only small fragments are known to practioners 3) kAlikula tantra- the
basic doctrine of bhANavi kaulini is expounded here. 4) urmimahA tantra
5) ratna mAlA 6) trishiro-bhairava 7) svachChanda: This enormous saMhitA
lays out the path of the highest yoga of prANAyAma and meditation on the
praNava, amongst other mantras. 8) siddha-yogeshvarI-mata 9) devI yAmala
10) mR^ityu\~Njaya vidya 11) mAlinI vijaya: This tantra appears to have
been originally a section of the great siddha-yogeshvarI-mata.
abhinavagupta composed a 1500 verse commentary on this text. 12) viGYAna
bhairava: The viGYAna bhairava text is considered an upaniShad and the
kAshmirian tantric kshemarAja has expounded a commentary on it.

Some of these tantras clearly go under different names. The
mR^ityu\~Njaya vidya is also known as the netra tantra and expounds the
vedic and tantric rituals related to the mR^ityujit vidyA at length. It
is a very important tantra that provides the critical mantras that
provide defense against mAraNa attacks and from an academic viewpoint
the various early lineages of the tantric schools. A major commentary on
it is by the great kshemarAja.
