+++
title = "Sridevi and other stuff need not be pushed as normative queerxa0icons"
date = "2018-03-02"

+++
Trigger warning:Religion. You can frankly speaking,sod off if you are
anti-religious and moan about whatever -ist or patriarch or whatever I
am in your cubbyholes.

(It’s primarily a reaction to this glorified blog that is a newspaper
column:
<https://www.hindustantimes.com/bollywood/thank-you-sridevi-our-queer-icon/story-Oy6SST3RhHpSfrWSh9MZZM.html>)

> we saw the promise of a future where we wouldn’t lie about who we were
> and what we liked

All of that passes away. Though I wish I had someone in my arms,and
someone who I could talk with/at-on the same level.

My queer icons are more off the beat than what
[activists](https://www.hindustantimes.com/bollywood/thank-you-sridevi-our-queer-icon/story-Oy6SST3RhHpSfrWSh9MZZM.html)
would put forward. My icons would be the poet
[Raskhan](https://bharatendu.com/2009/07/09/homosexual-bhakta/),and the
author Mishima. Only one muddled by activist babblings can *not*
appreciate Mishima’s vīryam(a pale reflection of Samkarṣaṇa’s bala\*),or
the devotion that Raskhan put to Mādhava,which makes even every single
shackle insignificant before long. It is that devotion which grants the
freedom from every single shackle as easily as one breaks a rotting
thread. And it’s this devotion which is in the very form of jñāna which
is very rare to obtain. The yati who carries Lakṣmī’s husband in him has
more freedom than any of us will ever have! (Need not even be a yati
strictly speaking,[Aghoremani
Devi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gopaler_Ma) is a living testimony to
that).

I do recognize that this path(and my inclinations) are not for
everyone,though.Few would care,anyway. Maybe I am crazy.

\*A reference to Saṃkarṣaṇa’s two predominating qualities amongst the
vyūhas.
