---
title: MY LIFE AND MISSION

---
<div>

[←](women_of_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](buddhas_message.htm)

  

## MY LIFE AND MISSION

(*Delivered at the Shakespeare Club of Pasadena, California, on January
27, 1900*)

Now, ladies and gentlemen, the subject for this morning was to have been
the Vedanta Philosophy. That subject itself is interesting, but rather
dry and very vast.

Meanwhile, I have been asked by your president and some of the ladies
and gentlemen here to tell them something about my work and what I have
been doing. It may be interesting to some here, but not so much so to
me. In fact, I do not quite know how to tell it to you, for this will
have been the first time in my life that I have spoken on that subject.

Now, to understand what I have been trying to do, in my small way, I
will take you, in imagination, to India. We have not time to go into all
the details and all the ramifications of the subject; nor is it possible
for you to understand all the complexities in a foreign race in this
short time. Suffice it to say, I will at least try to give you a little
picture of what India is like.

It is like a gigantic building all tumbled down in ruins. At first
sight, then, there is little hope. It is a nation gone and ruined. But
you wait and study, then you see something beyond that. The truth is
that so long as the principle, the ideal, of which the outer man is the
expression, is not hurt or destroyed, the man lives, and there is hope
for that man. If your coat is stolen twenty times, that is no reason why
you should be destroyed. You can get a new coat. The coat is
unessential. The fact that a rich man is robbed does not hurt the
vitality of the man, does not mean death. The man will survive.

Standing on this principle, we look in and we see — what? India is no
longer a political power; it is an enslaved race. Indians have no say,
no voice in their own government; they are three hundred millions of
slaves — nothing more! The average income of a man in India is two
shillings a month. The common state of the vast mass of the people is
starvation, so that, with the least decrease in income, millions die. A
little famine means death. So there, too, when I look on that side of
India, I see ruin-hopeless ruin.

But we find that the Indian race never stood for wealth. Although they
acquired immense wealth, perhaps more than any other nation ever
acquired, yet the nation did not stand for wealth. It was a powerful
race for ages, yet we find that that nation never stood for power, never
went out of the country to conquer. Quite content within their own
boundaries, they never fought anybody. The Indian nation never stood for
imperial glory. Wealth and power, then, were not the ideals of the race.

What then? Whether they were wrong or right — that is not the question
we discuss — that nation, among all the children of men, has believed,
and believed intensely, that this life is not real. The real is God; and
they must cling unto that God through thick and thin. In the midst of
their degradation, religion came first. The Hindu man drinks
religiously, sleeps religiously, walks religiously, marries religiously,
robs religiously.

Did you ever see such a country? If you want to get up a gang of
robbers, the leader will have to preach some sort of religion, then
formulate some bogus metaphysics, and say that this method is the
clearest and quickest way to get God. Then he finds a following,
otherwise not. That shows that the vitality of the race, the mission of
the race is religion; and because that has not been touched, therefore
that race lives.

See Rome. Rome's mission was imperial power, expansion. And so soon as
that was touched, Rome fell to pieces, passed out. The mission of Greece
was intellect, as soon as that was touched, why, Greece passed out. So
in modern times, Spain and all these modern countries. Each nation has a
mission for the world. So long as that mission is not hurt, that nation
lives, despite every difficulty. But as soon as its mission is
destroyed, the nation collapses.

Now, that vitality of India has not been touched yet. They have not
given up that, and it is still strong — in spite of all their
superstitions. Hideous superstitions are there, most revolting some of
them. Never mind. The national life — current is still there — the
mission of the race.

The Indian nation never will be a powerful conquering people — never.
They will never be a great political power; that is not their business,
that is not the note India has to play in the great harmony of nations.
But what has she to play? God, and God alone. She clings unto that like
grim death. Still there is hope there.

So, then, after your analysis, you come to the conclusion that all these
things, all this poverty and misery, are of no consequence — the man is
living still, and therefore there is hope.

Well! You see religious activities going on all through the country. I
do not recall a year that has not given birth to several new sects in
India. The stronger the current, the more the whirlpools and eddies.
Sects are not signs of decay, they are a sign of life. Let sects
multiply, till the time comes when every one of us is a sect, each
individual. We need not quarrel about that.

Now, take your country. (I do not mean any criticism). Here the social
laws, the political formation — everything is made to facilitate man's
journey in this life. He may live very happily so long as he is on this
earth. Look at your streets — how clean! Your beautiful cities! And in
how many ways a man can make money! How many channels to get enjoyment
in this life! But, if a man here should say, "Now look here, I shall sit
down under this tree and meditate; I do not want to work", why, he would
have to go to jail. See! There would be no chance for him at all. None.
A man can live in this society only if he falls in line. He has to join
in this rush for the enjoyment of good in this life, or he dies.

Now let us go back to India. There, if a man says, "I shall go and sit
on the top of that mountain and look at the tip of my nose all the rest
of my days", everybody says, "Go, and Godspeed to you!" He need not
speak a word. Somebody brings him a little cloth, and he is all right.
But if a man says, "Behold, I am going to enjoy a little of this life",
every door is closed to him.

I say that the ideas of both countries are unjust. I see no reason why a
man here should not sit down and look at the tip of his nose if he
likes. Why should everybody here do just what the majority does? I see
no reason.

Nor why, in India, a man should not have the goods of this life and make
money. But you see how those vast millions are forced to accept the
opposite point of view by tyranny. This is the tyranny of the sages.
This is the tyranny of the great, tyranny of the spiritual, tyranny of
the intellectual, tyranny of the wise. And the tyranny of the wise, mind
you, is much more powerful than the tyranny of the ignorant. The wise,
the intellectual, when they take to forcing their opinions upon others,
know a hundred thousand ways to make bonds and barriers which it is not
in the power of the ignorant to break.

Now, I say that this thing has got to stop. There is no use in
sacrificing millions and millions of people to produce one spiritual
giant. If it is possible to make a society where the spiritual giant
will be produced and all the rest of the people will be happy as well,
that is good; but if the millions have to be ground down, that is
unjust. Better that the one great man should suffer for the salvation of
the world.

In every nation you will have to work through their methods. To every
man you will have to speak in his own language. Now, in England or in
America, if you want to preach religion to them, you will have to work
through political methods — make organisations, societies, with voting,
balloting, a president, and so on, because that is the language, the
method of the Western race. On the other hand, if you want to speak of
politics in India, you must speak through the language of religion. You
will have to tell them something like this: "The man who cleans his
house every morning will acquire such and such an amount of merit, he
will go to heaven, or he comes to God." Unless you put it that way, they
will not listen to you. It is a question of language. The thing done is
the same. But with every race, you will have to speak their language in
order to reach their hearts. And that is quite just. We need not fret
about that.

In the Order to which I belong we are called Sannyâsins. The word means
"a man who has renounced". This is a very, very, very ancient Order.
Even Buddha, who was 560 years before Christ, belonged to that Order. He
was one of the reformers of his Order. That was all. So ancient! You
find it mentioned away back in the Vedas, the oldest book in the world.
In old India there was the regulation that every man and woman, towards
the end of their lives, must get out of social life altogether and think
of nothing except God and their own salvation. This was to get ready for
the great event — death. So old people used to become Sannyasins in
those early days. Later on, young people began to give up the world. And
young people are active. They could not sit down under a tree and think
all the time of their own death, so they went about preaching and
starting sects, and so on. Thus, Buddha, being young, started that great
reform. Had he been an old man, he would have looked at the tip of his
nose and died quietly.

The Order is not a church, and the people who join the Order are not
priests. There is an absolute difference between the priests and the
Sannyasins. In India, priesthood, like every other business in a social
life, is a hereditary profession. A priest's son will become a priest,
just as a carpenter's son will be a carpenter, or a blacksmith's son a
blacksmith. The priest must always be married. The Hindu does not think
a man is complete unless he has a wife. An unmarried man has no right to
perform religious ceremonies.

The Sannyasins do not possess property, and they do not marry. Beyond
that there is no organisation. The only bond that is there is the bond
between the teacher and the taught — and that is peculiar to India. The
teacher is not a man who comes just to teach me, and I pay him so much,
and there it ends. In India it is really like an adoption. The teacher
is more than my own father, and I am truly his child, his son in every
respect. I owe him obedience and reverence first, before my own father
even; because, they say, the father gave me this body, but he showed me
the way to salvation, he is greater than father. And we carry this love,
this respect for our teacher all our lives. And that is the only
organisation that exists. I adopt my disciples. Sometimes the teacher
will be a young man and the disciple a very old man. But never mind, he
is the son, and he calls me "Father", and I have to address him as my
son, my daughter, and so on.

Now, I happened to get an old man to teach me, and he was very peculiar.
He did not go much for intellectual scholarship, scarcely studied books;
but when he was a boy he was seized with the tremendous idea of getting
truth direct. First he tried by studying his own religion. Then he got
the idea that he must get the truth of other religions; and with that
idea he joined all the sects, one after another. For the time being he
did exactly what they told him to do — lived with the devotees of these
different sects in turn, until interpenetrated with the particular ideal
of that sect. After a few years he would go to another sect. When he had
gone through with all that, he came to the conclusion that they were all
good. He had no criticism to offer to any one; they are all so many
paths leading to the same goal. And then he said, "That is a glorious
thing, that there should be so many paths, because if there were only
one path, perhaps it would suit only an individual man. The more the
number of paths, the more the chance for every one of us to know the
truth. If I cannot be taught in one language, I will try another, and so
on". Thus his benediction was for every religion.

Now, all the ideas that I preach are only an attempt to echo his ideas.
Nothing is mine originally except the wicked ones, everything I say
which is false and wicked. But every word that I have ever uttered which
is true and good is simply an attempt to echo his voice. Read his life
by Prof. Max Muller. (*Ramakrishna: His Life and Sayings*, first
published in London in 1896. Reprinted in 1951 by Advaita Ashrama.)

Well, there at his feet I conceived these ideas — there with some other
young men. I was just a boy. I went there when I was about sixteen. Some
of the other boys were still younger, some a little older — about a
dozen or more. And together we conceived that this ideal had to be
spread. And not only spread, but made practical. That is to say, we must
show the spirituality of the Hindus, the mercifulness of the Buddhists,
the activity of the Christians, the brotherhood of the Mohammedans, by
our practical lives. "We shall start a universal religion now and here,"
we said, "we will not wait".

Our teacher was an old man who would never touch a coin with his hands.
He took just the little food offered, just so many yards of cotton
cloth, no more. He could never be induced to take any other gift. With
all these marvellous ideas, he was strict, because that made him free.
The monk in India is the friend of the prince today, dines with him; and
tomorrow he is with the beggar, sleeps under a tree. He must come into
contact with everyone, must always move about. As the saying is, "The
rolling stone gathers no moss". The last fourteen years of my life, I
have never been for three months at a time in any one place —
continually rolling. So do we all.

Now, this handful of boys got hold of these ideas, and all the practical
results that sprang out of these ideas. Universal religion, great
sympathy for the poor, and all that are very good in theory, but one
must practise.

Then came the sad day when our old teacher died. We nursed him the best
we could. We had no friends. Who would listen to a few boys, with their
crank notions? Nobody. At least, in India, boys are nobodies. Just think
of it — a dozen boys, telling people vast, big ideas, saying they are
determined to work these ideas out in life. Why, everybody laughed. From
laughter it became serious; it became persecution. Why, the parents of
the boys came to feel like spanking every one of us. And the more we
were derided, the more determined we became.

Then came a terrible time — for me personally and for all the other boys
as well. But to me came such misfortune! On the one side was my mother,
my brothers. My father died at that time, and we were left poor. Oh,
very poor, almost starving all the time! I was the only hope of the
family, the only one who could do anything to help them. I had to stand
between my two worlds. On the one hand, I would have to see my mother
and brothers starve unto death; on the other, I had believed that this
man's ideas were for the good of India and the world, and had to be
preached and worked out. And so the fight went on in my mind for days
and months. Sometimes I would pray for five or six days and nights
together without stopping. Oh, the agony of those days! I was living in
hell! The natural affections of my boy's heart drawing me to my family —
I could not bear to see those who were the nearest and dearest to me
suffering. On the other hand, nobody to sympathise with me. Who would
sympathise with the imaginations of a boy — imaginations that caused so
much suffering to others? Who would sympathise with me? None — except
one.

That one's sympathy brought blessing and hope. She was a woman. Our
teacher, this great monk, was married when he was a boy and she a mere
child. When he became a young man, and all this religious zeal was upon
him, she came to see him. Although they had been married for long, they
had not seen very much of each other until they were grown up. Then he
said to his wife, "Behold, I am your husband; you have a right to this
body. But I cannot live the sex life, although I have married you. I
leave it to your judgment". And she wept and said, "God speed you! The
Lord bless you! Am I the woman to degrade you? If I can, I will help
you. Go on in your work".

That was the woman. The husband went on and became a monk in his own
way; and from a distance the wife went on helping as much as she could.
And later, when the man had become a great spiritual giant, she came —
really, she was the first disciple — and she spent the rest of her life
taking care of the body of this man. He never knew whether he was living
or dying, or anything. Sometimes, when talking, he would get so excited
that if he sat on live charcoals, he did not know it. Live charcoals!
Forgetting all about his body, all the time.

Well, that lady, his wife, was the only one who sympathised with the
idea of those boys. But she was powerless. She was poorer than we were.
Never mind! We plunged into the breach. I believed, as I was living,
that these ideas were going to rationalise India and bring better days
to many lands and foreign races. With that belief, came the realisation
that it is better that a few persons suffer than that such ideas should
die out of the world. What if a mother or two brothers die? It is a
sacrifice. Let it be done. No great thing can be done without sacrifice.
The heart must be plucked out and the bleeding heart placed upon the
altar. Then great things are done. Is there any other way? None have
found it. I appeal to each one of you, to those who have accomplished
any great thing. Oh, how much it has cost! What agony! What torture!
What terrible suffering is behind every deed of success in every life!
You know that, all of you.

And thus we went on, that band of boys. The only thing we got from those
around us was a kick and a curse — that was all. Of course, we had to
beg from door to door for our food: got hips and haws — the refuse of
everything — a piece of bread here and there. We got hold of a
broken-down old house, with hissing cobras living underneath; and
because that was the cheapest, we went into that house and lived there.

Thus we went on for some years, in the meanwhile making excursions all
over India, trying to bring about the idea gradually. Ten years were
spent without a ray of light! Ten more years! A thousand times
despondency came; but there was one thing always to keep us hopeful —
the tremendous faithfulness to each other, the tremendous love between
us. I have got a hundred men and women around me; if I become the devil
himself tomorrow, they will say, "Here we are still! We will never give
you up!" That is a great blessing. In happiness, in misery, in famine,
in pain, in the grave, in heaven, or in hell who never gives me up is my
friend. Is such friendship a joke? A man may have salvation through such
friendship. That brings salvation if we can love like that. If we have
that faithfulness, why, there is the essence of all concentration. You
need not worship any gods in the world if you have that faith, that
strength, that love. And that was there with us all throughout that hard
time. That was there. That made us go from the Himalayas to Cape
Comorin, from the Indus to the Brahmaputra.

This band of boys began to travel about. Gradually we began to draw
attention: ninety per cent was antagonism, very little of it was
helpful. For we had one fault: we were boys — in poverty and with all
the roughness of boys. He who has to make his own way in life is a bit
rough, he has not much time to be smooth and suave and polite — "my lady
and my gentleman", and all that. You have seen that in life, always. He
is a rough diamond, he has not much polish, he is a jewel in an
indifferent casket.

And there we were. "No compromise!" was the watchword. "This is the
ideal, and this has got to be carried out. If we meet the king, though
we die, we must give him a bit of our minds; if the peasant, the same".
Naturally, we met with antagonism.

But, mind you, this is life's experience; if you really want the good of
others, the whole universe may stand against you and cannot hurt you. It
must crumble before your power of the Lord Himself in you if you are
sincere and really unselfish. And those boys were that. They came as
children, pure and fresh from the hands of nature. Said our Master: I
want to offer at the altar of the Lord only those flowers that have not
even been smelled, fruits that have not been touched with the fingers.
The words of the great man sustained us all. For he saw through the
future life of those boys that he collected from the streets of
Calcutta, so to say. People used to laugh at him when he said, "You will
see — this boy, that boy, what he becomes". His faith was unalterable:
"Mother showed it to me. I may be weak, but when She says this is so —
She can never make mistakes — it must be so.

"So things went on and on for ten years without any light, but with my
health breaking all the time. It tells on the body in the long run:
sometimes one meal at nine in the evening, another time a meal at eight
in the morning, another after two days, another after three days — and
always the poorest and roughest thing. Who is going to give to the
beggar the good things he has? And then, they have not much in India.
And most of the time walking, climbing snow peaks, sometimes ten miles
of hard mountain climbing, just to get a meal. They eat unleavened bread
in India, and sometimes they have it stored away for twenty or thirty
days, until it is harder than bricks; and then they will give a square
of that. I would have to go from house to house to collect sufficient
for one meal. And then the bread was so hard, it made my mouth bleed to
eat it. Literally, you can break your teeth on that bread. Then I would
put it in a pot and pour over it water from the river. For months and
months I existed that way — of course it was telling on the health.

Then I thought, I have tried India: it is time for me to try another
country. At that time your Parliament of Religions was to be held, and
someone was to be sent from India. I was just a vagabond, but I said,
"If you send me, I am going. I have not much to lose, and I do not care
if I lose that." It was very difficult to find the money, but after a
long struggle they got together just enough to pay for my passage — and
I came. Came one or two months earlier, so that I found myself drifting
about in the streets here, without knowing anybody.

But finally the Parliament of Religions opened, and I met kind friends,
who helped me right along. I worked a little, collected funds, started
two papers, and so on. After that I went over to England and worked
there. At the same time I carried on the work for India in America too.

My plan for India, as it has been developed and centralised, is this: I
have told you of our lives as monks there, how we go from door to door,
so that religion is brought to everybody without charge, except,
perhaps, a broken piece of bread. That is why you see the lowest of the
low in India holding the most exalted religious ideas. It is all through
the work of these monks. But ask a man, "Who are the English?" — he does
not know. He says perhaps, "They are the children of those giants they
speak of in those books, are they not?" "Who governs you?" "We do not
know." "What is the government?" They do not know. But they know
philosophy. It is a practical want of intellectual education about life
on this earth they suffer from. These millions and millions of people
are ready for life beyond this world — is not that enough for them?
Certainly not. They must have a better piece of bread and a better piece
of rag on their bodies. The great question is: How to get that better
bread and better rag for these sunken millions.

First, I must tell you, there is great hope for them, because, you see,
they are the gentlest people on earth. Not that they are timid. When
they want to fight, they fight like demons. The best soldiers the
English have are recruited from the peasantry of India. Death is a thing
of no importance to them. Their attitude is "Twenty times I have died
before, and I shall die many times after this. What of that?" They never
turn back. They are not given to much emotion, but they make very good
fighters.

Their instinct, however, is to plough. If you rob them, murder them, tax
them, do anything to them, they will be quiet and gentle, so long as you
leave them free to practise their religion. They never interfere with
the religion of others. "Leave us liberty to worship our gods, and take
everything else!" That is their attitude. When the English touch them
there, trouble starts. That was the real cause of the 1857 Mutiny — they
would not bear religious repression. The great Mohammedan governments
were simply blown up because they touched the Indians' religion.

But aside from that, they are very peaceful, very quiet, very gentle,
and, above all, not given to vice. The absence of any strong drink, oh,
it makes them infinitely superior to the mobs of any other country. You
cannot compare the decency of life among the poor in India with life in
the slums here. A slum means poverty, but poverty does not mean sin,
indecency, and vice in India. In other countries, the opportunities are
such that only the indecent and the lazy need be poor. There is no
reason for poverty unless one is a fool or a blackguard — the sort who
want city life and all its luxuries. They will not go into the country.
They say, "We are here with all the fun, and you must give us bread".
But that is not the case in India, where the poor fellows work hard from
morning to sunset, and somebody else takes the bread out of their hands,
and their children go hungry. Notwithstanding the millions of tons of
wheat raised in India, scarcely a grain passes the mouth of a peasant.
He lives upon the poorest corn, which you would not feed to your
canary-birds.

Now there is no reason why they should suffer such distress — these
people; oh, so pure and good! We hear so much talk about the sunken
millions and the degraded women of India — but none come to our help.
What do they say? They say, "You can only be helped, you can only be
good by ceasing to be what you are. It is useless to help Hindus." These
people do not know the history of races. There will be no more India if
they change their religion and their institutions, because that is the
vitality of that race. It will disappear; so, really, you will have
nobody to help.

Then there is the other great point to learn: that you can never help
really. What can we do for each other? You are growing in your own life,
I am growing in my own. It is possible that I can give you a push in
your life, knowing that, in the long run, all roads lead to Rome. It is
a steady growth. No national civilisation is perfect yet. Give that
civilisation a push, and it will arrive at its own goal: do not strive
to change it. Take away a nation's institutions, customs, and manners,
and what will be left? They hold the nation together.

But here comes the very learned foreign man, and he says, "Look here;
you give up all those institutions and customs of thousands of years,
and take my tomfool tinpot and be happy". This is all nonsense.

We will have to help each other, but we have to go one step farther: the
first thing is to become unselfish in help. "If you do just what I tell
you to do, I will help you; otherwise not." Is that help?

And so, if the Hindus want to help you spiritually, there will be no
question of limitations: perfect unselfishness. I give, and there it
ends. It is gone from me. My mind, my powers, my everything that I have
to give, is given: given with the idea to give, and no more. I have seen
many times people who have robbed half the world, and they gave $20,000
"to convert the heathen". What for? For the benefit of the heathen, or
for their own souls? Just think of that.

And the Nemesis of crime is working. We men try to hoodwink our own
eyes. But inside the heart, He has remained, the real Self. He never
forgets. We can never delude Him. His eyes will never be hoodwinked.
Whenever there is any impulse of real charity, it tells, though it be at
the end of a thousand years. Obstructed, it yet wakens once more to
burst like a thunderbolt. And every impulse where the motive is selfish,
self-seeking — though it may be launched forth with all the newspapers
blazoning, all the mobs standing and cheering — it fails to reach the
mark.

I am not taking pride in this. But, mark you, I have told the story of
that group of boys. Today there is not a village, not a man, not a woman
in India that does not know their work and bless them. There is not a
famine in the land where these boys do not plunge in and try to work and
rescue as many as they can. And that strikes to the heart. The people
come to know it. So help whenever you can, but mind what your motive is.
If it is selfish, it will neither benefit those you help, nor yourself.
If it is unselfish, it will bring blessings upon them to whom it is
given, and infinite blessings upon you, sure as you are living. The Lord
can never be hoodwinked. The law of Karma can never be hoodwinked.

Well then, my plans are, therefore, to reach these masses of India.
Suppose you start schools all over India for the poor, still you cannot
educate them. How can you? The boy of four years would better go to the
plough or to work, than to your school. He cannot go to your school. It
is impossible. Self-preservation is the first instinct. But if the
mountain does not go to Mohammed, then Mohammed can come to the
mountain. Why should not education go from door to door, say I. If a
ploughman's boy cannot come to education, why not meet him at the
plough, at the factory, just wherever he is? Go along with him, like his
shadow. But there are these hundreds and thousands of monks, educating
the people on the spiritual plane; why not let these men do the same
work on the intellectual plane? Why should they not talk to the masses a
little about history — about many things? The ears are the best
educators. The best principles in our lives were those which we heard
from our mothers through our ears. Books came much later. Book-learning
is nothing. Through the ears we get the best formative principles. Then,
as they get more and more interested, they may come to your books too.
First, let it roll on and on — that is my idea.

Well, I must tell you that I am not a very great believer in monastic
systems. They have great merits, and also great defects. There should be
a perfect balance between the monastics and the householders. But
monasticism has absorbed all the power in India. We represent the
greatest power. The monk is greater than the prince. There is no
reigning sovereign in India who dares to sit down when the "yellow
cloth" is there. He gives up his seat and stands. Now, that is bad, so
much power, even in the hands of good men — although these monastics
have been the bulwark of the people. They stand between the priestcraft
and knowledge. They are the centres of knowledge and reform. They are
just what the prophets were among the Jews. The prophets were always
preaching against the priests, trying to throw out superstitions. So are
they in India. But all the same so much power is not good there; better
methods should be worked out. But you can only work in the line of least
resistance. The whole national soul there is upon monasticism. You go to
India and preach any religion as a householder: the Hindu people will
turn back and go out. If you have given up the world, however, they say,
"He is good, he has given up the world. He is a sincere man, he wants to
do what he preaches." What I mean to say is this, that it represents a
tremendous power. What we can do is just to transform it, give it
another form. This tremendous power in the hands of the roving
Sannyasins of India has got to be transformed, and it will raise the
masses up.

Now, you see, we have brought the plan down nicely on paper; but I have
taken it, at the same time, from the regions of idealism. So far the
plan was loose and idealistic. As years went on, it became more and more
condensed and accurate; I began to see by actual working its defects,
and all that.

What did I discover in its working on the material plane? First, there
must be centres to educate these monks in the method of education. For
instance, I send one of my men, and he goes about with a camera: he has
to be taught in those things himself. In India, you will find every man
is quite illiterate, and that teaching requires tremendous centres. And
what does all that mean? Money. From the idealistic plane you come to
everyday work. Well, I have worked hard, four years in your country, and
two in England. And I am very thankful that some friends came to the
rescue. One who is here today with you is amongst them. There are
American friends and English friends who went over with me to India, and
there has been a very rude beginning. Some English people came and
joined the orders. One poor man worked hard and died in India. There are
an Englishman and an Englishwoman who have retired; they have some means
of their own, and they have started a centre in the Himalayas, educating
the children. I have given them one of the papers I have started — a
copy you will find there on the table — *The Awakened India*. And there
they are instructing and working among the people. I have another centre
in Calcutta. Of course, all great movements must proceed from the
capital. For what is a capital? It is the heart of a nation. All the
blood comes into the heart and thence it is distributed; so all the
wealth, all the ideas, all the education, all spirituality will converge
towards the capital and spread from it.

I am glad to tell you I have made a rude beginning. But the same work I
want to do, on parallel lines, for women. And my principle is: each one
helps himself. My help is from a distance. There are Indian women,
English women, and I hope American women will come to take up the task.
As soon as they have begun, I wash my hands of it. No man shall dictate
to a woman; nor a woman to a man. Each one is independent. What bondage
there may be is only that of love. Women will work out their own
destinies — much better, too, than men can ever do for them. All the
mischief to women has come because men undertook to shape the destiny of
women. And I do not want to start with any initial mistake. One little
mistake made then will go on multiplying; and if you succeed, in the
long run that mistake will have assumed gigantic proportions and become
hard to correct. So, if I made this mistake of employing men to work out
this women's part of the work, why, women will never get rid of that —
it will have become a custom. But I have got an opportunity. I told you
of the lady who was my Master's wife. We have all great respect for her.
She never dictates to us. So it is quite safe.

That part has to be accomplished.

</div>
