---
title: DISCIPLESHIP

---
<div>

[←](buddhas_message.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](is_vedanta_the_future.htm)

  

## DISCIPLESHIP

(*Delivered in San Francisco, on March 29, 1900*)

My subject is "Discipleship". I do not know how you will take what I
have to say. It will be rather difficult for you to accept it — the
ideals of teachers and disciples in this country vary so much from those
in ours. An old proverb of India comes to my mind: "There are hundreds
of thousands of teachers, but it is hard to find one disciple." It seems
to be true. The one important thing in the attainment of spirituality is
the attitude of the pupil. When the right attitude is there,
illumination comes easily.

What does the disciple need in order to receive the truth? The great
sages say that to attain truth takes but the twinkling of an eye — it is
just a question of knowing — the dream breaks. How long does it take? In
a second the dream is gone. When the illusion vanishes, how long does it
take? Just the twinkling of an eye. When I know the truth, nothing
happens except that the falsehood vanishes away: I took the rope for the
snake, and now I see it is the rope. It is only a question of half a
second and the whole thing is done. Thou art That. Thou art the Reality.
How long does it take to know this? If we are God and always have been
so, not to know this is most astonishing. To know this is the only
natural thing. It should not take ages to find out what we have always
been and what we now are.

Yet it seems difficult to realise this self-evident truth. Ages and ages
pass before we begin to catch a faint glimpse of it. God is life; God is
truth. We write about this; we feel in our inmost heart that this is so,
that everything else than God is nothing — here today, gone tomorrow.
And yet most of us remain the same all through life. We cling to
untruth, and we turn our back upon truth. We do not want to attain
truth. We do not want anyone to break our dream. You see, the teachers
are not wanted. Who wants to learn? But if anyone wants to realise the
truth and overcome illusion, if he wants to receive the truth from a
teacher, he must be a true disciple.

It is not easy to be a disciple; great preparations are necessary; many
conditions have to be fulfilled. Four principal conditions are laid down
by the Vedantists.

The first condition is that the student who wants to know the truth must
give up all desires for gain in this world or in the life to come.

The truth is not what we see. What we see is not truth as long as any
desire creeps into the mind. God is true, and the world is not true. So
long as there is in the heart the least desire for the world, truth will
not come. Let the world fall to ruin around my ears: I do not care. So
with the next life; I do not care to go to heaven. What is heaven? Only
the continuation of this earth. We would be better and the little
foolish dreams we are dreaming would break sooner if there were no
heaven, no continuation of this silly life on earth. By going to heaven
we only prolong the miserable illusions.

What do you gain in heaven? You become gods, drink nectar, and get
rheumatism. There is less misery there than on earth, but also less
truth. The very rich can understand truth much less than the poorer
people. "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle,
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God." The rich man has
no time to think of anything beyond his wealth and power, his comforts
and indulgences. The rich rarely become religious. Why? Because they
think, if they become religious, they will have no more fun in life. In
the same way, there is very little chance to become spiritual in heaven;
there is too much comfort and enjoyment there — the dwellers in heaven
are disinclined to give up their fun.

They say there will be no more weeping in heaven. I do not trust the man
who never weeps; he has a big block of granite where the heart should
be. It is evident that the heavenly people have not much sympathy. There
are vast masses of them over there, and we are miserable creatures
suffering in this horrible place. They could pull us all out of it; but
they do not. They do not weep. There is no sorrow or misery there;
therefore they do not care for anyone's misery. They drink their nectar,
dances go on; beautiful wives and all that.

Going beyond these things, the disciple should say, "I do not care for
anything in this life nor for all the heavens that have ever existed — I
do not care to go to any of them. I do not want the sense — life in any
form — this identification of myself with the body — as I feel now, 'I
am this body-this huge mass of flesh.' This is what I feel I am. I
refuse to believe that."

The world and the heavens, all these are bound up with the senses. You
do not care for the earth if you do not have any senses. Heaven also is
the world. Earth, heaven, and all that is between have but one name —
earth.

Therefore the disciple, knowing the past and the present and thinking of
the future, knowing what prosperity means, what happiness means, gives
up all these and seeks to know the truth and truth alone. This is the
first condition.

The second condition is that the disciple must be able to control the
internal and the external senses and must be established in several
other spiritual virtues.

The external senses are the visible organs situated in different parts
of the body; the internal senses are intangible. We have the external
eyes, ears, nose, and so on; and we have the corresponding internal
senses. We are continually at the beck and call of both these groups of
senses. Corresponding to the senses are sense-objects. If any
sense-objects are near by, the senses compel us to perceive them; we
have no choice or independence. There is the big nose. A little
fragrance is there; I have to smell it. If there were a bad odour, I
would say to myself, "Do not smell it"; but nature says, "Smell", and I
smell it. Just think what we have become! We have bound ourselves. I
have eyes. Anything going on, good or bad, I must see. It is the same
with hearing. If anyone speaks unpleasantly to me, I must hear it. My
sense of hearing compels me to do so, and how miserable I feel! Curse or
praise — man has got to hear. I have seen many deaf people who do not
usually hear, but anything about themselves they always hear!

All these senses, external and internal, must be under the disciple's
control. By hard practice he has to arrive at the stage where he can
assert his mind against the senses, against the commands of nature. He
should be able to say to his mind, "You are mine; I order you, do not
see or hear anything", and the mind will not see or hear anything — no
form or sound will react on the mind. In that state the mind has become
free of the domination of the senses, has become separated from them. No
longer is it attached to the senses and the body. The external things
cannot order the mind now; the mind refuses to attach itself to them.
Beautiful fragrance is there. The disciple says to the mind, "Do not
smell", and the mind does not perceive the fragrance. When you have
arrived at that point, you are just beginning to be a disciple. That is
why when everybody says, "I know the truth", I say, "If you know the
truth, you must have self-control; and if you have control of yourself,
show it by controlling these organs."

Next, the mind must be made to quiet down. It is rushing about. Just as
I sit down to meditate, all the vilest subjects in the world come up.
The whole thing is nauseating. Why should the mind think thoughts I do
not want it to think? I am as it were a slave to the mind. No spiritual
knowledge is possible so long as the mind is restless and out of
control. The disciple has to learn to control the mind. Yes, it is the
function of the mind to think. But it must not think if the disciple
does not want it to; it must stop thinking when he commands it to. To
qualify as a disciple, this state of the mind is very necessary.

Also, the disciple must have great power of endurance. Life seems
comfortable; and you find the mind behaves well when everything is going
well with you. But if something goes wrong, your mind loses its balance.
That is not good. Bear all evil and misery without one murmur of hurt,
without one thought of unhappiness, resistance, remedy, or retaliation.
That is true endurance; and that you must acquire.

Good and evil there always are in the world. Many forget there is any
evil — at least they try to forget; and when evil comes upon them, they
are overwhelmed by it and feel bitter. There are others who deny that
there is any evil at all and consider everything good. That also is a
weakness; that also proceeds from a fear of evil. If something is
evil-smelling, why sprinkle it with rose water and call it fragrant?
Yes, there are good and evil in the world — God has put evil in the
world. But you do not have to whitewash Him. Why there is evil is none
of your business. Please have faith and keep quiet.

When my Master, Shri Ramakrishna fell ill, a Brahmin suggested to him
that he apply his tremendous mental power to cure himself. He said that
if my Master would only concentrate his mind on the diseased part of the
body, it would heal. Shri Ramakrishna answered, "What! Bring down the
mind that I've given to God to this little body!" He refused to think of
body and illness. His mind was continually conscious of God; it was
dedicated to Him utterly. He would not use it for any other purpose.

This craving for health, wealth, long life, and the like — the so-called
good — is nothing but an illusion. To devote the mind to them in order
to secure them only strengthens the delusion. We have these dreams and
illusions in life, and we want to have more of them in the life to come,
in heaven. More and more illusion. Resist not evil. Face it! You are
higher than evil.

There is this misery in the world — it has to be suffered by someone.
You cannot act without making evil for somebody. And when you seek
worldly good, you only avoid an evil which must be suffered by somebody
else. Everyone is trying to put it on someone else's shoulders. The
disciple says, "Let the miseries of the world come to me; I shall endure
them all. Let others go free."

Remember the man on the cross. He could have brought legions of angels
to victory; but he did not resist. He pitied those who crucified him. He
endured every humiliation and suffering. He took the burden of all upon
himself: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest." Such is true endurance. How very high he was above
this life, so high that we cannot understand it, we slaves! No sooner
does a man slap me in the face than my hand hits back: bang, it goes!
How can I understand the greatness and blessedness of the Glorified One?
How can I see the glory of it?

But I will not drag the ideal down. I feel I am the body, resisting
evil. If I get a headache, I go all over the world to have it cured; I
drink two thousand bottles of medicine. How can I understand these
marvellous minds? I can see the ideal, but how much of that ideal? None
of this consciousness of the body, of the little self, of its pleasures
and pains, its hurts and comforts, none of these can reach that
atmosphere. By thinking only of the spirit and keeping the mind out of
matter all the time, I can catch a glimpse of that ideal. Material
thought and forms of the sense-world have no place in that ideal. Take
them off and put the mind upon the spirit. Forget your life and death,
your pains and pleasures, your name and fame, and realise that you are
neither body nor mind but the pure spirit.

When I say "I", I mean this spirit. Close your eyes and see what picture
appears when you think of your "I". Is it the picture of your body that
comes, or of your mental nature? If so, you have not realised your true
"I" yet. The time will come, however, when as soon as you say "I" you
will see the universe, the Infinite Being. Then you will have realised
your true Self and found that you are infinite. That is the truth: you
are the spirit, you are not matter. There is such a thing as illusion —
n it one thing is taken for another: matter is taken for spirit, this
body for soul. That is the tremendous illusion. It has to go.

The next qualification is that the disciple must have faith in the Guru
(teacher). In the West the teacher simply gives intellectual knowledge;
that is all. The relationship with the teacher is the greatest in life.
My dearest and nearest relative in life is my Guru; next, my mother;
then my father. My first reverence is to the Guru. If my father says,
"Do this", and my Guru says, "Do not do this", I do not do it. The Guru
frees my soul. The father and mother give me this body; but the Guru
gives me rebirth in the soul.

We have certain peculiar beliefs. One of these is that there are some
souls, a few exceptional ones, who are already free and who will be born
here for the good of the world, to help the world. They are free
already; they do not care for their own salvation — they want to help
others. They do not require to be taught anything. From their childhood
they know everything; they may speak the highest truth even when they
are babies six months old.

Upon these free souls depends the spiritual growth of mankind. They are
like the first lamps from which other lamps are lighted. True, the light
is in everyone, but in most men it is hidden. The great souls are
shining lights from the beginning. Those who come in contact with them
have as it were their own lamps lighted. By this the first lamp does not
lose anything; yet it communicates its light to other lamps. A million
lamps are lighted; but the first lamp goes on shining with undiminished
light. The first lamp is the Guru, and the lamp that is lighted from it
is the disciple. The second in turn becomes the Guru, and so on. These
great ones whom you call Incarnations of God are mighty spiritual
giants. They come and set in motion a tremendous spiritual current by
transmitting their power to their immediate disciples and through them
to generation after generation of disciples.

A bishop in the Christian Church, by the laying on of hands, claims to
transmit the power which he is supposed to have received from the
preceding bishops. The bishop says that Jesus Christ transmitted his
power to his immediate disciples and they to others, and that that is
how the Christ's power has come to him. We hold that every one of us,
not bishops only, ought to have such power. There is no reason why each
of you cannot be a vehicle of the mighty current of spirituality.

But first you must find a teacher, a true teacher, and you must remember
that he is not just a man. You may get a teacher in the body; but the
real teacher is not in the body; he is not the physical man — he is not
as he appears to your eyes. It may be the teacher will come to you as a
human being, and you will receive the power from him. Sometimes he will
come in a dream and transmit things to the world. The power of the
teacher may come to us in many ways. But for us ordinary mortals the
teacher must come, and our preparation must go on till he comes.

We attend lectures and read books, argue and reason about God and soul,
religion and salvation. These are not spirituality, because spirituality
does not exist in books or theories or in philosophies. It is not in
learning or reasoning, but in actual inner growth. Even parrots can
learn things by heart and repeat them. If you become learned, what of
it? Asses can carry whole libraries. So when real light will come, there
will be no more of this learning from books — no book-learning. The man
who cannot write even his own name can be perfectly religious, and the
man with all the libraries of the world in his head may fail to be.
Learning is not a condition of spiritual growth; scholarship is not a
condition. The touch of the Guru, the transmittal of spiritual energy,
will quicken your heart. Then will begin the growth. That is the real
baptism by fire. No more stopping. You go on and go on.

Some years ago one of your Christian teachers, a friend of mine, said,
"You believe in Christ?" "Yes," I answered, "but perhaps with a little
more reverence." "Then why don't you be baptised?" How could I be
baptised? By whom? Where is the man who can give true baptism? What is
baptism? Is it sprinkling some water over you, or dipping you in water,
while muttering formulas?

Baptism is the direct introduction into the life of the spirit. If you
receive the real baptism, you know you are not the body but the spirit.
Give me that baptism if you can. If not, you are not Christians. Even
after the so-called baptism which you received, you have remained the
same. What is the sense of merely saying you have been baptised in the
name of the Christ? Mere talk, talk — ever disturbing the world with
your foolishness! "Ever steeped in the darkness of ignorance, yet
considering themselves wise and learned, the fools go round and round,
staggering to and fro like the blind led by the blind." (Katha
Upanishad, I.ii.5) Therefore do not say you are Christians, do not brag
about baptism and things of that sort.

Of course there is true baptism — there was baptism in the beginning
when the Christ came to the earth and taught. The illumined souls, the
great ones that come to the earth from time to time, have the power to
reveal the Supernal Vision to us. This is true baptism. You see, before
the formulas and ceremonies of every religion, there exists the germ of
universal truth. In course of time this truth becomes forgotten; it
becomes as it were strangled by forms and ceremonies. The forms remain —
we find there the casket with the spirit all gone. You have the form of
baptism, but few can evoke the living spirit of baptism. The form will
not suffice. If we want to gain the living knowledge of the living
truth, we have to be truly initiated into it. That is the ideal.

The Guru must teach me and lead me into light, make me a link in that
chain of which he himself is a link. The man in the street cannot claim
to be a Guru. The Guru must be a man who has known, has actually
realised the Divine truth, has perceived himself as the spirit. A mere
talker cannot be the Guru. A talkative fool like me can talk much, but
cannot be the Guru. A true Guru will tell the disciple, "Go and sin no
more"; and no more can he sin, no more has the person the power to sin.

I have seen such men in this life. I have read the Bible and all such
books; they are wonderful. But the living power you cannot find in the
books. The power that can transform life in a moment can be found only
in the living illumined souls, those shining lights who appear among us
from time to time. They alone are fit to be Gurus. You and I are only
hollow talk-talk, not teachers. We are disturbing the world more by
talking, making bad vibrations. We hope and pray and struggle on, and
the day will come when we shall arrive at the truth, and we shall not
have to speak.

"The teacher was a boy of sixteen; he taught a man of eighty. Silence
was the method of the teacher; and the doubts of the disciple vanished
for ever." (*Dakshinâmurti-stotram*, 12 (adapted).) That is the Guru.
Just think, if you find such a man, what faith and love you ought to
have for that person! Why, he is God Himself, nothing less than that!
That is why Christ's disciples worshipped him as God. The disciple must
worship the Guru as God Himself. All a man can know is the living God,
God as embodied in man, until he himself has realised God. How else
would he know God?

Here is a man in America, born nineteen hundred years after Christ, who
does not even belong to the same race as Christ, the Jewish race. He has
not seen Jesus or his family. He says, "Jesus was God. If you do not
believe it, you will go to hell". We can understand how the disciples
believed it — that Christ was God; he was their Guru, and they must have
believed he was God. But what has this American got to do with the man
born nineteen hundred years ago? This young man tells me that I do not
believe in Jesus and therefore I shall have to go to hell. What does he
know of Jesus? He is fit for a lunatic asylum. This kind of belief will
not do. He will have to find his Guru.

Jesus may be born again, may come to you. Then, if you worship him as
God, you are all right. We must all wait till the Guru comes, and the
Guru must be worshipped as God. He is God, he is nothing less than that.
As you look at him, the Guru gradually melts away and what is left? The
Guru picture gives place to God Himself. The Guru is the bright mask
which God wears in order to come to us. As we look steadily on,
gradually the mask falls off and God is revealed.

"I bow to the Guru who is the embodiment of the Bliss Divine, the
personification of the highest knowledge and the giver of the greatest
beatitude, who is pure, perfect, one without a second, eternal, beyond
pleasure and pain, beyond all thought and all qualification,
transcendental". Such is in reality the Guru. No wonder the disciple
looks upon him as God Himself and trusts him, reveres him, obeys him,
follows him unquestioningly. This is the relation between the Guru and
the disciple.

The next condition the disciple must fulfil is to conceive an extreme
desire to be free.

We are like moths plunging into the flaming fire, knowing that it will
burn us, knowing that the senses only burn us, that they only enhance
desire. "Desire is never satiated by enjoyment; enjoyment only increases
desire as butter fed into fire increases the fire." (Bhâgavata, IX.
xix.14.) Desire is increased by desire. Knowing all this, people still
plunge into it all the time. Life after life they have been going after
the objects of desire, suffering extremely in consequence, yet they
cannot give up desire. Even religion, which should rescue them from this
terrible bondage of desire, they have made a means of satisfying desire.
Rarely do they ask God to free them from bondage to the body and senses,
from slavery to desires. Instead, they pray to Him for health and
prosperity, for long life: "O God, cure my headache, give me some money
or something!"

The circle of vision has become so narrow, so degraded, so beastly, so
animal! None is desiring anything beyond this body. Oh, the terrible
degradation, the terrible misery of it! What little flesh, the five
senses, the stomach! What is the world but a combination of stomach and
sex? Look at millions of men and women — that is what they are living
for. Take these away from them and they will find their life empty,
meaningless, and intolerable. Such are we. And such is our mind; it is
continually hankering for ways and means to satisfy the hunger of the
stomach and sex. All the time this is going on. There is also endless
suffering; these desires of the body bring only momentary satisfaction
and endless suffering. It is like drinking a cup of which the surface
layer is nectar, while underneath all is poison. But we still hanker for
all these things.

What can be done? Renunciation of the senses and desires is the only way
out of this misery. If you want to be spiritual, you must renounce. This
is the real test. Give up the world — this nonsense of the senses. There
is only one real desire: to know what is true, to be spiritual. No more
materialism, no more this egoism, I must become spiritual. Strong,
intense must be the desire. If a man's hands and feet were so tied that
he could not move and then if a burning piece of charcoal were placed on
his body, he would struggle with all his power to throw it off. When I
shall have that sort of extreme desire, that restless struggle, to throw
off this burning world, then the time will have come for me to glimpse
the Divine Truth.

Look at me. If I lose my little pocketbook with two or three dollars in
it, I go twenty times into the house to find that pocketbook. The
anxiety, the worry, and the struggle! If one of you crosses me, I
remember it twenty years, I cannot forgive and forget it. For the little
things of the senses I can struggle like that. Who is there that
struggles for God that way? "Children forget everything in their play.
The young are mad after the enjoyment of the senses; they do not care
for anything else. The old are brooding over their past misdeeds"
(Shankara). They are thinking of their past enjoyments — old men that
cannot have any enjoyment. Chewing the cud — that is the best they can
do. None crave for the Lord in the same intense spirit with which they
crave for the things of the senses.

They all say that God is the Truth, the only thing that really exists;
that spirit alone is, not matter. Yet the things they seek of God are
rarely spirit. They ask always for material things. In their prayers
spirit is not separated from matter. Degradation — that is what religion
has turned out to be. The whole thing is becoming sham. And the years
are rolling on and nothing spiritual is being attained. But man should
hunger for one thing alone, the spirit, because spirit alone exists.
That is the ideal. If you cannot attain it now, say, "I cannot do it;
that is the ideal, I know, but I cannot follow it yet." But that is not
what you do. You degrade religion to your low level and seek matter in
the name of spirit. You are all atheists. You do not believe in anything
except the senses. "So-and-so said such-and-such — there may be
something in it. Let us try and have the fun. Possibly some benefit will
come; possibly my broken leg will get straight."

Miserable are the diseased people; they are great worshippers of the
Lord, for they hope that if they pray to Him He will heal them. Not that
that is altogether bad — if such prayers are honest and if they remember
that that is not religion. Shri Krishna says in the Gitâ (VII.16), "Four
classes of people worship Me: the distressed, the seeker of material
things, the inquirer, and the knower of truth." People who are in
distress approach God for relief. If they are ill, they worship Him to
be healed; if they lose their wealth, they pray to Him to get it back.
There are other people who ask Him for all kinds of things, because they
are full of desires — name, fame, wealth, position and so on. They will
say, "O Virgin Mary, I will make an offering to you if I get what I
want. If you are successful in granting my prayer, I will worship God
and give you a part of everything." Men not so material as that, but
still with no faith in God, feel inclined to know about Him. They study
philosophies, read scriptures, listen to lectures, and so on. They are
the inquirers. The last class are those who worship God and know Him.
All these four classes of people are good, not bad. All of them worship
Him.

But we are trying to be disciples. Our sole concern is to know the
highest truth. Our goal is the loftiest. We have said big words to
ourselves — absolute realisation and all that. Let us measure up to the
words. Let us worship the spirit in spirit, standing on spirit. Let the
foundation be spirit, the middle spirit, the culmination spirit. There
will be no world anywhere. Let it go and whirl into space — who cares?
Stand thou in the spirit! That is the goal. We know we cannot reach it
yet. Never mind. Do not despair, and do not drag the ideal down. The
important thing is: how much less you think of the body, of yourself as
matter — as dead, dull, insentient matter; how much more you think of
yourself as shining immortal being. The more you think of yourself as
shining immortal spirit, the more eager you will be to be absolutely
free of matter, body, and senses. This is the intense desire to be free.

The fourth and last condition of discipleship is the discrimination of
the real from the unreal. There is only one thing that is real — God.
All the time the mind must be drawn to Him, dedicated to Him. God
exists, nothing else exists, everything else comes and goes. Any desire
for the world is illusion, because the world is unreal. More and more
the mind must become conscious of God alone, until everything else
appears as it really is — unreal.

These are the four conditions which one who wants to be a disciple must
fulfil; without fulfilling them he will not be able to come in contact
with the true Guru. And even if he is fortunate enough to find him, he
will not be quickened by the power that the Guru may transmit. There
cannot be any compromising of these conditions. With the fulfilment of
these conditions — with all these preparations — the lotus of the
disciple's heart will open, and the bee shall come. Then the disciple
knows that the Guru was within the body, within himself. He opens out.
He realises. He crosses the ocean of life, goes beyond. He crosses this
terrible ocean: and in mercy, without a thought of gain or praise, he in
his turn helps others to cross.

</div>
