+++
title = "On Agneeswarar andxa0Haradatta"
date = "2020-03-08"

+++
![WhatsApp Image 2020-03-07 at 5.57.36
PM](https://padmavajrablog.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/whatsapp-image-2020-03-07-at-5.57.36-pm.jpeg?w=739)Pic:utsavamUrti
of Agneeshwarar of Kanjanur.[This
link](https://www.templepurohit.com/hindu-temple/agniswarar-temple-kanjanur-tamil-nadu/)
mentioned Haradatta who was born as a Srivaishnava undergoing
tribaulations to prove his shivabhakti but does not give the details. I
have decided to fill in the details.

haradatta was born in a SV family in kanjanUr as sudarshana. As he grew
up he showed his love for shiva, shivabhaktas & shivAcAryas.From the age
of two, he would run to the nearby shiva temple & receive ash & shout
hara hara with the devotees. His father thought that this was just a
childish sport & ignored it. He thought it will be fixed after his
upanayana. His upanayana was done at 5; his father told him, “From now
on, you cannot act as you please. You must not go to shivAlaya. That
will be a sin. You must not even see those who wear ash. You must take a
bath at their very sight”. As soon as his father left, he wiped off his
vaiShNava marks & replaced them with tripundra bhasma and he returned
home like that in that very form. His father, vAsudeva was enraged. The
other vaiShNavas in the agrahAra cursed him as a disgrace & a ruiner of
the shrIvaiShNavas. His father, feeling humiliated, tied him to a pillar
& whipped him hard. But after his father got tired & left, he would
untie those ropes & run to agnIshvara. His father could bear no
more,told him not to enter the house and told his wife not to feed the
son. He would ask from outside the house, “mother, I’m hungry, serve me
food”. His mother was in a dilemma: “How will I disobey your father, oh
dear child? And how will I bear your cry for food? Why don’t you obey
your father? You should act as per father’s desire only. I will go to
the father & mother of the world for refuge. They will take care of
me.”  
Then he proceeded to agnIshvara and at there in front of the
dakShiNAmUrti there in meditation. Knowing his habit to meditate for
long periods, the shivabrAhmaNas left him there & locked up the temple.
He said: “agnIshvara, I have left my parents; you are my father; shakti
my mother; Skanda & gaNesha my brothers & the gaNas my friends. This is
my family now; accept me as yours oh god! Are you angry that I have done
pUjA as an ignorant child, contrary to vidhi? Even brahmA & viShNu
cannot see your feet; who can truly do pUjA to them? Will you not accept
me?! Curse me to become a work & get trampled by shivabhaktas; I will
accept that fate gladly & reach you. Will you not show mercy to the low
ones like me even now?”. Hearing all this, kalpakAmbikA could not bear
it any more. She instigated bhagavAn to show mercy to the child,
sudarshana, and then the great God smiled. Skanda & gaNesha came there
to accept they’re new brother & the gaNas their new comrade. The munis &
devas came there to shower flowers with vedaghoSa everywhere. And the
parents of the world were there & gave him a divine vision of them.
shiva granted him knowledge of all shAstras & made him omniscient. That
very night,his father who came there (hearing his overnight stay at the
temple) & other vaiShNavas all asked him questions. He was only 5 and
answered all of them with shrutipramANas. So the vaiShNavas told him,
“sit on a red hot iron bed & preach your shivaparatvam, if you do that,
we will accept your doctrine”. He did it. They set up the iron seat at
the local temple of varadarAja (as the vaiShNavas would obviously not
enter a shiva temple). His father & others fell at his feet & asked him
for prAyashcitta for their abuse of shiva & shaivas,and he married a
vaidika shivabhakta’s daughter from the vAdhUlagotra & led an exemplary
life.

One of his miracles was when a pANDya chieftain sent him an expensive
yellow cloth via a brAhmaNa, he was doing a homa & thinking agnIshvara
to be the lord of that agni, offered that cloth into the homAgni. The
king heard about it & became stunned at the svAmI’s display of his
lIlAvaibhavam. In the evening he went to have shrI haradatta’s darshana
and asked him if the cloth he sent had safely reached him. “It reached
us at an excellent time & has been offered to agnIshvara” replied
haradatta. Later when the king went to the temple, that very cloth was
on the mUlali\~Nga-That cloth which was observed by the brAhmaNa to have
been burnt into ashes.

Credit for the narration of this tale goes to
[@Ghorangirasa](https://twitter.com/ghorangirasa).


