+++
title = "A rambling note on the origins of the ideology ofxa0karmayoga"
date = "2020-03-09"

+++
Karmayoga is a much abused concept these days,nowadays people think that
it is doing whatever job one’s bosses or political superiors assign to
them perfectly and chores)pleasingly(or even daily. Or sometimes school
students are told that their studying hard and getting good grades means
they are good karmayogis, but no,it means nothing like that. This idea
had its origins amongst(specifically) shuklayajurvaidika circles(as
noted in the 2nd mantra of the ishopanishad). Karmayoga means doing
one’s nitya and naimittika karmas and yAgas as laid down in the smArta
systems as appropriate to one’s varNa while dedicating all its puNyas
and other results to the supreme deity of whatever system your ideal
is:vAsudeva,shiva,etc. In fact,this was probably the ideology of an old
set of ritualists who later became the one of the groups that went into
the formation of pA\~NcharAtra:The mantrasiddhAntins are a group of
brAhmaNas belonging to the kANva and mAdhyadina shAkhAs of the
shuklayajurveda,who are supposed to meditate on vAsudeva as they are
doing somayAga and dedicate their fruits to him. It is this strain of
ritualist thought that found its expression in the karmayoga idea of the
Gita(which,textually speaking is belonging to an old sAtavata esque
strain of thought in ancient India). And of course,the other tendency of
ancient Hindu thought to homologize all actions as ritual:even sex,would
mean ending up in an Aurobindo-esque ‘All life is yoga.’ conclusion.



> [View post on imgur.com](https://imgur.com/a/ViqpBXP)

Above are verses from the charyapAda of the pAdmasaMhitA which note that
the followers of mantrasiddhAnta do contemplation of vAsudeva with
trayimantras(vedamantras),associated with the kANva and mAdhyadina
shAkhAs,and thee brAhmaNas worship *vAsudeva* while performing somayAga.
This was the original ideal of karmayoga,historically speaking.

An end (semi) rant: The vyAdha gItA has been completely hopelessly
ripped out of its original context to a society which is scarcely little
like anything that would have supported the historical-cum-mythical
vyAdha.
