+++
title = "Pandemic days: the fizz is out of the bottle"

+++
Just this morning our brother remarked that the fear of the virus has
inverted this month with respect to the actual infection. We literally
hear this: in the past few months, while home-bound, we at least had
aural quietness for most of the day, something we generally prefer.
Since the lock-down was lifted in our regions over the past two days we
hear the loud blaring of music from the restaurant next door even as
diners flock to it in throngs. We can only see those seated outside and
do not know if any are seated inside. If it is only the former, it is a
lesser evil, but the music is any case an annoyance for the still
home-bound residents. A walk to the deśi grocery store revealed a
similar situation on the street and with other restaurants. Masks,
social distancing and the like are mostly breaking down. Most diners and
ramblers are young individuals who clearly know that they are at lower
risk but the danger they have inflicted on the rest of society, if any,
will be known over this month. However, there are much bigger things
than that are happening.

Humans are social animals and we have been wondering how the lock-down
and social distancing was going to spill over into the psychological
domain. Right from the early stages of the pandemic when it was still
mostly confined to the Cīna-s, we heard reports of the psychological
impact of being cooped up at home. The Americans, in particular, are a
very outdoor people, especially with summer making its advent. Hence,
the spring lock-down has clearly had a negative effect on their psyche
and over the last two weeks it has exploded in the form of an extensive
jana-kopa. With the jana-kopa unfolding, the political players seeking
to take advantage of it have decided to throw social distancing to the
winds and we are now witnessing massive congregations of people.
Earlier, the politicians of the opposite pakṣa were mainly the ones
against lock-downs. Ironically, the politicians cheering for the current
congregations are the very ones who were in favor of social distancing
and strong lock-downs until two weeks ago. The virus, of course, does
not care for the whims of either pakṣa, and what is unfolding might end
up teaching us some important epidemiological lessons: how much does
mass social aggregation outdoors really contribute to viral spread?
However, that might be conflated with other factors like the end of the
lock-down and consequent social aggregation we mentioned above.

The flash-point for this jana-kopa were a set of incidents relating to
the well-known and long-standing racial conflict which is baked into the
foundation of the USA. However, that is not the primary topic of our
discussion here. We primarily intend to touch upon how an outbreak of a
memetic viral pandemic rapidly overtook the original cause for the
flash-point of the jana-kopa. Here, we are seeing a pratyakṣa of how a
real viral infection interacts with a memetic pathogen, much like how a
viral infection could facilitate in a secondary bacterial infection in
biological pathology.

Before we look at that, we need to have quick survey of the lay of land
that facilitates the spread of the latest strain of the memetic
infection. As we have noted before, the world has come a long way from
the sārthavāha-s of yore who even when wide-ranging did not disrupt the
local systems. For instance, in say the Marahaṭṭā country, where we
formerly lived, there was the system of the bārā balutedāra-s which has
perhaps lasted in some form from the pre-Āryan days of the Harappan
civilization. This system comprised of 12 jāti-s who offered essential
services for a village. These spanned the entire range from the jāti-s
with a low social rank to those with a large component of steppe
ancestry and old Āryan descent who were high-ranked. Irrespective of the
real or imagined the local issues rising from inter-jāti conflicts,
these still for most part worked as a rather cohesive unit for probably
at least 1400 years. The sārthavāha operated on top of this system and
bore produce across the country and beyond. However, such vaṇij-s did
not do anything to interfere disruptively with the system in the
villages. The modern sārthavāha built by the stock market or the
internet is mostly a contrasting species. It is clear they have greater
reach and rapacity than the old sārthavāha-s but they are also prone to
more evil. There is an entire spectrum of the balance of evil they cause
to the utility they provide to society. The self-enriching
mithyā-kraya-kartṛ Sora has absolutely nothing useful to offer to the
world and a purely evil player. The vyāpārin Bejha offers several useful
services for the jana-samudāya but has leveraged the wealth he has
accumulated in the process to do evil. Among the corporations,
karṇa-piśācī guggulu might offer some small services of use to the
populace but has used its capture of an important resource to further
evil. A similar situation is seen with the duṣṭa, Jāka the dāraka: he
offers a platform for online advertisement and conversation but has used
it to further evil causes and contribute to the demise of freedom of
expression. Probably, Mukhagiri also falls in the same category as Jāka
the dāraka.

Why are these modern mleccha and mūlavātūla sārthavāha-s such duṣṭa-s?
We posit that it has two parts to it: 1) They are to a degree conscious
that their rapacious actions cause a measure of harm to individuals and
the emergent entity known as society which they comprise. Moreover, in
the past the mleccha and mūla-rugṇa sārthavāha-s used to practice what
came to be known as capitalism in an unbridled way and they saw that it
acquired a bad name. So there has been some urge in the midst of at
least some of them to perform a bit of parihāra. Like all humans they
too subliminally subscribe to the view that they can gain compensatory
puṇya by performing acts in support of religion. In the past, the
sārthavāha-s in our midst too, keen to acquire puṇya, used to make
donations to various deva-prāsāda-s or build new ones themselves (or
pāṣaṇdālaya-s). 2) The original ekarākṣasonmāda-s had a single rakṣas
as the object of their worship. They took the jabberings of their
unmatta-s — much like one seized by a rākṣasa-graha — to be the very
words of this rakṣas and as the basis of their impious systems. Closer
to our times, starting with durātman-s Marx and Engels, there arose
among the mleccha-s and the ādipraiṣhaka-s a mutation of the old
unmāda-s where the rakṣas count was reduced from 1 to 0. However, as we
have noted before, the rest of the unmāda, such as the promise of a
utopia on earth or in Lalaland remained intact. This version of the
unmāda is now the ascendant religion among the employees of or of these
very sārthavāha-s themselves. Thus, what has happened is that they seek
to earn puṇya by granting endowments for this new abrahma-ruj.

Even if one were not infected fully by this secular mutation of the old
unmāda-s, among the lay mleccha-s there is a certain naive econolatory:
they worship the faceless market running by its own vrata-s and
attribute all human abhyudaya to these magical market forces. They see
it as self-correcting and the panacea for all evil — whereas in the past
they used see the prathama and dvitīya unmāda-s as the foundation of
their well-being they now either additionally or exclusively genuflect
towards the miraculous market. In this worship of the market, especially
given that it is faceless, its purveyors, the vaṇij, naturally become
important idols in society. Now in itself this might have not been
specially negative with the vaṇij were dharma-kartṛ-s. However, as we
saw above a significant fraction of the mleccha and ādi-rugṇa vaṇij-s
have been infected by the caturthonmāda. As a consequence, these idols
of society are not purveying the neutral capitalism that the mleccha
elite worship but a new unmāda. This, along with their global reach, has
allowed that unmāda to attain pandemic proportions.

One may ask had it not already done so already in the heydays of the
Soviets and Mao, leaking over to India as the Naxal rudhironmāda? Yes,
it had but there are important distinctions with respect to the current
strain. First, the old strain was very much dependent on the Soviet
continuation of the old Rus empire. Once that fell, it was like a
chariot that had lost a wheel. While it briefly infected the Cīna-s,
what people do not get is that it was domesticated to the ultimate
advantage of the Cīna-s as it encountered an even more potent endogenous
coopter in the form Wei Yang Lord Shang’s legalism. Thus, the old strain
was mostly a failure. However, a lineage of it survived in mleccha
academia where it was incubated in the Ivy League soft departments and
their more pedestrian arborizations as a local disease, much like a
virus jumping from animal to animal in a Cīna “wet-market”. Like SARS-1
it has had localized outbreaks and was mostly used a weapon by mleccha-s
against others like the Hindus — e.g. to reinvigorate the Naxals in the
form of their urban variant (“the urban Naxals” as a Bollywood producer
terms it). Its local outbreaks were mostly seen in the mleccha academia
and news media. A few years ago we heard of a left-leaning professor
couple being forced out of a mleccha liberal arts college by a
particularly sustained outbreak of this disease. Some other, otherwise
rather neutral and harmless, mleccha physicians/professors were also
seriously targeted but being part of the Ivy elite themselves they
suffered little from the attacks. Similarly, there was a mlecchikā who
used to originally think of the rākṣasonmāda as a great blessing on
humanity. However, as it happens with that disease, when you get too
close to it you get the full blast of its stench. Thus, she suffered an
incident of rākṣasa-juṣṭi and suddenly saw light the truly hard way.
That also opened her eyes to the caturthonmāda and immediately brought
under attack from those infected by it. Thus, those who were observant
and discerning knew that this extremely dangerous mānasika-ruj was just
waiting to jump out into the wider population like a viral pandemic.

Rather notably, the jana-kopa triggered by the kṛṣṇa-mleccha-saṃgrāma in
big mleccha-land along with the psychological and economic fallout of
the Wuhan disease finally allowed this unmāda to break out as a pandemic
itself – indeed we see it catching fire across the mleccha world. Like
the Wuhan corruption it might eventually hit Bhārata too. Already it was
used by the duṣṭa Sora against Bhārata in conjunction with the
marūnmatta-s in the recent past. A part of the urban Bhārata elite are
nothing other than mleccha-s with an asita-tvak; hence, they would get
similarly afflicted by the disease. Like all the prior abrahma-ruj-s,
this latest strain retains its inherent hate for dharma and theoclasm.
Hence, the Hindu elite will need to become aware of this dangerous
disease and not be fooled by the subterfuge it practices of hiding
beneath other causes of jana-kopa. One thing that will show its face to
Hindus will be its collaboration with marūnmāda and its śanti-dūta-s and
pretonmāda and its prema-dūta-s in Bhārata.

While abrahma-ruj-s are of the mānasika kind they have some of the same
behaviors and consequences as a jivaruj. One might think that one is
cured of it but it might have merely has mutated in the infected
person’s mind and persist as a different version of the disease even
as persistent bacterial infection. As an example, we have a TSPian
ex-marūnmattikā, who is popular in mleccha secular circles and even
supported by Hindus, who exhibits the same hate for H as a full-blown
marūnmatta. Dick Dawkins is another example of the same. Here, the
disease has assumed a new persistent form while superficially appearing
as though cured. Even if one is truly cured of an abrahma-ruj one can
have a lifelong chronic inflammatory condition — this is seen among some
mleccha atheists and neo-heathens. That inflammatory condition can be
seen in the form of destructive dur-vāsana-s persisting among them.
Given this background, our general prognosis is that we are not going to
see the mleccha-s especially the mahā-mleccha come out of this. It might
not be this incident per say but this might be one in a series of many
that will eventually result in the decline and perhaps even demise of
the mahā-mleccha. The only lucky thing for them is that they have no
challengers right now who could exploit it well enough to give them the
coup de grace.

So what might play out? Given that the current strain is still an unmāda
it will compete vigorously with other unmāda-s for its host. Since, none
of these unmāda-s kill the host the battle is not going to lead to
attenuation in anyway. Finally, the second amendment of the mahāmleccha
constitution and those who know how to make use of it will be the last
line of defense for the pretonmāda. So these and the those infected by
the new strain will clash. The former have the advantage of fecundity
while the latter of propaganda and the economic backing from the
converted vyāpārin-s. The biological virus is still not done and could
still stir the mix. At this stage even though the new strain will
clearly win in the urban centers it is not going to yet take the rural
lands. We do not know if that failure would allow it to gain a total
victory. In any case we can say that already a covert war between two
unmāda-s, like the crusade and the jihād, is under way among the
maha-mleccha. In Europe the fourth strain will win and in turn it would
likely face defeat at the hands of the more vigorous marūnmāda.
Marūnmāda’s foothold in mahāmleccha is still weak; hence, while they
will take the side of the 4th strain the basic resolution of the war
remains unclear. Whoever wins, the mahāmleccha will be weakened as a
whole. But from a Hindu perspective, the pakṣas locked in yuddha among
the mlecchas will just be like being offered a choice between the evil
Qarmathians and the monstrous Ghaznavids.
