---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](pns_xxx.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [Shri Priya
Nath Sinha](priya_nath_sinha_contents.htm)
/ [→](../mrs_wright_xxxii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

XXXI  
(*Translated from [Bengali](pns_b9_266_e7_31.pdf)* )

\[*Shri Priya Nath Sinha*\]

Arrangements were being made for Swamiji's leaving India for America for
the second time (1899 A.D.). He had gone to Calcutta to see one of his
friends, and returning from there stopped for a few minutes at Balaram
Babu's house at Baghbazar. He then sent for another friend to accompany
him to the Math. The friend came, and the following conversation took
place between him and Swamiji:

Swamiji: A very funny thing happened today. I went to a friend's house.
He has had a picture painted, the subject of which is "Shri Krishna
addressing Arjuna on the battlefield of Kurukshetra". Shri Krishna
stands on the chariot, holding the reins in His hand and preaching the
Gita to Arjuna. He showed me the picture and asked me how I liked it.
"Fairly well", I said. But as he insisted on having my criticism on it,
I had to give my honest opinion by saying, "There is nothing in it to
commend itself to me; first, because the chariot of the time of Shri
Krishna was not like the modern pagoda-shaped car, and also, there is no
expression in the figure of Shri Krishna."

Q. — Was not the pagoda-chariot in use then?

Swamiji: Don't you know that since the Buddhistic era, there has been a
great confusion in everything in our country? The kings never used to
fight in pagoda-chariots. There are chariots even today in Rajputana
that greatly resemble the chariots of old. Have you seen the chariots in
the pictures of Grecian mythology? They have two wheels, and one mounts
them from behind; we had that sort of chariot. What good is it to paint
a picture if the details are wrong? An historical picture comes up to a
standard of excellence when after making proper study and research,
things are portrayed exactly as they were at that period. The truth must
be represented, otherwise the picture is nothing. In these days, our
young men who go in for painting are generally those who were
unsuccessful at school, and who have been given up at home as
good-for-nothing; what work of art can you expect from them? To paint a
really good picture requires as much talent as to produce a perfect
drama.

Q. — How then should Shri Krishna be represented in the picture in
question?

Swamiji: Shri Krishna ought to be painted as He really was, the Gita
personified; and the central idea of the Gita should radiate from His
whole form as He was teaching the path of Dharma to Arjuna, who had been
overcome by infatuation and cowardice.

So saying Swamiji posed himself in the way in which Shri Krishna should
be portrayed, and continued: "Look here, thus does he hold the bridle of
the horses — so tight that they are brought to their haunches, with
their forelegs fighting the air, and their mouths gaping. This will show
a tremendous play of action in the figure of Shri Krishna. His friend,
the world-renowned hero, casting aside his bow and arrows, has sunk down
like a coward on the chariot, in the midst of the two armies. And Shri
Krishna, whip in one hand and tightening the reins with the other, has
turned Himself towards Arjuna, with his childlike face beaming with
unworldly love and sympathy, and a calm and serene look — and is
delivering the message of the Gita to his beloved comrade. Now, tell me
what idea this picture of the Preacher of the Gita conveys to you."

The friend: Activity combined with firmness and serenity.

Swamiji: Ay, that's it! Intense action in the whole body, and withal a
face expressing the profound calmness and serenity of the blue sky. This
is the central idea of the Gita — to be calm and steadfast in all
circumstances, with one's body, mind, and soul centred at His hallowed
Feet!

कर्मण्यकर्म यः पश्येदकर्मणि च कर्म यः।  
स बुद्धिमान्मनुष्येषु स युक्तः कृत्स्नकर्मकृत्॥    (Gita IV.18).

He who even while doing action can keep his mind calm, and in whom, even
when not doing any outward action, flows the current of activity in the
form of the contemplation of Brahman, is the intelligent one among men,
he indeed is the Yogi, he indeed is the perfect worker.

At this moment, the man who had been sent to arrange a boat returned and
said that it was ready; so Swamiji told his friend, "Now let us go to
the Math. You must have left word at home that you were going there with
me?"

They continued their talk as they walked to the boat.

Swamiji: This idea must be preached to everyone — work, work, endless
work — without looking at results, and always keeping the whole mind and
soul steadfast at the lotus feet of the Lord!

Q. — But is this not Karma-Yoga?

Swamiji: Yes, this is Karma-Yoga; but without spiritual practices you
will never be able to do this Karma-Yoga. You must harmonise the four
different Yogas; otherwise how can you always keep your mind and heart
wholly on the Lord?

Q. — It is generally said that work according to the Gita means the
performance of Vedic sacrifices and religious exercises; any other kind
of work is futile.

Swamiji: All right; but you must make it more comprehensive. Who is
responsible for every action you do, every breath you take, and every
thought you think? Isn't it you yourself?

The friend: Yes and no. I cannot solve this clearly. The truth about it
is that man is the instrument and the Lord is the agent. So when I am
directed by His will, I am not at all responsible for my actions.

Swamiji: Well, that can be said only in the highest state of
realisation. When the mind will be purified by work and you will *see*
that it is He who is causing all to work, then only you will have a
right to speak like that. Otherwise it is all bosh, a mere cant.

Q. — Why so, if one is truly convinced by reasoning that the Lord alone
is causing all actions to be done?

Swamiji: It may hold good when one *has been so* convinced. But it only
lasts for that moment, and not a whit afterwards. Well, consider this
thoroughly, whether all that you do in your everyday life, you are not
doing with an egoistic idea that you yourself are the agent. How long do
you remember that it is the Lord who is making you work? But then, by
repeatedly analysing like that, you will come to a state when the ego
will vanish and in its place the Lord will come in. Then you will be
able to say with justice "Thou, Lord, art guarding all my actions from
within." But, my friend, if the ego occupies all the space within your
heart, where forsooth will there be room enough for the Lord to come in?
The Lord is verily absent!

Q. — But it is He who is giving me the wicked impulse?

Swamiji: No, by no means. It would be blaspheming the Lord to think in
that way. He is not inciting you to evil action, it is all the creation
of your desire for self-gratification. If one says the Lord is causing
everything to be done, and wilfully persists in wrong-doing, it only
brings ruin on him. That is the origin of self-deception. Don't you feel
an elation after you have done a good deed? You then give yourself the
credit of doing something good — you can't help it, it is very human.
But how absurd to take the credit of doing the good act on oneself and
lay the blame for the evil act on the Lord! It is a most dangerous idea
— the effect of ill-digested Gita and Vedanta. Never hold that view.
Rather say that He is causing the good work to be done while you are
responsible for the evil action. That will bring on devotion and faith,
and you will see His grace manifested at every step. The truth about it
is that no one has created you — you have created yourself. This is
discrimination, this is Vedanta. But one does not understand it before
realisation. Therefore the aspirant should begin with the dualistic
standpoint, that the Lord is causing the good actions, while he is doing
the evil. This is the easiest way to the purification of the mind. Hence
you find dualism so strong among the Vaishnavas. It is very difficult to
entertain Advaitic (non-dualistic) ideas at the outset. But the
dualistic standpoint gradually leads to the realisation of the Advaita.

Hypocrisy is always a dangerous thing. If there is no wilful
self-deception, that is to say, if one sincerely believes that the most
wicked impulse is also prompted by the Lord, rest assured that one will
not have to do those mean acts for long. All the impurities of the mind
are quickly destroyed. Our ancient scriptural writers understood this
well. And I think that the Tantrika form of worship originated from the
time that Buddhism began to decline and, through the oppression of the
Buddhists, people began to perform their Vedic sacrifices in secret.
They had no more opportunity to conduct them for two months at a
stretch, so they made clay images, worshipped them, and consigned them
to the water — finishing everything in one night, without leaving the
least trace! Man longs for a concrete symbol, otherwise his heart is not
satisfied. So in every home that one-night sacrifice began to take
place. As Shri Ramakrishna used to say, "Some enter the house by the
scavenger's entrance", so the spiritual teachers of that time saw that
those who could not perform any religious rite owing to their evil
propensities, also needed some way of coming round by degrees to the
path of virtue. For them those queer Tantrika rites came to be invented.

Q. — They went on doing evil actions thinking them to be good. So how
could this remove their evil tendencies?

Swamiji: Why, they gave a different direction to their propensities;
they did them, but with the object of realising the Lord.

Q. — Can this really be done?

Swamiji: It comes to the same thing. The motive must be right. And what
should prevent them from succeeding?

Q. — But many are caught in the temptation for wine, meat, etc. in
trying to get along with such means.

Swamiji: It was therefore that Shri Ramakrishna came. The days of
practising the Tantra in that fashion are gone. He, too, practised the
Tantra, but not in that way. Where there is the injunction of drinking
wine, he would simply touch his forehead with a drop of it. The Tantrika
form of worship is a very slippery ground. Hence I say that this
province has had enough of the Tantra. Now it must go beyond. The Vedas
should be studied. A harmony of the four kinds of Yogas must be
practised and absolute chastity must be preserved.

Q. — What do you mean by the harmony of the four Yogas?

Swamiji: Discrimination between the real and the unreal, dispassion and
devotion, work and practices in concentration, and along with these
there must be a reverential attitude towards women.

Q. — How can one look with reverence on women?

Swamiji: Well, they are the representatives of the Divine Mother. And
real well-being of India will commence from the day that the worship of
the Divine Mother will truly begin, and every man will sacrifice himself
at the altar of the Mother. . . .

Q. — Swamiji, in your boyhood, when we asked you to marry, you would
reply, "I won't, but you will see what I shall become." You have
actually verified your words.

Swamiji: Yes, dear brother, you saw how I was in want of food, and had
to work hard besides. Oh, the tremendous labour! Today the Americans out
of love have given me this nice bed, and I have something to eat also.
But, also, I have not been destined to enjoy physically — and lying on
the mattress only aggravates my illness. I feel suffocated, as it were.
I have to come down and lie on the floor for relief!

</div>
