---
title: KARMA IN ITS EFFECT ON CHARACTER

---
<div>

[←](../addresses_at_the_parliament/v1_c1_final_session.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Karma-Yoga](karma-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](each_is_great.htm)

  

CHAPTER I

## KARMA IN ITS EFFECT ON CHARACTER

The word Karma is derived from the Sanskrit Kri, to do; all action is
Karma. Technically, this word also means the effects of actions. In
connection with metaphysics, it sometimes means the effects, of which
our past actions were the causes. But in Karma-Yoga we have simply to do
with the word Karma as meaning work. The goal of mankind is knowledge.
That is the one ideal placed before us by Eastern philosophy. Pleasure
is not the goal of man, but knowledge. Pleasure and happiness come to an
end. It is a mistake to suppose that pleasure is the goal. The cause of
all the miseries we have in the world is that men foolishly think
pleasure to be the ideal to strive for. After a time man finds that it
is not happiness, but knowledge, towards which he is going, and that
both pleasure and pain are great teachers, and that he learns as much
from evil as from good. As pleasure and pain pass before his soul they
have upon it different pictures, and the result of these combined
impressions is what is called man's "character". If you take the
character of any man, it really is but the aggregate of tendencies, the
sum total of the bent of his mind; you will find that misery and
happiness are equal factors in the formation of that character. Good and
evil have an equal share in moulding character, and in some instances
misery is a greater teacher than happiness. In studying the great
characters the world has produced, I dare say, in the vast majority of
cases, it would be found that it was misery that taught more than
happiness, it was poverty that taught more than wealth, it was blows
that brought out their inner fire more than praise.

Now this knowledge, again, is inherent in man. No knowledge comes from
outside; it is all inside. What we say a man "knows", should, in strict
psychological language, be what he "discovers" or "unveils"; what a man
"learns" is really what he "discovers", by taking the cover off his own
soul, which is a mine of infinite knowledge.

We say Newton discovered gravitation. Was it sitting anywhere in a
corner waiting for him? It was in his own mind; the time came and he
found it out. All knowledge that the world has ever received comes from
the mind; the infinite library of the universe is in your own mind. The
external world is simply the suggestion, the occasion, which sets you to
study your own mind, but the object of your study is always your own
mind. The falling of an apple gave the suggestion to Newton, and he
studied his own mind. He rearranged all  the previous links of thought
in his mind and discovered a new link among them, which we call the law
of gravitation. It was not in the apple nor in anything in the centre of
the earth.

All knowledge, therefore, secular or spiritual, is in the human mind. In
many cases it is not discovered, but remains covered, and when the
covering is being slowly taken off, we say, "We are learning," and the
advance of knowledge is made by the advance of this process of
uncovering. The man from whom this veil is being lifted is the more
knowing man, the man upon whom it lies thick is ignorant, and the man
from whom it has entirely gone is all-knowing, omniscient. There have
been omniscient men, and, I believe, there will be yet; and that there
will be myriads of them in the cycles to come. Like fire in a piece of
flint, knowledge exists in the mind; suggestion is the friction which
brings it out. So with all our feelings and action — our tears and our
smiles, our joys and our griefs, our weeping and our laughter, our
curses and our blessings, our praises and our blames — every one of
these we may find, if we calmly study our own selves, to have been
brought out from within ourselves by so many blows. The result is what
we are. All these blows taken together are called Karma — work, action.
Every mental and physical blow that is given to the soul, by which, as
it were, fire is struck from it, and by which its own power and
knowledge are discovered, is Karma, this word being used in its widest
sense. Thus we are all doing Karma all the time. I am talking to you:
that is Karma. You are listening: that is Karma. We breathe: that is
Karma. We walk: Karma. Everything we do, physical or mental, is Karma,
and it leaves its marks on us.

There are certain works which are, as it were, the aggregate, the sum
total, of a large number of smaller works. If we stand near the seashore
and hear the waves dashing against the shingle, we think it is such a
great noise, and yet we know that one wave is really composed of
millions and millions of minute waves. Each one of these is making a
noise, and yet we do not catch it; it is only when they become the big
aggregate that we hear. Similarly, every pulsation of the heart is work.
Certain kinds of work we feel and they become tangible to us; they are,
at the same time, the aggregate of a number of small works. If you
really want to judge of the character of a man, look not at his great
performances. Every fool may become a hero at one time or another. Watch
a man do his most common actions; those are indeed the things which will
tell you the real character of a great man. Great occasions rouse even
the lowest of human beings to some kind of greatness, but he alone is
the really great man whose character is great always, the same wherever
he be.

Karma in its effect on character is the most tremendous power that man
has to deal with. Man is, as it were, a centre, and is attracting all
the powers of the universe towards himself, and in this centre is fusing
them all and again sending them off in a big current. Such a centre is
the *real* man — the almighty, the omniscient — and he draws the whole
universe towards him. Good and bad, misery and happiness, all are
running towards him and clinging round him; and out of them he fashions
the mighty stream of tendency called character and throws it outwards.
As he has the power of drawing in anything, so has he the power of
throwing it out.

All the actions that we see in the world, all the movements in human
society, all the works that we have around us, are simply the display of
thought, the manifestation of the will of man. Machines or instruments,
cities, ships, or men-of-war, all these are simply the manifestation of
the will of man; and this will is caused by character, and character is
manufactured by Karma. As is Karma, so is the manifestation of the will.
The men of mighty will the world has produced have all been tremendous
workers — gigantic souls, with wills powerful enough to overturn worlds,
wills they got by persistent work, through ages, and ages. Such a
gigantic will as that of a Buddha or a Jesus could not be obtained in
one life, for we know who their fathers were. It is not known that their
fathers ever spoke a word for the good of mankind. Millions and millions
of carpenters like Joseph had gone; millions are still living. Millions
and millions of petty kings like Buddha's father had been in the world.
If it was only a case of hereditary transmission, how do you account for
this petty prince, who was not, perhaps, obeyed by his own servants,
producing this son, whom half a world worships? How do you explain the
gulf between the carpenter and his son, whom millions of human beings
worship as God? It cannot be solved by the theory of heredity. The
gigantic will which Buddha and Jesus threw over the world, whence did it
come? Whence came this accumulation of power? It must have been there
through ages and ages, continually growing bigger and bigger, until it
burst on society in a Buddha or a Jesus, even rolling down to the
present day.  
   
All this is determined by Karma, work. No one can get anything unless he
earns it. This is an eternal law. We may sometimes think it is not so,
but in the long run we become convinced of it. A man may struggle all
his life for riches; he may cheat thousands, but he finds at last that
he did not deserve to become rich, and his life becomes a trouble and a
nuisance to him. We may go on accumulating things for our physical
enjoyment, but only what we earn is really ours. A fool may buy all the
books in the world, and they will be in his library; but he will be able
to read only those that he deserves to; and this deserving is produced
by Karma. Our Karma determines what we deserve and what we can
assimilate. We are responsible for what we are; and whatever we wish
ourselves to be, we have the power to make ourselves. If what we are now
has been the result of our own past actions, it certainly follows that
whatever we wish to be in future can be produced by our present actions;
so we have to know how to act. You will say, “What is the use of
learning how to work? Everyone works in some way or other in this
world.” But there is such a thing as frittering away our energies. With
regard to Karma-Yoga, the Gita says that it is doing work with
cleverness and as a science; by knowing how to work, one can obtain the
greatest results. You must remember that all work is simply to bring out
the power of the mind which is already there, to wake up the soul. The
power is inside every man, so is knowing; the different works are like
blows to bring them out, to cause these giants to wake up.

Man works with various motives. There cannot be work without motive.
Some people want to get fame, and they work for fame. Others want money,
and they work for money. Others want to have power, and they work for
power. Others want to get to heaven, and they work for the same. Others
want to leave a name when they die, as they do in China, where no man
gets a title until he is dead; and that is a better way, after all, than
with us. When a man does something very good there, they give a title of
nobility to his father, who is dead, or to his grandfather. Some people
work for that. Some of the followers of certain Mohammedan sects work
all their lives to have a big tomb built for them when they die. I know
sects among whom, as soon as a child is born, a tomb is prepared for it;
that is among them the most important work a man has to do, and the
bigger and the finer the tomb, the better off the man is supposed to be.
Others work as a penance; do all sorts of wicked things, then erect a
temple, or give something to the priests to buy them off and obtain from
them a passport to heaven. They think that this kind of beneficence will
clear them and they will go scot-free in spite of their sinfulness. Such
are some of the various motives for work.

Work for work's sake. There are some who are really the salt of the
earth in every country and who work for work's sake, who do not care for
name, or fame, or even to go to heaven. They work just because good will
come of it. There are others who do good to the poor and help mankind
from still higher motives, because they believe in doing good and love
good. The motive for name and fame seldom brings immediate results, as a
rule; they come to us when we are old and have almost done with life. If
a man works without any selfish motive in view, does he not gain
anything? Yes, he gains the highest. Unselfishness is more paying, only
people have not the patience to practice it. It is more paying from the
point of view of health also. Love, truth, and unselfishness are not
merely moral figures of speech, but they form our highest ideal, because
in them lies such a manifestation of power. In the first place, a man
who can work for five days, or even for five minutes, without any
selfish motive whatever, without thinking of future, of heaven, of
punishment, or anything of the kind, has in him the capacity to become a
powerful moral giant. It is hard to do it, but in the heart of our
hearts we know its value, and the good it brings. It is the greatest
manifestation of power — this tremendous restraint; self-restraint is a
manifestation of greater power than all outgoing action. A carriage with
four horses may rush down a hill unrestrained, or the coachman may curb
the horses. Which is the greater manifestation of power, to let them go
or to hold them? A cannonball flying through the air goes a long
distance and falls. Another is cut short in its flight by striking
against a wall, and the impact generates intense heat. All outgoing
energy following a selfish motive is frittered away; it will not cause
power to return to you; but if restrained, it will result in development
of power. This self-control will tend to produce a mighty will, a
character which makes a Christ or a Buddha. Foolish men do not know this
secret; they nevertheless want to rule mankind. Even a fool may rule the
whole world if he works and waits. Let him wait a few years, restrain
that foolish idea of governing; and when that idea is wholly gone, he
will be a power in the world. The majority of us cannot see beyond a few
years, just as some animals cannot see beyond a few steps. Just a little
narrow circle — that is our world. We have not the patience to look
beyond, and thus become immoral and wicked. This is our weakness, our
powerlessness.

Even the lowest forms of work are not to be despised. Let the man, who
knows no better, work for selfish ends, for name and fame; but everyone
should always try to get towards higher and higher motives and to
understand them. "To work we have the right, but not to the fruits
thereof:" Leave the fruits alone. Why care for results? If you wish to
help a man, never think what that man's attitude should be towards you.
If you want to do a great or a good work, do not trouble to think what
the result will be.

There arises a difficult question in this ideal of work. Intense
activity is necessary; we must always work. We cannot live a minute
without work. What then becomes of rest? Here is one side of the
life-struggle — work, in which we are whirled rapidly round. And here is
the other — that of calm, retiring renunciation: everything is peaceful
around, there is very little of noise and show, only nature with her
animals and flowers and mountains. Neither of them is a perfect picture.
A man used to solitude, if brought in contact with the surging whirlpool
of the world, will be crushed by it; just as the fish that lives in the
deep sea water, as soon as it is brought to the surface, breaks into
pieces, deprived of the weight of water on it that had kept it together.
Can a man who has been used to the turmoil and the rush of life live at
ease if he comes to a quiet place? He suffers and perchance may lose his
mind. The ideal man is he who, in the midst of the greatest silence and
solitude, finds the intensest activity, and in the midst of the
intensest activity finds the silence and solitude of the desert. He has
learnt the secret of restraint, he has controlled himself. He goes
through the streets of a big city with all its traffic, and his mind is
as calm as if he were in a cave, where not a sound could reach him; and
he is intensely working all the time. That is the ideal of Karma-Yoga,
and if you have attained to that you have really learnt the secret of
work.

But we have to begin from the beginning, to take up the works as they
come to us and slowly make ourselves more unselfish every day. We must
do the work and find out the motive power that prompts us; and, almost
without exception, in the first years, we shall find that our motives
are always selfish; but gradually this selfishness will melt by
persistence, till at last will come the time when we shall be able to do
really unselfish work. We may all hope that some day or other, as we
struggle through the paths of life, there will come a time when we shall
become perfectly unselfish; and the moment we attain to that, all our
powers will be concentrated, and the knowledge which is ours will be
manifest.

</div>
