---
title: 'EACH

  IS GREAT IN HIS OWN PLACE'

---
<div>

[←](effect_on_character.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Karma-Yoga](karma-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](secret_of_work.htm)

  

CHAPTER II

## EACH IS GREAT IN HIS OWN PLACE

According to the Sânkhya philosophy, nature is composed of three forces
called, in Sanskrit, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. These as manifested in
the physical world are what we may call equilibrium, activity, and
inertness. Tamas is typified as darkness or inactivity; Rajas is
activity, expressed as attraction or repulsion; and Sattva is the
equilibrium of the two.

In every man there are these three forces. Sometimes Tamas prevails. We
become lazy, we cannot move, we are inactive, bound down by certain
ideas or by mere dullness. At other times activity prevails, and at
still other times that calm balancing of both. Again, in different men,
one of these forces is generally predominant. The characteristic of one
man is inactivity, dullness and laziness; that of another, activity,
power, manifestation of energy; and in still another we find the
sweetness, calmness, and gentleness, which are due to the balancing of
both action and inaction. So in all creation — in animals, plants, and
men — we find the more or less typical manifestation of all these
different forces.

Karma-Yoga has specially to deal with these three factors. By teaching
what they are and how to employ them, it helps us to do our work better.
Human society is a graded organization. We all know about morality, and
we all know about duty, but at the same time we find that in different
countries the significance of morality varies greatly. What is regarded
as moral in one country may in another be considered perfectly immoral.
For instance, in one country cousins may marry; in another, it is
thought to be very immoral; in one, men may marry their sisters-in-law;
in another, it is regarded as immoral; in one country people may marry
only once; in another, many times; and so forth. Similarly, in all other
departments of morality, we find the standard varies greatly — yet we
have the idea that there must be a universal standard of morality.

So it is with duty. The idea of duty varies much among different
nations. In one country, if a man does not do certain things, people
will say he has acted wrongly; while if he does those very things in
another country, people will say that he did not act rightly — and yet
we know that there must be some universal idea of duty. In the same way,
one class of society thinks that certain things are among its duty,
while another class thinks quite the opposite and would be horrified if
it had to do those things. Two ways are left open to us — the way of the
ignorant, who think that there is only one way to truth and that all the
rest are wrong, and the way of the wise, who admit that, according to
our mental constitution or the different planes of existence in which we
are, duty and morality may vary. The important thing is to know that
there are gradations of duty and of morality — that the duty of one
state of life, in one set of circumstances, will not and cannot be that
of another.

To illustrate: All great teachers have taught, "Resist not evil," that
non-resistance is the highest moral ideal. We all know that, if a
certain number of us attempted to put that maxim fully into practice,
the whole social fabric would fall to pieces, the wicked would take
possession of our properties and our lives, and would do whatever they
liked with us. Even if only one day of such non-resistance were
practiced, it would lead to disaster. Yet, intuitively, in our heart of
hearts we feel the truth of the teaching "Resist not evil." This seems
to us to be the highest ideal; yet to teach this doctrine only would be
equivalent to condemning a vast portion of mankind. Not only so, it
would be making men feel that they were always doing wrong, and cause in
them scruples of conscience in all their actions; it would weaken them,
and that constant self-disapproval would breed more vice than any other
weakness would. To the man who has begun to hate himself the gate to
degeneration has already opened; and the same is true of a nation.

Our first duty is not to hate ourselves, because to advance we must have
faith in ourselves first and then in God. He who has no faith in himself
can never have faith in God. Therefore, the only alternative remaining
to us is to recognise that duty and morality vary under different
circumstances; not that the man who resists evil is doing what is always
and in itself wrong, but t hat in the different circumstances in which
he is placed it may become even his duty to resist evil.

In reading the Bhagavad-Gita, many of you in Western countries may have
felt astonished at the second chapter, wherein Shri Krishna calls Arjuna
a hypocrite and a coward because of his refusal to fight, or offer
resistance, on account of his adversaries being his friends and
relatives, making the plea that non-resistance was the highest ideal of
love. This is a great lesson for us all to learn, that in all matters
the two extremes are alike. The extreme positive and the extreme
negative are always similar. When the vibrations of light are too slow,
we do not see them, nor do we see them when they are too rapid. So with
sound; when very low in pitch, we do not hear it; when very high, we do
not hear it either. Of like nature is the difference between resistance
and non-resistance. One man does not resist because he is weak, lazy,
and cannot, not because he will not; the other man knows that  he can
strike an irresistible blow if he likes; yet he not only does not
strike, but blesses his enemies. The one who from weakness resists not
commits a sin, and as such cannot receive any benefit from the
non-resistance; while the other would commit a sin by offering
resistance. Buddha gave up his throne and renounced his position, that
was true renunciation; but there cannot be any question of renunciation
in the case of a beggar who has nothing to renounce. So we must always
be careful about what we really mean when we speak of this
non-resistance and ideal love. We must first take care to understand
whether we have the power of resistance or not. Then, having the power,
if we renounce it and do not resist, we are doing a grand act of love;
but if we cannot resist, and yet, at the same time, try to deceive
ourselves into the belief that we are actuated by motives of the highest
love, we are doing the exact opposite. Arjuna became a coward at the
sight of the mighty array against him; his "love" made him forget his
duty towards his country and king. That is why Shri Krishna told him
that he was a hypocrite: Thou talkest like a wise man, but thy actions
betray thee to be a coward; therefore stand up and fight!

Such is the central idea of Karma-Yoga. The Karma-Yogi is the man who
understands that the highest ideal is non-resistance, and who also knows
that this non-resistance is the highest manifestation of power in actual
possession, and also what is called the resisting of evil is but a step
on the way towards the manifestation of this highest power, namely,
non-resistance. Before reaching this highest ideal, man's duty is to
resist evil; let him work, let him fight, let him strike straight from
the shoulder. Then only, when he has gained the power to resist, will
non-resistance be a virtue.

I once met a man in my country whom I had known before as a very stupid,
dull person, who knew nothing and had not the desire to know anything,
and was living the life of a brute. He asked me what he should do to
know God, how he was to get free. "Can you tell a lie?" I asked him.
"No," he replied. "Then you must learn to do so. It is better to tell a
lie than to be a brute, or a log of wood. You are inactive; you have not
certainly reached the highest state, which is beyond all actions, calm
and serene; you are too dull even to do something wicked." That was an
extreme case, of course, and I was joking with him; but what I meant was
that a man must be active in order to pass through activity to perfect
calmness.

Inactivity should be avoided by all means. Activity always means
resistance. Resist all evils, mental and physical; and when you have
succeeded in resisting, then will calmness come. It is very easy to say,
"Hate nobody, resist not evil," but we know what that kind of thing
generally means in practice. When the eyes of society are turned towards
us, we may make a show of non-resistance, but in our hearts it is canker
all the time. We feel the utter want of the calm of non-resistance; we
feel that it would be better for us to resist. If you desire wealth, and
know at the same time that the whole world regards him who aims at
wealth as a very wicked man, you, perhaps, will not dare to plunge into
the struggle for wealth, yet your mind will be running day and night
after money. This is hypocrisy and will serve no purpose. Plunge into
the world, and then, after a time, when you have suffered   and enjoyed
all that is in it, will renunciation come; then will calmness come. So
fulfil your desire for power and everything else, and after you have
fulfilled the desire, will come the time when you will know that they
are all very little things; but until you have fulfilled this desire,
until you have passed through that activity, it is impossible for you to
come to the state of calmness, serenity, and self-surrender. These ideas
of serenity and renunciation have been preached for thousands of years;
everybody has heard of them from childhood, and yet we see very few in
the world who have really reached that stage. I do not know if I have
seen twenty persons in my life who are really calm and non-resisting,
and I have travelled over half the world.

Every man should take up his own ideal and endeavour to accomplish it.
That is a surer way of progress than taking up other men's ideals, which
he can never hope to accomplish. For instance, we take a child and at
once give him the task of walking twenty miles. Either the little one
dies, or one in a thousand crawls the twenty miles, to reach the end
exhausted and half-dead. That is like what we generally try to do with
the world. All the men and women, in any society, are not of the same
mind, capacity, or of the same power to do things; they must have
different ideals, and we have no right to sneer at any ideal. Let every
one do the best he can for realising his own ideal. Nor is it right that
I should be judged by your standard or you by mine. The apple tree
should not be judged by the standard of the oak, nor the oak by that of
the apple. To judge the apple tree you must take the apple standard, and
for the oak, its own standard.

Unity in variety is the plan of creation. However men and women may vary
individually, there is unity in the background. The different individual
characters and classes of men and women are natural variations in
creation. Hence, we ought not to judge them by the same standard or put
the same ideal before them. Such a course creates only an unnatural
struggle, and the result is that man begins to hate himself and is
hindered from becoming religious and good. Our duty is to encourage
every one in his struggle to live up to his own highest ideal, and
strive at the same time to make the ideal as near as possible to the
truth.

In the Hindu system of morality we find that this fact has been
recognised from very ancient times; and in their scriptures and books on
ethics different rules are laid down for the different classes of men —
the householder, the Sannyâsin (the man who has renounced the world),
and the student.

The life of every individual, according to the Hindu scriptures, has its
peculiar duties apart from what belongs in common to universal humanity.
The Hindu begins life as a student; then he marries and becomes a
householder; in old age he retires; and lastly he gives up the world and
becomes a Sannyasin. To each of these stages of life certain duties are
attached. No one of these stages is intrinsically superior to another.
The life of the married man is quite as great as that of the celibate
who has devoted himself to religious work. The scavenger in the street
is quite as great and glorious as the king on his throne. Take him off
his throne, make him do the work of the scavenger, and see how he fares.
Take up the scavenger and see how he will rule. It is useless to say
that the man who lives out of the world is a greater man than he who
lives in the world; it is much more difficult to live in the world and
worship God than to give it up and live a free and easy life. The four
stages of life in India have in later times been reduced to two — that
of the householder and of the monk. The householder marries and carries
on his duties as a citizen, and the duty of the other is to devote his
energies wholly to religion, to preach and to worship God. I shall read
to you a few passages from the Mahâ-Nirvâna-Tantra, which treats of this
subject, and you will see that it is a very difficult task for a man to
be a householder, and perform all his duties perfectly:

The householder should be devoted to God; the knowledge of God should be
his goal of life. Yet he must work constantly, perform all his duties;
he must give up the fruits of his actions to God.

It is the most difficult thing in this world to work and not care for
the result, to help a man and never think that he ought to be grateful,
to do some good work and at the same time never look to see whether it
brings you name or fame, or nothing at all. Even the most arrant coward
becomes brave when the world praises him. A fool can do heroic deeds
when the approbation of society is upon him, but for a man to constantly
do good without caring for the approbation of his fellow men is indeed
the highest sacrifice man can perform. The great duty of the householder
is to earn a living, but he must take care that he does not do it by
telling lies, or by cheating, or by robbing others; and he must remember
that his life is for the service of God, and the poor.

Knowing that mother and father are the visible representatives of God,
the householder, always and by all means, must please them. If the
mother is pleased, and the father, God is pleased with the man. That
child is really a good child who never speaks harsh words to his
parents.

Before parents one must not utter jokes, must not show restlessness,
must not show anger or temper. Before mother or father, a child must bow
down low, and stand up in their presence, and must not take a seat until
they order him to sit.

If the householder has food and drink and clothes without first seeing
that his mother and his father, his children, his wife, and the poor,
are supplied, he is committing a sin. The mother and the father are the
causes of this body; so a man must undergo a thousand troubles in order
to do good to them.

Even so is his duty to his wife. No man should scold his wife, and he
must always maintain her as if she were his own mother. And even when he
is in the greatest difficulties and troubles, he must not show anger to
his wife.

He who thinks of another woman besides his wife, if he touches her even
with his mind — that man goes to dark hell.

Before women he must not talk improper language, and never brag of his
powers. He must not say, “I have done this, and I have done that.”

The householder must always please his wife with money, clothes, love,
faith, and words like nectar, and never do anything to disturb her. That
man who has succeeded in getting the love of a chaste wife has succeeded
in his religion and has all the virtues.

The following are duties towards children:

A son should be lovingly reared up to his fourth year; he should be
educated till he is sixteen. When he is twenty years of age he should be
employed in some work; he should then be treated affectionately by his
father as his equal. Exactly in the same manner the daughter should be
brought up, and should be educated with the greatest care. And when she
marries, the father ought to give her jewels and wealth.

Then the duty of the man is towards his brothers and sisters, and
towards the children of his brothers and sisters, if they are poor, and
towards his other relatives, his friends and his servants. Then his
duties are towards the people of the same village, and the poor, and any
one that comes to him for help. Having sufficient means, if the
householder does not take care to give to his relatives and to the poor,
know him to be only a brute; he is not a human being.

Excessive attachment to food, clothes, and the tending of the body, and
dressing of the hair should be avoided. The householder must be pure in
heart and clean in body, always active and always ready for work.

To his enemies the householder must be a hero. Them he must resist. That
is the duty of the householder. He must not sit down in a corner and
weep, and talk nonsense about non-resistance. If he does not show
himself a hero to his enemies he has not done his duty. And to his
friends and relatives he must be as gentle as a lamb.

It is the duty of the householder not to pay reverence to the wicked;
because, if he reverences the wicked people of the world, he patronizes
wickedness; and it will be a great mistake if he disregards those who
are worthy of respect, the good people. He must not be gushing in his
friendship; he must not go out of the way making friends everywhere; he
must watch the actions of the men he wants to make friends with, and
their dealings with other men, reason upon them, and then make friends.

These three things he must not talk of. He must not talk in public of
his own fame; he must not preach his own name or his own powers; he must
not talk of his wealth, or of anything that has been told to him
privately.

A man must not say he is poor, or that he is wealthy — he must not brag
of his wealth. Let him keep his own counsel; this is his religious duty.
This is not mere worldly wisdom; if a man does not do so, he may be held
to be immoral.

The householder is the basis, the prop, of the whole society. He is the
principal earner. The poor, the weak, the children and the women who do
not work — all live upon the householder; so there must be certain
duties that he has to perform, and these duties must make him feel
strong to perform them, and not make him think that he is doing things
beneath his ideal. Therefore, if he has done something weak, or has made
some mistake, he must not say so in public; and if he is engaged in some
enterprise and knows he is sure to fail in it, he must not speak of it.
Such self-exposure is not only uncalled for, but also unnerves the man
and makes him unfit for the performance of his legitimate duties in
life. At the same time, he must struggle hard to acquire these things —
firstly, knowledge, and secondly, wealth. It is his duty, and if he does
not do his duty, he is nobody. A householder who does not struggle to
get wealth is immoral. If he is lazy and content to lead an idle life,
he is immoral, because upon him depend hundreds. If he gets riches,
hundreds of others will be thereby supported.

If there were not in this city hundreds who had striven to become rich,
and who had acquired wealth, where would all this civilization, and
these alms-houses and great houses be?

Going after wealth in such a case is not bad, because that wealth is for
distribution. The householder is the centre of life and society. It is a
worship for him to acquire and spend wealth nobly, for the householder
who struggles to become rich by good means and for good purposes is
doing practically the same thing for the attainment of salvation as the
anchorite does in his cell when he is praying; for in them we see only
the different aspects of the same virtue of self-surrender and
self-sacrifice prompted by the feeling of devotion to God and to all
that is His.

He must struggle to acquire a good name by all means. He must not
gamble, he must not move in the company of the wicked, he must not tell
lies, and must not be the cause of trouble to others.

Often people enter into things they have not the means to accomplish,
with the result that they cheat others to attain their own ends. Then
there is in all things the time factor to be taken into consideration;
what at one time might be a failure, would perhaps at another time be a
very great success.

The householder must speak the truth, and speak gently, using words
which people like, which will do good to others; nor should he talk of
the business of other men.

The householder by digging tanks, by planting trees on the roadsides, by
establishing rest-houses for men and animals, by making roads and
building bridges, goes towards the same goal as the greatest Yogi.

This is one part of the doctrine of Karma-Yoga — activity, the duty of
the householder. There is a passage later on, where it says that "if the
householder dies in battle, fighting for his country or his religion, he
comes to the same goal as the Yogi by meditation," showing thereby that
what is duty for one is not duty for another. At the same time, it does
not say that this duty is lowering and the other elevating. Each duty
has its own place, and according to the circumstances in which we are
placed, we must perform our duties.

One idea comes out of all this — the condemnation of all weakness. This
is a particular idea in all our teachings which I like, either in
philosophy, or in religion, or in work. If you read the Vedas, you will
find this word always repeated — fearlessness — fear nothing. Fear is a
sign of weakness. A man must go about his duties without taking notice
of the sneers and the ridicule of the world.

If a man retires from the world to worship God, he must not think that
those who live in the world and work for the good of the world are not
worshipping God: neither must those who live in the world, for wife and
children, think that those who give up the world are low vagabonds. Each
is great in his own place. This thought I will illustrate by a story.

A certain king used to inquire of all the Sannyasins that came to his
country, "Which is the greater man — he who gives up the world and
becomes a Sannyasin, or he who lives in the world and performs his
duties as a house holder?" Many wise men sought to solve the problem.
Some asserted that the Sannyasin was the greater, upon which the king
demanded that they should prove their assertion. When they could not, he
ordered them to marry and become householders. Then others came and
said, "The householder who performs his duties is the greater man." Of
them, too, the king demanded proofs. When they could not give them, he
made them also settle down as householders.

At last there came a young Sannyasin, and the king similarly inquired of
him also. He answered, "Each, O king, is equally great in his place."
"Prove this to me," asked the king. "I will prove it to you," said the
Sannyasin, "but you must first come and live as I do for  a few days,
that I may be able to prove to you what I say." The king consented and
followed the Sannyasin out of his own territory and passed through many
other countries until they came to a great kingdom. In the capital of
that kingdom a great ceremony was going on. The king and the Sannyasin
heard the noise of drums and music, and heard also the criers; the
people were assembled in the streets in gala dress, and a great
proclamation was being made. The king and the Sannyasin stood there to
see what was going on. The crier was proclaiming loudly that the
princess, daughter of the king of that country, was about to choose a
husband from among those assembled before her.

It was an old custom in India for princesses to choose husbands in this
way. Each princess had certain ideas of the sort of man she wanted for a
husband. Some would have the handsomest man, others would have only the
most learned, others again the richest, and so on. All the princes of
the neighbourhood put on their bravest attire and presented themselves
before her. Sometimes they too had their own criers to enumerate their
advantages and the reasons why they hoped the princess would choose
them. The princess was taken round on a throne, in the most splendid
array, and looked at and heard about them. If she was not pleased with
what she saw and heard, she said to her bearers, "Move on," and no more
notice was taken of the rejected suitors. If, however, the princess was
pleased with any one of them, she threw a garland of flowers over him
and he became her husband.

The princess of the country to which our king and the Sannyasin had come
was having one of these interesting ceremonies. She was the most
beautiful princess in the world, and the husband of the princess would
be ruler of the kingdom after her father's death. The idea of this
princess was to marry the handsomest man, but she could not find the
right one to please her. Several times these meetings had taken place,
but the princess could not select a husband. This meeting was the most
splendid of all; more people than ever had come to it. The princess came
in on a throne, and the bearers carried her from place to place. She did
not seem to care for any one, and every one became disappointed that
this meeting also was going to be a failure. Just then came a young man,
a Sannyasin, handsome as if the sun had come down to the earth, and
stood in one corner of the assembly, watching what was going on. The
throne with the princess came near him, and as soon as she saw the
beautiful Sannyasin, she stopped and threw the garland over him. The
young Sannyasin seized the garland and threw it off, exclaiming, "What
nonsense is this? I am a Sannyasin. What is marriage to me?" The king of
that country thought that perhaps this man was poor and so dared not
marry the princess, and said to him, "With my daughter goes half my
kingdom now, and the whole kingdom after my death!" and put the garland
again on the Sannyasin. The young man threw it off once more, saying,
"Nonsense! I do not want to marry," and walked quickly away from the
assembly.

Now the princess had fallen so much in love with this young man that she
said, "I must marry this man or I shall die"; and she went after him to
bring him back. Then our other Sannyasin, who had brought the king
there, said to him, "King, let us follow this pair"; so they walked
after them, but at a good distance behind. The young Sannyasin who had
refused to marry the princess walked out into the country for several
miles. When he came to a forest and entered into it, the princess
followed him, and the other two followed them. Now this young Sannyasin
was well acquainted with that forest and knew all the intricate paths in
it. He suddenly passed into one of these and disappeared, and the
princess could not discover him. After trying for a long time to find
him she sat down under a tree and began to weep, for she did not know
the way out. Then our king and the other Sannyasin came up to her and
said, "Do not weep; we will show you the way out of this forest, but it
is too dark for us to find it now. Here is a big tree; let us rest under
it, and in the morning we will go early and show you the road."

Now a little bird and his wife and their three little ones lived on that
tree, in a nest. This little bird looked down and saw the three people
under the tree and said to his wife, "My dear, what shall we do? Here
are some guests in the house, and it is winter, and we have no fire." So
he flew away and got a bit of burning firewood in his beak and dropped
it before the guests, to which they added fuel and made a blazing fire.
But the little bird was not satisfied. He said again to his wife, "My
dear, what shall we do? There is nothing to give these people to eat,
and they are hungry. We are householders; it is our duty to feed any one
who comes to the house. I must do what I can, I will give them my body."
So he plunged into the midst of the fire and perished. The guests saw
him falling and tried to save him, but he was too quick for them.

The little bird's wife saw what her husband did, and she said, "Here are
three persons and only one little bird for them to eat. It is not
enough; it is my duty as a wife not to let my husband's effort go in
vain; let them have my body also." Then she fell into the fire and was
burned to death.

Then the three baby-birds, when they saw what was done and that there
was still not enough food for the three guests, said, "Our parents have
done what they could and still it is not enough. It is our duty to carry
on the work of our parents; let our bodies go too." And they all dashed
down into the fire also.

Amazed at what they saw, the three people could not of course eat these
birds. They passed the night without food, and in the morning the king
and the Sannyasin showed the princess the way, and she went back to her
father.

Then the Sannyasin said to the king, "King, you have seen that each is
great in his own place. If you want to live in the world, live like
those birds, ready at any moment to sacrifice yourself for others. If
you want to renounce the world, be like that young man to whom the most
beautiful woman and a kingdom were as nothing. If you want to be a
householder, hold your life a sacrifice for the welfare of others; and
if you choose the life of renunciation, do not even look at beauty and
money and power. Each is great in his own place, but the duty of the one
is not the duty of the other.

</div>
