---
title: THE SECRET OF WORK

---
<div>

[←](each_is_great.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Karma-Yoga](karma-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](what_is_duty.htm)

  

CHAPTER III

## THE SECRET OF WORK

Helping others physically, by removing their physical needs, is indeed
great, but the help is great according as the need is greater and
according as the help is far reaching. If a man's wants can be removed
for an hour, it is helping him indeed; if his wants can be removed for a
year, it will be more help to him; but if his wants can be removed for
ever, it is surely the greatest help that can be given him. Spiritual
knowledge is the only thing that can destroy our miseries for ever; any
other knowledge satisfies wants only for a time. It is only with the
knowledge of the spirit that the faculty of want is annihilated for
ever; so helping man spiritually is the highest help that can be given
to him. He who gives man spiritual knowledge is the greatest benefactor
of mankind and as such we always find that those were the most powerful
of men who helped man in his spiritual needs, because spirituality is
the true basis of all our activities in life. A spiritually strong and
sound man will be strong in every other respect, if he so wishes. Until
there is spiritual strength in man even physical needs cannot be well
satisfied. Next to spiritual comes intellectual help. The gift of
knowledge is a far higher gift than that of food and clothes; it is even
higher than giving life to a man, because the real life of man consists
of knowledge. Ignorance is death, knowledge is life. Life is of very
little value, if it is a life in the dark, groping through ignorance and
misery. Next in order comes, of course, helping a man physically.
Therefore, in considering the question of helping others, we must always
strive not to commit the mistake of thinking that physical help is the
only help that can be given. It is not only the last but the least,
because it cannot bring about permanent satisfaction. The misery that I
feel when I am hungry is satisfied by eating, but hunger returns; my
misery can cease only when I am satisfied beyond all want. Then hunger
will not make me miserable; no distress, no sorrow will be able to move
me. So, that help which tends to make us strong spiritually is the
highest, next to it comes intellectual help, and after that physical
help.

The miseries of the world cannot be cured by physical help only. Until
man's nature changes, these physical needs will always arise, and
miseries will always be felt, and no amount of physical help will cure
them completely. The only solution of this problem is to make mankind
pure. Ignorance is the mother of all the evil and all the misery we see.
Let men have light, let them be pure and spiritually strong and
educated, then alone will misery cease in the world, not before. We may
convert every house in the country into a charity asylum, we may fill
the land with hospitals, but the misery of man will still continue to
exist until man's character changes.

We read in the Bhagavad-Gita again and again that we must all work
incessantly. All work is by nature composed of good and evil. We cannot
do any work which will not do some good somewhere; there cannot be any
work which will not cause some harm somewhere. Every work must
necessarily be a mixture of good and evil; yet we are commanded to work
incessantly. Good and evil will both have their results, will produce
their Karma. Good action will entail upon us good effect; bad action,
bad. But good and bad are both bondages of the soul. The solution
reached in the Gita in regard to this bondage-producing nature of work
is that, if we do not attach ourselves to the work we do, it will not
have any binding effect on our soul. We shall try to understand what is
meant by this “non-attachment to” to work.

This is the one central idea in the Gita: work incessantly, but be not
attached to it. Samskâra can be translated very nearly by "inherent
tendency". Using the simile of a lake for the mind, every ripple, every
wave that rises in the mind, when it subsides, does not die out
entirely, but leaves a mark and a future possibility of that wave coming
out again. This mark, with the possibility of the wave reappearing, is
what is called Samskâra. Every work that we do, every movement of the
body, every thought that we think, leaves such an impression on the
mind-stuff, and even when such impressions are not obvious on the
surface, they are sufficiently strong to work beneath the surface,
subconsciously. What we are every moment is determined by the sum total
of these impressions on the mind. What I am just at this moment is the
effect of the sum total of all the impressions of my past life. This is
really what is meant by character; each man's character is determined by
the sum total of these impressions. If good impressions prevail, the
character becomes good; if bad, it becomes bad. If a man continuously
hears bad words, thinks bad thoughts, does bad actions, his mind will be
full of bad impressions; and they will influence his thought and work
without his being conscious of the fact. In fact, these bad impressions
are always working, and their resultant must be evil, and that man will
be a bad man; he cannot help it. The sum total of these impressions in
him will create the strong motive power for doing bad actions. He will
be like a machine in the hands of his impressions, and they will force
him to do evil. Similarly, if a man thinks good thoughts and does good
works, the sum total of these impressions will be good; and they, in a
similar manner, will force him to do good even in spite of himself. When
a man has done so much good work and thought so many good thoughts that
there is an irresistible tendency in him to do good in spite of himself
and even if he wishes to do evil, his mind, as the sum total of his
tendencies, will not allow him to do so; the tendencies will turn him
back; he is completely under the influence of the good tendencies. When
such is the case, a man's good character is said to be established.

As the tortoise tucks its feet and head inside the shell, and you may
kill it and break it in pieces, and yet it will not come out, even so
the character of that man who has control over his motives and organs is
unchangeably established. He controls his own inner forces, and nothing
can draw them out against his will. By this continuous reflex of good
thoughts, good impressions moving over the surface of the mind, the
tendency for doing good becomes strong, and as the result we feel able
to control the Indriyas (the sense-organs, the nerve-centres). Thus
alone will character be established, then alone a man gets to truth.
Such a man is safe for ever; he cannot do any evil. You may place him in
any company, there will be no danger for him. There is a still higher
state than having this good tendency, and that is the desire for
liberation. You must remember that freedom of the soul is the goal of
all Yogas, and each one equally leads to the same result. By work alone
men may get to where Buddha got largely by meditation or Christ by
prayer. Buddha was a working Jnâni, Christ was a Bhakta, but the same
goal was reached by both of them. The difficulty is here. Liberation
means entire freedom — freedom from the bondage of good, as well as from
the bondage of evil. A golden chain is as much a chain as an iron one.
There is a thorn in my finger, and I use another to take the first one
out; and when I have taken it out, I throw both of them aside; I have no
necessity for keeping the second thorn, because both are thorns after
all. So the bad tendencies are to be counteracted by the good ones, and
the bad impressions on the mind should be removed by the fresh waves of
good ones, until all that is evil almost disappears, or is subdued and
held in control in a corner of the mind; but after that, the good
tendencies have also to be conquered. Thus the "attached" becomes the
"unattached". Work, but let not the action or the thought produce a deep
impression on the mind. Let the ripples come and go, let huge actions
proceed from the muscles and the brain, but let them not make any deep
impression on the soul.

How can this be done? We see that the impression of any action, to which
we attach ourselves, remains. I may meet hundreds of persons during the
day, and among them meet also one whom I love; and when I retire at
night, I may try to think of all the faces I saw, but only that face
comes before the mind — the face which I met perhaps only for one
minute, and which I loved; all the others have vanished. My attachment
to this particular person caused a deeper impression on my mind than all
the other faces. Physiologically the impressions have all been the same;
every one of the faces that I saw pictured itself on the retina, and the
brain took the pictures in, and yet there was no similarity of effect
upon the mind. Most of the faces, perhaps, were entirely new faces,
about which I had never thought before, but that one face of which I got
only a glimpse found associations inside. Perhaps I had pictured him in
my mind for years, knew hundreds of things about him, and this one new
vision of him awakened hundreds of sleeping memories in my mind; and
this one impression having been repeated perhaps a hundred times more
than those of the different faces together, will produce a great effect
on the mind.

Therefore, be "unattached"; let things work; let brain centres work;
work incessantly, but let not a ripple conquer the mind. Work as if you
were a stranger in this land, a sojourner; work incessantly, but do not
bind yourselves; bondage is terrible. This world is not our habitation,
it is only one of the many stages through which we are passing. Remember
that great saying of the Sânkhya, "The whole of nature is for the soul,
not the soul for nature." The very reason of nature's existence is for
the education of the soul; it has no other meaning; it is there because
the soul must have knowledge, and through knowledge free itself. If we
remember this always, we shall never be attached to nature; we shall
know that nature is a book in which we are to read, and that when we
have gained the required knowledge, the book is of no more value to us.
Instead of that, however, we are identifying ourselves with nature; we
are thinking that the soul is for nature, that the spirit is for the
flesh, and, as the common saying has it, we think that man "lives to
eat" and not "eats to live". We are continually making this mistake; we
are regarding nature as ourselves and are becoming attached to it; and
as soon as this attachment comes, there is the deep impression on the
soul, which binds us down and makes us work not from freedom but like
slaves.

The whole gist of this teaching is that you should work like a *master*
and not as a *slave*; work incessantly, but do not do slave's work. Do
you not see how everybody works? Nobody can be altogether at rest;
ninety-nine per cent of mankind work like slaves, and the result is
misery; it is all selfish work. Work through freedom! Work through love!
The word "love" is very difficult to understand; love never comes until
there is freedom. There is no true love possible in the slave. If you
buy a slave and tie him down in chains and make him work for you, he
will work like a drudge, but there will be no love in him. So when we
ourselves work for the things of the world as slaves, there can be no
love in us, and our work is not true work. This is true of work done for
relatives and friends, and is true of work done for our own selves.
Selfish work is slave's work; and here is a test. Every act of love
brings happiness; there is no act of love which does not bring peace and
blessedness as its reaction. Real existence, real knowledge, and real
love are eternally connected with one another, the three in one: where
one of them is, the others also must be; they are the three aspects of
the One without a second — the Existence - Knowledge - Bliss. When that
existence becomes relative, we see it as the world; that knowledge
becomes in its turn modified into the knowledge of the things of the
world; and that bliss forms the foundation of all true love known to the
heart of man. Therefore true love can never react so as to cause pain
either to the lover or to the beloved. Suppose a man loves a woman; he
wishes to have her all to himself and feels extremely jealous about her
every movement; he wants her to sit near him, to stand near him, and to
eat and move at his bidding. He is a slave to her and wishes to have her
as his slave. That is not love; it is a kind of morbid affection of the
slave, insinuating itself as love. It cannot be love, because it is
painful; if she does not do what he wants, it brings him pain. With love
there is no painful reaction; love only brings a reaction of bliss; if
it does not, it is not love; it is mistaking something else for love.
When you have succeeded in loving your husband, your wife, your
children, the whole world, the universe, in such a manner that there is
no reaction of pain or jealousy, no selfish feeling, then you are in a
fit state to be unattached.

Krishna says, "Look at Me, Arjuna! If I stop from work for one moment,
the whole universe will die. I have nothing to gain from work; I am the
one Lord, but why do I work? Because I love the world." God is
unattached because He loves; that real love makes us unattached.
Wherever there is attachment, the clinging to the things of the world,
you must know that it is all physical attraction between sets of
particles of matter — something that attracts two bodies nearer and
nearer all the time and, if they cannot get near enough, produces pain;
but where there is *real* love, it does not rest on physical attachment
at all. Such lovers may be a thousand miles away from one another, but
their love will be all the same; it does not die, and will never produce
any painful reaction.

To attain this unattachment is almost a life-work, but as soon as we
have reached this point, we have attained the goal of love and become
free; the bondage of nature falls from us, and we see nature as she is;
she forges no more chains for us; we stand entirely free and take not
the results of work into consideration; who then cares for what the
results may be?

Do you ask anything from your children in return for what you have given
them? It is your duty to work for them, and there the matter ends. In
whatever you do for a particular person, a city, or a state, assume the
same attitude towards it as you have towards your children — expect
nothing in return. If you can invariably take the position of a giver,
in which everything given by you is a free offering to the world,
without any thought of return, then will your work bring you no
attachment. Attachment comes only where we expect a return.

If working like slaves results in selfishness and attachment, working as
master of our own mind gives rise to the bliss of non-attachment. We
often talk of right and justice, but we find that in the world right and
justice are mere baby's talk. There are two things which guide the
conduct of men: might and mercy. The exercise of might is invariably the
exercise of selfishness. All men and women try to make the most of
whatever power or advantage they have. Mercy is heaven itself; to be
good, we have all to be merciful. Even justice and right should stand on
mercy. All thought of obtaining return for the work we do hinders our
spiritual progress; nay, in the end it brings misery. There is another
way in which this idea of mercy and selfless charity can be put into
practice; that is, by looking upon work as "worship" in case we believe
in a Personal God. Here we give up all the fruits our work unto the
Lord, and worshipping Him thus, we have no right to expect anything from
mankind for the work we do. The Lord Himself works incessantly and is
ever without attachment. Just as water cannot wet the lotus leaf, so
work cannot bind the unselfish man by giving rise to attachment to
results. The selfless and unattached man may live in the very heart of a
crowded and sinful city; he will not be touched by sin.

This idea of complete self-sacrifice is illustrated in the following
story: After the battle of Kurukshetra the five Pândava brothers
performed a great sacrifice and made very large gifts to the poor. All
people expressed amazement at the greatness and richness of the
sacrifice, and said that such a sacrifice the world had never seen
before. But, after the ceremony, there came a little mongoose, half of
whose body was golden, and the other half brown; and he began to roll on
the floor of the sacrificial hall. He said to those around, "You are all
liars; this is no sacrifice." "What!" they exclaimed, "you say this is
no sacrifice; do you not know how money and jewels were poured out to
the poor and every one became rich and happy? This was the most
wonderful sacrifice any man ever performed." But the mongoose said,
"There was once a little village, and in it there dwelt a poor Brahmin
with his wife, his son, and his son's wife. They were very poor and
lived on small gifts made to them for preaching and teaching. There came
in that land a three years' famine, and the poor Brahmin suffered more
than ever. At last when the family had starved for days, the father
brought home one morning a little barley flour, which he had been
fortunate enough to obtain, and he divided it into four parts, one for
each member of the family. They prepared it for their meal, and just as
they were about to eat, there was a knock at the door. The father opened
it, and there stood a guest. Now in India a guest is a sacred person; he
is as a god for the time being, and must be treated as such. So the poor
Brahmin said, 'Come in, sir; you are welcome,' He set before the guest
his own portion of the food, which the guest quickly ate and said, 'Oh,
sir, you have killed me; I have been starving for ten days, and this
little bit has but increased my hunger.' Then the wife said to her
husband, 'Give him my share,' but the husband said, 'Not so.' The wife
however insisted, saying, 'Here is a poor man, and it is our duty as
householders to see that he is fed, and it is my duty as a wife to give
him my portion, seeing that you have no more to offer him.' Then she
gave her share to the guest, which he ate, and said he was still burning
with hunger. So the son said, 'Take my portion also; it is the duty of a
son to help his father to fulfil his obligations.' The guest ate that,
but remained still unsatisfied; so the son's wife gave him her portion
also. That was sufficient, and the guest departed, blessing them. That
night those four people died of starvation. A few granules of that flour
had fallen on the floor; and when I rolled my body on them, half of it
became golden, as you see. Since then I have been travelling all over
the world, hoping to find another sacrifice like that, but nowhere have
I found one; nowhere else has the other half of my body been turned into
gold. That is why I say this is no sacrifice."

This idea of charity is going out of India; great men are becoming fewer
and fewer. When I was first learning English, I read an English story
book in which there was a story about a dutiful boy who had gone out to
work and had given some of his money to his old mother, and this was
praised in three or four pages. What was that? No Hindu boy can ever
understand the moral of that story. Now I understand it when I hear the
Western idea — every man for himself. And some men take everything for
themselves, and fathers and mothers and wives and children go to the
wall. That should never and nowhere be the ideal of the householder.

Now you see what Karma-Yoga means; even at the point of death to help
any one, without asking questions. Be cheated millions of times and
never ask a question, and never think of what you are doing. Never vaunt
of  your gifts to the poor or expect their gratitude, but rather be
grateful to them for giving you the occasion of practicing charity to
them. Thus it is plain that to be an ideal householder is a much more
difficult task than to be an ideal Sannyasin; the true life of work is
indeed as hard as, if not harder than, the equally true life of
renunciation.

</div>
