---
title: WHAT IS DUTY?

---
<div>

[←](secret_of_work.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Karma-Yoga](karma-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](we_help_ourselves.htm)

  

CHAPTER IV

## WHAT IS DUTY?

It is necessary in the study of Karma-Yoga to know what duty is. If I
have to do something I must first know that it is my duty, and then I
can do it. The idea of duty again is different in different nations. The
Mohammedan says what is written in his book, the Koran, is his duty; the
Hindu says what is in the Vedas is his duty; and the Christian says what
is in the Bible is his duty. We find that there are varied ideas of
duty, differing according to different states in life, different
historical periods and different nations. The term "duty", like every
other universal abstract term, is impossible clearly to define; we can
only get an idea of it by knowing its practical operations and results.
When certain things occur before us, we have all a natural or trained
impulse to act in a certain manner towards them; when this impulse
comes, the mind begins to think about the situation. Sometimes it thinks
that it is good to act in a particular manner under the given
conditions; at other times it thinks that it is wrong to act in the same
manner even in the very same circumstances. The ordinary idea of duty
everywhere is that every good man follows the dictates of his
conscience. But what is it that makes an act a duty? If a Christian
finds a piece of beef before him and does not eat it to save his own
life, or will not give it to save the life of another man, he is sure to
feel that he has not done his duty. But if a Hindu dares to eat that
piece of beef or to give it to another Hindu, he is equally sure to feel
that he too has not done his duty; the Hindu's training and education
make him feel that way. In the last century there were notorious bands
of robbers in India called thugs; they thought it their duty to kill any
man they could and take away his money; the larger the number of men
they killed, the better they thought they were. Ordinarily if a man goes
out into the street and shoots down another man, he is apt to feel sorry
for it, thinking that he has done wrong. But if the very same man, as a
soldier in his regiment, kills not one but twenty, he is certain to feel
glad and think that he has done his duty remarkably well. Therefore we
see that it is not the thing done that defines a duty. To give an
objective definition of duty is thus entirely impossible. Yet there is
duty from the subjective side. Any action that makes us go Godward is a
good action, and is our duty; any action that makes us go downward is
evil, and is not our duty. From the subjective standpoint we may see
that certain acts have a tendency to exalt and ennoble us, while certain
other acts have a tendency to degrade and to brutalise us. But it is not
possible to make out with certainty which acts have which kind of
tendency in relation to all persons, of all sorts and conditions. There
is, however, only one idea of duty which has been universally accepted
by all mankind, of all ages and sects and countries, and that has been
summed up in a Sanskrit aphorism thus: “Do not injure any being; not
injuring any being is virtue, injuring any being is sin.”

The Bhagavad-Gita frequently alludes to duties dependent upon birth and
position in life. Birth and position in life and in society largely
determine the mental and moral attitude of individuals towards the
various activities of life. It is therefore our duty to do that work
which will exalt and ennoble us in accordance with the ideals and
activities of the society in which we are born. But it must be
particularly remembered that the same ideals and activities do not
prevail in all societies and countries; our ignorance of this is the
main cause of much of the hatred of one nation towards another. An
American thinks that whatever an American does in accordance with the
custom of his country is the best thing to do, and that whoever does not
follow his custom must be a very wicked man. A Hindu thinks that his
customs are the only right ones and are the best in the world, and that
whosoever does not obey them must be the most wicked man living. This is
quite a natural mistake which all of us are apt to make. But it is very
harmful; it is the cause of half the uncharitableness found in the
world. When I came to this country and was going through the Chicago
Fair, a man from behind pulled at my turban. I looked back and saw that
he was a very gentlemanly-looking man, neatly dressed. I spoke to him;
and when he found that I knew English, he became very much abashed. On
another occasion in the same Fair another man gave me a push. When I
asked him the reason, he also was ashamed and stammered out an apology
saying, "Why do you dress that way?" The sympathies of these men were
limited within the range of their own language and their own fashion of
dress. Much of the oppression of powerful nations on weaker ones is
caused by this prejudice. It dries up their fellow feeling for fellow
men. That very man who asked me why I did not dress as he did and wanted
to ill-treat me because of my dress may have been a very good man, a
good father, and a good citizen; but the kindliness of his nature died
out as soon as he saw a man in a different dress. Strangers are
exploited in all countries, because they do not know how to defend
themselves; thus they carry home false impressions of the peoples they
have seen. Sailors, soldiers, and traders behave in foreign lands in
very queer ways, although they would not dream of doing so in their own
country; perhaps this is why the Chinese call Europeans and Americans
"foreign devils". They could not have done this if they had met the
good, the kindly sides of Western life.

Therefore the one point we ought to remember is that we should always
try to see the duty of others through their own eyes, and never judge
the customs of other peoples by our own standard. I am not the standard
of the universe. I have to accommodate myself to the world, and not the
world to me. So we see that environments change the nature of our
duties, and doing the duty which is ours at any particular time is the
best thing we can do in this world. Let us do that duty which is ours by
birth; and when we have done that, let us do the duty which is ours by
our position in life and in society. There is, however, one great danger
in human nature, viz that man never examines himself. He thinks he is
quite as fit to be on the throne as the king. Even if he is, he must
first show that he has done the duty of his own position; and then
higher duties will come to him. When we begin to work earnestly in the
world, nature gives us blows right and left and soon enables us to find
out our position. No man can long occupy satisfactorily a position for
which he is not fit. There is no use in grumbling against nature's
adjustment. He who does the lower work is not therefore a lower man. No
man is to be judged by the mere nature of his duties, but all should be
judged by the manner and the spirit in which they perform them.

Later on we shall find that even this idea of duty undergoes change, and
that the greatest work is done only when there is no selfish motive to
prompt it. Yet it is work through the sense of duty that leads us to
work without any idea of duty; when work will become worship — nay,
something higher — then will work be done for its own sake. We shall
find that the philosophy of duty, whether it be in the form of ethics or
of love, is the same as in every other Yoga — the object being the
attenuating of the lower self, so that the real higher Self may shine
forth — the lessening of the frittering away of energies on the lower
plane of existence, so that the soul may manifest itself on the higher
ones. This is accomplished by the continuous denial of low desires,
which duty rigorously requires. The whole organisation of society has
thus been developed, consciously or unconsciously, in the realms of
action and experience, where, by limiting selfishness, we open the way
to an unlimited expansion of the real nature of man.

Duty is seldom sweet. It is only when love greases its wheels that it
runs smoothly; it is a continuous friction otherwise. How else could
parents do their duties to their children, husbands to their wives, and
vice versa? Do we not meet with cases of friction every day in our
lives? Duty is sweet only through love, and love shines in freedom
alone. Yet is it freedom to be a slave to the senses, to anger, to
jealousies and a hundred other petty things that must occur every day in
human life? In all these little roughnesses that we meet with in life,
the highest expression of freedom is to forbear. Women, slaves to their
own irritable, jealous tempers, are apt to blame their husbands, and
assert their own "freedom", as they think, not knowing that thereby they
only prove that they are slaves. So it is with husbands who eternally
find fault with their wives.

Chastity is the first virtue in man or woman, and the man who, however
he may have strayed away, cannot be brought to the right path by a
gentle and loving and chaste wife is indeed very rare. The world is not
yet as bad as that. We hear much about brutal husbands all over the
world and about the impurity of men, but is it not true that there are
quite as many brutal and impure women as men? If all women were as good
and pure as their own constant assertions would lead one to believe, I
am perfectly satisfied that there would not be one impure man in the
world. What brutality is there which purity and chastity cannot conquer?
A good, chaste wife, who thinks of every other man except her own
husband as her child and has the attitude of a mother towards all men,
will grow so great in the power of her purity that there cannot be a
single man, however brutal, who will not breathe an atmosphere of
holiness in her presence. Similarly, every husband must look upon all
women, except his own wife, in the light of his own mother or daughter
or sister. That man, again, who wants to be a teacher of religion must
look upon every woman as his mother, and always behave towards her as
such.

The position of the mother is the highest in the world, as it is the one
place in which to learn and exercise the greatest unselfishness. The
love of God is the only love that is higher than a mother's love; all
others are lower. It is the duty of the mother to think of her children
first and then of herself. But, instead of that, if the parents are
always thinking of themselves first, the result is that the relation
between parents and children becomes the same as that between birds and
their offspring which, as soon as they are fledged, do not recognise any
parents. Blessed, indeed, is the man who is able to look upon woman as
the representative of the motherhood of God. Blessed, indeed, is the
woman to whom man represents the fatherhood of God. Blessed are the
children who look upon their parents as Divinity manifested on earth.

The only way to rise is by doing the duty next to us, and thus gathering
strength go on until we reach the highest state. A young Sannyâsin went
to a forest; there he meditated, worshipped, and practiced Yoga for a
long time. After years of hard work and practice, he was one day sitting
under a tree, when some dry leaves fell upon his head. He looked up and
saw a crow and a crane fighting on the top of the tree, which made him
very angry. He said, "What! Dare you throw these dry leaves upon my
head!" As with these words he angrily glanced at them, a flash of fire
went out of his head — such was the Yogi's power — and burnt the birds
to ashes. He was very glad, almost overjoyed at this development of
power — he could burn the crow and the crane by a look. After a time he
had to go to the town to beg his bread. He went, stood at a door, and
said, "Mother, give me food." A voice came from inside the house, "Wait
a little, my son." The young man thought, "You wretched woman, how dare
you make me wait! You do not know my power yet." While he was thinking
thus the voice came again: "Boy, don't be thinking too much of yourself.
Here is neither crow nor crane." He was astonished; still he had to
wait. At last the woman came, and he fell at her feet and said, "Mother,
how did you know that?" She said, "My boy, I do not know your Yoga or
your practices. I am a common everyday woman. I made you wait because my
husband is ill, and I was nursing him. All my life I have struggled to
do my duty. When I was unmarried, I did my duty to my parents; now that
I am married, I do my duty to my husband; that is all the Yoga I
practice. But by doing my duty I have become illumined; thus I could
read your thoughts and know what you had done in the forest. If you want
to know something higher than this, go to the market of such and such a
town where you will find a Vyâdha (The lowest class of people in India
who used to live as hunters and butchers.) who will tell you something
that you will be very glad to learn." The Sannyasin thought, "Why should
I go to that town and to a Vyadha?" But after what he had seen, his mind
opened a little, so he went. When he came near the town, he found the
market and there saw, at a distance, a big fat Vyadha cutting meat with
big knives, talking and bargaining with different people. The young man
said, "Lord help me! Is this the man from whom I am going to learn? He
is the incarnation of a demon, if he is anything." In the meantime this
man looked up and said, "O Swami, did that lady send you here? Take a
seat until I have done my business." The Sannyasin thought, "What comes
to me here?" He took his seat; the man went on with his work, and after
he had finished he took his money and said to the Sannyasin, "Come sir,
come to my home." On reaching home the Vyadha gave him a seat, saying,
"Wait here," and went into the house. He then washed his old father and
mother, fed them, and did all he could to please them, after which he
came to the Sannyasin and said, "Now, sir, you have come here to see me;
what can I do for you?" The Sannyasin asked him a few questions about
soul and about God, and the Vyadha gave him a lecture which forms a part
of the Mahâbhârata, called the *Vyâdha-Gitâ*. It contains one of the
highest flights of the Vedanta. When the Vyadha finished his teaching,
the Sannyasin felt astonished. He said, "Why are you in that body? With
such knowledge as yours why are you in a Vyadha's body, and doing such
filthy, ugly work?" "My son," replied the Vyadha, "no duty is ugly, no
duty is impure. My birth placed me in these circumstances and
environments. In my boyhood I learnt the trade; I am unattached, and I
try to do my duty well. I try to do my duty as a householder, and I try
to do all I can to make my father and mother happy. I neither know your
Yoga, nor have I become a Sannyasin, nor did I go out of the world into
a forest; nevertheless, all that you have heard and seen has come to me
through the unattached doing of the duty which belongs to my position."

There is a sage in India, a great Yogi, one of the most wonderful men I
have ever seen in my life. He is a peculiar man, he will not teach any
one; if you ask him a question he will not answer. It is too much for
him to take up the position of a teacher, he will not do it. If you ask
a question, and wait for some days, in the course of conversation he
will bring up the subject, and wonderful light will he throw on it. He
told me once the secret of work, "Let the end and the means be joined
into one." When you are doing any work, do not think of anything beyond.
Do it as worship, as the highest worship, and devote your whole life to
it for the time being. Thus, in the story, the Vyadha and the woman did
their duty with cheerfulness and whole-heartedness; and the result was
that they became illuminated, clearly showing that the right performance
of the duties of any station in life, without attachment to results,
leads us to the highest realisation of the perfection of the soul.

It is the worker who is attached to results that grumbles about the
nature of the duty which has fallen to his lot; to the unattached worker
all duties are equally good, and form efficient instruments with which
selfishness and sensuality may be killed, and the freedom of the soul
secured. We are all apt to think too highly of ourselves. Our duties are
determined by our desires to a much larger extent than we are willing to
grant. Competition rouses envy, and it kills the kindliness of the
heart. To the grumbler all duties are distasteful; nothing will ever
satisfy him, and his whole life is doomed to prove a failure. Let us
work on, doing as we go whatever happens to be our duty, and being ever
ready to put our shoulders to the wheel. Then surely shall we see the
Light!

</div>
