---
title: WE HELP OURSELVES, NOT THE WORLD

---
<div>

[←](what_is_duty.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Karma-Yoga](karma-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](non-attachment.htm)

  

CHAPTER V

## WE HELP OURSELVES, NOT THE WORLD

Before considering further how devotion to duty helps us in our
spiritual progress, let me place before you in a brief compass another
aspect of what we in India mean by Karma. In every religion there are
three parts: philosophy, mythology, and ritual. Philosophy of course is
the essence of every religion; mythology explains and illustrates it by
means of the more or less legendary lives of great men, stories and
fables of wonderful things, and so on; ritual gives to that philosophy a
still more concrete form, so that every one may grasp it — ritual is in
fact concretised philosophy. This ritual is Karma; it is necessary in
every religion, because most of us cannot understand abstract spiritual
things until we grow much spiritually. It is easy for men to think that
they can understand anything; but when it comes to practical experience,
they find that abstract ideas are often very hard to comprehend.
Therefore symbols are of great help, and we cannot dispense with the
symbolical method of putting things before us. From time immemorial
symbols have been used by all kinds of religions. In one sense we cannot
think but in symbols; words themselves are symbols of thought. In
another sense everything in the universe may be looked upon as a symbol.
The whole universe is a symbol, and God is the essence behind. This kind
of symbology is not simply the creation of man; it is not that certain
people belonging to a religion sit down together and think out certain
symbols, and bring them into existence out of their own minds. The
symbols of religion have a natural growth. Otherwise, why is it that
certain symbols are associated with certain ideas in the mind of almost
every one? Certain symbols are universally prevalent. Many of you may
think that the cross first came into existence as a symbol in connection
with the Christian religion, but as a matter of fact it existed before
Christianity was, before Moses was born, before the Vedas were given
out, before there was any human record of human things. The cross may be
found to have been in existence among the Aztecs and the Phoenicians;
every race seems to have had the cross. Again, the symbol of the
crucified Saviour, of a man crucified upon a cross, appears to have been
known to almost every nation. The circle has been a great symbol
throughout the world. Then there is the most universal of all symbols,
the Swastika. ![](swastika.jpg)At one time it was thought that the
Buddhists carried it all over the world with them, but it has been found
out that ages before Buddhism it was used among nations. In Old Babylon
and in Egypt it was to be found. What does this show? All these symbols
could not have been purely conventional. There must be some reason for
them; some natural association between them and the human mind. Language
is not the result of convention; it is not that people ever agreed to
represent certain ideas by certain words; there never was an idea
without a corresponding word or a word without a corresponding idea;
ideas and words are in their nature inseparable. The symbols to
represent ideas may be sound symbols or colour symbols. Deaf and dumb
people have to think with other than sound symbols. Every thought in the
mind has a form as its counterpart. This is called in Sanskrit
philosophy Nâma-Rupa — name and form. It is as impossible to create by
convention a system of symbols as it is to create a language. In the
world's ritualistic symbols we have an expression of the religious
thought of humanity. It is easy to say that there is no use of rituals
and temples and all such paraphernalia; every baby says that in modern
times. But it must be easy for all to see that those who worship inside
a temple are in many respects different from those who will not worship
there. Therefore the association of particular temples, rituals, and
other concrete forms with particular religions has a tendency to bring
into the minds of the followers of those religions the thoughts for
which those concrete things stand as symbols; and it is not wise to
ignore rituals and symbology altogether. The study and practice of these
things form naturally a part of Karma-Yoga.

There are many other aspects of this science of work. One among them is
to know the relation between thought and word and what can be achieved
by the power of the word. In every religion the power of the word is
recognised, so much so that in some of them creation itself is said to
have come out of the word. The external aspect of the thought of God is
the Word, and as God thought and willed before He created, creation came
out of the Word. In this stress and hurry of our materialistic life, our
nerves lose sensibility and become hardened. The older we grow, the
longer we are knocked about in the world, the more callous we become;
and we are apt to neglect things that even happen persistently and
prominently around us. Human nature, however, asserts itself sometimes,
and we are led to inquire into and wonder at some of these common
occurrences; wondering thus is the first step in the acquisition of
light. Apart from the higher philosophic and religious value of the
Word, we may see that sound symbols play a prominent part in the drama
of human life. I am talking to you. I am not touching you; the
pulsations of the air caused by my speaking go into your ear, they touch
your nerves and produce effects in your minds. You cannot resist this.
What can be more wonderful than this? One man calls another a fool, and
at this the other stands up and clenches his fist and lands a blow on
his nose. Look at the power of the word! There is a woman weeping and
miserable; another woman comes along and speaks to her a few gentle
words, the doubled up frame of the weeping woman becomes straightened at
once, her sorrow is gone and she already begins to smile. Think of the
power of words! They are a great force in higher philosophy as well as
in common life. Day and night we manipulate this force without thought
and without inquiry. To know the nature of this force and to use it well
is also a part of Karma-Yoga.

Our duty to others means helping others; doing good to the world. Why
should we do good to the world? Apparently to help the world, but really
to help ourselves. We should always try to help the world, that should
be the highest motive in us; but if we consider well, we find that the
world does not require our help at all. This world was not made that you
or I should come and help it. I once read a sermon in which it was said,
"All this beautiful world is very good, because it gives us time and
opportunity to help others." Apparently, this is a very beautiful
sentiment, but is it not a blasphemy to say that the world needs our
help? We cannot deny that there is much misery in it; to go out and help
others is, therefore, the best thing we can do, although in the long
run, we shall find that helping others is only helping ourselves. As a
boy I had some white mice. They were kept in a little box in which there
were little wheels, and when the mice tried to cross the wheels, the
wheels turned and turned, and the mice never got anywhere. So it is with
the world and our helping it. The only help is that we get moral
exercise. This world is neither good nor evil; each man manufactures a
world for himself. If a blind man begins to think of the world, it is
either as soft or hard, or as cold or hot. We are a mass of happiness or
misery; we have seen that hundreds of times in our lives. As a rule, the
young are optimistic and the old pessimistic. The young have life before
them; the old complain their day is gone; hundreds of desires, which
they cannot fulfil struggle in their hearts. Both are foolish
nevertheless. Life is good or evil according to the state of mind in
which we look at it, it is neither by itself. Fire, by itself, is
neither good nor evil. When it keeps us warm we say, "How beautiful is
fire!" When it burns our fingers, we blame it. Still, in itself it is
neither good nor bad. According as we use it, it produces in us the
feeling of good or bad; so also is this world. It is perfect. By
perfection is meant that it is perfectly fitted to meet its ends. We may
all be perfectly sure that it will go on beautifully well without us,
and we need not bother our heads wishing to help it.

Yet we must do good; the desire to do good is the highest motive power
we have, if we know all the time that it is a privilege to help others.
Do not stand on a high pedestal and take five cents in your hand and
say, "Here, my poor man," but be grateful that the poor man is there, so
that by making a gift to him you are able to help yourself. It is not
the receiver that is blessed, but it is the giver. Be thankful that you
are allowed to exercise your power of benevolence and mercy in the
world, and thus become pure and perfect. All good acts tend to make us
pure and perfect. What can we do at best? Build a hospital, make roads,
or erect charity asylums. We may organise a charity and collect two or
three millions of dollars, build a hospital with one million, with the
second give balls and drink champagne, and of the third let the officers
steal half, and leave the rest finally to reach the poor; but what are
all these? One mighty wind in five minutes can break all your buildings
up. What shall we do then? One volcanic eruption may sweep away all our
roads and hospitals and cities and buildings. Let us give up all this
foolish talk of doing good to the world. It is not waiting for your or
my help; yet we must work and constantly do good, because it is a
blessing to ourselves. That is the only way we can become perfect. No
beggar whom we have helped has ever owed a single cent to us; we owe
everything to him, because he has allowed us to exercise our charity on
him. It is entirely wrong to think that we have done, or can do, good to
the world, or to think that we have helped such and such people. It is a
foolish thought, and all foolish thoughts bring misery. We think that we
have helped some man and expect him to thank us, and because he does
not, unhappiness comes to us. Why should we expect anything in return
for what we do? Be grateful to the man you help, think of him as God. Is
it not a great privilege to be allowed to worship God by helping our
fellow men? If we were really unattached, we should escape all this pain
of vain expectation, and could cheerfully do good work in the world.
Never will unhappiness or misery come through work done without
attachment. The world will go on with its happiness and misery through
eternity.

There was a poor man who wanted some money; and somehow he had heard
that if he could get hold of a ghost, he might command him to bring
money or anything else he liked; so he was very anxious to get hold of a
ghost. He went about searching for a man who would give him a ghost, and
at last he found a sage with great powers, and besought his help. The
sage asked him what he would do with a ghost. I want a ghost to work for
me; teach me how to get hold of one, sir; I desire it very much,"
replied the man. But the sage said, "Don't disturb yourself, go home."
The next day the man went again to the sage and began to weep and pray,
"Give me a ghost; I must have a ghost, sir, to help me." At last the
sage was disgusted, and said, "Take this charm, repeat this magic word,
and a ghost will come, and whatever you say to him he will do. But
beware; they are terrible beings, and must be kept continually busy. If
you fail to give him work, he will take your life." The man replied,
"That is easy; I can give him work for all his life." Then he went to a
forest, and after long repetition of the magic word, a huge ghost
appeared before him, and said, "I am a ghost. I have been conquered by
your magic; but you must keep me constantly employed. The moment you
fail to give me work I will kill you." The man said, "Build me a
palace," and the ghost said, "It is done; the palace is built." "Bring
me money," said the man. "Here is your money," said the ghost. "Cut this
forest down, and build a city in its place." "That is done," said the
ghost, "anything more?" Now the man began to be frightened and thought
he could give him nothing more to do; he did everything in a trice. The
ghost said, "Give me something to do or I will eat you up." The poor man
could find no further occupation for him, and was frightened. So he ran
and ran and at last reached the sage, and said, "Oh, sir, protect my
life!" The sage asked him what the matter was, and the man replied, "I
have nothing to give the ghost to do. Everything I tell him to do he
does in a moment, and he threatens to eat me up if I do not give him
work." Just then the ghost arrived, saying, "I'll eat you up," and he
would have swallowed the man. The man began to shake, and begged the
sage to save his life. The sage said, "I will find you a way out. Look
at that dog with a curly tail. Draw your sword quickly and cut the tail
off and give it to the ghost to straighten out." The man cut off the
dog's tail and gave it to the ghost, saying, "Straighten that out for
me." The ghost took it and slowly and carefully straightened it out, but
as soon as he let it go, it instantly curled up again. Once more he
laboriously straightened it out, only to find it again curled up as soon
as he attempted to let go of it. Again he patiently straightened it out,
but as soon as he let it go, it curled up again. So he went on for days
and days, until he was exhausted and said, "I was never in such trouble
before in my life. I am an old veteran ghost, but never before was I in
such trouble." "I will make a compromise with you ;" he said to the man,
"you let me off and I will let you keep all I have given you and will
promise not to harm you." The man was much pleased, and accepted the
offer gladly.

This world is like a dog's curly tail, and people have been striving to
straighten it out for hundreds of years; but when they let it go, it has
curled up again. How could it be otherwise? One must first know how to
work without attachment, then one will not be a fanatic. When we know
that this world is like a dog's curly tail and will never get
straightened, we shall not become fanatics. If there were no fanaticism
in the world, it would make much more progress than it does now. It is a
mistake to think that fanaticism can make for the progress of mankind.
On the contrary, it is a retarding element creating hatred and anger,
and causing people to fight each other, and making them unsympathetic.
We think that whatever we do or possess is the best in the world, and
what we do not do or possess is of no value. So, always remember the
instance of the curly tail of the dog whenever you have a tendency to
become a fanatic. You need not worry or make yourself sleepless about
the world; it will go on without you. When you have avoided fanaticism,
then alone will you work well. It is the level-headed man, the calm man,
of good judgment and cool nerves, of great sympathy and love, who does
good work and so does good to himself. The fanatic is foolish and has no
sympathy; he can never straighten the world, nor himself become pure and
perfect.

To recapitulate the chief points in today's lecture: First, we have to
bear in mind that we are all debtors to the world and the world does not
owe us anything. It is a great privilege for all of us to be allowed to
do anything for the world. In helping the world we really help
ourselves. The second point is that there is a God in this universe. It
is not true that this universe is drifting and stands in need of help
from you and me. God is ever present therein, He is undying and
eternally active and infinitely watchful. When the whole universe
sleeps, He sleeps not; He is working incessantly; all the changes and
manifestations of the world are His. Thirdly, we ought not to hate
anyone. This world will always continue to be a mixture of good and
evil. Our duty is to sympathise with the weak and to love even the
wrongdoer. The world is a grand moral gymnasium wherein we have all to
take exercise so as to become stronger and stronger spiritually.
Fourthly, we ought not to be fanatics of any kind, because fanaticism is
opposed to love. You hear fanatics glibly saying, "I do not hate the
sinner. I hate the sin," but I am prepared to go any distance to see the
face of that man who can really make a distinction between the sin and
the sinner. It is easy to say so. If we can distinguish well between
quality and substance, we may become perfect men. It is not easy to do
this. And further, the calmer we are and the less disturbed our nerves,
the more shall we love and the better will our work be.

</div>
