---
title: THE IDEAL OF KARMA-YOGA

---
<div>

[←](freedom.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Karma-Yoga](karma-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](../raja-yoga/preface.htm)

  

CHAPTER VIII

## THE IDEAL OF KARMA-YOGA

The grandest idea in the religion of the Vedanta is that we may reach
the same goal by different paths; and these paths I have generalised
into four, viz those of work, love, psychology, and knowledge. But you
must, at the same time, remember that these divisions are not very
marked and quite exclusive of each other. Each blends into the other.
But according to the type which prevails, we name the divisions. It is
not that you can find men who have no other faculty than that of work,
nor that you can find men who are no more than devoted worshippers only,
nor that there are men who have no more than mere knowledge. These
divisions are made in accordance with the type or the tendency that may
be seen to prevail in a man. We have found that, in the end, all these
four paths converge and become one. All religions and all methods of
work and worship lead us to one and the same goal.

I have already tried to point out that goal. It is freedom as I
understand it. Everything that we perceive around us is struggling
towards freedom, from the atom to the man, from the insentient, lifeless
particle of matter to the highest existence on earth, the human soul.
The whole universe is in fact the result of this struggle for freedom.
In all combinations every particle is trying to go on its own way, to
fly from the other particles; but the others are holding it in check.
Our earth is trying to fly away from the sun, and the moon from the
earth. Everything has a tendency to infinite dispersion. All that we see
in the universe has for its basis this one struggle towards freedom; it
is under the impulse of this tendency that the saint prays and the
robber robs. When the line of action taken is not a proper one, we call
it evil; and when the manifestation of it is proper and high, we call it
good. But the impulse is the same, the struggle towards freedom. The
saint is oppressed with the knowledge of his condition of bondage, and
he wants to get rid of it; so he worships God. The thief is oppressed
with the idea that he does not possess certain things, and he tries to
get rid of that want, to obtain freedom from it; so he steals. Freedom
is the one goal of all nature, sentient or insentient; and consciously
or unconsciously, everything is struggling towards that goal. The
freedom which the saint seeks is very different from that which the
robber seeks; the freedom loved by the saint leads him to the enjoyment
of infinite, unspeakable bliss, while that on which the robber has set
his heart only forges other bonds for his soul.

There is to be found in every religion the manifestation of this
struggle towards freedom. It is the groundwork of all morality, of
unselfishness, which means getting rid of the idea that men are the same
as their little body. When we see a man doing good work, helping others,
it means that he cannot be confined within the limited circle of "me and
mine". There is no limit to this getting out of selfishness. All the
great systems of ethics preach absolute unselfishness as the goal.
Supposing this absolute unselfishness can be reached by a man, what
becomes of him? He is no more the little Mr. So-and-so; he has acquired
infinite expansion. The little personality which he had before is now
lost to him for ever; he has become infinite, and the attainment of this
infinite expansion is indeed the goal of all religions and of all moral
and philosophical teachings. The personalist, when he hears this idea
philosophically put, gets frightened. At the same time, if he preaches
morality, he after all teaches the very same idea himself. He puts no
limit to the unselfishness of man. Suppose a man becomes perfectly
unselfish under the personalistic system, how are we to distinguish him
from the perfected ones in other system? He has become one with the
universe and to become that is the goal of all; only the poor
personalist has not the courage to follow out his own reasoning to its
right conclusion. Karma-Yoga is the attaining through unselfish work of
that freedom which is the goal of all human nature. Every selfish
action, therefore, retards our reaching the goal, and every unselfish
action takes us towards the goal; that is why the only definition that
can be given of morality is this: *That which is selfish is immoral, and
that which is unselfish is moral*.

But, if you come to details, the matter will not be seen to be quite so
simple. For instance, environment often makes the details different as I
have already mentioned. The same action under one set of circumstances
may be unselfish, and under another set quite selfish. So we can give
only a general definition, and leave the details to be worked out by
taking into consideration the differences in time, place, and
circumstances. In one country one kind of conduct is considered moral,
and in another the very same is immoral, because the circumstances
differ. The goal of all nature is freedom, and freedom is to be attained
only by perfect unselfishness; every thought, word, or deed that is
unselfish takes us towards the goal, and, as such, is called moral. That
definition, you will find, holds good in every religion and every system
of ethics. In some systems of thought morality is derived from a
Superior Being — God. If you ask why a man ought to do this and not
that, their answer is: "Because such is the command of God." But
whatever be the source from which it is derived, their code of ethics
also has the same central idea — not to think of self but to give up
self. And yet some persons, in spite of this high ethical idea, are
frightened at the thought of having to give up their little
personalities. We may ask the man who clings to the idea of little
personalities to consider the case of a person who has become perfectly
unselfish, who has no thought for himself, who does no deed for himself,
who speaks no word for himself, and then say where his "himself" is.
That "himself" is known to him only so long as he thinks, acts, or
speaks for himself. If he is only conscious of others, of the universe,
and of the all, where is his "himself"? It is gone for ever.

Karma-Yoga, therefore, is a system of ethics and religion intended to
attain freedom through unselfishness, and by good works. The Karma-Yogi
need not believe in any doctrine whatever. He may not believe even in
God, may not ask what his soul is, nor think of any metaphysical
speculation. He has got his own special aim of realising selflessness;
and he has to work it out himself. Every moment of his life must be
realisation, because he has to solve by mere work, without the help of
doctrine or theory, the very same problem to which the Jnâni applies his
reason and inspiration and the Bhakta his love.

Now comes the next question: What is this work? What is this doing good
to the world? Can we do good to the world? In an absolute sense, no; in
a relative sense, yes. No permanent or everlasting good can be done to
the world; if it could be done, the world would not be this world. We
may satisfy the hunger of a man for five minutes, but he will be hungry
again. Every pleasure with which we supply a man may be seen to be
momentary. No one can permanently cure this ever-recurring fever of
pleasure and pain. Can any permanent happiness be given to the world? In
the ocean we cannot raise a wave without causing a hollow somewhere
else. The sum total of the good things in the world has been the same
throughout in its relation to man's need and greed. It cannot be
increased or decreased. Take the history of the human race as we know it
today. Do we not find the same miseries and the same happiness, the same
pleasures and pains, the same differences in position? Are not some
rich, some poor, some high, some low, some healthy, some unhealthy? All
this was just the same with the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Romans in
ancient times as it is with the Americans today. So far as history is
known, it has always been the same; yet at the same time we find that,
running along with all these incurable differences of pleasure and pain,
there has ever been the struggle to alleviate them. Every period of
history has given birth to thousands of men and women who have worked
hard to smooth the passage of life for others. And how far have they
succeeded? We can only play at driving the ball from one place to
another. We take away pain from the physical plane, and it goes to the
mental one. It is like that picture in Dante's hell where the misers
were given a mass of gold to roll up a hill. Every time they rolled it
up a little, it again rolled down. All our talks about the millennium
are very nice as school-boys' stories, but they are no better than that.
All nations that dream of the millennium also think that, of all peoples
in the world, they will have the best of it then for themselves. This is
the wonderfully unselfish idea of the millennium!

We cannot add happiness to this world; similarly, we cannot add pain to
it either. The sum total of the energies of pleasure and pain displayed
here on earth will be the same throughout. We just push it from this
side to the other side, and from that side to this, but it will remain
the same, because to remain so is its very nature. This ebb and flow,
this rising and falling, is in the world's very nature; it would be as
logical to hold otherwise as to say that we may have life without death.
This is complete nonsense, because the very idea of life implies death
and the very idea of pleasure implies pain. The lamp is constantly
burning out, and that is its life. If you want to have life, you have to
die every moment for it. Life and death are only different expressions
of the same thing looked at from different standpoints; they are the
falling and the rising of the same wave, and the two form one whole. One
looks at the "fall" side and becomes a pessimist another looks at the
"rise" side and becomes an optimist. When a boy is going to school and
his father and mother are taking care of him, everything seems blessed
to him; his wants are simple, he is a great optimist. But the old man,
with his varied experience, becomes calmer and is sure to have his
warmth considerably cooled down. So, old nations, with signs of decay
all around them, are apt to be less hopeful than new nations. There is a
proverb in India: "A thousand years a city, and a thousand years a
forest." This change of city into forest and vice versa is going on
everywhere, and it makes people optimists or pessimists according to the
side they see of it.

The next idea we take up is the idea of equality. These millennium ideas
have been great motive powers to work. Many religions preach this as an
element in them — that God is coming to rule the universe, and that then
there will be no difference at all in conditions. The people who preach
this doctrine are mere fanatics, and fanatics are indeed the sincerest
of mankind. Christianity was preached just on the basis of the
fascination of this fanaticism, and that is what made it so attractive
to the Greek and the Roman slaves. They believed that under the
millennial religion there would be no more slavery, that there would be
plenty to eat and drink; and, therefore, they flocked round the
Christian standard. Those who preached the idea first were of course
ignorant fanatics, but very sincere. In modern times this millennial
aspiration takes the form of equality — of liberty, equality, and
fraternity. This is also fanaticism. True equality has never been and
never can be on earth. How can we all be equal here? This impossible
kind of equality implies total death. What makes this world what it is?
Lost balance. In the primal state, which is called chaos, there is
perfect balance. How do all the formative forces of the universe come
then? By struggling, competition, conflict. Suppose that all the
particles of matter were held in equilibrium, would there be then any
process of creation? We know from science that it is impossible. Disturb
a sheet of water, and there you find every particle of the water trying
to become calm again, one rushing against the other; and in the same way
all the phenomena which we call the universe — all things therein — are
struggling to get back to the state of perfect balance. Again a
disturbance comes, and again we have combination and creation.
Inequality is the very basis of creation. At the same time the forces
struggling to obtain equality are as much a necessity of creation as
those which destroy it.

Absolute equality, that which means a perfect balance of all the
struggling forces in all the planes, can never be in this world. Before
you attain that state, the world will have become quite unfit for any
kind of life, and no one will be there. We find, therefore, that all
these ideas of the millennium and of absolute equality are not only
impossible but also that, if we try to carry them out, they will lead us
surely enough to the day of destruction. What makes the difference
between man and man? It is largely the difference in the brain. Nowadays
no one but a lunatic will say that we are all born with the same brain
power. We come into the world with unequal endowments; we come as
greater men or as lesser men, and there is no getting away from that
pre-natally determined condition. The American Indians were in this
country for thousands of years, and a few handfuls of your ancestors
came to their land. What difference they have caused in the appearance
of the country! Why did not the Indians make improvements and build
cities, if all were equal? With your ancestors a different sort of brain
power came into the land, different bundles of past impressions came,
and they worked out and manifested themselves. Absolute
non-differentiation is death. So long as this world lasts,
differentiation there will and must be, and the millennium of perfect
equality will come only when a cycle of creation comes to its end.
Before that, equality cannot be. Yet this idea of realising the
millennium is a great motive power. Just as inequality is necessary for
creation itself, so the struggle to limit it is also necessary. If there
were no struggle to become free and get back to God, there would be no
creation either. It is the difference between these two forces that
determines the nature of the motives of men. There will always be these
motives to work, some tending towards bondage and others towards
freedom.

This world's wheel within wheel is a terrible mechanism; if we put our
hands in it, as soon as we are caught we are gone. We all think that
when we have done a certain duty, we shall be at rest; but before we
have done a part of that duty, another is already in waiting. We are all
being dragged along by this mighty, complex world-machine. There are
only two ways out of it; one is to give up all concerns with the
machine, to let it go and stand aside, to give up our desires. That is
very easy to say, but is almost impossible to do. I do not know whether
in twenty millions of men one can do that. The other way is to plunge
into the world and learn the secret of work, and that is the way of
Karma-Yoga. Do not fly away from the wheels of the world-machine, but
stand inside it and learn the secret of work. Through proper work done
inside, it is also possible to come out. Through this machinery itself
is the way out.

We have now seen what work is. It is a part of natures foundation, and
goes on always. Those that believe in God understand this better,
because they know that God is not such an incapable being as will need
our help. Although this universe will go on always, our goal is freedom,
our goal is unselfishness; and according to Karma-Yoga, that goal is to
be reached through work. All ideas of making the world perfectly happy
may be good as motive powers for fanatics; but we must know that
fanaticism brings forth as much evil as good. The Karma-Yogi asks why
you require any motive to work other than the inborn love of freedom. Be
beyond the common worldly motives. "To work you have the right, but not
to the fruits thereof." Man can train himself to know and to practice
that, says the Karma-Yogi. When the idea of doing good becomes a part of
his very being, then he will not seek for any motive outside. Let us do
good because it is good to do good; he who does good work even in order
to get to heaven binds himself down, says the Karma-Yogi. Any work that
is done with any the least selfish motive, instead of making us free,
forges one more chain for our feet.

So the only way is to give up all the fruits of work, to be unattached
to them. Know that this world is not we, nor are we this world; that we
are really not the body; that we really do not work. We are the Self,
eternally at rest and at peace. Why should we be bound by anything? It
is very good to say that we should be perfectly non-attached, but what
is the way to do it? Every good work we do without any ulterior motive,
instead of forging a new chain, will break one of the links in the
existing chains. Every good thought that we send to the world without
thinking of any return, will be stored up there and break one link in
the chain, and make us purer and purer, until we become the purest of
mortals. Yet all this may seem to be rather quixotic and too
philosophical, more theoretical than practical. I have read many
arguments against the Bhagavad-Gita, and many have said that without
motives you cannot work. They have never seen unselfish work except
under the influence of fanaticism, and, therefore, they speak in that
way.

Let me tell you in conclusion a few words about one man who actually
carried this teaching of Karma-Yoga into practice. That man is Buddha.
He is the one man who ever carried this into perfect practice. All the
prophets of the world, except Buddha, had external motives to move them
to unselfish action. The prophets of the world, with this single
exception, may be divided into two sets, one set holding that they are
incarnations of God come down on earth, and the other holding that they
are only messengers from God; and both draw their impetus for work from
outside, expect reward from outside, however highly spiritual may be the
language they use. But Buddha is the only prophet who said, "I do not
care to know your various theories about God. What is the use of
discussing all the subtle doctrines about the soul? Do good and be good.
And this will take you to freedom and to whatever truth there is." He
was, in the conduct of his life, absolutely without personal motives;
and what man worked more than he? Show me in history one character who
has soared so high above all. The whole human race has produced but one
such character, such high philosophy, such wide sympathy. This great
philosopher, preaching the highest philosophy, yet had the deepest
sympathy for the lowest of animals, and never put forth any claims for
himself. He is the ideal Karma-Yogi, acting entirely without motive, and
the history of humanity shows him to have been the greatest man ever
born; beyond compare the greatest combination of heart and brain that
ever existed, the greatest soul-power that has even been manifested. He
is the first great reformer the world has seen. He was the first who
dared to say, "Believe not because some old manuscripts are produced,
believe not because it is your national belief, because you have been
made to believe it from your childhood; but reason it all out, and after
you have analysed it, then, if you find that it will do good to one and
all, believe it, live up to it, and help others to live up to it." He
works best who works without any motive, neither for money, nor for
fame, nor for anything else; and when a man can do that, he will be a
Buddha, and out of him will come the power to work in such a manner as
will transform the world. This man represents the very highest ideal of
Karma-Yoga.

</div>
