+++
title = "The iconography of kumAra according to the sanatkumAra-prashna"

+++
We had earlier discussed vidyA-s of the various specialized mUrti-s of
[kArttikeya](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/10/10/kumara-vidya-s/ "kumAra vidyA-s")
and their visualizations. Continuing with that discussion we shall now
look at the mUrti-s of the god as described by the kaumArAgama known as
the sanatkumAra prashna. The prashna series of kaumAragama-s are
comparable to the core saMhitA-s of the vaikhAnasa-s with respect to
providing the main scaffold for the temple rituals of skanda. The major
ones known to the kaumAra ritual experts are the agastya prashna, the
kaushika prashna and sanatkumAra prashna. Of these sanatkumAra prashna
is preserved in reasonably good manuscripts. The sharavanabhava paTala
of the sanatkumAra prashna outlines 16 icons of kumAra:

1\) j\~nAna shakti  
black-colored garments; a garland of white arka flowers; golden jeweled
crown; 4 hands with shakti, vajra, cock, skull-topped rod, white
yaj\~nopavIta.

2\) skanda  
cloud-colored garment, wearing gem-set ornaments and a flower garland,
seated in padmAsana, hair in the form of a shikhA; smoky complexion; 3
eyes and 4 hands holding cock and vajra in right and left, the other two
hands respectively showing abhaya and varada.

3\) agnijAta  
Of white and black complexion, with 2 heads and 8 hands holding sruva,
akShamAla, sword, svastika mudra (in right hands) and cock, shield,
vajra, ghee bowl (in left hands); performing vedic rites.

4\) saubheya  
red lotus complexion; 4 heads, 8 eyes, 8 arms and seated on a lotus;
left leg bent and placed on right leg. Holds shakti, hibiscus, flower
arrows, abhaya mudra (right hands) and vajra, sugar-cane bow, and varada
mudras (left hands).

5\) gA\~Ngeya  
scarlet complexion like fresh pomegranate flower; wearing a karaNDa
makuTa (a turban with net-like weaving), gem-set ear-rings and a blue
lotus garland; mounted on a gharial; One head with 3 eyes and 4 hands
holding an axe and water pot (right) and cock and sacrificial fire drill
(in left hands)

6\) sharavanabhava  
complexion of rising sun; wearing golden hued clothes; mounted on a
lion; one head with curly locks and 3 eyes and 6 hands holding flower
arrows and sugar-cane bow, sword and shield, vajra and cock banner in
the respective pairs of right and left hands.

7\) kArtikeya  
complexion of the rising sun, garment of variegated colors, riding on a
peacock, one head with a wreath of bilva leaves, 3 eyes with 10 hands
holding shakti, trident, arrow, a\~NkuSha and abhaya mudra (right), a
tomara missile with launcher, lasso, conch vajra and vIra mudra (left)

8\) kumAra  
two lotus flowers adoring the ears; wearing a crown; 1 head, 4 hands
holding shakti and vajra (right) and abhaya and vara (left); accompanied
by varuNa and vAyu.

9\) ShaNmukha  
Attired with several jewels and all garments of yellow silk; dazzling
ear-studs; 6 heads and 12 hands; riding a peacock; holding shakti,
vajra, sword, chakra, lasso, abhaya mudras, cock, bow, shield, and a
cudgel. Embracing two wives gajAyI (jayA) and gajavallI (vijayA) on left
and right.

gajAyI: complexion of rising sun, right hand holding a lily, wearing a
garland of mandAra flowers.  
gajavallI: black in color; left hand holding a lotus, crown; wearing a
jeweled bra on her firm breasts; blazing ear studs.

10\) tArakAri  
riding a bull; wearing a braided jaTa, holding trident, hatchet, sword,
abhaya mudra (right hands) and a lasso, a paiShAcha (?), shield and
varada mudra (left).

11\) senAnI  
Of black complexion; with a shikha; one head with 3 eyes; having a
merciful face; smeared with sweet-smelling unguents; holding a conch and
chakra and displaying abhaya and varada mudras.

12\) guha  
White garments; merciful face; 3 eyes; golden gem-set crown; 4 arms with
trident, vajra, abhaya and varada mudras. Accompanied on the left side
by his wife jayAyI.

13\) brahmachAri  
crimson complexion; 3 eyes and two hands with cudgel in the right and
vajra in the left. Standing with legs held slightly bent on a gem-set
lotus foot rest. Wearing the marks of a brahmachAri like shikha,
yaj\~nopavIta, mau\~nji girdle and kaupIna.

14\) shivadeha  
1 head wearing karaNDa makuTa; 6 hands holding a shakti, vajra, flag
japAmAla abhaya and varada mudras; mounted on a peacock.

15\) krau\~nchaddhAri (?)  
Seated on a lion-throne with a peacock vAhana; 3 eyes and 4 hands
holding a flag, cudgel, abhaya and varada mudras. Beside him are seated
his two wives jayAyI and vijayA on left and right respectively. He is
shown demolishing the krau\~ncha mountain.

16\) shikhivAhana  
With complexion of a pink lotus wearing deep blue (indra-nIla) garments;
1 head with 3 eyes and with 4 arms bearing lasso, a\~Nkusha, abhaya and
varada mudras; having hair in a top knot that appears blazing like fire,
with peacock vAhana.

In one type of kumAra temple the icon in the central shrine is
recommended to be j\~nAna shakti, in the eastern sub-shrine is skanda;
south â€“ saubheya; south-west- gA\~Ngeya; west- a sub-shrine with two
icons of sharavanabhava and ShaNmukha; in the north-west kArtikeya,
kumAra and tArakAri; in the northern sub-shrine- senAnI, guha and
shivadeha; In the north east- krau\~nchaddhAri, shikhivAhana and
brahmachAri.

Text also mentions the following division of offerings made at a
kumArAlaya: brAhmaNa-s: recitation of vedic formulae and hymns;
kShatriya-s: offer fowl; vaishya-s offer camphor and rock-sugar;
shUdra-s offer fruits and flowers during the kR^ittkA festival.
