---
title: ON MANTRA AND MANTRA-CHAITANYA

---
<div>

[←](on_music.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm) / [Notes of
Class Talks](notes_of_class_talks_contents.htm)
/ [→](on_conceptions_of_godhead.htm)

  

## ON MANTRA AND MANTRA-CHAITANYA

The Mantra-Shâstris (upholders of the Mantra theory) believe that some
words have been handed down through a succession of teachers and
disciples, and the mere utterance of them will lead to some form of
realisation. There are two different meanings of the word
Mantra-chaitanya. According to some, if you practise the repetition of a
certain Mantra, you will see the Ishta-Devatâ who is the object or deity
of that Mantra. But according to others, the word means that if you
practise the repetition of a certain Mantra received from a Guru not
competent, you will have to perform certain ceremonials by which that
Mantra will become Chetana or living, and then its repetition will be
successful. Different Mantras, when they are thus "living", show
different signs, but the general sign is that one will be able to repeat
it for a long time without feeling any strain and that his mind will
very soon be concentrated. This is about the Tantrika Mantras.

From the time of the Vedas, two different opinions have been held about
Mantras. Yâska and others say that the Vedas have meanings, but the
ancient Mantra-shastris say that they have no meaning, and that their
use consists only in uttering them in connection with certain
sacrifices, when they will surely produce effect in the form of various
material enjoyments or spiritual knowledge. The latter arises from the
utterance of the Upanishads.

</div>
