---
title: 'SHRI RAMAKRISHNA

  THE SIGNIFICANCE OF HIS

  LIFE AND

  TEACHINGS'

---
<div>

[←](on_questioning_the_competency_of_the_guru.htm)
[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm) / [Notes of
Class Talks](notes_of_class_talks_contents.htm)
/ [→](on_shri_ramakrishna.htm)

  

## SHRI RAMAKRISHNA THE SIGNIFICANCE OF HIS LIFE AND TEACHINGS

In a narrow society there is depth and intensity of spirituality. The
narrow stream is very rapid. In a catholic society, along with the
breadth of vision we find a proportionate loss in depth and intensity.
But the life of Sri Ramakrishna upsets all records of history. It is a
remarkable phenomenon that in Sri Ramakrishna there has been an
assemblage of ideas deeper than the sea and vaster than the skies.

We must interpret the Vedas in the light of the experience of Sri
Ramakrishna. Shankaracharya and all other commentators made the
tremendous mistake to think that the whole of the Vedas spoke the same
truth. Therefore they were guilty of torturing those of the apparently
conflicting Vedic texts which go against their own doctrines, into the
meaning of their particular schools. As, in the olden times, it was the
Lord alone, the deliverer of the *Gita*, who partially harmonised these
apparently conflicting statements, so with a view to completely settling
this dispute, immensely magnified in the process of time, He Himself has
come as Sri Ramakrishna. Therefore no one can truly understand the Vedas
and Vedanta, unless one studies them in the light of the utterance of
Sri Ramakrishna who first exemplified in his life and taught that these
scriptural statements which appear to the cursory view as contradictory,
are meant for different grades of aspirants and are arranged in the
order of evolution. The whole world will undoubtedly forget its fights
and disputes and be united in a fraternal tie in religious and other
matters as a consequence of these teachings.

If there is anything which Sri Ramakrishna has urged us to give up as
carefully as lust and wealth, it is the limiting of the infinitude of
God by circumscribing it within narrow bounds. Whoever, therefore, will
try to limit the infinite ideals of Sri Ramakrishna in that way, will go
against him and be his enemy.

One of his own utterances is that those who have seen the chameleon only
once, know only one colour of the animal, but those who have lived under
the tree, know all the colours that it puts on. For this reason, no
saying of Sri Ramakrishna can be accepted as authentic, unless it is
verified by those who constantly lived with him and whom he brought up
to fulfil his life's mission.

Such a unique personality, such a synthesis of the utmost of Jnana,
Yoga, Bhakti and Karma, has never before appeared among mankind. The
life of Sri Ramakrishna proves that the greatest breadth, the highest
catholicity and the utmost intensity can exist side by side in the same
individual, and that society also can be constructed like that, for
society is nothing but an aggregate of individuals.

He is the true disciple and follower of Sri Ramakrishna, whose character
is perfect and all-sided like this. The formation of such a perfect
character is the ideal of this age, and everyone should strive for that
alone.

</div>
