+++
title = "A dramiDa prashasti concerning shAstA"

+++
One topic of some interest in the evolution of the mantra-shAstra is the
emergence of the shAstA tantra-s the most voluminous of which is the
kulAla-tantra. We had earlier shown how shAstA has emerged from an
earlier equestrian deity revanta who was a part of the saura sect. A
memory of this is preserved in the Tantric compendium of
chenas-nArAyanan nambutiripad as also the North Indian mantra manuals
such as the mantra-mahodadhi. But Arya was established as a distinct
deity as early as the 200s of CE and certainly by the 600s of CE in the
drAviDa country. Given the large sthapanA-tantra like material in the
kulAla tantraM of which I have seen a bunch of manuscripts in the
drAviDa country I was curious as to investigate their provenance.

For this purpose I started looking at Tamil prashasti-s from the choLa
country. There was one from the north wall of the viShNu temple of
vaikuNTha-perumAl in Uttaramallur concerning a large temple of shAstA.
It is dated to the 50th day of the reign of pArthivendrAdhipati-varman
who defeated the pANDya-s of madhurai. Its officiants are the members of
the assembly of the brAhminical village of the
uttarameru-chaturvedi-ma\~NgalaM. The temple was built in a large piece
of land in the south of the village of uttarameru. The inscription was
written by a certain brAhmaNa shivadAsan brahmapriyan and the rite of
consecrating the temple land was performed by a certain shAttAn
brahmakuTTan (probably a Prakrit form of shAstA brahmagupta) from the
puLiya\~NguDi village. The personal name of this ritualist itself
contains the name of the deity and he is described as performing the
pUrvAcharaM. The inscription also mentions that the assembly intends the
performance of shrI-bali and archanAbhoga, both of which are mentioned
with vidhi-s for performance in the kulAla-tantra. In the inscription
the deity is termed both mahAshAstA and Arya.

Who was this pArthivendrAdhipati-varman? We notice on the eastern wall
of the vaikuNTha-perumAl kovil an inscription which says: pArthivendra
Aditya-varman who took the head of vIra-pANdya. This concordance
establishes the two to be same king. He comes after gaNDarAditya and
rAjAditya, which suggests that he might be aditya varman-II karikAla.
But we have no evidence whether Aditya karikAla really occupied the
throne. Further, there are inscriptions which talk of the 9th year of
his reign. From what we know aditya karikala was murdered before he was
yuvarAja for any such prolonged period. So we can only place the
inscription as being between 950 and 985 of CE, during which a great
temple of shAstA was built, but at least I am unsure of this choLa
ruler. Of course today nothing more than ruins of the temple appear to
exist.
