+++
title = "The cracker box yakShiNI"

+++
It was 1989, when we were still young. kR^iShNa shUdra noticed the
violent sphigshiras approaching us and panicked. He believed that we
might have hatched a plot that dashed his chances of snaring the
eye-freezing kamala-nayanA champakanAsA. Hence, he sought his revenge.
We rapidly took to our “gardabha-s” and fled from the scene. We then
applied ourselves to the powerful feral brAhmaNa shANDilya to assemble
forces for a defensive operation. A show of arms occurred on the
foothills of the vAnara-parvata and our pakSha emerged victorious.
Flushed with the joy of victory we went to wander in the expanses of the
vAnara-parvata and viShTa-parvata beside it. While descending from the
stinky mala-parvata, our eyes fell upon ArjavakeshI mArjAranetrI whose
tale we have alluded to early in the history of these pages. My
companions were transfixed; I was intrigued. They moved towards her to
make conversation – each taking their chance as a Mongol horseman aiming
at a distant mark on the horizon. But that day it seemed there were no
Khasars amongst them. We stood in a neutral state, observing the
strictures of dharma. Just then a stately ratha arrived and was parked
in the shade of the tree. From it emerged she who was like the
bahu-chitraka-matsya on the banner of ana\~Nga swimming in the midst of
latAmaNI-pravAla in the dakShiNAmbodhi. Even we were forced to utter:
“eshA rolamba-bindu-jAla loma-jAlam anurAgAkAro nishAkaro vijita
kamalam mukhaM; kAmadvajAyamAno matsyo bhAryAyuto.askShi-yugalaM;
sakala-senAbala vIro pashchimAmbodhi-pavano niHshvAsaH pathika
hR^id-bheda karavAlaH pravAlash-chAdhara vAgdalaM|”

Turning to ArjavakeshI she said some weighty words. Neither ArjavakeshI
nor most of our companions were able to understand much of what she
said. But our companions’ manliness was aroused and tried to claim some
understanding of her words. We understood her profound words and wanted
to say something to her but she was hardly impressed with our band and
asking ArjavakeshI to get into her ratha departed, leaving us all
thunderstruck. Then the shUdra golashiras and the feral brAhmaNa
shANDilya turning to us said that life had lost its meaning to them.
Looking at their faces I thought they were ready to perform the
purashcharaNa of skR^ik Chindi all the way to its conclusion if I had
only given it to them. I thought myself to be an achala, but even I was
drawn like a star towards a black hole. Then the skirmishes of the
western hall took place and I caught another glimpse of that
lIlAvatI-kula-chUDAmaNI and was in the state of a bear gazing at large
bee-hive atop an enormous rain tree. But performing our yoga and reining
in our senses we moved on to savor the dIpAvalI vacations.

Our diligent companions engaged in guzzling the enormous texts of the
curriculum in expectation of the great struggle on the field of
dvAdashAnta. But we entirely lacked their proclivities, instead engaging
in activities that to them seemed bordering on the insane – making balls
of out the gum of the rain tree pods and playing with fireworks as
befitted the season. It was during one such session that jyeShThadanta
hrasvaroman came to our regions on his new ashva and gave us a fire
cracker box. It was different from all others I had seen and contained a
few crackers of the micro-lakShmI type. I tied the wicks of all the
crackers in the box together and set off an ear-splitting fulmination,
which impressed even the maharaTTa high-explosives masters who reigned
in our habituation. As the kolAhala from the pyrotechnics settled down,
my attention turned to the cracker box again. I took it and examined it
carefully and was transfixed by it. I realized that it contained the
secret to mahAsukha, the cushion which saved yayAti in his fall. We
placed it in the balcony and waited for the fumes of dIpAvalI that
polluted the air to clear and let in the light from the quivering
kR^ittikA-s adorning the eastern welkin. On the first clear night we
observed lambda Tauri and tired from the exertions at our 4 inch
reflector we settled for some rest. Our eyes fell upon the cracker-box –
being brazenly superstitious we knew we had received a signal. We made
it the object of our dhyAna and invoked the glorious yakShinI
abhi-hR^iShTi in it. After intense sAdhana the form on its cover came
alive and the bewitching abhihR^iShTi came forth to us and in voice
putting the lyrebird to shame told us to proceed on our ashva in a
circuit between vAnara-parvata and the hill of chaNDikA. She told us
that we would first encounter a terrifying DAvI and then after having
transcended her we would encounter that one who delights. Following
abhihR^iShTi’s instructions we arrived at the lane where manAbhiruchitA
lived. She was surrounded by several others. Some them recognized me and
asked what we had done the previous day. We answered them in earnest.
Most were amused with a sense of Schadenfreude; lambashiras was alarmed,
but with her there was a resonance. She came over to our pakSha. With
that being achieved she suggested that we should perform that experiment
we had long thought about but never performed. What we did is part of
the story named “reanimation of the corpse of the great Joseph von
Fraunhofer”.
