+++
title = "A personal discursion on studying tAntrika history"

+++
For some reason I was prompted to put down these useless words after an
exchange with ekanetra. Many years ago, early in my youth the muni and I
had created a series of historical impromptu dramas in which we had a
series of tAntrika brAhmana characters as rAja-guru-s and the like.
These dramas were strange in the sense we felt we were literally playing
out lives which had been our own. There was some spontaneity with which
these characters and their actions unfolded. There was much realism in a
direction that written Indian histories have hardly paid much attention
to – including the great narrative tomes edited by RC Majumdar (of
course history as a national narrative is different from history as a
science…). This was because we were embarking on the study of the
tAntrika practice as insiders of the mantra shAstra tradition. A secular
offshoot of this mantra-jij\~nAsana was the early realization that a
very important facet of Indian medieval history was the interlock of the
kaumAra traditions, the kaula traditions like that of the kubjikA
lineage, and the different shaiva srotas with royal power, city
building, proto-chemistry and medicine. We saw this as extension of the
brahma-kShatra alliance that developed in the classical shrauta period
of the vedic layer of the dharma – in particular the primary veda of my
clan, the bhR^igu-veda. One discovery that intensely fascinated us was
the herbal grids of the kubjikA tradition. We also eventually intend to
outline some remarkable discoveries of related kaula traditions like
that of the corvocephalous goddess kAka-chanDeshvarI, such as the use of
frog-derived substances in medicine. Most of our early discoveries we
incorporated into the above dramas. In the early stages we discussed
these matters with the muni, R1’s father (our Acharya on the secrets of
the kaula texts) and the vaiShNava. Then we discussed them with ekanetra
and a close friend of mine; we have also immensely benefited from the
discussion with R, KRK and, to some degree, SRA on these topics. At some
point we were tempted to compose a comprehensive history of this role of
the tAntrika traditions, but realized that it needed more focus and
attentive study – another distinct domain of our research needs greater
attention these days. We hence started placing small notes summarizing
various observations on these pages with the hope of composing the
comprehensive monograph if we remain alive long enough and are not
killed by the valaga-s. Our idea was to lay out the interlock between
medical and tAntrIka tradition as one large section of this monograph
with subsections covering shaiva, kaula, vaiShNava, saura and kaumara
contributions. Unbeknownst to us the English mahApaNDita Alexis
Sanderson had also been pursuing research on some of the same topics. We
eventually became acquainted with many of his scholarly works and were
surprised by the convergences in many of the findings (though we totally
disagree with his historical conclusions regarding lakShmaNa
deshikendra). It is interesting to see that a person from a totally
different cultural background and working within a different academic
framework has reached several comparable conclusions. Now that
Sanderson’s scholarly works have been published we felt that there was
no point hurrying with a monograph on the topic. After some thought we
decided that we will still do it – actually we see this act of synthesis
as a sAdhana in itself and the purashcharaNa will be long and go for
some time on these pages. \[ekanetra and me were recently accused by
some of our co-ethnics and co-religionists of being Brown Sahibs
subverted by Western indologists for asking them to read Alexis
Sanderson and some of his successors’ works like that on the
malinIvijayottara. Subverted or not we insist that these scholars set
good standards for the study of the classical deva-bhASha and also
neglected shAstra-s. This is the point missed by our detractors.\].

This was supposed to be a preamble to a brief note on the role of
saiddhAntika tAntrika-s in the evolution of Hindu medicine – a topic we
will discuss next.
