+++
title = "Mantriform incantations in other cultures"

+++
A part of the study of the development of mantra-shAstra is a
comparative analysis with similar productions in other cultures. I fear
such comparisons at least in the preliminary stages of study are
entirely befuddled by subjective comparisons. Several investigative
techniques can be used to reduce this subjectivity: 1) machine-learning
methods or neural networks to recognize and classify. From my own
experience in another area of study I feel these approaches are heavily
dependent on good training sets. 2) Construction of syntax abstractions
like profiles or Markov models. This might work better. I can hardly
claim to have applied such ideas with any kind of rigor. But I still
feel that there are some mantra-shAstra-like elements in several
Eurasiatic ritual traditions that I see as being structurally related to
the ones in the Indo-Aryan cultural sphere (mantriform incantations).
These proposals definitely need more detailed investigation and can be
only considered to be preliminary.  
[![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/nit.jpg?w=205&h=300)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/nit.jpg)  
In the Egyptian world one finds several examples, of which spell of
goddess Nit (Neith; above) from around 500 BCE is worth reproducing:  
[![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/neith_glyph.gif?w=300&h=30)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/neith_glyph.gif)  
\-hail, mother great, not has been uncovered your birth \[This sentence
has been rendered above as hieroglyphs. Sound: a= hail (shown in red),
mut=mother, ur=great, an=not, sefekh=has been uncovered, mesu-s=your
birth. Note the hieroglyph for “\[a=hail\]” which is repeatedly used
throughout the incantation\];  
\-hail, goddess (netert?) great, within the underworld which is doubly
hidden;  
\-you unknown one;  
\-hail, you divine one great, not has been uncovered your veil;  
\-hail, uncover your veil;  
\-hail, hidden one, not is given my way of entrance to her, come,
receive you the ‘ba’ of Osiris, protect it in your two hands;

To us the “hail” in this Egyptian incantation is a functional analog of
svAhA or namaH in the Indo-Aryan mantra-shAstra.

Another great example is the Greek text, the so called “Mithras liturgy”
(Papyrus 574 of the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris). While it has been
called that, it does not appear to have been composed specifically for
the worship of Mithra. Rather, it is a tract of the generic neo-Platonic
kind with several syncretic influences, including the polytheistic
strain Judaists. The main deity appears to be Helios who might be
syncretized with Mithra, Zeus and even Yahveh, but Mithra is rarely
mentioned by name. It that sense parallels can be seen with the early
saura tantra-s of the Indic world which actually borrowed material from
a common source, given the role of the of magAchArya-s or shakadvIpi
brAhmaNa-s \[As an aside Jan Puhvel compares it to the blabbering of a
mentally ill patient of Carl Jung. My own suspicion is Jung retrofitted
his patients blabbering into the text. Frits Staal has a similar view
that the Indo-Aryan mantras are comparable to the productions of the
mentally diseased—indeed Hindus must be mentally diseased\].  
Some features in it are:  
1\) Two series of 7 incantations respectively to troops of 7 goddesses
and 7 gods. These incantations use the terms χαίρε which I see as a
functional analog of svAhA or namaH in the Indo-Aryan world. The
descriptions of the 7 male gods in the series resembles the marut-s in
the Indo-Aryan realm, and mirrors their 7-fold oblations.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3082/2685819651_4c3351812c_o.jpg)](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3082/2685819651_4c3351812c_o.jpg)

2\) Further, the text gives 3 similar incantations with χαίρε to Helios
which has been translated as:  
Hail, O Lord, O Master of the water\!  
Hail, O Founder of the earth\!  
Hail, O Ruler of the wind\!  
3\) The text also describes the deployment of an explosive sound like
phaT.

Related to the “Mithras” liturgy is the larger collection of texts
belonging to the Neo-Platonic Egypto-Greco-Roman syncretic religion.
While these are diverse collection of texts in both Greek and the layer
of Egyptian termed Demotic, they are ideologically quite similar and
best understood in the context of the greater Neo-Platonic synthesis.
They show signs of definitive influence from the polytheistic strains
within Semitism (which were constantly sidelined and suppressed by the
normative Abrahamistic strains). The work of the great German scholars
Hans Dieter Betz and Karl Preisendanz (Papyri Graecae Magicae. Die
Griechischen Zauberpapyri) provides us with much of the raw material for
this study. While a detailed comparison of this material with the Indic
Tantric material is far from complete, I do believe that the two should
be seen in comparative light. The rise of neo-Platonism in the West
coincides with the beginnings of the tAntrIka mantra-mArga in greater
India. Along with their approximately coincidental beginnings we also
see certain other commonalities in terms of the definitions of
revelation and revealed texts (Agama-s), use of geometric maNDala-s in
conjunction with mantra-s, and the importance of non-semantic sound and
syllable collections in incantations (mAtR^ika-s and bIja-s) in both the
Tantric and Neo-Platonic traditions. However, around the time
Neo-Platonism was completely destroyed by the violence of Isaism, the
tantra-s began their first explosive efflorescence in India. Hence in my
opinion the evolution of these two systems should be seen as a part of a
larger development happening all over Asia and the Classical world. As
an illustration of this commonality let us take the example of the fever
spell and the associated fever amulet (a “yantra”).

[![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/neoplatonic_jvara.jpg?w=300&h=260)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/neoplatonic_jvara.jpg)

“O Tireless One, KOK KOUK KOUL, save Tais whom Taraus bore from every
Shivering Fit, whether Tertian or Quartan or Quotidian Fever, or an
Every-other-day Fever, or one by Night, or even a Mild Fever, because I
am the ancestral, tireless God, KOK KOUK KOUL\! Immediately,
immediately\! Quickly, quickly\!” \[PGM XXXIII.1-25\]

Note use of imperatives immediately and quickly, just as in Tantric
mantras. Also note the description of fevers which exactly mirror the
Ahnika, dvyAhnika, tryAhnika and other jvara-s mentioned often in
Tantric mantra-s.

Another point of note is the use of a “deshi” type language in the Greek
magical papyri. Some spells have clear Hebrew names of deities such as
the god Yahveh and the goddess Adonai. A good example of a hybrid Greek
incantation is PGM VII.643-51 with a simultaneous invocation of Athena,
Osiris, Yahveh and Adonai. The latter two are in a Hebrewized insert.
Such syncretism was common in the Middle East and Mediterranean for a
long time (e.g. the Mittani inscription mention Vedic deities along with
many others). This suggests a participation from cosmopolitan
polytheistic Hebrews along with lay Greeks and Romans (unlike their
“orthodox” monotheistic cousins) in the Neo-Platonic system using
Greek as a medium but incorporating their own deities and using a
certain hybrid kind of language.

People over the ages have noted the non-canonical Sanskrit in some early
tantras – early Hindu authors attributed it to the idiolect of shiva and
umA (i.e. aisha) or by Buddha (who might not have liked Sanskrit too
much :-) ) Some have said that what is seen in early tantra-s is a kind
of hybrid language – some even like the term Buddhist hybrid Sanskrit in
the context of nAstIka tantra-s. Indologist Törzsök has suggested
comparison of aisha to pidgins. But we feel this comparison is not the
best one. In India it is most likely that the proper Sanskrit was the
domain of orthoprax (e.g. mImAmsaka-s, vedAntin-s, vaisheShika-s etc. )
who placed great emphasis on language. Others probably lacking a
rigorous training in Sanskrit might have tended to simply overlay
Sanskrit vocabulary on the morphology of Prakrit-s or that language of
fools (apabrahMsha) – but these aisha productions were by no means
pidgins. Many Hindu-s today and in the past have been bilingual – hence,
they can appreciate it. At one end of the spectrum they have their own
flavors of AngalIka, which might be Hinduized in different ways – like
in my inner circle I use a kind of a Sanskritized AngalIka. It is
interesting that this phenomenon of hybridization (though distinct in
specifics) apparently happened in both the Neo-Platonic Mantriform world
as well as Indian mantra-shAstra. This was followed by a canonization
and improvement of language in both streams (e.g. Emperor Julian’s
productions or abhinavagupta’s production of anuttara-trika. The
latter’s language is definitely a pleasure to savor and is distinct
from the shAstra-s he follows).
