+++
title = "Miscellaneous points of note in the skanda-sadabhAva"

+++
**kaumAra dIkSha:** The SS is one of the few surviving texts giving an
account of the kaumAra dIkSha. In its general pattern it follows the
dIkSha-s seen in the pA\~ncharAtra and saiddhAntika systems. In a pure
spot a maNTapa is erected with 4 doors and a fire altar is installed on
a shukla pa\~nchami. The maNTapa is anointed with pa\~nchagavya and
paddy is spread on the floor. The rite occurs after a clean bath and by
wearing clean clothes. Water is then sprinkled by hand from a pitcher,
and the pitcher then filled up and is taken to the NE and installed on a
spread of paddy. There the guru invokes kumAra using the mUla mantra
into the pitcher and worships the deva with flowers and the like. In the
middle in the fire altar the fire rite to kumAra is performed. Then to
the west of the altar a charu is cooked with rice and milk. The guru
then cuts the charu into 4 equal portions. One portion is offered as a
naivedya to the deity, the second portion is offered as an oblation into
the sacrificial fire with the mUla mantra, the third portion is offered
as a bali and the fourth portion is eaten by the student and the guru.
Then they perform Achamanam and the guru gives the student a fresh
toothbrush. Then they observe where the toothbrush falls â€“ if it falls
in the indra, varuNa, soma or ishAna directions then the initiation is
unsuccessful and a prAyashcitta is performed with oblations of the mUla
mantra. If it falls in the other directions then the initiation
continues. The student sleeps in the maNTapa with his head facing east.
\[The next day\] the AchArya asks the student his dreams. If he has
beheld kings, brAhmaNa-s, young women, a milk pail, flowers and fruits,
a tree with fruits, cows or fire then the initiation is a success. The
guru then draws the kaumAra maNDala and beginning the initiation into
the kaumAra ritual.The initiation is available for all 4 varNa-s and is
done for each varNa in each of the 4 main seasons starting in spring
beginning with the brAhmaNa. Spring may also be used for the remaining
varNa-s.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3097/2721966612_3c61582a41_o.png)](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3097/2721966612_3c61582a41_o.png)

**The instructions for constructing the kaumAra maNDala at the time of
initiation and the ensuing rite of initiation are thus:**  
It should be made of one, two or four spans in length. One desiring
prosperity should never make it raised. It is made with strings and
colored sand. First square is made and divided into 16 equal squares. In
the central 4 squares a circle is inscribe. In the circle a lotus is
made. This lotus is trisected by 3 filaments or kesara-s. The angles
between them are further trisected by 3 more kesaras. In the center of
the lotus a pericarp is made in the form of a circle \[in tradition one
usually places a bindu in the middle though it is not mentioned in the
text of the SS\]. Then one inscribes a circle in the big square. Inside
it touching the sides is constructed a six-petalled lotus figure.
Outside 4 doors are made with the doors determined by the size of the
lotus. The pericarp and filaments are painted yellow. The mUla-matra is
written in the pericarp. The lotus petals are painted blue. The
intervening spaces are then painted smoky color. The grid lines are
colored red with sand. The 4 bounding lines of the grid are painted
yellow, white, red and black. Thus, is constructed the kaumAra maNDala
that confers all siddhi-s.

The maNDala is constructed on a pITha by the guru and skanda is invoked
into it. The god is worshiped with flowers, scents, incense, charu and
bhakShaNa-s. On the 4 margins in the 4 directions water pitchers with
flower wreaths are placed. Flower garlands are draped around and free
flowers are scattered all over. Then the fire oblations are made in the
kuNDa. The calm student is then led blindfolded with a flower in hand
(specific for the respective varNa-s?). Then the student is tapped with
a bundle of darbha grass, sprinkled with water and honorably led
forward. Then he is touched on the head, endowed with the guNas, and
taken to the west door and asked to circumambulate in pradakShiNa order
and let the flower fall on its own. Depending on where the flower a
\[dIkSha\] name is chosen for him. Then the blindfold is removed and he
is allowed to see the maNTapa and worships silently. Then he performs
pradakShiNa and namaskaraM and is raised by the AchArya. Then he is
initiated into the procedures of the fire rituals with the kaumAra mUla
mantra-s. Finally the student pays the AchArya his fees. This ritual in
its basic form is close to the tantric initiations seen in the
saiddhAntika and pa\~ncharAtra systems with the kAlAtman and chakrAbja
maNDala-s, the mUla mantra-s of those systems like vyomavyApin and
mantra-rAja and the generation of a new dIkShita identity based on the
flower falling.

**Installation of the kumArAgni:** The sacrificial fire is consecrated
as the kumArAgni as per the tradition of the skanda-sadbhAva. The
general procedure follows the tantrIka-agnimukha which is common to all
tAntrIka traditions. The allowed samidh-s are those of vaika\~Nkata
palasha and khadira. The oblations may be made of dry or cooked rice,
sesame, cakes (apUpa), coarsely ground meal, lotuses, fruits, and dUrva
and darbha grasses.

**Deities receiving bali as per skanda-sadbhAva:** 1)lokapAla-s; vasu-s;
rudra-s; Aditya-s; rivers; indra pArShada-s; loka-mAtR^i-s;
aShTa-mAtR^ikA-s; skanda graha-s and diverse graha-s; vetAla-s;
vinAyaka; virabhadra; shyAma and shabala; shAstA and his pArShada-s;
vIrabhadra; ananta-nAga; gaNa-s of the following groups: 1) kumuda with
the kumuda-s, sha\~NkukarNa, puNDarIka, vAmana, sarvanetra, sumukha; 2)
dhUrtasena and 1008 skanda troops; 3) shUrasena, ugrasena, shikhisena,
jayasena, dyumatsena, chaNDasena, kunDAsena, vIrasena, pi\~Ngala and
skandasena.
