---
title: PAPER ON HINDUISM

---
<div>

[←](v1_c1_why_we_disagreee.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Addresses at The Parliament of
Religions](addresses_at_the_parliament.htm) / [→](v1_c1_crying_need.htm)

  

## PAPER ON HINDUISM

Read at the Parliament on 19th September, 1893

Three religions now stand in the world which have come down to us from
time prehistoric — Hinduism,  Zoroastrianism and Judaism. They have all
received tremendous shocks and all of them prove by their survival their
internal strength. But while Judaism failed to absorb Christianity and
was driven out of its place of birth by its all-conquering daughter, and
a handful of Parsees is all that remains to tell the tale of their grand
religion, sect after sect arose in India and seemed to shake the
religion of the Vedas to its very foundations, but like the waters of
the seashore in a tremendous earthquake it receded only for a while,
only to return in an all-absorbing flood, a thousand times more
vigorous, and when the tumult of the rush was over, these sects were all
sucked in, absorbed, and assimilated into the immense body of the mother
faith.

From the high spiritual flights of the Vedanta philosophy, of which the
latest discoveries of science seem like echoes, to the low ideas of
idolatry with its multifarious mythology, the agnosticism of the
Buddhists, and the atheism of the Jains, each and all have a place in
the Hindu's religion.

Where then, the question arises, where is the common centre to which all
these widely diverging radii converge? Where is the common basis upon
which all these seemingly hopeless contradictions rest? And this is the
question I shall attempt to answer.  

The Hindus have received their religion through revelation, the Vedas.
They hold that the Vedas are without beginning and without end. It may
sound ludicrous to this audience, how a book can be without beginning or
end. But by the Vedas no books are meant. They mean the accumulated
treasury of spiritual laws discovered by different persons in different
times. Just as the law of gravitation existed before its discovery, and
would exist if all humanity forgot it, so is it with the laws that
govern the spiritual world. The moral, ethical, and spiritual relations
between soul and soul and between individual spirits and the Father of
all spirits, were there before their discovery, and would remain even if
we forgot them.

The discoverers of these laws are called Rishis, and we honour them as
perfected beings. I am glad to tell this audience that some of the very
greatest of them were women. Here it may be said that these laws as laws
may be without end, but they must have had a beginning. The Vedas teach
us that creation is without beginning or end. Science is said to have
proved that the sum total of cosmic energy is always the same. Then, if
there was a time when nothing existed, where was all this manifested
energy? Some say it was in a potential form in God. In that case God is
sometimes potential and sometimes kinetic, which would make Him mutable.
Everything mutable is a compound, and everything compound must undergo
that change which is called destruction. So God would die, which is
absurd. Therefore there never was a time when there was no creation.

If I may be allowed to use a simile, creation and  creator are two
lines, without beginning and without end, running parallel to each
other. God is the ever active providence, by whose power systems after
systems are being evolved out of chaos, made to run for a time and again
destroyed. This is what the Brâhmin boy repeats every day: "*The sun and
the moon, the Lord created like the suns and moons of previous cycles*."
And this agrees with modern science.

Here I stand and if I shut my eyes, and try to conceive my existence,
"I", "I", "I", what is the idea before me? The idea of a body. Am I,
then, nothing but a combination of material substances? The Vedas
declare, “No”. I am a spirit living in a body. I am not the body. The
body will die, but I shall not die. Here am I in this body; it will
fall, but I shall go on living. I had also a past. The soul was not
created, for creation means a combination which means a certain future
dissolution. If then the soul was created, it must die. Some are born
happy, enjoy perfect health, with beautiful body, mental vigour and all
wants supplied. Others are born miserable, some are without hands or
feet, others again are idiots and only drag on a wretched existence.
Why, if they are all created, why does a just and merciful God create
one happy and another unhappy, why is He so partial? Nor would it mend
matters in the least to hold that those who are miserable in this life
will be happy in a future one. Why should a man be miserable even here
in the reign of a just and merciful God?

In the second place, the idea of a creator God does not explain the
anomaly, but simply expresses the cruel fiat of an all-powerful being.
There must have been causes, then, before his birth, to make a man
miserable or happy and those were his past actions.

Are not all the tendencies of the mind and the body accounted for by
inherited aptitude? Here are two parallel lines of existence — one of
the mind, the other of matter. If matter and its transformations answer
for all that we have, there is no necessity for supposing the existence
of a soul. But it cannot be proved that thought has been evolved out of
matter, and if a philosophical monism is inevitable, spiritual monism is
certainly logical and no less desirable than a materialistic monism; but
neither of these is necessary here.

We cannot deny that bodies acquire certain tendencies from heredity, but
those tendencies only mean the physical configuration, through which a
peculiar mind alone can act in a peculiar way. There are other
tendencies peculiar to a soul caused by its past actions. And a soul
with a certain tendency would by the laws of affinity take birth in a
body which is the fittest instrument for the display of that tendency.
This is in accord with science, for science wants to explain everything
by habit, and habit is got through repetitions. So repetitions are
necessary to explain the natural habits of a new-born soul. And since
they were not obtained in this present life, they must have come down
from past lives.

There is another suggestion. Taking all these for granted, how is it
that I do not remember anything of my past life ? This can be easily
explained. I am now speaking English. It is not my mother tongue, in
fact no words of my mother tongue are now present in my consciousness;
but let me try to bring them up, and they rush in. That shows that
consciousness is only the surface of the mental ocean, and within its
depths are stored up all our experiences. Try and struggle, they would
come up and you would be conscious even of your past life.

This is direct and demonstrative evidence. Verification is the perfect
proof of a theory, and here is the challenge thrown to the world by the
Rishis. We have discovered the secret by which the very depths of the
ocean of memory can be stirred up — try it and you would get a complete
reminiscence of your past life.

So then the Hindu believes that he is a spirit. Him the sword cannot
pierce — him the fire cannot burn — him the water cannot melt — him the
air cannot dry. The Hindu believes that every soul is a circle whose
circumference is nowhere, but whose centre is located in the body, and
that death means the change of this centre from body to body. Nor is the
soul bound by the conditions of matter. In its very essence it is free,
unbounded, holy, pure, and perfect. But somehow or other it finds itself
tied down to matter, and thinks of itself as matter.

Why should the free, perfect, and pure being be thus under the thraldom
of matter, is the next question. How can the perfect soul be deluded
into the belief that it is imperfect? We have been told that the Hindus
shirk the question and say that no such question can be there. Some
thinkers want to answer it by positing one or more quasi-perfect beings,
and use big scientific names to fill up the gap. But naming is not
explaining. The question remains the same. How can the perfect become
the quasi-perfect; how can the pure, the absolute, change even a
microscopic particle of its nature? But the Hindu is sincere. He does
not want to take shelter under sophistry. He is brave enough to face the
question in a manly fashion; and his answer is: “I do not know. I do not
know how the perfect being, the soul, came to think of itself as
imperfect, as joined to and conditioned by matter." But the fact is a
fact for all that. It is a fact in everybody's consciousness that one
thinks of oneself as the body. The Hindu does not attempt to explain why
one thinks one is the body. The answer that it is the will of God is no
explanation. This is nothing more than what the Hindu says, "I do not
know."

Well, then, the human soul is eternal and immortal, perfect and
infinite, and death means only a change of centre from one body to
another. The present is determined by our past actions, and the future
by the present. The soul will go on evolving up or reverting back from
birth to birth and death to death. But here is another question: Is man
a tiny boat in a tempest, raised one moment on the foamy crest of a
billow and dashed down into a yawning chasm the next, rolling to and fro
at the mercy of good and bad actions — a powerless, helpless wreck in an
ever-raging, ever-rushing, uncompromising current of cause and effect; a
little moth placed under the wheel of causation which rolls on crushing
everything in its way and waits not for the widow's tears or the
orphan's cry? The heart sinks at the idea, yet this is the law of
Nature. Is there no hope? Is there no escape? — was the cry that went up
from the bottom of the heart of despair. It reached the throne of mercy,
and words of hope and consolation came down and inspired a Vedic sage,
and he stood up before the world and in trumpet voice proclaimed the
glad tidings: "Hear, ye children of immortal bliss! even ye that reside
in higher spheres! I have found the Ancient One who is beyond all
darkness, all delusion: knowing Him alone you shall be saved from death
over again." "Children of immortal bliss" — what a sweet, what a hopeful
name! Allow me to call you, brethren, by that sweet name — heirs of
immortal bliss — yea, the Hindu refuses to call you sinners. Ye are the
Children of God, the sharers of immortal bliss, holy and perfect beings.
Ye divinities on earth — sinners! It is a sin to call a man so; it is a
standing libel on human nature. Come up, O lions, and shake off the
delusion that you are sheep; you are souls immortal, spirits free, blest
and eternal; ye are not matter, ye are not bodies; matter is your
servant, not you the servant of matter.

Thus it is that the Vedas proclaim not a dreadful combination of
unforgiving laws, not an endless prison of cause and effect, but that at
the head of all these laws, in and through every particle of matter and
force, stands One "by whose command the wind blows, the fire burns, the
clouds rain, and death stalks upon the earth."

And what is His nature?

He is everywhere, the pure and formless One, the Almighty and the
All-merciful. "Thou art our father, Thou art our mother, Thou art our
beloved friend, Thou art the source of all strength; give us strength.
Thou art He that beareth the burdens of the universe; help me bear the
little burden of this life." Thus sang the Rishis of the Vedas. And how
to worship Him? Through love. "He is to be worshipped as the one
beloved, dearer than everything in this and the next life."

This is the doctrine of love declared in the Vedas, and let us see how
it is fully developed and taught by Krishna, whom the Hindus believe to
have been God incarnate on earth.

He taught that a man ought to live in this world like a lotus leaf,
which grows in water but is never moistened by water; so a man ought to
live in the world — his heart to God and his hands to work.

It is good to love God for hope of reward in this or the next world, but
it is better to love God for love's sake, and the prayer goes: "Lord, I
do not want wealth, nor children, nor learning. If it be Thy will, I
shall go from birth to birth, but grant me this, that I may love Thee
without the hope of reward — love unselfishly for love's sake." One of
the disciples of Krishna, the then Emperor of India, was driven from his
kingdom by his enemies and had to take shelter with his queen in a
forest in the Himalayas, and there one day the queen asked him how it
was that he, the most virtuous of men, should suffer so much misery.
Yudhishthira answered, "Behold, my queen, the Himalayas, how grand and
beautiful they are; I love them. They do not give me anything, but my
nature is to love the grand, the beautiful, therefore I love them.
Similarly, I love the Lord. He is the source of all beauty, of all
sublimity. He is the only object to be loved; my nature is to love Him,
and therefore I love. I do not pray for anything; I do not ask for
anything. Let Him place me wherever He likes. I must love Him for love's
sake. I cannot trade in love."

The Vedas teach that the soul is divine, only held in the bondage of
matter; perfection will be reached when this bond will burst, and the
word they use for it is therefore, Mukti — freedom, freedom from the
bonds of imperfection, freedom from death and misery.

And this bondage can only fall off through the mercy of God, and this
mercy comes on the pure. So purity is the condition of His mercy. How
does that mercy act? He reveals Himself to the pure heart; the pure and
the stainless see God, yea, even in this life; then and then only all
the crookedness of the heart is made straight. Then all doubt ceases. He
is no more the freak of a terrible law of causation. This is the very
centre, the very vital conception of Hinduism. The Hindu does not want
to live upon words and theories. If there are existences beyond the
ordinary sensuous existence, he wants to come face to face with them. If
there is a soul in him which is not matter, if there is an all-merciful
universal Soul, he will go to Him direct. He must see Him, and that
alone can destroy all doubts. So the best proof a Hindu sage gives about
the soul, about God, is: "I have seen the soul; I have seen God." And
that is the only condition of perfection. The Hindu religion does not
consist in struggles and attempts to believe a certain doctrine or
dogma, but in realising — not in believing, but in being and becomin.

Thus the whole object of their system is by constant struggle to become
perfect, to become divine, to reach God and see God, and this reaching
God, seeing God, becoming perfect even as the Father in Heaven is
perfect, constitutes the religion of the Hindus.

And what becomes of a man when he attains perfection? He lives a life of
bliss infinite. He enjoys infinite and perfect bliss, having obtained
the only thing in which man ought to have pleasure, namely God, and
enjoys the bliss with God.  
So far all the Hindus are agreed. This is the common religion of all the
sects of India; but, then, perfection is absolute, and the absolute
cannot be two or three. It cannot have any qualities. It cannot be an
individual. And so when a soul becomes perfect and absolute, it must
become one with Brahman, and it would only realise the Lord as the
perfection, the reality, of its own nature and existence, the existence
absolute, knowledge absolute, and bliss absolute. We have often and
often read this called the losing of individuality and becoming a stock
or a stone.

“He jests at scars that never felt a wound.”

I tell you it is nothing of the kind. If it is happiness to enjoy the
consciousness of this small body, it must be greater happiness to enjoy
the consciousness of two bodies, the measure of happiness increasing
with the consciousness of an increasing number of bodies, the aim, the
ultimate of happiness being reached when it would become a universal
consciousness.

Therefore, to gain this infinite universal individuality, this miserable
little prison-individuality must go. Then alone can death cease when I
am alone with life, then alone can misery cease when I am one with
happiness itself, then alone can all errors cease when I am one with
knowledge itself; and this is the necessary scientific conclusion.
Science has proved to me that physical individuality is a delusion, that
really my body is one little continuously changing body in an unbroken
ocean of matter; and Advaita (unity) is the necessary conclusion with my
other counterpart, soul.

Science is nothing but the finding of unity. As soon as science would
reach perfect unity, it would stop from further progress, because it
would reach the goal. Thus Chemistry could not progress farther when it
would discover one element out of which all other could be made. Physics
would stop when it would be able to fulfill its services in discovering
one energy of which all others are but manifestations, and the science
of religion become perfect when it would discover Him who is the one
life in a universe of death, Him who is the constant basis of an
ever-changing world. One who is the only Soul of which all souls are but
delusive manifestations. Thus is it, through multiplicity and duality,
that the ultimate unity is reached. Religion can go no farther. This is
the goal of all science.

All science is bound to come to this conclusion in the long run.
Manifestation, and not creation, is the word of science today, and the
Hindu is only glad that what he has been cherishing in his bosom for
ages is going to be taught in more forcible language, and with further
light from the latest conclusions of science.

Descend we now from the aspirations of philosophy to the religion of the
ignorant. At the very outset, I may tell you that there is no
*polytheism* in India. In every temple, if one stands by and listens,
one will find the worshippers applying all the attributes of God,
including omnipresence, to the images. It is not polytheism, nor would
the name henotheism explain the situation. "The rose called by any other
name would smell as sweet." Names are not explanations.

I remember, as a boy, hearing a Christian missionary preach to a crowd
in India. Among other sweet things he was telling them was that if he
gave a blow to their idol with his stick, what could it do? One of his
hearers sharply answered, "If I abuse your God, what can He do?" “You
would be punished,” said the preacher, "when you die." "So my idol will
punish you when you die," retorted the Hindu.

The tree is known by its fruits. When I have seen amongst them that are
called idolaters, men, the like of whom in morality and spirituality and
love I have never seen anywhere, I stop and ask myself, "Can sin beget
holiness?"  
Superstition is a great enemy of man, but bigotry is worse. Why does a
Christian go to church? Why is the cross holy? Why is the face turned
toward the sky in prayer? Why are there so many images in the Catholic
Church? Why are there so many images in the minds of Protestants when
they pray? My brethren, we can no more think about anything without a
mental image than we can live without breathing. By the law of
association, the material image calls up the mental idea and *vice
versa*. This is why the Hindu uses an external symbol when he worships.
He will tell you, it helps to keep his mind fixed on the Being to whom
he prays. He knows as well as you do that the image is not God, is not
omnipresent. After all, how much does omnipresence mean to almost the
whole world? It stands merely as a word, a symbol. Has God superficial
area? If not, when we repeat that word "omnipresent", we think of the
extended sky or of space, that is all.

As we find that somehow or other, by the laws of our mental
constitution, we have to associate our ideas of infinity with the image
of the blue sky, or of the sea, so we naturally connect our idea of
holiness with the image of a church, a mosque, or a cross. The Hindus
have associated the idea of holiness, purity, truth, omnipresence, and
such other ideas with different images and forms. But with this
difference that while some people devote their whole lives to their idol
of a church and never rise higher, because with them religion means an
intellectual assent to certain doctrines and doing good to their
fellows, the whole religion of the Hindu is centred in realisation. Man
is to become divine by realising the divine. Idols or temples or
churches or books are only the supports, the helps, of his spiritual
childhood: but on and on he must progress.

He must not stop anywhere. "*External worship, material worship,*" say
the scriptures, "*is the lowest stage; struggling to rise high, mental
prayer is the next stage, but the highest stage is when the Lord has
been realised*." Mark, the same earnest man who is kneeling before the
idol tells you, "*Him the Sun cannot express, nor the moon, nor the
stars, the lightning cannot express Him, nor what we speak of as fire;
through Him they shine*." But he does not abuse any one's idol or call
its worship sin. He recognises in it a necessary stage of life. "*The
child is father of the man*." Would it be right for an old man to say
that childhood is a sin or youth a sin?

If a man can realise his divine nature with the help of an image, would
it be right to call that a sin? Nor even when he has passed that stage,
should he call it an error. To the Hindu, man is not travelling from
error to truth, but from truth to truth, from lower to higher truth. To
him all the religions, from the lowest fetishism to the highest
absolutism, mean so many attempts of the human soul to grasp and realise
the Infinite, each determined by the conditions of its birth and
association, and each of these marks a stage of progress; and every soul
is a young eagle soaring higher and higher, gathering more and more
strength, till it reaches the Glorious Sun.

Unity in variety is the plan of nature, and the Hindu has recognised it.
Every other religion lays down certain fixed dogmas, and tries to force
society to adopt them. It places before society only one coat which must
fit Jack and John and Henry, all alike. If it does not fit John or
Henry, he must go without a coat to cover his body. The Hindus have
discovered that the absolute can only be realised, or thought of, or
stated, through the relative, and the images, crosses, and crescents are
simply so many symbols — so many pegs to hang the spiritual ideas on. It
is not that this help is necessary for every one, but those that do not
need it have no right to say that it is wrong. Nor is it compulsory in
Hinduism.

One thing I must tell you. Idolatry in India does not mean anything
horrible. It is not the mother of harlots. On the other hand, it is the
attempt of undeveloped minds to grasp high spiritual truths. The Hindus
have their faults, they sometimes have their exceptions; but mark this,
they are always for punishing their own bodies, and never for cutting
the throats of their neighbours. If the Hindu fanatic burns himself on
the pyre, he never lights the fire of Inquisition. And even this cannot
be laid at the door of his religion any more than the burning of witches
can be laid at the door of Christianity.

To the Hindu, then, the whole world of religions is only a travelling, a
coming up, of different men and women, through various conditions and
circumstances, to the same goal. Every religion is only evolving a God
out of the material man, and the same God is the inspirer of all of
them. Why, then, are there so many contradictions? They are only
apparent, says the Hindu. The contradictions come from the same truth
adapting itself to the varying circumstances of different natures.

It is the same light coming through glasses of different colours. And
these little variations are necessary for purposes of adaptation. But in
the heart of everything the same truth reigns. The Lord has declared to
the Hindu in His incarnation as Krishna, "*I am in every religion as the
thread through a string of pearls. Wherever thou seest extraordinary
holiness and extraordinary power raising and purifying humanity, know
thou that I am there*." And what has been the result? I challenge the
world to find, throughout the whole system of Sanskrit philosophy, any
such expression as that the Hindu alone will be saved and not others.
Says Vyasa, "*We find perfect men even beyond the pale of our caste and
creed*." One thing more. How, then, can the Hindu, whose whole fabric of
thought centres in God, believe in Buddhism which is agnostic, or in
Jainism which is atheistic?

The Buddhists or the Jains do not depend upon God; but the whole force
of their religion is directed to the great central truth in every
religion, to evolve a God out of man. They have not seen the Father, but
they have seen the Son. And he that hath seen the Son hath seen the
Father also. 

This, brethren, is a short sketch of the religious ideas of the Hindus.
The Hindu may have failed to carry out all his plans, but if there is
ever to be a universal religion, it must be one which will have no
location in place or time; which will be infinite like the God it will
preach, and whose sun will shine upon the followers of Krishna and of
Christ, on saints and sinners alike; which will not be Brahminic or
Buddhistic, Christian or Mohammedan, but the sum total of all these, and
still have infinite space for development; which in its catholicity will
embrace in its infinite arms, and find a place for, every human being,
from the lowest grovelling savage not far removed from the brute, to the
highest man towering by the virtues of his head and heart almost above
humanity, making society stand in awe of him and doubt his human nature.
It will be a religion which will have no place for persecution or
intolerance in its polity, which will recognise divinity in every man
and woman, and whose whole scope, whose whole force, will be created in
aiding humanity to realise its own true, divine nature.

Offer such a religion, and all the nations will follow you. Asoka's
council was a council of the Buddhist faith. Akbar's, though more to the
purpose, was only a parlour-meeting. It was reserved for America to
proclaim to all quarters of the globe that the Lord is in every
religion.

May He who is the Brahman of the Hindus, the Ahura-Mazda of the
Zoroastrians, the Buddha of the Buddhists, the Jehovah of the Jews, the
Father in Heaven of the Christians, give strength to you to carry out
your noble idea! The star arose in the East; it travelled steadily
towards the West, sometimes dimmed and sometimes effulgent, till it made
a circuit of the world; and now it is again rising on the very horizon
of the East, the borders of the Sanpo,[1](#fn1) a thousandfold more
effulgent than it ever was before.

Hail, Columbia, motherland of liberty! It has been given to thee, who
never dipped her hand in her neighbour’s blood, who never found out that
the shortest way of becoming rich was by robbing one’s neighbours, it
has been given to thee to march at the vanguard of civilisation with the
flag of harmony.

1.  [^](#txt1)Note from devotee  
      
    Marie Louise Burke (Sister Gargi) makes the following comment:  
      
    In all the early reports of Swamiji's paper on Hinduism (which he
    had evidently written in longhand and given to the press) the word
    "Pacific" was transcribed as "Tasifu," which the reporters may have
    thought was some far away inland sea of Oriental mystery and
    romance. The plain fact of the matter was that Swamiji's Ps looked
    like Ts; and his "Pacific" like "Tasifu." By some unknown process,
    "Tasifu" became "Sanpo" (a Tibetan name for the Brahmaputra River)
    in the Complete Works; thus the "horizon of the East" receded ever
    farther. But, characteristically, Swamiji used words understandable
    to everyone in his talks before the Parliament; indeed, never when
    speaking to the public (or, as far as we know, in private) was he
    esoteric or obscure. "Pacific," clear, simple, and sensible, was
    surely what he wrote in his paper and what he said.  
      
    Swami Vivekananda in The West — New Discoveries, Marie Louise Burke
    (Vol 1, Page 143).

</div>
