+++
title = "Quriltai of 2008"

+++
We wondered if the mAraNa might finally catch up with us and we may
enter the realm of vaivasvata before the time really wished it to
happen. We were not like in the state of the other Quriltai where the
janAH assembled around us even as the brAhmaNa-s around rAmo bhArgava.
There were many vIra-s, including the fiery third vIra, and people were
praising them, but one alone stood out amongst them. Some said he was
durvAsas who had returned, yet others said he was datta who had
returned. We went and saw that vIra. We wondered instead was this great
punarvasu or the illustrious shyAvAshva or the splendid archanAnas or
gaviShThira who had returned. We decided he was half a shyAvAshva who
had come back in the kali age, though his pArShada-s thought he was
punarvasu who had returned. We said to ourselves, this is how shyAvAshva
would have been. This was a real vIra – when you seen one you know one –
one realizes he will be a deshikendra. As the foremost of the vipra, the
gAthina, had seen shunaHshepa and said he will be a R^iShi we too
realized that the vIra will be a brahmavAdin. Our clansman pointed the
vIra out to us. Amongst the throngs of men claiming to be learned we
could connect only with him, like at harischandra’s sattra the kaushika
connected with shunaHshepa, who was already a vipra. Will he rise to be
a devarAta? The fate of men remains unknown. After all, the vigorous
tree could be struck down by lighting or the farmer could dump acid
thinking it is a fertilizer. I remarked to ekanetra when you see a kavi
you know it, the rest are mere men.

\~\*\~

Never had a quriltai of this size ever been held. Due to grAhin
relentlessly shadowing us we did not lead the troops. The “friend of
kAma” and the virile taittirIyaka asked our amAtya and sachiva to aid
their troops along with SJ’s amAtya. The third hero was also asked to
participate directly in the battle. Depleted thus, we faced the grAhin
alone but we kept the grAhin at bay. Just then Fourier’s janAH along
with the notable mantravAdin arrived. One from Fourier’s party, who had
attacked kAma-mitrA and the taittirIyaka, had been smashed by PM and
MM’s counterattack. That one appeared to surrender before the amAtya
and sachiva. We urged them to accept them to accept the surrender and
end hostilities. A little after midnight, when we retired to slumber,
the first vIra stole out from our tent as a spasha. He saw the
ardha-shyAvAsha’s svasR^I in revelry with our clanswoman. In the guise
of speaking with those ladies he espied our sachiva and his amAtya
negotiating a truce between the Fouriers and kAmamitra. But the virile
taittirIyaka who had been hammered by the grAhin, just as I was, grew
excited, and along with kAma-mitra attacked the Fouriers violently. The
powerful mantravAdin from Fourier’s camp who lay in wait cast an
abhichAra. The next morning the first vIra reported all of this to us.
While we were discussing matters with ardha-shyAvAshva the taittirIyaka
and kAmamitrA demanded that we should help them in a counter-prayoga. We
did some minor vidhi-s but had to excuse ourselves because we along with
SJ had to return to our fort aided by the senAnI of the third vIra.
While we were crossing the Susquehanna River we were seized again by the
grAhin and tormented. We returned to our fort alive, but it looked we
were back in square one.
