+++
title = "Fierce battling"

+++
Fourier’s men surrendered to the amAtya and sachiva. The second one of
Fourier confirmed that the back-hurl performed by MM on behalf of PM
(before he himself was taken out) had found it is mark. The blow was so
severe to the second one of Fourier that their division of the army was
extirpated. But the other one struck us with all available force. The
power of the grAhin attacking us was so strong that we were shaken for a
week. Then we knew only one remedy would work against it – the great
vidyA trailokya-stambhinI of the shAnkhAyana tantra. Strangely, either
the ari’s dUradR^iShTi or an unfortunate coincidence had thrown a small
spanner on that wheel. But we pushed on undaunted with great confidence
knowing the might of this deployment. With 1/2 hour of the prayoga it
shattered the grAhin like vIrabhadra’s gaNa breaking the R^ibhu-s our
ancestor. We thought we would have repulsed the grahin entirely after
some fighting. But mysterious that small break relating to the quantity
of dravya used in the prayoga allowed the ari to revive the grAhin even
though it seemed destroyed. Sadly, for us our prayoga was like that of
sUta-putra’s shakti from indra — it could not be used again. We were not
repulsed and used the dravya of rudhira-kAlI to continue fighting the
possibility of the grAhin surging. We realized we again had to go to the
precise field old “Gaugamela” where our travails had begun in 2003. This
time our amAtya and sachiva joined us with their forces. We took
precautions against the “kosha” front being stormed and marched boldly.
For about 2 hours our forces held well in “Gaugamela”. Then we obtained
signals that we might be taken by the grAhin. But our bold sachiva came
to our aid with his forces by pointing a subterranean relief point and
we drove back the enemy. Then we thoroughly flattened the grounds of the
old “Gaugamela” and were about to return when for the first time we got
the hint that the ari might have reactivated the grAhin. We soon
returned to our fort and obtained relief by deploying the last elements
of the trailokya-stambhinI prayoga.

But then next the grAhin escaping attacked us again. Our ShaShThI pujA
was broken but we called on tryambaka rudra to aid us. The weather was
awful but the sachiva and amAtya pointed out that we would need to send
troops to aid them in the battle close to the place where we were
captured and interred by the pishAchI 3 years ago. We took the needful
precautions to prevent our flank being shattered by the grAhin and
marched there. We held pretty well purely relying on the rudhirakAlI
dravya but after we returned to our fortress we were attacked by grAhin
again. Now we did not have much cover from the trailokya-staMbhinI, but
the amAtya and sachiva wanted to march to aid the “friend of kAma” who
was preparing for the great battle. There, the virile taittirIyaka had
earlier been hit by this grAhin but his situation was not surprising
because at that point he had no mantra-defense. We told the amAtya and
sachiva that we our shakti having been exhausted like that of karNa we
could be finished if a mAraNa is launched at us at this point. We asked
them to place the muni on the throne and continue the battle in this
event — after all the muni had made a major sally, not unlike the third
vIra. Not for no reason we have our amAtya and sachiva — despite them
having been outwitted by this ari on several occasions. The sachiva was
unafraid and asked us to keep fighting and not think of death. The
sachiva said that he had gone to the vana where he saw a vision of
mahAdeva, whom we had invoked earlier in the morning. We used that
substance of rudra along with that with which viShNu had sent us aid
exactly 1 year ago when a similar terrifying grAhin had seized. This was
the third such attack the first being the long attack that began in July
of 1998 shortly after ekanetra and me had met R in the evening
rendezvous. Then then amAtya also asked to boldly take to the
battlefield and pointed to a secret means that would allow a second
deployment of the shAkhAyana tantra prayoga. Though shaken we returned
to the battlefield to face the grAhin with the substance of rudra and
viShNu.
