---
title: THE HINDU RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](soul_god_and_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](what_is_religion.htm)

  

## THE HINDU RELIGION

My religion is to learn. I read my Bible better in the light of your
Bible and the dark prophecies of my religion become brighter when
compared with those of your prophets. Truth has always been universal.
If I alone were to have six fingers on my hand while all of you had only
five, you would not think that my hand was the true intent of nature,
but rather that it was abnormal and diseased. Just so with religion. If
one creed alone were to be true and all the others untrue, you would
have a right to say that that religion was diseased; if one religion is
true, all the others must be true. Thus the Hindu religion is your
property as well as mine. Of the two hundred and ninety millions of
people inhabiting India, only two millions are Christians, sixty
millions Mohammedans and all the rest are Hindus.

The Hindus found their creed upon the ancient Vedas, a word derived from
Vid, "to know". These are a series of books which, to our minds, contain
the essence of all religion; but we do not think they alone contain the
truths. They teach us the immortality of the soul. In every country and
every human breast there is a natural desire to find a stable
equilibrium — something that does not change. We cannot find it in
nature, for all the universe is nothing but an infinite mass of changes.
But to infer from that that nothing unchanging exists is to fall into
the error of the Southern school of Buddhists and the Chârvâkas, which
latter believe that all is matter and nothing mind, that all religion is
a cheat, and morality and goodness, useless superstitions. The Vedanta
philosophy teaches that man is not bound by his five senses. They only
know the present, and neither the future nor the past; but as the
present signifies both past and future, and all three are only
demarcations of time, the present also would be unknown if it were not
for something above the senses, something independent of time, which
unifies the past and the future in the present.

But what is independent? Not our body, for it depends upon outward
conditions; nor our mind, because the thoughts of which it is composed
are caused. It is our soul. The Vedas say the whole world is a mixture
of independence and dependence, of freedom and slavery, but through it
all shines the soul independent, immortal, pure, perfect, holy. For if
it is independent, it cannot perish, as death is but a change, and
depends upon conditions; if independent, it must be perfect, for
imperfection is again but a condition, and therefore dependent. And this
immortal and perfect soul must be the same in the highest God as well as
in the humblest man, the difference between them being only in the
degree in which this soul manifests itself.

But why should the soul take to itself a body? For the same reason that
I take a looking-glass — to see myself. Thus, in the body, the soul is
reflected. The soul is God, and every human being has a perfect divinity
within himself, and each one must show his divinity sooner or later. If
I am in a dark room, no amount of protestation will make it any brighter
— I must light a match. Just so, no amount of grumbling and wailing will
make our imperfect body more perfect. But the Vedanta teaches — call
forth your soul, show your divinity. Teach your children that they are
divine, that religion is a positive something and not a negative
nonsense; that it is not subjection to groans when under oppression, but
expansion and manifestation.

Every religion has it that man's present and future are modified by the
past, and that the present is but the effect of the past. How is it,
then, that every child is born with an experience that cannot be
accounted for by hereditary transmission? How is it that one is born of
good parents, receives a good education and becomes a good man, while
another comes from besotted parents and ends on the gallows? How do you
explain this inequality without implicating God? Why should a merciful
Father set His child in such conditions which must bring forth misery?
It is no explanation to say God will make amends; later on — God has no
blood-money. Then, too, what becomes of my liberty, if this be my first
birth? Coming into this world without the experience of a former life,
my independence would be gone, for my path would be marked out by the
experience of others. If I cannot be the maker of my own fortune, then I
am not free. I take upon myself the blame for the misery of this
existence, and say I will unmake the evil I have done in another
existence. This, then, is our philosophy of the migration of the soul.
We come into this life with the experience of another, and the fortune
or misfortune of this existence is the result of our acts in a former
existence, always becoming better, till at last perfection is reached.

We believe in a God, the Father of the universe, infinite and
omnipotent. But if our soul at last becomes perfect, it also must become
infinite. But there is no room for two infinite unconditional beings,
and hence we believe in a Personal God, and we ourselves are He. These
are the three stages which every religion has taken. First we see God in
the far beyond, then we come nearer to Him and give Him omnipresence so
that we live in Him; and at last we recognise that we are He. The idea
of an Objective God is not untrue — in fact, every idea of God, and
hence every religion, is true, as each is but a different stage in the
journey, the aim of which is the perfect conception of the Vedas. Hence,
too, we not only tolerate, but we Hindus accept every religion, praying
in the mosque of the Mohammedans, worshipping before the fire of the
Zoroastrians, and kneeling before the cross of the Christians, knowing
that all the religions, from the lowest fetishism to the highest
absolutism, mean so many attempts of the human soul to grasp and realise
the infinite, each determined by the conditions of its birth and
association, and each of them marking a stage of progress. We gather all
these flowers and bind them with the twine of love, making a wonderful
bouquet of worship.

If I am God, then my soul is a temple of the Highest, and my every
motion should be a worship — love for love's sake, duty for duty's sake,
without hope of reward or fear of punishment. Thus my religion means
expansion, and expansion means realisation and perception in the highest
sense — no mumbling words or genuflections. Man is to become divine,
realising the divine more and more from day to day in an endless
progress.

(Summary of a lecture delivered before the Ethical Society, Brooklyn, at
the Pouch Gallery in Clinton Avenue, on the 30th December, 1894.
Reproduced from the *Brooklyn Standard Union.*)

</div>
