---
title: REASON AND RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](the_vedanta_philosophy.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](vedanta_as_a_factor_in_civilisation.htm)

  

## REASON AND RELIGION

(*Delivered in England*)

A sage called Nârada went to another sage named Sanatkumâra to learn
about truth, and Sanatkumara inquired what he had studied already.
Narada answered that he had studied the Vedas, Astronomy, and various
other things, yet he had got no satisfaction. Then there was a
conversation between the two, in the course of which Sanatkumara
remarked that all this knowledge of the Vedas, of Astronomy, and of
Philosophy, was but secondary; sciences were but secondary. That which
made us realise the Brahman was the supreme, the highest knowledge. This
idea we find in every religion, and that is why religion always claimed
to be supreme knowledge. Knowledge of the sciences covers, as it were,
only part of our lives, but the knowledge which religion brings to us is
eternal, as infinite as the truth it preaches. Claiming this
superiority, religions have many times looked down, unfortunately, on
all secular knowledge, and not only so, but many times have refused to
be justified by the aid of secular knowledge. In consequence, all the
world over there have been fights between secular knowledge and
religious knowledge, the one claiming infallible authority as its guide,
refusing to listen to anything that secular knowledge has to say on the
point, the other, with its shining instrument of reason, wanting to cut
to pieces everything religion could bring forward. This fight has been
and is still waged in every country. Religions have been again and again
defeated, and almost exterminated. The worship of the goddess of Reason
during the French Revolution was not the first manifestation of that
phenomenon in the history of humanity, it was a re-enactment of what had
happened in ancient times, but in modern times it has assumed greater
proportions. The physical sciences are better equipped now than
formerly, and religions have become less and less equipped. The
foundations have been all undermined, and the modern man, whatever he
may say in public, knows in the privacy of his heart that he can no more
"believe". Believing certain things because an organised body of priests
tells him to believe, believing because it is written in certain books,
believing because his people like him to believe, the modern man knows
to be impossible for him. There are, of course, a number of people who
seem to acquiesce in the so-called popular faith, but we also know for
certain that they do not think. Their idea of belief may be better
translated as "not-thinking-carelessness". This fight cannot last much
longer without breaking to pieces all the buildings of religion.

The question is: Is there a way out? To put it in a more concrete form:
Is religion to justify itself by the discoveries of reason, through
which every other science justifies itself? Are the same methods of
investigation, which we apply to sciences and knowledge outside, to be
applied to the science of Religion? In my opinion this must be so, and I
am also of opinion that the sooner it is done the better. If a religion
is destroyed by such investigations, it was then all the time useless,
unworthy superstition; and the sooner it goes the better. I am
thoroughly convinced that its destruction would be the best thing that
could happen. All that is dross will be taken off, no doubt, but the
essential parts of religion will emerge triumphant out of this
investigation. Not only will it be made scientific — as scientific, at
least, as any of the conclusions of physics or chemistry — but will have
greater strength, because physics or chemistry has no internal mandate
to vouch for its truth, which religion has.

People who deny the efficacy of any rationalistic investigation into
religion seem to me somewhat to be contradicting themselves. For
instance, the Christian claims that his religion is the only true one,
because it was revealed to so-and-so. The Mohammedan makes the same
claim for his religion; his is the only true one, because it was
revealed to so-and-so. But the Christian says to the Mohammedan,
"Certain parts of your ethics do not seem to be right. For instance,
your books say, my Mohammedan friend, that an infidel may be converted
to the religion of Mohammed by force, and if he will not accept the
Mohammedan religion he may be killed; and any Mohammedan who kills such
an infidel will get a sure entry into heaven, whatever may have been his
sins or misdeeds." The Mohammedan will retort by saying, "It is right
for me to do so, because my book enjoins it. It will be wrong on my part
not to do so." The Christian says, "But my book does not say so." The
Mohammedan replies, "I do not know; I am not bound by the authority of
your book; my book says, 'Kill all the infidels'. How do you know which
is right and which is wrong? Surely what is written in my book is right
and what your book says, 'Do not kill,' is wrong. You also say the same
thing, my Christian friend; you say that what Jehovah declared to the
Jews is right to do, and what he forbade them to do is wrong. So say I,
Allah declared in my book that certain things should be done, and that
certain things should not be done, and that is all the test of right and
wrong." In spite of that the Christian is not satisfied; he insists on a
comparison of the morality of the Sermon on the Mount with the morality
of the Koran. How is this to be decided? Certainly not by the books,
because the books, fighting between themselves, cannot be the judges.
Decidedly then we have to admit that there is something more universal
than these books, something higher than all the ethical codes that are
in the world, something which can judge between the strength of
inspirations of different nations. Whether we declare it boldly,
clearly, or not — it is evident that here we appeal to reason.

Now, the question arises if this light of reason is able to judge
between inspiration and inspiration, and if this light can uphold its
standard when the quarrel is between prophet and prophet, if it has the
power of understanding anything whatsoever of religion. If it has not,
nothing can determine the hopeless fight of books and prophets which has
been going on through ages; for it means that all religions are mere
lies, hopelessly contradictory, without any constant idea of ethics. The
proof of religion depends on the truth of the constitution of man, and
not on any books. These books are the outgoings, the effects of man's
constitution; man made these books. We are yet to see the books that
made man. Reason is equally an effect of that common cause, the
constitution of man, where our appeal must be. And yet, as reason alone
is directly connected with this constitution, it should be resorted to,
as long as it follows faithfully the same. What do I mean by reason? I
mean what every educated man or woman is wanting to do at the present
time, to apply the discoveries of secular knowledge to religion. The
first principle of reasoning is that the particular is explained by the
general, the general by the more general, until we come to the
universal. For instance, we have the idea of law. If something happens
and we believe that it is the effect of such and such a law, we are
satisfied; that is an explanation for us. What we mean by that
explanation is that it is proved that this one effect, which had
dissatisfied us, is only one particular of a general mass of occurrences
which we designate by the word "law". When one apple fell, Newton was
disturbed; but when he found that all apples fell, it was gravitation,
and he was satisfied. This is one principle of human knowledge. I see a
particular being, a human being, in the street. I refer him to the
bigger conception of man, and I am satisfied; I know he is a man by
referring him to the more general. So the particulars are to be referred
to the general, the general to the more general, and everything at last
to the universal, the last concept that we have, the most universal —
that of existence. Existence is the most universal concept.

We are all human beings; that is to say, each one of us, as it were, a
particular part of the general concept, humanity. A man, and a cat, and
a dog, are all animals. These particular examples, as man, or dog, or
cat, are parts of a bigger and more general concept, animal. The man,
and the cat, and the dog, and the plant, and the tree, all come under
the still more general concept, life. Again, all these, all beings and
all materials, come under the one concept of existence, for we all are
in it. This explanation merely means referring the particular to a
higher concept, finding more of its kind. The mind, as it were, has
stored up numerous classes of such generalisations. It is, as it were,
full of pigeon-holes where all these ideas are grouped together, and
whenever we find a new thing the mind immediately tries to find out its
type in one of these pigeon-holes. If we find it, we put the new thing
in there and are satisfied, and we are said to have known the thing.
This is what is meant by knowledge, and no more. And if we do not find
that there is something like it, we are dissatisfied, and have to wait
until we find a further classification for it, already existing in the
mind. Therefore, as I have already pointed out, knowledge is more or
less classification. There is something more. A second explanation of
knowledge is that the explanation of a thing must come from inside and
not from outside. There had been the belief that, when a man threw up a
stone and it fell, some demon dragged it down. Many occurrences which
are really natural phenomena are attributed by people to unnatural
beings. That a ghost dragged down the stone was an explanation that was
not in the thing itself, it was an explanation from outside; but the
second explanation of gravitation is something in the nature of the
stone; the explanation is coming from inside. This tendency you will
find throughout modern thought; in one word, what is meant by science is
that the explanations of things are in their own nature, and that no
external beings or existences are required to explain what is going on
in the universe. The chemist never requires demons, or ghosts, or
anything of that sort, to explain his phenomena. The physicist never
requires any one of these to explain the things he knows, nor does any
other scientist. And this is one of the features of science which I mean
to apply to religion. In this religions are found wanting and that is
why they are crumbling into pieces. Every science wants its explanations
from inside, from the very nature of things; and the religions are not
able to supply this. There is an ancient theory of a personal deity
entirely separate from the universe, which has been held from the very
earliest time. The arguments in favour of this have been repeated again
and again, how it is necessary to have a God entirely separate from the
universe, an extra-cosmic deity, who has created the universe out of his
will, and is conceived by religion to be its ruler. We find, apart from
all these arguments, the Almighty God painted as the All-merciful, and
at the same time, inequalities remain in the world. These things do not
concern the philosopher at all, but he says the heart of the thing was
wrong; it was an explanation from outside, and not inside. What is the
cause of the universe? Something outside of it, some being who is moving
this universe! And just as it was found insufficient to explain the
phenomenon of the falling stone, so this was found insufficient to
explain religion. And religions are falling to pieces, because they
cannot give a better explanation than that.

Another idea connected with this, the manifestation of the same
principle, that the explanation of everything comes from inside it, is
the modern law of evolution. The whole meaning of evolution is simply
that the nature of a thing is reproduced, that the effect is nothing but
the cause in another form, that all the potentialities of the effect
were present in the cause, that the whole of creation is but an
evolution and not a creation. That is to say, every effect is a
reproduction of a preceding cause, changed only by the circumstances,
and thus it is going on throughout the universe, and we need not go
outside the universe to seek the causes of these changes; they are
within. It is unnecessary to seek for any cause outside. This also is
breaking down religion. What I mean by breaking down religion is that
religions that have held on to the idea of an extra-cosmic deity, that
he is a very big man and nothing else, can no more stand on their feet;
they have been pulled down, as it were.

Can there be a religion satisfying these two principles? I think there
can be. In the first place we have seen that we have to satisfy the
principle of generalisation. The generalisation principle ought to be
satisfied along with the principle of evolution. We have to come to an
ultimate generalisation, which not only will be the most universal of
all generalisations, but out of which everything else must come. It will
be of the same nature as the lowest effect; the cause, the highest, the
ultimate, the primal cause, must be the same as the lowest and most
distant of its effects, a series of evolutions. The Brahman of the
Vedanta fulfils that condition, because Brahman is the last
generalisation to which we can come. It has no attributes but is
Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss — Absolute. Existence, we have seen, is
the very ultimate generalisation which the human mind can come to.
Knowledge does not mean the knowledge we have, but the essence of that,
that which is expressing itself in the course of evolution in human
beings or in other animals as knowledge. The essence of that knowledge
is meant, the ultimate fact beyond, if I may be allowed to say so, even
consciousness. That is what is meant by knowledge and what we see in the
universe as the essential unity of things. To my mind, if modern science
is proving anything again and again, it is this, that we are one —
mentally, spiritually, and physically. It is wrong to say we are even
physically different. Supposing we are materialists, for argument's
sake, we shall have to come to this, that the whole universe is simply
an ocean of matter, of which you and I are like little whirlpools.
Masses of matter are coming into each whirlpool, taking the whirlpool
form, and coming out as matter again. The matter that is in my body may
have been in yours a few years ago, or in the sun, or may have been the
matter in a plant, and so on, in a continuous state of flux. What is
meant by your body and my body? It is the oneness of the body. So with
thought. It is an ocean of thought, one infinite mass, in which your
mind and my mind are like whirlpools. Are you not seeing the effect now,
how my thoughts are entering into yours, and yours into mine? The whole
of our lives is one; we are one, even in thought. Coming to a still
further generalisation, the essence of matter and thought is their
potentiality of spirit; this is the unity from which all have come, and
that must essentially be one. We are absolutely one; we are physically
one, we are mentally one, and as spirit, it goes without saying, that we
are one, if we believe in spirit at all. This oneness is the one fact
that is being proved every day by modern science. To proud man it is
told: You are the same as that little worm there; think not that you are
something enormously different from it; you are the same. You have been
that in a previous incarnation, and the worm has crawled up to this man
state, of which you are so proud. This grand preaching, the oneness of
things, making us one with everything that exists, is the great lesson
to learn, for most of us are very glad to be made one with higher
beings, but nobody wants to be made one with lower beings. Such is human
ignorance, that if anyone's ancestors were men whom society honoured,
even if they were brutish, if they were robbers, even robber barons,
everyone of us would try to trace our ancestry to them; but if among our
ancestors we had poor, honest gentlemen, none of us wants to trace our
ancestry to them. But the scales are falling from our eyes, truth is
beginning to manifest itself more and more, and that is a great gain to
religion. That is exactly the teaching of the Advaita, about which I am
lecturing to you. The Self is the essence of this universe, the essence
of all souls; He is the essence of your own life, nay, "Thou art That".
You are one with this universe. He who says he is different from others,
even by a hair's breadth, immediately becomes miserable. Happiness
belongs to him who knows this oneness, who knows he is one with this
universe.

Thus we see that the religion of the Vedanta can satisfy the demands of
the scientific world, by referring it to the highest generalisation and
to the law of evolution. That the explanation of a thing comes from
within itself is still more completely satisfied by Vedanta. The
Brahman, the God of the Vedanta, has nothing outside of Himself; nothing
at all. All this indeed is He: He is in the universe: He is the universe
Himself. "Thou art the man, Thou art the woman, Thou art the young man
walking in the pride of youth, Thou art the old man tottering in his
step." He is here. Him we see and feel: in Him we live, and move, and
have our being. You have that conception in the New Testament. It is
that idea, God immanent in the universe, the very essence, the heart,
the soul of things. He manifests Himself, as it were, in this universe.
You and I are little bits, little points, little channels, little
expressions, all living inside of that infinite ocean of Existence,
Knowledge, and Bliss. The difference between man and man, between angels
and man, between man and animals, between animals and plants, between
plants and stones is not in kind, because everyone from the highest
angel to the lowest particle of matter is but an expression of that one
infinite ocean, and the difference is only in degree. I am a low
manifestation, you may be a higher, but in both the materials are the
same. You and I are both outlets of the same channel, and that is God;
as such, your nature is God, and so is mine. You are of the nature of
God by your birthright; so am I. You may be an angel of purity, and I
may be the blackest of demons. Nevertheless, my birthright is that
infinite ocean of Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss. So is yours. You have
manifested yourself more today. Wait; I will manifest myself more yet,
for I have it all within me. No extraneous explanation is sought; none
is asked for. The sum total of this whole universe is God Himself. Is
God then matter? No, certainly not, for matter is that God perceived by
the five senses; that God as perceived through the intellect is mind;
and when the spirit sees, He is seen as spirit. He is not matter, but
whatever is real in matter is He. Whatever is real in this chair is He,
for the chair requires two things to make it. Something was outside
which my senses brought to me, and to which my mind contributed
something else, and the combination of these two is the chair. That
which existed eternally, independent of the senses and of the intellect,
was the Lord Himself. Upon Him the senses are painting chairs, and
tables, and rooms, houses, and worlds, and moons, and suns, and stars,
and everything else. How is it, then, that we all see this same chair,
that we are all alike painting these various things on the Lord, on this
Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss? It need not be that all paint the same
way, but those who paint the same way are on the same plane of existence
and therefore they see one another's paintings as well as one another.
There may be millions of beings between you and me who do not paint the
Lord in the same way, and them and their paintings we do not see.

On the other hand, as you all know, the modern physical researches are
tending more and more to demonstrate that what is real is but the finer;
the gross is simply appearance. However that may be, we have seen that
if any theory of religion can stand the test of modern reasoning, it is
the Advaita, because it fulfils its two requirements. It is the highest
generalisation, beyond even personality, generalisation which is common
to every being. A generalisation ending in the Personal God can never be
universal, for, first of all, to conceive of a Personal God we must say,
He is all-merciful, all-good. But this world is a mixed thing, some good
and some bad. We cut off what we like, and generalise that into a
Personal God! Just as you say a Personal God is this and that, so you
have also to say that He is not this and not that. And you will always
find that the idea of a Personal God has to carry with it a personal
devil. That is how we clearly see that the idea of a Personal God is not
a true generalisation, we have to go beyond, to the Impersonal. In that
the universe exists, with all its joys and miseries, for whatever exists
in it has all come from the Impersonal. What sort of a God can He be to
whom we attribute evil and other things? The idea is that both good and
evil are different aspects, or manifestations of the same thing. The
idea that they were two was a very wrong idea from the first, and it has
been the cause of a good deal of the misery in this world of ours — the
idea that right and wrong are two separate things, cut and dried,
independent of each other, that good and evil are two eternally
separable and separate things. I should be very glad to see a man who
could show me something which is good all the time, and something which
is bad all the time. As if one could stand and gravely define some
occurrences in this life of ours as good and good alone, and some which
are bad and bad alone. That which is good today may be evil tomorrow.
That which is bad today may be good tomorrow. What is good for me may be
bad for you. The conclusion is, that like every other thing, there is an
evolution in good and evil too. There is something which in its
evolution, we call, in one degree, good, and in another, evil. The storm
that kills my friend I call evil, but that may have saved the lives of
hundreds of thousands of people by killing the bacilli in the air. They
call it good, but I call it evil. So both good and evil belong to the
relative world, to phenomena. The Impersonal God we propose is not a
relative God; therefore it cannot be said that It is either good or bad,
but that It is something beyond, because It is neither good nor evil.
Good, however, is a nearer manifestation of It than evil.

What is the effect of accepting such an Impersonal Being, an Impersonal
Deity? What shall we gain? Will religion stand as a factor in human
life, our consoler, our helper? What becomes of the desire of the human
heart to pray for help to some being? That will all remain. The Personal
God will remain, but on a better basis. He has been strengthened by the
Impersonal. We have seen that without the Impersonal, the Personal
cannot remain. If you mean to say there is a Being entirely separate
from this universe, who has created this universe just by His will, out
of nothing, that cannot be proved. Such a state of things cannot be. But
if we understand the idea of the Impersonal, then the idea of the
Personal can remain there also. This universe, in its various forms, is
but the various readings of the same Impersonal. When we read it with
the five senses, we call it the material world. If there be a being with
more senses than five, he will read it as something else. If one of us
gets the electrical sense, he will see the universe as something else
again. There are various forms of that same Oneness, of which all these
various ideas of worlds are but various readings, and the Personal God
is the highest reading that can be attained to, of that Impersonal, by
the human intellect. So that the Personal God is true as much as this
chair is true, as much as this world is true, but no more. It is not
absolute truth. That is to say, the Personal God is that very Impersonal
God and, therefore, it is true, just as I, as a human being, am true and
not true at the same time. It is not true that I am what you see I am;
you can satisfy yourself on that point. I am not the being that you take
me to be. You can satisfy your reason as to that, because light, and
various vibrations, or conditions of the atmosphere, and all sorts of
motions inside me have contributed to my being looked upon as what I am,
by you. If any one of these conditions change, I am different again. You
may satisfy yourself by taking a photograph of the same man under
different conditions of light. So I am what I appear in relation to your
senses, and yet, in spite of all these facts, there is an unchangeable
something of which all these are different states of existence, the
impersonal me, of which thousands of me's are different persons. I was a
child, I was young, I am getting older. Every day of my life, my body
and thoughts are changing, but in spite of all these changes, the
sum-total of them constitutes a mass which is a constant quantity. That
is the impersonal me, of which all these manifestations form, as it
were, parts.

Similarly, the sum-total of this universe is immovable, we know, but
everything pertaining to this universe consists of motion, everything is
in a constant state of flux, everything changing and moving. At the same
time, we see that the universe as a whole is immovable, because motion
is a relative term. I move with regard to the chair, which does not
move. There must be at least two to make motion. If this whole universe
is taken as a unit there is no motion; with regard to what should it
move? Thus the Absolute is unchangeable and immovable, and all the
movements and changes are only in the phenomenal world, the limited.
That whole is Impersonal, and within this Impersonal are all these
various persons beginning with the lowest atom, up to God, the Personal
God, the Creator, the Ruler of the Universe, to whom we pray, before
whom we kneel, and so on. Such a Personal God can be established with a
great deal of reason. Such a Personal God is explicable as the highest
manifestation of the Impersonal. You and I are very low manifestations,
and the Personal God is the highest of which we can conceive. Nor can
you or I become that Personal God. When the Vedanta says you and I are
God, it does not mean the Personal God. To take an example. Out of a
mass of clay a huge elephant of clay is manufactured, and out of the
same clay, a little clay mouse is made. Would the clay mouse ever be
able to become the clay elephant? But put them both in water and they
are both clay; as clay they are both one, but as mouse and elephant
there will be an eternal difference between them. The Infinite, the
Impersonal, is like the clay in the example. We and the Ruler of the
Universe are one, but as manifested beings, men, we are His eternal
slaves, His worshippers. Thus we see that the Personal God remains.
Everything else in this relative world remains, and religion is made to
stand on a better foundation. Therefore it is necessary, that we first
know the Impersonal in order to know the Personal.

As we have seen, the law of reason says, the particular is only known
through the general. So all these particulars, from man to God, are only
known through the Impersonal, the highest generalisation. Prayers will
remain, only they will get a better meaning. All those senseless ideas
of prayer, the low stages of prayer, which are simply giving words to
all sorts of silly desire in our minds, perhaps, will have to go. In all
sensible religions, they never allow prayers to God; they allow prayers
to gods. That is quite natural. The Roman Catholics pray to the saints;
that is quite good. But to pray to God is senseless. To ask God to give
you a breath of air, to send down a shower of rain, to make fruits grow
in your garden, and so on, is quite unnatural. The saints, however, who
were little beings like ourselves, may help us. But to pray to the Ruler
of the Universe, prating every little need of ours, and from our
childhood saying, "O Lord, I have a headache; let it go," is ridiculous.
There have been millions of souls that have died in this world, and they
are all here; they have become gods and angels; let them come to your
help. But God! It cannot be. Unto Him we must go for higher things. A
fool indeed is he who, resting on the banks of the Gangâ, digs a little
well for water; a fool indeed is he who, living near a mine of diamonds,
digs for bits of crystal.

And indeed we shall be fools if we go to the Father of all mercy, Father
of all love, for trivial earthly things. Unto Him, therefore, we shall
go for light, for strength, for love. But so long as there is weakness
and a craving for servile dependence in us, there will be these little
prayers and ideas of the worship of the Personal God. But those who are
highly advanced do not care for such little helps, they have wellnigh
forgotten all about this seeking things for themselves, wanting things
for themselves. The predominant idea in them is — not I, but thou, my
brother. Those are the fit persons to worship the Impersonal God. And
what is the worship of the Impersonal God? No slavery there — "O Lord, I
am nothing, have mercy on me." You know the old Persian poem, translated
into English: "I came to see my beloved. The doors were closed. I
knocked and a voice came from inside. 'Who art thou?' 'I am so-and-so'
The door was not opened. A second time I came and knocked; I was asked
the same question, and gave the same answer. The door opened not. I came
a third time, and the same question came. I answered, 'I am thee, my
love,' and the door opened." Worship of the Impersonal God is through
truth. And what is truth? That I am He. When I say that I am not Thou,
it is untrue. When I say I am separate from you it is a lie, a terrible
lie. I am one with this universe, born one. It is self evident to my
senses that I am one with the universe. I am one with the air that
surrounds me, one with heat, one with light, eternally one with the
whole Universal Being, who is called this universe, who is mistaken for
the universe, for it is He and nothing else, the eternal subject in the
heart who says, "I am," in every heart — the deathless one, the
sleepless one, ever awake, the immortal, whose glory never dies, whose
powers never fail. I am one with That.

This is all the worship of the Impersonal, and what is the result? The
whole life of man will be changed. Strength, strength it is that we want
so much in this life, for what we call sin and sorrow have all one
cause, and that is our weakness. With weakness comes ignorance, and with
ignorance comes misery. It will make us strong. Then miseries will be
laughed at, then the violence of the vile will be smiled at, and the
ferocious tiger will reveal, behind its tiger's nature, my own Self.
That will be the result. That soul is strong that has become one with
the Lord; none else is strong. In your own Bible, what do you think was
the cause of that strength of Jesus of Nazareth, that immense, infinite
strength which laughed at traitors, and blessed those that were willing
to murder him? It was that, "I and my Father are one"; it was that
prayer, "Father, just as I am one with you, so make them all one with
me." That is the worship of the Impersonal God. Be one with the
universe, be one with Him. And this Impersonal God requires no
demonstrations, no proofs. He is nearer to us than even our senses,
nearer to us than our own thoughts; it is in and through Him that we see
and think. To see anything, I must first see Him. To see this wall I
first see Him, and then the wall, for He is the eternal subject. Who is
seeing whom? He is here in the heart of our hearts. Bodies and minds
change; misery, happiness, good and evil come and go; days and years
roll on; life comes and goes; but He dies not. The same voice, "I am, I
am," is eternal, unchangeable. In Him and through Him we know
everything. In Him and through Him we see everything. In Him and through
Him we sense, we think, we live, and we are. And that "I," which we
mistake to be a little "I," limited, is not only my "I," but yours, the
"I" of everyone, of the animals, of the angels, of the lowest of the
low. That "I am" is the same in the murderer as in the saint, the same
in the rich as in the poor, the same in man as in woman, the same in man
as in animals. From the lowest amoeba to the highest angel, He resides
in every soul, and eternally declares, "I am He, I am He." When we have
understood that voice eternally present there, when we have learnt this
lesson, the whole universe will have expressed its secret. Nature will
have given up her secret to us. Nothing more remains to be known. Thus
we find the truth for which all religions search, that all this
knowledge of material sciences is but secondary. That is the only true
knowledge which makes us one with this Universal God of the Universe.

</div>
