---
title: STEPS OF HINDU PHILOSOPHIC THOUGHT

---
<div>

[←](the_spirit_and_influence_of_vedanta.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm)
/ [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](steps_to_realisation.htm)

  

## STEPS OF HINDU PHILOSOPHIC THOUGHT

The first group of religious ideas that we see coming up — I mean
recognised religious ideas, and not the very low ideas, which do not
deserve the name of religion — all include the idea of inspiration and
revealed books and so forth. The first group of religious ideas starts
with the idea of God. Here is the universe, and this universe is created
by a certain Being. Everything that is in this universe has been created
by Him. Along with that, at a later stage, comes the idea of soul — that
there is this body, and something inside this body which is not the
body. This is the most primitive idea of religion that we know. We can
find a few followers of that in India, but it was given up very early.
The Indian religions take a peculiar start. It is only by strict
analysis, and much calculation and conjecture, that we can ever think
that that stage existed in Indian religions. The tangible state in which
we find them is the next step, not the first one. At the earliest step
the idea of creation is very peculiar, and it is that the whole universe
is created out of zero, at the will of God; that all this universe did
not exist, and out of this nothingness all this has come. In the next
stage we find this conclusion is questioned. How can existence be
produced out of nonexistence? At the first step in the Vedanta this
question is asked. If this universe is existent it must have come out of
something, because it was very easy to see that nothing comes out of
nothing, anywhere. All work that is done by human hands requires
materials. If a house is built, the material was existing before; if a
boat is made the material existed before; if any implements are made,
the materials were existing before. So the effect is produced.
Naturally, therefore, the first idea that this world was created out of
nothing was rejected, and some material out of which this world was
created was wanted. The whole history of religion, in fact, is this
search after that material.

Out of what has all this been produced? Apart from the question of the
efficient cause, or God, apart from the question that God created the
universe, the great question of all questions is: Out of what did He
create it? All the philosophies are turning, as it were, on this
question. One solution is that nature, God, and soul are eternal
existences, as if three lines are running parallel eternally, of which
nature and soul comprise what they call the dependent, and God the
independent Reality. Every soul, like every particle of matter, is
perfectly dependent on the will of God. Before going to the other steps
we will take up the idea of soul, and then find that with all the
Vedantic philosophers, there is one tremendous departure from all
Western philosophy. All of them have a common psychology. Whatever their
philosophy may have been, their psychology is the same in India, the old
Sânkhya psychology. According to this, perception occurs by the
transmission of the vibrations which first come to the external
sense-organs, from the external to the internal organs, from the
internal organs to the mind, from the mind to the Buddhi, from the
Buddhi or intellect, to something which is a unit, which they call the
Âtman. Coming to modern physiology, we know that it has found centres
for all the different sensations. First it finds the lower centres, and
then a higher grade of centres, and these two centres exactly correspond
with the internal organs and the mind, but not one centre has been found
which controls all the other centres. So physiology cannot tell what
unifies all these centres. Where do the centres get united? The centres
in the brain are all different and there is not one centre which
controls all the other centres; therefore, so far as it goes, the Indian
psychology stands unchallenged upon this point. We must have this
unification, some thing upon which the sensations will be reflected, to
form a complete whole. Until there is that something, I cannot have any
idea of you, or a picture, or anything else. If we had not that unifying
something, we would only see, then after a while breathe, then hear, and
so on, and while I heard a man talking I would not see him at all,
because all the centres are different.

This body is made of particles which we call matter, and it is dull and
insentient. So is what the Vedantists call the fine body. The fine body,
according to them, is a material but transparent body, made of very fine
particles, so fine that no microscope can see them. What is the use of
that? It is the receptacle of the fine forces. Just as this gross body
is the receptacle of the gross forces, so the fine body is the
receptacle of the fine forces, which we call thought, in its various
modifications. First is the body, which is gross matter, with gross
force. Force cannot exist without matter. It must require some matter to
exist, so the grosser forces work in the body; and those very forces
become finer; the very force which is working in a gross form, works in
a fine form, and becomes thought. There is no distinction between them,
simply one is the gross and the other the fine manifestation of the same
thing. Neither is there any distinction between this fine body and the
gross body. The fine body is also material, only very fine matter; and
just as this gross body is the instrument that works the gross forces,
so the fine body is the instrument that works the fine forces. From
where do all these forces come? According to Vedanta philosophy, there
are two things in nature, one of which they call Âkâsha, which is the
substance, infinitely fine, and the other they call Prâna, which is the
force. Whatever you see, or feel, or hear, as air, earth, or anything,
is material — the product of Akasha. It goes on and becomes finer and
finer, or grosser and grosser, changing under the action of Prana. Like
Akasha, Prana is omnipresent, and interpenetrating everything. Akasha is
like the water, and everything else in the universe is like blocks of
ice, made out of that water, and floating in the water, and Prana is the
power that changes this Akasha into all these various forms. The gross
body is the instrument made out of Akasha, for the manifestation of
Prana in gross forms, as muscular motion, or walking, sitting, talking,
and so forth. That fine body is also made of Akasha, a very fine form of
Akasha, for the manifestation of the same Prana in the finer form of
thought. So, first there is this gross body. Beyond that is this fine
body, and beyond that is the Jiva, the real man. Just as the nails can
be pared off many times and yet are still part of our bodies, not
different, so is our gross body related to the fine. It is not that a
man has a fine and also a gross body; it is the one body only, the part
which endures longer is the fine body, and that which dissolves sooner
is the gross. Just as I can cut this nail any number of times, so,
millions of times I can shed this gross body, but the fine body will
remain. According to the dualists, this Jiva or the real man is very
fine, minute.

So far we see that man is a being, who has first a gross body which
dissolves very quickly, then a fine body which remains through aeons,
and then a Jiva. This Jiva, according to the Vedanta philosophy, is
eternal, just as God is eternal. Nature is also eternal, but changefully
eternal. The material of nature — Prana and Akasha — is eternal, but it
is changing into different forms eternally. But the Jiva is not
manufactured either of Akasha or Prana; it is immaterial and, therefore,
will remain for ever. It is not the result of any combination of Prana
and Akasha, and whatever is not the result of combination, will never be
destroyed, because destruction is going back to causes. The gross body
is a compound of Akasha and Prana and, therefore, will be decomposed.
The fine body will also be decomposed, after a long time, but the Jiva
is simple, and will never be destroyed. It was never born for the same
reason. Nothing simple can be born. The same argument applies. That
which is a compound only can be born. The whole of nature comprising
millions and millions of souls is under the will of God. God is
all-pervading, omniscient, formless, and He is working through nature
day and night. The whole of it is under His control. He is the eternal
Ruler. So say the dualists. Then the question comes: If God is the ruler
of this universe, why did He create such a wicked universe, why must we
suffer so much? They say, it is not God's fault. It is our fault that we
suffer. Whatever we sow we reap. He did not do anything to punish us.
Man is born poor, or blind, or some other way. What is the reason? He
had done something before, he was born that way. The Jiva has been
existing for all time, was never created. It has been doing all sorts of
things all the time. Whatever we do reacts upon us. If we do good, we
shall have happiness, and if evil, unhappiness. So the Jiva goes on
enjoying and suffering, and doing all sorts of things.

What comes after death? All these Vedanta philosophers admit that this
Jiva is by its own nature pure. But ignorance covers its real nature,
they say. As by evil deeds it has covered itself with ignorance, so by
good deeds it becomes conscious of its own nature again. Just as it is
eternal, so its nature is pure. The nature of every being is pure.

When through good deeds all its sins and misdeeds have been washed away,
then the Jiva becomes pure again, and when it becomes pure, it goes to
what is called Devayâna. Its organ of speech enters the mind. You cannot
think without words. Wherever there is thought, there must be words. As
words enter the mind, so the mind is resolved into the Prana, and the
Prana into the Jiva. Then the Jiva gets quickly out of the body, and
goes to the solar regions. This universe has sphere after sphere. This
earth is the world sphere, in which are moons, suns, and stars. Beyond
that here is the solar sphere, and beyond that another which they call
the lunar sphere. Beyond that there is the sphere which they call the
sphere of lightning, the electric sphere, and when the Jiva goes there,
there comes another Jiva, already perfect, to receive it, and takes it
to another world, the highest heaven, called the Brahmaloka, where the
Jiva lives eternally, no more to be born or to die. It enjoys through
eternity, and gets all sorts of powers, except the power of creation.
There is only one ruler of the universe, and that is God. No one can
become God; the dualists maintain that if you say you are God, it is a
blasphemy. All powers except the creative come to the Jiva, and if it
likes to have bodies, and work in different parts of the world, it can
do so. If it orders all the gods to come before it, if it wants its
forefathers to come, they all appear at its command. Such are its powers
that it never feels any more pain, and if it wants, it can live in the
Brahmaloka through all eternity. This is the highest man, who has
attained the love of God, who has become perfectly unselfish, perfectly
purified, who has given up all desires, and who does not want to do
anything except worship and love God.

There are others that are not so high, who do good works, but want some
reward. They say they will give so much to the poor, but want to go to
heaven in return. When they die, what becomes of them? The speech enters
the mind, the mind enters the Prana, the Prana enters the Jiva, and the
Jiva gets out, and goes to the lunar sphere, where it has a very good
time for a long period. There it enjoys happiness, so long as the effect
of its good deeds endures. When the same is exhausted, it descends, and
once again enters life on earth according to its desires. In the lunar
sphere the Jiva becomes what we call a god, or what the Christians or
Mohammedans call an angel. These gods are the names of certain
positions; for instance, Indra, the king of the gods, is the name of a
position; thousands of men get to that position. When a virtuous man who
has performed the highest of Vedic rites dies, he becomes a king of the
gods; by that time the old king has gone down again, and become man.
Just as kings change here, so the gods, the Devas, also have to die. In
heaven they will all die. The only deathless place is Brahmaloka, where
alone there is no birth and death.

So the Jivas go to heaven, and have a very good time, except now and
then when the demons give them chase. In our mythology it is said there
are demons, who sometimes trouble the gods. In all mythologies, you read
how these demons and the gods fought, and the demons sometimes conquered
the gods, although many times, it seems, the demons did not do so many
wicked things as the gods. In all mythologies, for instance, you find
the Devas fond of women. So after their reward is finished, they fall
down again, come through the clouds, through the rains, and thus get
into some grain or plant and find their way into the human body, when
the grain or plant is eaten by men. The father gives them the material
out of which to get a fitting body. When the material suits them no
longer, they have to manufacture other bodies. Now there are the very
wicked fellows, who do, all sorts of diabolical things; they are born
again as animals, and if they are very bad, they are born as very low
animals, or become plants, or stones.

In the Deva form they make no Karma at all; only man makes Karma. Karma
means work which will produce effect. When a man dies and becomes a
Deva, he has only a period of pleasure, and during that time makes no
fresh Karma; it is simply a reward for his past good Karma. When the
good Karma is worked out, then the remaining Karma begins to take
effect, and he comes down to earth. He becomes man again, and if he does
very good works, and purifies himself, he goes to Brahmaloka and comes
back no more.

The animal is a state of sojourn for the Jiva evolving from lower forms.
In course of time the animal becomes man. It is a significant fact that
as the human population is increasing, the animal population is
decreasing. The animal souls are all becoming men. So many species of
animals have become men already. Where else have they gone?

In the Vedas, there is no mention of hell. But our Purânas, the later
books of our scriptures, thought that no religion could be complete,
unless hells were attached to it, and so they invented all sorts of
hells. In some of these, men are sawed in half, and continually
tortured, but do not die. They are continually feeling intense pain, but
the books are merciful enough to say it is only for a period. Bad Karma
is worked out in that state and then they come back on earth, and get
another chance. So this human form is the great chance. It is called the
Karma-body, in which we decide our fate. We are running in a huge
circle, and this is the point in the circle which determines the future.
So this is considered the most important form that there is. Man is
greater than the gods.

So far with dualism, pure and simple. Next comes the higher Vedantic
philosophy which says, that this cannot be. God is both the material and
the efficient cause of this universe. If you say there is a God who is
an infinite Being, and a soul which is also infinite, and a nature which
is also infinite, you can go on multiplying infinites without limit
which is simply absurd; you smash all logic. So God is both the material
and the efficient cause of the universe; He projects this universe out
of Himself. Then how is it that God has become these walls and this
table, that God has become the pig, and the murderer, and all the evil
things in the world? We say that God is pure. How can He become all
these degenerate things? Our answer is: just as I am a soul and have a
body, and in a sense, this body is not different from me, yet I, the
real I, in fact, am not the body. For instance, I say, I am a child, a
young man, or an old man, but my soul has not changed. It remains the
same soul. Similarly, the whole universe, comprising all nature and an
infinite number of souls, is, as it were, the infinite body of God. He
is interpenetrating the whole of it. He alone is unchangeable, but
nature changes, and soul changes. He is unaffected by changes in nature
and soul. In what way does nature change? In its forms; it takes fresh
forms. But the soul cannot change that way. The soul contracts and
expands in knowledge. It contracts by evil deeds. Those deeds which
contract the real natural knowledge and purity of the soul are called
evil deeds. Those deeds, again, which bring out the natural glory of the
soul, are called good deeds. All these souls were pure, but they have
become contracted; through the mercy of God, and by doing good deeds,
they will expand and recover their natural purity. Everyone has the same
chance, and in the long run, must get out. But this universe will not
cease, because it is eternal. This is the second theory. The first is
called dualism. The second holds that there are God, soul, and nature,
and soul and nature form the body of God, and, therefore, these three
form one unit. It represents a higher stage of religious development and
goes by the name of qualified monism. In dualism, the universe is
conceived as a large machine set going by God while in qualified monism,
it is conceived as an organism, interpenetrated by the Divine Self.

The last are the non-dualists. They raise the question also, that God
must be both the material and the efficient cause of this universe. As
such, God has become the whole of this universe and there is no going
against it. And when these other people say that God is the soul, and
the universe is the body, and the body is changing, but God is
changeless, the non-dualists say, all this is nonsense. In that case
what is the use of calling God the material cause of this universe? The
material cause is the cause become effect; the effect is nothing but the
cause in another form. Wherever you see an effect, it is the cause
reproduced. If the universe is the effect, and God the cause, it must be
the reproduction of God. If you say that the universe is the body of
God, and that the body becomes contracted and fine and becomes the
cause, and out of that the universe is evolved, the non-dualists say
that it is God Himself who has become this universe. Now comes a very
fine question. If this God has become this universe, you and all these
things are God. Certainly. This book is God, everything is God. My body
is God, and my mind is God, and my soul is God. Then why are there so
many Jivas? Has God become divided into millions of Jivas? Does that one
God turn into millions of Jivas? Then how did it become so? How can that
infinite power and substance, the one Being of the universe, become
divided? It is impossible to divide infinity. How can that pure Being
become this universe? If He has become the universe, He is changeful,
and if He is changeful, He is part of nature, and whatever is nature and
changeful is born and dies. If our God is changeful, He must die some
day. Take note of that. Again, how much of God has become this universe?
If you say X (the unknown algebraical quantity), then God is God minus X
now, and, therefore, not the same God as before this creation, because
so much has become this universe.

So the non-dualists say, "This universe does not exist at all; it is all
illusion. The whole of this universe, these Devas, gods, angels, and all
the other beings born and dying, all this infinite number of souls
coming up and going down, are all dreams." There is no Jiva at all. How
can there be many? It is the one Infinity. As the one sun, reflected on
various pieces of water, appears to be many, and millions of globules of
water reflect so many millions of suns, and in each globule will be a
perfect image of the sun, yet there is only one sun, so are all these
Jivas but reflections in different minds. These different minds are like
so many different globules, reflecting this one Being. God is being
reflected in all these different Jivas. But a dream cannot be without a
reality, and that reality is that one Infinite Existence. You, as body,
mind, or soul, are a dream, but what you really are, is Existence,
Knowledge, Bliss. You are the God of this universe. You are creating the
whole universe and drawing it in. Thus says the Advaitist. So all these
births and rebirths, coming and going are the figments of Mâyâ. You are
infinite. Where can you go? The sun, the moon, and the whole universe
are but drops in your transcendent nature. How can you be born or die? I
never was born, never will be born. I never had father or mother,
friends or foes, for I am Existence, Knowledge, Bliss Absolute. I am He,
I am He. So, what is the goal, according to this philosophy? That those
who receive this knowledge are one with the universe. For them, all
heavens and even Brahmaloka are destroyed, the whole dream vanishes, and
they find themselves the eternal God of the universe. They attain their
real individuality, with its infinite knowledge and bliss, and become
free. Pleasures in little things cease. We are finding pleasure in this
little body, in this little individuality. How much greater the pleasure
when this whole universe is my body! If there is pleasure in one body,
how much more when all bodies are mine! Then is freedom attained. And
this is called Advaita, the non-dualistic Vedanta philosophy.

These are the three steps which Vedanta philosophy has taken, and we
cannot go any further, because we cannot go beyond unity. When a science
reaches a unity, it cannot by any manner of means go any further. You
cannot go beyond this idea of the Absolute.

All people cannot take up this Advaita philosophy; it is hard. First of
all, it is very hard to understand it intellectually. It requires the
sharpest of intellects, a bold understanding. Secondly, it does not suit
the vast majority of people. So there are these three steps. Begin with
the first one. Then by thinking of that and understanding it, the second
will open itself. Just as a race advances, so individuals have to
advance. The steps which the human race has taken to reach to the
highest pinnacles of religious thought, every individual will have to
take. Only, while the human race took millions of years to reach from
one step to another, individuals may live the whole life of the human
race in a much shorter duration. But each one of us will have to go
through these steps. Those of you who are non-dualists look back to the
period of your lives when you were strong dualists. As soon as you think
you are a body and a mind, you will have to take the whole of this
dream. If you take one portion, you must take the whole. The man who
says, here is this world, and there is no (Personal) God, is a fool;
because if there is a world, there will have to be a cause, and that is
what is called God. You cannot have an effect without knowing that there
is a cause. God will only vanish when this world vanishes; then you will
become God (Absolute), and this world will be no longer for you. So long
as the dream that you are a body exists, you are bound to see yourself
as being born and dying; but as soon as that dream vanishes, so will the
dream vanish that you are being born and dying, and so will the other
dream that there is a universe vanish. That very thing which we now see
as the universe will appear to us as God (Absolute), and that very God
who has so long been external will appear to be internal, as our own
Self.

</div>
