---
title: STEPS TO REALISATION

---
<div>

[←](steps_of_hindu_philosophic_thought.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](vedanta_and_privilege.htm)

  

## STEPS TO REALISATION

(*A class-lecture delivered in America*)

First among the qualifications required of the aspirant for Jnâna, or
wisdom, come Shama and Dama, which may be taken together. They mean the
keeping of the organs in their own centres without allowing them to
stray out. I shall explain to you first what the word "organ" means.
Here are the eyes; the eyes are not the organs of vision but only the
instruments. Unless the organs also are present, I cannot see, even if I
have eyes. But, given both the organs and the instruments, unless the
mind attaches itself to these two, no vision takes place. So, in each
act of perception, three things are necessary — first, the external
instruments, then, the internal organs, and lastly, the mind. If any one
of them be absent, then there will be no perception. Thus the mind acts
through two agencies — one external, and the other internal. When I see
things, my mind goes out, becomes externalised; but suppose I close my
eyes and begin to think, the mind does not go out, it is internally
active. But, in either case, there is activity of the organs. When I
look at you and speak to you, both the organs and the instruments are
active. When I close my eyes and begin to think, the organs are active,
but not the instruments. Without the activity of these organs, there
will be no thought. You will find that none of you can think without
some symbol. In the case of the blind man, he has also to think through
some figure. The organs of sight and hearing are generally very active.
You must bear in mind that by the word "organ" is meant the nerve centre
in the brain. The eyes and ears are only the instruments of seeing and
hearing, and the organs are inside. If the organs are destroyed by any
means, even if the eyes or the ears be there, we shall not see or hear.
So in order to control the mind, we must first be able to control these
organs. To restrain the mind from wandering outward or inward, and keep
the organs in their respective centres, is what is meant by the words
Shama and Dama. Shama consists in not allowing the mind to externalise,
and Dama, in checking the external instruments.

Now comes Uparati which consists in not thinking of things of the
senses. Most of our time is spent in thinking about sense-objects,
things which we have seen, or we have heard, which we shall see or shall
hear, things which we have eaten, or are eating, or shall eat, places
where we have lived, and so on. We think of them or talk of them most of
our time. One who wishes to be a Vedantin must give up this habit.

Then comes the next preparation (it is a hard task to be a
philosopher!), Titikshâ, the most difficult of all. It is nothing less
than the ideal forbearance — "Resist not evil." This requires a little
explanation. We may not resist an evil, but at the same time we may feel
very miserable. A man may say very harsh things to me, and I may not
outwardly hate him for it, may not answer him back, and may restrain
myself from apparently getting angry, but anger and hatred may be in my
mind, and I may feel very badly towards that man. That is not
non-resistance; I should be without any feeling of hatred or anger,
without any thought of resistance; my mind must then be as calm as if
nothing had happened. And only when I have got to that state, have I
attained to non-resistance, and not before. Forbearance of all misery,
without even a thought of resisting or driving it out, without even any
painful feeling in the mind, or any remorse — this is Titiksha. Suppose
I do not resist, and some great evil comes thereby; if I have Titiksha,
I should not feel any remorse for not having resisted. When the mind has
attained to that state, it has become established in Titiksha. People in
India do extraordinary things in order to practice this Titiksha. They
bear tremendous heat and cold without caring, they do not even care for
snow, because they take no thought for the body; it is left to itself,
as if it were a foreign thing.

The next qualification required is Shraddhâ, faith. One must have
tremendous faith in religion and God. Until one has it, one cannot
aspire to be a Jnâni. A great sage once told me that not one in twenty
millions in this world believed in God. I asked him why, and he told me,
"Suppose there is a thief in this room, and he gets to know that there
is a mass of gold in the next room, and only a very thin partition
between the two rooms; what will be the condition of that thief?" I
answered, "He will not be able to sleep at all; his brain will be
actively thinking of some means of getting at the gold, and he will
think of nothing else." Then he replied, "Do you believe that a man
could believe in God and not go mad to get him? If a man sincerely
believes that there is that immense, infinite mine of Bliss, and that It
can be reached, would not that man go mad in his struggle to reach it ?"
Strong faith in God and the consequent eagerness to reach Him constitute
Shraddha.

Then comes Samâdhâna, or constant practice, to hold the mind in God.
Nothing is done in a day. Religion cannot be swallowed in the form of a
pill. It requires hard and constant practice. The mind can be conquered
only by slow and steady practice.

Next is Mumukshutva, the intense desire to be free. Those of you who
have read Edwin Arnold's *Light of Asia* remember his translation of the
first sermon of Buddha, where Buddha says,

Ye suffer from yourselves. None else compels.  
None other holds you that ye live and die,  
And whirl upon the wheel, and hug and kiss  
Its spokes of agony,  
Its tire of tears, its nave of nothingness.

All the misery we have is of our own choosing; such is our nature. The
old Chinaman, who having been kept in prison for sixty years was
released on the coronation of a new emperor, exclaimed, when he came
out, that he could not live; he must go back to his horrible dungeon
among the rats and mice; he could not bear the light. So he asked them
to kill him or send him back to the prison, and he was sent back.
Exactly similar is the condition of all men. We run headlong after all
sorts of misery, and are unwilling to be freed from them. Every day we
run after pleasure, and before we reach it, we find it is gone, it has
slipped through our fingers. Still we do not cease from our mad pursuit,
but on and on we go, blinded fools that we are.

In some oil mills in India, bullocks are used that go round and round to
grind the oil-seed. There is a yoke on the bullock's neck. They have a
piece of wood protruding from the yoke, and on that is fastened a wisp
of straw. The bullock is blindfolded in such a way that it can only look
forward, and so it stretches its neck to get at the straw; and in doing
so, it pushes the piece of wood out a little further; and it makes
another attempt with the same result, and yet another, and so on. It
never catches the straw, but goes round and round in the hope of getting
it, and in so doing, grinds out the oil. In the same way you and I who
are born slaves to nature, money and wealth, wives and children, are
always chasing a wisp of straw, a mere chimera, and are going through an
innumerable round of lives without obtaining what we seek. The great
dream is love; we are all going to love and be loved, we are all going
to be happy and never meet with misery, but the more we go towards
happiness, the more it goes away from us. Thus the world is going on,
society goes on, and we, blinded slaves, have to pay for it without
knowing. Study your own lives, and find how little of happiness there is
in them, and how little in truth you have gained in the course of this
wild-goose chase of the world.

Do you remember the story of Solon and Croesus? The king said to the
great sage that Asia Minor was a very happy place. And the sage asked
him, "Who is the happiest man? I have not seen anyone very happy."
"Nonsense," said Croesus, "I am the happiest man in the world." "Wait,
sir, till the end of your life; don't be in a hurry," replied the sage
and went away. In course of time that king was conquered by the
Persians, and they ordered him to be burnt alive. The funeral pyre was
prepared and when poor Croesus saw it, he cried aloud "Solon! Solon!" On
being asked to whom he referred, he told his story, and the Persian
emperor was touched, and saved his life.

Such is the life-story of each one of us; such is the tremendous power
of nature over us. It repeatedly kicks us away, but still we pursue it
with feverish excitement. We are always hoping against hope; this hope,
this chimera maddens us; we are always hoping for happiness.

There was a great king in ancient India who was once asked four
questions, of which one was: "What is the most wonderful thing in the
world?" "Hope," was the answer. This is the most wonderful thing. Day
and nights we see people dying around us, and yet we think we shall not
die; we never think that we shall die, or that we shall suffer. Each man
thinks that success will be his, hoping against hope, against all odds,
against all mathematical reasoning. Nobody is ever really happy here. If
a man be wealthy and have plenty to eat, his digestion is: out of order,
and he cannot eat. If a man's digestion be good, and he have the
digestive power of a cormorant, he has nothing to put into his mouth. If
he be rich, he has no children. If he be hungry and poor, he has a whole
regiment of children, and does not know what to do with them. Why is it
so? Because happiness and misery are the obverse and reverse of the same
coin; he who takes happiness, must take misery also. We all have this
foolish idea that we can have happiness without misery, and it has taken
such possession of us that we have no control over the senses.

When I was in Boston, a young man came up to me, and gave me a scrap of
paper on which he had written a name and address, followed by these
words: "All the wealth and all the happiness of the world are yours, if
you only know how to get them. If you come to me, I will teach you how
to get them. Charge, $ 5." He gave me this and said, "What do you think
of this?" I said, "Young man, why don't you get the money to print this?
You have not even enough money to get this printed !" He did not
understand this. He was infatuated with the idea that he could get
immense wealth and happiness without any trouble. There are two extremes
into which men are running; one is extreme optimism, when everything is
rosy and nice and good; the other, extreme pessimism, when everything
seems to be against them. The majority of men have more or less
undeveloped brains. One in a million we see with a well-developed brain;
the rest either have peculiar idiosyncrasies, or are monomaniacs.

Naturally we run into extremes. When we are healthy and young, we think
that all the wealth of the world will be ours, and when later we get
kicked about by society like footballs and get older, we sit in a corner
and croak and throw cold water on the enthusiasm of others. Few men know
that with pleasure there is pain, and with pain, pleasure; and as pain
is disgusting, so is pleasure, as it is the twin brother of pain. It is
derogatory to the glory of man that he should be going after pain, and
equally derogatory, that he should be going after pleasure. Both should
be turned aside by men whose reason is balanced. Why will not men seek
freedom from being played upon? This moment we are whipped, and when we
begin to weep, nature gives us a dollar; again we are whipped, and when
we weep, nature gives us a piece of ginger-bread, and we begin to laugh
again.

The sage wants liberty; he finds that sense-objects are all vain and
that there is no end to pleasures and pains. How many rich people in the
world want to find fresh pleasures! All pleasures are old, and they want
new ones. Do you not see how many foolish things they are inventing
every day, just to titillate the nerves for a moment, and that done, how
there comes a reaction? The majority of people are just like a flock of
sheep. If the leading sheep falls into a ditch, all the rest follow and
break their necks. In the same way, what one leading member of a society
does, all the others do, without thinking what they are doing. When a
man begins to see the vanity of worldly things, he will feel he ought
not to be thus played upon or borne along by nature. That is slavery. If
a man has a few kind words said to him, he begins to smile, and when he
hears a few harsh words, he begins to weep. He is a slave to a bit of
bread, to a breath of air; a slave to dress, a slave to patriotism, to
country, to name, and to fame. He is thus in the midst of slavery and
the real man has become buried within, through his bondage. What you
call man is a slave. When one realises all this slavery, then comes the
desire to be free; an intense desire comes. If a piece of burning
charcoal be placed on a man's head, see how he struggles to throw it
off. Similar will be the struggles for freedom of a man who really
understands that he is a slave of nature.

We have now seen what Mumukshutva, or the desire to be free, is. The
next training is also a very difficult one. Nityânitya-Viveka —
discriminating between that which is true and that which is untrue,
between the eternal and the transitory. God alone is eternal, everything
else is transitory. Everything dies; the angels die, men die, animals
die, earths die, sun, moon, and stars, all die; everything undergoes
constant change. The mountains of today were the oceans of yesterday and
will be oceans tomorrow. Everything is in a state of flux. The whole
universe is a mass of change. But there is One who never changes, and
that is God; and the nearer we get to Him, the less will be the change
for us, the less will nature be able to work on us; and when we reach
Him, and stand with Him, we shall conquer nature, we shall be masters of
phenomena of nature, and they will have no effect on us.

You see, if we really have undergone the above discipline, we really do
not require anything else in this world. All knowledge is within us. All
perfection is there already in the soul. But this perfection has been
covered up by nature; layer after layer of nature is covering this
purity of the soul. What have we to do? Really we do not develop our
souls at all. What can develop the perfect? We simply take the evil off;
and the soul manifests itself in its pristine purity, its natural,
innate freedom.

Now begins the inquiry: Why is this discipline so necessary? Because
religion is not attained through the ears, nor through the eyes, nor yet
through the brain. No scriptures can make us religious. We may study all
the books that are in the world, yet we may not understand a word of
religion or of God. We may talk all our lives and yet may not be the
better for it; we may be the most intellectual people the world ever
saw, and yet we may not come to God at all. On the other hand, have you
not seen what irreligious men have been produced from the most
intellectual training? It is one of the evils of your Western
civilisation that you are after intellectual education alone, and take
no care of the heart. It only makes men ten times more selfish, and that
will be your destruction. When there is conflict between the heart and
the brain, let the heart be followed, because intellect has only one
state, reason, and within that, intellect works, and cannot get beyond.
It is the heart which takes one to the highest plane, which intellect
can never reach; it goes beyond intellect, and reaches to what is called
inspiration. Intellect can never become inspired; only the heart when it
is enlightened, becomes inspired. An intellectual, heartless man never
becomes an inspired man. It is always the heart that speaks in the man
of love; it discovers a greater instrument than intellect can give you,
the instrument of inspiration. Just as the intellect is the instrument
of knowledge, so is the heart the instrument of inspiration. In a lower
state it is a much weaker instrument than intellect. An ignorant man
knows nothing, but he is a little emotional by nature. Compare him with
a great professor — what wonderful power the latter possesses! But the
professor is bound by his intellect, and he can be a devil and an
intellectual man at the same time; but the man of heart can never be a
devil; no man with emotion was ever a devil. Properly cultivated, the
heart can be changed, and will go beyond intellect; it will be changed
into inspiration. Man will have to go beyond intellect in the end. The
knowledge of man, his powers of perception, of reasoning and intellect
and heart, all are busy churning this milk of the world. Out of long
churning comes butter, and this butter is God. Men of heart get the
"butter", and the "buttermilk" is left for the intellectual.

These are all preparations for the heart, for that love, for that
intense sympathy appertaining to the heart. It is not at all necessary
to be educated or learned to get to God. A sage once told me, "To kill
others one must be equipped with swords and shields, but to commit
suicide a needle is sufficient; so to teach others, much intellect and
learning are necessary, but not so for your own self-illumination." Are
you pure? If you are pure, you will reach God. "Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God." If you are not pure, and you know all
the sciences in the world, that will not help you at all; you may be
buried in all the books you read, but that will not be of much use. It
is the heart that reaches the goal. Follow the heart. A pure heart sees
beyond the intellect; it gets inspired; it knows things that reason can
never know, and whenever there is conflict between the pure heart and
the intellect, always side with the pure heart, even if you think what
your heart is doing is unreasonable. When it is desirous of doing good
to others, your brain may tell you that it is not politic to do so, but
follow your heart, and you will find that you make less mistakes than by
following your intellect. The pure heart is the best mirror for the
reflection of truth, so all these disciplines are for the purification
of the heart. And as soon as it is pure, all truths flash upon it in a
minute; all truth in the universe will manifest in your heart, if you
are sufficiently pure.

The great truths about atoms, and the finer elements, and the fine
perceptions of men, were discovered ages ago by men who never saw a
telescope, or a microscope, or a laboratory. How did they know all these
things? It was through the heart; they purified the heart. It is open to
us to do the same today; it is the culture of the heart, really, and not
that of the intellect that will lessen the misery of the world.

Intellect has been cultured with the result that hundreds of sciences
have been discovered, and their effect has been that the few have made
slaves of the many — that is all the good that has been done. Artificial
wants have been created; and every poor man, whether he has money or
not, desires to have those wants satisfied, and when he cannot, he
struggles, and dies in the struggle. This is the result. Through the
intellect is not the way to solve the problem of misery, but through the
heart. If all this vast amount of effort had been spent in making men
purer, gentler, more forbearing, this world would have a thousandfold
more happiness than it has today. Always cultivate the heart; through
the heart the Lord speaks, and through the intellect you yourself speak.

You remember in the Old Testament where Moses was told, "Take off thy
shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy
ground." We must always approach the study of religion with that
reverent attitude. He who comes with a pure heart and a reverent
attitude, his heart will be opened; the doors will open for him, and he
will see the truth.

If you come with intellect only, you can have a little intellectual
gymnastics, intellectual theories, but not truth. Truth has such a face
that any one who sees that face becomes convinced. The sun does not
require any torch to show it; the sun is self-effulgent. If truth
requires evidence, what will evidence that evidence? If something is
necessary as witness for truth, where is the witness for that witness?
We must approach religion with reverence and with love, and our heart
will stand up and say, this is truth, and this is untruth.

The field of religion is beyond our senses, beyond even our
consciousness. We cannot *sense* God. Nobody has seen God with his eyes
or ever will see; nobody has God in his consciousness. I am not
conscious of God, nor you, nor anybody. Where is God? Where is the field
of religion? It is beyond the senses, beyond consciousness.
Consciousness is only one of the many planes in which we work; you will
have to transcend the field of consciousness, to go beyond the senses,
approach nearer and nearer to your own centre, and as you do that, you
will approach nearer and nearer to God. What is the proof of God? Direct
perception, Pratyaksha. The proof of this wall is that I perceive it.
God has been perceived that way by thousands before, and will be
perceived by all who want to perceive Him. But this perception is no
sense-perception at all; it is supersensuous, superconscious, and all
this training is needed to take us beyond the senses. By means of all
sorts of past work and bondages we are being dragged downwards; these
preparations will make us pure and light. Bondages will fall off by
themselves, and we shall be buoyed up beyond this plane of
sense-perception to which we are tied down, and then we shall see, and
hear, and feel things which men in the three ordinary states (viz
waking, dream, and sleep) neither feel, nor see, nor hear. Then we shall
speak a strange language, as it were, and the world will not understand
us, because it does not know anything but the senses. True religion is
entirely transcendental. Every being that is in the universe has the
potentiality of transcending the senses; even the little worm will one
day transcend the senses and reach God. No life will be a failure; there
is no such thing as failure in the universe. A hundred times man will
hurt himself, a thousand times he will tumble, but in the end he will
realise that he is God. We know there is no progress in a straight line.
Every soul moves, as it were, in a circle, and will have to complete it,
and no soul can go so low but there will come a time when it will have
to go upwards. No one will be lost. We are all projected from one common
centre, which is God. The highest as well as the lowest life God ever
projected, will come back to the Father of all lives. "From whom all
beings are projected, in whom all live, and unto whom they all return;
that is God."

</div>
