---
title: VEDANTA AND PRIVILEGE

---
<div>

[←](steps_to_realisation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [→](privilege.htm)

  

## VEDANTA AND PRIVILEGE

(*Delivered in London*)

We have nearly finished the metaphysical portion of the Advaita. One
point, and perhaps the most difficult to understand, remains. We have
seen so far that, according to the Advaita theory, all we see around us,
and the whole universe in fact, is the evolution of that one Absolute.
This is called, in Sanskrit, Brahman. The Absolute has become changed
into the whole of nature. But here comes a difficulty. How is it
possible for the Absolute to change? What made the Absolute to change?
By its very definition, the Absolute is unchangeable. Change of the
unchangeable would be a contradiction. The same difficulty applies to
those who believe in a Personal God. For instance, how did this creation
arise? It could not have arisen out of nothing; that would be a
contradiction — something coming out of nothing can never be. The effect
is the cause in another form. Out of the seed, the big tree grows; the
tree is the seed, plus air and water taken in. And if there were any
method of testing the amount of the air, and water taken to make the
body of the tree, we should find that it is exactly the same as the
effect, the tree. Modern science has proved beyond doubt that it is so,
that the cause is the effect in another form. The adjustment of the
parts of the cause changes and becomes the effect. So, we have to avoid
this difficulty of having a universe without a cause, and we are bound
to admit that God has become the universe.

But we have avoided one difficulty, and landed in another. In every
theory, the idea of God comes through the idea of unchangeability. We
have traced historically how the one idea which we have always in mind
in the search for God, even in its crudest form, is the idea of freedom;
and the idea of freedom and of unchangeability is one and the same. It
is the free alone which never changes, and the unchangeable alone which
is free; for change is produced by something exterior to a thing, or
within itself, which is more powerful than the surroundings. Everything
which can be changed is necessarily bound by certain cause or causes,
which cannot be unchangeable. Supposing God has become this universe,
then God is here and has changed. And suppose the Infinite has become
this finite universe, so much of the Infinite has gone, and, therefore,
God is Infinite minus the universe. A changeable God would be no God. To
avoid this doctrine of pantheism, there is a very bold theory of the
Vedanta. It is that this universe, as we know and think it, does not
exist, that the unchangeable has not changed, that the whole of this
universe is mere appearance and not reality, that this idea of parts,
and little beings, and differentiations is only apparent, not the nature
of the thing itself. God has not changed at all, and has not become the
universe at all. We see God as the universe, because we have to look
through time, space, and causation. It is time, space, and causation
that make this differentiation apparently, but not really. This is a
very bold theory indeed. Now this theory ought to be explained a little
more clearly. It does not mean idealism in the sense in which it is
generally understood. It does not say that this universe does not exist;
it exists, but at the same time it is not what we take it for. To
illustrate this, the example given by the Advaita philosophy is well
known. In the darkness of night, a stump of a tree is looked upon as a
ghost by some superstitious person, as a policeman by a robber, as a
friend by some one waiting for his companion. In all these cases, the
stump of the tree did not change, but there are apparent changes, and
these changes were in the minds of those who saw it. From the subjective
side we can understand it better through psychology. There is something
outside of ourselves, the true nature of which is unknown and unknowable
to us; let us call it *x*. And there is something inside, which is also
unknown and unknowable to us; let us call it *y*. The knowable is a
combination of *x* plus *y*, and everything that we know, therefore,
must have two parts, the *x* outside, and the *y* inside; and the *x*
plus *y* is the thing we know. So, every form in the universe is partly
our creation and partly something outside. Now what the Vedanta holds is
that this *x* and this *y* are one and the same.

A very similar conclusion has been arrived at by some western
philosophers, especially by Herbert Spencer, and some other modern
philosophers. When it is said that the same power which is manifesting
itself in the flower is welling up in my own consciousness, it is the
very same idea which the Vedantist wants to preach, that the reality of
the external world and the reality of the internal world are one and the
same. Even the ideas of the internal and external exist by
differentiation and do not exist in the things themselves. For instance,
if we develop another sense, the whole world will change for us, showing
that it is the subject which will change the object. If I change, the
external world changes. The theory of the Vedanta, therefore, comes to
this, that you and I and everything in the universe are that Absolute,
not parts, but the whole. You are the whole of that Absolute, and so are
all others, because the idea of part cannot come into it. These
divisions, these limitations, are only apparent, not in the thing
itself. I am complete and perfect, and I was never bound, boldly
preaches the Vedanta. If you think you are bound, bound you will remain;
if you know that you are free, free you are. Thus the end and aim of
this philosophy is to let us know that we have been free always, and
shall remain free for ever. We never change, we never die, and we are
never born. What are all these changes then? What becomes of this
phenomenal world? This world is admitted as an apparent world, bound by
time, space, and causation, and it comes to what is called the
Vivarta-vâda in Sanskrit, evolution of nature, and manifestation of the
Absolute. The Absolute does not change, or re-evolve. In the little
amoeba is that infinite perfection latent. It is called amoeba from its
amoeba covering, and from the amoeba to the perfect man the change is
not in what is inside — that remains the same, unchangeable — but the
change occurs in the covering.

There is a screen here, and some beautiful scenery outside. There is a
small hole in the screen through which we can only catch a glimpse of
it. Suppose this hole begins to increase; as it grows larger and larger,
more and more of the scenery comes into view, and when the screen has
vanished, we come face to face with the whole of the scenery. This scene
outside is the soul, and the screen between us and the scenery is Mâyâ —
time, space, and causation. There is a little hole somewhere, through
which I can catch only a glimpse of the soul. When the hole is bigger, I
see more and more, and when the screen has vanished, I know that I am
the soul. So changes in the universe are not in the Absolute; they are
in nature. Nature evolves more and more, until the Absolute manifests
Itself. In everyone It exists; in some It is manifested more than in
others. The whole universe is really one. In speaking of the soul, to
say that one is superior to another has no meaning. In speaking of the
soul, to say that man is superior to the animal or the plant, has no
meaning; the whole universe is one. In plants the obstacle to
soul-manifestation is very great; in animals a little less; and in man
still less; in cultured, spiritual men still less; and in perfect men,
it has vanished altogether. All our struggles, exercises, pains,
pleasures, tears, and smiles, all that we do and think tend towards that
goal, the tearing up of the screen, making the hole bigger, thinning the
layers that remain between the manifestation and the reality behind. Our
work, therefore, is not to make the soul free, but to get rid of the
bondages. The sun is covered by layers of clouds, but remains unaffected
by them. The work of the wind is to drive the clouds away, and the more
the clouds disappear, the more the light of the sun appears. There is no
change whatsoever in the soul — Infinite, Absolute, Eternal, Knowledge,
Bliss, and Existence. Neither can there be birth or death for the soul.
Dying, and being born, reincarnation, and going to heaven, cannot be for
the soul. These are different appearances, different mirages, different
dreams. If a man who is dreaming of this world now dreams of wicked
thoughts and wicked deeds, after a certain time the thought of that very
dream will produce the next dream. He will dream that he is in a
horrible place, being tortured. The man who is dreaming good thoughts
and good deeds, after that period of dream is over, will dream he is in
a better place; and so on from dream to dream. But the time will come
when the whole of this dream will vanish. To everyone of us there must
come a time when the whole universe will be found to have been a mere
dream, when we shall find that the soul is infinitely better than its
surroundings. In this struggle through what we call our environments,
there will come a time when we shall find that these environments were
almost zero in comparison with the power of the soul. It is only a
question of time, and time is nothing in the Infinite. It is a drop in
the ocean. We can afford to wait and be calm.

Consciously or unconsciously, therefore, the whole universe is going
towards that goal. The moon is struggling to get out of the sphere of
attraction of other bodies, and will come out of it, in the long run.
But those who consciously strive to get free hasten the time. One
benefit from this theory we practically see is that the idea of a real
universal love is only possible from this point of view. All are our
fellow passengers, our fellow travellers — all life, plants, animals;
not only my brother man, but my brother brute, my brother plant; not
only my brother the good, but my brother the evil, my brother the
spiritual and my brother the wicked. They are all going to the same
goal. All are in the same stream, each is hurrying towards that infinite
freedom. We cannot stay the course, none can stay it, none can go back,
however he may try; he will be driven forward, and in the end he will
attain to freedom. Creation means the struggle to get back to freedom,
the centre of our being, whence we have been thrown off, as it were. The
very fact that we are here, shows that we are going towards the centre,
and the manifestation of this attraction towards the centre is what we
call love.

The question is asked: From what does this universe come, in what does
it remain, to what does it go back? And the answer is: From love it
comes, in love it remains, back it goes unto love. Thus we are in a
position to understand that, whether one likes it or not, there is no
going back for anyone. Everyone has to get to the centre, however he may
struggle to go back. Yet if we struggle consciously, knowingly, it will
smooth the passage, it will lessen the jar, and quicken the time.
Another conclusion we naturally arrive at from this is that all
knowledge and all power are within and not without. What we call nature
is a reflecting glass — that is all the use of nature — and all
knowledge is this reflection of the within on this glass of nature. What
we call powers, secrets of nature, and force, are all within. In the
external world are only a series of changes. There is no knowledge in
nature; all knowledge comes from the human soul. Man manifests
knowledge, discovers it within himself, which is pre-existing through
eternity. Everyone is the embodiment of Knowledge, everyone is the
embodiment of eternal Bliss, and eternal Existence. The ethical effect
is just the same, as we have seen elsewhere, with regard to equality.

But the idea of privilege is the bane of human life. Two forces, as it
were, are constantly at work, one making caste, and the other breaking
caste; in other words, the one making for privilege, the other breaking
down privilege. And whenever privilege is broken down, more and more
light and progress come to a race. This struggle we see all around us.
Of course there is first the brutal idea of privilege, that of the
strong over the weak. There is the privilege of wealth. If a man has
more money than another, he wants a little privilege over those who have
less. There is the still subtler and more powerful privilege of
intellect; because one man knows more than others, he claims more
privilege. And the last of all, and the worst, because the most
tyrannical, is the privilege of spirituality. If some persons think they
know more of spirituality, of God, they claim a superior privilege over
everyone else. They say, "Come down and worships us, ye common herds; we
are the messengers of God, and you have to worship us." None can be
Vedantists, and at the same time admit of privilege to anyone, either
mental, physical, or spiritual; absolutely no privilege for anyone. The
same power is in every man, the one manifesting more, the other less;
the same potentiality is in everyone. Where is the claim to privilege?
All knowledge is in every soul, even in the most ignorant; he has not
manifested it, but, perhaps, he has not had the opportunity, the
environments were not, perhaps, suitable to him. When he gets the
opportunity, he will manifest it. The idea that one man is born superior
to another has no meaning in the Vedanta; that between two nations one
is superior and the other inferior has no meaning whatsoever. Put them
in the same circumstances, and see whether the same intelligence comes
out or not. Before that you have no right to say that one nation is
superior to another. And as to spirituality, no privilege should be
claimed there. It is a privilege to serve mankind, for this is the
worship of God. God is here, in all these human souls. He is the soul of
man. What privilege can men ask? There are no special messengers of God,
never were, and never can be. All beings, great or small, are equally
manifestations of God; the difference is only in the manifestation. The
same eternal message, which has been eternally given, comes to them
little by little. The eternal message has been written in the heart of
every being; it is there already, and all are struggling to express it.
Some, in suitable circumstances, express it a little better than others,
but as bearers of the message they are all one. What claim to
superiority is there? The most ignorant man, the most ignorant child, is
as great a messenger of God as any that ever existed, and as great as
any that are yet to come. For the infinite message is there imprinted
once for all in the heart of every being. Wherever there is a being,
that being contains the infinite message of the Most High. It is there.
The work of the Advaita, therefore, is to break down all these
privileges. It is the hardest work of all, and curious to say, it has
been less active than anywhere else in the land of its birth. If there
is any land of privilege, it is the land which gave birth to this
philosophy — privilege for the spiritual man as well as for the man of
birth. There they have not so much privilege for money (that is one of
the benefits, I think), but privilege for birth and spirituality is
everywhere.

Once a gigantic attempt was made to preach Vedantic ethics, which
succeeded to a certain extent for several hundred years, and we know
historically that those years were the best times of that nation. I mean
the Buddhistic attempt to break down privilege. Some of the most
beautiful epithets addressed to Buddha that I remember are, "Thou the
breaker of castes, destroyer of privileges, preacher of equality to all
beings." So, he preached this one idea of equality. Its power has been
misunderstood to a certain extent in the brotherhood of Shramanas, where
we find that hundreds of attempts have been made to make them into a
church, with superiors and inferiors. Your cannot make much of a church
when you tell people they are all gods. One of the good effects of
Vedanta has been freedom of religious thought, which India enjoyed
throughout all times of its history. It is something to glory in, that
it is the land where there was never a religious persecution, where
people are allowed perfect freedom in religion.

This practical side of Vedanta morality is necessary as much today as it
ever was, more necessary, perhaps, than it ever was, for all this
privilege-claiming has become tremendously intensified with the
extension of knowledge. The idea of God and the devil, or Ahura Mazda
and Ahriman, has a good deal of poetry in it. The difference between God
and the devil is in nothing except in unselfishness and selfishness. The
devil knows as much as God, is as powerful as God; only he has no
holiness — that makes him a devil. Apply the same idea to the modern
world: excess of knowledge and power, without holiness, makes human
beings devils. Tremendous power is being acquired by the manufacture of
machines and other appliances, and privilege is claimed today as it
never has been claimed in the history of the world. That is why the
Vedanta wants to preach against it, to break down this tyrannising over
the souls of men.

Those of you who have studied the Gita will remember the memorable
passages: "He who looks upon the learned Brahmin, upon the cow, the
elephant, the dog, or the outcast with the same eye, he indeed is the
sage, and the wise man"; "Even in this life he has conquered relative
existence whose mind is firmly fixed on this sameness, for the Lord is
one and the same to all, and the Lord is pure; therefore those who have
this sameness for all, and are pure, are said to be living in God." This
is the gist of Vedantic morality — this sameness for all. We have seen
that it is the subjective world that rules the objective. Change the
subject, and the object is bound to change; purify yourself, and the
world is bound to be purified. This one thing requires to be taught now
more than ever before. We are becoming more and more busy about our
neighbours, and less and less about ourselves. The world will change if
we change; if we are pure, the world will become pure. The question is
why I should see evil in others. I cannot see evil unless I be evil. I
cannot be miserable unless I am weak. Things that used to make me
miserable when I was a child, do not do so now. The subject changed, so
the object was bound to change; so says the Vedanta. All these things
which we call causes of misery and evil, we shall laugh at when we
arrive at that wonderful state of equality, that sameness. This is what
is called in Vedanta attaining to freedom. The sign of approaching that
freedom is more and more of this sameness and equality. In misery and
happiness the same, in success and defeat the same — such a mind is
nearing that state of freedom.

The mind cannot be easily conquered. Minds that rise into waves at the
approach of every little thing at the slightest provocation or danger,
in what a state they must be! What to talk of greatness or spirituality,
when these changes come over the mind? This unstable condition of the
mind must be changed. We must ask ourselves how far we can be acted upon
by the external world, and how far we can stand on our own feet, in
spite of all the forces outside us. When we have succeeded in preventing
all the forces in the world from throwing us off our balance, then alone
we have attained to freedom, and not before. That is salvation. It is
here and nowhere else; it is this moment. Out of this idea, out of this
fountain-head, all beautiful streams of thought have flowed upon the
world, generally misunderstood in their expression, apparently
contradicting each other. We find hosts of brave and wonderfully
spiritual souls, in every nation, taking to caves or forests for
meditation, severing their connection with the external world. This is
the one idea. And, on the other hand, we find bright, illustrious beings
coming into society, trying to raise their fellow men, the poor, the
miserable. Apparently these two methods are contradictory. The man who
lives in a cave, apart from his fellow-beings, smiles contemptuously
upon those who are working for the regeneration of their fellow men.
"How foolish!" he says; "what work is there? The world of Maya will
always remain the world of Maya; it cannot be changed." If I ask one of
our priests in India, "Do you believe in Vedanta?" — he says, "That is
my religion; I certainly do; that is my life." "Very well, do you admit
the equality of all life, the sameness of everything?" "Certainly, I
do." The next moment, when a low-caste man approaches this priest, he
jumps to one side of the street to avoid that man. "Why do you jump?"
"Because his very touch would have polluted me." "But you were just
saying we are all the same, and you admit there is no difference in
souls." He says, "Oh, that is in theory only for householders; when I go
into a forest, then I will look upon everyone as the same." You ask one
of your great men in England, of great birth and wealth, if he believes
as a Christian in the brotherhood of mankind, since all came from God.
He answers in the affirmative, but in five minutes he shouts something
uncomplimentary about the common herd. Thus, it has been a theory only
for several thousand years and never came into practice. All understand
it, declare it as the truth, but when you ask them to practice it, they
say, it will take millions of years.

There was a certain king who had a huge number of courtiers, and each
one of these courtiers declared he was ready to sacrifice his life for
his master, and that he was the most sincere being ever born. In course
of time, a Sannyâsin came to the king. The king said to him that there
never was a king who had so many sincere courtiers as he had. The
Sannyasin smiled and said he did not believe that. The king said the
Sannyasin could test it if he liked. So the Sannyasin declared that he
would make a great sacrifice by which the king's reign would be extended
very long, with the condition that there should be made a small tank
into which each one of his courtiers should pour a pitcher of milk, in
the dark of night. The king smiled and said, "Is this the test?" And he
asked his courtiers to come to him, and told them what was to be done.
They all expressed their joyful assent to the proposal and returned. In
the dead of night, they came and emptied their pitchers into the tank.
But in the morning, it was found full of water only. The courtiers were
assembled and questioned about the matter. Each one of them had thought
there would be so many pitchers of milk that his water would not be
detected. Unfortunately most of us have the same idea and we do our
share of work as did the courtiers in the story.

There is so much idea of equality, says the priest, that my little
privilege will not be detected. So say our rich men, so say the tyrants
of every country. There is more hope for the tyrannised over, than for
the tyrants. It will take a very long time for tyrants to arrive at
freedom, but less time for the others. The cruelty of the fox is much
more terrible than the cruelty of the lion. The lion strikes a blow and
is quiet for some time afterwards, but the fox trying persistently to
follow his prey never misses an opportunity. Priestcraft is in its
nature cruel and heartless. That is why religion goes down where
priestcraft arises. Says the Vedanta, we must give up the idea of
privilege, then will religion come. Before that there is no religion at
all.

Do you believe what Christ says, "Sell all that thou hast, and give to
the poor?" Practical equality there; no trying to torture the texts, but
taking the truth as it is. Do not try to torture texts. I have heard it
said that that was preached only to the handful of Jews who listened to
Jesus. The same argument will apply to other things also. Do not torture
texts; dare to face truth as it is. Even if we cannot reach to it, let
us confess our weakness, but let us not destroy the ideal. Let us hope
that we shall attain to it sometime, and strive for it. There it is —
"Sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor, and follow me." Thus,
trampling on every privilege and everything in us that works for
privilege, let us work for that knowledge which will bring the feeling
of sameness towards all mankind. You think that because you talk a
little more polished language you are superior to the man in the street.
Remember that when you are thinking this, you are not going towards
freedom, but are forging a fresh chain for your feet. And, above all, if
the pride of spirituality enters into you, woe unto you. It is the most
awful bondage that ever existed. Neither can wealth nor any other
bondage of the human heart bind the soul so much as this. "I am purer
than others", is the most awful idea that can enter into the human
heart. In what sense are you pure? The God in you is the God in all. If
you have not known this, you have known nothing. How can there be
difference? It is all one. Every being is the temple of the Most High;
if you can see that, good, if not, spirituality has yet to come to you.

</div>
