---
title: PRIVILEGE

---
<div>

[←](vedanta_and_privilege.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [→](krishna.htm)

  

## PRIVILEGE

(*Delivered at the Sesame Club, London*)

Two forces seem to be working throughout nature. One of these is
constantly differentiating, and the other is as constantly unifying; the
one making more and more for separate individuals, the other, as it
were, bringing the individuals into a mass, bringing out sameness in the
midst of all this differentiation. It seems that the action of these two
forces enters into every department of nature and of human life. On the
physical plane, we always find the two forces most distinctly at work,
separating the individuals, making them more and more distinct from
other individuals, and again making them into species and classes, and
bringing out similarities of expressions, and form. The same holds good
as regards the social life of man. Since the time when society began,
these two forces have been at work, differentiating and unifying. Their
action appears in various forms, and is called by various names, in
different places, and at different times. But the essence is present in
all, one making for differentiation, and the other for sameness; the one
making for caste, and the other breaking it down; one making for classes
and privileges, and the other destroying them. The whole universe seems
to be the battle-ground of these two forces. On the one hand, it is
urged, that though this unifying process exists, we ought to resist it
with all our might, because it leads towards death, that perfect unity
is perfect annihilation, and that when the differentiating process that
is at work in this universe ceases, the universe comes to an end. It is
differentiation that causes the phenomena that are before us;
unification would reduce them all to a homogeneous and lifeless matter.
Such a thing, of course, mankind wants to avoid. The same argument is
applied to all the things and facts that we see around us. It is urged
that even in physical body and social classification, absolute sameness
would produce natural death and social death. Absolute sameness of
thought and feeling would produce mental decay and degeneration.
Sameness, therefore, is to be avoided. This has been the argument on the
one side, and it has been urged in every country and in various times,
with only a change of language. Practically it is the same argument
which is urged by the Brahmins of India, when they want to uphold the
divisions and castes, when they want to uphold the privileges of a
certain portion of the community, against everybody else. The
destruction of caste, they declare, would lead to destruction of
society, and boldly they produce the historical fact that theirs has
been the longest-lived society. So they, with some show of force, appeal
to this argument. With some show of authority they declare that that
alone which makes the individual live the longest life must certainly be
better than that which produces shorter lives.

On the other hand, the idea of oneness has had its advocates throughout
all times. From the days of the Upanishads, the Buddhas, and Christs,
and all other great preachers of religion, down to our present day, in
the new political aspirations, and in the claims of the oppressed and
the downtrodden, and of all those who find themselves bereft of
privileges — comes out the one assertion of this unity and sameness. But
human nature asserts itself. Those who have an advantage want to keep
it, and if they find an argument, however one-sided and crude, they must
cling to it. This applies to both sides.

Applied to metaphysics, this question also assumes another form. The
Buddhist declares that we need not look for anything which brings unity
in the midst of these phenomena, we ought to be satisfied with this
phenomenal world. This variety is the essence of life, however miserable
and weak it may seem to be; we can have nothing more. The Vedantist
declares that unity is the only thing that exists; variety is but
phenomenal, ephemeral and apparent. "Look not to variety," says the
Vedantist, "go back to unity." "Avoid unity; it is a delusion," says the
Buddhist, "go to variety." The same differences of opinion in religion
and metaphysics have come down to our own day, for, in fact, the
sum-total of the principles of knowledge is very small. Metaphysics and
metaphysical knowledge, religion and religious knowledge, reached their
culmination five thousand years ago, and we are merely reiterating the
same truths in different languages, only enriching them sometimes by the
accession of fresh illustrations. So this is the fight, even today. One
side wants us to keep to the phenomenal, to all this variation, and
points out, with great show of argument, that variation has to remain,
for when that stops, everything is gone. What we mean by life has been
caused by variation. The other side, at the same time, valiantly points
to unity.

Coming to ethics, we find a tremendous departure. It is, perhaps, the
only science which makes a bold departure from this fight. For ethics is
unity; its basis is love. It will not look at this variation. The one
aim of ethics is this unity, this sameness. The highest ethical codes
that mankind has discovered up to the present time know no variation;
they have no time to stop to look into it; their one end is to make for
that sameness. The Indian mind, being more analytical — I mean the
Vedantic mind — found this unity as the result of all its analyses, and
wanted to base everything upon this one idea of unity. But as we have
seen, in the same country, there were other minds (the Buddhistic) who
could not find that unity anywhere. To them all truth was a mass of
variation, there was no connection between one thing and another.

I remember a story told by Prof. Max Müller in one of his books, an old
Greek story, of how a Brahmin visited Socrates in Athens. The Brahmin
asked, "What is the highest knowledge?" And Socrates answered, "To know
man is the end and aim of all knowledge." "But how can you know man
without knowing God?" replied the Brahmin. The one side, the Greek side,
which is represented by modern Europe, insisted upon the knowledge of
man; the Indian side, mostly represented by the old religions of the
world, insisted upon the knowledge of God. The one sees God in nature,
and the other sees nature in God. To us, at the present time, perhaps,
has been given the privilege of standing aside from both these aspects,
and taking an impartial view of the whole. This is a fact that variation
exists, and so it must, if life is to be. This is also a fact that in
and through these variations unity must be perceived. This is a fact
that God is perceived in nature. But it is also a fact that nature is
perceived in God. The knowledge of man is the highest knowledge, and
only by knowing man, can we know God. This is also a fact that the
knowledge of God is the highest knowledge, and knowing God alone we can
know man. Apparently contradictory though these statements may appear,
they are the necessity of human nature. The whole universe is a play of
unity in variety, and of variety in unity. The whole universe is a play
of differentiation and oneness; the whole universe is a play of the
finite in the Infinite. We cannot take one without granting the other.
But we cannot take them both as facts of the same perception, as facts
of the same experience; yet in this way it will always go on.

Therefore, coming to our more particular purpose, which is religion
rather than ethics, a state of things, where all variation has died
down, giving place to a uniform, dead homogeneity, is impossible so long
as life lasts. Nor is it desirable. At the same time, there is the other
side of the fact, viz that this unity already exists. That is the
peculiar claim — not that this unity has to be made, but that it already
exists, and that you could not perceive the variety at all, without it.
God is not to be made, but He already exists. This has been the claim of
all religions. Whenever one has perceived the finite, he has also
perceived the Infinite. Some laid stress on the finite side, and
declared that they perceived the finite without; others laid stress on
the Infinite side, and declared they perceived the Infinite only. But we
know that it is a logical necessity that we cannot perceive the one
without the other. So the claim is that this sameness, this unity, this
perfection — as we may call it — is not to be made, it already exists,
and is here. We have only to recognise it, to understand it. Whether we
know it or not, whether we can express it in clear language or not,
whether this perception assumes the force and clearness of a
sense-perception or not, it is there. For we are bound by the logical
necessity of our minds to confess that it is there, else, the perception
of the finite would not be. I am not speaking of the old theory of
substance and qualities, but of oneness; that in the midst of all this
mass of phenomena, the very fact of the consciousness that you and I are
different brings to us, at the same moment, the consciousness that you
and I are not different. Knowledge would be impossible without that
unity. Without the idea of sameness there would be neither perception
nor knowledge. So both run side by side.

Therefore the absolute sameness of conditions, if that be the aim of
ethics, appears to be impossible. That all men should be the same, could
never be, however we might try. Men will be born differentiated; some
will have more power than others; some will have natural capacities,
others not; some will have perfect bodies, others not. We can never stop
that. At the same time ring in our ears the wonderful words of morality
proclaimed by various teachers: "Thus, seeing the same God equally
present in all, the sage does not injure Self by the Self, and thus
reaches the highest goal. Even in this life they have conquered relative
existence whose minds are firmly fixed on this sameness; for God is
pure, and God is the same to all. Therefore such are said to be living
in God." We cannot deny that this is the real idea; yet at the same time
comes the difficulty that the sameness as regards external forms and
position can never be attained.

But what can be attained is elimination of privilege. That is really the
work before the whole world. In all social lives, there has been that
one fight in every race and in every country. The difficulty is not that
one body of men are naturally more intelligent than another, but whether
this body of men, because they have the advantage of intelligence,
should take away even physical enjoyment from those who do not possess
that advantage. The fight is to destroy that privilege. That some will
be stronger physically than others, and will thus naturally be able to
subdue or defeat the weak, is a self-evident fact, but that because of
this strength they should gather unto themselves all the attainable
happiness of this life, is not according to law, and the fight has been
against it. That some people, through natural aptitude, should be able
to accumulate more wealth than others, is natural: but that on account
of this power to acquire wealth they should tyrannize and ride roughshod
over those who cannot acquire so much wealth, is not a part of the law,
and the fight has been against that. The enjoyment of advantage over
another is privilege, and throughout ages, the aim of morality has been
its destruction. This is the work which tends towards sameness, towards
unity, without destroying variety.

Let all these variations remain eternally; it is the very essence of
life. We shall all play in this way, eternally. You will be wealthy, and
I shall be poor; you will be strong, and I shall be weak; you will be
learned and I ignorant; you will be spiritual, and I, less so. But what
of that? Let us remain so, but because you are physically or
intellectually stronger, you must not have more privilege than I, and
that you have more wealth is no reason why you should be considered
greater than I, for that sameness is here, in spite of the different
conditions.

The work of ethics has been, and will be in the future, not the
destruction of variation and the establishment of sameness in the
external world — which is impossible for it would bring death and
annihilation — but to recognise the unity in spite of all these
variations, to recognise the God within, in spite of everything that
frightens us, to recognise that infinite strength as the property of
everyone in spite of all apparent weakness, and to recognise the
eternal, infinite, essential purity of the soul in spite of everything
to the contrary that appears on the surface. This we have to recognise.
Taking one side alone, one half only of the position, is dangerous and
liable to lead to quarrels. We must take the whole thing as it is, stand
on it as our basis and work it out in every part of our lives, as
individuals and as unit members of society.

</div>
