---
title: VILVAMANGALA

---
<div>

[←](mohammed.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_soul_and_god.htm)

  

## VILVAMANGALA

(Found in the papers of Miss S. E. Waldo by Swami Raghavananda when he
was in the U.S.A.)

This is a story from one of the books of India, called "Lives of
Saints". There was a young man, a Brahmin by birth, in a certain
village. The man fell in love with a bad woman in another village. There
was a big river between the two villages, and this man, every day, used
to go to that girl, crossing this river in a ferry boat. Now, one day he
had to perform the obsequies of his father, and so, although he was
longing, almost dying to go to the girl, he could not. The ceremonies
had to be performed, and all those things had to be undergone; it is
absolutely necessary in Hindu society. He was fretting and fuming and
all that, but could not help it. At last the ceremony ended, and night
came, and with the night, a tremendous howling storm arose. The rain was
pouring down, and the river was lashed into gigantic waves. It was very
dangerous to cross. Yet he went to the bank of the river. There was no
ferry boat. The ferrymen were afraid to cross, but he would go; his
heart was becoming mad with love for the girl, so he would go. There was
a log floating down, and he got that, and with the help of it, crossed
the river, and getting to the other side dragged the log up, threw it on
the bank, and went to the house. The doors were closed. He knocked at
the door, but the wind was howling, and nobody heard him. So he went
round the walls and at last found what he thought to be a rope, hanging
from the wall. He clutched at it, saying to himself, "Oh, my love has
left a rope for me to climb." By the help of that rope he climbed over
the wall, got to the other side, missed his footing, and fell, and noise
aroused the inmates of the house, and the girl came out and found the
man there in a faint. She revived him, and noticing that he was smelling
very unpleasantly, she said, "What is the matter with you? Why this
stench on your body? How did you come into the house?" He said, "Why,
did not my love put that rope there?" She smiled, and said, "What love?
We are for money, and do you think that I let down a rope for you, fool
that you are? How did you cross the river?" "Why, I got hold of a log of
wood." "Let us go and see," said the girl. The rope was a cobra, a
tremendously poisonous serpent, whose least touch is death. It had its
head in a hole, and was getting in when the man caught hold of its tail,
and he thought it was a rope. The madness of love made him do it. When
the serpent has its head in its hole, and its body out, and you catch
hold of it, it will not let its head come out; so the man climbed up by
it, but the force of the pull killed the serpent. "Where did you get the
log?" "It was floating down the river." It was a festering dead body;
the stream had washed it down and that he took for a log, which
explained why he had such an unpleasant odour. The woman looked at him
and said, "I never believed in love; we never do; but, if this is not
love, the Lord have mercy on me. We do not know what love is. But, my
friend, why do you give that heart to a woman like me? Why do you not
give it to God? You will be perfect." It was a thunderbolt to the man's
brain. He got a glimpse of the beyond for a moment. "Is there a God?"
"Yes, yes, my friend, there is," said the woman. And the man walked on,
went into a forest, began to weep and pray. "I want Thee, Oh Lord! This
tide of my love cannot find a receptacle in little human beings. I want
to love where this mighty river of my love can go, the ocean of love;
this rushing tremendous river of my love cannot enter into little pools,
it wants the infinite ocean. Thou art there; come Thou to me." So he
remained there for years. After years he thought he had succeeded, he
became a Sannyasin and he came into the cities. One day he was sitting
on the bank of a river, at one of the bathing places, and a beautiful
young girl, the wife of a merchant of the city, with her servant, came
and passed the place. The old man was again up in him, the beautiful
face again attracted him. The Yogi looked and looked, stood up and
followed the girl to her home. Presently the husband came by, and seeing
the Sannyasin in the yellow garb he said to him, "Come in, sir, what can
I do for you?" The Yogi said, "I will ask you a terrible thing." "Ask
anything, sir, I am a Grihastha (householder), and anything that one
asks I am ready to give." "I want to see your wife." The man said,
"Lord, what is this! Well, I am pure, and my wife is pure, and the Lord
is a protection to all. Welcome; come in sir." He came in, and the
husband introduced him to his wife. "What can I do for you?" asked the
lady. He looked and looked, and then said, "Mother, will you give me two
pins from your hair?" "Here they are." He thrust them into his two eyes
saying "Get away, you rascals! Henceforth no fleshy things for you. If
you are to see, see the Shepherd of the groves of Vrindaban with the
eyes of the soul. Those are all the eyes you have." So he went back into
the forest. There again he wept and wept and wept. It was all that great
flow of love in the man that was struggling to get at the truth, and at
last he succeeded; he gave his soul, the river of his love, the right
direction, and it came to the Shepherd. The story goes that he saw God
in the form of Krishna. Then, for once, he was sorry that he had lost
his eyes, and that he could only have the internal vision. He wrote some
beautiful poems of love. In all Sanskrit books, the writers first of all
salute their Gurus. So he saluted that girl as his first Guru.

</div>
