---
title: AT THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS

---
<div>

[←](hindus_at_the_fair.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](personal_traits.htm)

  

## AT THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS

(The Dubuque, Iowa, *Times*, September 29, 1893)

WORLD'S FAIR, Sept. 28. — (Special.) — The Parliament of religions
reached a point where sharp acerbities develop. The thin veil of
courtesy was maintained, of course, but behind it was ill feeling. Rev.
Joseph Cook criticised the Hindoos sharply and was more sharply
criticised in turn. He said that to speak of a universe that was not
created is almost unpardonable nonsense, and the Asiatics retorted that
a universe which had a beginning is a self-evident absurdity. Bishop J.
P. Newman, firing at long range from the banks of the Ohio, declared
that the orientals have insulted all the Christians of the United States
by their misrepresentations of the missionaries, and the orientals, with
their provokingly calm and supercilious smile, replied that this was
simply the bishop's ignorance.

BUDDHIST PHILOSOPHY

In response to the question direct, three learned Buddhists gave us in
remarkably plain and beautiful language their bed-rock belief about God,
man and matter.

\[Following this is a summary of Dharmapala's paper on "The World's Debt
to Buddha", which he prefaced, as we learn from another source, by
singing a Singhalese song of benediction. The article then continues:\]

His \[Dharmapala's\] peroration was as pretty a thing as a Chicago
audience ever heard. Demosthenes never exceeded it.

CANTANKEROUS REMARKS

Swami Vivekananda, the Hindoo monk, was not so fortunate. He was out of
humor, or soon became so, apparently. He wore an orange robe and a pale
yellow turban and dashed at once into a savage attack on Christian
nations in these words: "We who have come from the east have sat here
day after day and have been told in a patronizing way that we ought to
accept Christianity because Christian nations are the most prosperous.
We look about us and we see England the most prosperous Christian nation
in the world, with her foot on the neck of 250,000,000 Asiatics. We look
back into history and see that the prosperity of Christian Europe began
with Spain. Spain's prosperity began with the invasion of Mexico.
Christianity wins its prosperity by cutting the throats of its fellow
men. At such a price the Hindoo will not have prosperity."

And so they went on, each succeeding speaker getting more cantankerous,
as it were.

\*          \*          \*

(*Outlook*, October 7, 1893)

. . . The subject of Christian work in India calls Vivekananda, in his
brilliant priestly orange, to his feet. He criticises the work of
Christian missions. It is evident that he has not tried to understand
Christianity, but neither, as he claims, have its priests made any
effort to understand *his* religion, with its ingrained faiths and
race-­prejudices of thousands of years' standing. They have simply come,
in his view, to throw scorn on his most sacred beliefs, and to undermine
the morals and spiritualist of the people he has been set to teach.

\*          \*          \*

(*Critic*, October 7, 1893)

But the most impressive figures of the Parliament were the Buddhist
priest, H. Dharmapala of Ceylon, and the Hindoo monk, Suami Vivekananda.
"If theology and dogma stand in your way in search of truth," said the
former incisively, "put them aside. Learn to think without prejudice, to
love all beings for love's sake, to express your convictions fearlessly,
to lead a life of purity, and the sunlight of truth will illuminate
you." But eloquent as were many of the brief speeches at this meeting,
whose triumphant enthusiasm rightly culminated in the superb rendering
by the Apollo Club of the Hallelujah chorus, no one expressed so well
the spirit of the Parliament, its limitations and its finest influence,
as did the Hindoo monk. I copy his address in full, but I can only
suggest its effect upon the audience, for he is an orator by divine
right, and his strong intelligent face in its picturesque setting of
yellow and orange was hardly less interesting than these earnest words
and the rich, rhythmical utterance he gave them.... \[After quoting the
greater part of Swamiji's Final Address, the article continues:\]

Perhaps the most tangible result of the congress was the feeling it
aroused in regard to foreign missions. The impertinence of sending
half-educated theological students to instruct the wise and erudite
Orientals was never brought home to an English-speaking audience more
forcibly. It is only in the spirit of tolerance and sympathy that we are
at liberty to touch their faith, and the exhorters who possess these
qualities are rare. It is necessary to realize that we have quite as
much to learn from the Buddhists as they from us, and that only through
harmony can the highest influence be exerted.

LUCY MONROE.

Chicago, 3 Oct., 1893.

\*          \*          \*

\[To a request of the New York World of October 1, 1893, for "a
sentiment or expression regarding the significance of the great meeting"
from each representative, Swamiji replied with a quotation from the Gita
and one from Vyâsa:\]

"I am He that am in every religion — like the thread that passes through
a string of pearls." "Holy, perfect and pure men are seen in all creeds,
therefore they all lead to the same truth — for how can nectar be the
outcome of poison?"

</div>
