---
title: PERSONAL TRAITS

---
<div>

[←](at_the_parliament_of_religions.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](reincarnation.htm)

  

## PERSONAL TRAITS

(*Critic*, October 7, 1893)

. . . It was an outgrowth of the Parliament of Religions, which opened
our eyes to the fact that the philosophy of the ancient creeds contains
much beauty for the moderns. When we had once clearly perceived this,
our interest in their exponents quickened, and with characteristic
eagerness we set out in pursuit of knowledge. The most available means
of obtaining it, after the close of the Parliament, was through the
addresses and lectures of Swami Vivekananda, who is still in this city
\[Chicago\]. His original purpose in coming to this country was to
interest Americans in the starting of new industries among the Hindoos,
but he has abandoned this for the present, because he finds that, as
"the Americans are the most charitable people in the world," every man
with a purpose comes here for assistance in carrying it out. When asked
about the relative condition of the poor here and in India, he replied
that our poor would be princes there, and that he had been taken through
the worst quarter of the city only to find it, from the standpoint of
his knowledge, comfortable and even pleasant.

A Brahmin of the Brahmins, Vivekananda gave up his rank to join the
brotherhood of monks, where all pride of caste is voluntarily
relinquished. And yet he bears the mark of race upon his person. His
culture, his eloquence, and his fascinating personality have given us a
new idea of Hindoo civilization. He is an interesting figure, his fine,
intelligent, mobile face in its setting of yellows, and his deep,
musical voice prepossessing one at once in his favor. So it is not
strange that he has been taken up by the literary clubs, has preached
and lectured in churches, until the life of Buddha and the doctrines of
his faith have grown familiar to us. He speaks without notes, presenting
his facts and his conclusions with the greatest art, the most convincing
sincerity; and rising at times to a rich, inspiring eloquence. As
learned and cultivated, apparently, as the most accomplished Jesuit, he
has also something Jesuitical in the character of his mind; but though
the little sarcasms thrown into his discourses are as keen as a rapier,
they are so delicate as to be lost on many of his hearers. Nevertheless
his courtesy is unfailing, for these thrusts are never pointed so
directly at our customs as to be rude. At present he contents himself
with enlightening us in regard to his religion and the words of its
philosophers. He looks forward to the time when we shall pass beyond
idolatry — now necessary in his opinion to the ignorant classes — beyond
worship, even, to a knowledge of the presence of God in nature, of the
divinity and responsibility of man. "Work out your own salvation," he
says with the dying Buddha; "I cannot help you. No man can help you.
Help yourself."

LUCY MONROE.

</div>
