---
title: PLEA FOR TOLERANCE

---
<div>

[←](the_hindoo_monk.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](manners_and_customs_in_india.htm)

  

## PLEA FOR TOLERANCE

(*Memphis Commercial*, January 17, 1894)

An audience of fair proportions gathered last night at the Auditorium to
greet the celebrated Hindu monk. Swami Vive Kananda, in his lecture on
Hinduism.

He was introduced in a brief but informing address by Judge R. J.
Morgan, who gave a sketch of the development of the great Aryan race,
from which development have come the Europeans and the Hindus alike, so
tracing a racial kinship between the people of America and the speaker
who was to address them.

The eminent Oriental was received with liberal applause, and heard with
attentive interest throughout. He is a man of fine physical presence,
with regular bronze features and form of fine proportions. He wore a
robe of pink silk, fastened at the waist with a black sash, black
trousers and about his head was gracefully draped a turban of yellow
India silk. His delivery is very good, his use of English being perfect
as regards choice of words and correctness of grammar and construction.
The only inaccuracy of pronunciation is in the accenting of words at
times upon a wrong syllable. Attentive listeners, however, probably lost
few words, and their attention was well rewarded by an address full of
original thought, information and broad wisdom. The address might fitly
be called a plea for universal tolerance, illustrated by remarks
concerning the religion of India. This spirit, he contended, the spirit
of tolerance and love, is the central inspiration of all religions which
are worthy, and this, he thinks, is the end to be secured by any form of
faith.

His talk concerning Hinduism was not strictly circumstantial. His
attempt was rather to give an analysis of its spirit than a story of its
legends or a picture of its forms. He dwelt upon only a few of the
distinctive credal or ritual features of his faith, but these he
explained most clearly and perspicuously. He gave a vivid account of the
mystical features of Hinduism, out of which the so often misinterpreted
theory of reincarnation has grown. He explained how his religion ignored
the differentiations of time, how, just as all men believe in the
present and the future of the soul, so the faith of Brahma believes in
its past. He made it clear, too, how his faith does not believe in
"original sin," but bases all effort and aspiration on the belief of the
perfectibility of humanity. Improvement and purification, he contends,
must be based upon hope. The development of man is a return to an
original perfection. This perfection must come through the practice of
holiness and love. Here he showed how his own people have practiced
these qualities, how India has been a land of refuge for the oppressed,
citing the instance of the welcome given by the Hindus to the Jews when
Titus sacked Jerusalem and destroyed the Temple.

In a graphic way he told that the Hindus do not lay much stress upon
forms. Sometimes every member of the family will differ in their
adherence to sects, but all will worship God by worshipping the spirit
of love which is His central attribute. The Hindus, he says, hold that
there is good in all religions, that all religions are embodiments of
man's inspiration for holiness, and being such, all should be respected.
He illustrated this by a citation from the Vedas \[?\], in which varied
religions are symbolized as the differently formed vessels with which
different men came to bring water from a spring. The forms of the
vessels are many, but the water of truth is what all seek to fill their
vessels with. God knows all forms of faith, he thinks, and will
recognize his own name no matter what it is called, or what may be the
fashion of the homage paid him.

The Hindus, he continued, worship the same God as the Christians. The
Hindu trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, Siva is merely an embodiment of God the
creator, the preserver and the destroyer. That the three are considered
three instead of one is simply a corruption due to the fact that general
humanity must have its ethics made tangible. So likewise the material
images of Hindu gods are simply symbols of divine qualities.

He told, in explanation of the Hindu doctrine of incarnation, the story
of Krishna, who was born by immaculate conception and the story of whom
greatly resembles the story of Jesus. The teaching of Krishna, he
claims, is the doctrine of love for its own sake, and he expressed
\[it\] by the words "If the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
religion, the love of God is its end."

His entire lecture cannot be sketched here, but it was a masterly appeal
for brotherly love, and an eloquent defense of a beautiful faith. The
conclusion was especially fine, when he acknowledged his readiness to
accept Christ but must also bow to Krishna and to Buddha; and when, with
a fine picture of the cruelty of civilization, he refused to hold Christ
responsible for the crimes of progress.

</div>
