---
title: HINDOO PHILOSOPHY

---
<div>

[←](manners_and_customs_in_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](miracles.htm)

  

## HINDOO PHILOSOPHY

(*Detroit Free Press*, February 16, 1894)

The second lecture of the Hindoo monk, Swami Vive Kananda, was given
last evening at the Unitarian church to a large and very appreciative
audience. The expectation of the audience that the speaker would
enlighten them regarding "Hindoo Philosophy," as the lecture was
entitled, was gratified to only a limited extent. Allusions were made to
the philosophy of Buddha, and the speaker was applauded when he said
that Buddhism was the first missionary religion of the world, and that
it had secured the largest number of converts without the shedding of a
drop of blood; but he did not tell his audience anything about the
religion or philosophy of Buddha. He made a number of cute little jabs
at the Christian religion, and alluded to the trouble and misery that
had been caused by its introduction into heathen countries, but he
skilfully avoided any comparison between the social condition of the
people in his own land and that of the people to whom he was speaking.
In a general way he said the Hindoo philosophers taught from a lower
truth to a higher; whereas, a person accepting a newer Christian
doctrine is asked and expected to throw his former belief all away and
accept the newer in its entirety. "It is an idle dream when all of us
will have the same religious views," said he. "No emotion can be
produced except by clashing elements acting upon the mind. It is the
revulsion of change, the new light, the presentation of the new to the
old, that elicits sensation."

\[As the first lecture had antagonised some people, the *Free Press*
reporter was very cautious. Fortunately, however, the Detroit Tribune
consistently upheld Swamiji, and thus in its report of February 16 we
get some idea of his lecture on "Hindu Philosophy," although the
*Tribune* reporter seems to have taken somewhat sketchy notes:\]

(*Detroit Tribune*, February 16, 1894)

The Brahman monk, Swami Vive Kananda, again lectured last evening at the
Unitarian church, his topic being "Hindu Philosophy." The speaker dealt
for a time with general philosophy and metaphysics, but said that he
would devote the lecture to that part pertaining to religion. There is a
sect that believes in a soul, but are agnostic in relation to God.
Buddahism \[sic\] was a great moral religion, but they could not live
long without believing in a god. Another sect known as the giants
\[Jains\] believe in the soul, but not in the moral government of the
country. There were several millions of this sect in India. Their
priests and monks tie a handkerchief over their faces believing if their
hot breath comes in contact with man or beast death will ensue.

Among the orthodox, all believe in the revelation. Some think every cord
in the Bible comes directly from God. The stretching of the meaning of a
word would perhaps do in most religions, but in that of the Hindus they
have the Sanscrit, which always retains the full meaning and reasons of
the world.

The distinguished Oriental thought there was a sixth sense far greater
than any of the five we know we possess. It was the truth of revelation.
A man may read all the books on religion in the world and yet be the
greatest blackguard in the country. Revelation means later reports of
spiritual discoveries.

The second position some take is a creation without beginning or end.
Suppose there was a time when the world did not exist; what was God
doing then? To the Hindus the creation was only one of forms. One man is
born with a healthy body, is of good family and grows up a godly man.
Another is born with a maimed and crooked body and develops into a
wicked man and pays the penalty. Why must a just and holy god create one
with so many advantages and the other with disadvantages? The person has
no choice. The evildoer has a consciousness of his guilt. The difference
between virtue and vice was expounded. If God willed all things there
would be an end to all science. How far can man go down? Is it possible
for man to go back to brute again?

Kananda was glad he was a Hindu. When Jerusalem was destroyed by the
Romans several thousand \[Jews\] settled in India. When the Persians
were driven from their country by the Arabs several thousand found
refuge in the same country and none were molested. The Hindu, believe
all religions are true, but theirs antedates all others. Missionaries
are never molested by the Hindus. The first English missionaries were
prevented from landing in that country by English and it was a Hindu
that interceded for them and gave them the first hand. Religion is that
which believes in all. Religion was compared to the blind men and the
elephant. Each man felt of a special part and from it drew his
conclusions of what an elephant was. Each was right in his way and yet
all were needed to form a whole. Hindu philosophers say "truth to truth,
lower truth to higher." It is an idle dream of those who think that all
will at some time think alike, for that would be the death of religion.
Every religion breaks up into little sects, each claiming to be the true
one and all the others wrong. Persecution is unknown in Buddahism. They
sent out the first missionaries and are the only ones who can say they
have converted millions without the shedding of a single drop of blood.
Hindus, with all their faults and superstitions, never persecute. The
speaker wanted to know how it was the Christians allowed such iniquities
as are everywhere present in Christian countries.

</div>
