---
title: THE DIVINITY OF MAN

---
<div>

[←](miracles.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_love_of_god.htm)

  

## THE DIVINITY OF MAN

(*Detroit Free Press*, February 18, 1894)

Swami Vive Kananda, Hindoo philosopher and priest, concluded his series
of lectures, or rather, sermons, at the Unitarian church last night,
speaking on "The Divinity of God" \[sic\]. (Actually the subject was
"The Divinity of Man".) In spite of the bad weather, the church was
crowded almost to the doors half an hour before the eastern brother — as
he likes to be called — appeared. All professions and business
occupations were represented in the attentive audience — lawyers,
judges, ministers of the gospel, merchants, rabbi — not to speak of the
many ladies who have by their repeated attendance and rapt attention
shown a decided inclination to shower adulation upon the dusky visitor
whose drawing-room attraction is as great as his ability in the rostrum.

The lecture last night was less descriptive than preceding ones, and for
nearly two hours Vive Kananda wove a metaphysical texture on affairs
human and divine so logical that he made science appear like common
sense. It was a beautiful logical garment that he wove, replete with as
many bright colors and as attractive and pleasing to contemplate as one
of the many-hued fabrics made by hand in his native land and scented
with the most seductive fragrance of the Orient. This dusky gentleman
uses poetical imagery as an artist uses colors, and the hues are laid on
just where they belong, the result being somewhat bizarre in effect, and
yet having a peculiar fascination. Kaleidoscopic were the swiftly
succeeding logical conclusions, and the deft manipulator was rewarded
for his efforts from time to time by enthusiastic applause.

The lecture was prefaced with the statement that the speaker had been
asked many questions. A number of these he preferred to answer
privately, but three he had selected, for reasons which would appear, to
answer from the pulpit. They were: (This and the next four paragraphs
appear in Vol. IV of the *Complete Works* under the heading, ["Is India
a Benighted
Country?"](../../volume_4/lectures_and_discourses/is_india_a_benighted_country.htm#v3_ran)
)

"Do the people of India throw their children into the laws of the
crocodiles?"

"Do they kill themselves beneath the wheels of the juggernaut?"

"Do they burn widows with their husbands?"

The first question the lecturer treated in the vein that an American
abroad would answer inquiries about Indians running around in the
streets of New York and similar myths which are even to-day entertained
by many persons on the continent. The statement was too ludicrous to
give a serious response to it. When asked by certain well-meaning but
ignorant people why they gave only female children to the crocodiles, he
could only ironically reply that probably it was because they were
softer and more tender and could be more easily masticated by the
inhabitants of the rivers in the benighted country. Regarding the
juggernaut legend the lecturer explained the old practice in the sacred
city and remarked that possibly a few in their zeal to grasp the rope
and participate in the drawing of the car slipped and fell and were so
destroyed. Some such mishaps had been exaggerated into the distorted
version from which the good people of other countries shrank with
horror. Vive Kananda denied that the people burned widows. It was true,
however, that widows had burned themselves. In the few cases where this
had happened, they had been urged not to do so by the priests and holy
men who were always opposed to suicide Where the devoted widows
insisted, stating that they desired to accompany their husbands in the
transformation that had taken place they were obliged to submit to the
fiery test. That is, they thrust their hands within the flames and if
they permitted them to be consumed no further opposition was placed in
the way of the fulfilment of their desires. But India is not the only
country where women who have loved have followed immediately the loved
one through the realms of immortality; suicide in such cases have
occurred in every land. It is an uncommon bit of fanaticism in any
country; as unusual in India as elsewhere. No, the speaker repeated, the
people do not burn women in India; nor have they ever burned witches.

Proceeding to the lecture proper, Vive Kananda proceeded to analyze the
physical, mental and soul attributes of life. The body is but a shell;
the mind something that acts but a brief and fantastic part; while the
soul has distinct individuality in itself. To realize the infinity of
self is to attain "freedom" which is the Hindoo word for "salvation." By
a convincing manner of argument the lecturer showed that every soul is
something independent, for if it were dependent, it could not acquire
immortality. He related a story from the old legends of his country to
illustrate the manner in which the realization of this may come to the
individual. A lioness leaping towards a sheep in the act gave birth to a
cub. The lioness died and the cub was given suck by the sheep and for
many years thought itself a sheep and acted like one. But one day
another lion appeared and led the first lion to a lake where he looked
in and saw his resemblance to the other lion. At that he roared and
realized else full majesty of self. Many people are like the lion
masquerading as a sheep and get into a corner, call themselves sinners
and demean themselves in every imaginable fashion, not yet seeing the
perfection and divinity which lies in self. The ego of man and woman is
the soul. If the soul is independent, how then can it be isolated from
the infinite whole? Just as the great sun shines on a lake and
numberless reflections are the result, so the soul is distinct like each
reflection, although the great source is recognized and appreciated. The
soul is sexless. When it has realized the condition of absolute freedom,
what could it have to do with sex which is physical? In this connection
the lecturer delved deeply into the water of Swedenborgian philosophy,
or religion, and the connection between the conviction of the Hindoo and
the spiritual expressions of faith on the part of the more modern holy
man was fully apparent. Swedenborg seemed like a European successor of
an early Hindoo priest, clothing in modern garb an ancient conviction; a
line of thought that the greatest of French philosophers and novelists
\[Balzac?\] saw fit to embody in his elevating tale of the perfect soul.
Every individual has in himself perfection. It lies within the dark
recesses of his physical being. To say that a man has become good
because God gave him a portion of His perfection is to conceive the
Divine Being as God minus just so much perfection as he has imparted to
a person on this earth. The inexorable law of science proves that the
soul is individual and must have perfection within itself, the
attainment of which means freedom, not salvation, and the realization of
individual infinity. Nature! God! Religion! It is all one.

The religions are all good. A bubble of air in a glass of water strives
to join with the mass of air without; in oil, vinegar and other
materials of differing density its efforts are less or more retarded
according to the liquid. So the soul struggles through various mediums
for the attainment of its individual infinity. One religion is best
adapted to a certain people because of habits of life, association,
hereditary traits and climatic influences. Another religion is suited to
another people for similar reasons. All that is, is best seemed to be
the substance of the lecturer's conclusions. To try abruptly to change a
nation's religion would be like a man who sees a river flowing from the
Alps. He criticizes the way it has taken. Another man views the mighty
stream descending from the Himalayas, a stream that has been running for
generations and thousands of years, and says that it has not taken the
shortest and best route. The Christian pictures God as a personal being
seated somewhere above us. The Christian cannot necessarily be happy in
Heaven unless he can stand on the edge of the golden streets and from
time to time gaze down into the other place and see the difference.
Instead of the golden rule, the Hindoo believes in the doctrine that all
non-self is good and all self is bad, and through this belief the
attainment of the individual infinity and the freedom of the soul at the
proper time will be fulfilled. How excessively vulgar, stated Vive
Kananda, was the golden rule! Always self! always self! was the
Christian creed. To do unto others as you would be done by! It was a
horrible, barbarous, savage creed, but he did not desire to decry the
Christian creed, for those who are satisfied with it to them it is well
adapted. Let the great stream flow on, and he is a fool who would try to
change its course, when nature will work out the solution. Spiritualist
(in the true acceptance of the word) and fatalist, Vive Kananda
emphasized his opinion that all was well and he had no desire to convert
Christians. They were Christians; it was well. He was a Hindoo; that,
also, was well. In his country different creeds were formulated for the
needs of people of different grades of intelligence, all this marking
the progress of spiritual evolution. The Hindoo religion was not one of
self; ever egotistical in its aspirations, ever holding up promises of
reward or threats of punishment. It shows to the individual he may
attain infinity by non-self. This system of bribing men to become
Christians, alleged to have come from God, who manifested Himself to
certain men on earth, is atrocious. It is horribly demoralizing and the
Christian creed, accepted literally, has a shameful effect upon the
moral natures of the bigots who accept it, retarding the time when the
infinity of self may be attained.

\*          \*          \*

\[The Tribune reporter, perhaps the same who had earlier heard "giants"
for "Jains," this time heard "bury" for "burn"; but otherwise, with the
exception of Swamiji's statements regarding the golden rule, he seems to
have reported more or less accurately:\]

(*Detroit Tribune*, February 18, 1894)

Swami Vive Kananda at the Unitarian Church last night declared that
widows were never buried \[burned\] alive in India through religion or
law, but the act in all cases had been voluntary on the part of the
women. The practice had been forbidden by one emperor, but it had
gradually grown again until a stop was put to it by the English
government. Fanatics existed in all religions, the Christian as well as
the Hindu. Fanatics in India had been known to hold their hands over
their heads in penance for so long a time that the arm had gradually
grown stiff in that position, and so remained ever after. So, too, men
had made a vow to stand still in one position. These persons would in
time lose all control of the lower limbs and never after be able to
walk. All religions were true, and the people practiced morality, not
because of any divine command, but because of its own good. Hindus, he
said, did not believe in conversion, calling it perversion.
Associations, surroundings and educations were responsible for the great
number of religions, and how foolish it was for an exponent of one
religion to declare that another man's belief was wrong. It was as
reasonable as a man from Asia coming to America and after viewing the
course of the Mississippi to say to it: "You are running entirely wrong.
You will have to go back to the starting place and commence it all over
again." It would be just as foolish for a man in America to visit the
Alps and after following the course of a river to the German Sea to
inform it that its course was too tortuous and that the only remedy
would be to flow as directed. The golden rule, he declared, was as old
as the earth itself and to it could be traced all rules of morality
\[sic\]. Man is a bundle of selfishness. He thought the hell fire theory
was all nonsense. There could not be perfect happiness when it was known
that suffering existed. He ridiculed the manner some religious persons
have while praying. The Hindu, he said, closed his eyes and communed
with the inner spirit, while some Christians he had seen had seemed to
stare at some point as if they saw God seated upon his heavenly throne.
In the matter of religion there were two extremes, the bigot and the
atheist. There was some good in the atheist, but the bigot lived only
for his own little self. He thanked some anonymous person who had sent
him a picture of the heart of Jesus. This he thought a manifestation of
bigotry. Bigots belong to no religion. They are a singular phenomena
\[sic\].

</div>
