---
title: THE WOMEN OF INDIA

---
<div>

[←](the_love_of_god.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](../buddhistic_india.htm)

  

## THE WOMEN OF INDIA

(*Detroit Free Press*, March 25, 1894)

Kananda lectured last night at the Unitarian church on "The Women of
India." The speaker reverted to the women of ancient India, showing in
what high regard they are held in the holy books, where women were
prophetesses. Their spirituality then was admirable. It is unfair to
judge women in the east by the western standard. In the west woman is
the wife; in the east she is the mother. The Hindoos worship the idea of
mother, and even the monks are required to touch the earth with their
foreheads before their mothers. Chastity is much esteemed.

The lecture was one of the most interesting Kananda has delivered and he
was warmly received.

\*          \*          \*

(*Detroit Evening News*, March 25, 1894)

Swami Vive Kananda lectured at the Unitarian Church last night on "The
Women of India, Past, Medieval and the Present." He stated that in India
the woman was the visible manifestation of God and that her whole life
was given up to the thought that she was a mother, and to be a perfect
mother she must be chaste. No mother in India ever abandoned her
offspring, he said, and defied any one to prove the contrary. The girls
of India would die if they, like American girls, were obliged to expose
half their bodies to the vulgar gaze of young men. He desired that India
be judged from the standard of that country and not from this.

  
\*          \*          \*

(*Tribune*, April 1, 1894)

While Swami Kananda was in Detroit he had a number of conversations, in
which he answered questions regarding the women of India. It was the
information he thus imparted that suggested a public lecture from him on
this subject. But as he speaks without notes, some of the points he made
in private conversation did not appear in his public address. Then his
friends were in a measure disappointed. But one of his lady listeners
has put on paper some of the things he told in his afternoon talks, and
it is now for the first time given to the press:

To the great tablelands of the high Himalaya mountains first came the
Aryans, and there to this day abides the pure type of Brahman, a people
which we westerners can but dream of. Pure in thought, deed and action,
so honest that a bag of gold left in a public place would be found
unharmed twenty years after; so beautiful that, to use Kananda's own
phrase, "to see a girl in the fields is to pause and marvel that God
could make anything so exquisite." Their features are regular, their
eyes and hair dark, and their skin the color which would be produced by
the drops which fell from a pricked finger into a glass of milk. These
are the Hindus in their pure type, untainted and untrammeled.

As to their property laws, the wife's dowry belongs to her exclusively,
never becoming the property of the husband. She can sell or give away
without his consent. The gifts from any one to herself, including those
of the husband, are hers alone, to do with as she pleases.

Woman walks abroad without fear; she is as free as perfect trust in
those about her can render her. There is no zenana in the Himalayas, and
there is a part of India which the missionaries never reach. These
villages are most difficult of access. These people, untouched by
Mahometan influence, can but be reached by wearisome and toilsome
climbing, and are unknown to Mahometan and Christian alike.

INDIA'S FIRST INHABITANTS

In the forest of India are found races of wild people — very wild, even
to cannibalism. These are the original Indians and never were Aryan or
Hindu.

As the Hindus settled in the country proper and spread over its vast
area, corruptions of many kinds found home among them. The sun was
scorching and the men exposed to it were dark in color.

Five generations are but needed to change the transparent glow of the
white complexion of the dwellers of the Himalaya Mountains to the
bronzed hue of the Hindu of India.

Kananda has one brother very fair and one darker than himself. His
father and mother are fair. The women are apt to be, the cruel etiquette
of the Zenana established for protection from the Mohammedans keep ing
them within doors, fairer. Kananda is thirty-one years old.

A CLIP AT AMERICAN MEN

Kananda asserts with an amused twinkle in his eye that American men
amuse him. They profess to worship woman, but in his opinion they simply
worship youth and beauty. They never fall in love with wrinkles and gray
hair. In fact he is under a strong impression that American men once had
a trick — inherited, to be sure — of burning up their old women. Modern
history calls this the burning of witches. It was men who accused and
condemned witches, and it was usually the old age of the victim that led
her to the stake. So it is seen that burning women alive is not
exclusively a Hindu custom. He thought that if it were remembered that
the Christian church burned old women at the stake, there would be less
horror expressed regarding the burning of Hindu widows.

BURNINGS COMPARED

The Hindu widow went to her death agony amid feasting and song, arrayed
in her costliest garments and believing for the most part that such an
act meant the glories of Paradise for herself and family. She was
worshipped as a martyr and her name was enshrined among the family
records.

However horrible the rite appears to us, it is a bright picture compared
to the burning of the Christian witch who, considered a guilty thing
from the first, was thrown in a stifling dungeon, tortured cruelly to
extort confession, subjected to an infamous trial, dragged amid jeering
to the stake and consoled amid her sufferings by the bystander's comfort
that the burning of her body was but the symbol for hell's everlasting
fires, in which her soul would suffer even greater torment.

MOTHERS ARE SACRED

Kananda says the Hindu is taught to worship the principle of motherhood.
The mother outranks the wife. The mother is holy. The motherhood of God
is more in his mind than the fatherhood.

All women, whatever the caste, are exempt from corporal punishment.
Should a woman murder, her head is spared. She may be placed astride a
donkey facing his tail. Thus riding through the streets a drummer shouts
her crime, after which she is free, her humiliation being deemed
sufficient punishment to serve as a preventive for further crime.

Should she care to repent, there are religious houses open to her, where
she can become purified or she can at her own option at once enter the
class of monks and so become a holy woman.

The question was put to Mr. Kananda whether the freedom thus allowed in
the joining the monks without a superior over them did not tend to
hypocrisy among the order, as he claims, of the purest of Hindu
philosophers. Kananda assented, but explained that there is no one
between the people and the monk. The monk has broken down all caste. A
Brahmin will not touch the low-caste Hindu but let him or her become a
monk and the mightiest will prostrate himself before the low-caste monk.

The people are obliged to take care of the monk, but only as long as
they believe in his sincerity. Once condemned for hypocrisy he is called
a liar and falls to the depths of mendicancy — a mere wandering beggar —
inspiring no respect.

OTHER THOUGHTS

A woman has the right of way with even a prince. When the studious
Greeks visited Hindustan to learn of the Hindu, all doors were open to
them, but when the Mohammedan with his sword and the Englishman with his
bullets came their doors were closed. Such guests were not welcomed. As
Kananda deliciously words it: "When the tiger comes we close our doors
until he has passed by."

The United States, says Kananda, has inspired him with hopes for great
possibilities in the future, but our destiny, as that of the world,
rests not in the lawmakers of today, but in the women. Mr. Kananda's
words: "The salvation of your country depends upon its women."

</div>
