+++
title = "The Activist Indologist"

+++
Edgar Hoover had made leftism a matter of the past in American politics.
Hunted mercilessly by Hoover and McCarthy they leftists found refuge in
American academia from where they mainly concentrated on social issues
taking the side of the Islamists, and cudgels against sociobiologists.
Harvard University is home to several such academics, who wistfully hope
that their utopian egalitarian society will be enforced. Currently, the
most leftist a party can get is the Democractic party. It is via this
party they will reappear. However, there was another aspect to their
subterranean lives in academia. In my early days in this environment I
remarked to a couple of friends (They were maitravaruNi and kaushika :)
) that these leftist academics have a secret political role. They foster
the American rapproachment of China and are a great subversionary force
deployed against India. The leftist US academics have their helpers
throughout the Leukosphere as well as yellow journalists of Indian
rags.  
For example take a viT-mukha like Khushwant Singh: “I am not as much
bothered by Pakistani Hindu haters as I am by Indian Muslim haters.”

Or take an Italian Archeologist Maurizio Tosi, who belongs to this
network of leftist Hindu haters, writes in his flawed English : “… the
LAW is our god, the LAW made by the humans for the humans. I know no
god, I have no soul, I am food for the worms or…..the fishes if I die in
India…..Since on January 1st 1643 the British Parliament executed for
treachery the king Charles 1st Europe has made a choice/ NOBODY, least
of all a dream of abstraction for fear of death like god, allah and the
like, ought to be above our LAW. It might be a wrong law, but it is
real. So if you choose to send your chjildren to our schools, to train
them in a competitive environment of science….DO NOT bother us with the
crap of your soulms and fears. Wer hjave enough of fanatics who exploit
our liberality; Your freedom ends where mine begins…..”  
  
What is Tosi trying to say? If we cut the crap, we see that he is
mouthing old Leukosupremacist fantasies in a diaphanous garb. Charles
Murray, an American far-rightist raconteur, recently produced a
voluminous tome “Human Accomplishment” which was nectar to the
Leukospheric leaders. Its basic thesis was that European leukotestate
gents were the epitome of human achievement in the arts and the
sciences. Juxtapose this with a now famous statement of a garrulous
Harvard philologist of German origin: “India is a cul de sac“. Here is
where one sees a remarkable convergence between the right and the left
streams of the monotheistic Leukosphere: both hold a monotheistic view
at heart- thus giving them an excellent chance to cooperate on common
enemies. Hindus to them are a problem: They look different, they seem to
have a civilization of their own, they have a large army, which even
evicted Portugal with impunity, they even manage democracy that the
Leukotestate supremacists pride themselves about, and even more galling
is the fact that Hindus still preserve a very archaic form of
Indo-European culture that the Leukotesta have lost. “This ought not to
be true” they tell themselves. Here the leaders of the Leukosphere see a
good opportunity to redirect their artsy leftists: cat leftist \>
anti.india. Thus, is born the activist Indologist, who is a saboteur for
the leukospheric leaders in the crusade against pagan India.

“A-servin’ of ‘Er Majesty the Queen,  
Of all them blackfaced crew  
The finest man I knew  
Was our regimental bhisti, Gunga Din.”

Thus, another Anglical troubadour regally patronized his ever-faithful
coolie. And sure enough like the legendary Gunga Din we have the supine
drudges of the Indologist. I once received a high-sounding letter from a
co-ethnic who asked us to indicate on a web site that Vedic Sanskrit was
certainly younger than Hittite. I politely told him that this was an
Indological fantasy, and while the Hittite lineage was definitely the
earliest branching Indo-European, it did not make Hittite attested well
after 2000 BC older than the ancestral R^igveda. The Gunga Din of course
declared that the great Indologist had told him so and he was on a
mission to correct the rightist fantasies of Hindus. This leaves little
doubt that we need to put such Indologists out of business for good.
