+++
title = "The Triassic crurotarsans"

+++
A phytosaur and the shuvosaurid Effigia.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/phytosaur.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/phytosaur.gif)[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/effigia.0.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/effigia.0.jpg)

The archosaurs of the crurotarsan clade (the crocodile line) had their
heydays in the Triassic, taking up the dominance of the terrestrial and
semi-aquatic ecosystems from the synapsid promammals. Chatterjee had
claimed in the 1980s that the Triassic crurotarsan Postosuchus, was a
precursor of Tyrannosaurus, the late Cretaceous coelurosaurian dinosaur.
Likewise Chatterjee also claimed that other coelurosaurian clade, the
ornithomimosaurs had an origin in the Triassic, after he discovered the
toothless archosaur Shuvosaurus, which indeed looked like an
ornithomimosaur. Examining his remains it became clear to me that the
archosaurian forms represent convergences to a similar morphospace
position amongst the crurotarsan rather than early dinosaur precursors.
Thus, the crurotarsan Postosuchus appears to have converged to a
theropod carnivore-like condition and Shuvosaurus to that of an
ornithomimosaur, several million years prior to the dinosaurian
equivalents.

The recent discoveries by Nesbitt point to other such convergences:
Effigia, is another Shuvosaurid that is remarkably like an
ornithomimosaur or an elaphrosaur in several ways-it clearly occupied an
ecological niche close to them. The presence of other fragmentary
versions such as Sillosuchus suggest that the Shuvosaurids might have
been a very widespread aspect of the ecosystem. The highly armored
Aetosaurs evolved a state similar to the armored dinosaurs of the
thryeophoran clade- the ankylosaurs and stegosaurs. Recently, the
recovery a reasonable skeleton of Revueltosaurus, revealed that it was
not an ornithischian dinosaur but a crurotarsan probably close to the
Aetosaurs. Thus, the Revueltosaurs, seem to have anticipated the small
ornithischians prior to their meteoric rise in the Jurassic. The
mega-predatory crurotarsans- Prestosuchus, Rauisuchus, Saurosuchus,
Postosuchus, Tikisuchus and Ticinosuchus repeatedly approximated the
theropod condition. The ornithosuchids approximated the smaller
coelurosaurs and probably even acquired a facultatively bipedal gait.
Likewise the early crocodylomorphs also appear to have occupied a niche
similar to the smaller dinosaurian predators. The forms like
Arizonasaurus and the Ctenosauriscids appear to have converged to the
state similar to Dimetrodon and related pelycosaurs, with giant
sail-backs one one end and the spinosaurs amongst the dinosaurs. The
phytosaurs appear to have occupied the later crocodilian morphospace as
semi-aquatic predators.

P. Olsen and colleagues have studied the geology of the
Triassic-Jurassic boundary in great detail and noticed the following: 1)
There is an iridium spike in the boundary. 2) There is marked spike in
the fern spores. 3) There is a rise in the number of theropod trackways.

This coincided with: 1) a complete extinction of the dominant Triassic
crurotarsans except the crocodylomorphs 2) the rise in number of
dinosaur genera and 3) enormous increase in size of the dinosaurs. This
may mean that the dominance of the dinosaurs was ushered by a celestial
impact event that knocked out most of the crurotarsans and made way for
the rise of the dinosaurs. Clearly the basic archosaurian body plan
appears to have been a constraint (la Gouldâ€™s spandrel) that caused
dinosaurs to iteratively fill in eco-morpho-space zones of the
crurotarsan precursors. The surviving crurotarsans, the crocodiles
appear to have largely taken up the eco-morpho-space released from the
phytosaurs by their extinction. Though the notosuchid clade appears to
have undergone considerable morphological diversification towards the
end of the Jurassic. It seems the crocodiles were always
survivor-opportunists, that took up all kinds of niches when ever a
chance presented itself.

In light of this one wonders if at least part of Protoavis of Chatterjee
may represent a crurotarsan imitation of the avian state?? Far fetched
but not impossible.
