+++
title = "The three-headed one"

+++
oM drAM dattAtreya namaH  
oM aiM kroM klIM clUM hrAM hrIM hrUM sauH dattAtreyAya svAhA ||  
The three-headed one, also known as the terrifying trishiro-bhairava,
wandered around carefree in the great forests of himaparvatas. With one
of his arms was holding the most beautiful madhumati of sweet smiles in
an embrace around her gold-girt slender waist. In his other hands he
held a mace, a trident, the blazing sudarshana, and a conch. He was of
fair complexion, youthful and energetic with ever-smiling faces. The
delightful madhumati would occassionally cast her arms around him, like
a jasmine creeper winding around a full-grown khadira tree, and she
would bring her face close to his. Their eyes would meet, exchanging
glances of the highest bliss. The great trimukha would hold her face
with his hand, and it would seem like a lotus sprouting from a pond
under the pleasant spring sun. In her hands, madhumati held a chalice of
sweet maireya liqour, which she would playfully quaff. Occasionally she
would pass the chalice full of mirth to trishiras and they would quaff
together in eternal Ananda. The bIja eM was constantly resonating around
madhumati even as she with her dazzling beauty concealed the
three-headed one from the gaze of on lookers. They might stop in a
secluded slyvan grotto and engage in kAmakrIDa, nR^itya and aTTahAsa. In
the highest ecstasy of pleasure the mighty tryAnana offered madhumati
the premaratna – the gem of love, and having nothing greater to offer in
return, madhumati, full of rasa, matched it by offering her own breasts.
The incomparable trimUrtI clasping her breasts in his hands, gently
placed a camphor flavored betel leaf between her pearl-like teeth. Then
sporting with nails, polished like the mother-of-sea-pearl, he tickled
the three folds in her mid-riff. Embraced by madhumati the trideva
looked like the peaks of the Himalayas girt by snow and pine forests.
The bIjas AM, hrIM, kroM, klIM, huM and oM filled the air. They spread
the mAyA.

The great rAmo bhArgava wandered there holding and axe that had been
washed in the blood of the vItihotras over and over again. He could have
a glimpse of the trideva because of madhumati. She shrouded dattAtreya
like a mass of clouds blocking the vision of the high peak of kailAsha
parvata. Through his intense meditation and grace of the deity the
bhArgava could finally attain dattAtreya and madhumati. They gave him
audience even as they quaffed the maireya liquor. trimukha first showed
him the yoni mudra and then the jvAlini. The three-headed one was
surrounded by 4 dogs. The bhArgava declared his familiarity with them
and asked: “Oh Noble one what is the rahasya of the agni chaitanya?” The
lover of madhumati said: “From raM it emanates. The splendid vAgIshvarI
having taken a purifying bath after her menstrual flow is lying in
joyous abandon on a soft couch. prajApati full of shR^i\~NgAra rasa
approaches her who is the embodiment of beauty and engages in passionate
intercourse. Into her yoni he deposits his retas. That retas is vahni
which endowed with the chaitanya of raM. He salutes that with the
formula:  
hrUM vaHni chaitanyAya namaH  
He then offers AchamanaM to the great IshvarI of vak. Then the great
vaishvAnara shoots up as he utters:  
chit-pi\~Ngala hana hana daha daha pacha pacha sarvaGYAGYApaya svAhA   

In the former days O rAma your illustrious ancestor, the foremost of the
atharvans, bhR^igu saw many mantras. But this one which the primordial
bhR^igu saw, who himself has sprung from the retas of prajApati, is the
base of the new kalpa that is being enunciated. The dull-witted cannot
grasp it:  
oM vAishvAnara ihAvaha lohitAkSha sarvakarmANi sAdhaya svAhA  

It is with it the act of sacrifice is achieved. He is then protected by
the emanations of the 7 bIjas:  
sryUm | shryUm | ShryUm | vryUm | LR^iryUm |R^iryUm |yryUm ||

``` 
```
