+++
title = "MahaShivRatri And The Mytholinguistics Of War [Part 3] – The Mind, The Mania, Thexa0Manyu"
date = "February 22, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/666234bcebd39735416bd13d496a7820.jpg?w=414)

\[Author’s Note: It is said that some efforts take on a ‘mind of their
own’. While this was initially intended as the third part to our
MythoLinguistics of War series, with a focus more narrowly upon the
strong saliency of Indo-European concepts of “Mind” and ‘Spirit’ with
those of Warfare – as the writing progressed, it became clear that this
was to become a somewhat broader, yet focused Deepa account that would
be of strong Shaivite saliency. The Manyu of the thing had, we might
say, made His presence felt; and we were swept up in His Furor. With
further developments within this ambit in mind, which also saw Him
accompanied by Devi’s Empowering Furor alongside, it made spear-point
sense to allow events to take their natural course (for what can be more
natural than following the Inspiration of the Gods, Their Guidance); and
we thusly arrived heer, where we are now – with a MahaShivRatri
devotional tribute piece which significantly builds upon last year’s
strikingly successful GHOST DIVISION undertaking, and additionally
incorporates perhaps surprising ‘bridging material’ drawn from the Greek
mythopoetic canon. It is lengthy, it is wild, and large swathes of it
were written in multi-thousand-words-a-night up-til-dawn grasp of what
might perhaps be spoken of as ‘Furor’ ; thus making it, in some ways, a
Shaped Like Itself article, and hopefully a truly Resounding
contribution to both the theological realm, as well as the applied
immanentization of same through the course of Tonight’s Devotions. ॐ नमः
शिवाय \]

**The Essential Characteristic – The Dominion Of ‘Men’**

As I mentioned in the first article to this series, a core reason for my
enthusiasm for this emergent field of MythoLinguistics, is because it
enables us to explore fundamental truths about our Ancestors’ world-view
that are difficult to reach via other means.

The previous two pieces have sought to explore War as the Universe, and
the Role of Man within that War. This third portion takes the latter and
thence arcens back around again to the first – by looking at the
Proto-Indo-European particle “Men”, several of its prominent derivatives
in later Indo-European languages, and how all of this irreducibly
combines with the mythology and theology around these to tell us some
pretty roaringly-resounding truths about ourselves, as well as (certain
of) the Gods and the Universe At Large.

So what is this ‘Men’ root, and why am I looking at it in a series mused
by the spirit of War. Well, while it does not *literally* mean “Men” in
the modern, English sense – it is so intimately connected with who, with
*what* we are, that I have virtually no hesitation in *maintaining* it
and its consequent derivations as being, in effect, “Our Word”, “Our
Story”, quite literally the Spirit of Us.

Its generally accepted field-of-meaning in Proto-Indo-European is that
it concerns ‘Mental Activity’, with those two words I have used to
conceptualize it both being quite important, albeit in different ways.
For while it *is* accurate to translate it as “Mind” \[and you can see
the etymological relationship there, right from the get-go\], it is
*also* accurate to point out that it refers to *what we do with our
mind*, as well.

Concepts such as ‘Thought’ (or ‘Memory’ – Muninn, entirely
unsurprisingly, flies forth to us from this ancient source), and more
especially, the actions *of* Thinking, the *expressions* of what is
going on within the realms of our Mind, are what is meant by this. And,
alongside this, a particular sphere of ‘metaphysical activity’,
religious or spiritual belief and enactable forms of same. The Faith
which can Move Mountains – *that* is what is meant by “Men”, at its
higher forms of expression, particularly when we are utilizing it to
*drop* mountains from space onto a demon-dragon as a form of orbital
bombardment, just to be sure … via the utilization of a “Mantra” \[same
root\], as Great Brihaspati did unto His Foe.

Now, I touched briefly upon the idea that PIE ‘Men’ has some conceptual
linkage with modern ‘Men’ \[as in the word – not necessarily the men as
they actually are, some might cynically suggest\]. This is not the only
possible etymological lineage for “Man” in modern English (or, for that
matter, “Man(n)u(s)”, our Progenitor), but I do not think that it is
hard to see how it figuratively makes sense: that the ‘Mon’ which is
‘Man’ (PIE and modern English respectively) , is partially derived (or
vice versa) from the notion that to *be* man entails being in possession
of mental faculties – and therefore, flowing directly from that, that
the act of labelling another being *as* “Man” means an explicit
recognition of their being able to think and feel and believe as ‘I’ do,
and thus being alike to us to the point of sharing in our taxonym. Thus,
in some ways, is the “Mannerbund” \[a ‘band’ of Men, but also a ‘bond’
of Men\] formed – through the recognition by men of each other and our
common faculties and purpose.

But this is somewhat secondary to our purposes, here – as it is enough
to state that the Indo-European Man has a ‘Mind’ that is this ‘Men’ in
the PIE sense \[i.e. replete with ‘active’ element and expression-ism\];
without having to worry about whether there is a *direct* linguistic
relationship with the concept of PIE ‘Mon’ (the more direct linguistic
root for modern “Man” per some reconstructions).

For “Man”, the individual, is but the houser, the vehicle for the
panoply of terms, of concepts, with the stem of “Man” in Sanskrit –
‘Thought’, ‘Belief’, ‘Concept’ \[मन् – ‘Man’\]; ‘Zeal’, ‘Devotion’,
‘Attachment’, ‘Enthusiasm’, ‘Eagerness’, and I would go so far as to say
‘Duty’ \[मना – ‘Mana’\]; ‘Honour’, ‘Respect’, ‘Reputation’, ‘Regard’,
‘Image’, \[and interestingly, ‘House’ or ‘Altar’ in some contexts\]
\[मान – ‘Maana’\]; which leads us to the Sanskrit term – and, as we
shall soon see, Divine, Mytholinguistic Theonym – at the Heart of this
piece. Indeed. it’s Spirit.

**GHOST DIVISION Mk.II – SPIRIT WARRIOR**

मन्यु – Manyu. What does this mean? On one level, it is the ‘Mind’ and
‘Spirit’ Itself. On another, it is the ‘active expression’ of that Mind,
and the raging forth of that Spirit – you have heard the English idiom
“High Spirit(s)”, well, this is the Sanskrit hypostasis of the concept.
It can be translated as “Mood”, but the better representation – to my
Mind – is as “Passion”, “Ardour” for those are the emotions to which
‘Manyu’ is most directly affixed. Anger, Wrath, Roaring Grief and Sorrow
\[and these are, some would suggest, the natural fruits of ‘Attachment’
– another one of those ‘Man-‘ Sanskrit terms we met earlier, “Mana(a)”,
to be more specific\]. But also, and this is quite important, the
emotions and the active expressions of “Piety”, of “Zeal”, and
“Resiliency” in the face of the foe or hellish circumstance. If “Manyu”
means “Rage”, then it is “Righteous Fury” \[and ‘Furor’, in the Latinate
and especially as applied to Germanic experiences, is most relevant
here!\]; If it is “Impetuousness”, then it is also “Pride” (And if it
is, figuratively ‘Imperiousness’, then it is also, as its natural
close-correlate, ‘Grandeur’); If it is “Craze(d)”, then it is also
“Courage”; If it is “Grief” \[and this, in and of itself, is a curious
linguistic cross-occurrence, given the phonetically similar German terms
for ‘seizing’, in an assault, or *being* Seized, as with the ‘Furor’
concept briefly afore aforementioned\], then it is Loss which Shall Be
Avenged. Or, also eminently appropriately, it is “Sacrifice” – another
meaning of “Manyu”, and also hugely relevant for both the ‘Religious’,
and ‘Martial’ contexts and connotations of the Term. But then, as we
have seen quite clearly in the preceding portions of this series, when I
say “Religious” and “Martial”, especially in this context, I repeat
myself. For just as ‘Manyu’ can adjectivally relate to Agni – as in
Piety – it is also most clearly said in relation to Rudra – as in
Destruction. Thus is the Duality of ‘Fire’ \[‘Spirit’\], Thus is the
Duality of Man \[‘Mind’\], Thus is the Duality of the Dvandva – but as
with many a ‘Dvandva’ compound, in truth, there is no ‘Duality’ at all
heer … only a single element, that is expressed via two seemingly
slightly contrasting Faces.

Interestingly, for our purposes, a strikingly close parallel
construction to this is to be found in the other #NAS corpus – that of
the Old Norse. Here, “Odr” \[also, when utilized as a theonym, referring
to the Husband of Freyja … which is a remarkably obvious pseudonym for,
you know, Odin\] is understood to mean pretty much the same thing as
“Manyu” – only with a far greater emphasis upon the ‘Furor’ element,
which is more implicit and implied due to the thelogical context in the
Sanskrit term. However, in addition to its adjectival usage to connote a
state of frenzy, of fervor, of ecstatic rage, (whirlwind) energized
conduct, and more than a hint of what might at first strike \[and then
strike again, and again, and again until the target is felled\] one as
‘insanity’; as well as the noun-essence employments to mean “mind”, and
“soul”, and “spirit” as well as “mood”; we also have an expressive sense
to the term – wherein it comes out (quite literally – of the mouth, most
usually; and perhaps we should note the Sanskrit correlates of
‘light/seeing’ and speaking in several terms like Bhasa, from PIE
‘Bheh’, meaning to shine or to glow – certainly, perhaps, the way in
which we perceive one who has become Divinely Inspired; ‘Arka’
(‘hymnal’/’lightning’/’flame’/’sage’/’singer’), as well, is relevant,
amidst several other such terms) … as Poetry, verse, song, and “prayer”
in a certain sense, as well.

Reflexively, it can also refer to the aforementioned (Divine)
Inspiration which sparks and empowers such feats of composition – and as
I have long maintained, the “Furor Poeticus”, as it is known, is not at
all distinct from the “Furor Teutonicus”, the “Battle Rage” so
characteristic of the Germanic people as to bear their name in the Latin
exposition of their sort. It is just that the same thing is being
expressed in different ways as befits the needs and nature of the
expressor and the inspirer. With the possible exception for some rare
sort capable of carrying out a rather more literal application of the
term “battle-rap” than might otherwise be perhaps expected. Or, going
back and looking at it the *other* way – the manner in which Brihaspati
makes use of a verse He has come up with to defeat the demon-dragon
Vala, in a manner compared in its impact to the Vajra of Indra (possibly
partially because in several RigVedic Verses, it features the conjuring
of a meteorite for orbital bombardment of the bunker-complex
within-which the foe has laired). Or, come to think of it, and as we
shall briefly address much later on, the array of citations for the
warrior empowerment and supremacy of Goddess Vak \[‘Speech’\], and also
in some hymnals, the exaltant martial proficiency of Saraswati (Goddess
of Eloquence and Wisdom, Arts, Literature, and the Milky Way).

To be in possession \[an intentional double-phrasing there\] of a Mind,
in other words, may also mean that one is capable of the feats of Speech
– and/or the other forms of ‘artistic’ expression’ to demonstrate an
intellect and an appreciation for beauty … such as the entrancing feats
of a gifted spear-wielder, for instance.

Indeed, speaking briefly of both the ‘Furor Poeticus’ and the ‘Furor
Teutonicus’, and their unifying characteristic(s) of the sense of being
‘seized’ by something and thence moving in an ecstatic high energy and
trance-like, rapturous, raging state … it should come as absolutely no
surprise to us to find the same Deity, Who Bears the relevant Name, to
be responsible for both. And this also, as I have previously elucidated,
helps to show why Odin, Shiva, Dionysus are patron(s) of the performing
arts, the theater and the stage as well. Not just because “ShakesSpear”
is almost a direct theonym, either. But because the notion of being an
actor, especially in ancient dramateurgy meant ‘putting on a mask’ –
speaking with a voice that was decidedly not one’s own, and an eloquence
that was most definitely borrowed. This finds its expression going down
different paths in the various cultural derivations – in the Hindu end
of things, the ‘dance’ side has become much more prominent, and the
notion is also of moving in-synch with the universe’s *own* unfolding,
unfurling dance-like progression of steps …. as Shiva creates and
maintains its rhythm at the center of It All, the bhooming bass of the
Damaru (Drum) moving all others especially those who, to reference me
some Nietzsche, may or may not be “Insane”, but can *definitely* Hear
the Music. (Of the Spheres, or otherwise). In the Norse, more emphasis
is placed upon the Verse side of things, and the Skaldic tradition
contains some absolutely underrated (presumably due to their serious
complexity and the otherwise-obscurity of our English’s direct and
immediately adjacent forebear languages) poetic compositions and
constructions as well (as does Sanskrit, of course, but then – we
already well know about them!); and for the Athenians (as well as, to a
certain extent, the English – in somewhat more gaudy and often
profane(d) fashion, too, their cultural descendants, the Americans), the
drama is held to be both amazing and at the heart of civic life. All
three have all the elements, of course – including the battle-rage, as
well, and quite some ‘enabling’ utilization of mind-altering substances,
on a spectrum from alcohol to cannabis, and psychedelic mushrooms as
well.

But the point here is that these elements – the ‘Furor’, the
Enraged/Energized Spirit welling up deep from within one, and the
conceptual aid of ‘Donning the Mask’ – are integral to our understanding
of the operation of the Manyu.

Something we should be entirely unsurprised about; as “Odr” and “Odin”
have coterminities of roots and of essence with the PIE terms “Weht”
\[‘Excitement’/’Rage’/’Inspiration’; which also stands at the root of
Latin “Vates” (‘Seer’, ‘Poet’)\] and “Hweh”/”Hwehti”/”Hwehnt”
\[‘Blow’/’Blowing’/’Wind’, respectively\]; with some reconstructions
actually going so far as to effectively combine the two; and suggesting
a figurative meaning field along the lines of “‘Blow’, ‘Fan \[as in, the
fan the flames’\], ‘Inspire'”.

Certainly, it is difficult to see a hard-and-fast separation of the
terms in question – the Deity presiding over the activities of the
former pretty invariably having a Wind (and Wandering) correlation, and
often a direct responsibility for what we might easily call the “Breath
of Life”. The relationship is quite clearly demonstrated in the Sanskrit
“Vata” – which, in addition to being a Theonym for the Wind-Lord, and
meaning Wind (as well as an upper atmospheric layer, a region of the
high winds, and potentially also intermixing with the Akasha), and
referring to the Vital Breath (also strongly associated with the Rudras,
but then I repeat myself – ‘smoking breath’, ‘hot breath’ being a sign
not only of life but of its active expression via *rage*, as well; and
the last breath, which may veer-y likely bear this, being that of the
Spirit exiting the body via exhalation), is also correlate with the
*other* “Vata” \[the same spelling/pronunciation in Sanskrit, as it
happens – ‘वात’; a pattern shared with the verb ‘वाति’\] which refers to
attacking, injuring, seizing, and danger.

Perhaps we might say that for the Ancient Indo-European Man, “To Be
Alive” meant also and quite irreducibly, “To Be Angry”. \[I also have my
own thoughts about the Old Norse ‘Eitr’ being similarly derived – both
in terms of its necessity for life … as well as its poison in too great
of an abundance, and, for that matter, its primary means of expression
via the *mouth* especially of certain serpents; but we shall, perhaps,
leave that as another story for another time\]

Perhaps, with particular regard to the sort of Wind which is Powerful,
Howling/Roaring, Oncoming, and Irresistible in its Raging and beauteous
while potentially veer-y destructive force … we could take this above
typology further; and call our Ideal Man, our Forebear, Our Ancestor for
what He Truly Is – The Storm. \[And not least because this, too, carries
implicit within it in modern English, the sense of the assault (a
French-sourced term itself connoting rapid military movement via the
air) – to “Storm a Trench”, for instance; a sense also captured in the
Germanic ‘Greif’ (which also, interestingly, was the name of Rommel’s
personal transport, and may also mean a Griffin/Gryphon – a creature
most prominently associated in ancient texts with *another* band of
Wind-Raiders of ancient Indo-European archetypal significance .. the
Scythians), that happens to stand at the core and root of Jung’s famous
term from his ‘Wotan’ essay for a man becoming ‘seized’ by the eponymous
Odr Deity .. the ‘Ergreifen’ concept, which should probably also be
understood as the ability to ‘grip’ a people via one’s oratory,
charisma, and other forms of supernatural God(s)-given Radiance\]

**The Roaring Wrath Of The World-Reigner**

But now, having met “Manyu” the word, let us hail “Manyu” the God. And
see whence the literal Apotheosis (or, if you prefer, ‘Hypostasis’) of
all of the above is to be found, even ere out amongst our People.

In the course of the GHOST DIVISION article, I referenced a certain work
of English poetry when explicating the Shaivite warrior-emissary
emanation of VeeraBhadra – “Who is the Happy Warrior? Who is He / That
every man in arms should wish to be?”

It should perhaps come as no surprise that there are several potential
answers to the above question, in an Indo-European context. For just as
the Eskimo is often regarded as having fifty words for Snow … when what
they *actually* have is several dozen words for different *kinds* of
snow, sorted by its quality and nature (e.g. whether it’s safe to walk
or sled over, etc. – and also, presumably, whether it’s “yellow”) … the
Indo-European pantheons have many, *many* War Gods and Goddesses, but
with many of these actually being somewhat specialized or otherwise
differentiated presiders over a particular *form* of excellence-in-War.

But the absolute Lord of War, in the Vedic understanding, would have to
be Manyu – one of the Forms of Rudra, and depicted as the specific
emanation of the (Martial) Wrath of the Lord of Creation. A Being so
Terrifying in His Warmaking Power, that even the rest of the Gods
*combined* state Their Fear of Him.

As Well They Should – for in each instance of the Manyu’s Manifestation,
the only thing which can stop the relentless rampage is Victory.

So with That In Mind, let us briefly read one of the Manyu Hymnals of
the RigVeda:

RV X 84 ‘Manyu’ \[Griffith Translation\]:

“1. BORNE on with thee, O Manyu girt by Maruts, let our brave men,
impetuous, bursting forward,  
March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, with pointed arrows,
sharpening their weapons.  
2 Flashing like fire, be thou, O conquering Manyu, invoked, O Victor, as
our army’s leader.  
Slay thou our foes, distribute their possessions: show forth thy vigour,
scatter those who hate us.  
3 O Manyu, overcome thou our assailant on! breaking, slaying, crushing
down the foemen.  
They have not hindered thine impetuous vigour: Mighty, Sole born! thou
makest them thy subjects.  
4 Alone or many thou art worshipped, Manyu: sharpen the spirit of each
clan for battle.  
With thee to aid, O thou of perfect splendour, we will uplift the
glorious shout for conquest.  
5 Unyielding bringing victory like Indra, O Manyu, be thou here our
Sovran Ruler.  
To thy dear name, O Victor, we sing praises: we know the spring from
which thou art come hither.  
6 Twin-born with power, destructive bolt of thunder, the highest
conquering might is thine, Subduer!  
Be friendly to its in thy spirit, Manyu, O Much-invoked, in shock of
mighty battle.  
7 For spoil let Varuṇa and Manyu give us the wealth of both sides
gathered and collected;  
And let our enemies with stricken spirits, o’erwhelmed with terror,
slink away defeated.”

Now, this hymnal – one of two within the RigVeda with Manyu as the
direct subject – is also repeated within the AtharvaVeda, and it is, I
think, no coincidence that in that latter scriptural corpus, it occurs
immediately after that Book’s (slightly altered in order of verses)
reproduction of the famed DeviSukta, the Great Hymnal of Vak which is
also originally of the Tenth Mandala of the RigVeda. There are several
explanations for this, including the natural progression from the
Roudran elements found within this latter Hymnal – wherein Vak equips
and augments Rudra to slay the Enemy of the Faith; but also Her
summoning forth of the God-Father from the Brow of the World \[at this
point in Vedic cosmology often considered also to be the Great Male God;
so therefore, both Father-Emanation and Father-Of-Emanation are Shiva,
impelled by Devi in both cases – the ‘circumstantial’ and the ‘cosmic’,
respectively\]; and from a more Devi-centric explicatory model, both Her
“Rous\[ing\] and Order\[ing\] Battle for the Nation”, as well as the
statement that She Herself has “become so Mighty in My Grandeur”. We
shall consider *that* ‘side’ to the typology later on \[with further
analysis of the Storming Breath of the Tempest Wind with which She
imbues, being the subject of a future article linking the ‘Breath of
Life’, with the ‘Smoking Breath’, the ‘Breath of Anger’ – and thence,
from Vayu-Vata to Woden\].

But I have charged ahead somewhat. Let us return to something more
foundational. First, the several accountings of the Emanation of the
Manyu; and then the broader expressions of the same occurrence within
the Hindu corpus – followed by a highly intriguing instance which I
believe demonstrates the same typology enacted elsewhere in the
Indo-European World, and which also handily brings us right back around
full circle to where we began.

The text that is likely the earliest available to us – which should not
be confused with this being the earliest *expression* of the occurrence
– which gives some account of the emanation of the Manyu, is the
Shatapatha Brahmana, a Vedic commentary that is conservatively dated to
somewhere between two and a half and three thousand years old in its
final form. However, while this may sound comparatively recent, it is
important to note that the Hymnals and the Rites which it is expounding
upon, include elements which were already well-codified perhaps as much
as a thousand years before; and which doubtless all draw from the august
mythoreligious practices and understandings of the Indo-Iranian,
Andronovo, and thence even earlier Indo-European peoples stretching back
far beyond any assayable antiquity.

The Shatapatha Brahmana exposition in question \[9th Khanda, 1st
Adhyaya\] deals with the SataRudriya \[‘Satisfaction of Rudra’, to
translate a little figuratively\] Ritual process found within the
Yajurveda; with the particular element we are interested in being the
explanation for why the SataRudriya is performed in the first place.

The particular verse in question speaks of Prajapati \[‘Lord of
Creation’\] being in what could perhaps be described as a state of
distress, certainly of high emotion \[‘Manyu’, on both counts, as we
shall see\]. He is pervaded *by* Manyu \[whether in terms of the
Deity/Deific expression, or the state of Emotion being intentionally
somewhat ambiguous, not least thanks to the way Sanskrit vocabulary
works\], and then weeps openly as an outward expression of His inner
tempestuous state \[although it is worth noting the potential for the
thousands of tears thus described to be an intentional double-meaning
with thousands of *eyes* – a frequent characteristic of Dyaus Pitar, and
something which shall become quite relevant further on\]. This handily
supplies not only an explanation for the etymology of “Rudra” as a
theonym \[‘Roarer’, ‘Howler’\], replete with Thunderstorm metaphoric
association in the form of the Tears of the Lord of All – but also
recalls the strong association of Lord Rudra with ‘tears’ which we can
see in any Shaivite Temple today … the Rudraksha \[‘Tear(s) of Rudra’,
also translated as ‘Eye(s) of Rudra’\] which we wear and string into
Mala of prayer-beads, and recall also the Lord of the Howling Storm
Wind’s Compassionate Mercy to His Devotees.

This ‘externalization’ process of what Prajapati is feeling, whether due
to an immense Sorrow and fundamental desire to fix it (potentially by
*ending* the cause … with the smile of an axe), or perhaps the more
direct route-patha of immesurable Anger felt by the God capable of
Believing-Into-Being … leads through these tears, and therefore through
the Eyes, to the Emanation of the Manyu – Who is heer depicted as the
most fearsome and the most formidable of the Rudra(s), indeed!

The rest of the Gods quail in terror at the Manyu’s appearance, and
state Their fear openly – making especial reference to the prospect that
His untrammeled Wrath \[‘Manyu’, again\] places even Them at risk of
Destruction. Prajapati’s response to this is to enjoin the Gods to
gather sustenance-provisions for a sacrificial rite to Appease the Manyu
(of) Rudra, and thereby ward off great harm in so doing. The subsequent
acts of carrying out the SataRudriya ritual observances by later
generations of men, therefore, are an ‘Eternal Return’/’Mythic
Recurrence’ principle in action – of doing the same as even the Mighty
Gods had done prior during Mythic Time, so as to secure not only the
avoidance of the baelful negative attentions of Rudra that are attained
through one’s ingratitude … but also the beneficent and generously
merciful bestowments of the Lord Rudra when He is Pleased, especially
with His Chosen People(s).

So that gives us, I think, the baseline elements for a ‘typology’ for
The Manyu; the better to facilitate our examination of these subsequent
scriptural occurrences which I believe are also occurrences of the same
Manifestation.

To phrase it succinctly, The Manyu appears when The Great God is in a
state of high (and ‘negative’) emotion – either Anger, or
Sorrow(-Leading-To-Anger); generally emanates out via the Eye(s); is
depicted as being Terrifying, even to other Deities \[and it is
interesting to note that the other RigVedic Manyu hymnal \[RV X 83\]
suggests The Manyu can slay and/or subjugate not only Dasyus, but also
Aryas, as well, where necessary\]; and also has an association with
Piety – or, more specifically, the *non-performance* of the proper Pious
Conduct, Virtues, and Rites.

It is tempting, especially in light of that last element, to think of
The Manyu as being something like the ‘enforcer’ type so frequently
associated with a certain *other* kind of God-Father – the one who is
dispatched to facilitate the ponying-up of “Protection Money”, if you
get my drift, lest disastrous calamity and unseemly “accidents” befall
the ‘miser’.

Yet I don’t think that’s either fair nor accurate. Not just because, as
we have covered earlier in this series, the pious contributions of
devotees *are* a notable part of what helps to sustain the Divine War
Effort on *all of our* collective behalf against the Demons (and
therefore, the notion of contribution to this through sacrifice is not
sensibly comparable to organized crime carrying out acts of egregious
extortion – but rather, is best compared to a state in a situation of
tense geopolitical circumstances if not outright war, needing taxation
revenue in order to furnish its army and civil defence) ; but also
because, if you look closely at one of the key RigVedic Verses (for
that) which I’ve earlier cited \[RV X 125 6\] – what we *in fact* see is
a direct attestation that Rudra the Wrathful is dispatched to *protect*
the pious conduct from those who would disrupt it (and the lives and
(life)threads of its enactors/officiators/participants) and do it and
its people harm \[the ‘it and its people’, in a sense, being *exactly*
what is meant by ‘Arya’ – the proper customs, and those who adhere to
them\].

However, it is also important not to over-emphasize the ‘Negative
Theology’ perspective and approach, lest we lead ourselves to some form
of iniquitous “A Yagna A Day Keeps The Manyu Away” horrendous
mythunderstanding. It is – once more – the strong desire of any
genuinely pious Devotee *not* to Anger the God(s), this is true; but not
simply because the Inevitability which flows from such anger is
strenuously undesirable … but rather (and also, to be fair), out of a
feeling of love, duty, and respect \[‘Manyu’, ‘Manyu’, and ‘Manyu’,
again, as it happens\] for the God(s) that we seek to please Them. And
further, as can capaciously be seen from both the Manyu Hymnal which I
have fully quoted in translation \[RV X 84\] earlier in this piece, as
well as many other ancient Shaivite/Roudran Hymns, there is often an
anticipation, a yearning, for direct Divine Intervention or other forms
of tangible assistance and empowerment resultant from our propitiation
of these Mightiest amongst the Mighties \[see, for instance, the
metaphysics of offering and bestowment contained in the second line of
the DeviSukta \[RV X 125 2\]\]. I do not mean to reduce this latter
sphere down to a ‘quid pro quo’ – for that would imply and entail a
‘separation’ between Deity and Devotees that is far more akin to the
impersonal and impartial and un-im-passioned (indeed, the direct,
antithetical opposite – and therefore, also, to ‘Manyu’ .. like
‘boredom’, stagnancy, and staleness also is) commercial exchange between
corporate entities in the modern world than anything Mythic, Right,
Righteous and True. But the Relationship is a Relationship, even as
between parties about as unutterably unequal as any could possibly be
(which does not stop parents in the prime of life from looking after an
infant, nor a small child from feeling a valid and valued participant in
the family life, the relationship, with his forebear-progenitors); and
*that* is the proper expression, in many ways, of proper Indo-European
Piety. Not ‘paying protection’ to a Family; but *under* Protection (and
also extending Service, Protection to others and Upplanders, as well –
‘Dharmo Rakshati Rakshitaha’, indeed), as *part* of *the* Family. Even
if the Patriarch/Matriarch of said Family \[and that is what ‘Mankind’
may in some ways be regarded as – the Kindred of Man(n)u(s), our storied
penultimate ancestor) is often quite far removed and best contacted via
a favoured intermediary or through the sending of messages through
prayer rituals and offerings.

**“I Bend the Bow for Rudra that His Arrow May Strike and Slay the Hater
of Devotion” – On Ugra Manyu And Perhaps Angra Mainyu**

However, to but briefly speak of those who may, perhaps, have found
themselves on the *other end* of the Wrathful Protector of Devotion’s
militant attentions … it has long been readily apparent to linguists and
mythographers that there has been some form of cross-cultural schism
between the two key Indo-Iranian religious spheres which have survived
relatively intact for us down to this day – those being the Zoroastrians
on the one hand, and the Hindus on the other; with the latter, in my
considered opinion representing the ‘continuation’ of much of what was
represented in the pre-Zoroastrian Indo-Iranian mythoreligious orthodoxy
…. and the Zoroastrians, by contrast, occurring as a deliberate
subversive ‘reform’ effort which sought to break away, and seemingly
downright *invert* key element of that aforementioned and afore-existing
dominant sphere of belief.

Academics have gone back and forth over the years as to how salient this
or that causative factor is likely to have been in all of this – with
some attempting to explain the entire thing away as almost a
(pseudo-linguistic) coincidence in a bid to downplay the potential for
‘Nationalistic’ readings of ancient history; however regardless of
whether one falls into that camp, or whether one views the scriptural
and linguistic evidence together as supporting the concept of an
attempted religious usurpation/insurrection occurring … it cannot be
ignored that this aforementioned ‘mytholinguistic’ suite of evidence
recalls a trenchant animosity from the Zoroastrian-Persianate grouping
against the Indo-Aryan religion and the language which resultingly,
inextricably bears it. I have considered this in more expansive detail
in several of my previous works \[for instance, the relatively recent
“Aesir-Vanir, Asura-Deva, but also A’Sura, Daeva”\], and so shall not
reiterate that material here, except to note that as briefly explored in
my article on the Scythian burial at Pazyryk – that the Zoroastrians
appear to have reserved some of their greatest dread and would-be
vilification for Shiva-Rudra, and the accompanying #GangSteppe spear/bow
armed wind-rider Harrying, Harrowing deific complex.

Suffice to say, that in addition to the relatively well-known “Deva –
Daeva” correspondence-but-also-contratemps \[wherein the term for “God”
(Shining One) found right the way across the Indo-European World – in
Nordic as ‘-Tyr’, in Latin as ‘Deus’, etc. … has somehow become one for
‘False God’, ‘Demon’, in the liturgical languages of the Zoroastrians\],
we also have the perhaps rather amusing further correspondence:

To quote myself on the subject:

“In Sanskrit, one of the words for ‘Army’ is ‘Sena’ – सेना. Now, the
cognate terms for this in Avestan and Old Persian, are ‘Haena’ and 𐏃𐎡𐎴𐎠
\[‘Haina’\] respectively. \[The ‘S’ => ‘H’ sound-shift between Indian
and Iranian languages is well attested – c.f, for example, and not at
all coincidentally, “Asura” => “Ahura”\].

Why am I finding this amusing? Well, you see, in these Iranian languages
… “Haena” means “hostile army”. So … we say “Army”. They hear “Hostile
Army”.

Or, in other words … They Remember.

Now, as it happens, a veer-y similar situation occurs in Finnish around
Old Norse: “Herja” (‘raiding’) – which, in Finnish, means “thing to run
away from really fast”. Well, “predator”, “demon”, “malefic spirit”,
\[interestingly, particularly of the throat\], “villain”, you get the
idea … –

Because they, *too*, *remember* “

How does this pertain to The Manyu? Well, on one level, it should
already be more than readily apparent. What is The Manyu – the Mighty
Arch-Militant God. The Slayer of Foes and the Smiter of the Hater of
(proper, pious) Devotion. He presides over the Holy Army of the Vedic
Arya; with a rank and a role that would more properly be termed
‘Emperor’ in the old sense – that is, “Imperator”. Or, perhaps if we
were speaking Old Norse, Herjan. And I have chosen that translation
quite deliberately, as it is also a well-attested Theonym of Lord Odin.
Fitting, as The Manyu is Rudra (or, insofar as it is a distinction along
a spectrum of being, the ‘Roaring, Passionate-Zeal Infused War-Spirit’
Emanation of Same); and Rudra is Odin – in form, in function, in manner,
in method, and in meaning (with, it should be said, a few shades of
cultural ‘translation’ heer and there).

So it should be unsurprising to find that the Zoroastrians also appear
to have an understanding, an appreciation of The Manyu as one of those
aforementioned ‘Names To Run Away From Really Fast’ – or \[because\]
Veer-y Fast, as the case may be.

This being “Angra Mainyu” – the “Mainyu” term being *directly* cognate
with Sanskrit “Manyu”; while “Angra” appears to share etymology with the
Sanskrit “अस्र” \[‘Asra’ – Tear\]. The notion of a Crying (or, if you
like, *Roaring*) (High) Spirit, described as the Chief of the Daevas,
speculated in some academic sources to have some degree of linkage with
Vayu-Vata, and with a pointed association in various texts with concepts
of Darkness \[or, as we would say in Sanskrit – ‘Kaal’\] and Time \[but,
then, I repeat myself – at least in Sanskrit\] especially as source of
the being’s emanation. There are other potential etymologies for
“Angra”, of course – in particular, the same roots as contemporaneous
Sanskrit terms for the Throwing or Shooting of weapons, and the Slaying
and Smiting thus carried out. Of further interest and import for our
analysis, is the later attestations we have for Angra Mainyu as having
presided over the creation of the Peacock. Which matters not so much
because it has become a symbol of India – nor even because the Peacock,
as seen in a certain Greek myth upon the subject, is the bearer of the
‘Thousand Eyes’ \[a well-known characteristic of the Sky Father\] … but
because the Peacock is *also* the emblem, the ensign, and the Vahana
\[‘Vehicle’\] of Lord Skanda. Who is Lord Skanda? Why, the Son of Shiva,
the Lord of War, the Charger, the Shooter, \[His Name has etymological
and meaning-field connexions with both; and it can clearly be seen how
His habitual modus operandi as a mounted warrior bearing spear, closely
accords with each – especially together\], the Commander of the Armies
of the Heavenly Host, brought into being to strike down with great
vengeance and furious Ugra upon a particular dire demonic threat to the
DevaRajya and thusly upheld Order of the Cosmos \[Rta\]. Or, in other
words and more succinctly – “This is the happy Warrior; this is He/ That
every man in arms should wish to be”; and likely the latter,
(post-)Puranic age emblematic expression for the vitally integral Hindu
(human, as well as more-than) Armies of the Deva-Worshippers.

Now, it should be outright stated here that I am not suggesting somebody
go out and suddenly start worshiping “Angra Mainyu”. I am also
definitely not suggesting there is a precise and proven ‘identification’
that has been made here, which might support such aforementioned
objectionable conduct. One should never enter into the worshiping of
demons; and one should exercise great caution when approaching what goes
on in the mythological corpuses of another culture, lest by
irrepressible over-confidence, some over-stepping equation is made which
portends dire consequence as a fairly direct result. And besides, there
is utterly no need for such ‘transgressive’ behavior. For if I am
correct in my hypothesized linkage above – that The Manyu, as the
effective hypostasis of all that the Zoroastrian religious ‘reformers’
of the day would have hated and feared in the Indo-Iranian religious
orthodox which they were attempting to rebel against and break away
from, and therefore that they may have reasonably directly ‘demonized’
The Manyu as *the* Adversary against which they would spend their lives
to contend – then there is no need to speak positively nor piously of
“Angra Mainyu”. For we *already* have hymnals and offerings to The
Manyu, The Manyu Who Is Rudra; Temples and grand rites unto Shiva, and
to Odin. And if I am incorrect in what I have potentially suggested –
then it is well to avoid positive regard for “Angra Mainyu” anyway, on
point of general principle; and be thankful that we have such prominent
and powerful patron-protector Deities against the demonic foe.

But let us return to the Manyu typology of which I was expounding
earlier, and its application to several Hindu mythic occurrences in
order to test it – and them – and see what it is that we may find.

**The Myths Of The Manyu Considered**

The first of these is reasonably straightforward, not least because we
know from direct textual attestation that it is speaking of The Manyu.
It is from the Gautami Mahatmya portion of the Brahma Purana, and in the
course of characterizing a particular river-side holy-site \[the
eponymously named Manyutirtha\], it briefly details the prosecution of a
war between the Devas and Danavas (a race of demons), in which the Devas
have found Themselves severely hard-pressed and retreating in disarray.
On the advice of Lord Brahma, the Devas proceed to the relevant
river-side site, and carry out acts of pious devotion in order to
beseech and petition Lord Shiva – which interestingly, include not only
dance and ShivLingPuja, but also a series of fairly direct resonancies
with the Manyu Hymns of the RigVeda. That is to say, it is possible that
veer-y similar rites to those which a human tribe of Vedic Aryans would
utilize to entreat The Manyu to be with them in Time of War, were
undertaken (or to be understood as being undertaken) by the Gods in the
course of Their Own efforts to petition Same. This is something which I
have often found quite charming about Hinduism – the way in which, while
there are, in some vitally important ways, differences of ‘kind’ between
us and The Gods (or for that matter other such intelligent races and
beings) … there are also some fundamental similarities in the
manifestations of proper life and pious conduct, which suggest that the
distance between us and the Heavens is also one of ‘degree’, as well.

In terms of an Eliadian ‘Eternal Return’ / ‘mythic resonance’, ‘mythic
recurrence’ typology – it is further interesting to note that the
initial occurrence referenced in the Shatapatha Brahmana text, is itself
being re-enacted/’recurred’/’re-immanentized’ again within a *further*
mythic sphere by The Gods … and this is also, itself, engaged with by
mortal devotees even today at the relevant and eponymously-named
riverside-site. At least, in terms of going there to piously worship
Lord Shiva (as) The Manyu … probably not so often for the *explicit and
express* direct purpose of summoning the Great God of War for literal
(mythic) Holy War against an assembled army of demons. Although, as I
have often noted, and as forms the core and the crux of this series,
these ongoing acts of proper, righteous conduct and enthusiastic, pious,
*zealous* \[‘Manyu’, again\] support for The Gods are themselves active
net contributors to ‘our Side’ in the ongoing War that runs like a
fissure through the metaphysical topography of our existence.

But to engage in a ‘mythic return’ of our own, that is to say to return
to the application of our typology to the text in front of us – we see
these elements I have earlier elucidated once more to be occurring. For
it is not only the case that The Manyu is manifested by Lord Shiva in
response to the dire threat against His worshipers (both Gods, and
ensuingy, us in the human realms also) as well as the implicit concept
and immanency of Devotion, and following the direct petitioning of these
beings unto Him for Deliverancey and Augmentation in the Fight – but we
*also* see that, once more, The Manyu has been emanated via Lord Shiva’s
Third Eye; that there is a ‘Revelation’ wherein the full-scale of the
Divine Power is properly realized by the behelders and awe-struck hailed
accordingly; and, perhaps more intriguingly, that part of the manner in
which The Manyu has His Martial Impact, is actually through ‘entering
into’ the assembled warriors of the DevaGana, the DevaSena, and
increasing Their zeal, their morale, their competency, their ‘fighting
spirit’ \[‘Manyu’, again, on all fronts – in this context, the Manyu(s)
of the Devas Themselves\] \[Perhaps this is somewhat figuratively what
is meant by ‘Esprit de Corps’\]. This resonates in significant ways with
what we have elsewhere understood in both the religious and martial
spheres \[but, again, I repeat myself\] of the Indo-Europeans – wherein
a holy-man is ‘elevated’ \[perhaps in German, we might say
‘ergreiffed’\] by the investiture of the Divine, and ecstastic
\[literally – ex-stasis, ‘outside of time/being’, so ‘authentic’ in
their expression of essence are they in those moments\] combatants like
the Wolf-Warriors, the Berserkers, become so through this raising and
‘frenzying up’ \[‘furor’ – in this case, Teutonicus; although
‘Poeticus’, also, as applies the Holy-Man .. and *both* are tangible
contributions to the ongoing, onrushing, roaring course of the
Dharma-Yuddha\] of their Spirit.

To quote directly from the text in translation:

“After saying thus Manyu revealed his form that had been produced from
the third eye of Lord Śiva. It was that form which had been gathered
together by means of brilliance. It was the same as was called Pauruṣa
(manliness) in men, Ahaṃkāra (Ego) in all creatures, anger in all which
is terrible and which causes annihilation.  
On seeing that representative of Śaṅkara, who was resplendent on account
of his own refulgence and who was holding aloft all types of weapons,
Devas bowed to him. Daityas and Danujas became afraid. Devas joined
their palms in reverence.  
Having joined their palms in reverence they said to Manyu—“O lord, be
our commander-in-chief. O Manyu, we shall enjoy kingdom won by you.
Hence in every activity you are victorious. You are the person who will
increase our victory.  
You are Indra and Varuṇa. You alone are the guardians of quarters. Enter
us, enter for the sake of our victory.”  
Manyu spoke to them all—“There is nothing without me. I entered
everyone. I am present in everyone,. No one knows me.  
Manyu was the lord himself born from him in separate forms.  
He shall be in the form of Rudra. Rudra became Manyu and Śiva.
Everything, the mobile and immobile is pervaded by Manyu (Anger).  
After obtaining him, Devas obtained victory in battle. Victory, anger
and heroism all these originated from the splendour of the lord.  
After fighting with Daityas and attaining victory on account of Manyu,
Devas protected by Manyu went the way they had come.”

Stirring stuff; stirring up of the Spirit, in fact, just to read it –
even in English translation. And while there is an in-depth exegesis
that could and probably should be written upon the above (in particular,
explicating what is meant by the line around Manyu as both Indra and
Varuna – which may not necessarily be meant directly literally, but
rather, as concepts somewhat analogous to what we might think of as the
Dumezilian 2nd and First Functions, or perhaps ‘War Chief’ and Sovereign
Chief, and certainly invoking the strong Demon-Slaying quality of Lord
Indra (‘Vritrahan’ style – consider/compare the similar epithet for
Saraswati in RV VI 61 7; which is either interpreted to mean Saraswati
is Slayer of Vritra, or is equivalent in demon-slaying potency *to*
Indra, Slayer of Vritra), and the All-Encompassing Imperial Grandeur and
Might of Lord Varuna – with the latter being especially appropriate
given Varuna as Rudra as Dyaus Pitar, as considered in my earlier
article upon this subject, ‘Swear By The Sea, Swear By The Stars, Swear
By The Sky’\]; however we shall save that for another time.

But before we move on to our next comparative instance, I shall but
briefly highlight several points from it which shall assist with the
explication of these subsequent occurrences.

**Fear Is The Mind Kala / A Friend Of The Mind (Who Is) Kala ;**

The first of these is that what the Devas had *actually asked for* when
approaching Lord Brahma for guidance and advice following Their defeat
at the hands of the Danavas – was to be granted “freedom from Fear”.
Hence Brahma directing Them to Mahadeva – Who is, after all, not only so
strongly correlated with the notions of Holy Terror as to have an entire
series of theonyms devoted directly to this concept \[‘Bhairava’ is
probably the most familiar to us\], but Who *also* has such power over
Fear as to be Chief amongst Those who can *remove* its salient potency
and power over us. Hence the suite of Shaivite theonyms directly devoted
to *that* concept – such as ‘Aghora’ (the opposite (‘a-‘) of terrifying
\[‘ghora’\] – hence Shiva is both Ghora as He is Gaura , as well as
being AGhora as He is Kaal \[‘Gaura’ meaning ‘Fair’ or ‘White’ or ‘Pale’
; ‘Kaal’, as we should all know by now, also meaning ‘Black’, as well as
‘Death’, and being quite a prominent Shaivite Theonym; the former is
more usually associated with “Beauty”, but Night, and Kaali most
definitely have Beauty all Her – And His – Own\].

This is also directly relevant in a battlefield context; as, after all
fear is a most potent destabilizer of armies; and panic is something
that can cause or exacerbate more casualties than cannon-fire. A fact
which, entirely uncoincidentally, was certainly well-known to the
semi-mythic and certainly mythically resonant Harii mentioned by Tacitus
in Germania. I considered this “tribe” \[or, more properly, Gana\] in
the course of the GHOST DIVISION series written in devotion for
MahaShivRatri 2019, but suffice to say that whether the Harii were the
Ghost Warriors of the Germanic Afterworld and Lord of the Dead \[Shiva,
again, as Odin\] *Themselves*, or ‘merely’ a particular Germanic
practice or tribe of acting in conscious imitation of these … well, I’ll
let Tacitus put it in his own (translated) words:

“As for the Harii, quite apart from their strength, which exceeds that
of the other tribes I have just listed, they pander to their innate
savagery by skill and timing: with black shields and painted bodies,
they choose dark nights to fight, and by means of terror and shadow of a
ghostly army they cause panic, since no enemy can bear a sight so
unexpected and hellish; in every battle the eyes are the first to be
conquered.”

Colonel Kurtz, it would appear, was on to something when he uttered the
immortally insightful lines: “Horror! Horror has a face, and you must
make a friend of horror. Horror and moral terror are your friends. If
they are not, then they are enemies to be feared. They are truly
enemies.”

But in any case, what we see bestowed in the course of this episode of
the Brahma Purana, is the removal of Fear \[Abhaya, you shall see, is
one of the most prominent Mudra posings for Murtis for a reason –
partially, no doubt, because the experience of being in the direct
personal presence of a Deity *should* contain a certain measure of
awe-inspiring abject terror as the ontological possibilities are parsed
in the mind of the up-until-that-moment non-believer\]; and thence the
‘activation’, the ‘enabling’, the ‘exciting’, the ’empowering’ and the
‘rising up’, the ‘exaltation’ \[indeed, the ‘exhalation’ via the mighty
roar\] of the ‘Manyu’ of all the Deva’s War-Host thusly assembled.

Fear, as a certain work by Frank Herbert noted, is the “Mind-Killer”.
“Mind”, in this sense somewhat correlate with “Manyu”; and reflecting
the capacity for depressed morale and the paralyzing turmoil of terror
to dampen one’s ardour, extinguish one’s anger, and otherwise suffocate
one’s pious zeal.

Its removal – or, rather, its transcension …for it is a rare sort indeed
who has no sense of fear, and probably a dead sort, too, as fear is
actually there for a reason; it is just that it makes a useful servant
in its proper place, but an absolutely torrid master of the psyche. Its
transcension, is what enables the truly mighty deeds.

Its *imposition*, meanwhile, has the exact opposite impact; stultifying
the mind, suppressing the will, and transfixing the limbs to make for an
easy target, easy prey, easy death. Hence the mention in the course of
the recounting of this particular combat, that the “Daityas and Danujas
became afraid” upon the appearance of the Manyu and in prelude to their
impending doom.

And in that sense, we may perhaps see that the Mani-festation of the
Manyu was not solely that of a mighty warrior lord, a foremost combatant
capable of carrying the day by Himself; but rather that He became the
Inspirer, the Uplifter, the Empower of Those who Followed With Him. And
therefore, motivated by His Holy, Heroic Example, They became more than
They otherwise, to that point, were or had been. To quote more
specifically from the text – “Victory, anger and heroism \[-\] All these
originated from the splendour of the Lord”.

In this sense, while I have often eschewed fully ‘euhemeric’
interpretations of Vedic Hymnals and other Indo-European mytho-poetic or
scriptural elements, as basically being about as bad as Scriptural
Literalism, and often a short-hand path toward Atheism to boot … there
is nevertheless a quite valid concept for the RigVedic Manyu Hymnals as
having a performative element designed to raise an army’s Spirit(s)
before Battle; to focus and steel the mind(s) of its warriors via the
skillful recitation of the Mantras \[same etymological root again\]
thusly contained therein. And certainly, one of the benefits of a ritual
action that we *know* the consequential results of, is that it primes
our minds for the thing that is soon to be expected of us. Even were
there not the absolute anticipation of Divine Intervention – whether
‘direct’ in the form of *The* Manyu appearing in the host’s midst, or
‘indirect’ in the form of the metaphysical empowerment and raising of
the prowess and the potency of the Sena (indeed, perhaps turning in the
Eliadian Eternal Return sense, the Army *into* The Manyu – which would
certainly explain some of the language used in some extollings thereof)
– the war-spirit of the army for whom these invocations were performed
would benefit. The grouping of men would be turned into a Mannerbund,
individuals forged into a single body for the singular purpose and
driven by the single (Imperial – ‘Imperator’ in Latin being the command
of an army) will – as Tennyson put it in Ulysses: “One equal temper of
heroic hearts, / \[…\] strong in will / To strive, to seek, to find, and
not to yield.”

The other point to be raised heer, is that what The Manyu is asked to do
by the Devas is not simply to carve a bloody path(a) through the foe
singlehanded \[although given that this is a Hindu deific emanation,
“singlehanded” is perhaps not quite the right terming to utilize\]. Even
though the Devas do entreat Lord Shiva – “May we be happy by resorting
to the strength of His arms” – it is part of Their Prayer for One “Who
will take up command of Our army in the battle.”

And what is the faculty, the element of personhood most associated with
the Command of an Army? (Not only ‘Imperator’, but also an array of
Odinic theonyms and titlery are directly associated with just such a
concept – Herjan, for instance) Partially, this is true, it is a
function of Inspiration – and it can be as simple, in some contexts, as
killing your way forward and thusly through momentum motivating others
to follow along in your wake.

But in the form of Strategy, Tactics, Techniques (and, as it happens,
Logistics … which is in large measure what *really* conditions and
constrains the aformentioned) – why, it is the Mind.

**The Aegis of Athena – Insight and Incitement ; Wisdom And Fear**

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/86973723_2473516979567048_4517986152904392704_n.jpg?w=480)

In the Western mindset, if we were to ask someone to name a deity of
strategy and the mental arts of warfare – those who didn’t just stare
back blankly at us would likely almost invariably reply with one name:
“Athena”. Or, if they were of a more Latinate bent, “Minerva”.

Now, it might seem more than a little curious for me to be speaking
about a Goddess in the context of this piece, yet I assure you that the
linkage is not only of probative interest … but quite integral. And
helps to demonstrate and thence dovetail (or, if you prefer, war-hawk)
two threads for the further explication of the Hindu context later in
this piece.

But first … why Athena, why Minerva? Why am I not talking in great,
grandiloquent detail of some of the more immediately obvious
comparatives for this role in the Greco-Roman Classical Mythology? Ares,
perhaps; or Bacchus/Dionysus.

And the initial answer to that is, as with so many things in
Indo-European mythoreligion … what’s in a name. “Minerva” – you can see
right away the etymological derivation from that “Men” particle
mentioned earlier \[Plato also sought to connect “Athena” to “mind” in
Cratylus\]. And certainly, Minerva / Athena is well-renowned and
well-regarded for Her presiding over the spheres of certain mental arts.
If you ask what Minerva *is*, many would say that She is a Goddess of
Wisdom. Indeed, in many standard basic-level approaches to comparative
mythography, you find Her cited as the comparative-equivalent figure to
Saraswati in the Vedic reckoning. Which had always seemed a bit odd to
me, up until I actually went and looked into the relevant RigVedic
Hymnals on Saraswati, and found that actually, yes, Saraswati, too, was
a martial Goddess, and regarded as the potent equal to Lord Indra in
terms of demon-slaying. For Athena / Minerva is also clearly a War
Goddess – well-armed, spear-armed, in fact \[and even depicted with the
Thunderbolt, so Mighty and Heavenly is She\]; and presiding over Her
Polis in the manner I explored some pieces ago now in “BHARAT MATA AND
THE INDO-EUROPEAN DEIFIC OF NATIONAL IDENTITY”.

So rightaway, we have two of the vitally important components of The
Manyu. The notion of the “War-Mind”, we might potentially call these.
Yet if the “Men” particle is so integral to this Goddess, then where is
it to be found within the Ancient Greek? Simple. In an integral portion
of what She Does for Her Chosen champions.

Consider this line from The Iliad:

“I have put your ancestors’ unflinching ménos into your breast,  
such as the shield-brandishing horseman Tydeus used to have.”

That’s Athena speaking to Diomedes \[a name which directly renders as
‘Divinely Inspired/Aided’\] – and the field of meaning for ‘Menos’ is
almost exactly that of the Vedic ‘Manyu’. “Mind”, “Anger”, “Spirit”,
“Courage”, “Power”, “Purpose”, “Desire”, “Wish”, “Motive\[-\]”,
“\[-\]Force”, “Ardor”, “Passion”, “Violence”. You get the idea. It may
be somewhat figurative to term it “Frenzy” \[not least because in the
Athenian mind this might be something a bit more associated, martially
at least, with Ares; and ‘Mania’ being the term related to ‘Menos’ which
might perhaps capture the sense in both the Ancient Greek and the Modern
English utterances thereof\], but it is not hard to see how it is
directly correlate with the investment of The Manyu, and in certain
regard of The Odr \[Certainly, Eliade made this exact connection –
including framing the “Sacred Fury” of the Nordic Berserkir as “Wut,
Menos, Furor”; ‘Wut’, of course, being closely etymologically and
functionally related to “Woden”\].

No wonder, then, that Diomedes the spearman is regarded as being so
mighty and skillful that he – and he almost alone – is capable of
contending martially with Gods … and living to tell the tale.
\[Partially, it is interesting to note, because the ‘Menos’ of Diomedes
is a purpose-based and purpose-built one. It does not lead to him
carrying out reckless and unquenchable blood-lust nor hubristic heights
of demi-heretical God-fighting. Rather, he does what he is Ordered,
empowered, to do – and wounds Aphrodite when She takes the field in
protection of Aeneas; and although he then strikes against Apollo as
well, in somewhat defiance of his Orders, he does not go as far in this
as he could have, and desists swiftly when reminded of the limits placed
upon him; his subsequent spearing of even mighty Ares is carried out
only under, again, Athena’s express Orders to do so\]

And speaking briefly to the ramifications of the Odr in relation to
Athena – I have long argued, although shall not do so at any great
length here, that Odysseus either is a recollection of, or perhaps a
‘descent’ \[‘avatara’\] of, the same Indo-European Deific as Odin and
Rudra. The etymology is not unrelated – the two main possibilities
advanced in ancient texts being a meaning of ‘who incites anger’
\[‘odussomai’\], and ‘who cries out/shouts \[in lamentation\]’
\[‘oduromai’\]; so whether in form or in function, the Howling of the
Storm Wind Who Invests Us With The Manyu seems most appropriate to put
forward as linkage. And that is before we consider the escalating
pile-up of obvious further parallels – the wanderer, who goes in
disguise (particularly as an old man or an anonymized figure – ‘Otis’ /
‘Nemo’\], who engages in wordplay and cunning illusory subterfuge as he
infiltrates, who is a bowman possessed of just such a weapon that no
other could possibly string and utilize \[interestingly, something
directly equivalent to this occurs in the Ramayana\], who has
association with both a faithful hound and the Corvid, and indeed with
the Wind(s), who may appear *himself* to be mad, who speaks with the
dead and via descent to their realm, who is capable also of using words
for diplomatic purpose as well as for incitement, and so on and so
forth.

Odysseus, as is well known, is a favourite of Athena; and is assisted in
various manners by Her throughout the course of the Iliad and Odyssey.

Matters are further componded when we consider what *else* Athena has
customary association with. In more recent times, these have included a
capacious emphasis upon the Arts, perhaps reflecting the manner in which
these are both closely correlate with, and something of an active
expression of, the concept of Wisdom. This had long been present in the
Roman understanding of Minerva – wherein Poetry, in particular, was
thought to be within Her dominion; although it is also present in the
Ancient Greek understanding. Indeed, the extolling of Athena as Athena
Itonia goes rather beyond poetry, and potentially even into the
Underworld – with later Roman sources speaking of what was variously
identified as a deific representation of Hades, or perhaps of a
Chthonian Zeus \[but, then, I repeat myself in our modern understanding
of Zeus-Hades-Poseidon, don’t I\] appearing alongside Her and with
mystical associations thereto.

So, poetry and wisdom, inspiration and empowerment, fury and violence
and intellect. It is not at all hard to see how whether it is Athena,
potentially bestowing Menos – or Minerva, especially when named directly
as such – that The Manyu is present in both linguistics and also in
legendary leadings here.

Indeed, I would go much further, and point out that we have additional
evidence to more strongly support a linkage with the Shaivite-Odinic
deific complex from whence The Manyu is a rather specific emanation.
These include Athena being hailed as Anemotis – She with the mastery of
the Winds, Who can quell devastating storms when properly asked for
assistance through prayer; as Ageleia and Ageleis, which have been
derived in a variety of ways including the ‘Pillager/Plunderer’ or
‘Leader to Spoils \[of War\]’ \[‘Ago Leia’ – ‘Leitis’, in the sense of a
distributor of war-won treasures also occurring as an epithet of
Athena\], as well as Leader of Nations \[‘Agein Laous’\], ‘Untameable’
\[‘Agelaiai’\], and ‘Protector’ \[a stance mirrored in ‘Alakomeneida’ –
Powerful Protector\]; Avenger \[‘Axiopoinos’\]; Victory, and the Divine
Bestower Of, particularly through Auspicious and Fortunate
interventions; Roarer (and of capacious eloquence all its own therein,
as well as otherwise), Rider, Spear-Thrower, or Spear-Wielder, after a
certain sense the Wearer of the Cloak or Wearer of the Skin \[it is
something I have regarded with some smiling, the fact that the figure
eponymous with Civilization and Wisdom in the popular imagination – is
clad in the flayed skin of a vanquished adversary as warding; perhaps
this might have some figurative linkage with the way in which a
bear-skin-shirted or wolf-head-wearing raging warrior’s panoply features
the trophy of the fallen formidable creature in order to totemically
draw upon its prowess when in combat\] \[the *other* potential and
relevant sense of one who is ‘cloaked’ being provided by the Helmet of
Hades, which bestows invisibility to Her when donned and needed\].

The strong medical associations of Athena / Minerva also have resonancy
with those found with Rudra, an array of the RigVedic Hymnals relating
to which, I have earlier written briefly about in relation also to
Hermes and Odin. And speaking of those Two – it cannot be at all
coincidental to find Athena also called ‘Xenia’, the Stranger/Foreigner,
and implicitly a wandering sort to have come amongst the people and be
requiring the Sacred Hospitality \[this name, we find also affixed to
Zeus, this role and function may also be found in the Vratya materials
of the AtharvaVeda and elsewhere – Shiva, of course, being *The* Vratya,
Greatest of these skin-wearing, spear-shaking, wisdom-wielding,
\[like-the\] wind-riding ‘outlaws’\]. We even find Her granting the
power to understand the Language of the Birds (itself a deepa-ly
embedded Indo-European mythological concept; especially in concert with
the ability to perceive the Future – granted to the same guy by Her in
compensation for taking His eyesight …trading the mundane eye for
in-sight you might say – now Who does *that* remind you of! Crow-talking
and all!). There is further speculation which could be mounted in
relation to ‘Agoraea’ \[understood as protector of the Agora, and likely
the people of/ therein; an epithet and function shared with Zeus, with
Hermes, and with Artemis; and which would presumably derive either from
the political (and social) integrality of the Agora to the Polis, or the
commercial element (Odin, too, possesses something relating to more
*conventional* commerce rather just than the exchange of spear-point for
blood and bounteous plunder; Hermes is even more direct in such a
linkage), or perhaps even, as may have been the case with Artemis \[Who
we may, perhaps, *also* be meeting later via Vedic comparative
expression\], a patron denizen and protectress of the Open Spaces\]; but
I suspect I have made at least part of my point.

Now there are two further elements which we must consider before we move
on to the Genesis of Tritogeneia.

The first of these is the Eyes. It is said in certain proverbs that
these are the proverbial ‘windows to the soul’ – and certainly, the
notion that the Eyes are the ‘true-seeing’ manner in which to divine the
true nature, is well ensconsed. After all, it is said in the Rigsthula
that one of the identifying marks of the Jarl Caste, even from infancy,
is to be found exactly there(in): ”ötul váru augu sem yrmlingi.” –
“Flashing/Flaring, his eyes like a young dragon’s shon”. We also find
the possession of a third eye, bestowing supernatural insight, as a
characteristic of Shiva – and also, in a slightly less visually obvious
sense, the highly proficient Shaivite Devotee. This Third Eye can bring
about Destruction (such as when Shiva utilized it to burn KamaDeva –
Love – to ashes) – and in a way, this is also ‘Deconstruction’, as it
shows what is not true, what is not really there … by burning away the
illusion – and therefore leaving only what things really are. In terms
of these ‘Flaring Eyes’, these ‘Blazing Eyes’ and I do not (necessarily)
mean the red-eyes of one who has partaken of cannabis nor the
excessively wide-eyes of one fired-up on methamphetamine – we find this,
too, in direct reference to Odin. Baleygr stands as the most prominent
example; and the notion of the Eye That Sees True, far-sighted also from
the Golden Throne is his, too.

But how does this pertain to Athena?

Well, for a start, some of Her more frequent theonymic citations in
ancient Greek verse are incredibly similarly phrased – focusing upon Her
Eyes, Blazing Eyes and otherwise remarkable opthalmic characteristics.
This may also help to explain why She had attained such strong
coterminity of association with the Owl – which, other than the Dragon
(whose eyes are also renowned to be powerful, potent, and perspicacious
beyond most mortal measure (hence the etymology of the word from Ancient
Greek) – and often quite hypnotic, into the bargain as well … but more
on that in a moment), would probably be one of the more prominent Eye
creatures in the ancient Greek mythopoetic imagination and symbological
lexicon.

Yet the essential characteristic is not Athena’s alone – it is also one
which She bestows upon chosen empowered devotee favourites. Witness what
happens when She grants the Menos to Diomedes (the ‘Divinely Guided’, or
‘Divinely Clever/Wise’). ‘Flame’ is depicted as coruscating from his
Helm and from his Head (recall what I had mentioned around PIE ‘Bheh’
earlier, in reference to the ‘glow’ of one subject to the Divine
Inspiration; and also the manner in which Shiva’s Third Eye is blazing
and burns what it beheld when He is Wrathful; and also the Bale-Eye of
Odin). And then, again, when She responds to the prayer of Diomedes,
“good at the war-cry”. We shall quote:

“So spake he in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him, and made his limbs
light, his feet and his hands above; and she drew near to his side and
spake to him winged words: “Be of good courage now, Diomedes, to fight
against the Trojans, for in thy breast have I put the might of thy
father, the dauntless might, such as the horseman Tydeus, wielder of the
shield, was wont to have. And the mist moreover have I taken from thine
eyes that afore was upon them, to the end that thou mayest well discern
both god and man.”

So, as we can see, the investiture of the Menos by Athena to Diomedes
has lead to his seeing the world far more as it actually is. The stream
of fiery-vision, as Athena also may be said to possess, being now, too,
the characteristic of Her Chosen Champion upon the field of war. Indeed,
these attributes help Diomedes to do the otherwise unthinkable – to
contend directly with not one, not two, but *three* other Gods in
reasonable succession, managing to drive even Ares from the battlefield
through a truly inspired spear-casting.

Truly, this is a man in whom the Manyu is most wisely invested!

But there is one final ‘eye’ element which we should look at when
writing this comparative mythography of Athena in relation to Shiva. And
that is a set of eyes, or at least a visage, which is most definitely in
Goddess Athena’s possession … yet are not Hers. Those being the eyes and
surrounding horrifying face of the Medusa.

Except leaving aside the in-legendarium occurence of the Medusa, wherein
Athena curses a particular woman to bear the petrifying appearance,
there is actually quite a lot more going on with the Medusa, the
Gorgoneion, particularly in relation to Athena \[yet also, upon
occasion, Zeus\] than many might otherwise realize.

Look at the words. Look at the terms. Look at the etymology – *and* the
function. There are two ‘kernels’ here – ‘Medusa’ and ‘Gorgoneion’. The
latter is applied to a terrifying face that is found upon a shield. I
believe that the root of this term, ‘gorgos’, which means a ‘grim’
expression of terrifying and fierce saliency … is likely to be the same
as the Sanskrit ‘Ghora’ \[‘घोर’\] – a well attested quality and
theonymic of Rudra, which means The Terrible, The Terrifying. The
Proto-Indo-European underpinning for which, Ghowros, other than sounding
like a certain appropriately wide-eyed Klingon grimr, effectively means
“To Be Angry\[looking\]”. So, in other words, the Gorgoneion is a
‘War-Face’ – and one which is borne by the warrior of terrifying potency
storming into combat. Just as the Ghora ‘facing’ of Shiva-Rudra is known
to us, and is particularly apt for the description of the various War
Forms of this deific expression – And His Wife \[but more upon Her more
directly, in due course\]. And just as the ‘vehemency’ and clear
expression of the rage and martial potency of the Ghora Deva, is
strongly in line with what is meant by “Manyu”. It is not hard to see
how confronting such a panic-inducing visage would lead quite naturally
to the enemy becoming petrified – not so much in the literally intended
sense (at least, at first), as in the other sense which the term enjoys
even in modern English: that of becoming frozen to the spot and utterly
unable to act due to the nerves becoming overwhelmed through sheer
terror. \[There is also another potential etymological underpinning for
‘Gorgos’ – that of the same ultimate root as the Sanskrit Garjana …
which would mean Roaring, Thunder(ing); as we shall see, these
characteristics are also extremely well attested for Devi Athena; and
are also, quite clearly, strongly correlate with Rudra; as well as being
an obvious quality for Zeus, and an attested quality also for Odin;
although in terms of whether the underlying meaning for ‘Gorgos’ should
be ‘Angry\[faced\]’ or ‘Roaring/Thunder\[ing\]’, I can but say that if
somebody comes toward you with Thunderous Expression, you know *exactly*
what it is that this means – as is also the case when we behold the
oncoming face of the Thunder Cloud in tense anticipation of Her Harsh
Winds And Lightning … very very frightening!\]

A similar pattern may potentially play out with the underlying root of
“Medusa” – wherein the reconstructive etymology is suggested to lead
back through ‘Medo’ – to protect, to rule; from Proto-Indo-European
‘Med’, which can also mean to counsel or advise. We have earlier met, as
it happens, another likely derivative of this form in “Diomedes”, in
multiple senses of the term, above – and even though in theory these are
both from somewhat different PIE roots again, the Sanskrit ‘Medha’
\[‘wisdom’, ‘mental faculty’, ‘knowledge’, ‘insight’, ‘guidance’\] and
Ancient Greek ‘Metis’ \[‘cunning’, ‘counsel’, ‘plan’, ‘insight’, ‘mental
capacity’\], I would consider to be so closely linked in concept to each
other, as well as to what is meant by the earlier “Menos” as to form a
natural sphere and closely aligned spectrum, all of which act in natural
concert with “Medo” of which we have just (re) met.

And that leads us on quite handily to Athena’s Parentage. Which is one
portion Zeus, and the other – a figure by the name of Metis, a titaness
who came to be regarded as an embodiment of the conceptry of ‘wise
counsel’, (supernatural) cunning (as in, cunning in the area of the
supernatural – hence why she is ascribed with providing Zeus with the
concept and the means of execution to force Kronus to vomit forth His
offspring; which may, in fact, form a doublet of the myth of the genesis
of Athena, just as Cronus all-up does for Zeus), and deep thought. Which
makes it rather peculiar that Zeus would be able to so easily do as He
did to her, placing her in such a situation as to consume her and end
her independent existence in a bid to avoid her giving birth to a more
potent offspring than He … but, as they say, perhaps love really does
make even the sharpest and most otherwise wise and perspicacious of us
into fools. Hence, perhaps, why Shiva had Him \[Kamadeva\] shot on
sight.

However, I suspect that there is actually something else going on here.

Now, in order to explain this, we must go back to the Vedas – *always*,
we go back to the Vedas. Except, not quite; not so directly, in this
instance – for it is within the Brahmana commentary-layer which appends
the Vedas in both time and exegesis that we are looking. Specifically,
the Shatapatha Brahmana accounting for the reasoning underpinning our
performance of the SataRudriya \[‘Satisfaction of Sri Rudra’; although
more literally, the rite of the glorification and sacrifice to the
‘Hundred forms of Rudra’\] Rite found in the Yajurveda. It is important
to note that the Shatapatha Brahmana, while an important guide for the
operation and underlying purpose of Vedic ritual, is nevertheless a text
set down quite some centuries after the earlier layers of the Vedas
Themselves upon which it is commenting. And that it is certainly
possible for some elements to have ‘shifted’ in expression slightly –
not least when we consider that all of what I am about to say has been
filtered through the lenses of English-language translation – over that
period. Nevertheless, the similarities with the Greek theological
materials we shall consider immediately following are *resounding*.

Quoth the Shatapatha Brahmana:

“6. And as to why he performs the Satarudriya offering. When Pragâpati
had become disjointed, the deities departed from him. Only one god did
not leave him, to wit, Manyu (wrath): extended he remained within. He
(Pragâpati) cried, and the tears of him that fell down settled on Manyu.
He became the hundred-headed, thousand-eyed, hundred-quivered Rudra. And
the other drops that fell down, spread over these worlds in countless
numbers, by thousands; and inasmuch as they originated from crying
(rud), they were called Rudras (roarers). That hundred-headed,
thousand-eyed, hundred-quivered Rudra, with his bow strung, and his
arrow fitted to the string, was inspiring fear, being in quest of food.
The gods were afraid of him.

7 They spake unto Pragâpati ‘We are afraid of this one, lest he should
hurt us!’ He spake, ‘Gather food for him, and appease him therewith!’
They gathered for him that food, the Satarudriya (offering), and thereby
appeased him; and inasmuch as they thereby appeased (sam) the
hundred-headed (satasîrsha) Rudra, it is called
Satasîrsharudrasamanîya,–and satasîrsharudrasamanîya, doubtless, is what
they mystically call Satarudriya, for the gods love the mystic. And in
like manner does this (Sacrificer) now gather for him that food, the
Satarudriya, and appease him thereby.”

Or, to provide a more succinct synopsis in light of our earlier
aforementioned Manyu-myth typology – what we have here is the AllFather
\[a slightly figurative rendition for ‘Prajapati’\], experiencing a
powerful emotional state \[‘Manyu’\], and thence via the expression via
the *eyes* we see The Manyu appear, or emanate – Who is described as
Roaring, Well-Armed, Terrifying, even above other Gods, and to Whom one
ought to be making offerings, oblations, sacrifice.

Now, our minds refreshed of that – let us consult the rather more recent
Ancient Greek verses upon the subject:

Pindar, circa 464 BC in his 7th Olympian Ode spake thusly:

“Disturbances of the mind lead astray even a wise man. Tlepolemus went
and sought the god’s oracle. To him the golden-haired god spoke, from
his fragrant sanctuary, of a voyage by ship from the shore of Lerna
straight to the pasture land with sea all around it, where once the
great king of the gods showered the city with golden snow, when, by the
skills of Hephaestus with the bronze-forged hatchet, Athena leapt from
the top of her father’s head and cried aloud with a mighty shout. The
Sky and mother Earth shuddered before her. Then even the god that brings
light to mortals, son of Hyperion, enjoined his dear children to observe
the obligation that was soon to be due: that they should be the first to
build for the goddess an altar visible to all men, and by founding a
sacred burnt-offering warm the spirit of the father and of the daughter
who thunders with her spear. She who casts excellence and joys into men
is the daughter of Forethought, Reverence.”

And lest Pindar be accused of ‘invention’ in this matter, here is the
28th Homeric Hymnal – also to Athena, and composed perhaps three
centuries earlier:

“I begin to sing of Pallas Athena, the glorious goddess, bright-eyed,
inventive, unbending of heart, pure virgin, saviour of cities,
courageous, Tritogeneia.  
Wise Zeus himself bare her from his awful head, arrayed in warlike arms
of flashing gold, and awe seized all the gods as they gazed.  
But Athena sprang quickly from the immortal head and stood before Zeus
who holds the aegis, shaking a sharp spear: great Olympus began to reel
horribly at the might of the bright-eyed goddess, and earth round about
cried fearfully, and the sea was moved and tossed with dark waves, while
foam burst forth suddenly: the bright Son of Hyperion stopped his
swift-footed horses a long while, until the maiden Pallas Athena had
stripped the heavenly armour from her immortal shoulders.  
And wise Zeus was glad.  
And so hail to you, daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis! Now I will
remember you and another song as well.”

Or, to go back somewhat further, Hesiod in his Theogony:

“But Zeus himself gave birth from his own head to bright-eyed
Tritogeneia, the awful, the strife-stirring, the host-leader, the
unwearying, the queen, who delights in tumults and wars and battles. But
Hera without union with Zeus — for she was very angry and quarrelled
with her mate — bare famous Hephaestus, who is skilled in crafts more
than all the sons of Heaven.

But Hera was very angry and quarrelled with her mate. And because of
this strife she bare without union with Zeus who holds the aegis a
glorious son, Hephaestus, who excelled all the sons of Heaven in crafts.
But Zeus lay with the fair-cheeked daughter of Ocean and Tethys apart
from Hera…deceiving Metis (Thought) although she was full wise. But he
seized her with his hands and put her in his belly, for fear that she
might bring forth something stronger than his thunderbolt: therefore did
Zeus, who sits on high and dwells in the aether, swallow her down
suddenly. But she straightway conceived Pallas Athene: and the father of
men and gods gave her birth by way of his head on the banks of the river
Trito. And she remained hidden beneath the inward parts of Zeus, even
Metis, Athena’s mother, worker of righteousness, who was wiser than gods
and mortal men. There the goddess (Athena) received that whereby she
excelled in strength all the deathless ones who dwell in Olympus, she
who made the host-scaring weapon of Athena. And with it (Zeus) gave her
birth, arrayed in arms of war.”

Interestingly, the next section is relevant to Poseidon – roaring,
earth-shaking Poseidon, and His Issue – Triton. The underlying
similarity with Tritogeneia – the name used in the immediately preceding
section to introduce Athena – has never been quite satisfactorily
explained; although the lead theories include some linkage to a physical
river by the name of Trito(n) in Boeotia near one of Her leading
sanctuaries; or perhaps more likely that it is another ‘Trito’ that
means “Head” in the relevant language – therefore rendering Athena
Tritogeneia as Athena Whose Genesis Was From The Head. However, it has
also been suggested that the epithet might stem from Her, in some
sources such as Apollodorus, being raised by Triton – or, more
interestingly, mention by Pausanias of Athena as actually *being* the
child of Tritonis \[in this case, a female water figure\] and Poseidon …
which would be odd, considering the well-known rivalry between Poseidon
and Athena in some rather important areas – although rather less odd
when we recall that Poseidon and Zeus are, in archaic origins,
functionally almost the same deific, and certainly running off what is
fundamentally the same (Proto)Indo-European Deific Complex: That of
Dyaus Pitar, the Sky Father (and cognizant, of course, that the Sky is
*also* Sea in that most ancient form of our underlying Cosmology).

But I have digressed again. And it is necessary to swiftly return to
chartered course so that we may have due space to encompass also the
next Facings of this Mighty God(dess)!

As applies those three Ancient Greek sources and how they compare to our
Shatapatha Brahmana excerpt, the resonances should be immediately –
indeed, with deference to Great Zeus, perhaps near-*skull-poundingly*
apparent.

In each case, what we see is the same – this ‘Manyu’ figure emerges
well-armed, terrifying, the frightener even of all the rest of the Gods
and world; (S)He comes forth from the (fore)head of the Great God, with
a mighty and resounding Roar, a war-cry most formidable; following the
seizing of the mind of said Great God by this curious mental element –
the Manyu, the Metis. And what happens then? Well, in the Pindar source
it is clearest (other than in the Shatapatha Brahmana, of course),
although you can also divine same in the Homeric Hymnal – the Roaring
and Wrathful Athena is placated, via sacrificial offering or other means
(perhaps including Her enjoying the terror and the tumult which She has
produced out there in the world, in the latter), and becomes calmer,
removing Her Armour – Her Spear, just as Rudra’s Arrows in the relevant
Vedic Hymnal, turning auspicious and “casting excellent and joys” into
the minds and hearts of men rather than devastation and death.

What this means, of course, is that the ‘Metis’ of which Zeus was
previously so enamoured, and which provided such cunning insight and
clever potency to Him … may be a concept much like the Manyu in the
former part of that Shatapatha Brahmana excerpt, or the Odr we have
previously met. A ‘mental element’, a ‘mood’, a ‘faculty’ (and, indeed,
there is another occurrence of a non-personified ‘Metis’ in relation to
Zeus as Ruler that is directly relevant here – the ‘Royal Metis’); which
has been garbed in a personhood (perhaps unsurprising given a
meaning-field of ‘spirit’ for the Sanskrit comparative) as a titaness
and a sexual conquest, indeed a first queen, a wife, of Zeus; rather
than the deliberately more ambiguous phrasing of the Shatapatha
Brahmana, wherein the Manyu that is within Prajapati and which thence
leads to the expression out via the Eye(s) of The Manyu seems to be the
labeling of an emotional state and mental condition as the surface
manifestation of something inexorably, ineffably Deepa. \[In either
case, there is likely something to be said for the concept of ‘working
up a rage’ and having time to think up a solution – as this appears to
be what produces the armaments of Athena, via the handiworks of the
Metis, a phrasing we might perhaps coin as a hammering in the temples\]

It is outright impossible, I feel, to look at all of this above evidence
and *not* come to the inescapable conclusion that all four sources, and
then some, are actually describing the same event – the same
mythological point of incredible saliency and relevancy for the Ancient
Indo-European (Wo)Man.

Which leads us to two rather obvious points of observation. First, that
it appears, most curiously, that the Ancient Greeks effectively had
concepts almost directly analogous to the Third Eye so prominent within
Hinduism. This is somewhat obscured via the manner in which these have
manifested in all of the above – and it is, to be sure, only in the
later Sanskrit literature that it actually congeals into its easily
recognizable form within Hinduism as well. But the notion of emanation
out through the Eye(s), of destruction coming out through the Eye(s)
\[which, to be sure, is also what the expression of this Wrathful Deity
out via the Eye(s) has as tangible impact), and also of Insight – seeing
things as they actually are … well, Zeus’s Forehead, Athena’s Blazing
Eyes, the Visage of the Gorgon/Medusa (as borne aloft by Athena, and in
the former case, also Zeus in particular), the Head and Clear Vision of
Diomedes as bestowed by Athena (and interestingly, a rather similar
manifestation for Achilles courtesy of the same Goddess – perhaps there
might be something for a future piece to be explored in Her touching the
nape of his neck as this occurs, in terms of the ascent of the Kundalini
serpent, the Shakti \[force/power/empowerment\] going up the spinal
column, and in this particular case toward the area adjacent to the
Vishuddhi Chakra .. but that is another speculation for another time).

And second, that there appears to have been one rather obvious
difference between the Ancient Greek understanding of this myth, and the
aforementioned specific Vedic one (there are, as we shall shortly see,
others…). That being the gender of the emanation in question.

Now, it is tempting to advance various ‘surface-level’ speculations for
this. To presume that what we are seeing is a situation wherein the
Greek accounting has ‘diverged’ and produced a female Divine Warrior
rather than a male one; for reasons that are almost incidental to the
actual core and elemental substance of the myth. This is not to say that
these are ‘accidents’, but rather to impute a certain ‘less than pure’
motivation thereto. Probably the most obvious one of these is the idea
that the Greeks had backed themselves into a proverbial corner with
their ‘doubling up’ of Ouranos and Kronos, Kronos and Zeus – and
therefore knew that a Divine Son of Zeus was an impossibility within
their mythic schema, because of course this would lead to yet another
cycle of Uprising against the suppressive Father-Lord \[‘Pati’, in
Sanskrit; ‘Patriarch’, perhaps more directly in English, and combining
both words\]. Which we have a direct mention of when it comes to why
Zeus is supposed to have consumed Metis in the first place (and it is,
as noted earlier, one of those further ironies that the potion provided
by the Metis is what leads to Kronos vomiting forth Zeus’ siblings; just
as it is a further odd irony that some sources have Ouranos providing
the advice to Zeus to consume Metis in the first place\]. To avoid
*just* such a situation \[although one could, perhaps, argue that the
rivalry between Poseidon and Athena in some certain aspects may perhaps
recall this typology regardless\].

Yet I don’t think that’s right; and for several interleavened reasons.
One of which being that as the Metis is also regarded as female, it
makes a certain logical sense that the divine figure directly descended
and in a sense emanated *from* the Metis, Who Herself *bestows* Menos,
Metis to the Warrior, the King, and the Sage and Poet … would also be
female. It therefore makes, in a certain sense, what happens when one of
these leaders of men gets a cunning idea and a flashing enlightenment,
an act of Eliadian ‘eternal return’ and mythic recurrence/mythic
resonancy for Zeus getting the thought to provide Kronos with the
potion, or other such occurrences, perhaps. But better, because *unlike*
Zeus, the bearer of the thought is not above the source of Inspiration –
and therefore the individual human is unable to attempt to
consume/suppress/singularly-possess nor even attempt to outright destroy
this source. And woe betide the man who tries. Mortal skulls do not tend
to be *nearly* so amenable to being hit repeatedly with an axe.

But the other, and vitally more important, is that we *have* directly
comparable Vedic and later Hindu attestations for pretty much this
concept – these concepts – in pointedly Female expression and essence.
Indeed, given the nature of these … it shall rather rapidly become
apparent that They could not be any way else.

**‘A ROARING COMES ACROSS THE SKY’ – THE SHOUTING ARRIVAL OF THE
SPEAR-TONGUE**

There are many ways in which we could begin this section, picking up
upon the thread that we have been tracing the trail of right the way
from the beginning of the article within the realms of ‘Mind’.

We could have gone for the functional parallel with the Metis mentioned
as the Mother of Mighty Athena – wherein, were you to ask a Hindu about
a concept of the wife of a great God as an empowerer and
insight-/potency-granter for Same, there would be an instant
familiarity. Even in the notion of said wife forming part of the form of
the great God in question – although as applies the most prominent
instance of this, the Ardhanarishvara Shared Aspect of Shiva & Devi
Parvati, it is a partnership in the truest sense of the term, and is on
a decidedly equal footing. Indeed, “Ardhanarishvara” as a theonym
directly means the God-Emperor Who Is Half Woman. Which, lest this be
misinterpreted as some modern sources with Westoxifying agendas would
perhaps quite like to do – is a married couple whose integrality of
essence and purpose is so complete as to be an effective Unity. Quite a
contrast, in many ways, to any of Zeus’s marriages as attested in the
Greek legendarium that imminently spring to mind.

We could also have gone with the more direct application of our
earlier-congealed Manyu mythic typology; and examined the many and
various occurrences within the realms of the Shakta theological corpus
of flaming-eyed most-formidable ultimate-warrior/destructor/avenger
forms of the Goddess, emerging from the Third Eye or Face/Brows of the
Devi, and proceeding to lay waste to entire armies of demons
singlehandledly (something which also has close coterminity with the
position and role of Athena as the prime champion of the Gods against
the Giants in some previous ‘chaoskampf’ style conflict – hence where
She acquired that marvelous mantle, the cloak of flayed skin which She
wears as Her impervious Aegis), and channeling righteous rage and
full-throated fury toward the proper protection and upholding of pious
rites and their bearers.

But personally, I prefer to go for the throat. Which, in this context,
is where the Vishuddhi Chakra is – the place where Purified Speech
shouts forth, roaring, from the Akasha, and Shiva is also said to dwell.
It is also where we find perhaps the most integral expression of all to
be radiating from, via our mouths – the means and the mechanism via
which all this capacious Insight, and Inspiring Verse, Potent Poetry,
Glimmering Understanding, and Thunderously Wrathful War-Cry, is actually
communicated.

I am speaking, of course, of Speech. That force which, in our reckoning,
creates, maintains, empowers, upholds, and ultimately rules the
Universe.

Now we have already briefly addressed some core Indo-European
mytho-poetic conceptry around Speech, particularly in a sacral or
otherwise Divinely oriented or ‘guided’ context. How the ‘voice’ we
speak with in such realms is rarely one that is largely or even entirely
our own. Perhaps, when we are reciting ancient ritual mantras, we are
speaking in words which allow us to borrow some of the might and the
majesty of those far more illustrious predecessors of ours who first set
them down. Maybe, we even hear the not-so-subtle echo of them, and Gods
Aswell (insofar as the two clades can meaningfully be distinguished at
least some of the time), speaking, chanting alongside us – expressing
Themselves out through our Mouths. And certainly, in the Eliadian
‘Eternal Return’ / Mythic Recurrence / Mythic Resonancy sense, the idea
is veer-y much that we are no longer simply ourselves … but are rather
speaking with the face, the mask, the grimr, the standing after a
certain measure upon us that is that of the legendary figure rather than
just ourselves down here, merely human, alone.

This is also the case with the Furor Poeticus concept – wherein the
Divine Spark of Inspiration, even though it is not necessarily
channelling something pre-existingly known to us for our ‘recitation’,
is nevertheless passing on *through* us something from the Above, the
Upplands, On High. Truthful-speaking, and trenchant insight which
endures, because it *resonates* with something far greater than a simple
human sentence of even the finest English could ever hope to achieve.

And, in its way, it is also the case with the impartment of the martial
prowess upon others, or other forms of their consequent empowerment in
many cases – the speech, the externalized expression, transmits the
energy, the insight, the potency, the understanding, and the hearer, the
bearer, is risen up in overt and implicit response to same. This is
partially why the phenomenon of the war-cry \[an element of intrinsic
immanence to every expression of the deific complex under discussion
above) is so relevant here – because it is something which goes out from
somewhere within ourselves (whether that is truly where it has its
actual seeded origination), via the mouth, and then returns into our
brain via our own ears – and also enters into the minds of others on our
side and joined in our cause who are similarly listening. It is an
integral part, whether it is a stirring speech or a simple transmission
of the wisdom which helps us to see better and differently, of making
the Mannerbund, and thence rallying it to combined action as a single
effective body (of men – thinking beings, spirits, ‘minds’, as we beheld
much earlier toward the outset of this stream).

Frantz Fanon memorably observed that “To speak . . . means above all to
assume a culture, to support the weight of a civilization”. He was
right, of course – but we go further. Speaking is how we bring not only
ourselves, but also others like us into our culture, our civilization;
it is how much more than just mortal civilization is supported and
propagated on down the ages, as well. Not for nothing do we find it so
frequently the case within ancient Indo-European cultures that the
demarcation between who is part of one’s community, versus who is not –
is one of Speech. Whether in the Arya – Mleccha duality, wherein the
former connoted also the ability to properly participate in and uphold
the rites and community functions … whereas the latter wasn’t even so
much concerned with knowledge of these, so much as the ‘jabbering’ of
their speech rendering them inable and ineligible to do likewise. Or the
Greek (and, curiously enough, later Sanskrit as well) terms akin to
“Barbarian”, wherein the “Ba-Ba” sound of the ‘uncivilized’ folk to
their north was held to be the distinguishing characteristic (inter
alia) of a proud and proper man from a pseudo-animalistic savage. Even
in recent times this has persisted – whether in the case of the markings
of accent and dialect and the BBC Received Pronunciation being enough to
elevate somebody of almost any appearance (to the extent that Susan
Boyle’s singing-voice renders her an apparent angel) to that of a
certain proximity to the cultural or even political ‘elite’. Or in the
Planet of the Apes, wherein the roles are both reversed and not – a man
standing up to speak aloud causing instant re-evaluation of his
beyond-even-barbaric status from the point of view of the Apes.

Yet it can also go ‘the other way’ as well. And while one of the
delightful simple and to the (spear-)point idioms in the Germanic
culturo-linguistic spheres is the reference to the non-Germanic peoples
as not even something as refine as “people who can’t speak like we do”,
but rather the considerably more sharply direct “Walking \[soon-to-be\]
Dead”/’Prey’/’Targets’ \[‘Walhaz’\] … what I actually seek to draw the
reader’s attention to is a rather curious set of ethnonyms promulgated
by the Baltic, Finnish, and other generally non-Germanic tribes to
demarcate their terrifyingly warlike neighbours.

They are built around the particle “Vac”, and the curious thing about
this is that given the strong archaic Indo-European linguistic affinity
of the Baltic languages in particular, this would therefore seem to
suggest that the way these groupings referred to the raiding
Germanic/Nordic folk as being, in a sense, ‘those who Speak’. Although
given the situational context, the actual meaning of these terms is much
more plausibly reconstructive as something akin to “the War-Cry\[ers\]”
– or, as I have occasionally preferred to render it, from their imagined
perspective … “Speech To Run Away From Really Fast”. “\[War-\] Speakers”
would also have a certain undeniable resonancy. Not least in terms of
the manner in which it appears likely that the Nordic/Germanic men in
question made an active weapon of Speech. Whether in the form of the
aforementioned War-Cries and their likely psychological impact upon each
of friend and prey; or in the form of spoken charms and prayers, some of
which may have come down to us in the later-recorded Nordic scriptural
materials – which may even, come to think of it, find some degree of
resonancy as well in some of the War-Charms and War-Hymns of the Vedas,
or find their echoes in those of other Indo-European scriptural and
liturgical canons.

But To Speak of upholding, empowering – and striking down upon them with
great vengeance and Furorius Ugra – is to speak of Vak.

And it is to Her Great Hymnal that we shall now turn – to declare loudly
as we may speak with heroes in assembly.

**Vak’s Stellarum**

RigVeda X 125 – The DeviSukta \[Griffith Translation\]

“1. I TRAVEL with the Rudras and the Vasus, with the Ādityas and
All-Gods I wander.  
I hold aloft both Varuṇa and Mitra, Indra and Agni, and the Pair of
Aśvins.  
2 I cherish and sustain high-swelling Soma, and Tvaṣṭar I support,
Pūṣan, and Bhaga.  
I load with wealth the zealous sacrificer who pours the juice and offers
his oblation  
3 I am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasures, most thoughtful, first
of those who merit worship.  
Thus Gods have stablished me in many places with many homes to enter and
abide in.  
4 Through me alone all eat the food that feeds them,—each man who sees,
brewhes, hears the word outspoken  
They know it not, but yet they dwell beside me. Hear, one and all, the
truth as I declare it.  
5 1, verily, myself announce and utter the word that Gods and men alike
shall welcome.  
I make the man I love exceeding mighty, make him a sage, a Ṛṣi, and a
Brahman.  
6 I bend the bow for Rudra that his arrow may strike and slay the hater
of devotion.  
I rouse and order battle for the people, and I have penetrated Earth and
Heaven.  
7 On the world’s summit I bring forth the Father: my home is in the
waters, in the ocean.  
Thence I extend o’er all existing creatures, and touch even yonder
heaven with my forehead.  
8 I breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest, the while I hold
together all existence.  
Beyond this wide earth and beyond the heavens I have become so mighty in
my grandeur.”

To explain but briefly what is going on within this Hymnal – the Goddess
Vak \[Speech, especially Divine Speech\] is directly relating Her
theological role and function to the hearer. Indeed, that is meant
rather literally – the traditional authorship ascribed to this hymnal is
the Devi Herself. To me, this is the core of so much of what we believe,
and it is at the understandable heart of the Shakta theological canon.
For those reasons, it is also reproduced in various subsequent forms and
references interspersed throughout the notable works thereof. These
include its occurrence, as mentioned much earlier in this piece,
immediately prior to the Manyu Hymns in the Atharva Veda. A placement
which I had stated I did not at all believe to be coincidental.

This is because, as an integral part of the range of empowerments and
essences thusly ascribed by and to Her, we have those which immediately
presage the role and function of The Manyu within the Hindu pantheon. As
well as other intriguing elements, chiefly from a cosmological and
metaphysical perspective, which further align with what we have earlier
discussed.

As you shall recall, The Manyu is an emanation or form of Rudra, an
incredibly fearsome and formidable War God, often invoked in the
protection of hallowed piety – the sites, enactors, and even the
concepts themselves, of our religion; and which may also act as the
empowerer, the inspirer, and frequently the overarching commander of the
war-hosts of the Vedic People(s) and Pantheon, in service of the Divine
Sovereign and DevaRajya.

As you shall also recall, the concept of The Manyu links most strongly
with the Nordic notion of the Odr \[a key element under the aegis of
Odin\], which manifests itself both as the Furor Teutonicus
battle-ferocity – but also as the Furor Poeticus form of Divine
Inspiration in the skald’s art, the poet’s proficiency, perhaps even the
theologian’s conjuring of more subtle weapons in the ongoing
Dharma-Yuddha War.

And as we have seen, in the figure of Athena (and, to be sure, Odin),
the Deity Who is the most fearsome and often loudly roaring warrior, is
just as capable of working through humans and others who have been
Divinely Empowered or Inspired or Guided in either, especially *both*
ways. The Brahmin’s carrying out of the proper rites and offerings is no
less essential, after all, to a truly *existential* conflict than the
Kshatriya’s martial exercises. And the truly gifted – such as Lord
Brihaspati – are able to wield both, effectively as one.

Now, examine these lines from the Griffith translation:

“I make the man I love exceeding mighty, make him a sage, a Ṛṣi, and a
Brahman.  
I bend the bow for Rudra that his arrow may strike and slay the hater of
devotion.  
I rouse and order battle for the people, and I have penetrated Earth and
Heaven.”

Or, in the Rao translation:

“Whomsoever I choose, I render him an exalted one, make him a ṛṣi, make
him Brahman or make him highly intelligent.  
I bend the bow (to fasten the bow string at its ends) for Rudra, to slay
the tormenting, Brahman-hating enemy.  
I wage war against (hostile) men (to protect the praying ones); I have
pervaded the Heaven and Earth.”

Here we have all of these competencies directly stated. The empowering
of a man to produce an Inspired speaker of the holy words, a diviner of
the sacred verses, and a perceiver of what is actually there \[hence to
be able to do so, inter alia\]. The empowering, also, of a terrific
war-deity as protector against the “hater of devotion” \[and it is
interesting that Brihaspati, as I mentioned earlier, as both Sage/Poet
*and* Bow-equipped Defender of the Faith, with His Bow-string being Rta,
Cosmic Order, Herself – is Rudra, and therefore the hypostasis of both
Vak-supported competencies in One; it is also interesting to note that
the ‘Humkara’ – a vocalized expression of piety for us, is translatable,
as well, as the twanging of a bow-string\]. As applies the line
pertaining to ‘Making War for the People’, there is some deliberate
ambiguity in the translation – it is possible to render it in the less
direct ‘inspiration and command’ sense, as Griffith has here; and it is
also possible to portray a rather more actively engaged Champion Who is
carrying out much of the fighting Herself. The truth is that the answer
is almost certainly intended to be ‘both’, particularly at once, and
especially in the company of Her Husband, referred to in the immediately
previous line. The Couple That Slays Together, Stays Together – even if
there might be an interregnum in the middle, somewhat, as we shall see a
little later in this piece.

There is more, so much more, that should be extolled in exegesis about
this Hymnal and its accompanying theological and mythopoetic saliency –
hence why it has formed such a cornerstone for many of my previous
works, where I’ve done much exactly that. It is not reproduced here.

But before we move on to several further (and briefer) RigVedic verses
of direct relevancy for this illustrative exposition, there is one
rather curious point which does demand additional examination from the
DeviSukta. That concerns the mention of ‘bringing forth the (All)Father”
upon the World’s Summit; which is rendered in the Rao translation of th
same line : “I bring forth the paternal (heaven – abode of the manes)
upon the crown (brows) of (this Supreme Being)”. Now, it would be
tempting to insistently read, in the manner that Rao has implied, this
as a statement of mythic geography and cosmology – with a functional
element in the form of what the Realm of the Forefathers actually does:
provide a seed and derivation-chain for the rest of sapient life.
However while that is not necessarily an inaccurate understanding, it
should be read both in the context of other translations which emphasize
that it is the AllFather *Himself* being thusly emanated at the highest
point of the then-Universe; and also the veer-y next part of Rao’s
translation of the verse, wherein the (meta)physical location is, itself
(or, perhaps, ‘Himself’) held to be at the forehead of the Cosmic Man,
the AllFather.

You know – *exactly* where it appears that The Metis took up residence
within Zeus \[i.e. where a Third Eye allows Wisdom or Insight or
Inspiration to Get In to the skull); and *exactly* where we *also* see
the emanation out again of the tangible results, the expressed
outpourings thereof (such as The Manyu, or Athena). Which, in this
relatively positive case, is either the Great God in particular – and
this would square rather well with the concept of Rudra emanating into
the universe via the Third Eye of Prajapati ; or it is a generalized
concept of the ancestral source of all life – either concept, and
especially both (this may help to explain why Yama’s Realm is up there,
where the Ancestors go back to, in archaic Vedic cosmology), being
strongly underpinned also by the ensuing verse around the Wind which Vak
breathes forth as empowering ‘breath of life’ for the worlds and their
denizens. Perhaps there is even a place for the RigVedic Hymnal’s
notation that Vak has exceeded the Heaven and the Earth in Her Grandeur,
in the Greek accountings of Ouranos and Earth telling Zeus to consume
the Metis – an inversion of what is meant in the original Sanskrit , to
suggest that maybe Heaven and Earth aren’t too happy about that, and
hence demand some form of obviating of the Glory of She. But that is
simple speculation upon my part as to why the Greek iteration appears to
have some of the same details, yet get them almost precisely around the
wrong way. Albeit with what is intended in this mighty Hymnal never
truly being entirely suppressed – as can be seen by Hesiod’s treatment
elsewhere in his work on the figure of Hekate, especially in relation to
Zeus … and most resoundingly, for our purposes, the manner in which
Athena Herself does not suffer to be ‘forgotten about’ within the
well-protected and akashic confines of Zeus’ Skull.

The last point I shall make before we move on, is that within the first
lines of this remarkable RigVedic Hymnal, we do not simply see the idle
notion of Vak Devi merely happening to walk alongside an arbitrary
grouping of male Gods. Rather, the senses in which She engages with
these deities – Who include within Their number, the powerful Sky Gods,
Warriors and Wise Ones – is actually more in the sense of an onrushing
Advance. A Vanguard, a Leading Edge. A premier position amidst the
RudraGana and the Vasu Aspects of Dyaus Pitar, the Solar Lords, and
others besides. When She states that She “holds aloft” or “supports” the
“foe-destroying Tvaśtṛ, Pūśan and Bhaga” (as the Rao translation
emphatically puts it), I suspect that in part what we might be
witnessing is a subtle shade of that much-earlier enunciated Jung
concept – the Ergreiffen ‘Seizing’/’Holding’ of Them; as we should
expect the deific concept underlying to do. Indeed, it is interesting to
observe that in the next line, this degree of ‘control’ goes even
further – to the point that, given Her role not only in Inspiring the
composition of the prayerful rites’ verses, but also in Guiding Their
sacred enactment, and ultimately delivering Their fruitful outcome –
that She Makes The Rains Run On Time. As well as, in the next line
again, providing the essential elements and investiture of the animus
which makes a creature a man – and which makes a man alive; in a manner
not at all dissimilar to the male deific \[Vayu is a strong exemplar\]
responsible for this role in other portions of the general Indo-European
mythoreligious canons. Perhaps She works alongside Him – Perhaps She is
the Anima of the Animus. Quite likely, it is – as is often the case with
Sanskrit and with Hindu theology – Both.

However, it should not be presumed that I am making over-much from a
single Hymnal. The elements which I have chosen to focus upon in RV X
125 are present throughout the Vedic canon, and radiate forwards through
time and onward via space in the subsequent Puranic corpus as well.

For example, when it comes to the role of Vak (potentially alongside
Brihaspati) in guiding the evolution and attainment of ‘proper speech’
by Man, RV X 107 strongly accords with the typology for the Odr, the
Menos and Metis that we have earlier identified. Vak is described as
being found within the Rsis – the Divinely Inspired Seers of the
hallowed verses. And further, rather than being some form of abstract
quality, we see a direct and strongly engaging personal form to the
impartment of Vak’s Gift: to quote the Griffith translation – “One man
hath ne’er seen Vāk, and yet he seeth: one man hath hearing but hath
never heard her. / But to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond
well-dressed woman to her husband.” Which simultaneously makes the point
that the deepa sensorial capacity required for such comprehension and
crafting is not the common and ordinary faculty of sight nor that of
hearing, but rather is one which – in the manner of the line from RV X
125 pertaining to Devi making the man She chooses \[the word used in the
Griffith translation is ‘loves’; and the Sanskrit term in the original
is, indeed, Kama-based, although it is a matter of some interpretation
what level of its spectrum of meaning, and whether it is ‘wishes’,
‘likes’, ‘chooses’, or ‘loves’ that is the best fit within the context
of that line, as well as more generally; certainly the more ardent
formulation makes abundant sense in regard to Her Male Divine
Counterpart, Shiva in various Forms and Aspects; and oddly enough, would
also accord with both the Metis’ marital relationship with Zeus, as well
as Freyja’s teaching of Odin certain magical secrets unlocked via
speech\].

A further and rather more specific manyufestation of the principle, with
regard to the Furor Somaticus of Indra rather than Furor Poeticus of the
Rsi, can be found in RV VIII 89, dually dedicated to both Indra *and*
Vak. It begins in no uncertain terms establishing the precedency
(cosmologically as well as in terms of power in-universe) of Vak ahead
of th other Deities, and has Vak state directly to Indra: “When, Indra,
thou securest me my portion, with me thou shalt perform heroic actions.”
And speaking of the concepts of Furor Poeticus and securing justly due
portions, it is also interesting to note the imperative emphasis placed
upon the role of the Rsi-Skald in chronicling and repeating in epic
format the Saga of the Soma-Lord: “All these thy deeds must be declared
at Soma-feasts”. We can also interpret the vital role of the Inspired
Mind to the Divine Combat(ant), when looking at the “Speed of Thought”
with which an augmenter of Indra is seen moving \[in this case, the
Falcon (in some translations, Eagle) Shyena\] to bring His Lord the
Stimulant; as well as the tantalizing thought that the next line’s
situation of the Weapon of Indra is to be found deep within the Waters
as rendering it a treasure housed within the depths of the Akasha and
conjurable to this plane only via the proper faculty of the mind. This
in fact accords rather well with two other instances of RigVedic
attestation – first, Brihaspati’s utilization of the Power of Prayer
\[Speech, Vak once again – and most certainly aligned with the Odr-Metis
concept as we have previously understood it\] in the manner of the Vajra
to smite just such a Demon-Dragon as Indra is about to go into battle
against; and second, the almost directly equivalent lines in the
DeviSukta around these deepa cosmic waters existing above and beyond the
otherwise attainable realms being where Vak Herself has Her Home \[which
implicitly renders, as the great 13th century Vijayanagara Empire
theologian, Sayana, has long maintained – not only Vak an in-universe
expression of the Brahman, the Rta which is outside and above our
universe, but also the Vajra potentially at least somewhat likewise – in
this instance, at least; wherein Vak is quite clearly also meant to be
the mightiest weapon of the Gods; and, indeed, one that is beyond Their
‘control’ nor full comprehension – as we can see with the reference to
Her possession of forms of Speech, perhaps not unlike the Rune-rows that
Odin *doesn’t* give to Man, which even The Gods do not understand the
utterance of and which may be interpreted as having the power to
(un)make Worlds. Which is exactly what we should expect of the Goddess
Who carries out precisely that from the beyond-space before time and
space ever existed\].

And, lest I again be accused of over-reading what might otherwise seem
to some onlookers a potentially isolated incident of Indra requiring the
assistance, the empowerment, the *comradeship* of Devi in order to carry
out His defining act as Vritrahan … perish the thought! RV VI 61 – a
Saraswati Hymnal – comes to our aid in this measure, as well!

Now, it is again the case that much more can and should be extolled
about this particular hymnal – as well as the person of Saraswati within
the eldest Vedic texts more generally; but we are well beyond the bounds
of space already, so I shall attempt to keep it brief and summarize more
than I’d otherwise find desirable. It should come as no surprise to find
that a Saraswati hymnal has Her hailed for Her provision of mental
alacrity – after all, that is what Saraswati, even today, is beseeched
for and associated with; and this is partially why Her Name is one of
deepa meaning, as ‘Sanctified Speech’ – which again links back to the
function of the Rsi, the Seer, the Divinely Guided Religious Poet. But
what one might not, perhaps, be initially expecting is the close series
of manners in which this Hymnal conforms to our Odr-Metis typology, as
well as in glimmerings and in gleamings, that of the Manyu. The former
is straightforward enough, as applies the provision of the Poetic gift;
yet it is matched with citations for Her bestowal of martial proficiency
(and, of course, the post-battle Skaldic recounting thereof) to the
chosen men; which also finds expression in Her sending to a particular
king of a potent warrior son (which may perhaps be a sort of echo of the
manifestation of the Manyu – a male ruler ’emanating’ via his seed the
desired-for divinely empowered protector-combatant … albeit taking
rather more time to reach full maturity and lethality, one presumes).
And, most strikingly (rather literally), with direct acclamation for Her
unparalleled power in a martial role. These include Saraswati honoured
for having “casteth down \[…\] those who scorned the Gods, the brood of
every Bṛsaya skilled in magic arts”; as well as the resounding line –
“uta syā naḥ sarasvatī ghorā hiraṇyavartaniḥ \| vṛtraghnī vaṣṭi suṣṭutim
\|\|”. Griffith’s rendering of this line is thus: “Yea, this divine
Sarasvatī, terrible with her golden path, Foe-slayer, claims our
eulogy”; however while this is technically not incorrect, it leaves
unvoiced a vitally important matter of direct relevancy to what we
parsed in RV VIII 89 as applies Indra and Vak against Vritra. And that
is the hailing of Saraswati as “Vrtraghni” in RV VI 61 right there –
“Slayer of Vritra”. Because it either is intended to mean just and
literally exactly that … that Saraswati slayed Vritra, whether Herself
or acting alongside Indra or even as the latter’s Ultimate Weapon; or it
is intended to mean somewhat more figuratively that Saraswati’s martial
power and lethality is on a par with the rather more famous (for this
deed, anyway) Indra and that She is just as capable of such an
incredibly mighty undertaking as demonstrated through apparently quite
capacious previous activities in this area. You place that together with
the next line – “swift-moving with a rapid rush, Comes onward with
tempestuous roar”, along with Her repeatedly stated role as the Guardian
for Her People and Majesty even amidst the rest of the Pantheon’s Mighty
and I would say that it’s pretty clear just how close RigVedic Saraswati
actually is, in truth, to the Athena so much more familiar to many of us
from Classical myth and scripture. It certainly places Their shared
characteristic of a Riverine origin – a ‘Stream of Consciousness’,
perhaps – in an excellent and star-pathed Light.

But to return, however briefly, to RV VIII 89, the eleventh line reads
“The Deities generated Vāk the Goddess, and animals of every figure
speak her.” I mention this not just because it is a tangible
demonstration for how the insights of the Odr-Metis complex are
expressed and then carried even further through breath and voice by
other bearers after the lightning-bolt has seared its way into the mind
of one particularly high mind at their inception … but also because this
may directly presage another element for the Hindu female expression in
particular of the Manyu typology. For in situations wherein the
emanation does not take place via the Third Eye, Face or Brow, one of
the other well-renowned modes via which Devi in Her Warrior, Avenger,
Destroyer, and eventually Annihilator Forms is brought into being, is
via the Mouth or Mouths of other earlier-appearing (in the contexts of
the episodes in question, rather than in the broader cosmology nor
mythology) divinity. This makes a figurative sense on multiple levels.
As earlier explicated, in Sanskrit the concepts of Seeing and Speaking
have always been strongly linguistically aligned, and both also with the
signifers (both sighted/seen and sonorous) of the Divine Inspiration.
The notion of the Divine Warrior-Champion congealing via the energetic
force expressed via the Mouths of the Divinity in need further recalls
each of the utilization of Prayer and Verse in conjuring the Manyu, the
Roaring of the Manyu-type (and, in this case, the combined Roaring of
all assembled, as one, becoming so mighty and resounding that it echoes
into being *The* Roarer!); as well as, in a veer-y real sense, the
concept that a sufficiently potent Inspired Speech can actually, itself,
reshape the world. For that is what has happened here – the Insight and
Empowerment placed into the assembled Divinity, in a manner not
dissimilar to the internal manifestation of the Manyu in Prajapati in
the Shatapatha Brahmana commentary-apend-text has surged forth and
charged outward; and in so doing, revealed *exactly* the re-combination
of Furor Poeticus and Furor Teutonicus which I had much earlier stated
to be the case. And perhaps also demonstrating a certain military form
of ‘Vox Populi Est Vox Dei’ – insofar as the Voice(s) of the assembled
Divine Folk and others, come together to Empower Their Champion, the One
Who Shall Lead Them Upon The Field Of War. ‘Inspiration’, it seems does
not only come from Above – but can also flow in laterally; a
Visage-based occurrence of this being the appearance of the Katyayani
NavaDurga Warrior Form of Devi, Who arrives from the Flaming Eyes of
many of The Gods simultaneously, and in some accounts in response to a
severe threat which even Bhairava \[the Third-Eye projected literally
‘Terrifying’ executioner-emanation of Shiva and Himself a the Manyu
expression\] had been unable to handle alone.

**One Equal Temper Of Heroic Hearts – The Twin-Forked Lightning of Time
and Fate**

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/a1337f53f9edbb0f264b4fe2f27bfd35.jpg?w=564)

And that, I think, is pretty much the crux of this piece – the place
where all the threads and skeins finally come together, in perhaps a
manner not entirely unlike that of the Fire(y)-Speech which summoned Her
forth.

For in this occurrence, we have it all. We have Piety as The Weapon; we
have The Mind as The Weapon; we have Language – Speech – as The Weapon.
We have the Divine Champion, we have Victory, we have a valiant and
noble war-effort waged against a demonic foe. We also have, as I have
said (judging by the length and passion of this piece, the fervor and
zeal with which it has been prepared, it is also ‘Shaped Like Itself’ in
this regard) the expression of the Furor Poeticus in manner directly
correlate, and in fact actually functionally identical with the Furor of
the Gods’ Chosen Executor! The Same Deities Inspire It; The Same Deities
Enact It; The Same Deities Triumph Through It; just as we can find
expressed elsewhere also within the realms Indo-European mythoreligious
canons. Devi (Durga/Parvati/Kali) And Mahadeva with Their Manyu, Athena
And Zeus with Their Menos and Metis, Odin as the bestower and embodier
of the Odr, as well.

What more needs to be said.

Well, as it happens, three things. The first of which is that the
implicit element in that aforementioned co-occurrence of The Manyu of
Devi and The Manyu of Mahadeva – is just exactly that. Co-occurrence.
Co-operation. Comradeship. This is, unquestionably, amidst the mightiest
of weapons, and as I have earlier illustrated, a perhaps surprisingly
integral element of Who and What the Manyu Is – as applies the effective
hypostasis also of the Mannerbund. The group of Men \[thinking beings\],
bound together in common purpose and fraternal sodality, so perfect in
their Unity as to be effectively a single corps. Great minds may think
alike – but *Dutiful* Minds *collaborate*. And the power of
confederation in these regards is not merely one of addition of one
element to the other – it is of the *multiplication*, occasionally quite
downright exponentially so, of the Power of both. Hence, working
together, Bhairava and Katyayani – or other such occurrences of similar
blessed Unity – accomplish what either alone, or perhaps even some
standing adjacent but not *alongside* one another, shoulder to shoulder
in terms of spirit \[‘Manyu’, again!\], could not but aspirationally
hope to do.

The second, and this builds also from the first – is that Understanding
is The Weapon. There is, too, a Sanskrit “Man-” related series of terms
built in regard to this; but suffice to say that by Understanding, by
Learning, you are in effect engaged in a far greater spanning sphere of
co-operation than you might otherwise realize. And one which stretches
not only out all around us geographically, spatially – but backward and
forward over again in terms of Time, as well as upward (and then some)
beyond this human flat-plane/field of vision of ours.

Roger Zelazny in Lord of Light put it thus – “An army, great in space,
may offer opposition in a brief span of time. One man, brief in space,
must spread his opposition across a period of many years if he is to
have a chance of succeeding.”

We know that, we inherently grasp that. And that is why we are as an
army – of the mind but also of the sword (and as applies the tongue, I
then do repeat myself) – ever expanding in terms of the territory of its
numbers and temporal membership; and thence also broadening and
deepening its ability to fight back and overcome on down the many long
ages that have been and come to pass, and art yet unfurling ahead of us
in train.

That is, after all, why we do what we do, here at Arya Akasha and at
#NAS.

But I mentioned a third thing; and this is a final evidential example I
shall draw upon – which nicely serves also to act as a bit of ‘Mythic
Recurrence’ as well. For this piece has also been prepared as our 2020
devotional tribute for MahaShivRatri – the Great Night of Lord Shiva –
the anniversary of the occasion of His reunification with His ‘other
half’, Devi Parvati, Devi Durga, Devi Kali. It is therefore a fitting
way to end things, the Vayu Purana excerpt from which I am about to
quote.

Although but briefly and by way of mythohistorical context, I should
probably explain what it is that has occurred in the Puranic narrative
up until this point. The event around which this instance occurs is the
Horse-Sacrifice of Daksha – at which a great outrage against not only
Lord Shiva, but also Devi is committed. The precise details vary
somewhat between sources, with two main (and non-exclusive) mythemes
present. One, which forms the core cassus belli in the Vayu Purana
accounting, is that Shiva is denied His Share in the sacrificial rite in
question, with an added theological point (as voiced by the wise Sage
Dadhichi – although his warning, Greek-self-fulfilling prophecy-like,
went unheeded and thence came true!) around hailing another deity,
another of the Trimurti as Supreme instead. The other, which is perhaps
much more enduring in the popular imagination due to its sense of
tragedy and heart-cleaving loss, features Sati \[the previous-to-Parvati
incarnation/form of Shiva’s Wife\], Who is Daksha’s Daughter, going to
the rite of Daksha anyway despite the deliberate snub of Her Husband,
and enduring such calumnious insults directed against Her Beloved as
well as Herself that she feels compelled to *Herself* jump into the
sacrificial pyre \[some commentators observe that this is in part
because of Her being caught between two great claims to Her allegiance
and honour – Her Father, and Her Husband; and ‘taking a third option’
when these could not otherwise be reconciled\]

Now, I have my own thoughts about the theological underpinnings of
what’s going on here (suffice to say, Daksha is attempting to set
himself up as Emperor of the Universe … and manages to infuriate the
*real* Ishvara, Who is otherwise not necessarily so troubled by the
pretensions of the false “Prajapati” \[another claimed title of
Daksha\], up until the upstart offends or otherwise harms His Wife – at
which point the ancient Vedic equivalent to the Berserk Button may
perhaps somewhat aptly be said to have been hit – oddly enough, exactly
what Daksha’s forebear, Brahma does to significantly annoy Shiva
immediately before Bhairava is sent to cut Brahma back down to size, in
another occurrence of The Manyu mythic typology); but suffice to say,
whichever iteration of the story one goes with for the ‘causation’, at
this point they reconverge.

Shiva-Rudra, particularly in those tellings wherein He has just lost His
Wife (in which case, the ‘sorrow’ rendering for the state of Manyu
inside Prajapati in the Shatapatha Brahmana explication, replete with
crying considerable tears of furious lament, is definitely an apt
understanding!), is rather heavily emotionally incited by this –
‘seized’, we might even perhaps say – and thence externalizes that
highly charged psyche-state in the form of a Divine Avenger:
VeeraBhadra.

At this point, I think I shall let Lord Vayu take over – not that He, of
course, hasn’t been already:

“Then the mighty and incomprehensible deity, being pleased, said to his
bride, thus agitated; and speaking; ‘Slender-waisted queen of the gods,
thou knowest not the purport of what thou sayest; but I know it, oh thou
with large eyes, for the holy declare all things by meditation. By thy
perplexity this day are all the gods, with Mahendra and all the three
worlds, utterly confounded. In my sacrifice, those who worship me,
repeat my praises, and chant the Rathantara song of the Sáma veda; my
priests worship me in the sacrifice of true wisdom, where no officiating
Brahman is needed; and in this they offer me my portion.’ Deví spake;
‘The lord is the root of all, and assuredly, in every assemblage of the
female world, praises or hides himself at will.’ Mahádeva spake; ‘Queen
of the gods, I praise not myself: approach, and behold whom I shall
create for the purpose of claiming my share of the rite.’

“Having thus spoken to his beloved spouse, the mighty Maheśwara created
from his mouth a being like the fire of fate; a divine being, with a
thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet; wielding a thousand
clubs, a thousand shafts; holding the shell, the discus, the mace, and
bearing a blazing bow and battle-axe; fierce and terrific, shining with
dreadful splendour, and decorated with the crescent moon; clothed in a
tiger’s skin, dripping with blood; having a capacious stomach, and a
vast mouth, armed with formidable tusks: his ears were erect, his lips
were pendulous, his tongue was lightning; his hand brandished the
thunderbolt; flames streamed from his hair; a necklace of pearls wound
round his neck; a garland of flame descended on his breast: radiant with
lustre, he looked like the final fire that consumes the world. Four
tremendous tusks projected from a mouth which extended from ear to ear:
he was of vast bulk, vast strength, a mighty male and lord, the
destroyer of the universe, and like a large fig-tree in circumference;
shining like a hundred moons at once; fierce as the fire of love; having
four heads, sharp white teeth, and of mighty fierceness, vigour,
activity, and courage; glowing with the blaze of a thousand fiery suns
at the end of the world; like a thousand undimmed moons: in bulk like
Himádri, Kailása, or Meru, or Mandara, with all its gleaming herbs;
bright as the sun of destruction at the end of ages; of irresistible
prowess, and beautiful aspect; irascible, with lowering eyes, and a
countenance burning like fire; clothed in the hide of the elephant and
lion, and girt round with snakes; wearing a turban on his head, a moon
on his brow; sometimes savage, sometimes mild; having a chaplet of many
flowers on his head, anointed with various unguents, and adorned with
different ornaments and many sorts of jewels; wearing a garland of
heavenly Karnikára flowers, and rolling his eyes with rage. Sometimes he
danced; sometimes he laughed aloud; sometimes he stood wrapt in
meditation; sometimes he trampled upon the earth; sometimes he sang;
sometimes he wept repeatedly: and he was endowed with the faculties of
wisdom, dispassion, power, penance, truth, endurance, fortitude,
dominion, and self-knowledge.

“This being, then, knelt down upon the ground, and raising his hands
respectfully to his head, said to Mahádeva, ‘Sovereign of the gods,
command what it is that I must do for thee.’ To which Maheśwara replied,
Spoil the sacrifice of Daksha.’ Then the mighty Vírabhadra, having heard
the pleasure of his lord, bowed down his head to the feet of Prajápati;
and starting like a lion loosed from bonds, despoiled the sacrifice of
Daksha, knowing that the had been created by the displeasure of Deví.
She too in her wrath, as the fearful goddess Rudrakálí, accompanied him,
with all her train, to witness his deeds. Vírabhadra the fierce, abiding
in the region of ghosts, is the minister of the anger of Deví. And he
then created, from the pores of his skin, powerful demigods, the mighty
attendants upon Rudra, of equal valour and strength, who started by
hundreds and thousands into existence. Then a loud and confused clamour
filled all the expanse of ether, and inspired the denizens of heaven
with dread. The mountains tottered, and earth shook; the winds roared,
and the depths of the sea were disturbed; the fires lost their radiance,
and the sun grew pale; the planets of the firmament shone not, neither
did the stars give light; the Rishis ceased their hymns, and gods and
demons were mute; and thick darkness eclipsed the chariots of the skies.

“Then from the gloom emerged fearful and numerous forms, shouting the
cry of battle; who instantly broke or overturned the sacrificial
columns, trampled upon the altars, and danced amidst the oblations.
Running wildly hither and thither, with the speed of wind, they tossed
about the implements and vessels of sacrifice, which looked like stars
precipitated from the heavens. The piles of food and beverage for the
gods, which had been heaped up like mountains; the rivers of milk; the
banks of curds and butter; the sands of honey and butter-milk and sugar;
the mounds of condiments and spices of every flavour; the undulating
knolls of flesh and other viands; the celestial liquors, pastes, and
confections, which had been prepared; these the spirits of wrath
devoured or defiled or scattered abroad. Then falling upon the host of
the gods, these vast and resistless Rudras beat or terrified them,
mocked and insulted the nymphs and goddesses, and quickly put an end to
the rite, although defended by all the gods; being the ministers of
Rudra’s wrath, and similar to himself. Some then made a hideous clamour,
whilst others fearfully shouted, when Yajna was decapitated. For the
divine Yajna, the lord of sacrifice, then began to fly up to heaven, in
the shape of a deer; and Vírabhadra, of immeasurable spirit,
apprehending his power, cut off his vast head, after he had mounted into
the sky. Daksha the patriarch, his sacrifice being destroyed, overcome
with terror, and utterly broken in spirit, fell then upon the ground,
where his head was spurned by the feet of the cruel Vírabhadra. The
thirty scores of sacred divinities were all presently bound, with a band
of fire, by their lion-like foe; and they all then addressed him,
crying, ‘Oh Rudra, have mercy upon thy servants: oh lord, dismiss thine
anger.’ Thus spake Brahmá and the other gods, and the patriarch Daksha;
and raising their hands, they said, ‘Declare, mighty being, who thou
art.’

Vírabhadra said, ‘I am not a god, nor an Áditya; nor am I come hither
for enjoyment, nor curious to behold the chiefs of the divinities: know
that I am come to destroy the sacrifice of Daksha, and that I am called
Vírabhadra, the issue of the wrath of Rudra. Bhadrakálí also, who has
sprung from the anger of Deví, is sent here by the god of gods to
destroy this rite. Take refuge, king of kings, with him who is the lord
of Umá; for better is the anger of Rudra than the blessings of other
gods.’

It is truly beautiful verse, even in translation \[Horace Hayman Wilson
being the renderer, here; and utilizing that high-minded almost King
James-esque slightly ornate, archaic English one often found in the
first half of the 1800s, when he was writing; and which is so
appropriate yet laterly under-utilized when rendering hallowed materials
for the Anglosphere-native mind\]. Hence why I went much further than I
had previously intended and chose to quote those entire spans of
passages rather than just two partial paragraphs for emphatic value.

There is a more proper and fuller-length exegesis I can and probably
should write up about both this incident, as well as the continuing
underlying similarities with the Manyu verses which have been passed
down to us within the Vedic corpus; including the rather intriguing
possibility that Daksha’s subsequent penitent conduct and appeasing of
Shiva-via-Veerabhadra in response to all of this (thus leading to
Shiva’s decision to take mercy upon Daksha and regard him with
bestowment of a boon … which Daksha promptly uses to have the sacrifice
that has been disrupted re-set – this time, in properly pious dedication
to Shiva) *also* has Vedic precedency in the lines from RV X 83:  
“I have departed, still without a portion, wise God! according to thy
will, the Mighty. / I, feeble man, was wroth thee, O Manyu I am myself;
come thou to give me vigour.  
/ Come hither. I am all thine own; advancing turn thou to me,
Victorious, All-supporter! \[…\] / The best of meath I offer to support
thee: may we be first to drink thereof in quiet.”

What we can state for certain, however, is that the attestations in the
Shatapatha Brahmana explication of the SataRudriya rite pertaining to
The Manyu are most definitely borne out by the Puranic account of the
appearance of VeeraBhadra at the Horse-Sacrifice of Daksha. A Mighty
Rudra, congealed from the expressed and expressive Wrath of The
AllFather, the God-Emperor, appearing at the head of an insurmountable
army of the alike and the like-minded, and ready to utilize great
violence such that even the *entire rest of the Pantheon* are both
rightfully and righteously affeared of Him – is sent to ‘stablish proper
piety, by securing the sustaining apportionment of the great sacrificial
rite; sanctioning in the process, those who are the foes of the
appropriate devotional conduct.

Yet while it is indeed a grand and beautifully extolled account of The
Manyu’s awe-inspiring aggressive action made manifest, that is not quite
why I have chosen to end with it.

Rather, as I have earlier stated, it is for another reason. A mythically
resonant and recurrent reason. That being that VeeraBhadra is not the
only Manyu Who took to the field on such a day; and nor was He only the
expression of the Wrath of Shiva. He was joined by Another; and also in
any case was hailed as being ‘the Minister of the Anger of Devi’ as
well.

Whether as BhadraKali or RudraKali (and for various reasons, I prefer
the latter theonym for this encounter), She Also Was There; just as Devi
was with Mahadeva on Kailash at the inception of the whole episode,
conversing with Him and outraged (also) on and as His Be-Half.

We observe MahaShivRatri, in no small part, because it commemorates the
Re-Unification of Shiva and Devi following the latter’s Death at the
Daksha-rite aforementioned.

I chose to end with the Vayu Purana’s accounting of VeeraBhadra and
BhadraKali’s all-subjugating deployment there, because it is both the
proper resolution to the outrageous egregities of Daksha – as well as,
in the veer-y same occurrence, the indescribable glory of Their Unity.
It is a miniature mythic-recurrence my placing of it heer, as it is, in
effect, a re-unification all its own, and in direct homa-ge to the
august date. We have considered Them many times in the coursing span of
this piece somewhat separately; but to be a true MahaShivRatri tribute,
it was only rite that They be properly considered Together. The Be-All
and the End-All of both this piece, and ultimately of All Things.

To adapt slightly from an original:

“Take refuge, king of kings, with They Who Are Ardhanarishvara; for
better is the Manyu-Furor-Shakti of Rudra And Rudrani than the blessings
of other Gods.”

ईशानादस्य भुवनस्य , जगताम् पतये , रुद्र;  
श्री महाराज्ञी , श्रीमत् सिंहासनेश्वरी , भुवनेश्वरी, देवी दुर्गा

ॐ नमः शिवाय  
ॐ नमः शिवाय  
ॐ नमः शिवाय
