---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](04_tuesday_june_25.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](06_thursday_june_27.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

WEDNESDAY, *June 26, 1895*.

Our best work is done, our greatest influence is exerted, when we are
without thought of self. All great geniuses know this. Let us open
ourselves to the one Divine Actor, and let Him act, and do nothing
ourselves. "*O Arjuna! I have no duty in the whole world*", says
Krishna. Be perfectly resigned, perfectly unconcerned; then alone can
you do any true work. No eyes can see the real forces, we can only see
the results. Put out self, lose it, forget it; just let God work, it is
His business. We have nothing to do but stand aside and let God work.
The more we go away, the more God comes in. Get rid of the little "I",
and let only the great "I" live.

We are what our thoughts have made us; so take care of what you think.
Words are secondary. Thoughts live, they travel far. Each thought we
think is tinged with our own character, so that for the pure and holy
man, even his jests or abuse will have the twist of his own love and
purity and do good.

Desire nothing; think of God and look for no return. It is the
desireless who bring results. The begging monks carry religion to every
man's door; but they think that they do nothing, they claim nothing,
their work is unconsciously done. If they should eat of the tree of
knowledge, they would become egoists, and all the good they do would fly
away. As soon as we say "I", we are humbugged all the time; and we call
it "knowable", but it is only going round and round like a bullock tied
to a tree. The Lord has hidden Himself best, and His work is best; so he
who hides himself best, accomplishes most. Conquer *yourself*, and the
whole universe is yours.

In the state of Sattva we see the very nature of things, we go beyond
the senses and beyond reason. The adamantine wall that shuts us in is
egoism; we refer everything to ourselves, thinking. "I do this, that,
and the other." Get rid of this puny "I"; kill this diabolism in us;
"Not I, but Thou" — say it, feel it, live it. Until we give up the world
manufactured by the ego, never can we enter the kingdom of heaven. None
ever did, none ever will. To give up the world is to forget the ego, to
know it not at all — living *in* the body, but not *of* it. This rascal
ego must be obliterated. Bless men when they revile you. Think how much
good they are doing you; they can only hurt themselves. Go where people
hate you, let them thrash the ego out of you, and you will get nearer to
the Lord. Like the mother-monkey, we hug our "baby", the world, as long
as we can, but at last when we are driven to put it under our feet and
step on it[1](#fn1) then we are ready to come to God. Blessed it is to
be persecuted for the sake of righteousness. Blessed are we if we cannot
read, we have less to take us away from God.

Enjoyment is the million-headed serpent that we must tread under foot.
We renounce and go on, then find nothing and despair; but hold on, *hold
on*. The world is a demon. It is a kingdom of which the puny ego is
king. Put it away and stand firm. Give up lust and gold and fame and
hold fast to the Lord, and at last we shall reach a state of perfect
indifference. The idea that the gratification of the senses constitutes
enjoyment is purely materialistic. There is not one spark of real
enjoyment there; all the joy there is, is a mere reflection of the true
bliss.

Those who give themselves up to the Lord do more for the world than all
the so-called workers. One man who has purified himself thoroughly
accomplishes more than a regiment of preachers. *Out of purity and
silence comes the word of power*.

"Be like a lily — stay in one place and expand your petals; and the bees
will come of themselves." There was a great contrast between Keshab
Chandra Sen and Shri Ramakrishna. The second never recognised any sin or
misery in the world, no evil to fight against. The first was a great
ethical reformer, leader, and founder of the Brahmo-Samaj. After twelve
years the quiet prophet of Dakshineswar had worked a revolution not only
in India, but in the world. The power is with the silent ones, who only
live and love and then withdraw their personality. They never say "me"
and "mine"; they are only blessed in being instruments. Such men are the
makers of Christs and Buddhas, ever living fully identified with God,
ideal existences, asking nothing, and not consciously doing anything.
They are the real movers, the Jivanmuktas, (Literally, free even while
living.) absolutely selfless, the little personality entirely blown
away, ambition non-existent. They are all principle, no personality.

1.  [^](#txt1)The mother-monkey is very fond of her young, but if an
    iron plate is heated under her feet and it becomes unbearable, she
    throws down the baby and stands on it to save herself.

</div>
