---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](07_friday_june_28.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](09_sunday_june_30.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SATURDAY, *June 29, 1895*. (*The Swami came this morning with a Gita in
his hand*.)

Krishna, the "Lord of souls", talks to Arjuna or Gudâkesha, "lord of
sleep" (he who has conquered sleep). The "field of virtue" (the
battlefield) is this world; the five brothers (representing
righteousness) fight the hundred other brothers (all that we love and
have to contend against); the most heroic brother, Arjuna (the awakened
soul), is the general. We have to fight all sense-delights, the things
to which we are most attached, to kill them. We have to stand alone; we
are Brahman, all other ideas must be merged in this one.

Krishna did everything but without any attachment; he was in the world,
but not of it. "Do all work but without attachment; work for work's
sake, never for yourself."

Freedom can never be true of name and form; it is the clay out of which
we (the pots) are made; then it is limited and not free, so that freedom
can never be true of the related. One pot can never say "I am free" as a
pot; only as it loses all ideas of form does it become free. The whole
universe is only the Self with variations, the one tune made bearable by
variation; sometimes there are discords, but they only make the
subsequent harmony more perfect. In the universal melody three ideas
stand out — freedom, strength, and sameness.

If your freedom hurts others, you are not free there. You must not hurt
others.

"To be weak is to be miserable", says Milton. Doing and suffering are
inseparably joined. (Often, too, the man who laughs most is the one who
suffers most.) "To work you have the right, not to the fruits thereof."

\*    \*    \*

Evil thoughts, looked at materially, are the disease bacilli.

Each thought is a little hammer blow on the lump of iron which our
bodies are, manufacturing out of it what we want it to be.

We are heirs to all the good thoughts of the universe, if we open
ourselves to them.

The book is all in us. Fool, hearest not thou? In thine own heart day
and night is singing that Eternal Music — *Sachchidânanda*, *soham*,
*soham* — Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute, I am He, I am He.

The fountain of all knowledge is in every one of us, in the ant as in
the highest angel. Real religion is one, but we quarrel with the forms,
the symbols, the illustrations. The millennium exists already for those
who find it; we have lost ourselves and then think the world is lost.

Perfect strength will have no activity in this world; it only is, it
does not act.

While real perfection is only one, relative perfections must be many.

</div>
