---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](08_saturday_june_29.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](10_monday_july_1.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SUNDAY, *June 30, 1895*.

To try to think without a phantasm is to try to make the impossible
possible. We cannot think "mammalia" without a concrete example. So with
the idea of God.

The great abstraction of ideas in the world is what we call God.

Each thought has two parts — the thinking and the word; and we must have
both. Neither idealists nor materialists are right; we must take both
idea and expression.

All knowledge is of the reflected, as we can only see our face in a
mirror. No one will ever know his own Self or God; but we are that own
Self, we are God.

In Nirvana you are when *you* are not. Buddha said, "You are best, you
are real, when you are not" — when the little self is gone.

The Light Divine within is obscured in most people. It is like a lamp in
a cask of iron, no gleam of light can shine through. Gradually, by
purity and unselfishness we can make the obscuring medium less and less
dense, until at last it becomes as transparent as glass. Shri
Ramakrishna was like the iron cask transformed into a glass cask through
which can be seen the inner light as it is. We are all on the way to
become the cask of glass and even higher and higher reflections. As long
as there is a "cask" at all, we must think through material means. No
impatient one can ever succeed.

\*    \*    \*

Great saints are the object-lessons of the Principle. But the disciples
make the saint the Principle, and then they forget the Principle in the
person.

The result of Buddha's constant inveighing against a personal God was
the introduction of idols into India. In the Vedas they knew them not,
because they saw God everywhere, but the reaction against the loss of
God as Creator and Friend was to make idols, and Buddha became an idol —
so too with Jesus. The range of idols is from wood and stone to Jesus
and Buddha, but we must have idols.

\*    \*    \*

Violent attempts at reform always end by retarding reform. Do not say,
"You are bad"; say only, "You are good, but be better."

Priests are an evil in every country, because they denounce and
criticise, pulling at one string to mend it until two or three others
are out of place. Love never denounces, only ambition does that. There
is no such thing as "righteous" anger or justifiable killing.

If you do not allow one to become a lion, he will become a fox. Women
are a power, only now it is more for evil because man oppresses woman;
she is the fox, but when she is not longer oppressed, she will become
the lion.

Ordinarily speaking, spiritual aspiration ought to be balanced through
the intellect; otherwise it may degenerate into mere sentimentality. . .
.

All theists agree that behind the changeable there is an Unchangeable,
though they vary in their conception of the Ultimate. Buddha denied this
*in toto*. "There is no Brahman, no Atman, no soul," he said.

As a character Buddha was the greatest the world has ever seen; next to
him Christ. But the teachings of Krishna as taught by the Gita are the
grandest the world has ever known. He who wrote that wonderful poem was
one of those rare souls whose lives sent a wave of regeneration through
the world. The human race will never again see such a brain as his who
wrote the Gita.

\*    \*    \*

There is only one Power, whether manifesting as evil or good. God and
the devil are the same river with the water flowing in opposite
directions.

</div>
