---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](11_tuesday_july_2.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](13_friday_july_5.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

WEDNESDAY, *July 3, 1895*.

Generally speaking, human religion begins with fear. "The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom." But later comes the higher idea.
"Perfect love casteth out fear." Traces of fear will remain with us
until we get knowledge, know what God is. Christ, being man, had to see
impurity and denounced it; but God, infinitely higher, does not see
iniquity and cannot be angry. Denunciation is never the highest. David's
hands were smeared with blood; he could not build the temple. (Bible,
Samuel, Chap. XVII — end.)

The more we grow in love and virtue and holiness, the more we see love
and virtue and holiness outside. All condemnation of others really
condemns ourselves. Adjust the microcosm (which is in your power to do)
and the macrocosm will adjust itself for you. It is like the
*hydrostatic paradox*, one drop of water can balance the universe. We
cannot see outside what we are not inside. The universe is to us what
the huge engine is to the miniature engine; and indication of any error
in the tiny engine leads us to imagine trouble in the huge one.

Every step that has been really gained in the world has been gained by
love; criticising can never do any good, it has been tried for thousand
of years. Condemnation accomplishes nothing.

A real Vedantist must sympathise with all. Monism, or absolute oneness
is the very soul of Vedanta. Dualists naturally tend to become
intolerant, to think theirs as the only way. The Vaishnavas in India,
who are dualists, are a most intolerant sect. Among the Shaivas, another
dualistic sect, the story is told of a devotee by the name of
Ghantâkarna or the Bell-eared, who was so devout a worshipper of Shiva
that he did not wish even to hear the name of any other deity; so he
wore two bells tied to his ears in order to drown the sound of any voice
uttering other Divine names. On account of his intense devotion to
Shiva, the latter wanted to teach him that there was no difference
between Shiva and Vishnu, so He appeared before him as half Vishnu and
half Shiva. At that moment the devotee was waving incense before Him,
but so great was the bigotry of Ghantakarna that when he saw the
fragrance of the incense entering the nostril of Vishnu, he thrust his
finger into it to prevent the god from enjoying the sweet smell. . . .

The meat-eating animal, like the lion, gives one blow and *subsides*,
but the patient bullock goes on all day, eating and sleeping as it
walks. The "live Yankee" can not compete with the rice-eating Chinese
coolie. While military power dominates, meat-eating still prevail; but
with the advance of science, fighting will grow less, and then the
vegetarians will come in.

\*    \*    \*

We divide ourselves into two to love God, myself loving my Self. God has
created me and I have created God. We create God in our image; it is we
who create Him to be our master, it is not God who makes us His
servants. When we know that we are one with God, that we and He are
friends, then come equality and freedom. So long as you hold yourself
separated by a hair's breadth from this Eternal One, fear cannot go.

Never ask that foolish question, what good will it do to the world? Let
the world go. Love and ask nothing; love and look for nothing further.
Love and forget all the "isms". Drink the cup of love and become mad.
Say "Thine, O Thine for ever O Lord!" and plunge in, forgetting all
else. The very idea of God is love. Seeing a cat loving her kittens
stand and pray. God has become manifest there; literally believe this.
Repeat "I am Thine, I am Thine", for we can see God everywhere. Do not
seek for Him, just see Him.

"May the Lord ever keep you alive, Light of the world, Soul of the
universe!" . . .

The Absolute cannot be worshipped, so we must worship a manifestation,
such a one as has our nature. Jesus had our nature; he became the
Christ; so can we, and so *must* we. Christ and Buddha were the names of
a state to be attained; Jesus and Gautama were the persons to manifest
it. "Mother" is the first and highest manifestation, next the Christs
and Buddhas. We make our own environment, and we strike the fetters off.
The Atman is the fearless. When we pray to a God outside, it is good,
only we do not know what we do. When we know the Self, we understand.
The highest expression of love is unification.

            "There was a time when I was a woman and he was a man.  
            Still love grew until there was neither he nor I;  
            Only I remember faintly there was a time when there were
two.  
            But love came between and made them one."

— *Persian Sufi Poem*

  
Knowledge exists eternally and is co-existent with God. The man who
discovers a spiritual law is inspired, and what he brings is revelation;
but revelation too is eternal, not to be crystallised as final and then
blindly followed. The Hindus have been criticised so many years by their
conquerors that they (the Hindus) dare to criticise their religion
themselves, and this makes them free. Their foreign rulers struck off
their fetters without knowing it. The most religious people on earth,
the Hindus have actually no sense of blasphemy; to speak of holy things
in any way is to them in itself a sanctification. Nor have they any
artificial respect for prophets or books, or for hypocritical piety.

The Church tries to fit Christ into it, not the Church into Christ; so
only those writings were preserved that suited the purpose in hand. Thus
the books are not to be depended upon and book-worship is the worst kind
of idolatry to bind our feet. All has to conform to the book — science,
religion, philosophy; it is the most horrible tyranny, this tyranny of
the Protestant Bible. Every man in Christian countries has a huge
cathedral on his head and on top of that a book, and yet man lives and
grows! Does not this prove that man is God?

Man is the highest being that exists, and this is the greatest world. We
can have no conception of God higher than man, so our God is man, and
man is God. When we rise and go beyond and find something higher, we
have to jump out of the mind, out of body and the imagination and leave
this world; when we rise to be the Absolute, we are no longer in this
world. Man is the apex of the only world we can ever know. All we know
of animals is only by analogy, we judge them by what we do and feel
ourselves.

The sum total of knowledge is ever the same, only sometimes it is more
manifested and sometimes less. The only source of it is within, and
there only is it found.

\*    \*    \*

All poetry, painting, and music is feeling expressed through words,
through colour, through sound. . . .

Blessed are those upon whom their sins are quickly visited, their
account is the sooner balanced! Woe to those whose punishment is
deferred, it is the greater!

Those who have attained sameness are said to be living in God. All
hatred is killing the "Self by the self", therefore love is the law of
life. To rise to this is to be perfect; but the more perfect we are,
less work (so-called) can we do. The Sâttvika see and know that all is
mere child's play and do not trouble themselves about anything.

It is easy to strike a blow, but tremendously hard to stay the hand,
stand still, and say, "In Thee, O Lord, I take refuge", and then wait
for Him to act.

</div>
