---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](13_friday_july_5.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](15_sunday_july_7.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SATURDAY, *July 6, 1895*. (*Today we had Shankaracharya's commentary on
Vyâsa's Vedânta Sutras*.)

Om tat sat! According to Shankara, there are two phases of the universe,
one is I and the other thou; and they are as contrary as light and
darkness, so it goes without saying that neither can be derived from the
other. On the subject, the object has been superimposed; the subject is
the only reality, the other a mere appearance. The opposite view is
untenable. Matter and the external world are but the soul in a certain
state; in reality there is only one.

All our world comes from truth and untruth coupled together. Samsâra
(life) is the result of the contradictory forces acting upon us, like
the diagonal motion of a ball in a parallelogram of forces. The world is
God and is real, but that is not the world we see; just as we see silver
in the mother-of-pearl where it is not. This is what is known as Adhyâsa
or superimposition, that is, a relative existence dependent upon a real
one, as when we recall a scene we have seen; for the time it exists for
us, but that existence is not real. Or some say, it is as when we
imagine heat in water, which does not belong to it; so really it is
something which has been put where it does not belong, "taking the thing
for what it is not". We see reality, but distorted by the medium through
which we see it.

You can never know yourself except as objectified. When we mistake one
thing for another, we always take the thing before us as the real, never
the unseen; thus we mistake the object for the subject. The Atman never
becomes the object. Mind is the internal sense, the outer senses are its
instruments. In the subject is a trifle of the objectifying power that
enables him to know "I am"; but the subject is the object of its own
Self, never of the mind or the senses. You can, however, superimpose one
idea on another idea, as when we say, "The sky is blue", the sky itself
being only an idea. Science and nescience there are, but the Self is
never affected by any nescience. Relative knowledge is good, because it
leads to absolute knowledge; but neither the knowledge of the senses,
nor of the mind, nor even of the Vedas is true, since they are all
within the realm of relative knowledge. First get rid of the delusion,
"I am the body", then only can we want real knowledge. Man's knowledge
is only a higher degree of brute knowledge.

\*    \*    \*

One part of the Vedas deals with Karma — form and ceremonies. The other
part deals with the knowledge of Brahman and discusses religion. The
Vedas in this part teach of the Self; and because they do, their
knowledge is approaching real knowledge. Knowledge of the Absolute
depends upon no book, nor upon anything; it is absolute in itself. No
amount of study will give this knowledge; is not theory, it is
realization. Cleanse the dust from the mirror, purify your own mind, and
in a flash you know that you are Brahman.

God exists, not birth nor death, not pain nor misery, nor murder, nor
change, nor good nor evil; all is Brahman. We take the "rope for the
serpent", the error is ours. . . . We can only do good when we love God
and He reflects our love. The murderer is God, and the "clothing of
murderer" is only superimposed upon him. Take him by the hand and tell
him the truth.

Soul has no caste, and to think it has is a delusion; so are life and
death, or any motion or quality. The Atman never changes, never goes nor
comes. It is the eternal Witness of all Its own manifestations, but we
take It for the manifestation; an eternal illusion, without beginning or
end, ever going on. The Vedas, however, have to come down to our level,
for if they told us the highest truth in the highest way, we could not
understand it.

Heaven is a mere superstition arising from desire, and desire is ever a
yoke, a degeneration. Never approach any thing except as God; for if we
do, we see evil, because we throw a veil of delusion over what we look
at, and then we see evil. Get free from these illusions; be blessed.
Freedom is to lose all illusions.

In one sense Brahman is known to every human being; he knows, "I am";
but man does not know himself as he is. We all know we are, but not how
we are. All lower explanations are partial truths; but the flower, the
essence of the Vedas, is that the Self in each of us is Brahman. Every
phenomenon is included in birth, growth, and death — appearance,
continuance and disappearance. Our own realisation is beyond the Vedas,
because even they depend upon that. The highest Vedanta is the
philosophy of the Beyond.

To say that creation has any beginning is to lay the axe at the root of
all philosophy.

Maya is the energy of the universe, potential and kinetic. Until Mother
releases us, we cannot get free.

The universe is ours to enjoy. But want nothing. To want is weakness.
Want makes us beggars, and we are sons of the king, not beggars.

</div>
