---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](14_saturday_july_6.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](16_monday_july_8.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SUNDAY MORNING, *July 7, 1895*.

Infinite manifestation dividing itself in portion still remains
infinite, and each portion is infinite.[1](#fn1)

Brahman is the same in two forms — changeable and unchangeable,
expressed and unexpressed. Know that the Knower and the known are one.
The Trinity — the Knower, the known, and knowing — is manifesting as
this universe. That God the Yogi sees in meditation, he sees through the
power of his own Self.

What we call nature, fate, is simply God's will.

So long as enjoyment is sought, bondage remains. Only imperfection can
enjoy, because enjoyment is the fulfilling of desire. The human soul
enjoys nature. The underlying reality of nature, soul, and God is
Brahman; but It (Brahman) is unseen, until we bring It out. It may be
brought out by *Pramantha* or friction, just as we can produce fire by
friction. The body is the lower piece of wood, Om is the pointed piece
and Dhyâna (meditation) is the friction. When this is used, that light
which is the knowledge of Brahman will burst forth in the soul. Seek it
through Tapas. Holding the body upright, sacrifice the organs of sense
in the mind. The sense-centres are within, and their organs without;
drive them into the mind and through Dhârâna (concentration) fix the
mind in Dhyana. Brahman is omnipresent in the universe as is butter in
milk, but friction makes It manifest in one place. As churning brings
out the butter in the milk, so Dhyana brings the realisation of Brahman
in the soul.

All Hindu philosophy declares that there is a sixth sense, the
superconscious, and through it comes inspiration.

\*    \*    \*

The universe is motion, and friction will eventually bring everything to
an end; then comes a rest; and after that all begins again. . . .

So long as the "skin sky" surrounds man, that is, so long as he
identifies himself with his body, he cannot see God.

SUNDAY AFTERNOON

There are six schools of philosophy in India that are regarded as
orthodox, because they believe in the Vedas.

Vyasa's philosophy is *par excellence* that of the Upanishads. He wrote
in Sutra form, that is, in brief algebraical symbols without nominative
or verb. This caused so much ambiguity that out of the Sutras came
dualism, mono-dualism, and monism or "roaring Vedanta"; and all the
great commentators in these different schools were at times "conscious
liars" in order to make the texts suit their philosophy.

The Upanishads contain very little history of the doings of any man, but
nearly all other scriptures are largely personal histories. The Vedas
deal almost entirely with philosophy. Religion without philosophy runs
into superstition; philosophy without religion becomes dry atheism.

Vishishta-advaita is qualified Advaita (monism). Its expounder was
Râmânuja. He says, "Out of the ocean of milk of the Vedas, Vyasa has
churned this butter of philosophy, the better to help mankind." He says
again, "All virtues and all qualities belong to Brahman, Lord of the
universe. He is the greatest Purusha. Madhva is a through-going dualist
or Dvaitist. He claims that even women might study the Vedas. He quotes
chiefly from the Purânas. He says that Brahman means Vishnu, not Shiva
at all, because there is no salvation except through Vishnu.

1.  [^](#txt1)Infinity is one without a second, ever indivisible, and
    unmanifested. By "infinite manifestation" the Swami means the
    universe, both visible and invisible. Although it is made up of
    countless forms which are limited by their very nature, still as a
    whole it is always infinite, nay, even a portion of it is infinite,
    as each such portion is inseparably united with it.

</div>
