---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](15_sunday_july_7.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](17_tuesday_july_9.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

MONDAY, *July 8, 1895*.

There is no place for reasoning in Madhva's explanation, it is all taken
from the revelation in the Vedas.

Ramanuja says, the Vedas are the holiest study. Let the sons of the
three upper castes get the Sutra (The holy thread.) and at eight, ten,
or eleven years of age begin the study, which means going to a Guru and
learning the Vedas word for word, with perfect intonation and
pronunciation.

Japa is repeating the Holy Name; through this the devotee rises to the
Infinite. This boat of sacrifice and ceremonies is very frail, we need
more than that to know Brahman, which alone is freedom. Liberty is
nothing more than destruction of ignorance, and that can only go when we
know Brahman. It is not necessary to go through all these ceremonials to
reach the meaning of the Vedanta. Repeating Om is enough.

Seeing difference is the cause of all misery, and ignorance is the cause
of seeing difference. That is why ceremonials are not needed, because
they increase the idea of inequality; you practice them to get rid of
something or to obtain something.

Brahman is without action, Atman is Brahman, and we are Atman; knowledge
like this takes off all error. It must be heard, apprehended
intellectually, and lastly realised. Cogitating is applying reason and
establishing this knowledge in ourselves by reason. Realising is making
it a part of our lives by constant thinking of it. This constant thought
or Dhyana is as oil that pours in one unbroken line from vessel to
vessel; Dhyana rolls the mind in this thought day and night and so helps
us to attain to liberation. Think always "Soham, Soham"; this is almost
as good as liberation. Say it day and night; realisation will come as
the result of this continuous cogitation. This absolute and continuous
remembrance of the Lord is what is meant by Bhakti.

This Bhakti is indirectly helped by all good works. Good thoughts and
good works create less differentiation than bad ones; so indirectly they
lead to freedom. Work, but give up the results to the Lord. Knowledge
alone can make us perfect. He who follows the God of Truth with
devotion, to him the God of Truth reveals Himself. . . . We are lamps,
and our burning is what we call "life". When the supply of oxygen gives
out, then the lamp must go out. All we can do is to keep the lamp clean.
Life is a product, a compound, and as such must resolve itself into its
elements.

</div>
