---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](19_thursday_july_11.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](21_saturday_july_13.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

FRIDAY, *July 12, 1895*. (*Shankara's Commentary*.)

Fourth Vyasa Sutra. "Âtman (is) the aim of all."

Ishvara is to be known from the Vedanta; all Vedas point to Him (Who is
the Cause; the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer). Ishvara is the
unification of the Trinity, known as Brahmâ, Vishnu, and Shiva, which
stand at the head of the Hindu Pantheon. "Thou art our Father who takest
us to the other shore of the dark ocean" (Disciple's words to the
Master).

The Vedas cannot show you Brahman, you are That already; they can only
help to take away the veil that hides the truth from our eyes. The first
veil to vanish is ignorance; and when that is gone, sin goes; next
desire ceases, selfishness ends, and all misery disappears. This
cessation of ignorance can only come when I know that God and I are one;
in other words, identify yourself with Atman, not with human
limitations. *Dis*-identify yourself with the body, and all pain will
cease. This is the secret of healing. The universe is a case of
hypnotisation; de-hypnotise yourself and cease to suffer.

In order to be free we have to pass through vice to virtue, and then get
rid of both. Tamas is to be conquered by Rajas, both are to be submerged
in Sattva; then go beyond the three qualities. Reach a state where your
very breathing is a prayer.

Whenever you learn (gain anything) from another man's words, know that
you had the experience in a previous existence, because experience is
the only teacher.

With all powers comes further misery, so kill desire. Getting any desire
is like putting a stick into a nest of hornets. Vairâgya is finding, out
that desires are but gilded balls of poison.

"Mind is not God" (Shankara). "Tat tvam asi" "Aham Brahmâsmi" ("That
thou art", "I am Brahman"). When a man realises this, all the knots of
his heart are cut asunder, all his doubts vanish". Fearlessness is not
possible as long as we have even God *over us*; we must *be* God. What
is disjoined will be for ever disjoined; if you are separate from God,
then you can never be one with Him, and vice versa. If by virtue you are
joined to God, when that ceases, disjunction will come. The junction is
eternal, and virtue only helps to remove the veil. We are *âzâd* (free),
we must realise it. "Whom the Self chooses" means we are the Self and
choose ourselves.

Does seeing depend upon our own efforts or does it depend upon something
outside? It depends upon ourselves; our efforts take off the dust, the
mirror does not change. There is neither knower, knowing, nor known. "He
who knows that he does not know, knows It." He who has a theory knows
nothing.

The idea that we are bound is only an illusion.

Religion is not of this world; it is "heart-cleansing", and its effect
on this world is secondary. Freedom is inseparable from the nature of
the Atman. This is ever pure, ever perfect, ever unchangeable. This
Atman you can never know. We can say nothing about the Atman but "not
this, not this".

"Brahman is that which we can never drive out by any power of mind or
imagination." (Shankara).

\*    \*    \*

The universe is thought, and the Vedas are the words of this thought. We
can create and uncreate this whole universe. Repeating the words, the
unseen thought is aroused, and as a result a seen effect is produced.
This is the claim of a certain sect of Karmis. They think that each one
of us is a creator. Pronounce the words, the thought which corresponds
will arise, and the result will become visible. "Thought is the power of
the word, the word is the expression of the thought," say Mimâmsakas, a
Hindu philosophical sect.

</div>
