---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](20_friday_july_12.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](22_sunday_july_14.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SATURDAY, *July 13th, 1895*.

Everything we know is a compound, and all sense-knowledge comes through
analysis. To think that mind is a simple, single, or independent is
dualism. Philosophy is not got by studying books; the more you read
books, the more muddled becomes the mind. The idea of unthinking
philosophers was that the mind was a simple, and this led them to
believe in free-will. Psychology, the analysis of the mind, shows the
mind to be a compound, and every compound must be held together by some
outside force; so the will is bound by the combination of outside
forces. Man cannot even will to eat unless he is hungry. Will is subject
to desire. But we are free; everyone feels it.

The agnostic says this idea is a delusion. Then, how do you prove the
world? Its only proof is that we all see it and feel it; so just as much
we all feel freedom. If universal consensus affirms this world, then it
must be accepted as affirming freedom; but freedom is not of the will as
it is. The constitutional belief of man in freedom is the basis of all
reasoning. Freedom is of the will as it was before it became bound. The
very idea of free-will shows every moment man's struggle against
bondage. The free can be only one, the Unconditioned, the Infinite, the
Unlimited. Freedom in man is now a memory, an attempt towards freedom.

Everything in the universe is struggling to complete a circle, to return
to its source, to return to its only real Source, Atman. The search for
happiness is a struggle to find the balance, to restore the equilibrium.
Morality is the struggle of the bound will to get free and is the proof
that we have come from perfection. . . .

The idea of duty is the midday sun of misery scorch ing the very soul.
"O king, drink this one drop of nectar and be happy." ("I am not the
doer", this is the nectar.)

Let there be action without reaction; action is pleasant, all misery is
reaction. The child puts its hand in the flame, that is pleasure; but
when its system reacts, then comes the pain of burning. When we can stop
that reaction, then we have nothing to fear. Control the brain and do
not let it read the record; be the witness and do not react, only thus
can you be happy. The happiest moments we ever know are when we entirely
forget ourselves. Work of your own free will, not from duty. We have no
duty. This world is just a gymnasium in which we play; our life is an
eternal holiday.

The whole secret of existence is to have no fear. Never fear what will
become of you, depend on no one. Only the moment you reject all help are
you free. The full sponge can absorb no more.

\*    \*    \*

Even fighting in self-defence is wrong, though it is higher than
fighting in aggression. There is no "righteous" indignation, because
indignation comes from not recognising sameness in all things.

</div>
