---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](21_saturday_july_13.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](23_monday_july_15.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SUNDAY, *July 14, 1895*.

Philosophy in India means that through which we see God, the rationale
of religion; so no Hindu could ever ask for a link between religion and
philosophy.

Concrete, generalised, abstract are the three stages in the process of
philosophy. The highest abstraction in which all things agree is the
One. In religion we have first, symbols and forms; next, mythologies;
and last, philosophy. The first two are for the time being; philosophy
is the underlying basis of all, and the others are only stepping stones
in the struggle to reach the Ultimate.

In Western religion the idea is that without the New Testament and
Christ there could be no religion. A similar belief exists in Judaism
with regard to Moses and the Prophets, because these religions are
dependent upon mythology only. Real religion, the highest, rises above
mythology; it can never rest upon that. Modern science has really made
the foundations of religion strong. That the whole universe is one, is
scientifically demonstrable. What the metaphysicians call "being", the
physicist calls "matter", but there is no real fight between the two,
for both are one. Though an atom is invisible, unthinkable, yet in it
are the whole power and potency of the universe. That is exactly what
the Vedantist says of Atman. All sects are really saying the same thing
in different words.

Vedanta and modern science both posit a self-evolving Cause. In Itself
are all the causes. Take for example the potter shaping a pot. The
potter is the primal cause, the clay the material cause, and the wheel
the instrumental cause; but the Atman is all three. Atman is cause and
manifestation too. The Vedantist says the universe is not real, it is
only apparent. Nature is God seen through nescience. The Pantheists say,
God has become nature or this world; the Advaitists affirm that God is
appearing as this world, but He is not this world.

We can only know experience as a mental process, a fact in the mind as
well as a mark in the brain. We cannot push the brain back or forward,
but we can the mind; it can stretch over all time — past, present, and
future; and so facts in the mind are eternally preserved. All facts are
already generalised in mind, which is omnipresent.[1](#fn1)

Kant's great achievement was the discovery that "time, space, and
causation are modes of thought," but Vedanta taught this ages ago and
called it "Maya." Schopenhauer stands on reason only and rationalises
the Vedas. . . . Shankara maintained the orthodoxy of the Vedas.

\*    \*    \*

"Treeness" or the idea of "tree", found out among trees is knowledge,
and the highest knowledge is One. . . .

Personal God is the last generalization of the universe, only hazy, not
clear-cut and philosophic. . . .

Unity is self-evolving, out of which everything comes.

Physical science is to find out facts, metaphysics is the thread to bind
the flowers into a bouquet. Every abstraction is metaphysical; even
putting manure at the root of a tree involves a process of abstraction.
. . .

Religion includes the concrete, the more generalized and the ultimate
unity. Do not stick to particularisations. Get to the principle, to the
One. . . .

Devils are machines of darkness, angels are machines of light; but both
are machines. Man alone is alive. Break the machine, strike the
balance[2](#fn2) and then man can become free. This is the only world
where man can work out his salvation.

"Whom the Self chooses" is true. Election is true, but put it within. As
an external and fatalistic doctrine, it is horrible.

1.  [^](#txt1)As the entire creation existing in space, time, and
    causation can never exist beyond mind or memory manifesting itself
    as thinking, feeling, and willing, the whole of space, time, and
    causation must have to be in it. Hence mind is omnipresent.
    Individual mind is a portion of the omnipresent or universal mind.
2.  [^](#txt2)Find out that the relationship between yourself and the
    machine is as between a worker and his instrument. Never identify
    yourself with it.

</div>
