---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](23_monday_july_15.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](25_wednesday_july_17.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

TUESDAY, *July 16, 1895*. (*Shankara*)

The "unseen cause" (Or mass of subtle impressions.) leads us to
sacrifice and worship, which in turn produce seen results; but to attain
liberation we must first hear, then think or reason, and then meditate
upon Brahman.

The result of works and the result of knowledge are two different
things. "Do" and "Do not do" are the background of all morality, but
they really belong only to the body and the mind. All happiness and
misery are inextricably connected with the senses, and body is necessary
to experience them. The higher the body, the higher the standard of
virtue, even up to Brahma; but all have bodies. As long as there is a
body, there must be pleasure and pain; only when one has got rid of the
body can one escape them. The Atman is bodiless, says Shankara.

No law can make you free, you are free. Nothing can give you freedom, if
you have it not already. The Atman is self-illumined. Cause and effect
do not reach there, and this disembodiedness is freedom. Beyond what
was, or is, or is to be, is Brahman. As an effect, freedom would have no
value; it would be a compound, and as such would contain the seeds of
bondage. It is the one real factor. Not to be attained, hut the real
nature of the soul.

Work and worship, however, are necessary to take away the veil, to lift
oh the bondage and illusion. They do not give us freedom; but all the
same, without effort on our own part we do not open our eyes and see
what we are. Shankara says further that Advaita-Vedanta is the crowning
glory of the Vedas; hut the lower Vedas are also necessary, because they
teach work and worship, and through these many come to the Lord. Others
may come without any help but Advaita. Work and worship lead to the same
result as Advaita.

Books cannot teach God, but they can destroy ignorance; their action is
negative. To hold to the books and at the same time open the way to
freedom is Shankara's great achievement. But after all, it is a kind of
hair-splitting. Give man first the concrete, then raise him to the
highest by slow degrees. This is the effort of the various religions and
explains their existence and why each is suited to some stage of
development. The very books are a part of the ignorance they help to
dispel. Their duty is to drive out the ignorance that has come upon
knowledge. "Truth shall drive out untruth." You are free and cannot he
made so. So long as you have a creed, you have no God. "He who knows he
knows, knows nothing." Who can know the Knower? There are two eternal
facts in existence, God and the universe, the former unchangeable, the
latter changeable. The world exists eternally. Where your mind cannot
grasp the amount of change, you call it eternally. . . . You see the
stone or the bas-relief on it, but not both at once; yet both are one.

\*    \*    \*

Can you make yourself at rest even for a second? All Yogis say you can.
. . .

*The greatest sin is to think yourself weak. No one is greater*: realise
you are Brahman. Nothing has power except what you give it. We are
beyond the sun, the stars, the universe. Teach the Godhood of man. Deny
evil, create none. Stand up and say, I am the master, the master of all.
We forge the chain, and we alone can break it.

No action can give you freedom; only knowledge can make you free,
Knowledge is irresistible; the mind cannot take it or reject it. When it
comes the mind has to accept it; so it is not a work of the mind; only,
its expression comes in the mind.

Work or worship is to bring you back to your own nature. It is an entire
illusion that the Self is the body; so even while living here in the
body, we can be free. The body has nothing in common with the Self.
Illusion is taking the real for the unreal — not "nothing at all".

</div>
