---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](25_wednesday_july_17.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](27_friday_july_19.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

THURSDAY, *July 18, 1895*.

(*The lesson today was mainly Shankara's argument against the conclusion
of the Sânkhya philosophy*.)

The Sankhyas say that consciousness is a compound, and beyond that, the
last analysis gives us the Purusha, Witness, but that there are many
Purushas — each of us is one. Advaita, on the contrary, affirms that
Purushas can be only One, that Purusha cannot be conscious, unconscious,
or have any qualification, for either these qualities would bind, or
they would eventually cease; so the One must be without any qualities,
even knowledge, and It cannot be the cause of the universe or of
anything. "In the beginning, existence only, One without a second", says
the Vedas.

\*    \*    \*

The presence of Sattva with knowledge does not prove that Sattva is the
cause of knowledge; on the contrary, Sattva calls out what was already
existing in man, as the fire heats an iron ball placed near it by
arousing the heat latent in it, not by entering into the ball.

Shankara says, knowledge is not a bondage, because it is the nature of
God. The world ever is, whether manifested or unmanifested; so an
eternal object exists.

*Jnâna-bala-kriyâ* (knowledge, power, activity) is God. Nor does He need
form, because the finite only needs form to interpose as an obstruction
to catch and hold infinite knowledge; but God really needs no such help.
There is no "moving soul", there is only one Atman. Jiva (individual
soul) is the conscious ruler of this body, in whom the five life
principles come into unity, and yet that very Jiva is the Atman, because
all is Atman. What you think about it is your delusion and not in the
Jiva. You are God, and whatever else you may think is wrong. You must
worship the Self in Krishna, not Krishna as Krishna. Only by worshipping
the Self can freedom be won. Even personal God is but the Self
objectified. "Intense search after my own reality is Bhakti", says
Shankara.

All the means we take to reach God are true; it is only like trying to
find the pole-star by locating it through the stars that are around it.

\*    \*    \*

The Bhagavad-Gita is the best authority on Vedanta.

</div>
