---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](27_friday_july_19.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](29_sunday_july_21.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SATURDAY, *July 20, 1895*.

 Perception is our only real knowledge or religion. Talking about it for
ages will never make us know our soul. There is no difference between
theories and atheism. In fact, the atheist is the truer man. Every step
I take in the light is mine for ever. When you go to a country and see
it, then it is yours. We have each to see for ourselves; teachers can
only "bring the food", we must eat it to be nourished. Argument can
never prove God save as a logical conclusion.

It is impossible to find God outside of ourselves. Our own souls
contribute all the divinity that is outside of us. We are the greatest
temple. The objectification is only a faint imitation of what we see
within ourselves.

Concentration of the powers of the mind is our only instrument to help
us see God. If you know one soul (your own), you know all souls, past,
present, and to come. The will concentrates the mind, certain things
excite and control this will, such as reason, love, devotion, breathing.
The concentrated mind is a lamp that shows us every corner of the soul.

No one method can suit all. These different methods are not steps
necessary to be taken one after another. Ceremonials are the lowest
form; next God external, and after that God internal. In some cases
gradation may be needed, but in many only one way is required. It would
be the height of folly to say to everyone, "You must pass through Karma
and Bhakti before you can reach Jnana."

Stick to your reason until you reach something higher; and you will know
it to be higher, because it will not jar with reason. The stage beyond
consciousness is inspiration (Samâdhi); but never mistake hysterical
trances for the real thing. It is a terrible thing to claim this
inspiration falsely, to mistake instinct for inspiration. There is no
external test for inspiration, we know it ourselves; our guardian
against mistake is negative — the voice of reason. All religion is going
beyond reason, but reason is the only guide to get there. Instinct is
like ice, reason is the water, and inspiration is the subtlest form or
vapour; one follows the other. Everywhere is this eternal sequence —
unconsciousness, consciousness, intelligence — matter, body, mind — and
to us it seems as if the chain began with the particular link we first
lay hold of. Arguments on both sides are of equal weight, and both are
true. We must reach beyond both, to where there is neither the one nor
the other. These successions are all Maya.

Religion is above reason, supernatural. Faith is not belief, it is the
grasp on the Ultimate, an illumination. First hear, then reason and find
out all that reason can give about the Atman; let the flood of reason
flow over It, then take what remains. If nothing remains, thank God you
have escaped a superstition. When you have determined that nothing *can*
take away the Atman, that It stands every test, hold fast to this and
teach it to all. Truth cannot be partial; it is for the good of all.
Finally, in perfect rest and peace meditate upon It, concentrate your
mind upon It, make yourself one with It. Then no speech is needed;
silence will carry the truth. Do not spend your energy in talking, but
meditate in silence; and do not let the rush of the outside world
disturb you. When your mind is in the highest state, you are unconscious
of it. Accumulate power in silence and become a dynamo of spirituality.
What can a beggar give? Only a king can give, and he only when he wants
nothing himself.

Hold your money merely as custodian for what is God's. Have no
attachment for it. Let name and fame and money go; they are a terrible
bondage. Feel the wonderful atmosphere of freedom. You are free, free,
free! Oh, blessed am I! Freedom am I! I am the Infinite! In my soul I
can find no beginning and no end. All is my Self. Say this unceasingly.

</div>
