---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](29_sunday_july_21.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](31_wednesday_july_24.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

TUESDAY, *July 23, 1895*. (*Bhagavad-Gita, Karma-Yoga*)

To attain liberation through work, join yourself to work but without
desire, looking for no result. Such work leads to knowledge, which in
turn brings emancipation. To give up work before you *know*, leads to
misery. Work done for the Self gives no bondage. Neither desire pleasure
nor fear pain from work. It is the mind and body that work, not I. Tell
yourself this unceasingly and realise it. Try not to know that you work.

Do all as a sacrifice or offering to the Lord. Be in the world, but not
of it, like the lotus leaf whose roots are in the mud but which remains
always pure. Let your love go to all, whatever they do to you. A blind
man cannot see colour, so how can we see evil unless it is in us? We
compare what we see outside with what we find in ourselves and pronounce
judgment accordingly. If we are pure, we cannot see impurity. It may
exist, but not for us. See only God in every man, woman and child; see
it by the *antarjyotis*, "inner light", and seeing that, we can see
naught else. Do not want this world, because what you desire you get.
Seek the Lord and the Lord only. The more power there is, the more
bondage, the more fear. How much more afraid and miserable are we than
the ant! Get out of it all and come to the Lord. Seek the science of the
maker and not that of the made.

"I am the doer and the deed." "He who can stem the tide of lust and
anger is a great Yogi."

"Only by practice and non-attachment can we conquer mind." . . .

Our Hindu ancestors sat down and thought on God and morality, and so
have we brains to use for the same ends; but in the rush of trying to
get gain, we are likely to lose them again.

\*            \*            \*

The body has in itself a certain power of curing itself and many things
can rouse this curative power into action, such as mental conditions, or
medicine, or exercise, etc. As long as we are disturbed by physical
conditions, so long we need the help of physical agencies. Not until we
have got rid of bondage to the nerves, can we disregard them.

There is the unconscious mind, but it is below consciousness, which is
just one part of the human organism. Philosophy is guess-work about the
mind. Religion is based upon sense contact, upon seeing, the only basis
of knowledge. What comes in contact with the superconscious mind is
fact. Âptas are those who have "sensed" religion. The proof is that if
you follow their method, you too will see. Each science requires its own
particular method and instruments. An astronomer cannot show you the
rings of Saturn by the aid of all the pots and pans in the kitchen. He
needs a telescope. So, to see the great facts of religion, the methods
of those who have already seen must be followed. The greater the science
the more varied the means of studying it. Before we came into the world,
God provided the means to get out; so all we have to do is to find the
means. But do not fight over methods. Look only for realisation and
choose the best method you can find to suit you. Eat the mangoes and let
the rest quarrel over the basket. See Christ, then you will be a
Christian. All else is talk; the less talking the better.

The message makes the messenger. The Lord makes the temple; not vice
versa.

Learn until "the glory of the Lord shines through your face", as it
shone through the face of Shvetaketu.

Guess against guess makes fight; but talk of what you have been, and no
human heart can resist it. Paul was converted against his will by
realisation.

TUESDAY AFTERNOON. (*After dinner there was a short conversation in the
course of which the Swami said*:)

Delusion creates delusion. Delusion creates itself and destroys itself,
such is Maya. All knowledge (so-called), being based on Maya, is a
vicious circle, and in time that very knowledge destroys itself. "Let go
the rope", delusion cannot touch the Atman. When we lay hold of the rope
— identify ourselves with Maya — she has power over us. Let go of it, be
the Witness only, then you can admire the picture of the universe
undisturbed.

</div>
