---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](30_tuesday_july_23.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](32_thursday_july_25.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

WEDNESDAY, *July 24, 1895*.

The powers acquired by the practice of Yoga are not obstacles for the
Yogi who is perfect, but are apt to be so for the beginner, through the
wonder and pleasure excited by their exercise. Siddhis are the powers
which mark success in the practice; and they may be produced by various
means, such as the repetition of a Mantra, by Yoga practice, meditation,
fasting, or even by the use of herbs and drugs. The Yogi, who has
conquered all interest in the powers acquired and who renounces all
virtue arising from his actions, comes into the "cloud of virtue" (name
of one of the states of Samadhi) and radiates holiness as a cloud rains
water.

Meditation is on a series of objects, concentration is on one object.

Mind is cognised by the Atman, but it is not self-illuminated. The Atman
cannot be the cause of anything. How can it be? How can the Purusha join
itself to Prakriti (nature)? It does not; it is only illusively thought
to do so. . . .

Learn to help without pitying or feeling that there is any misery. Learn
to be the same to enemy and to friend; then when you can do that and no
longer have any desire, the goal is attained.

Cut down the banyan tree of desire with the axe of non-attachment, and
it will vanish utterly. It is all illusion. "He from whom blight and
delusion have fallen, he who has conquered the evils of association, he
alone is *âzâd* (free)."

To love anyone personally is bondage. Love all alike, then all desires
fall off.

Time, the "eater of everything", comes, and all has to go. Why try to
improve the earth, to paint the butterfly? It all has to go at last. Do
not be mere white mice in a treadmill, working always and never
accomplishing anything. Every desire is fraught with evil, whether the
desire itself be good or evil. It is like a dog jumping for a piece of
meat which is ever receding from his reach, and dying a dog's death at
last. Do not be like that. Cut off all desire.

\*            \*            \*

Paramâtman as ruling Maya is Ishvara; Paramâtman as under Maya is
Jivâtman. Maya is the sum total of manifestation and will utterly
vanish.

Tree-nature is Maya, it is really God-nature which we see under the veil
of Maya. The "why" of anything is in Maya. To ask why Maya came is a
useless question, because the answer can never be given in Maya, and
beyond Maya who will ask it? Evil creates "why", not "why" the evil, and
it is evil that asks "why". Illusion destroys illusion. Reason itself,
being based upon contradiction, is a circle and has to kill itself.
Sense-perception is an inference, and yet all inference comes from
perception.

Ignorance reflecting the light of God is seen; but by itself it is zero.
The cloud would not appear except as the sunlight falls on it.

There were four travellers who came to a high wall. The first one
climbed with difficulty to the top and without looking back, jumped
over. The second clambered up the wall, looked over, and with a shout of
delight disappeared. The third in his turn climbed to the top, looked
where his companions had gone, laughed with joy, and followed them. But
the fourth one came back to tell what had happened to his
fellow-travellers. The sign to us that there is something beyond is the
laugh that rings back from those great ones who have plunged from Maya's
wall.

\*            \*            \*

Separating ourselves from the Absolute and attributing certain qualities
to It give us Ishvara. It is the Reality of the universe as seen through
our mind. Personal devil is the misery of the world seen through the
minds of the superstitious.

</div>
