---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](33_friday_july_26.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](35_sunday_july_28.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SATURDAY, *July 27, 1895*. (*Kathopanishad*)

Learn not the truth of the Self save from one who has realised it; in
all others it is mere talk. Realisation is beyond virtue and vice,
beyond future and past; beyond all the pairs of opposites. "The
stainless one sees the Self, and an eternal calm comes in the Soul."
Talking, arguing, and reading books, the highest flights of the
intellect, the Vedas themselves, all these cannot give knowledge of the
Self.

In us are two — The God-soul and the man-soul. The sages know that the
latter is but the shadow, that the former is the only real Sun.

Unless we join the mind with the senses, we get no report from eyes,
nose, ears, etc. The external organs are used by the power of the mind.
Do not let the senses go outside, and then you can get rid of body and
the external world.

This very "x" which we see here as an external world, the departed see
as heaven or hell according to their own mental states. Here and
hereafter are two dreams, the latter modelled on the former; get rid of
both, all is omnipresent, all is now. Nature, body, and mind go to
death, not we; we never go nor come. The man Swami Vivekananda is in
nature, is born, and dies; but the self which we see as Swami
Vivekananda is never born and never dies. It is the eternal and
unchangeable Reality.

The power of the mind is the same whether we divide it into five senses
or whether we see only one. A blind man says, "Everything has a distinct
echo, so I clap my hands and get that echo, and then I can tell
everything that is around me." So in a fog the blind man can safely lead
the seeing man. Fog or darkness makes no difference to him.

Control the mind, cut off the senses, then you are a Yogi; after that,
all the rest will come. Refuse to hear, to see, to smell, to taste; take
away the mental power from the external organs. You continually do it
unconsciously as when your mind is absorbed; so you can learn to do it
consciously. The mind can put the senses where it pleases. Get rid of
the fundamental superstition that we are obliged to act through the
body. We are not. Go into your own room and get the Upanishads out of
your own Self. You are the greatest book that ever was or ever will be,
the infinite depository of all that is. Until the inner teacher opens,
all outside teaching is in vain. It must lead to the opening of the book
of the heart to have any value.

The will is the "still small voice", the real Ruler who says "do" and
"do not". It has done all that binds us. The ignorant will leads to
bondage, the knowing will can free us. The will can be made strong in
thousands of ways; every way is a kind of Yoga, but the systematised
Yoga accomplishes the work more quickly. Bhakti, Karma, Raja, and
Jnana-Yoga get over the ground more effectively. Put on all powers,
philosophy, work, prayer, meditation — crowd all sail, put on all head
of steam — reach the goal. The sooner, the better. . . .

Baptism is external purification symbolising the internal. It is of
Buddhist origin.

The Eucharist is a survival of a very ancient custom of savage tribes.
They sometimes killed their great chiefs and ate their flesh in order to
obtain in themselves the qualities that made their leaders great. They
believed that in such a way the characteristics that made the chief
brave and wise would become theirs and make the whole tribe brave and
wise, instead of only one man. Human sacrifice was also a Jewish idea
and one that clung to them despite many chastisements from Jehovah.
Jesus was gentle and loving, but to fit him into Jewish beliefs, the
idea of human sacrifice, in the form of atonement or as a human
scapegoat, had to come in. This cruel idea made Christianity depart from
the teachings of Jesus himself and develop a spirit of persecution and
bloodshed. . . .

Say, "it is my nature", never say, "It is my duty" — to do anything
whatever.

"Truth alone triumphs, not untruth." Stand upon Truth, and you have got
God.

\*            \*            \*

From the earliest times in India the Brahmin caste have held themselves
beyond all law; they claim to be gods. They are poor, but their weakness
is that they seek power. Here are about sixty millions of people who are
good and moral and hold no property, and they are what they are because
from their birth they are taught that they are above law, above
punishment. They feel themselves to be "twice-born", to be sons of God.

</div>
