---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](35_sunday_july_28.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](37_tuesday_july_30.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

MONDAY, *July 29, 1895*.

We sometimes indicate a thing by describing its surroundings. When we
say "Sachchidananda" (Existence-Knowledge-Bliss), we are merely
indicating the shores of an indescribable Beyond. Not even can we say
"is" about it, for that too is relative. Any imagination, any concept is
in vain. Neti, neti ("Not this, not this") is all that can be said, for
even to think is to limit and so to lose.

The senses cheat you day and night. Vedanta found that out ages ago;
modern science is just discovering the same fact. A picture has only
length and breadth, and the painter copies nature in her cheating by
artificially giving the appearance of depth. No two people see the same
world. The highest knowledge will show you that there is no motion, no
change in anything; that the very idea of it is all Maya. Study nature
as a whole, that is, study motion. Mind and body are not our real self;
both belong to nature, but eventually we can know the *ding an sich*. 
Then mind and body being transcended, all that they conceive goes. When
you cease utterly to know and see the world, then you realise Atman. The
superseding of relative knowledge is what we want. There is no infinite
mind or infinite knowledge, because both mind and knowledge are limited.
We are now seeing through a veil; then we reach the "x", which is the
Reality of all our knowing.

If we look at a picture through a pin-hole in a cardboard, we get an
utterly mistaken notion; yet what we see is really the picture. As we
enlarge the hole, we get a clearer and clearer idea. Out of the reality
we manufacture the different views in conformity with our mistaken
perceptions of name and form. When we throw away the cardboard, we see
the same picture, but we see it as it is. We put in all the attributes,
all the errors; the picture itself is unaltered thereby. That is because
Atman is the reality of all; all we see is Atman, but not as we see it,
as name and form; they are all in our veil, in Maya.

They are like spots in the object-glass of a telescope, yet it is the
light of the sun that shows us the spots; we could not even see the
illusion save for the background of reality which is Brahman. Swami
Vivekananda is just the speck on the object-glass; I am Atman, real,
unchangeable, and that reality alone enables me to see Swami
Vivekananda. Atman is the essence of every hallucination; but the sun is
never identified with the spots on the glass, it only shows them to us.
Our actions, as they are evil or good, increase or decrease the "spots";
but they never affect the God within us. Perfectly cleanse the mind of
spots and instantly we see, "I and my father are one".

We first perceive, then reason later. We must have this perception as a
fact, and it is called religion, realisation. No matter if one never
heard of creed or prophet or book. Let him get this realisation, and he
needs no more. Cleanse the mind, this is all of religion; and until we
ourselves clear off the spots, we cannot see the Reality as it is. The
baby sees no sun; he has not yet the measure of it in himself. Get rid
of the defects within yourself, and you will not be able to see any
without. A baby sees robbery done, and it means nothing to him. Once you
find the hidden object in a puzzle picture, you see it ever more; so
when once you are free and stainless, you see only freedom and purity in
the world around. That moment all the knots of the heart are cut
asunder, all crooked places are made straight, and this world vanishes
as a dream. And when we awake, we wonder how we ever came to dream such
trash!

"Getting whom, misery mountain high has no power to move the soul."

With the axe of knowledge cut the wheels asunder, and the Atman stands
free, even though the old momentum carries on the wheel of mind and
body. The wheel can now only go straight, can only do good. If that body
does anything bad, know that the man is not Jivanmukta; he lies if he
makes that claim. But it is only when the wheels have got a good
straight motion (from cleansing the mind) that the axe can be applied.
All purifying action deals conscious or unconscious blows on delusion.
To call another a sinner is the worst thing you can do. Good action done
ignorantly produces the same result and helps to break the bondage.

To identify the sun with the spots on the object-glass is the
fundamental error. Know the sun, the "I", to be ever unaffected by
anything, and devote yourself to cleansing the spots. Man is the
greatest being that ever can be. The highest worship there is, is to
worship man as Krishna, Buddha, Christ. What you want, you create. Get
rid of desire. . . .

The angels and the departed are all here, seeing this world as heaven.
The same "x" is seen by all according to their mental attitude. The best
vision to be had of the "x" is here on this earth. Never want to go to
heaven, that is the worst delusion. Even here, too much wealth and
grinding poverty are both bondages and hold us back from religion. Three
great gifts we have: first, a human body. (The human mind is the nearest
reflection of God, we are "His own image".) Second, the desire to be
free. Third, the help of a noble soul, who has crossed the ocean of
delusion, as a teacher. When you have these three, bless the Lord; you
are sure to be free.

What you only grasp intellectually may be overthrown by a new argument;
but what you realise is yours for ever. Talking, talking religion is but
little good. Put God behind everything — man, animal, food, work; make
this a habit.

Ingersoll once said to me: "I believe in making the most out of this
world, in squeezing the orange dry, because this world is all we are
sure of." I replied: "I know a better way to squeeze the orange of this
world than you do, and I get more out of it. I *know* I cannot die, so I
am not in a hurry; I know there is no fear, so I enjoy the squeezing. I
have no duty, no bondage of wife and children and property; I can love
all men and women. Everyone is God to me. Think of the joy of loving man
as God! Squeeze your orange this way and get ten thousandfold more out
of it. Get every single drop."

That which seems to be the will is the Atman behind, it is really free.

MONDAY AFTERNOON.

Jesus was imperfect because he did not live up fully to his own ideal,
and above all because he did not give woman a place equal to man. Women
did everything for him, and yet he was so bound by the Jewish custom
that not one was made an apostle. Still he was the greatest character
next to Buddha, who in his turn was not fully perfect. Buddha, however,
recognised woman's right to an equal place in religion, and his first
and one of his greatest disciples was his own wife, who became the head
of the whole Buddhistic movement among the women of India. But we ought
not to criticise these great ones, we should only look upon them as far
above ourselves. Nonetheless we must not pin our faith to any man,
however great; we too must become Buddhas and Christs.

No man should be judged by his defects. The great virtues a man has are
his especially, his errors are the common weaknesses of humanity and
should never be counted in estimating his character.

\*            \*            \*

*Vira*, the Sanskrit word for "heroic", is the origin of our word
"virtue", because in ancient times the best fighter was regarded as the
most virtuous man.

</div>
