---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](37_tuesday_july_30.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](39_thursday_august_1.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

WEDNESDAY, *July 31, 1895*.

Luther drove a nail into religion when he took away renunciation and
gave us morality instead. Atheists and materialists can have ethics, but
only believers in the Lord can have religion.

The wicked pay the price of the great soul's holiness. Think of that
when you see a wicked man. Just as the poor man's labour pays for the
rich man's luxury, so is it in the spiritual world. The terrible
degradation of the masses in India is the price nature pays for the
production of great souls like Mirâ-bâi, Buddha, etc.[1](#fn1)

\*            \*            \*

"I am the holiness of the holy" (Gita). I am the root, each uses it in
his own way, but all is I. "I do everything, you are but the occasion."

Do not talk much, but feel the spirit within you; then you are a Jnani.
This is knowledge, all else is ignorance. All that is to be known is
Brahman. It is the all. . . .

Sattva binds through the search for happiness and knowledge, Rajas binds
through desire, Tamas binds through wrong perception and laziness.
Conquer the two lower by Sattva, and then give up all to the Lord and be
free.

The Bhakti-Yogi realises Brahman very soon and goes beyond the three
qualities. (Gita, Chapter XII.)

The will, the consciousness, the senses, desire, the passions, all these
combined make what we call the "soul".

There is first, the apparent self (body); second, the mental self who
mistakes the body for himself (the Absolute bound by Maya); third, the
Atman, the ever pure, the ever free. Seen partially, It is nature; seen
wholly, all nature goes, even the memory of it is lost. There is the
changeable (mortal), the eternally changeable (nature), and the
Unchangeable (Atman).

Be perfectly hopeless, that is the highest state. What is there to hope
for? Burst asunder the bonds of hope, stand on your Self, be at rest,
never mind what you do, give up all to God, but have no hypocrisy about
it.

Svastha, the Sanskrit word for "standing on your own Self", is used
colloquially in India to inquire, "Are you well, are you happy?" And
when Hindus would express, "I saw a thing", they say, "I saw a
word-meaning (Padârtha)." Even this universe is a "word-meaning".

\*            \*            \*

A perfect man's body mechanically does right; it can do only good
because it is fully purified. The past momentum that carries on the
wheel of body is all good. All evil tendencies are burnt out.

\*            \*            \*

"That day is indeed a bad day when we do not speak of the Lord, not a
stormy day."

Only love for the Supreme Lord is true Bhakti. Love for any other being,
however great, is not Bhakti. The "Supreme Lord" here means Ishvara, the
concept of which transcends what you in the West mean by the personal
God. "He from whom this universe proceeds, in whom it rests, and to whom
it returns, He is Ishvara, the Eternal, the Pure, the All-Merciful, the
Almighty, the Ever-Free, the All-Knowing, the Teacher of all teachers,
the Lord who of His own nature is inexpressible Love."

Man does not manufacture God out of his own brain; but he can only see
God in the light of his own capacity, and he attributes to Him the best
of all he knows. Each attribute is the whole of God, and this signifying
the whole by one quality is the metaphysical explanation of the personal
God. Ishvara is without form yet has all forms, is without qualities yet
has all qualities. As human beings, we have to see the trinity of
existence — God, man, nature; and we cannot do otherwise.

But to the Bhakta all these philosophical distinctions are mere idle
talk. He cares nothing for argument, he does not reason, he "senses", he
perceives. He wants to love himself in pure love of God, and there have
been Bhaktas who maintain that this is more to be desired than
liberation, who say, "I do not want to *be*  sugar. I want to taste
sugar; I want to love and enjoy the Beloved."

In Bhakti-Yoga the first essential is to want God honestly and
intensely. We want everything but God, because our ordinary desires are
fulfilled by the external world. So long as our needs are confined
within the limits of the physical universe, we do not feel any need for
God; it is only when we have had hard blows in our lives and are
disappointed with everything here that we feel the need for something
higher; then we seek God.

Bhakti is not destructive; it teaches that all our faculties may become
means to reach salvation. We must turn them all towards God and give to
Him that love which is usually wasted on the fleeting objects of sense.

Bhakti differs from your Western idea of religion in that Bhakti admits
no elements of fear, no Being to be appeased or propitiated. There are
even Bhaktas who worship God as their own child, so that there may
remain no feeling even of awe or reverence. There can be no fear in true
love, and so long as there is the least fear, Bhakti cannot even begin.
In Bhakti there is also no place for begging or bargaining with God. The
idea of asking God for anything is sacrilege to a Bhakta. He will not
pray for health or wealth or even to go to heaven.

One who wants to love God, to be a Bhakta, must make a bundle of all
these desires and leave them outside the door and then enter. He who
wants to enter the realms of light must make a bundle of all
"shop-keeping" religion and cast it away before he can pass the gates.
It is not that you do not get what you pray for; you get everything, but
it is low, vulgar, a beggar's religion. "Fool indeed is he, who, living
on the banks of the Ganga, digs a little well for water. Fool indeed is
the man who, coming to a mine of diamonds, begins to search for glass
beads." These prayers for health and wealth and material prosperity are
not Bhakti. They are the lowest form of Karma. Bhakti is a higher thing.
We are striving to come into the presence of the King of kings. We
cannot get there in a beggar's dress. If we wanted to enter the presence
of an emperor, would we be admitted in a beggar's rags? Certainly not.
The lackey would drive us out of the gates. This is the Emperor of
emperors and never can we come before Him in a beggar's garb.
Shop-keepers never have admission there, buying and selling will not do
there at all. You read in the Bible that Jesus drove the buyers and
sellers out of the temple.

So it goes without saying that the first task in becoming a Bhakta is to
give up all desires of heaven and so on. Such a heaven would be like
this place, this earth, only a little better. The Christian idea of
heaven is a place of intensified enjoyment. How can that be God? All
this desire to go to heaven is a desire for enjoyment. This has to be
given up. The love of the Bhakta must be absolutely pure and unselfish,
seeking nothing for itself either here or hereafter.

"Giving up the desire of pleasure and pain, gain or loss, worship God
day and night; not a moment is to be lost in vain."

"Giving up all other thoughts, the whole mind day and night worships
God. Thus being worshipped day and night, He reveals Himself and makes
His worshippers feel Him."

[→](39_thursday_august_1.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#txt1)Just as in storming a fort ninety out of a hundred
    soldiers may die, so that the remaining ten may win. It is only in a
    society with very lofty ideals that such great souls are born, but
    the masses, failing to live up to those ideals are degraded.
