---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](39_thursday_august_1.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](41_saturday_august_3.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

FRIDAY, *August 2, 1895*.

Nishthâ (devotion to one ideal) is the beginning of realisation. "Take
the honey out of all flowers; sit and be friendly with all, pay
reverence to all, say to all, 'Yes, brother, yes, brother', but keep
firm in your own way." A higher stage is actually to take the position
of the other. If I am all, why can I not really and actively sympathise
with my brother and see with his eyes? While I am weak, I must stick to
one course (Nishthâ), but when I am strong, I can feel with every other
and perfectly sympathise with his ideas.

The old idea was: "Develop one idea at the expense of all the rest". The
modern way is "harmonious development". A third way is to "develop the
mind and control it", then put it where you will; the result will come
quickly. This is developing yourself in the truest way. Learn
concentration and use it in any direction. Thus you lose nothing. He who
gets the whole must have the parts too. Dualism is included in Advaitism
(monism).

"I first saw him and he saw me. There was a flash of eye from me to him
and from him to me."

This went on until the two souls became so closely united that they
actually became one. . . .

There are two kinds of Samadhi — I concentrate on myself, then I
concentrate and there is a unity of subject and object.

You must be able to sympathise fully with each particular, then at once
to jump back to the highest monism. After having perfected yourself, you
limit yourself voluntarily. Take the whole power into each action. Be
able to become a dualist for the time being and forget Advaita, yet be
able to take it up again at will.

\*            \*            \*

Cause and effect are all Maya, and we shall grow to understand that all
we see is as disconnected as the child's fairy tales now seem to us.
There is really no such thing as cause and effect and we shall come to
know it. Then if you can, lower your intellect to let any allegory pass
through your mind without questioning about connection. Develop love of
imagery and beautiful poetry and then enjoy all mythologies as poetry.
Come not to mythology with ideas of history and reasoning. Let it flow
as a current through your mind, let it be whirled as a candle before
your eyes, without asking who holds the candle, and you will get the
circle; the residuum of truth will remain in your mind.

The writers of all mythologies wrote in symbols of what they saw and
heard, they painted flowing pictures. Do not try to pick out the themes
and so destroy the pictures; take them as they are and let them act on
you. Judge them only by the effect and get the good out of them.

\*            \*            \*

Your own will is all that answers prayer, only it appears under the
guise of different religious conceptions to each mind. We may call it
Buddha, Jesus, Krishna, Jehovah, Allah, Agni, but it is only the Self,
the "I". . . .

Concepts grow, but there is no historical value in the allegories which
present them. Moses' visions are more likely to be wrong than ours are,
because we have more knowledge and are less likely to be deceived by
illusions.

Books are useless to us until our own book opens; then all other books
are good so far as they confirm our book. It is the strong that
understand strength, it is the elephant that understands the lion, not
the rat. How can we understand Jesus until we are his equals? It is all
in the dream to feed five thousand with two loaves, or to feed two with
five loaves; neither is real and neither affects the other. Only
grandeur appreciates grandeur, only God realises God. The dream is only
the dreamer, it has no other basis. It is not one thing and the dreamer
another. The keynote running through the music is — "I am He, I am He",
all other notes are but variations and do not affect the real theme. We
are the living books and books are but the words we have spoken.
Everything is the living God, the living Christ; see it as such. Read
man, he is the living poem. We are the light that illumines all the
Bibles and Christs and Buddhas that ever were. Without that, these would
be dead to us, not living.

Stand on your own Self.

The dead body resents nothing; let us make our bodies dead and cease to
identify ourselves with them.

</div>
