---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](43_monday_august_5.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm)
/ [→](../conversations_and_dialogues/from_the_diary_of_a_disciple/scc_i.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

TUESDAY, *August 6, 1895*.

Without the "I" there can be no "you" outside. From this some
philosophers came to the conclusion that the external world did not
exist save in the subject; that the "you" existed only in the "I".
Others have argued that the "I" can only be known through the "you" and
with equal logic. These two views are partial truths, each wrong in part
and each right in part. Thought is as much material and as much in
nature as body is. Both matter and mind exist in a third, a unity which
divides itself into the two. This unity is the Atman, the real Self.

There is being, "x", which is manifesting itself as both mind and
matter. Its movements in the seen are along certain fixed lines called
law. As a unity, it is free; as many, it is bound by law. Still, with
all this bondage, an idea of freedom is ever present, and this is
Nivritti, or the "dragging from attachment". The materialising forces
which through desire lead us to take an active part in worldly affairs
are called Pravritti.

That action is moral which frees us from the bondage of matter and vice
versa. This world appears infinite, because everything is in a circle;
it returns to whence it came. The circle meets, so there is no rest or
peace here in any place. We must get out. Mukti is the one end to be
attained. . . .

Evil changes in form but remains the same in quality. In ancient times
force ruled, today it is cunning. Misery in India is not so bad as in
America, because the poor man here sees the greater contrast to his own
bad condition.

Good and evil are inextricably combined, and one cannot be had without
the other. The sum total of energy in this universe is like a lake,
every wave inevitably leads to a corresponding depression. The sum total
is absolutely the same; so to make one man happy is to make another
unhappy. External happiness is material and the supply is fixed; so that
not one grain can be had by one person without taking from another. Only
bliss beyond the material world can be had without loss to any. Material
happiness is but a transformation of material sorrow.

Those who are born in the wave and kept in it do not see the depression
and what is there. Never think, you can make the world better and
happier. The bullock in the oil-mill never reaches the wisp of hay tied
in front of him, he only grinds out the oil. So we chase the
will-o'-the-wisp of happiness that always eludes us, and we only grind
nature's mill, then die, merely to begin again. If we could get rid of
evil, we should never catch a glimpse of anything higher; we would be
satisfied and never struggle to get free. When man finds that all search
for happiness in matter is nonsense, then religion begins. All human
knowledge is but a part of religion.

In the human body the balance between good and evil is so even that
there is a chance for man to wish to free himself from both.

The free never became bound; to ask how he did, is an illogical
question. Where no bondage is, there is no cause and effect. "I became a
fox in a dream and a dog chased me." Now how can I ask why the dog
chased me? The fox was a part of the dream, and the dog followed as a
matter of course; but both belong to the dream and have no existence
outside. Science and religion are both attempts to help us out of the
bondage; only religion is the more ancient, and we have the superstition
that it is the more holy. In a way it is, because it makes morality a
vital point, and science does not.

"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." This sentence
alone would save mankind if all books and prophets were lost. This
purity of heart will bring the vision of God. It is the theme of the
whole music of this universe. In purity is no bondage. Remove the veils
of ignorance by purity, then we manifest ourselves as we really are and
know that we were never in bondage. The seeing of many is the great sin
of all the world. See all as Self and love all; let all idea of
separateness go. . . .

The diabolical man is a part of my body as a wound or a burn is. We have
to nurse it and get it better; so continually nurse and help the
diabolical man, until he "heals" and is once happy and healthy.

While we think on the relative plane, we have the right to believe that
as bodies we can be hurt by relative things and equally that we can be
helped by them. This idea of help, abstracted, is what we call God. The
sum total of all ideas of help is God.

God is the abstract compound of all that is merciful and good and
helpful; that should be the sole idea. As Atman, we have no body; so to
say, "I am God, and poison does not hurt me", is an absurdity. While
there is a body and we see it, we have not realised God. Can the little
whirlpool remain after the river vanishes? Cry for help, and you will
get it; and at last you will find that the one crying for help has
vanished, and so has the Helper, and the play is over; only the Self
remains.

This once done, come back and play as you will. This body can then do no
evil, because it is not until the evil forces are all burned out that
liberation comes. All dross has been burned out and there remains "flame
without heat and without smoke".

The past momentum carries on the body, but it can only do good, because
the bad was all gone before freedom came. The dying thief on the cross
reaped the effects of his past actions. He had been a Yogi and had
slipped; then he had to be born again; again he slipped and became a
thief; but the past good he had done bore fruit, and he met Jesus in the
moment when liberation could come, and one word made him free.

Buddha set his greatest enemy free, because he, by hating him (Buddha)
so much, kept constantly thinking of him; that thought purified his
mind, and he became ready for freedom. Therefore think of God all the
time, and that will purify you. . . .

(*Thus ended the beautiful lessons of our beloved Guru. The following
Monday he left Thousand Island Park and returned to New York.*)

</div>
