+++
title = "The vrAtya stoma"

+++
The vratya stoma is described in the first 4 sections of the 17th
chapter of the pa\~nchaviMsha brAhmaNa. The stoma has been described as
a means of admitting non-Aryans to the Aryan fold but this is not clear
from the vedic text describing the rite. A summary of the brAhmaNa
discourse is given below:  
The vrAtya stoma’s frame tale goes thus. The devas went to svargo lokaH.
The gaNas of the dreaded The god were left behind leading the life of
vrAtyas. They reached the spot where the devas had ascended to svarga
but they neither found the stoma nor the Chandas by means of which they
may join them. Then the devas told the maruts deliver the attendents of
rudra the needful so that they may reach us. To them the maruts
delivered that stoma with the 16 mantra chant which is the cryptic
anuShTubh.

Those who lead the life of a vrAtya are verily destitute or left behind
because they neither practise the vedic study nor farming nor trade. It
is by the stoma of the maruts that they prosper. For the rite he deploys
the chant ” adha hi indra girvaNaH: For o indra who delights in the
chants\`(RV8.7-9)” which are in the kakubh Chandas. But the kakubh is an
unequal Chandas for the sAmans. So he shall perform the shifting
transformation on unequal padas of the kakubh to get the equalized
verses for the song to the maruts known as the dyautAna sAman. When the
gR^ihasta chants the nidhana of this song it must end in the word
“indra” musically uttered. The vrAtyas would be excluded from the
prosperity if they were to use this nidhana. Hence they must replace
indra in the nidhana of the song with the anirukta nidhana which goes
thus with the following mystic stobha: au^2 3 ho^1 2345 ; i.e. falling
from the highest pitch to the second last svara of the regular saman
scale.

The sacrificial oblations to the maruts may be made with the series of
chants with 4 stomas with 16 mantras. The structure of the chants in the
rite with respect to the the number of mantras they contain is thus: 9,
15, 15, 15, 16 : 16, 17, 17, 17, 16 : 16, 21  
  
This rite is supposed to expitiate those who have eaten abhojya food as
though the brAhmaNa’s food, those who speak in corrupted sanskrit, who
have perform unjust acts, who despite being vrAtyas speak in Chandas.

Thus, while there is an element of prAyshchitta in the prathama vrAtya
stoma does not seem to be for non-Aryans.
