+++
title = "Wanderings in the sun"

+++
They say it is galanin. It had triggered the waves in the rasArNava. The
warm sun was exceedingly pleasant as it dipped towards the western peg.
The relieved ourselves of the ill memories of the tragic bandha
temporarily and wandered on the sunny plains. But the samudra within was
hardly placid. The huge waves lashed as result of the highest rasa. Then
it came under the grasp of dhumAvati’s sleep and was suppressed for a
long time.

As we wandered in the sun we wondered why the waves were lashing about.
We connected with the muni and “spoke”-

I: The fatal cell phone torments us.

M: Now is not time to think of the cell phone when you wander in the
sun.

I:Indeed, but even the pleasures of hayasthanika and Arginine no longer
mean anything.

M: The shachIva and the amAtya were wandering on the vAnara mountain in
search of gold. Gold alone of all those metal does not decay due to the
virulence of oxygen. They chipped away at the rocks and found iron in
abundance. But of what use is iron for this purpose? The atmosphere at
your place is so filled with oxygen. They found a few copper nuggets and
were transporting it via the pAShaNDa hill, when the traitor “Shoi”
stole it from them as they trusted him. You caught up in the battle of
pAShaNDa hill were unable to send reinforcements. They of course found a
lot of Fool’s gold but the phenol test you performed showed their true
colors. Then they found a large lump of aluminium and brought it to us.
It was correctly realized that the aluminium was no use for the said
purpose. You wisely dropped.

I: Indeed all that was true until we made the fatal mistake with the
globule of mercury.

M: Thus, Oh mantravAha, are the vagaries of rasAyana \! As we mentioned
before the amAtya sensed some trouble. Still, we walked into the trap\!
Sometimes you never know until the experiment is done. And in rasAyana
some experiments are dangerous.
