+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "May 16, 2021"

+++
A review-summary of the platonic dialogue of Minos. This dialogue serves
as a preview to *Laws* and the two speakers are Socrates & an unknown
interlocutor \[Friend\]. Law in greek is *nomos* but a more accurate
understanding is custom. Custom that is accepted, written down is
accepted (*nomizomenon*) as written law. Laws is one of the late
platonic dialogues & remained unpublished at Plato’s death. Socrates
begins by establishing laws do not have sorts, they do not differ in the
essence of lawness just as “what sort of gold?” is a silly question. A
law is something different from what is accepted by the people. Just as
speech is different from what is spoken, sight is different from what is
seen. Laws cannot be resolutions, for some resolutions or political
judgements of a city are wicked but the law is always good. Are not the
law-abiding just & the lawless unjust? So wicked resolutions are not
laws. Laws are still judgements & since it isn’t wicked judgement it is
always the admirable or good judgement. Is not good judgement always
true judgement? And is not true judgement discovery of reality ? So
*laws are discoveries of reality*. If humans do not make use of the same
judgements, then does it not mean that they are not capable of
discovering what reality is?  

On a side note, we find out the carthaginians did human sacrifices which
the greeks condemned. In earlier times, the greeks buried their dead in
the house. Socrates now says just as what is heavy or light does not
change among the greeks or persians, similarly what is fine is fine and
what is shameful is shameful. Just as there are laws of cookery and
medicine that are common across the world. There are treatises written
to expound those laws and classes of people skilled in using them
(doctors, cooks). What is correct is simply the accepted idea in a given
sphere. But whose laws are most authoritative? The shepherds’ for the
sheep and the kings for human souls.  
  
Among the ancient kings, plato says the minoans of crete had the best
lawgiver – *Minos \[a son of Zeus and Europa\]*. Plato says Minos was
educated by Zeus as mentioned by both Homer & Hesiod – and held in the
highest regard by them. This is akin to Manu the divine lawgiver who
possesses the *rājavidyā* in our tradition. Plato says the athenian
poets demonize minos because crete went to war with athens. (story of
the minotaur that was fed athenian youths).

