+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "May 14, 2021"

+++
In the 400s CE, rome was divided into two halves:- the eastern half
ruled by the emperor at constantinople covered anatolia, greece, thrace,
syria, egypt, palestine. This half was administratively roman but
culturally & linguistically greek. In this half of the mediterranean,
koine greek had served as a lingua franca for centuries. In the western
half in the areas of italy, north africa, gaul, hispania & britain – the
lingua franca was latin. Educated roman aristocrats were educated in
greek since birth. However, the layperson in the western half always had
little to no knowledge of the greek language. Why is this important?  
  
Natural philosophy & science in rome was almost entirely in ancient
greek. the two main traditions of plato, aristotle and all their
students wrote entirely in greek. Geometry – that of Euclid was entirely
in greek. When the empire fell to the vandals & goths in the middle of
the 5th century, with its fall the knowledge of greek in western rome
vanished. Languages in these times were very hard to learn, especially
ones like ancient greek. Native speakers were essential to help teach
the language. There were no grammar books or structured courses in latin
to learn greek. Another issue complicated things, the Greek language
itself was changing & by the 700s Byzantine Greek had emerged which was
radically different from the Koine spoken before. Koine itself was
nearly 800 years removed from the language of Plato, Aristotle (Attic).
Attic itself was removed another 400 years from the Greek of Homer &
Hesiod. It was becoming very hard to read and understand the ancients
for even native greek speakers, leave alone latins trying to learn the
tongue.

One might ask, were not any famous greek works translated into latin?
some. Half of the Timaeus of Plato (containing a cosmology with the
demiurge as the creator, based on his theory of forms) was available in
latin. This text was the only authentic platonic material the entire
christian church had at its avail for nearly half a millenium. The
church had more luck with Aristotle, the polymath founder of the Lyceum
& possibly the most influential greek philosopher. A roman aristocrat
named Anicus Boethius (480-520 CE) was fortunate enough to have received
a proper education in Athens or Alexandria which rendered him fluent in
Ancient Greek. Boethius allied himself with the germanic king Theodoric
who was then ruling the now ravaged Rome. Taking on the rule of his
prime minister; he had some short term success. Eventually, Boethius
found himself imprisioned in Pavia due to being on the wrong side of a
secret roman plot to depose of Theodoric & install a roman emperor.
Boethius was innocent but took the side of the plotters who were his
friends out of perhaps loyalty. Once in prison and sentenced to death,
he found time for philosophy as his only companion. He likely realized
the gravity of the situation (the fall of the classical world, along
with it the disappearance of greek) and began on a mission to preserve
classical knowledge by translating everything into latin.

Some scholars speculate that though born a christian, he probably
reverted to paganism during his time in prison which further
strengthened his resolve to preserve classical greek knowledge. While he
died without completing his goal, he left behind 4 translated works of
Aristotle (with original commentaries on them) 2 of mathematics
(Ptolemy, Nichomachus) and around a dozen original works. His best known
work, (*De consolatione philosophiae*) is in the form of a platonic
dialogue with philosophy personified as a lady answering his questions.
This work was so famous in europe, Alfred of Wessex (the champion of the
Old English tongue) tried translating it on his own into OE. 800 years
later, Queen Elizabeth the I would try the same thing.

On this paltry diet of timaeus of plato & the aristotelian corpus of
boethius – the catholics fed their hunger for a pagan philosophy &
science they had heard of but did not have direct access too for nearly
800 years before the 12th century renaissance brough back a lot of greek
knowledge. On a side note, the 12th century renaissance happened when
plato & aristotle were reliably brought back to latin europe when the
spanish reconquered the moorish kingdoms, whose libraries housed arabic
translations of virtually all of ancient hellenic philosophy. The arabs
themselves only got this knowledge because they had *conquered the greek
speaking parts of byzantine* in the 800s and had taken prompt efforts to
translate all original works into arabic. The private library of the
abbasid caliph harun al rashid was the *bayt al hikmah or the baghdad
house of wisdom* that housed the creme de la creme of greek philosophy &
science.  
  
To highlight the absolute poverty of latin christian europe in the
sciences in the middle ages, we can look at private correspondence
letters from 1020 CE of two catholic scholars – *Raoul of Liège and
Ragimbold of Cologne*. These two lacked basic knowledge of geometry and
were unaware the angles of a triangle make up 180 degrees, unaware of
what an exterior or interior angle was. The two were unaware of what the
square root of two was, as it wasn’t a rational number.

In the next post, we will look at how pagan science influenced both
western christian europe & the arab world. We also try to understand
it’s importance in christianity & why the christians or arabs themselves
were unable to come up with a philosophy and science of their own but
relied on the system of our yavana cousins.

