+++
title = "Man Cannot Ban What Man Did Not Create – On Sweden’s Proposed “Rune-Ban”"
date = "May 23, 2019"

+++
![60951639_10161793976465574_8110987777912340480_n
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/60951639_10161793976465574_8110987777912340480_n-1.jpg?w=676)

The heralded intent of the Swedish government to attempt to “ban” Runes,
and more broadly other heritage/religious elements on grounds that they
might “look” Neo-Nazi, must be \*absolutely\* opposed.

Before proceeding further, and lest I be (wilfully) misinterpreted, I
shall say one thing. I am no fan of Neo-Nazis, and have regularly found
that some of the most obstinate and ridiculous of outright
\*intentional\* distorters and perverters of our area of expertise here
at Arya Akasha and #NAS, have come from within their ranks.

This is a pattern which continues the legacy of various \*actual\* Nazis
from the 1930s and 40s – who appeared to run around with what I have
termed a “Headcanon: ACCEPTED” approach to pretty much anything
pertaining to the Indo-European peoples and ways. Hence, ridiculous
claims made at the time that “Brahmins are Jews” \[and therefore that
Hindu texts should be “de-Brahminized” or whatever in order to provide
“Aryan authenticity” – which is an absolute inversion of reality!\]; and
on the Nordic front, the attempted popularization of the so-called
“Armanen runes” in preference of actual and authentic Runic tradition.
\[A full discursion on Why Guido von List Basically Did Not Care About
Authentic Religion Or Heritage is beyond the scope of this piece – just
take my word for it\].

I therefore am not penning this in order to attempt to defend (Neo-)Nazi
utilization of Runes, any more than I – a pious Hindu – would be
especially keen upon Neo-Nazi co-option of any of our symbols, such as
the Swastika, or even the very word “Aryan”.

But you see, this is the problem: If you endeavour to outlaw Runes, then
only Outlaws shall have Them. And I am not meaning “outlaw”, here, in
its sense as “Vratya” \[referencing our #NASservation around the ancient
Vratya of India as both ‘Outlaws’ directly translated, as well as
‘Word-Warriors’, more figuratively rendered; and also a rather pointed
oblique allusion to a certain Other Figure\]; but rather, to the
political and apparently legal undesirables of these ‘Far-Right’
political currents.

By attempting to ‘marginalize’ and ‘push to the fringes’ foundational
elements of heritage and history, you all but ensure that not only will
the wilful distorters of them who are found \*at the margins\* will have
exclusive and uncontested claim to Them … but also that any seeking to
encounter their own culture and heritage, shall inexorably be driven to
seek out these fringe-dwellers as the now all but exclusive possession
and (mis-)users of the symbols and other elements in question.

\[On a brief side-note, and before persons from both sides of \*that\*
debate jump upon the metaphor I opened with above … I am not here
attempting to make some form of broader analogous point around
firearm-ownership restrictions. Runes, and by extension, Words and
Speech more broadly, \*are\* a mighty weapon \[and we have the RigVedic
Hymnal citation for Vac \[‘Voice’ – or, more figuratively, I suppose,
‘communication’\] as the \*most powerful\* Weapon – as it is also the
force which can reshape reality with but an utterance; yet they are also
‘intangible’, and much harder to genuinely or meaningfully police the
possession of. How do you excise the contents of someone’s mind? Erase
their memory to remove knowledge and thereby completely prevent its
transmission in secret?

The answer, of course, is that you attempt to ‘over-write’ what is
already there – and thus ensure that any subsequent recollection or
further reproduction will be ‘twisted’, and therefore something somewhat
or entirely different from its previous, initial form. Orwell phrased
this as “Newspeak”. And I suppose you could also class the insistence
that any and every “Runic” symbol (except, one presumes, the Bluetooth
corporate logo and device-icon) is axiomatically a heraldic insignia of
(Neo-Nazi) ‘hate’, as a similar exercise in memetic-supplantation fur
kulturkampfen purposes\]

Further, even beyond what has been said above, there is no getting
around the fact that the Runes, especially of the Elder Futhark,
represent a fundamental and intrinsic element of Scandinavian heritage.
And an irreducible component of a yet-living suite of religious
movements.

To attempt to cut Them out from the heart of your history and, indeed,
your present and your future, due to the would-be corruption and
co-option perpetrated by a few (the incredible vast majority of time,
not even located in Sweden), seems utterly abominable to me.

It is not ‘fit for purpose’, as it shall only have likely very limited
effect upon “Neo-Nazis”. And instead, as I have said, mostly merely
makes criminals out of those genuinely interested in their heritage, and
those authentically practicing a (minority) religion.

I am also genuinely quite concerned about the ‘further steps’ which may
ensue from such a move. As I have mentioned elsewhere and in more
detail, we have already seen an effort at having the Swastika “banned”
from the Kumbh Mela religious festival in India this year. It is the
world’s largest gathering of Hindus, and goes back centuries. The
symbol, meanwhile, has an easily authenticable lineage of occurrence and
significance/saliency spanning some thousands of years, and not even
‘just’ in Hindu use.

Yet because of the Nazis, and their self-declared ideological
successors, you had a push from people outside India to outlaw a Hindu
symbol at a Hindu occurrence in the very heartland of Hinduism.

A similar argument has been mounted here in New Zealand, upon occasions
when curmudgeons and Christian-supremacists have objected to Hindus
having Swastikas visible on their properties – or, in one case, putting
up an entirely legal Murti of Lord Shiva outside, that didn’t even have
any obvious Swastikas upon it. \[I am also anticipating a comparable
situation for the Gyan mudra \[hand-gesture\] that somewhat frequently
occurs in our iconography and practice – as it looks like a certain
“white power hand sign” that Stephen Fry of all people was just attacked
in the media for apparently making\]

If we are to go down this morally moribund trajectory, would it not be
simpler to ask for the banning of the religion in question all up.

Certainly, it would be far ‘easier’ in some senses, to attempt to
criminalize the speaking of Sanskrit in these places, than to attempt to
meaningfully discern whether somebody using the word “Aryan” is a pious
Hindu (yes, there are even some white ones – apparently soon to become
more “Ghora” than “Gora” in the eyes of certain of their countrymen)
rather than a dangerous subversive political extremist or ‘white
nationalist’.

But why stop there? Neo-Nazis and Fascists often spread their propaganda
by writing in English, using ‘Roman’ characters and Christian elements.
ISIS recruits using Arabic, and deploying notionally Islamic religious
concepts. Shall these, too, be barred from public nor private use? Does
the memetic adoption of “Deus Vult” necessitate the barring of Latin
from Catholic liturgy ? (There’s probably a Vatican II joke in there
somewhere) Does the occurrence of the word “Democratic” in “Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea” mean we shall now seek, too, the outlawry of
the very concept (or even just the word (of)) ‘Democracy’?

Runestones remain studded in the ground throughout Scandinavia. Shall
they now be ‘uprooted’, in some form of ‘cultural revolution’ style
iconoclasm, lest they become still-living signs of resistance against
the McWorld-ist and probably implicitly ‘liberal’ Atheist attempts to
first distance and then deconnect entirely, a people from its heritage?

How about the many Roman relics – the archaeological and architectural
wonders which yet still stand even in the streets of Italy and other
European countries as well as in museums half the world over. These have
been, and occasionally still are, regarded as potent symbols of
‘Fascist’ inspiration – the Ara Pacis Augustae, in particular, was
‘restored’ and protectively housed for public display by none other than
Mussolini. Shall these, too, be subjected to a Damnatio Memoriae, the
Colosseum and Trajan’s Column dismantled ‘stone by stone’ til an
unutterable and gravely almost-imaginable cultural desert, a dead-land,
a wasteland has been in their place wrought, and surely facetiously
termed “unproblematic” “peace” ?

Or are we better than that. Capable of appreciating the position that
the best ‘antidote’ to the poisonous (mis-)use and corruption of
religious and heritage elements, is to counter this with the proper and
hallowed-via-authenticity exaltation of these elements instead.

Putting my religious fundamentalist zealot helmet back on (not that it
had ever left my head), one vitally important Mythic Truth also occurs:

The Runes were not ‘created’ by ordinary human hand. (In fact, there is
a rather good argument that They were not ‘created’ by Divine Hand,
either – instead being more accurately thought of as ‘received’,
‘discovered’, ‘divined’ … ‘Shruti’ (श्रुति), as we would say in
Sanskrit; on the basis that They represent something fundamental and
intrinsic to the fabric of Reality Itself, and beyond)

They can therefore not be \*destroyed\* or otherwise ‘obviated’ by human
hand, particularly not through merely temporarily mighty politician’s
proclamation.

To insist upon this incredibly arrogant and unctuously presumptuous
effort to do otherwise, is to actively court disaster.

A great and terrible curse, indeed – the erasure of a people. And not
(necessarily) in any exclusively ‘supernatural’ or visually dramatic sfx
sense, either. Even if this proposed law-change, and its lugubriously
logical successors were to come into force, there would likely still
remain humans living in Scandinavia.

Yet there is only so far you can go, with the forcible erasure of
history and heritage, before they would indelibly be said to have
stopped being Swedes.

As I have said voluminously both earlier and elsewhere, I am no fan of
Neo-Nazis and related edge-dwellers choosing to distort, to co-opt, and
appropriate elements of authentic religious and cultural occurrence.
Indeed, a not-insignificant part of what I/we do, and why we do it, here
at Arya Akasha and the Nordic-Aryan Sangha , is because we are are
genuinely furious at the ongoing malefic misuse of what is precious to
us – literally sacrosanct – by these sorts of people in service of their
occasionally outright demonic agendas.

Against them, we must – and do – defend.

But not so are they our only foe.

Those allegedly well-intended iconoclasts from the notionally more
‘liberal’ end of the spectrum, who evidently seek to perpetuate the lie
that Runes, Swastikas, or an enthusiasm for one’s ancestral heritage and
living, vital (in many senses of the term) religion … are all somehow
axiomatically, intrinsically, and irreducibly “Nazi” or otherwise
“objectionable” … they, too, have earned our \*entirely deserved\* ire.

We are therefore, it seems, all but ‘surrounded’. Under attack from and
subjected to siege by ‘extremists’ from almost all sides. (Who
curiously, as it happens, often seem in actuality to agree about a great
many things)

Good. That concentrates most everybody we’ve got a problem with in
roughly the same place, for easier disposal. And besides which, means we
shall be able to advance in \*any\* direction.

“अमन्तवो मां त उप कषियन्ति शरुधिश्रुत शरद्धिवं ते वदामि \|\| “
