+++
title = "GHOST DIVISION – On The BhutaGana of Mahadev & The Einherjar ofxa0Odin"
date = "May 13, 2019"

+++
**![56842864_362064057739258_284252325902548992_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56842864_362064057739258_284252325902548992_o.jpg?w=676)**

**GHOST DIVISION – On The BhutaGana of Mahadev & The Einherjar of Odin**

\[*Author’s Note: This piece was initially intended as an offering for
MahaShivRatri, which was this year in early March. A combination of
delays in the writing and peer-review process – for which I take full
responsibility – meant that it was not published until early April; as
‘Luck’ \[one potential translation for ‘Shiva’\] would have it, just in
time for Arya Akasha’s first anniversary of proceeding ‘above ground’
with our operations. References to matters of ‘timing’ and dates ,
therefore, should be taken in this light.*\]

Tonight marks the high holy observance of MahaShivRatri – the Great
Night of Shiva. Falling upon a New Moon when the sky is darkest, this is
often regarded as the blackest point of the year. Appropriate, then, for
MahaKaal.

As with many elements within Hinduism, there are several reasonings for
the Sacredness of this Night. Some say that it is the occasion when Lord
Shiva Nataraja performs the Tandava – the cosmic dance whose rhythms and
motions are keyed to those of the Universe itself. Others emphasize the
significance of the commemoration of the reunification of Lord Shiva and
Lady Parvati in marriage, following the latter’s reincarnation after the
events of the ill-famed Horse-Sacrifice of Daksha \[for more details
upon this, please consult Arya Akasha’s NavRatri series, and in
particular the piece on Ma as ChandraGhanta\].

This multiplicity of mythic mandates for the observance is mirrored in
the myriad of methods via which Devotees will mark it, dependent upon
temperament and regional/sect-ional custom. At its most basic, Shaivites
and other Hindus will make offerings of milk upon a Shaivite Altar
\[ShivLingPuja\]. The more ardent Devotees will carry out a Jagraan – an
all-night vigil at which it is customary to sing hymns, to perform more
intricate rituals (such as synchronized RudraAbhishekam\], to chant,
even to dance, and to tell the stories and legends of Mahadev so that we
may (re-)immanentize them out into the reality around us once more.

As a point of interest, Kathmandu this time of year is shrouded the
city-over in dense clouds of smoke – the conventional fire offerings
intermingled with the cannabis smoke so beloved of the Lord, as
thousands upon thousands of Sadhus and other holy-men of the Mountains
come down from their meditations amidst the crags to throng the streets
leading to the Pashupatinath complex which lies at its heart. These
‘wild men’ live their lives in conscious honorific imitation of Shiva,
growing their hair long and Jatta, bearing both Trident and Drum,
dancing, and smoking cannabis in resin or plant form with little thought
given to the externally imposed (quite literally – by the Americans, in
the 1970s) laws governing such things. It amuses me every year when the
Nepali police issue a statement in the run-up to Maha ShivRatri stating
they won’t be enforcing anti-drug laws against the Shaivite Saints and
Sadhus in attendance – nobody, one supposes, wants to arrest a holy-man.

![56416921_362695837676080_2054022239061278720_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56416921_362695837676080_2054022239061278720_n.jpg?w=676)

Nepal also goes very ‘all-out’ in other ways for this festival; with the
custom that is often performed by ordinary Devotees elsewhere in the
Hindusphere, of dressing up (in a manner perhaps not entirely dissimilar
to Halloween/The Day of the Dead costuming in their older and
yet-uncommercialized significance) as the Bhole Ki Baraat – the Wedding
Processional/Armed Retinue of Mahadev – being mirrored directly by the
Nepali Army, who carry out an annual Parade in honour of the Deity Whose
Trishula & Damaru they themselves bear as their ensign.

[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/05/13/ghost-division-on-the-bhutagana-of-mahadev-the-einherjar-of-odin/56337117_362695891009408_8006045113937559552_n/)

![56337117_362695891009408_8006045113937559552_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56337117_362695891009408_8006045113937559552_n.jpg?w=320&h=199 "56337117_362695891009408_8006045113937559552_n")

[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/05/13/ghost-division-on-the-bhutagana-of-mahadev-the-einherjar-of-odin/56337163_362695931009404_3232525526660808704_n/)

![56337163_362695931009404_3232525526660808704_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56337163_362695931009404_3232525526660808704_n.jpg?w=348&h=199 "56337163_362695931009404_3232525526660808704_n")

[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/05/13/ghost-division-on-the-bhutagana-of-mahadev-the-einherjar-of-odin/56595510_362695971009400_2632748066922299392_n/)

![56595510_362695971009400_2632748066922299392_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56595510_362695971009400_2632748066922299392_n.jpg?w=672&h=394 "56595510_362695971009400_2632748066922299392_n")

In fact, it is this element of the mythology which forms the crux of
this piece. You see, the Baraat of Rudra is comprised of many of the
same elements as the BhutaGana of Mahadev. Which is entirely
understandable. After all, if one is going to have an armed wedding
processional (as was the custom in older times upon the Subcontinent for
a prospective Dulha \[Groom\]), then it only makes sense for it to be
built around the Army of Ghosts (and, for that matter, Court of Fiends,
intimidatingly visaged religious folks etc.) which frequently accompany
Shiva anyway.

![56385004_362695734342757_1316239804995731456_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56385004_362695734342757_1316239804995731456_n.jpg?w=676)

So therefore, just as MahaShivRatri is an observance of reunification,
and characterized by votive offerings from Devotees to recognize said
theme … allow us here at the Nordic-Aryan Sangha \[ #NAS \] and Arya
Akasha Research Institute, to present our 2019 MahaShivRatri commentary:

**GHOST DIVISION – On the BhutaGana of Mahadev, and the Einherjar of
Odin.**

As we shall demonstrate, in the case of the Terrifying \[Yggr/Bhairava\]
Lord of the Worlds, the One Who is Roarer \[Rudra/Hrjóðr\], Who is
Wielder of the \[Three\]Spear \[ShulaPani/GeirTyr\], with the Flaming
Eye \[Baleygr – also a well-known Shaivite element\], accompanied by the
Two Wolves, Husband of the Mountain-Goddess \[UmaPataye / Faðmbyggvir
Friggjar\] and Who is the Wandering \[Harrower\] of the Storm Wind
\[Vayu-Vata/Voden\] … the accompaniment of this most Mighty of Deities,
in both Indo-European cultures’ mythological perspectives, by an armed
force of dead-but-not warriors is yet further evidence of the underlying
fundamental \*unity\* of both ‘Vedic’ and ‘Eddic’ religion.**  
**

[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/05/13/ghost-division-on-the-bhutagana-of-mahadev-the-einherjar-of-odin/56306582_361850254427305_7165358407375912960_o/)

![56306582_361850254427305_7165358407375912960_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56306582_361850254427305_7165358407375912960_o.jpg?w=482&h=241 "56306582_361850254427305_7165358407375912960_o")

[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/05/13/ghost-division-on-the-bhutagana-of-mahadev-the-einherjar-of-odin/56349182_361850187760645_2749074885312512000_o/)

![56349182_361850187760645_2749074885312512000_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56349182_361850187760645_2749074885312512000_o.jpg?w=186&h=241 "56349182_361850187760645_2749074885312512000_o")

It also has further societal and devotional implications for the
‘soteriology’ of each pathway. Insofar as the highest honour for the
pious in both cultures can be regarded as the demonstration over the
course of one’s lifetime and in the manner of one’s death that you, too,
are worthy to join the most esteemed ranks of the retinue of the Lord of
the (Un)Dead \[Draugrdrottin/Bhutenath\] and ascend to a more
fundamental (indeed – Feudal ! ) unity of purpose with the
primarch-primogenitor Heavenly Father of our people(s). \[add
appropriate Old Norse & Sanskrit equivalencies for the aforementioned
terms\].

But who – or, one supposes more especially, what – are these revenant
reivers?

**The Haunting Harii of the High(est) One  
**  
![56508766_363169294295401_7389132684603162624_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56508766_363169294295401_7389132684603162624_n.jpg?w=676)

We shall start with the Nordic understanding – the Einherjar, and other,
strongly similar encounterings such as the “Harii” ‘tribe’ cited by
Tacitus in Germania, and the subsequent developments of the Wild Hunt
and Troupe of Harlequin.

As applies the “Einherjar”, the etymology of the term renders it
something closely approximating “One Man Army” – a fitting epithet for
those who were, in life, the mightiest of the mighty upon the fields of
war. \[The ‘Herja’ particle, as a point of interest, continues on also
into modern German as “Heer” – Army; modern English in “to harry”, or
Harrow, the latter of which originally referred to a Germanic raiding
party; and in a fitting bout of #NAS – is strongly coterminous with the
“Hara” epithet of Mahadev, meaning a “Destroyer” or “Seizer”, and in a
slightly older form, “Overpowerer”, “Victor”.\] \[However, it is
important to note the other potential rendering of ‘Einherjar’ – with
‘Ein’, in this sense, meaning a “Unique”, ‘one-of-a-kind’ combatant –
further underscoring the quite literally exceptionally high standards of
both skill and nobility requisite for entry into Odin’s own Spear-Hall\]

Observed in combat by the Valkyries \[the ‘choosers of the slain’ – an
epithet closely coterminous with the Valkjosandi theonym of Odin, their
Lord\], they are selected upon their death for their inherent
worthiness, their nobility, as measured in no small part through their
sheer hypercompetence at feats of heroics and force of arms; and then
borne aloft to a further ‘winnowing’ (or, if you prefer, “harrowing”)
process, wherein half the ‘worthies’ are directed to Freyja’s own
equivalent to Valhalla – Folkvangr \[the ‘field of the body-of-men’ ,
perhaps understandable in a manner similar to an army encampment\].

Once there, they continue to hone and perfect their martial skills
fighting against one another day in, day out; interrupted by the
restorative feasts and drinking, and presumably also story-telling upon
an evening.

The purpose of all of this?

The superior prosecution of the War At The End Of Time; a conflict so
incredibly dire in scope and portency that, as Odin says in the
Gylfaginning, “when the Wolf comes”, even such a mighty host of the
greatest warriors in the world, numbering in their thousands, and with
thousands of years worth of further preparation and training atop their
already incredible prowess, shall seem “too few”.

But what is Indo-European mythology – especially of the Germanic
iterations – without brave, glorious, and noble Last Stands.

![55822274_363169177628746_322241796966973440_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/55822274_363169177628746_322241796966973440_n.jpg?w=676)

Now, it is intriguing to note that the same general concept of ‘ghost
warriors’, turns up repeatedly and in perhaps surprising places,
elsewhere in the corpus of what we know about the ancient Germanic folk.

One most prominent source is, as mentioned earlier, a peculiar passage
in Tacitus’ Germania work of ethnography, detailing a tribe he called
the “Harii”.

Quoth Tacitus: “As for the Harii, quite apart from their strength, which
exceeds that of the other tribes I have just listed, they pander to
their innate savagery by skill and timing: with black shields and
painted bodies, they choose dark nights to fight, and by means of terror
and shadow of a ghostly army they cause panic, since no enemy can bear a
sight so unexpected and hellish; in every battle the eyes are the first
to be conquered.”

Now, there are a number of things going on here that are important to
mention. The first ,unquestionably, is that it’s likely Tacitus was
getting the wrong end of the stick \[usually, in Germanic culture, the
\*pointy\* end of the spear … quite literally\] when it came to
nomenclature – if this tribe ever did exist, and wasn’t simply an
interpolation via slightly confused interlocutors recounting tales of
the rather more \*literal\* Ghost Warriors we have earlier encountered
above. “Harii”, is a latinization of the aforementioned Germanic words
for a war-host, a raiding-party, an army; or of those referring to
warriors and their warrior-chieftains. It is possible, I suppose, that
some Roman somewhere with a passing knowledge of Germanic speech
encountered some Germans, asked them who they were, and in a manner akin
to a particular scene from The 300, was told simply that they were
“warriors”, which got misrecorded as an ethonym instead of a more …
generalized statement of fact and purpose.

But given the other elements at play in this passage, including the
pointed use of psychological warfare, striking from the dark in
unexpected places, the visual efforts to appear as the supernatural
soldiers of the sepulchre, and the quite pointed remarks about the
infliction of \*blindness\* of the enemy upon the field of war \[which
strongly recall two Theonyms of Odin – Herblindi , and Gunnblindi –
meaning ‘Army-Blinder’ and ‘Battle-Blinder’, respectively\] … I suspect
that this is either the indirect recounting of the archetypal
‘Bhutagana’ of Odin – or, perhaps more interestingly, that it is a sort
of necessary ‘re-unification’ of the aforementioned archetypal concept
in its \*mythic\* sense, with the ideal performance, tactics, and
ultimate result of actually-existing Germanic tribal war-hosts.

Or, phrased another way – while I would be rather surprised if there
ever were a “Harii” tribe of Germanic humans at the time Tacitus was
writing … and suspect rather strongly that it’s at least one and
possibly several layers of confusion (appropriately enough) about a
mythic account or actually practiced martial practice … in its supernal
sense, this passage is best understood (to my mind, anyway), as
\*both\*.

The prototypical , archetypal army of legendary reputation to which all
should aspire to be.

Much like, as we have seen earlier, the Einherjar all up.

**The Performances Of The Masqued One ; The Sayings of the High
Harlequin ; Insane Kon Pati  
**  
![57176959_364879844124346_6781080235929501696_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/57176959_364879844124346_6781080235929501696_o.jpg?w=260&h=380)

Another, perhaps less immediately obvious derivation from this initial
point of inspiration, concerns the medieval and renaissance figure of
the “Harlequin”, and his associated troup of ghosts and devils. Now,
it’s not hard to see why this seems rather curious if not outright
counterintuitive to the modern eye.

If we say “Harlequin”, at \*best\* most think of some Renaissance
Italian actor dressed up like a clown. The ordinary person more probably
thinks of a female criminal with demonstrable ‘daddy-issues’ from a
certain rather recent bad movie.

![56842849_364879814124349_4620885795425746944_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56842849_364879814124349_4620885795425746944_o.jpg?w=251&h=500)

Yet as applies the former, at least, the essential connexions are there
if you know where to look. After all, in terms of ‘dramatic
performance’, the putting on of masks or disguises, and the singing
recitation of poetry … both Odin and Shiva have very \*very\* strong
resonances here. Doubly so when we consider the strong elements of
intellect, meta-textual/meta-narrative (self-)awareness \[that is to
say, being keenly aware of one’s own place within the plot, the story …
and thence, able to ‘manipulate’, to ‘game’, and even to ‘subvert’
somewhat or ‘dance upon the fourth wall’ if not outright breaking
through it\] , and a significant acrobatic agility, untrammelled by the
fetters of ‘orthodox’ or ‘ordained’ social conduct, particularly in
pursuit of a rather special woman … which the Harlequin came to be
characterized by.

![56968337_364879764124354_6641573251409510400_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56968337_364879764124354_6641573251409510400_o.jpg?w=300&h=387)

Etymologically, too, the linkage is almost neon in its direction –
Harlequin, you see, derives from “Herle King”, “Herle Cyning” ; that is
to say, the Lord of the Host , the King of Raiders – the Herjan \[in Old
Norse\], a well attested theonymic epithet of Odin. And, speaking of
Odinic theonyms – consider also the “Grimnir”, “Masked One”, which lends
itself to the Grimnismal (‘Sayings of the Masked One’) article of Nordic
scripture. (As a point of further interest, “Grima”, meaning a mask or a
hood (a disguise), when it entered into Old English, also came to mean a
Spectre, an Apparition, a Ghost. It has come down to us via the modern
term “Grimace”, but in its more archaic roots in Proto-Indo-European, as
“Ghrey”, it meant ‘to smear’, ‘to paint’. This recalls, to my mind,
anyway, also the Shaivite practice of the wearing of Tripundra tilaka
markings by Devotees – or the full-scale Vibhuti (Sacred Ash, often of
the Cremation Pyres in the case of some traditions/Victory) of the more
hard-core Shaivite Sadhus. Interestingly, its Ancient Greek derivative –
Khrio – apart from sounding similar to and having figurative connections
in terms of use with, the “Krewh” PIE particle’s Greek and Latin
derivatives \[terms referring to corpses, cruelty, Ice and Cold,
coverings \[see also: PIE: “Kel”, whence “Helmet”, but also whence
“Kaal” – as in .. MahaKaal, the Shaivite Theonym of the ‘Great Death’,
‘Great Black’, ‘Great Time’ – the all-covering and all-destroying\],
carrion-eaters (such as Crows, Ravens, and even, as we shall see, the
Cremation Flame) but also, interestingly, striking, and in one case,
knocking at the door\], is also used to refer to “anointment – and
therefore, in Biblical translation, to the Anointing of a King. While
‘Grey’ theoretically has another, similar sounding PIE derivation, I do
in fact suspect that, particularly as applies “Grime” and Ash, that it
also may derive herefrom \[and while I do not seek to imply a linguistic
derivation, there is also the PIE “Greyd” particle, meaning to Roar, to
Shout – which is of obvious significance to “Rudra”\]. Which matters,
due to the role of “Grey” as the colour of Sky and Stone \[and Steel\]
\[and Smoke, for that matter – but more on that, perhaps, in another
article\]; which, as you may recall from some of my previous work, are
elements closely correlated with both Sky Father and Sovereignty …
although given the PIE Pel/Pelh, meaning “Grey”, a “Covering”, “Pale”,
but also a “Skin”, a “Hide” \[i.e. a “pelt” – like a wolf-skin, of the
famed Indo-European Wolf-Warriors … or a bear-skin, as in the
Berserkers\] , and unsurprisingly an array of terms pertaining to old
age \[Parusa, in Sanskrit, derived from the same root has wound up with
a rather intriguing range of meanings – including greyness,
barbarian-ness, piercing (like the wind), an arrow, attacking speech,
and in slightly modified form, a riddle… \] – you will perhaps forgive
me my Biblical \[and, more specifically, Apocalyptic\] indulgence when I
refer to a “Pale Horseman” \]

![56591027_363169237628740_8454159470203764736_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56591027_363169237628740_8454159470203764736_o.jpg?w=676)

This is further strengthened via the French identification of the “Wild
Hunt” as the Mesnée d’Hellequin – the House \[or, if you prefer, the
Huscarla\] of Harlequin. And it is to that phenomenon which we now shall
turn. Albeit briefly, for the examination of the Wild Hunt, in all its
various observations throughout the Indo-Europeanisphere , would be
quite a weighty work all by itself!

**Riders On The Storm – The Wild Hunt In Europe & Eurasia  
**  
![56960579_364888390790158_2114413593821708288_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56960579_364888390790158_2114413593821708288_o.jpg?w=676)

Suffice to say that in an array of Northern European cultures, it has
never lost its very direct identification with Odin (as seen in quite a
number of localized names in particular tongues especially occurring
across the Germanosphere), and is customarily visualized as an oncoming
host of, as the old song puts it – “Ghost Riders In The Sky”; often
engaged in some sort of hunt, lead by a mighty figure appropriately
equipped (say, with a spear – a frequent hunting weapon when upon
horseback), and characterized overall by a “wildness” (hence, you know,
the name) – an untameable fury. In Sanskrit, we would say “Ugra”.

![56806508_364891190789878_8304263183133048832_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56806508_364891190789878_8304263183133048832_n.jpg?w=676)Now
this, in and of itself, is interesting, for looking at what we have just
described we do not only have a very close coterminity with the
aforementioned ‘Ghost Warriors’ who form Odin’s ‘host’ and ‘household
guard’, so to speak. We \*also\* have a straight-up refraction of the
likely original Indo-European divine archetype whence both Odin (Voden,
Vatain, etc.) and Vayu-Vata \[Who interestingly is regarded as bearing a
\*Flag\*, in relation to His Lance, a symbol of striking import in terms
of both sovereignty and battle-line/rallying-point\], and quite a number
of wind-wandering, horseback-riding, lance/spear equipped deific figures
in between (these are especially common amidst the Scythians and related
Indo-European cultures of the Steppes, for reasons that should be
patently obvious – it represents, more than any other, their idealized
way of life and war and death (the infliction of)).

The Lord of such a Host, then, is not just the Atriðr (the Charging
Rider – and it occurred to me at Mandir this evening that
Kartikeya/Skanda, the Son of Shiva and a Commander of the Heavenly Army,
is very much also this in terms of both panoply and iconography, as well
as linguistics .. “Like Father Like Son”, we might say), or the Fráríðr
(He Who Rides Forth). He is also the Reiðartýr (the God of Riders). A
veritable ‘Rider On The Storm’.

![57317113_364888437456820_3461371438710128640_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/57317113_364888437456820_3461371438710128640_n.jpg?w=676)

This ‘archetypal’ formulation shall be expanded upon at various points
in the ensuing article below; as it is my belief that it lies at the
very core of most all the veritable whirlwind of mythemes and
elementized instances which are presently under our consideration.

Yet speaking of ‘Storm-Riders’, in the Vedic context, it is not
necessarily the BhutaGana who spring instantly to mind. Rather, in
addition to those Hindu deific aspects aforementioned, it is the Maruts
to Whom we now turn.

**The Golden Legion Of Thunder Warriors  
**  
![57313529_365788610700136_1003601688046600192_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/57313529_365788610700136_1003601688046600192_o.jpg?w=676)

On the face of it, leading into the Vedic section of this piece with the
Maruts, may seem like something of a curious choice. After all, whereas
the BhutaGana or the Einherjar are ‘post-human’ ‘Ghost-Warriors’ after a
sort, born of men and having already died at least once … the Maruts are
something very different. At least in terms of essence-tial origin. They
are more appropriately thought of as something akin to ‘Demigods’,
although with parentage directly traceable to Rudra and the Earth
Mother, this is more of a relative term in terms of power-levels, than a
literal one. Matters are further complicated by the potentially
coterminous class of roaring followers of Rudra, the Rudras, with whom
the Maruts share many significant characteristics, role, and function.

Interestingly, for the purposes of our Indo-European Vedic-Eddic
cross-comparative analysis, the Rudras are specifically identified with
the ‘breath of life’. This is vital (in more than one sense of the term)
– as not only is this itself an Odinic linkage, and further emanation of
the general principle of ‘Wind’ \[or, in at least one ancient IE
culture, that we shall not go into too deeply, “Smoke” or “Mist”\]; but
the Upanishadic citation for the \*leaving\* of Breath from the body
(i.e. \*Death\*) being what produces the perceptible observation of the
Rudras (although I suspect rather strongly that the resultant
‘folk-etymological’ explanation for Their group-name as referring to the
‘howling’ of those who mourn somebody who has just died … may be a
post-facto interpolation of limited saliency, and borne from a desire to
‘make things fit’) … well, that fairly naturally entails the Rudras,
too, in this accounting, being post-mortal figures existing in
archetypal emanation of Their mighty Lord. This is further supported by
the iconographic descriptions of the Rudras – whether as Roaring,
aggressive, skull-bearing, trident-wielding wild-haired warriors clad in
potentially totemic skins of fearsome beasts, Their Moon-Crowns perhaps
signifying that They are as Princes or Jarls amongst the Ishvara’s
\[God-Emperor’s\] Forces; or in perhaps less overtly anthropomorphic
form, as lightning-infused storm-clouds, Whose roaring is more directly
that of the Storm : as They range about the Upper Atmosphere, there can
be little doubt as to Their most direct affinity and affiliation.

![the-wild-hunt-nathan-bishop](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/the-wild-hunt-nathan-bishop.jpg?w=676)

In either case – that of the Maruts, and/or that of the Rudras – we
have, once again, the essential ingredients of the \*broader\* \[as
broad as an incoming storm-front, in fact, riding forth from the North,
and therefore implicitly, the high atmospheric heavens about the World
Mountain(s)\] typology of the Housecarls of the Hurricane we have
sketched out earlier. It is my belief that even though the Maruts may be
described as chariot-borne combatants (\*horseless\* chariots, in some
RigVedic hymnals, I note – which induces me to ponder at least partially
on the basis of Rule of Cool, the concept of the ‘roaring’ of the Maruts
being because They are astride flying motorbikes … \], and of directly
Divine parentage, that They nevertheless very much represent the same
underlying archetype as the Wild Hunt, in this regard.

How else to conceptualize or otherwise construe this retinue of
rampaging riders, armed with lances of light and axes of golden-electric
hue (in both cases, in emulation of the armaments of Vayu-Rudra,
respectively), Who soar through the Sky, striking with the magnitude not
of mere mortals – but of the proverbial Force of Nature, the Fury of the
Storm and the Might of the Monsoon Itself.

This interpretation is strengthened considerably by the display of the
RudraGana on show in the Vayu Purana – one of my favourite sections of
the mythological Hindu accounts – wherein Their manifestation, mission,
and ministry as executors of the Wrath of Rudra is so eloquently
described. First, Veerabhadra \[a Form or Emanation of Mahadev, more
specifically of His Wrath\] is brought into being, and also described in
such terms that we are left in absolutely no doubt that here stands (or,
occasionally, \*dances\*) an embodiment of many if not most of the key
features of Mahadev – an ’emulation’, we might say.

Now, the etymology of “VeeraBhadra” is interesting, and very revealing
in terms of our overall comparative typology with the earlier
aforementioned Einherjar of Odin. The name ‘Veerabhadra’ itself may be
broadly translated as “Great Hero”, but also as the ‘Excellent Man’.
“Veera” being of the same etymological origins as the Latin “Vir”, but
also “Virtus”, and thence both “Virile” and “Virtue” in modern English –
each pertaining in certain senses to the idealized qualities of the best
man. “Bhadra” , meanwhile, shares both an etymology and a certain shade
of meaning with the modern English term “Better”, and serves to
communicate the notion of ‘greatness’, of ‘excellence’. A ‘Great Hero’,
of the Best of Men, you may recall, being \*exactly\* what Odin-dev
demands of His Chosen emissaries upon the fields of war.

The further (and somewhat more figurative) derivations of these terms
only strengthen the linkage – “Veera” can also refer to a ‘Son’, an
‘Actor’, a ‘Chief’, particularly one who is ‘Brave’ and ‘Daring’ (and,
interestingly enough, ‘Fire’ – which is, after all, both sanctifying and
destroying). “Bhadra” has also itself come to mean ‘nobility’,
‘auspicious/good luck’ \[perhaps compare the Old Norse ‘Hamingja’\],
‘skillful, skill at arms’, as well as terms for both iron and gold \[the
metals of death and immortality/nobility\], ‘prosperity’,
‘friendliness’, and ‘happiness’. And what are the Einherjar? Why, Odin’s
Adoptive \*Sons\*, drawn of the greatest, the bravest, the luckiest, and
most martially skilled of those of Noble stock and bearing (that is to
say – ‘chiefs’, the cognate term of which, ‘Captain’ is also very
relevant here in terms of the relationship with the Rudran retinue which
accompanies VeeraBhadra in the myth). “Actor”, meanwhile, recalls both
the strong dramateurgical associations of the Deity in question (c.f the
Harlequin and His Troupe; but also, one could argue, Odin’s Masks and
mastery of verse; and, as we shall see subsequently in this piece,
Mahadev’s most strong linkage to the concept), as well as the idea of
‘acting as’ another – emulating a figure for a role. Such as, in this
particular case, one’s Patron-Primogenitor Deity, as the (im)mortal and
immediate instrument of His Holy Wrath, an embodied (in the instance of
VeeraBhadra, quite literally) thereof here on Earth or elsewhere.

‘Friendliness’ might seem an odd quality in a superlatively competent
combatant and killer, yet ‘camaraderie’ is key to an effective fighting
force; the Nordic concept of ‘Frith’, particularly as a bond between the
closest of friends (same etymological root) and especially those who
share common purpose, as well as in its subsequent sense pertaining to
‘Fealty’ and ‘Feudal’ loyalty towards one’s Lord, forms a very useful
comparative here.

“Happiness”, meanwhile, is also a quality we should be entirely
unsurprised to find in a (V)Ed(d)ic Divine Warrior (Consider the Odinic
Theonymic: Herteitr – ‘Glad of War’; ‘teitr’, interestingly, deriving
from a term referring to ‘radiate’, to ‘shimmer’ and ‘shine’,
‘brilliance’, ‘brightness’). Even leaving aside the strong image of one
who ‘laughs in the face of danger’, smiles as they smitheth the foe, and
generally all-around seems most ‘at peace’ when in the midst of war; at
its simplest level, one who enjoys – indeed, \*relishes\* – their role
and sacred purpose, is a vital figure for the truly religious to
emulate – almost regardless of the service to which they are called upon
to perform.

We find a similar concept in the philosophical interpretations of the
term ecstasy. Its literal meaning is something along the lines of
‘outside one’s self’, interpreted variously as ‘connection with God’,
being ‘outside of time’ through total engagement and absorption within
one’s action and purpose – or, as I have previously sought to explain
it, the sort of joy which the hammer being used as a hammer must
experience. The ‘self’, or at least the self-critical and constraining
portions of it, is discarded in favour of the most simple and
near-purest-possible Being; rendering the devotee far beyond ‘human’ –
quite probably, acting in accordance with some deep-seated mythic
archetypal ethos they are not at all conscious of choosing to become. It
is more than possible, it is likely in fact, that various of the
trance-like rages or states of (oft-dancing) devotion such as the
Hamasking of the Berserks, the howling rages of the Ulfhednar, the famed
Furor Teutonicus or Furor Poeticus, and even (perhaps most especially)
the ‘Ergreiffing’ phenomenon reported upon by Jung in his famed ‘Wotan’
essay, are similar occurrences.

As Wordsworth put it in his poem at least partially about Lord Nelson –
“This is the Happy Warrior;this is He / That every man in arms should
wish to be”.

These superlatives do not simply apply only to VeeraBhadra – but also,
almost equally, to the war-cry shouting formations of Rudras similarly
emanated Whom He is accompanied by. The Rudras are described as even
able to subdue the might of the other Gods due to Their being as their
Deific Progenitor Himself in (relative, here) power and wrathfulness.

![503207_1000](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/503207_1000.jpg?w=676)

The message is clear: the Rudras, and Their most martially proficient
commander in the field of combat, charging “from the gloom”, and flying
through the sky, with the full force and fury of the storm, are a
further manifestation of the concept that the War-Host of Woden-Rudra
run upon exactly the same archetype as He is – albeit at far more
numerous scale.

Yet these are not the only Ganas amidst the War-Hosts of Woden-Dev.

**The Cremation Court of Krewh, the Kravyada-King  
**![57402258_366658920613105_7931774576655073280_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/57402258_366658920613105_7931774576655073280_n.jpg?w=676)  
We shall largely leave the ‘Court of Fiends’ for another time; as they
are a fascinatingly broad area of discussion in and of themselves.
However, in addition to the obvious point of cross-cultural comparison
with the warband of ‘devils’ which the aforementioned Hellequin figure
is accompanied by, there are two salient elements yet to be raised about
them, of direct relevancy to our cross-cultural analysis.

The first of these, concerns the role and function of these frightful
apparitions, particularly in their preferential demesne of the Smashana
– the Charnel, Cremation Grounds, where Lord Shiva is Also to be Found.
You see, here they act as something of a ‘filtration mechanism’;
ensuring in a manner very reminiscent of the Valkyries of Odin, that
only the bravest and most mighty souls are able to move close enough to
Mahadev in this guise for the benefit of an audience – and potential
recruitment themselves into the Retinue of Rudra the Terrific.
Partially, this is supposed to be an ‘exercise in self-mastery’ and the
demonstration of Faith: where others would quail in terror at what they
see dwelling therein (both in themselves, to be sure, but also most
especially, in amongst the Ashes and the Skulls of the Charnel Quarters)
and run screaming thereupon, or collapse in paroxysms of phobia, their
hearts stopping in their chests from adrenal overload … those who have
attained a certain mastery over their emotions, and over their
perceptive powers of discernment (one part of the Aghori devotional
understanding, to be sure), and those who are appropriately sure of
Mahadev’s protection and mastery over All, are not similarly imperilled.

![57155082_366659057279758_7590972838727647232_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/57155082_366659057279758_7590972838727647232_n.jpg?w=676)

This is also the case in terms of the martial vigour, and the cunning of
said aspirants to the Company of MahaKaala – for in addition to the
presence of mind not to collapse at the meerest sight of the Court of
Fiends, and the determination to persist through their frightening
visages and malefic intercessions, it shall also often be necessary to
more directly subdue (via ‘conventional means’ or otherwise) some of the
Champions of the Skull-King; an adequate ‘test of mettle’ before meeting
the Lord of Metal Himself.

This is a combination of a sort of Barbarian-ethos ‘test of strength’,
mythic Katabasis \[the ‘Going Under’ of a venturing into the Underworld
frequently encountered in an array of Indo-European and other myth,
which also forms the core mytheme for Joseph Campbell’s Hero with a
Thousand Faces\], and an interesting ‘twist’ on what has been previously
observed with the Valkyries. For as the Valkyries ‘choose of the slain’
once these aspirants are \*already\* dead, in battle – here, the
would-be worthies instead venture into the Demesne of the Dead , perhaps
\*as if\* they are slain, and only thereupon to be judged via further
exertions upon their behalf. In a way, this may perhaps be said to be
more ‘courageous’ – or at least more ‘bold’. After all, to every man
upon this earth death cometh soon or late. Yet to voluntarily venture
into a microcosm of Hell while yet still alive, in pursuit of decidedly
uncertain reward … and to still live to tell the tale … \*that\* is a
form of Heroism all its own.

Most particularly when it is enabled and indeed \*impelled\* through the
most single-minded dedication and pious devotion that \*only\* Mahadev ,
not thoughts of self-preservation (which is ultimately, what ‘fear’
stems from), nor material gain (which is, after all, fundamentally
‘illusion’ – or a golden hind – and the denizens of the Deadening
Space(s) are masters thereof to their purpose), nor vainglorious pursuit
of one’s own aggressive (self-)aggrandizement (in which case, the terror
of death weighs most doubly – both due to the potential for the ‘end’ to
this span of ‘self’ which it represents; and also due to a fundamental,
foundational \*lack of Piety\*, and Belief : FAITH : in the
Isvara-Who-Is-Dominate-Over-Death to empower one, to guide one, to meet
these challenges and triumph also over them) … – that \*only\* Mahadev
and the simple desire to be nearer, more proximate and closer in
emulation to one’s righteous (Svarga-)Sovereign , lies within one’s
heart as plenipotentiary purpose. For anything \*else\* may have to be
“burned away” (this is, after all, a cremation ground) – and burnings,
you see, especially of that which we hold most tightly to, and
definitely of iron-y disposition, can \*hurt\*. (or, often, disfigure in
the longer term) .

It is also possible that the ascension through the Cremation Ground is
to be interpreted rather more literally – that is to say, as transpiring
with death, and therefore being very much aligned with the Einherjar
tradition, of the best of the slain being those from among whom
Odin-Rudra takes into His Company.

And, for that matter, that the processional into the Cremation Grounds –
a place of fire, and the ‘burning away’ of what is no longer necessary
for a soul- represents exactly that for a Devotee. Heading into a place
of death … wherein the Devotee (or, at least, their soul) does not die;
but the illusions, delusions, impurities, and other such encumbrances
upon them which would otherwise hinder their efforts to be ‘Closer to
God’ in both propinquity and in proclivity. Except whereas in
‘conventional circumstances’, this would include the destruction of the
body in fire so that the soul might be unfettered for further
transmigration elsewhere (which, to be sure, \*may\* include eventual
winding up with, or even potentially \*part of\* one’s Deity) … in these
instances, neither portion (the disintegration in flame or otherwise of
the body, and/or the transmigration of the soul) are necessarily the
case. Instead, the Devotee able to master their fear, brave the
inhospitable environs \[and inhabitants\], and the implicit conditions
of their mortality, is hopefully accepted thusly into the Court of the
Charnel Lord, to become ever more like Him as a result.

![58461034_372070603408668_4848327820104957952_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/58461034_372070603408668_4848327820104957952_n.jpg?w=676)

This more ‘figurative’ approach to the notion of sanskara-by-immolation
also shows up in some commentaries upon the Srimad Bhagavatam – wherein
the BhutaGana phenomenon is ‘explained’ via suggestion that Lord Shiva
surrounds Himself with Ghost and Demons, as these are supposedly
decidedly imperfect and unenlightened beings (hence why they have become
‘stuck’ at their various stations and stages of existence), and Mahadeva
has taken it upon Himself to help them, to improve them, to ‘refine’
them, so that they may thence continue their ongoing progression
‘upwards’.

It’s a nice story … but especially given the Vaishnava context of these
remarks – which seemingly go out of their way in both the original text
and the attached commentaries, to attack Shiva and Shaivites as various
sorts of unkempt, crazy, drug-using, and even out-right a-Vedic
‘dullards’ … I think that we can safely say that there is, at the very
least, a certain level of ‘inter-sect-ional’ negative/pejorative bias
going on here. With consequent distortion of the actual realities of the
matter.

This is not, of course, to say that I entirely dismiss the core of the
notion that Shiva may very definitely and very deliberately incorporate
into His company \[in both senses of the term\], imperfect beings who
could use some help and guidance in improvement. Quite the contrary –
and one could perhaps argue that the circumstances of Sri Ravan present
something of an illustration of somebody coming into closer proximity
with the Great God, and engaging in various tasks and acts of
improvements at His behest. BholeNath is Most Merciful.

It is just that I am fairly certain that there is far more (and far more
positively) going on than that ‘core’. For example, the statements of
Lord Shiva genuinely enjoying the company of His creatures, as they are
often rather alike to Him in many arrays of temperament, enthusiasms,
and interests. And despite the supreme exaltation of Lord Shiva’s
situation of quite radiant ‘Domestic Bliss’ with Lady Parvati \[hence
the Ardhanarishvara combined Aspect as a symbol of Their perfect union\]
– it is entirely understandable that even He may, from time to time,
also relish spending time with, as the colloquialism would put it – “The
Boys”. \[Although as a brief footnote on that … given what we know from
the mythology, Lady Parvati, especially in certain Forms and Aspects, is
very much \*also\* capable of comporting with ‘The Boys’ in this sense;
and, further, is attested in scriptural sources as possessing Ganas of
Her Own – whether Her Own Bhuts \[‘ निजगणभूत’\], or fearsome ‘savage’
female figures perhaps analogous to the modern conception of ‘Amazons’
\[‘महाशबरीगण’\]; this may also link to the Nordic understanding of
Freyja taking half the share of warrior worthies selected by the
Valkyries, to Her demesne of Folkvangr\]. One can also clearly imagine
Sire Odin drinking, story-telling, and fight-training (that is to say ..
“socializing”, although this does not quite capture the depth and weight
of what is entailed by this here) with the denizens of Valhalla in much
the same manner.

In either case, there is a clear resonance to be found with the concept
underpinning the name of Valhalla – Hall of the Slain. Both locales,
after all, are places of the God: where the selected of the Dead go and
where yet-mortal and yet-breathing great men should often desire to
head. Both would be seemingly inhospitable to any unworthy soul which
somehow managed to enter therein to – the likely outcome being their
yet-remaining shade ripped to shreds by the more ‘worthy’ inhabitants.
And both are places where the imperfect (yet still somehow worthy) go to
be rendered greater,closer to perfection than they already can be in
their previous phases of existence.

![59418064_824890687882056_5983456477795319808_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/59418064_824890687882056_5983456477795319808_n.jpg?w=676)

It may be thought that Odin would have little use for “broken” things –
and therefore, that this would provide somewhat of a point of
distinction between the BhutaGana of the Smashana, and the Einherjar of
Valhalla. Yet even leaving aside the fact that if one is making a
weapon, the jagged shards of ‘imperfection’ can also be very useful (and
there is a surrounding metaphor here about how some bottles, when
dropped, just shatter .. whereas others produce lethal, and surprisingly
efficient killing devices in the pattern of their crack); what is the
ceaseless training undergone by the Adopted Sons of Odin, other than the
quest to render the imperfect, as close to a monomolecular killing edge
as honingly possible.

As I have said – this is actually a point of \*coterminity\* with the
BhutaGana rationale. The rather strong desire and evident effort to make
better, to engage in an ongoing process of perfection, of that which is
as-yet imperfect, but which yet shows promise. A true action of the
Patron of Devotees.

**Brahmins, Also, In RudraLoka  
**![57154429_367198113892519_3861266338878062592_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/57154429_367198113892519_3861266338878062592_o.jpg?w=676)  
The second element to be raised in connexion with the Court of Fiends of
the Kaal-King, concerns the BrahmaRakshasas – Rakshasas of Brahmin
status, and Brahmins who have become a particular type of Rakshasa. The
former may include such luminary examples as Ravana, Who despite His
malefic actions in the course of the Ramayana, was nevertheless amongst
the most foremost Devotees of Mahadev \[and, in fact, per legends, was
responsible for the composition of the ShivTandavStotram which we still
sing in reverence today, amongst other works of esteemable quality and
quotient\]. But as fearsome and formidable as those such fiends
nevertheless are, our focus here is upon the latter typology. That of
the Brahmin who upon his death, becomes a Brahma Rakshasa.
\[Interestingly, this term is also used in the current day to refer
often with scorn and derision by certain sorts, to a Brahmin who yet
eats meat – Rakshasa, having a figurative connection to the notion of a
rapacious consumer of flesh. Perhaps also the root of more modern and
pop-cultural informing linkages of the concept of Rakshasas with that of
Tigers – these large and eminent lords of the jungle also informing the
“Manticore” which comes to us here in the West via a derivation from the
Persian for ‘man-eater’ – Merthykuwar \]

Now ordinarily, this is to be seen as a ‘condemnation’ for the otherwise
should-be virtuous soul of the Brahmana in question. However, I have
never taken the view that to be a Rakshasa is to be axiomatically evil;
and the spate of such instances from Puranic-era and subsequent Hindu
mythology would appear to support this critical perspective upon the
more ‘narrow-minded’ presumption. This does \*not\*, of course,
axiomatically entail that no Rakshasa, Brahmin or otherwise, is “evil”;
and especially given the aforementioned instance of a ‘morally complex’
figure like Ravana (wherein serious and laudable acts of piety, and
indeed of good-governance for His subjects; are mixed with ‘fatal flaw’
weaknesses that eventually lead to His undoing as the fairly evitable
result of particular morally condemnable conduct), as well as the
extreme possibility as presented elsewhere in Shaivite mythology that
carrying out His Divine Will may entail otherwise seemingly ‘malefic’
acts (c.f the mass-purgation at the Horse-Sacrifice of Daksha by
VeeraBhadra and the Hara’s Hosts which we have been discussing; or the
action of KaalBhairavJi which lead to His incurment of the Sin and
consequent Pursuit of Brahmahatya – as righteous as the Beheading of
Brahma had been) … it is very possible that, much like men, these beings
may be something other than entirely clear-cut ‘good’ or ‘evil’ in their
actions and essence – or, for that matter, that what might at first
\*appear\* to be ‘evil’, is in fact merely ‘good’ of a far more
overarching kind. The Nordic-relevant paradigm of “Law vs Chaos” as a
not-entirely-perfect correlate for “Good vs Evil” is also salient here.
But I digress.

The point is – whereas in the Nordic reasoning, Odin has prime concern
for the conscription of the mightiest warriors, for the purposes of the
War at the End of Time (and perhaps, although this is my speculation,
for other reckonings, or even recreational pursuits (After all, Shiva
enjoys the company of His Ganas), in the mean-time) ; in the Vedic , it
has not been the case that only Kshatriyas \[or, for that matter, the
various lineages and individuals of Weapons-wielding Brahmins, etc.) are
capable of heroic heights upon the fields of war. Indeed, as has been
covered elsewhere in our works on the presently relevant/immanent
concept of “Dharma-Yuddha”, there is a \*very strong\* cause for those
whose abilities and aptitudes lean more towards the ‘metaphysical’ than
the ‘merely-physical’ to make vitally important active contribution in
these regards. This is particularly the case given the fantastic powers
available to those Sages Who possess the conversant \[literally\]
knowledge of Sanskrit, of Rites (sacrificial and otherwise), and of
Mantras, Siddhis, and Insights; which render Them \*fully capable\* of
subduing more conventionally equipped foes, or even, in some cases,
entire armies and potentially some amongst The Gods .

The recruitment of such ‘Sudarshana-serrated’ Souls, post-mortem (and
this is another intriguing similarity between the Einherjar, and the
BrahmaRakshasas – the fact that the latter also tend to result from
Brahmins dying ‘early’ \[i.e. premature/’before their time’\] and
especially ‘unnatural’ deaths), therefore makes absolutely abundant
sense. As with their Brahmin competencies and empowerments and the
greater resilience and other such characteristics of the fiendish form
.. they present a most mighty force indeed.

![57277895_367198250559172_8197138190440595456_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/57277895_367198250559172_8197138190440595456_n.jpg?w=676)

It is not, it would appear, only Warriors who Go To RudraLoka.

**Rakshas And Rakshasas – Protectors, Devourers … Actors?  
**  
![yulia-misyul-boss-concept-rakshasa](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/yulia-misyul-boss-concept-rakshasa.jpg?w=676)

As a brief point on etymology, it is interesting to note that “Raksa”,
which \*can\* also mean ‘Rakshasa’, but is ordinarily a slightly
different term, has additional meanings of “protection/protector”,
“ashes”, and rather curiously, occasionally “mistress” \[this last, I
suspect resultant from the same sort of linguistic meaning-field of a
“kept woman” in derivation from the notion of “to keep”, which can
itself also entail “protection” or “holding” as a concept\]. The
implications of these should be clear – namely, that in the context of
the BrahmaRakshasas Who form part of Sri Rudra’s Retinue Most Mighty,
especially within the demesne of the Smashana Cremation Grounds, … well
what is a Retinue for, if not also for “Protection”. And what do we find
within the bounds of the Cremation Grounds, other than Ash? (And an
awe-ful spectrum of fiends and specters, apparently; in addition to
Forms of both Shiva & Shakti, singularly or in unison, there Dancing, or
meditating, or otherwise extant, to greet us should we prove worthy or
dead).

![john-chiu-1](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/john-chiu-1.jpg?w=676)

Thishas a further interesting impetus for the concept of Rakshasas
(Brahmanical, or otherwise) to be encountered within the span of the
Charnel court-yard. After all, a Rakshasa is an eater of flesh. A
‘Kravya-vore’, a ‘carni-vore’ – it is slightly inaccurate to regard them
as “carrion”-eaters, as that entails they don’t kill what they’re eating
yet instead scavenge. And in terms of the two things you are virtually
guaranteed to find in a cremation ground – Corpses and Fire consuming
them – it is not at all hard to see how a potential figurative linkage
might ensue with those \*other\* man-eaters of passionate intensity,
seeming unsatiable hunger, and frightening implication. This, surely, is
why the term “Kravyada” contains within its spectrum of meaning both
Demons and Lions, (in at least one case, a Wolf), Hawks and “Goblins”
\[a term of interpolation that I have always disliked in these
circumstances, but I digress\], Flesh-eaters, Predators, as well as the
Fire of the Funeral Pyre – Whose all-consuming hunger for the corpses of
the (soon-to-be) dead and departed is surely the common, unifying factor
of all of the above-enumerated and enlisted.

![220px-Demon_Yakshagana](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/220px-demon_yakshagana.jpg?w=676)But
again, I digress. The final note I shall make upon the Rakshasas , is
that they are also specifically cited in a Shastra context – alongside
the Bhutagana, the Maruts, and other such entities – as requiring
propitiation alongside the “Gods of the Stage”. This recalls not only
the hailing of Lord Shiva (and, correspondingly, Lady Durga) as
Themselves supreme dramateurges (a sphere of artistic endeavour which,
for the ancient Hindus, in a manner not dissimilar from that of the
ancient Greeks, encompassed not just what we would today regard as
“acting”, but also singing, dancing, and other such performing arts, all
woven together in a tapestry of representation, beauty, grandeur, and
storytelling); but also, another form of Odin Whom we have earlier met
in the course of the unfolding of this piece. Namely, the Harlequin
figure \[a ‘Masked One’ – or, as we should say in Old Norse ..
‘Grimnar’\], Whose demesne has become the stage; and the earlier
Harlequin/Hellequin and His troupe of Devils and Ghosts.

And speaking of troupes of Ghosts, the time has now come for the
BhutaGana of Mahadev to make their long-overdue and much-awaited Parodos
into this piece.

**The Apparition of the Gana  
**![tumblr_ozj4d6cnoj1t271yno8_1280](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/tumblr_ozj4d6cnoj1t271yno8_1280.jpg?w=676)  
To be sure, the term is also rendered more simply as the “Ganas” of
Shiva – this lesser degree of specificity serving also to encompass the
array of other beings, entities who can be enumerated amidst the Armies
of the Ishvara. However, due to the dual shades of meaning of the term
“Bhuta”, which can in onesense simply mean “being” \[a word it is rather
strongly cognate with – being derived ultimately from the same sorts of
“To Be” verb-iage) , but in another refer to an undead, post-mortem
creature (that is to say, a ‘Has-Been”, so to speak) – most especially,
a ghost. There is a \*third\* sense, in which “Bhuta” has come to mean
an “element”, a constituent of existence/being, as seen, for instance,
in the Panchabhuta \[‘Five Elements’ – Earth, Water, Air, Fire,
Aether/Akasha(/in certain senses, Dyaus)\] which Lord Shiva is also
regarded as Master over; which further informs the notion of Mahadev as
‘Lord of Being’ (a concept attested in multiple Shaivite theonyms) but
that is another commentary, for another time.

In any case, the connotation of “Bhuta” as ‘has-been’ \[i.e. was-alive
and had a ‘present’, in the past tense – yet now remains, even though it
no longer lives, and its active life is in the past tense\] renders it
not entirely inappropriate as something of a ‘catchall’ term for the
further array of undead which are to be found therein – the Pretas
(interestingly, regarded as constituted of Air and Aether), Vetalas,
Pishachas, as well as the Bhuts themselves, and no doubt, others besides
(for instance, the BrahmaRakshasas I have already mentioned, above). A
slightly more figurative interpretation would therefore also include the
‘renunciate’ holy-men who also dwell within the Cremation Ground and
otherwise have ‘left behind’ their previous mortal lives in order to
live closer (both figuratively/conceptually and literally) to the
presence of Their Lord. Some might, therefore, somewhat metaphorically
regard these as ‘Ghosts’, not least due their sepulchral appearance as
coated in the ash of the cremation pyres, and their existence ‘beyond’
the world of men as a ‘remainder’ of their previous selves shorn of
bodily comforts and the ‘household’ span of living, leaving their
families behind at the place of death.

![59079063_371802573432073_8338040906187800576_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/59079063_371802573432073_8338040906187800576_n.jpg?w=676)

The term ‘Gana’, is further interesting; and is perhaps best initially
approached through its cognates – which, in the Western Indo-European
languages, include such terms as “Genos” and “Gens” in Ancient Greek and
Latin respectively, whence the more modern “Genus”, which bears a
striking resemblance to the shared reconstructive PIE originator of all
of these terms – ‘Genhos’ (referring to the concept of a race or a line
of heritage – a ‘set’ that has a descent and a ‘kind’ in common). \[This
is also, as it happens, the PIE root which quite likely gives us “Kon” –
“King”, or as the royal term of address not at all coincidentally goes,
“Sire”.\]

In Sanskrit, it retains this general shade of meaning; however, as with
many words in that language, whether due to the significant span of time
involved or the logical entailments of the meaning-field of the term, it
has also acquired others. These include the notion of a ‘nation’ or ‘the
people’ \[as slightly distinct from the much more defined and ethnically
based “a people”\], as shown in terms such as ‘Ganarajya’, which would
render as “popular rule” or “people’s rule”, perhaps “people’s republic”
\[or, for that matter, simply “republic” – res publica, indeed, being an
interesting comparative\] – the latter of which is still today utilized
in the Sanskrit referentials for the modern Republic of India. \[Another
term, Janapada, is closely related – Jana being a close correlate of
Gana, from the very same root; Pada, referring to the foot , therefore
providing a combined rendering as a territory ‘under the heel’ of a
people, and/or which they stand upon and walk in – the ‘footprint’ of a
people, you might say, as its defined territory\].

This has also resulted in “Gana” coming to bear the potential meaning of
a ‘council’, a deliberative body incarnated for the shared purpose of
discussion on defined matters – like a Parliament, or a theological
conclave.

Yet it is three further developments upon the term which are most
relevant for our purposes.

![59004743_371802630098734_1675396437849931776_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/59004743_371802630098734_1675396437849931776_n.jpg?w=676)  
First, that of the idea of “Gana” as connoting a group of people who
have been united not simply by the shared sacrament of blood – but by a
common purpose, an aim shared as the essential foundation of their ‘set’
and ‘kindred’ and ‘kind’; which has obvious imputations both for the
religious, and for those who are gathered around a single, powerful
figure or concept or idea.

This is inarguably the cardinal and ‘foundational’ ambit of ‘Gana’;
correlating members by their ‘thematic’ adherence, and potentially also
signifying the ‘denominative’ (as in, ‘of the name of’ (‘de nominative’
in its most literal sense), sharing a characteristic of, belonging to)
linkage of the resultant Gana with the concept or character at their
center \[e.g. the ‘RudraGana’, referring simultaneously to the Gana of
Rudra (i.e. the war-host/attendants/descendents of the God Rudra), the
Gana of Rudras (i.e. the grouping made up of the Rudras), and the Gana
alike unto Rudra (i.e. which is unified by their sharing of a common
characteristic, the emulation of Lord Rudra)\]. Interestingly, despite
being likely etymologically unrelated, the Germanic suffix “-Jana”
shares both elements of pronunciation with ‘Gana’, as well as the more
formal ‘thematic’ and ‘denominative’ functions within that
proto-language.

Second, that of the idea of “Gana” as referring to a small-to-medium
sized military unit, perhaps akin to a modern ‘company’, or mayhap a
“battalion”, or in older times (and this works out rather well in some
senses given the subsequent development of this word’s meaning in modern
English\], a “cohort”.

And third, the notion of “Gana” as referring to as a grouping of
“attendants” or servants of a figure. Although given the nature of the
figure in question, as a Deity, but also as a Ruler – this would
therefore naturally entail a rather more diverse assortment than what we
might find in an English stately home. (For example, the presence amidst
the Retinues of Rudra, of Priests/Holy-Men , Icon-Bearers, Holy
Avengers, and so on and so forth .. )

![59093882_371802700098727_1338511254829924352_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/59093882_371802700098727_1338511254829924352_n.jpg?w=676)

Nevertheless, there is a significant resonance to be found in all three
of these definitions, properly construed, with the Nordic concept of the
Huscarla – the House\[‘s\] Karls \[‘Men of the House’\]. A term which,
despite its modernly familiar meaning of a body of armed men in the
personal retinue of a lord, had an older swathe and broader of meaning
which also encompassed other, not-immediately/directly-militarized
free-men of the Lord’s House. Interestingly, another term – Hird – went
in the other direction over a similar period, from meaning just such an
armed retinue of personal guard, to a more generalized concept of a
‘household’, and even a royal court.

**Sons Of The Storm – The Lords Of The Host  
**![2e2ea8d579f42853fb8f914795570b40](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/2e2ea8d579f42853fb8f914795570b40.jpg?w=676)  
In any case, both of these Old Norse concepts align most strongly with
the sense of the BhutaGana, in its aforementioned broader sense, as the
Retinue, the Chamber Militant, indeed, the \*Companions\* \[and I mean
that term, too, also in its far older militaristic sense\] of Lord
Shiva. Although it is perhaps worth noting that while both are very much
in accord with the concept of the Einherjar, neither \*quite\*
encapsulates the severe degree of closeness with which the Einherjar
were occasionally regarded in relation to Odin – stated in the
Gylfaginning to be as that of His adoptive Sons.

This notion of “Sons” (adoptive or otherwise) is one which comes through
repeatedly when detailing the Ganas of Mahadev. As we have already
heard, the Rudras and the Maruts may be direct instances of the Sons of
Shiva, arrayed about Their Lord in resplendent, Roudran (that is to say
– ‘Roaring’) might. However it is also worth noting the positions of two
\*other\* Sons of Shiva, rather better known in these modern days – that
of Skanda/Kartikeya, and most especially, of Ganesha.

As applies the former, Lord Skanda – Whose Name means ‘The Charger’ – I
would contend that we have another instance of the prototypical
Storm-Sergeant of the Wild Hunt, as mentioned way aloft above in the
course of this essay. Consider not only His position as the Lord of the
Wrathful Might of the Heavenly Hosts, but also the traditional
representations of Him as seated upon a bird (that is to say – a flying
mount), and armed with a rather large spear.

![372445b59ccb659bc9dd940d1cb1c290](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/372445b59ccb659bc9dd940d1cb1c290.jpg?w=676)

As was said earlier .. “Like Father, Like Son!” \[an interpretation
given considerable strength by the citation in the MahaBharata for Lord
Rudra stating that Skanda should be regarded as a form or aspect of
Rudra\]

The etymological roots of the theonym of Skanda are also illuminating.
While it is conventionally regarded as deriving from PIE ‘Skendh’ – that
is, “To Jump”, and related concepts; I would instead perhaps link it to
PIE (S)Kewd – that is, “To Shoot”, “To Throw”, or rather directly .. “To
Skewer”. You can see how this is relevant for a Spear-Wielding Deity;
and interestingly, it is also the origin-point for the folk-name of
those \*other\* famous mounted warriors, the Scythians, with their
mastery of both riding and firing-on-the-move, as akin to the wind and
the hail and the storm themselves .. , and possessed of prominent deific
figures with long-arm weapons, mounted upon horseback.

![kartikey-god-of-war](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/kartikey-god-of-war.jpg?w=676)

It is also interesting and worthy to note the ‘role and function’ of
Lord Skanda, whence His epic genesis \[covered in greater detail in the
span of our NavRatri Processional of the NavaDurgas series – in
particular, for reasons that ought be clear, in the commentary on MataJI
as SkandaMata (‘Mother of Skanda’)\] is the result in no small part of a
Need for a weapon – a living weapon, at that – with which The Gods might
defeat the onslaught of the demon-lord Tarakasur.

I mention this not at all to seek to impugne the nature of the
relationship, nor depth of paternal affection and love for Son by Father
– but rather because something in it reminded me of the Odinic approach.
That of seeing the “long view”, of being able to ‘instrumentalize’ one’s
progeny (adoptive or otherwise), as Weapons in the ongoing fight, the
eternal war, against the demonic, the chaotic, the a’sura-nith.

Now to be sure, the most immediately thought-of parallel figure – that
of Odin’s son Vali, the Avenger of Baldur and Binder of Loki beneath the
Serpent’s Tears … is not necessarily an ideal cognate, for a number of
reasons including the frankly shoddy nature of the Gesta Danorum as a
source, and obviously the nature of the ‘other part’ of the parentage
involved. Although the specific citations contained within the
Gylfaginning for Vali as an exceptionally proficient marksman and an
aggressive fighter, and potentially recording the archetypal totemic
‘Wolf Warrior’ so wide-ranging and renowned throughout the Indo-European
Peoples’ (mytho-)history \[this last, in particular, also being a
recurrent theme with the Shaivite span of Aspects and Avatars\], in
concert with the ‘Ultor’-ior motive of conception, nevertheless suggests
at least a certain degree of ‘conceptual overlap’.

Notwithstanding, of course, the fact that the course of our researches
thus far have lead Arya Akasha / #NAS towards strong preference for a
Heimdall equation with Skanda, at this point in time.

**The Gana As Custodian Guard  
**![e8b559510ff33f3d6e5394991651df2e](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/e8b559510ff33f3d6e5394991651df2e.jpg?w=676)  
Yet while Skanda is regarded as the ‘Lord of War’, and therefore the
‘Supreme Commander’ in a military sense of the Armies of the Heavens \[a
position which, in the Nordic end of things, would be held by Odin – as
Herjan, Hertyr, Hergautr, etc.\]; in terms of a Lord of the Host, that
title may be more directly affixed to His Sibling – Ganesha.

Not least because, well, that’s what the Deific Theonym in question
\*directly\* translates as: Gana-Esha \[‘Esha’ meaning ‘Lord’\]. Further
conceptual support for the linkage of Ganesha with the Ganas, can be
found in various of the myths surrounding Ganesha; and in particular,
the much-retold legend of how He came to bear an Elephant’s Head.

![46704833_2040164546041200_5492424824032591872_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/46704833_2040164546041200_5492424824032591872_n.jpg?w=676)

As the story goes, Parvati had placed Ganesha on guard-duty outside a
location where She was bathing. Shiva arrives, and seeking His wife,
proceeds to attempt to enter; whereupon He is challenged by the child –
which, for some reason, He does not recognize. In an incandescent mood,
Rudra then decapitates the sentinel, and goes in anyway. Parvati, upon
realizing what has happened to Her Son, is understandably irate; and
berates Mahadev for His action. Shiva, distraught and remorseful at what
has occurred, arranges for a replacement head to be procured and
attached, which turns out to be that of an elephant.

![3ed6aa85022445e3fee65de14ee89acc](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/3ed6aa85022445e3fee65de14ee89acc.jpg?w=676)  
Now, according to some sources, Ganesha then acquires the title
‘Ganapati’, understood as ‘Lord of \[all\] Creatures’, at this point, as
part of the ‘rehabilitation’. But I’m not sure if that’s quite what’s
gone on here. You see, the role little Ganesha was carrying out when the
decapitation occurred, was that of a sentinel – a guardian, a watchman
standing in warding of His Lord (or, in this case, Lady). This is an
absolutely prime function for a warrior in the retinue of a King; and
therefore, I am of the opinion that this pre-eminent upholding of Duty,
even in the face of what must have been the absolutely terrifying nature
of an encounter with a lethally enraged Lord Shiva, must have been what
induced the application of the GanaPati appellation. That is to say –
Ganesha is Named as the Chief of the Ganas, as He is shown and seen to
be of the highest resilience and resoluteness in the carrying out of one
of the prime Duties of the Gana of Mahadev. That of Guarding, of
Standing Watch over the Divine Couple (whether singly, or in partnership
of Each Other’s blessed company), and of holding the entrance.

![major-hindu-gods-goddesses-facts_13-min](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/major-hindu-gods-goddesses-facts_13-min.jpg?w=676)

You can see how this leads directly into Ganesha’s portfolio
responsibility as God of Entrances/Gateways/Doors/Openings. Hence why at
Hindu Temples, you will customarily see a small (or, in some cases,
(very) large) Ganesha positioned strategically at the entryway. Thus
simultaneously showing that the Mandir is under the Protection of the
Gods; and also, interestingly enough, carrying out a ‘filtration’
process of keeping out the “unworthy” (and therefore, from the direct
Presence (in the Murtis, and radiating out, inter alia) of the Gods in
Their Dwelling Therein). I say “interestingly enough”, because you may
recall the earlier citation for exactly this, as a prime purpose of the
Ganas in Their accompaniment of Lord Shiva into the Cremation Ground.

The selection of the motif of the Elephant’s Head, contra to some of the
mythological accounts in this direction, can also have been no accident.
After all, if we consider the traditional associations of the Elephant
within the context of Hindu Iconography – that of mental faculty, of
serious capability of force, and also of \*regality\* and royal power –
it would make absolute sense for these to be visualized in connection
with the retinue, the Royal Guard, of the God-Emperor. This becomes
exceptionally the case in light of the \*other\* associations of the
elephant – strong faculty of memory (a pretty important skill for the
supernal sentinel, especially given the elephant’s ability for facial
recognition and other such identifiers), and being \*very, very
protective\* of their Graveyards.

**The Father of the Songs of Prayer  
**

[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/05/13/ghost-division-on-the-bhutagana-of-mahadev-the-einherjar-of-odin/attachment/5353/)

![5353](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/5353.jpg?w=271&h=397 "5353")

[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/05/13/ghost-division-on-the-bhutagana-of-mahadev-the-einherjar-of-odin/56398229_10161626177630574_8022077092982161408_n/)

![56398229_10161626177630574_8022077092982161408_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56398229_10161626177630574_8022077092982161408_n.jpg?w=397&h=397&crop=1 "56398229_10161626177630574_8022077092982161408_n")

  
However, it is worth noting that the august title of “GanaPati” has not
always been applied to Ganesha. Going back to the Hymns of the RigVeda,
the chief citation for the term in fact occurs in reference to Brhaspati
\[RV.2.23.1\] (with a subsequent reference in RV.10.112.9 that has been
suggested as affixing to Lord Indra; yet which I would contend may also
refer in that instance to Brhaspati once more – on grounds of the ‘Sage
of Sages’ sobriquet which occurs immediately next to it). If you have
ever heard the famous “Om Gananam Tva Ganapatim” verse, that is often
today regarded as hailing Ganesh – that is where this comes from. It has
been ‘repurposed’ (or “inherited”, if you like), from its earlier Vedic
bearer to its later (particularly Puranic/Post-Puranic) wearer.

I mention this not simply as an idle point of interest; but in
particular, because research we are right at this moment conducting,
suggests that Brhaspati may in fact be a potential Vedic cognate for
Odin. The notion of Brhaspati – the older, wisest, night-sky,
eight-horse-borne, ‘straight-shooting’, “victorious in the strife”, Lord
of Prayer \[perhaps analogous, due to the forms of prayer involved, with
the Nordic Galdraföðr \] – as Lord of the Host, would therefore make
strong conceptual sense, not least given Odin’s Own Theonyms as
Herföðr/Herjaföðr , as Hergautr, as Hertýr, and as Herjan. (And after
all – what is the Roar, but a Savage Song of Prayerful Exaltation,
properly considered) This is particularly the case given the
significance of the “-Pati” title in use here – which shares an obvious
root with the Western Indo-European languages’ Patriarch, Paternity, and
Father (to name but a few) … as this further reinforces the idea of
being not merely an abstract ’employer’ (as if there could even \*be\*
such a thing, in the time-period talked about, in this especial context
emphatically), but rather the “Father of the Host”, the “Chieftain” of
it in a sense that goes beyond simply being its “leader”, and more
towards its progenitor, its inceptor, its pre-eminent member, as the
greatest amongst the potentially related category of its membership.

Which, if you will recall, is \*exactly\* the relationship of Odin with
\*His\* ‘Adopted Sons’ in the Einherjar; that of Sri Rudra to the Rudras
and Maruts; as well as the figurative coterminity betwixt the Leader of
the Wild Hunt (etc.) and its Riders (who are very much patterned after
the archetypal figure of it and their Chieftain).

This last pattern, it can be strongly argued, is also closely related to
the ‘unifying factor’ of Lord Shiva with various of His Ganas, and their
constituents. That is to say, within each one we can more likely than
not find an essentialized characteristic of Mahadeva which they emulate.
Whether in terms of the Renunciates, often specifically depicted as
Kapalikas, who both recall the activities and ethos of Shiva-As-AdiYogi,
as well as, in the case of the latter, Kaal-Bhairav-Ji (often regarded
as their prototypical quasi-‘founder’); or in the case of the terrifying
and sepulchral characteristics of the Bhuts and others, which echo the
supreme terror of ‘BaleYggr’ / Bhairava, or the dual ‘consuming’ (and
therefore ‘destructive’) but also ‘performing’ (and therefore
‘creative’, in a sense) facings of the BrahmaRakshas.

![58655504_2101473546632196_224231772848652288_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/58655504_2101473546632196_224231772848652288_n.jpg?w=676)

Technically speaking , one could viably suggest that \*All\* is, in its
own way, constituent reflections/refractions of the Great God; although
that is a Shaivite theological exposition (although directly relevant
for the Aghori, if I recall) , for another time.

The point is that the Ganas of Shiva, are clearly not only unified by
their purpose, nor congealed as a warrior band or simply because they
are ‘alike entities’ with each other. Rather, they are so-called (in
that they are both referred to as, and summonsed by) this fundamental
linkage of essence, eth(n)os, and emulation with their – with our –
Great Lord. Even if they are ‘only’ partial refractions, at best, of His
Supernal Majesty(‘s), aspects and attributes.

On that note, there is one final grouping we shall consider, before
turning to concluding remarks – to try and make sense of it all.

**The Vratya – Oath-Bound & Outlaws  
**  
![55835906_10161598600730574_3653976201967435776_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/55835906_10161598600730574_3653976201967435776_n.jpg?w=676)

A proper detailing and accounting of the Vratya is beyond the scope of
this piece (although we may very well return to this theme in future
endeavours).

For now, it is suffice to say that the Vratyas recorded in the Vedas
appear to have been a warrior-mystic order – armed with lance and bow,
with long hair and an appearance that could suggest frenzy or insanity
or intoxication, often mounted upon horse or wagon, renowned for their
singing ability and correlate control of the essential wind-force of
breath, possessed of great and secret knowledge, wandering and to be
received with care and hospitality as an honoured guest \[for a
potential explication as to just \*why\* rulers are specifically
directed to treat the Vratya who turns up in their court with utmost
respect and proper hospitableness, perhaps consult the Grimnismal 😉 \] …

… and if the above sounds \*familiar\* to you, it should therefore come
as \*absolutely no surprise\* to find out that Lord Shiva is
specifically identified as the Chief Vratya – the Vrata-Pati.

What this indicates, to my mind at least, is that the Vratya are a
strong instance of that tendency discursed upon repeatedly above : –
that of a clade of the Chosen of the God under discussion, who most
emphatically are as He is in both panoply and proclivity. This would
therefore make them a very strong cognate for the European ‘Wild Hunt’
phenomenon briefly outlined well above – which is also, after all, made
up of horse-borne \[and lance, spear, javelin, and bow equipped\]
warriors who move with the swiftness of the storm-front, are regarded as
“crazy” (or, if you prefer, “wild”), and are lead by the
archetypal-level-Greatest of their number.

It is also possible that there is quite some ‘blurring’ going on between
the Vratya cited in the Vedas, and the Vratya who are occasionally
mentioned in subsequent scriptures and shastras – with the former
forming a more substantively ‘mythic’ grouping, and the latter more
likely to refer to the mortal imitators/inheritors of the glorious
Vratya tradition. Which may present a potential comparable phenomenon to
what happened with Tacitus and his “Harii”.

![58691969_200351454181522_3279983674036060160_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/58691969_200351454181522_3279983674036060160_n.jpg?w=676)

In any case, the etymology and interrelationships of the relevant
Sanskrit words – Vrata, Vraata, and Vratya – are most illuminating for
our purpose here.

For the first term – Vrata \[व्रत\] – derives from the same root-origin
as the modern English “Word”. PIE: Werh, “To Speak”, Werdhom, “Word”.
Although it is important to clarify that in its later developments of
meaning from this Ancestor of the Steppe, it takes on an apparition
rather more similar to the \*older\* English sense of the word “Word” –
as in, not merely something somebody says .. but an oath, an
undertaking, a pledge, a potency of \*Law\*. Indeed, of \*Lore\*. “I
Give You My Word” being the relevant idiom – fully cognizant, also, of
the extent to which “Words Have Power”.

![59506183_1339557902849737_2935193165621100544_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/59506183_1339557902849737_2935193165621100544_n.jpg?w=676)

These presumably help to explain its use in the context of religious
acts of devotion; and also, in terms of legal codes (the position of
“LawSpeaker” evidently being something of a #NAS one); and thence,
through all of the above combined, to mean the “Realm” itself. A body of
people, brought together in a combined metaphysical union – a community
– through the shared fabric of laws, of customs \[another potential
translation of “Vrata”\], and of rituals, and of binding oaths of fealty
and emphatic feelings of solidarity, of sodality towards a Sovereign.

Speaking of “bodies of people”, this is a close confederate of the
concept of “Vrata” \[perhaps more properly, if slightly inelegantly, to
be rendered in Roman characters as “Vraata”\] \[व्रात\] – which directly
means, in much the same way as “Gana”, outlined above, a “host” or a
“troop” or other grouping of like-minded, like-motivated, like-mandated,
and like-manifested (that is to say – quite possibly sharing ‘genetic’
coterminity) beings. It is also interesting to note its potential use to
refer to the persons coming together for a marriage event \[compare,
perhaps, the “Herr” of German Bridegroom appellation, and its vague
linkage to older Germanic terms for rulership;\], which directly recalls
the Bhole Ki Baraat \[Wedding Processional of the BhutaGana for
Mahadev\] mentioned way well back above in the introductory parodos.

It is not at all hard to see how “Vrata” and “Vraata” closely
interrelate – a body of (armed) men brought together by the common
purpose of serving the Sovereign, bound by oaths of fealty thereto, and
therefore united in all senses as a holy act \[both the giving and
receiving of oaths, as well as the armed exercise of the Bund’s potency
through combat in service of their Lord, being Holy Acts\].

We should therefore find it absolutely unsurprising that the Old Norse
term “Var” – a “pledge”, “Varar”, an oath – is so closely related.

![8af639c85d24951c728dad174de04f73](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/8af639c85d24951c728dad174de04f73.jpg?w=676)

The third term – Vratya itself \[व्रात्य\] (the lengthened first ‘a’
sound renders it “Vraatya”\] – is the inverse of another “Vratya”
\[व्रत्य\]. The former, is often translated into English as “vagrant”
\[apt, as this comes from exactly the same root as “wanderer”, with
added ‘uneasiness’ connotations of a rough-looking man … both of which
arcen back to ‘Gangleri’\], or “outlaw” \[one also beyond the realm and
its law, in the wilds\] – or, most particularly for our purposes, one of
that order of mendicant (warrior-)monks illustriously aforementioned.
The latter (“Vratya” – व्रत्य), means one who is “obedient”, and
interestingly – that which fits in certain senses within the ‘orthodox’
bounds of an array of ‘conventional’ religious rite and observance. It
is not hard to see how these terms relate to the earlier “Vrata”
\[व्रत\]  which lies at their fundamental root.

The addition of “Pati”, a Sanskrit particle we have met frequently
before over the course of this article, turns it to a Theonymic, and a
specifically Shaivite one at that.

Here, it is VrataPati – the Father/Chieftain of the Vrata; eulogized
also within an entire book of the AtharvaVeda dedicated to Him as the
chief, eminent Vratya \[व्रात्य\]. These map well with Shiva’s terms of
reference and respect elsewhere within the mythology – as we have
earlier seen, the interpretation of “VrataPati” as “Father/Lord of the
Host”, is a strong coterminate with Gana-Esha \[therefore explaining why
this is also a lesser-known Theonymic Title of His Son Ganesha\], with
SenaPati \[that is to say – “Army Commander” – another Theonymic Title
of both Shiva and and His Son Kartikeya/Skanda\], and of course, with
the array of Odinic theonyms such as Herjaföðr, HerGautr, Hertyr, and
Herjan.

Meanwhile, the EkaVratya term utilized in direct reference to Lord
Rudra-Shiva, that is to say, the “Prime Vratya”, the One Vratya, the
Archetypal Vratya – helps to convey the broader mytheme I have been
sketching out for much of this article : that of the Spear-God
\[GeirTyr/ShulaPani\], as being the prototypical and greatest of the
clade.

The Retinue Who Accompany Him, and the Devotees who Worship Him, all
seek to emulate the Eminent Sire. Therefore, even beyond the ‘genetic
approach’ \[wherein, as with the Rudras mentioned above, and Above, They
bear such close countenance resemblance to Rudra, precisely because They
are His Sons\], elucidating why those retinues and even (perhaps
especially) those mortal lineages of devotional pathways are so familiar
(in at least two senses) to Him.

![tumblr_pntoxtwFx11t271yno8_1280](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/tumblr_pntoxtwfx11t271yno8_1280.jpg?w=676)

This also helps to explain another meaning of VrataPati – that of
“Father of the Realm”, “Father of the Nation”; which directly links to
the Nordic understandings of both the term “Gautr”, as well as the array
of directly Odinic theonyms which feature “Gautr” in their construction.

Indeed, it is also possible to construe “VrataPati”, with the “Vrata” as
in “Word”, as connoting something far more ‘powerful’ again – as One
with power over the ‘lexical’ fabric of reality. Sanskrit being the
‘Language of Creation’, immanent unto It, therefore, in a very real
sense, renders ‘VrataPati’ as “All-Father” – the ‘Author’ (for what else
is a ‘master, a creator, a producer of words’) of All. However, in
addition to the clear facility of both ‘creation’ and ‘direction’ which
it grants – is also the ‘destruction’ and plenipotentiary martial power
that Mastery of the Word bestows. Sanskrit, after all, bears citation
within the RigVedic Hymnals – in particular, RV.8.89, amongst others –
as the mightiest of weapons and the supreme empowerment.

‘Mastery of the Word’ recalls also the notion of having supreme command
over the arts and gifts of rhetoric, speaking, literary and dramateurgy.
All of which, as we have earlier seen, apply to with huge significance
and saliency both Shiva and to Odin – not only in the sense of
congealing the characters and setting for the Cosmic Play \[लीला\], but
also in terms of the acts of recording and thence the speaking and
repetition, the transmission of the structure of reality and the
histories of a people, its mythography and cosmology down onto the next
generation (consider, for instance, the role of the Grimnismal, or any
other Nordic/Eddic or Hindu/Vedic text which takes the form of a ‘song’
or similar recounting via a character to an audience), down to its
succeeding generations. Heritage and Herja-tage; and also, as we shall
recall from earlier in this piece – Brhaspati, the Liege of Liturgy, the
Father of the Songs of Prayer.

![d0111fb5e255d3cc3d16968b763435a1](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/d0111fb5e255d3cc3d16968b763435a1-1.jpg?w=676)

Interestingly, one of the terms for such a ‘song’, is “Gana” \[‘गान’\] –
derived ultimately from a very similar PIE particle to the Nordic
“Galdr” \[‘Gah’/’Geh’ vs ‘Ghel’\]; and which is also used within the
context of the Mahishasura Mardini Stotram to refer to the entire
sweeping span of existence \[as the Cosmic Play, with Shiva and Shakti
as the Great Actor, the Protagonist, the causative agent and narrative
focal point therein – as well as, of course, ‘the director’,
figuratively speaking\], as well as the clamourous din of Divine Warfare
as \*itself\* being a sort of hymnal of holy praise and exaltation.
Further coterminity, for our purposes, is to be found with the Sanskrit
‘Gna’ \[‘ग्ना’\], which simultaneously means a Wife, a Goddess, Speech,
Voice. (Which, itself, in concert with ‘Brhaspati’, ‘Vratapati’, renders
strong additional shades of meaning for UmaPatayee \[‘Angan Friggjar’,
‘Faðmbyggvir Friggjar’, etc.\]) This derives from the same source as our
modern English word – Queen, with the ‘underlying idea’ likely being
that of a ‘mother’, in much the same way as our modern ‘King’ \[Kin +
Ingwaz\], Sire, and Patriarch are also keyed to a ‘generative’
understanding of lordship and leadership. Albeit with the ‘unifying
force’ that quite literally ‘calls into being’ the ‘genos’, the ‘gana’,
the grouping in question, not simply being the earlier ‘genetic’
causation – but the responding to a clarion call of rallying, a
unification on the basis of purpose and shared loyalty to the
(regal-theological) cause. A ‘Gana-Gana’, in other words. And therefore,
closely coterminate with what is understood by the Vrata’s source of
unified loyalty and identifying characteristic as a group.

In any case, all of this gives some further idea of the utter potency
and immanence of these wagonborne warriors, the Vratya – road-men for
the Cosmic Lord of Dharma! (to reference me some Hunter S. Thompson)

Now, whether that therefore thusly construes the Vratya themselves as
being something akin to “Word-Warriors”, or “Force Immanent To The Very
Fabric Of Reality, Descending Upon Ye In Howling Host(s)” , or even,
perhaps … Combat Theologians … I shall not seek to here-say.

The point is, that these Vratya, eloquently seem to encompass many of
the ‘core traits’ and reflect much of the emergent quintessence of the
Ghost Division that we have above sought to elucidate. Indeed, the only
major element of these that they might immediately be said to lack, is
the default presumption that they’re … well … “Ghosts”. And yet, this
should not be overly focused upon – as not only are we dealing with a
metaphysical paradigm wherein “life” and “death” are not, strictly
speaking, a binary duality; but through their superior (even
\*Supernal\*) dedication to their Deity, and embodiment of the
‘archetype’ and ‘role’ in question – they in effect, become “undying”,
themselves.

Men, you might say, “Above Time”. Although in actuality, and with
important deference to the theonymics around “Kaal” (rather than “Karl”
– these being Sanskrit and Old Norse for “Time” and “Man”,
respectively), more accurately Men \*With\* Time. Men \*Of\* Time. The
Retinue and occasionally Rampaging Representatives of the Great Reeve
(Reave-r – and, for that matter, in both senses, “Raver”), Himself.
\[Indeed, the notation for “Revere” as an alternate construction for
“Reaver” in somewhat older English, but also in its more contemporary
sense, as the act of Reverence, seems most appropriate here\].

Not least because of the plenipotentiary position of Old Man Time as the
yet unstoppable, and ultimately un-outrunnable Vanquisher of All. Truly
the mightiest of lieges in this particular regard. Supercedable only via
the Eternal.

But this is not the only interpolation of the phrase “Old Man Time”. For
just as there is the interpretation of The Old Man Who Is Time … there
is also the figurative sense of the Time of the Old Man. The Ancestor.
And it is to that most important clade or clan, to whom we shall now
turn in closing.

**The Ancestors Ride For The Empire Of Eternity  
**  
![56389437_362065974405733_2375058296974344192_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/56389437_362065974405733_2375058296974344192_n.jpg?w=676)

At numerous points in this preceding piece, we have touched upon the
notion of Primogenitors. Of the mythic precursor(s) of the Indo-European
race as a whole (hence ‘Gautr’), and also of our own more immediate \[if
millennia or more removed\] forebears. And it is not hard to see why.
For the Father in the Sky, whether called by Odin or Rudra or Vayu or
Dyaus-Pitar \[we shall … spare a moment for the Catholic co-option of
“Deus Pater”, as with so much else of Indo-European religion which they
have sought to cobble atop of\], is also held to be accompanied by, to
be riding in leadership of, a host of warriors , the likes of which the
World shalt only rarely see again. This is your Ancestral Folk Belief.
It may also, for the favoured few, entail a quite literal faith in a
supremely superhuman heroic forebear of deeds illustrious enough to
ascend directly unto such Praetorian-Pitar status.

![33083913_206138319998500_1938731517106716672_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/33083913_206138319998500_1938731517106716672_n.png?w=676)

Even were that not the immediately obvious case, allow me to sketch out
two other vitally important mechanisms via which it can be held to be
so.

The first of these is via the most ingenious concept of the ‘Eternal
Return’ or ‘Eternal Recurrence’, as prophecyed by Mircea Eliade. What
this means, in practice, is the idea that many of our religious rites
here in the present and mortal-(mostly)material world, are in point of
fact, the re-enactment – and thusly, thence, the \*re-immanentization\*
– of the Supernal, the Eternal, the \*Mythic\* out into the world around
us. Consider that Bhole Ki Baraat custom which I mentioned much earlier
to worst he outset of this piece. The idea of ordinary Hindus and/or the
Nepali Army, re-enacting as Shiva’s BhutaGana for His Wedding
Processional, as retold in Myth; and as lived, for those brief occasions
when the observance is performed, by the Devotees Themselves. As we have
seen also with the ‘Vratya’ concept, as well as one of my personal
suppositions for the potential explanation for Tacitus’ “Harii” … this
is a ‘concept with legs’ – which is frequently undergone by
Indo-European People(s) seeking to do not just as their direct ancestors
did in keeping this or that Tradition alive … but, in point of fact, as
their Capital A \*Ancestors\* did – existing, during the course of these
re-enactments and otherwise, as the Ishvara & Primarchs of the
Indo-Europeans both Did and Do Today.

A Noble And Glorious Thing!

The second, starts out as a concept that might \*look\* euhemeric .. but
in point of fact \[and/or lance, spear, arrow, and blade\], is
potentially anything but.

![download](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/download.jpg?w=676)

It is my belief that the phenomenon of the Wild Hunt, and related
mythological occurrences, are in fact something of a “Folk Memory” – of
the time when the Indo-Europeans were in fact, horse-borne (or
chariot/war-wagon mounted), shooters or spearmen \[and, in point of
fact, even the name “Scythian” derives from the Proto-Indo-European root
for “shoot”\], ‘huntsmen’ of man and beast, far-ranging and
un-keep-out-able as the Wind. An interpretation strengthened via the
perhaps surprising references to Odin Himself as hailing from the Black
Sea (or possibly Anatolian) area – whence the Urheimat likely lies.

Now lest I be misinterpreted here, I am \*not\* seeking to suggest that
this means they’re any less Real as a result of this. Rather, quite the
contrary. This above-proffered explanation shows a clear pathway of
connection between the Mythic and the Historical; with the co-occurring
‘Mytho-Historical’ Manifestation of the ‘Ghost Division’ therefore
bringing both the Historical \[i.e. the materialy adducible Ancestors
and Ancestral existences\] into the Mythical, and vice versa \[via the
‘grounding’ of the phenomenon, also, in the barrows of the Steppe\].

![367ac3b2c36bd475df706086c52b9be0](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/367ac3b2c36bd475df706086c52b9be0.jpg?w=676)

In any case, the idea is not merely one of a legend passed down to keep
alive the vague idea of what we once were … but also, and at least as
importantly, a “living” \[perhaps ironic phrasing\] memory, comprised of
figures from our past, rampaging through our present, and thence helping
to inform and refresh our glorious future. That is to say – these are
\*actual\* illustrious Forebears, of whatever degree of Divinity or
Divine Descent , periodically witnessed across the clouds or amidst the
smoke of the cremation pyres. And no doubt, quite especially after the
intake of the particular ancient somewhat entheogenic sacraments of
Cannabis and/or Psilocybe – which can have a considerable positive net
effect, for those able to handle it – of aiding and availing with the
re-viewing , the re-velation of the world in a much more Mythic
perspective. Both are quite strongly associated with the Lord of the
Ghosts Deity in question; and with further buttressing from both the
spear-shape of the mushroom, and the well-attested tendencies of
Scythians, Sadhus, and Shiva Himself towards the crystal-bearing cane in
question. (Indeed, one more colloquial term for Cannabis upon the
Subcontinent – Vijaya (Victory) – provides quite an interesting
potential #NAS spin on the array of Odinic Theonymics along the lines of
“Victory-God”)

The identity of the “High Rider”, then, stands in most strong
elucidation as a result of all of the above. Reconfirmed not merely as
an ‘Archetypal’ resonance, a cross-cultural ‘resemblance’, nor a vague
and now-enhanced ‘remembrance’ … but as the actual Sire – that is to
say, King – of the ancient Indo-European Folk.

A King Upon The Mountain – A King Amidst The Stars. The King Of Clouds
And Cavalry Amongst Them. Whose Beard And Breath Is As A Nebula; Whose
Way And Pathway To Accession Is The Milky One. Who Is, Indeed, Verily,
The \*Highest\* One. And As Boundless In HIS Reaving As The Wind.

Attended By Mighty Attendants; And Accompanied By The Mightiest Of His
Sons –

The Supreme Loka-Lord, The Wind-Wizard, \[The Wand-Bearer, The
Shake-Spear-er, The Staff-Smiter\];The Master Of Speech, Whose Tongue
Lashes Like Lightning; The Tempestor Thundering With The Strength, The
Speed, And The Sagacity Of The Storm.

The Crazed-Yet-Canny, The Cunning-And-Choleric \[in point of fact –
Cunningly Choleric\], The One Who Is Both Cold \[Krewh, Krios, indeed,
Crystalline, in certain senses, and Corpse-Pallor\] \*as well as\*
Calidus and Callidus in all available senses.

Riding To The End Of Time Across The Sky Of Sea And Steppe Of Stars,
With Awe-Inspiring And Terrific Retinue; Ever The Lead Trouper – Setting
The Pace, Inspiring The Form, Guiding The Unfolding : Whether Upon The
Field Of War Or The Lila Of The Cosmic Play.

HE is known by different names to different of His glorious descended
Peoples; yet even here, the desire for riddles and references, and
robust remembrances; the Kennings of fKings; show that we have always
known, deep down, that this is in fact the same Wanderer-Warlord
Divinity, simply behind different Masks \[which are, themselves, often
rather recognizable – note the repetition of the leitmotifs of the
Black-Blue of Death and Darkening, and the Grey of Steel and Sky and
Spear and Spire and Smoke and ash/Smashana\], and occasionally seeing
fit to play somewhat different rolls \[consider the “Nebh-” PIE
particulate which underpins each of “Nebula” and “Neptune” – i.e.
“Njord” … although we shall have to explain \*that\* in some as-yet
unpenned future article!\].

And while this article has certainly taken its time wending its way
through my brain and fingertips outward to the outside world … which has
thus meant that it is \*well\* overdue as a proper or ‘timely’ \[in one
sense of the term\] Tribute for Mahadev upon the Night of MahaShivRatri
… I take some solace from that ancient wisdom tapped by Tolkien. A
Wizard is never late, nor is he early – he arrives precisely when he
means to.

And besides – you know what they say.

All Guð Theigns take Time (काला).
