---
title: WOMEN OF INDIA

---
<div>

[←](six_lessons_on_raja-yoga/raja-yoga_vi.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](my_life_and_mission.htm)

  

## WOMEN OF INDIA

(*Delivered at the Shakespeare Club House, in Pasadena, California, on
January 18, 1900*)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: "Some persons desire to ask questions about Hindu
Philosophy before the lecture and to question in general about India
after the lecture; but the chief difficulty is I do not know what I am
to lecture on. I would be very glad to lecture on any subject, either on
Hindu Philosophy or on anything concerning the race, its history, or its
literature. If you, ladies and gentlemen, will suggest anything, I would
be very glad."

QUESTIONER: "I would like to ask, Swami, what special principle in Hindu
Philosophy you would have us Americans, who are a very practical people,
adopt, and what that would do for us beyond what Christianity can do."

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: "That is very difficult for me to decide; it rests
upon you. If you find anything which you think you ought to adopt, and
which will be helpful, you should take that. You see I am not a
missionary, and I am not going about converting people to my idea. My
principle is that all such ideas are good and great, so that some of
your ideas may suit some people in India, and some of our ideas may suit
some people here; so ideas must be cast abroad, all over the world."

QUESTIONER: "We would like to know the result of your philosophy; has
your philosophy and religion lifted your women above our women?"

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: "You see, that is a very invidious question: I like
our women and your women too."

QUESTIONER: "Well, will you tell us about your women, their customs and
education, and the position they hold in the family?"

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: "Oh, yes, those things I would be very glad to tell
you. So you want to know about Indian women tonight, and not philosophy
and other things?"

THE LECTURE

I must begin by saying that you may have to bear with me a good deal,
because I belong to an Order of people who never marry; so my knowledge
of women in all their relations, as mother, as wife, as daughter and
sister, must necessarily not be so complete as it may be with other men.
And then, India, I must remember, is a vast continent, not merely a
country, and is inhabited by many different races. The nations of Europe
are nearer to each other, more similar to each other, than the races in
India. You may get just a rough idea of it if I tell you that there are
eight different languages in all India. Different languages — not
dialects — each having a literature of its own. The Hindi language,
alone, is spoken by 100,000,000 people; the Bengali by about 60,000,000,
and so on. Then, again, the four northern Indian languages differ more
from the southern Indian languages than any two European languages from
each other. They are entirely different, as much different as your
language differs from the Japanese, so that you will be astonished to
know, when I go to southern India, unless I meet some people who can
talk Sanskrit, I have to speak to them in English. Furthermore, these
various races differ from each other in manners, customs, food, dress,
and in their methods of thought.

Then, again, there is caste. Each caste has become, as it were, a
separate racial element. If a man lives long enough in India, he will be
able to tell from the features what caste a man belongs to. Then,
between castes, the manners and customs are different. And all these
castes are exclusive; that is to say, they would meet socially, but they
would not eat or drink together, nor intermarry. In those things they
remain separate. They would meet and be friends to each other, but there
it would end.

Although I have more opportunity than many other men to know women in
general, from my position and my occupation as a preacher, continuously
travelling from one place to another and coming in contact with all
grades of society — (and women, even in northern India, where they do
not appear before men, in many places would break this law for religion
and would come to hear us preach and talk to us) — still it would be
hazardous on my part to assert that I know everything about the women of
India.

So I will try to place before you the ideal. In each nation, man or
woman represents an ideal consciously or unconsciously being worked out.
The individual is the external expression of an ideal to be embodied.
The collection of such individuals is the nation, which also represents
a great ideal; towards that it is moving. And, therefore, it is rightly
assumed that to understand a nation you must first understand its ideal,
for each nation refuses to be judged by any other standard than its own.

All growth, progress, well-being, or degradation is but relative. It
refers to a certain standard, and each man to be understood has to be
referred to that standard of his perfection. You see this more markedly
in nations: what one nation thinks good might not be so regarded by
another nation. Cousin-marriage is quite permissible in this country.
Now, in India, it is illegal; not only so, it would be classed with the
most horrible incest. Widow-marriage is perfectly legitimate in this
country. Among the higher castes in India it would be the greatest
degradation for a woman to marry twice. So, you see, we work through
such different ideas that to judge one people by the other's standard
would be neither just nor practicable. Therefore we must know what the
ideal is that a nation has raised before itself. When speaking of
different nations, we start with a general idea that there is one code
of ethics and the same kind of ideals for all races; practically,
however, when we come to judge of others, we think what is good for us
must be good for everybody; what we do is the right thing, what we do
not do, of course in others would be outrageous. I do not mean to say
this as a criticism, but just to bring the truth home. When I hear
Western women denounce the confining of the feet of Chinese ladies, they
never seem to think of the corsets which are doing far more injury to
the race. This is just one example; for you must know that cramping the
feet does not do one-millionth part of the injury to the human form that
the corset has done and is doing — when every organ is displaced and the
spine is curved like a serpent. When measurements are taken, you can
note the curvatures. I do not mean that as a criticism but just to point
out to you the situation, that as you stand aghast at women of other
races, thinking that you are supreme, the very reason that they do not
adopt your manners and customs shows that they also stand aghast at you.

Therefore there is some misunderstanding on both sides. There is a
common platform, a common ground of understanding, a common humanity,
which must be the basis of our work. We ought to find out that complete
and perfect human nature which is working only in parts, here and there.
It has not been given to one man to have everything in perfection. You
have a part to play; I, in my humble way, another; here is one who plays
a little part; there, another. The perfection is the combination of all
these parts. Just as with individuals, so with races. Each race has a
part to play; each race has one side of human nature to develop. And we
have to take all these together; and, possibly in the distant future,
some race will arise in which all these marvellous individual race
perfections, attained by the different races, will come together and
form a new race, the like of which the world has not yet dreamed. Beyond
saying that, I have no criticism to offer about anybody. I have
travelled not a little in my life; I have kept my eyes open; and the
more I go about the more my mouth is closed. I have no criticism to
offer.

Now, the ideal woman in India is the mother, the mother first, and the
mother last. The word woman calls up to the mind of the Hindu,
motherhood; and God is called Mother. As children, every day, when we
are boys, we have to go early in the morning with a little cup of water
and place it before the mother, and mother dips her toe into it and we
drink it.

In the West, the woman is wife. The idea of womanhood is concentrated
there — as the wife. To the ordinary man in India, the whole force of
womanhood is concentrated in motherhood. In the Western home, the wife
rules. In an Indian home, the mother rules. If a mother comes into a
Western home, she has to be subordinate to the wife; to the wife belongs
the home. A mother always lives in our homes: the wife must be
subordinate to her. See all the difference of ideas.

Now, I only suggest comparisons; I would state facts so that we may
compare the two sides. Make this comparison. If you ask, "What is an
Indian woman as wife?", the Indian asks, "Where is the American woman as
mother? What is she, the all-glorious, who gave me this body? What is
she who kept me in her body for nine months? Where is she who would give
me twenty times her life, if I had need? Where is she whose love never
dies, however wicked, however vile I am? Where is she, in comparison
with her, who goes to the divorce court the moment I treat her a little
badly? O American woman! where is she?" I will not find her in your
country. I have not found the son who thinks mother is first. When we
die, even then, we do not want our wives and our children to take her
place. Our mother! — we want to die with our head on her lap once more,
if we die before her. Where is she? Is woman a name to be coupled with
the physical body only? Ay! the Hindu mind fears all those ideals which
say that the flesh must cling unto the flesh. No, no! Woman! thou shalt
not be coupled with anything connected with the flesh. The name has been
called holy once and for ever, for what name is there which no lust can
ever approach, no carnality ever come near, than the one word mother?
That is the ideal in India.

I belong to an Order very much like what you have in the Mendicant
Friars of the Catholic Church; that is to say, we have to go about
without very much in the way of dress and beg from door to door, live
thereby, preach to people when they want it, sleep where we can get a
place — that way we have to follow. And the rule is that the members of
this Order have to call every woman "mother"; to every woman and little
girl we have to say "mother"; that is the custom. Coming to the West,
that old habit remained and I would say to ladies, "Yes, mother", and
they are horrified. I could not understand why they should be horrified.
Later on, I discovered the reason: because that would mean that they are
old. The ideal of womanhood in India is motherhood — that marvellous,
unselfish, all-suffering, ever-forgiving mother. The wife walks
behind-the shadow. She must imitate the life of the mother; that is her
duty. But the mother is the ideal of love; she rules the family, she
possesses the family. It is the father in India who thrashes the child
and spanks when there is something done by the child, and always the
mother puts herself between the father and the child. You see it is just
the opposite here. It has become the mother's business to spank the
children in this country, and poor father comes in between. You see,
ideals are different. I do not mean this as any criticism. It is all
good — this what you do; but our way is what we have been taught for
ages. You never hear of a mother cursing the child; she is forgiving,
always forgiving. Instead of "Our Father in Heaven", we say "Mother" all
the time; that idea and that word are ever associated in the Hindu mind
with Infinite Love, the mother's love being the nearest approach to
God's love in this mortal world of ours. "Mother, O Mother, be merciful;
I am wicked! Many children have been wicked, but there never was a
wicked mother" — so says the great saint Râmprasâd.

There she is — the Hindu mother. The son's wife comes in as her
daughter; just as the mother's own daughter married and went out, so her
son married and brought in another daughter, and she has to fall in line
under the government of the queen of queens, of his mother. Even I, who
never married, belonging to an Order that never marries, would be
disgusted if my wife, supposing I had married, dared to displease my
mother. I would be disgusted. Why? Do I not worship my mother? Why
should not her daughter-in-law? Whom I worship, why not she? Who is she,
then, that would try to ride over my head and govern my mother? She has
to wait till her womanhood is fulfilled; and the one thing that fulfils
womanhood, that is womanliness in woman, is motherhood. Wait till she
becomes a mother; then she will have the same right. That, according to
the Hindu mind, is the great mission of woman — to become a mother. But
oh, how different! Oh, how different! My father and mother fasted and
prayed, for years and years, so that I would be born. They pray for
every child before it is born. Says our great law-giver, Manu, giving
the definition of an Aryan, "He is the Aryan, who is born through
prayer". Every child not born through prayer is illegitimate, according
to the great law-giver. The child must be prayed for. Those children
that come with curses, that slip into the world, just in a moment of
inadvertence, because that could not be prevented — what can we expect
of such progeny? Mothers of America, think of that! Think in the heart
of your hearts, are you ready to be women? Not any question of race or
country, or that false sentiment of national pride. Who dares to be
proud in this mortal life of ours, in this world of woes and miseries?
What are we before this infinite force of God? But I ask you the
question tonight: Do you all pray for the children to come? Are you
thankful to be mothers, or not? Do you think that you are sanctified by
motherhood, or not? Ask that of your minds. If you do not, your marriage
is a lie, your womanhood is false, your education is superstition, and
your children, if they come without prayer, will prove a curse to
humanity.

See the different ideals now coming before us. From motherhood comes
tremendous responsibility. There is the basis, start from that. Well,
why is mother to be worshipped so much? Because our books teach that it
is the pre-natal influence that gives the impetus to the child for good
or evil. Go to a hundred thousand colleges, read a million books,
associate with all the learned men of the world — better off you are
when born with the right stamp. You are born for good or evil. The child
is a born god or a born demon; that is what the books say. Education and
all these things come afterwards — are a mere bagatelle. You are what
you are born. Born unhealthful, how many drug stores, swallowed
wholesale, will keep you well all through your life? How many people of
good, healthy lives were born of weak parents, were born of sickly,
blood-poisoned parents? How many? None — none. We come with a tremendous
impetus for good or evil: born demons or born gods. Education or other
things are a bagatelle.

Thus say our books: direct the pre-natal influence. Why should mother be
worshipped? Because she made herself pure. She underwent harsh penances
sometimes to keep herself as pure as purity can be. For, mind you, no
woman in India thinks of giving up her body to any man; it is her own.
The English, as a reform, have introduced at present what they call
"Restitution of conjugal rights", but no Indian would take advantage of
it. When a man comes in physical contact with his wife, the
circumstances she controls through what prayers and through what vows!
For that which brings forth the child is the holiest symbol of God
himself. It is the greatest prayer between man and wife, the prayer that
is going to bring into the world another soul fraught with a tremendous
power for good or for evil. Is it a joke? Is it a simple nervous
satisfaction? Is it a brute enjoyment of the body? Says the Hindu: no, a
thousand times, no!

But then, following that, there comes in another idea. The idea we
started with was that the ideal is the love for the mother — herself
all-suffering, all-forbearing. The worship that is accorded to the
mother has its fountain-head there. She was a saint to bring me into the
world; she kept her body pure, her mind pure, her food pure, her clothes
pure, her imagination pure, for years, because I would be born. Because
she did that, she deserves worship. And what follows? Linked with
motherhood is wifehood.

You Western people are individualistic. I want to do this thing because
I like it; I will elbow every one. Why? Because I like to. I want my own
satisfaction, so I marry this woman. Why? Because I like her. This woman
marries me. Why? Because she likes me. There it ends. She and I are the
only two persons in the whole, infinite world; and I marry her and she
marries me — nobody else is injured, nobody else responsible. Your Johns
and your Janes may go into the forest and there they may live their
lives; but when they have to live in society, their marriage means a
tremendous amount of good or evil to us. Their children may be veritable
demons-burning, murdering, robbing, stealing, drinking, hideous, vile.

So what is the basis of the Indian's social order? It is the caste law.
I am born for the caste, I live for the caste. I do not mean myself,
because, having joined an Order, we are outside. I mean those that live
in civil society. Born in the caste, the whole life must be lived
according to caste regulation. In other words, in the present-day
language of your country, the Western man is born individualistic, while
the Hindu is socialistic — entirely socialistic. Now, then, the books
say: if I allow you freedom to go about and marry any woman you like,
and the woman to marry any man she likes, what happens? You fall in
love; the father of the woman was, perchance, a lunatic or a
consumptive. The girl falls in love with the face of a man whose father
was a roaring drunkard. What says the law then? The law lays down that
all these marriages would be illegal. The children of drunkards,
consumptives, lunatics, etc., shall not be married. The deformed,
humpbacked, crazy, idiotic — no marriage for them, absolutely none, says
the law.

But the Mohammedan comes from Arabia, and he has his own Arabian law; so
the Arabian desert law has been forced upon us. The Englishman comes
with his law; he forces it upon us, so far as he can. We are conquered.
He says, "Tomorrow I will marry your sister". What can we do? Our law
says, those that are born of the same family, though a hundred degrees
distant, must not marry, that is illegitimate, it would deteriorate or
make the race sterile. That must not be, and there it stops. So I have
no voice in my marriage, nor my sister. It is the caste that determines
all that. We are married sometimes when children. Why? Because the caste
says: if they have to be married anyway without their consent, it is
better that they are married very early, before they have developed this
love: if they are allowed to grow up apart, the boy may like some other
girl, and the girl some other boy, and then something evil will happen;
and so, says the caste, stop it there. I do not care whether my sister
is deformed, or good-looking, or bad-looking: she is my sister, and that
is enough; he is my brother, and that is all I need to know. So they
will love each other. You may say, "Oh! they lose a great deal of
enjoyment — those exquisite emotions of a man falling in love with a
woman and a woman falling in love with a man. This is a sort of tame
thing, loving each other like brothers and sisters, as though they have
to." So be it; but the Hindu says, "We are *socialistic*. For the sake
of one man's or woman's exquisite pleasure we do not want to load misery
on hundreds of others."

There they are — married. The wife comes home with her husband; that is
called the second marriage. Marriage at an early age is considered the
first marriage, and they grow up separately with women and with their
parents. When they are grown, there is a second ceremony performed,
called a second marriage. And then they live together, but under the
same roof with his mother and father. When she becomes a mother, she
takes her place in turn as queen of the family group.

Now comes another peculiar Indian institution. I have just told you that
in the first two or three castes the widows are not allowed to marry.
They cannot, even if they would. Of course, it is a hardship on many.
There is no denying that not all the widows like it very much, because
non-marrying entails upon them the life of a student. That is to say, a
student must not eat meat or fish, nor drink wine, nor dress except in
white clothes, and so on; there are many regulations. We are a nation of
monks — always making penance, and we like it. Now, you see, a woman
never drinks wine or eats meat. It was a hardship on us when we were
students, but not on the girls. Our women would feel degraded at the
idea of eating meat. Men eat meat sometimes in some castes; women never.
Still, not being allowed to marry must be a hardship to many; I am sure
of that.

But we must go back to the idea; they are intensely *socialistic*. In
the higher castes of every country you will find the statistics show
that the number of women is always much larger than the number of men.
Why? Because in the higher castes, for generation after generation, the
women lead an easy life. They "neither toil nor spin, yet Solomon in all
his glory was not arrayed like one of them". And the poor boys, they die
like flies. The girl has a cat's nine lives, they say in India. You will
read in the statistics that they outnumber the boys in a very short
time, except now when they are taking to work quite as hard as the boys.
The number of girls in the higher castes is much larger than in the
lower. Conditions are quite opposite in the lower castes. There they all
work hard; women a little harder, sometimes, because they have to do the
domestic work. But, mind you, I never would have thought of that, but
one of your American travellers, Mark Twain, writes this about India:
"In spite of all that Western critics have said of Hindu customs, I
never saw a woman harnessed to a plough with a cow or to a cart with a
dog, as is done in some European countries. I saw no woman or girl at
work in the fields in India. On both sides and ahead (of the railway
train) brown-bodied naked men and boys are ploughing in the fields. But
not a woman. In these two hours I have not seen a woman or a girl
working in the fields. In India, even the lowest caste never does any
hard work. They generally have an easy lot compared to the same class in
other nations; and as to ploughing, they never do it. "

Now, there you are. Among the lower classes the number of men is larger
than the number of women; and what would you naturally expect? A woman
gets more chances of marriage, the number of men being larger.

Relative to such questions as to widows not marrying: among the first
two castes, the number of women is disproportionately large, and here is
a dilemma. Either you have a non-marriageable widow problem and misery,
or the non-husband-getting young lady problem. To face the widow
problem, or the old maid problem? There you are; either of the two. Now,
go back again to the idea that the Indian mind is socialistic. It says,
"Now look here! we take the widow problem as the lesser one." Why?
"Because they have had their chance; they have been married. If they
have lost their chance, at any rate they have had one. Sit down, be
quiet, and consider these poor girls-they have not had one chance of
marriage." Lord bless you! I remember once in Oxford Street, it was
after ten o'clock, and all those ladies coming there, hundreds and
thousands of them shopping; and some man, an American, looks around, and
he says, "My Lord! how many of them will ever get husbands, I wonder!"
So the Indian mind said to the widows, "Well, you have had your chance,
and now we are very, very sorry that such mishaps have come to you, but
we cannot help it; others are waiting."

Then religion comes into the question; the Hindu religion comes in as a
comfort. For, mind you, our religion teaches that marriage is something
bad, it is only for the weak. The very spiritual man or woman would not
marry at all. So the religious woman says, "Well, the Lord has given me
a better chance. What is the use of marrying? Thank God, worship God,
what is the use of my loving man?" Of course, all of them cannot put
their mind on God. Some find it simply impossible. They have to suffer;
but the other poor people, they should not suffer for them. Now I leave
this to your judgment; but that is their idea in India.

Next we come to woman as daughter. The great difficulty in the Indian
household is the daughter. The daughter and caste combined ruin the poor
Hindu, because, you see, she must marry in the same caste, and even
inside the caste exactly in the same order; and so the poor man
sometimes has to make himself a beggar to get his daughter married. The
father of the boy demands a very high price for his son, and this poor
man sometimes has to sell everything just to get a husband for his
daughter. The great difficulty of the Hindu's life is the daughter. And,
curiously enough, the word daughter in Sanskrit is "duhitâ". The real
derivation is that, in ancient times, the daughter of the family was
accustomed to milk the cows, and so the word "duhita" comes from "duh",
to milk; and the word "daughter" really means a milkmaid. Later on, they
found a new meaning to that word "duhita", the milkmaid — she who milks
away all the milk of the family. That is the second meaning.

These are the different relations held by our Indian women. As I have
told you, the mother is the greatest in position, the wife is next, and
the daughter comes after them. It is a most intricate and complicated
series of gradation. No foreigner can understand it, even if he lives
there for years. For instance, we have three forms of the personal
pronoun; they are a sort of verbs in our language. One is very
respectful, one is middling, and the lowest is just like *thou* and
*thee*. To children and servants the last is addressed. The middling one
is used with equals. You see, these are to be applied in all the
intricate relations of life. For example, to my elder sister I always
throughout my life use the pronoun *âpani*, but she never does in
speaking to me; she says *tumi* to me. She should not, even by mistake,
say *apani* to me, because that would mean a curse. Love, the love
toward those that are superior, should always be expressed in that form
of language. That is the custom. Similarly I would never dare address my
elder sister or elder brother, much less my mother or father, as *tu* or
*tum* or *tumi*. As to calling our mother and father by name, why, we
would never do that. Before I knew the customs of this country, I
received such a shock when the son, in a very refined family, got up and
called the mother by name! However, I got used to that. That is the
custom of the country. But with us, we never pronounce the name of our
parents when they are present. It is always in the third person plural,
even before them.

Thus we see the most complicated mesh-work in the social life of our men
and our women and in our degree of relationship. We do not speak to our
wives before our elders; it is only when we are alone or when inferiors
are present. If I were married, I would speak to my wife before my
younger sister, my nephews or nieces; but not before my elder sister or
parents. I cannot talk to my sisters about their husbands at all. The
idea is, we are a monastic race. The whole social organisation has that
one idea before it. Marriage is thought of as something impure,
something lower. Therefore the subject of love would never be talked of.
I cannot read a novel before my sister, or my brothers, or my mother, or
even before others. I close the book.

Then again, eating and drinking is all in the same category. We do not
eat before superiors. Our women never eat before men, except they be the
children or inferiors. The wife would die rather than, as she says,
"munch" before her husband. Sometimes, for instance, brothers and
sisters may eat together; and if I and my sister are eating, and the
husband comes to the door, my sister stops, and the poor husband flies
out.

These are the customs peculiar to the country. A few of these I note in
different countries also. As I never married myself, I am not perfect in
all my knowledge about the wife. Mother, sisters — I know what they are;
and other people's wives I saw; from that I gather what I have told you.

As to education and culture, it all depends upon the man. That is to
say, where the men are highly cultured, there the women are; where the
men are not, women are not. Now, from the oldest times, you know, the
primary education, according to the old Hindu customs, belongs to the
village system. All the land from time immemorial was nationalised, as
you say — belonged to the Government. There never is any private right
in land. The revenue in India comes from the land, because every man
holds so much land from the Government. This land is held in common by a
community, it may be five, ten, twenty, or a hundred families. They
govern the whole of the land, pay a certain amount of revenue to the
Government, maintain a physician, a village schoolmaster, and so on.

Those of you who have read Herbert Spencer remember what he calls the
"monastery system" of education that was tried in Europe and which in
some parts proved a success; that is, there is one schoolmaster, whom
the village keeps. These primary schools are very rudimentary, because
our methods are so simple. Each boy brings a little mat; and his paper,
to begin with, is palm leaves. Palm leaves first, paper is too costly.
Each boy spreads his little mat and sits upon it, brings out his
inkstand and his books and begins to write. A little arithmetic, some
Sanskrit grammar, a little of language and accounts — these are taught
in the primary school.

A little book on ethics, taught by an old man, we learnt by heart, and I
remember one of the lessons:  
        "For the good of a village, a man ought to give up his family;  
        For the good of a country, he ought to give up his village;  
        For the good of humanity, he may give up his country;  
        For the good of the world, everything."

Such verses are there in the books. We get them by heart, and they are
explained by teacher and pupil. These things we learn, both boys and
girls together. Later on, the education differs. The old Sanskrit
universities are mainly composed of boys. The girls very rarely go up to
those universities; but there are a few exceptions.

In these modern days there is a greater impetus towards higher education
on the European lines, and the trend of opinion is strong towards women
getting this higher education. Of course, there are some people in India
who do not want it, but those who do want it carried the day. It is a
strange fact that Oxford and Cambridge are closed to women today, so are
Harvard and Yale; but Calcutta University opened its doors to women more
than twenty years ago. I remember that the year I graduated, several
girls came out and graduated — the same standard, the same course, the
same in everything as the boys; and they did very well indeed. And our
religion does not prevent a woman being educated at all. In this way the
girl should be educated; even thus she should be trained; and in the old
books we find that the universities were equally resorted to by both
girls and boys, but later the education of the whole nation was
neglected. What can you expect under foreign rule? The foreign conqueror
is not there to do good to us; he wants his money. I studied hard for
twelve years and became a graduate of Calcutta University; now I can
scarcely make $5.00 a month in my country. Would you believe it? It is
actually a fact. So these educational institutions of foreigners are
simply to get a lot of useful, practical slaves for a little money — to
turn out a host of clerks, postmasters, telegraph operators, and so on.
There it is.

As a result, education for both boys and girls is neglected, entirely
neglected. There are a great many things that should be done in that
land; but you must always remember, if you will kindly excuse me and
permit me to use one of your own proverbs, "What is sauce for the goose
is sauce for the gander." Your foreign born ladies are always crying
over the hardships of the Hindu woman, and never care for the hardships
of the Hindu man. They are all weeping salt tears. But who are the
little girls married to? Some one, when told that they are all married
to old men, asked, "And what do the young men do? What! are all the
girls married to old men, only to old men?" We are born old — perhaps
all the men there.

The ideal of the Indian race is freedom of the soul. This world is
nothing. It is a vision, a dream. This life is one of many millions like
it. The whole of this nature is Maya, is phantasm, a pest house of
phantasms. That is the philosophy. Babies smile at life and think it so
beautiful and good, but in a few years they will have to revert to where
they began. They began life crying, and they will leave it crying.
Nations in the vigour of their youth think that they can do anything and
everything: "We are the gods of the earth. We are the chosen people."
They think that God Almighty has given them a charter to rule over all
the world, to advance His plans, to do anything they like, to turn the
world upside down. They have a charter to rob, murder, kill; God has
given them this, and they do that because they are only babes. So empire
after empire has arisen — glorious, resplendent — now vanished away —
gone, nobody knows where; it may have been stupendous in its ruin.

As a drop of water upon a lotus leaf tumbles about and falls in a
moment, even so is this mortal life. Everywhere we turn are ruins. Where
the forest stands today was once the mighty empire with huge cities.
That is the dominant idea, the tone, the colour of the Indian mind. We
know, you Western people have the youthful blood coursing through your
veins. We know that nations, like men, have their day. Where is Greece?
Where is Rome? Where that mighty Spaniard of the other day? Who knows
through it all what becomes of India? Thus they are born, and thus they
die; they rise and fall. The Hindu as a child knows of the Mogul invader
whose cohorts no power on earth could stop, who has left in your
language the terrible word "Tartar". The Hindu has learnt his lesson. He
does not want to prattle, like the babes of today. Western people, say
what you have to say. This is your day. Onward, go on, babes; have your
prattle out. This is the day of the babies, to prattle. We have learnt
our lesson and are quiet. You have a little wealth today, and you look
down upon us. Well, this is your day. Prattle, babes, prattle — this is
the Hindu's attitude.

The Lord of Lords is not to be attained by much frothy speech. The Lord
of Lords is not to be attained even by the powers of the intellect. He
is not gained by much power of conquest. That man who knows the secret
source of things and that everything else is evanescent, unto him He,
the Lord, comes; unto none else. India has learnt her lesson through
ages and ages of experience. She has turned her face towards Him. She
has made many mistakes; loads and loads of rubbish are heaped upon the
race. Never mind; what of that? What is the clearing of rubbish, the
cleaning of cities, and all that? Does that give life? Those that have
fine institutions, they die. And what of institutions, those tinplate
Western institutions, made in five days and broken on the sixth? One of
these little handful nations cannot keep alive for two centuries
together. And our institutions have stood the test of ages. Says the
Hindu, "Yes, we have buried all the old nations of the earth and stand
here to bury all the new races also, because our ideal is not this
world, but the other. Just as your ideal is, so shall you be. If your
ideal is mortal, if your ideal is of this earth, so shalt thou be. If
your ideal is matter, matter shalt thou be. Behold! Our ideal is the
Spirit. That alone exists, nothing else exists; and like Him, we live
for ever."

</div>
