---
title: BUDDHA'S MESSAGE TO THE WORLD

---
<div>

[←](my_life_and_mission.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](discipleship.htm)

  

## BUDDHA'S MESSAGE TO THE WORLD

(*Delivered in San Francisco, on March 18, 1900*)

Buddhism is historically the most important religion — historically, not
philosophically — because it was the most tremendous religious movement
that the world ever saw, the most gigantic spiritual wave ever to burst
upon human society. There is no civilisation on which its effect has not
been felt in some way or other.

The followers of Buddha were most enthusiastic and very missionary in
spirit. They were the first among the adherents of various religions not
to remain content with the limited sphere of their Mother Church. They
spread far and wide. They travelled east and west, north and south. They
reached into darkest Tibet; they went into Persia, Asia Minor; they went
into Russia, Poland, and many other countries of the Western world. They
went into China, Korea, Japan; they went into Burma, Siam, the East
Indies, and beyond. When Alexander the Great, through his military
conquests, brought the Mediterranean world in contact with India, the
wisdom of India at once found a channel through which to spread over
vast portions of Asia and Europe. Buddhist priests went out teaching
among the different nations; and as they taught, superstition and
priestcraft began to vanish like mist before the sun.

To understand this movement properly you should know what conditions
prevailed in India at the time Buddha came, just as to understand
Christianity you have to grasp the state of Jewish society at the time
of Christ. It is necessary that you have an idea of Indian society six
hundred years before the birth of Christ, by which time Indian
civilisation had already completed its growth.

When you study the civilisation of India, you find that it has died and
revived several times; this is its peculiarity. Most races rise once and
then decline for ever. There are two kinds of people; those who grow
continually and those whose growth comes to an end. The peaceful
nations, India and China, fall down, yet rise again; but the others,
once they go down, do not come up — they die. Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they shall enjoy the earth.

At the time Buddha was born, India was in need of a great spiritual
leader, a prophet. There was already a most powerful body of priests.
You will understand the situation better if you remember the history of
the Jews — how they had two types of religious leaders, priests and
prophets, the priests keeping the people in ignorance and grinding
superstitions into their minds. The methods of worship the priests
prescribed were only a means by which they could dominate the people.
All through the Old Testament, you find the prophets challenging the
superstitions of the priests. The outcome of this fight was the triumph
of the prophets and the defeat of the priests.

Priests believe that there is a God, but that this God can be approached
and known only through them. People can enter the Holy of Holies only
with the permission of the priests. You must pay them, worship them,
place everything in their hands. Throughout the history of the world,
this priestly tendency has cropped up again and again — this tremendous
thirst for power, this tiger-like thirst, seems a part of human nature.
The priests dominate you, lay down a thousand rules for you. They
describe simple truths in roundabout ways. They tell you stories to
support their own superior position. If you want to thrive in this life
or go to heaven after death, you have to pass through their hands. You
have to perform all kinds of ceremonies and rituals. All this has made
life so complicated and has so confused the brain that if I give you
plain words, you will go home unsatisfied. You have become thoroughly
befuddled. The less you understand, the better you feel! The prophets
have been giving warnings against the priests and their superstitions
and machinations; but the vast mass of people have not yet learnt to
heed these warnings — education is yet to come to them.

Men must have education. They speak of democracy, of the equality of all
men, these days. But how will a man know he is equal with all? He must
have a strong brain, a clear mind free of nonsensical ideas; he must
pierce through the mass of superstitions encrusting his mind to the pure
truth that is in his inmost Self. Then he will know that all
perfections, all powers are already within himself, that these have not
to be given him by others. When he realises this, he becomes free that
moment, he achieves equality. He also realises that every one else is
equally as perfect as he, and he does not have to exercise any power,
physical, mental or moral, over his brother men. He abandons the idea
that there was ever any man who was lower than himself. Then he can talk
of equality; not until then.

Now, as I was telling you, among the Jews there was a continuous
struggle between the priests and the prophets; and the priests sought to
monopolise power and knowledge, till they themselves began to lose them
and the chains they had put on the feet of the people were on their own
feet. The masters always become slaves before long. The culmination of
the struggle was the victory of Jesus of Nazareth. This triumph is the
history of Christianity. Christ at last succeeded in overthrowing the
mass of witchcraft. This great prophet killed the dragon of priestly
selfishness, rescued from its clutches the jewel of truth, and gave it
to all the world, so that whosoever desired to possess it would have
absolute freedom to do so, and would not have to wait on the pleasure of
any priest or priests.

The Jews were never a very philosophical race: they had not the subtlety
of the Indian brain nor did they have the Indian's psychic power. The
priests in India, the Brahmins, possessed great intellectual and psychic
powers. It was they who began the spiritual development of India, and
they accomplished wonderful things. But the time came when the free
spirit of development that had at first actuated the Brahmins
disappeared. They began to arrogate powers and privileges to themselves.
If a Brahmin killed a man, he would not be punished. The Brahmin, by his
very birth, is the lord of the universe! Even the most wicked Brahmin
must be worshipped!

But while the priests were flourishing, there existed also the
poet-prophets called Sannyâsins. All Hindus, whatever their castes may
be, must, for the sake of attaining spirituality, give up their work and
prepare for death. No more is the world to be of any interest to them.
They must go out and become Sannyasins. The Sannyasins have nothing to
do with the two thousand ceremonies that the priests have invented:
Pronounce certain words — ten syllables, twenty syllables, and so on —
all these things are nonsense.

So these poet-prophets of ancient India repudiated the ways of the
priest and declared the pure truth. They tried to break the power of the
priests, and they succeeded a little. But in two generations their
disciples went back to the superstitious, roundabout ways of the priests
— became priests themselves: "You can get truth only through us!" Truth
became crystallised again, and again prophets came to break the
encrustations and free the truth, and so it went on. Yes, there must be
all the time the man, the prophet, or else humanity will die.

You wonder why there have to be all these roundabout methods of the
priests. Why can you not come directly to the truth? Are you ashamed of
God's truth that you have to hide it behind all kinds of intricate
ceremonies and formulas? Are you ashamed of God that you cannot confess
His truth before the world? Do you call that being religious and
spiritual? The priests are the only people fit for the truth! The masses
are not fit for it! It must be diluted! Water it down a little!

Take the Sermon on the Mount and the Gitâ — they are simplicity itself.
Even the streetwalker can understand them. How grand! In them you find
the truth clearly and simply revealed. But no, the priests would not
accept that truth can be found so directly. They speak of two thousand
heavens and two thousand hells. If people follow their prescriptions,
they will go to heaven! If they do not obey the rules, they will go to
hell!

But the people shall learn the truth. Some are afraid that if the full
truth is given to all, it will hurt them. They should not be given the
unqualified truth — so they say. But the world is not much better off by
compromising truth. What worse can it be than it is already? Bring truth
out! If it is real, it will do good. When people protest and propose
other methods, they only make apologies for witchcraft.

India was full of it in Buddha's day. There were the masses of people,
and they were debarred from all knowledge. If just a word of the Vedas
entered the ears of a man, terrible punishment was visited upon him. The
priests had made a secret of the Vedas — the Vedas that contained the
spiritual truths discovered by the ancient Hindus!

At last one man could bear it no more. He had the brain, the power, and
the heart — a heart as infinite as the broad sky. He felt how the masses
were being led by the priests and how the priests were glorying in their
power, and he wanted to do something about it. He did not want any power
over any one, and he wanted to break the mental and spiritual bonds of
men. His heart was large. The heart, many around us may have, and we
also want to help others. But we do not have the brain; we do not know
the ways and means by which help can be given. But this man had the
brain to discover the means of breaking the bondages of souls. He learnt
why men suffer, and he found the way out of suffering. He was a man of
accomplishment, he worked everything out; he taught one and all without
distinction and made them realise the peace of enlightenment. This was
the man Buddha.

You know from Arnold's poem, *The Light of Asia*, how Buddha was born a
prince and how the misery of the world struck him deeply; how, although
brought up and living in the lap of luxury, he could not find comfort in
his personal happiness and security; how he renounced the world, leaving
his princess and new-born son behind; how he wandered searching for
truth from teacher to teacher; and how he at last attained to
enlightenment. You know about his long mission, his disciples, his
organisations. You all know these things.

Buddha was the triumph in the struggle that had been going on between
the priests and the prophets in India. One thing can be said for these
Indian priests — they were not and never are intolerant of religion;
they never have persecuted religion. Any man was allowed to preach
against them. Theirs is such a religion; they never molested any one for
his religious views. But they suffered from the peculiar weaknesses of
all the priests: they also sought power, they also promulgated rules and
regulations and made religion unnecessarily complicated, and thereby
undermined the strength of those who followed their religion.

Buddha cut through all these excrescences. He preached the most
tremendous truths. He taught the very gist of the philosophy of the
Vedas to one and all without distinction, he taught it to the world at
large, because one of his great messages was the equality of man. Men
are all equal. No concession there to anybody! Buddha was the great
preacher of equality. Every man and woman has the same right to attain
spirituality — that was his teaching. The difference between the priests
and the other castes he abolished. Even the lowest were entitled to the
highest attainments; he opened the door of Nirvâna to one and all. His
teaching was bold even for India. No amount of preaching can ever shock
the Indian soul, but it was hard for India to swallow Buddha's doctrine.
How much harder it must be for you!

His doctrine was this: Why is there misery in our life? Because we are
selfish. We desire things for ourselves — that is why there is misery.
What is the way out? The giving up of the self. The self does not exist;
the phenomenal world, all this that we perceive, is all that exists.
There is nothing called soul underlying the cycle of life and death.
There is the stream of thought, one thought following another in
succession, each thought coming into existence and becoming non-existent
at the same moment, that is all; there is no thinker of the thought, no
soul. The body is changing all the time; so is mind, consciousness. The
self therefore is a delusion. All selfishness comes of holding on to the
self, to this illusory self. If we know the truth that there is no self,
then we will be happy and make others happy.

This was what Buddha taught. And he did not merely talk; he was ready to
give up his own life for the world. He said, "If sacrificing an animal
is good, sacrificing a man is better", and he offered himself as a
sacrifice. He said, "This animal sacrifice is another superstition. God
and soul are the two big superstitions. God is only a superstition
invented by the priests. If there is a God, as these Brahmins preach,
why is there so much misery in the world? He is just like me, a slave to
the law of causation. If he is not bound by the law of causation, then
why does he create? Such a God is not at all satisfactory. There is the
ruler in heaven that rules the universe according to his sweet will and
leaves us all here to die in misery — he never has the goodness to look
at us for a moment. Our whole life is continuous suffering; but this is
not sufficient punishment — after death we must go to places where we
have other punishments. Yet we continually perform all kinds of rites
and ceremonies to please this creator of the world!"

Buddha said, "These ceremonials are all wrong. There is but one ideal in
the world. Destroy all delusions; what is true will remain. As soon as
the clouds are gone, the sun will shine". How to kill the self? Become
perfectly unselfish, ready to give up your life even for an ant. Work
not for any superstition, not to please any God, not to get any reward,
but because you are seeking your own release by killing your self.
Worship and prayer and all that, these are all nonsense. You all say, "I
thank God" — but where does He live? You do not know, and yet you are
all going crazy about God.

Hindus can give up everything except their God. To deny God is to cut
off the very ground from under the feet of devotion. Devotion and God
the Hindus must cling to. They can never relinquish these. And here, in
the teaching of Buddha, are no God and no soul — simply work. What for?
Not for the self, for the self is a delusion. We shall be ourselves when
this delusion has vanished. Very few are there in the world that can
rise to that height and work for work's sake.

Yet the religion of Buddha spread fast. It was because of the marvellous
love which, for the first time in the history of humanity, overflowed a
large heart and devoted itself to the service not only of all men but of
all living things — a love which did not care for anything except to
find a way of release from suffering for all beings.

Man was loving God and had forgotten all about his brother man. The man
who in the name of God can give up his very life, can also turn around
and kill his brother man in the name of God. That was the state of the
world. They would sacrifice the son for the glory of God, would rob
nations for the glory of God, would kill thousands of beings for the
glory of God, would drench the earth with blood for the glory of God.
This was the first time they turned to the other God — man. It is man
that is to be loved. It was the first wave of intense love for all men —
the first wave of true unadulterated wisdom — that, starting from India,
gradually inundated country after country, north, south, east, west.

This teacher wanted to make truth shine as truth. No softening, no
compromise, no pandering to the priests, the powerful, the kings. No
bowing before superstitious traditions, however hoary; no respect for
forms and books just because they came down from the distant past. He
rejected all scriptures, all forms of religious practice. Even the very
language, Sanskrit, in which religion had been traditionally taught in
India, he rejected, so that his followers would not have any chance to
imbibe the superstitions which were associated with it.

There is another way of looking at the truth we have been discussing:
the Hindu way. We claim that Buddha's great doctrine of selflessness can
be better understood if it is looked at in our way. In the Upanishads
there is already the great doctrine of the Âtman and the Brahman. The
Atman, Self, is the same as Brahman, the Lord. This Self is all that is;
It is the only reality. Mâyâ, delusion, makes us see It as different.
There is one Self, not many. That one Self shines in various forms. Man
is man's brother because all men are one. A man is not only my brother,
say the Vedas, he is myself. Hurting any part of the universe, I only
hurt myself. I am the universe. It is a delusion that I think I am Mr.
So-and-so — that is the delusion.

The more you approach your real Self, the more this delusion vanishes.
The more all differences and divisions disappear, the more you realise
all as the one Divinity. God exists; but He is not the man sitting upon
a cloud. He is pure Spirit. Where does He reside? Nearer to you than
your very self. He is the Soul. How can you perceive God as separate and
different from yourself? When you think of Him as some one separate from
yourself, you do not know Him. He is you yourself. That was the doctrine
of the prophets of India.

It is selfishness that you think that you see Mr. So-and-so and that all
the world is different from you. You believe you are different from me.
You do not take any thought of me. You go home and have your dinner and
sleep. If I die, you still eat, drink, and are merry. But you cannot
really be happy when the rest of the world is suffering. We are all one.
It is the delusion of separateness that is the root of misery. Nothing
exists but the Self; there is nothing else.

Buddha's idea is that there is no God, only man himself. He repudiated
the mentality which underlies the prevalent ideas of God. He found it
made men weak and superstitious. If you pray to God to give you
everything, who is it, then, that goes out and works? God comes to those
who work hard. God helps them that help themselves. An opposite idea of
God weakens our nerves, softens our muscles, makes us dependent.
Everything independent is happy; everything dependent is miserable. Man
has infinite power within himself, and he can realise it — he can
realise himself as the one infinite Self. It can be done; but you do not
believe it. You pray to God and keep your powder dry all the time.

Buddha taught the opposite. Do not let men weep. Let them have none of
this praying and all that. God is not keeping shop. With every breath
you are praying in God. I am talking; that is a prayer. You are
listening; that is a prayer. Is there ever any movement of yours, mental
or physical, in which you do not participate in the infinite Divine
Energy? It is all a constant prayer. If you call only a set of words
prayer, you make prayer superficial. Such prayers are not much good;
they can scarcely bear any real fruit.

Is prayer a magic formula, by repeating which, even is you do not work
hard, you gain miraculous results? No. All have to work hard; all have
to reach the depths of that infinite Energy. Behind the poor, behind the
rich, there is the same infinite Energy. It is not that one man works
hard, and another by repeating a few words achieves results. This
universe is a constant prayer. If you take prayer in this sense, I am
with you. Words are not necessary. Better is silent prayer.

The vast majority of people do not understand the meaning of this
doctrine. In India any compromise regarding the Self means that we have
given power into the hands of the priests and have forgotten the great
teachings of the prophets. Buddha knew this; so he brushed aside all the
priestly doctrines and practices and made man stand on his own feet. It
was necessary for him to go against the accustomed ways of the people;
he had to bring about revolutionary changes. As a result this
sacrificial religion passed away from India for ever, and was never
revived.

Buddhism apparently has passed away from India; but really it has not.
There was an element of danger in the teaching of Buddha — it was a
reforming religion. In order to bring about the tremendous spiritual
change he did, he had to give many negative teachings. But if a religion
emphasises the negative side too much, it is in danger of eventual
destruction. Never can a reforming sect survive if it is only reforming;
the formative elements alone — the real impulse, that is, the principles
— live on and on. After a reform has been brought about, it is the
positive side that should be emphasised; after the building is finished
the scaffolding must be taken away.

It so happened in India that as time went on, the followers of Buddha
emphasised the negative aspect of his teachings too much and thereby
caused the eventual downfall of their religion. The positive aspects of
truth were suffocated by the forces of negation; and thus India
repudiated the destructive tendencies that flourished in the name of
Buddhism. That was the decree of the Indian national thought.

The negative elements of Buddhism — there is no God and no soul —died
out. I can say that God is the only being that exists; it is a very
positive statement. He is the one reality. When Buddha says there is no
soul, I say, "Man, thou art one with the universe; thou art all things."
How positive! The reformative element died out; but the formative
element has lived through all time. Buddha taught kindness towards lower
beings; and since then there has not been a sect in India that has not
taught charity to all beings, even to animals. This kindness, this
mercy, this charity — greater than any doctrine — are what Buddhism left
to us.

The life of Buddha has an especial appeal. All my life I have been very
fond of Buddha, but not of his doctrine. I have more veneration for that
character than for any other — that boldness, that fearlessness, and
that tremendous love! He was born for the good of men. Others may seek
God, others may seek truth for themselves; he did not even care to know
truth for himself. He sought truth because people were in misery. How to
help them, that was his only concern. Throughout his life he never had a
thought for himself. How can we ignorant, selfish, narrow-minded human
beings ever understand the greatness of this man?

And consider his marvellous brain! No emotionalism. That giant brain
never was superstitious. Believe not because an old manuscript has been
produced, because it has been handed down to you from your forefathers,
because your friends want you to — but think for yourself; search truth
for yourself; realise it yourself. Then if you find it beneficial to one
and many, give it to people. Soft-brained men, weak-minded,
chicken-hearted, cannot find the truth. One has to be free, and as broad
as the sky. One has to have a mind that is crystal clear; only then can
truth shine in it. We are so full of superstitions! Even in your country
where you think you are highly educated, how full of narrownesses and
superstitions you are! Just think, with all your claims to civilisation
in this country, on one occasion I was refused a chair to sit on,
because I was a Hindu.

Six hundred years before the birth of Christ, at the time when Buddha
lived, the people of India must have had wonderful education. Extremely
free-minded they must have been. Great masses followed him. Kings gave
up their thrones; queens gave up their thrones. People were able to
appreciate and embrace his teaching, so revolutionary, so different from
what they had been taught by the priests through the ages! But their
minds have been unusually free and broad.

And consider his death. If he was great in life, he was also great in
death. He ate food offered to him by a member of a race similar to your
American Indians. Hindus do not touch them, because they eat everything
indiscriminately. He told his disciples, "Do not eat this food, but I
cannot refuse it. Go to the man and tell him he has done me one of the
greatest services of my life — he has released me from the body." An old
man came and sat near him — he had walked miles and miles to see the
Master — and Buddha taught him. When he found a disciple weeping, he
reproved him, saying, "What is this? Is this the result of all my
teaching? Let there be no false bondage, no dependence on me, no false
glorification of this passing personality. The Buddha is not a person;
he is a realisation. Work out your own salvation."

Even when dying, he would not claim any distinction for himself. I
worship him for that. What you call Buddhas and Christs are only the
names of certain states of realisation. Of all the teachers of the
world, he was the one who taught us most to be self-reliant, who freed
us not only from the bondages of our false selves but from dependence on
the invisible being or beings called God or gods. He invited every one
to enter into that state of freedom which he called Nirvana. All must
attain to it one day; and that attainment is the complete fulfilment of
man.

</div>
