+++
title = "Asilisaurus and the rise of the dinosaur line"

+++
In the days of my youth a clansman visiting from England had given me a
set of pamphlets from the British Natural History museum which described
among other things the work of the English paleontologist Charig in
Tanzania. It was there that I first came to know of the enigmatic
archosauriforms of Tanzania such as Mandasuchus. In 1957 Charig wrote a
lengthy dissertation on the archosauriforms discovered in Tanzania and
he named a number of enigmatic forms such as Mandasuchus, Teleocrater,
Nyasasaurus, Hypselorhachis and Pallisteria. Charig claimed that
Mandasuchus was an ancestor of the sauropodomorph dinosaurs. He felt
that Nyasasasaurus was also more closely related to the dinosaurs. Later
some researchers felt that Mandasuchus was more closely related to the
fierce crocodile-line predator *Ticinosuchus*. Most of these opinions
were in the absence of a formal description of the Tanzanian
archosauriforms and only added to the mystery of this Middle Triassic
fauna. Given the great diversity of Tanzanian forms I suspected that the
studies on the origin of the dinosaurs, pterosaurs and crocodiles would
really benefit from revisiting the Tanzanian forms. However, Charig died
before these forms could be described at any length. In general the
study of early dinosaurs and archosauriforms has lagged behind the
studies on the crocodiles and the dinosaurs of the later Mesozoic.
However, several recent discoveries and new phylogenetic studies by
Nesbitt and Irmis have contributed considerably to filling gaps in our
understanding of this early evolutionary phase.

Firstly, these studies showed that during the Triassic the
crocodile-line was particularly dominant and presented a wide range of
morphotypes that probably occupied very distinct ecological niches. As
we have seen [earlier on these
pages](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/12/19/crocodiles-in-the-shadow-of-the-dinosaurs/)
the crocodile-line includes many forms such as the large predators like
postosuchids (e.g. *Postosuchus*, *Polonosuchus*, *Rauisuchus* and
*Tikisuchus*), prestosuchids (e.g. *Batrachotomus*, *Saurosuchus* and
*Prestosuchus*) and Ticinosuchids, probably smaller predators the
ornithosuchids (e.g. *Ornithosuchus* and *Riojasuchus*), fast-running
gracile crocodiles like *Erpetosuchus*, the poposaurs which come in two
forms, namely the sail-backed ctenosauriscids and
ornithomimosaur-mimics, the shuvosaurids (e.g. *Effigia*: should they be
called ornithomimosauromimids \!), armored aetosaurs (recently described
at length by Parker et al), the aquatic *Qianosuchus*, the ornithischian
mimic *Revueltosaurus* and perhaps also the convergently crocodile-like
phytosaurs. On the other hand the dinosaur-line and the pterosaurs have
been poorly represented in the fossil record from this period. It is in
this context that the revival of Tanzanian fossil hunting has proffered
a remarkable new result – *Asilisaurus*.

The Tanzanian fauna in question comes from the Ruhuhu basin of the
Ansinian age of the Middle Triassic (probably around \~242-238 Mya). It
is has a rich mix of terrestrial vertebrates which include:1)
stereospondyl amphibians; 2) members of the mammal-line namely the
dicynodonts *Sangusaurus* and *Angonisaurus* and small cynodonts like
*Aleodon* and *Scalenodon*; 3) rhynchosaurs like Stenaulorhynchus; 4)
But by far the most dominant faunal element at the top of the food chain
in these beds are the archosauriformes, which were previously known as
containing crocodiles, poposaurs and several other crocodile-line
archosaurs (Charig’s animals). Now with the recovery of Asilisaurus by
Nesbitt et al we know that this fauna also included the beginnings of
the dinosaur-line. Sampling in other parts of Africa suggest that the
Omingonde Formation from the Ansinian age of Nambia might have a similar
fauna suggesting that the Southern Pangaea might have been home to the
great faunal revolution that marked the early phase of the rise of the
archosaurs as the most dominant land animals at the top of the food web.
This archosaurian rise can be visualized as wave upon wave of radiations
beginning with the opening of the Triassic bounded by two of the
greatest extinctions of land animals – the Permian-Triassic and the
Cretaceous-Paleogene, punctuated in between by the Triassic-Jurassic
extinction event. To understand the explosive take over the terrestrial,
aerial and, to a degree, aquatic ecosystems by the archosaurs across the
Pangaean landmass we must go back to the late Permian just before the
series of mass extinctions that were to take place. This terrestrial
ecosystem was dominated by the great radiation of predators and
herbivores of the mammal-line of diverse forms. Among the carnivores we
had the sphenacodontine “pelycosaurs”, dinocephalians, gorgonopsians,
therocephalians, procynosuchids and galesaurs. In a series of
extinctions over the late Permian and P/T boundary most of these forms
became extinct. A few therocephalians and galesaurs lingered on and new
mammal-line carnivores like the cynognathids emerged after the
extinction. But with the exception of forms like *Moschorhinus* there
were hardly any large mammal-line predators in the aftermath of the P/T
extinctions. Among the cynodonts, the largest sizes reached were the
hyaena-sized carnivores like *Cynognathus* (cynognathids) and
*Chiniquodon* and *Belesodon* (chiniquodonts). The large terrestrial
herbivores were again from the mammal-line – the anomodonts. But among
the numerous small diapsid carnivores was one special form represented
by fragmentary remains from the late Permian of Russia – Archosaurus,
the first archosauriform. The crown was soon to pass to the descendents
of this lineage. After the P/T event the anomodonts like Lystrosaurus
survived to populate the world but faced stiff competition from the
archosauromorphs, the rhynchosaurs. Among the carnivores the mammal-line
eventually lost their dominance to the rising archosauriforms.

Immediately, after the P/T event we see that forms very similar to
Archosaurus were growing in size and expanding to achieve global
distribution across Pangaea. This marks the first radiation of the
archosauriforms – the proterosuchian radiation. It is not entirely clear
if this proterosuchian radiation was monophyletic rather than being
paraphyletic with respect to the other archosauriforms. It included
forms like Proterosuchus, which has been reported from South Africa and
Asia, which grew to about 3 meters in size – larger than the mammal-line
predators of the age. Proterosuchus was in many ways superficially
similar in body shape and gait to modern crocodiles – indeed some
workers have even proposed that it was a semi-aquatic form that included
fishes in its diet (simple conical teeth). Other Early Triassic
proterosuchids like Kalisuchus (yes, named after the devatA kAlI) and
Tasmaniosaurus from Australia, Vonhuenia and perhaps Blomia from Russia
suggest that this group of archosauriforms had attained global
distribution shortly after the P/T extinction. They persisted till the
middle Triassic as suggested by Sarmatosuchus from Russia. However,
their remains are rather fragmentary or poorly studied to be sure if
they occupied an ecological niche similar to that proposed for
Proterosuchus. Their generally large size relative to the coeval
mammal-line predators suggests that they were moving into the position
of being the apex predators. We observe that both the archosaurs and the
synapsids that crossed the P/T boundary are typified by adaptations that
are related to more efficient breathing. In the case of the archosaurs
this appears to have been the innovation of the constant unidirectional
flow lungs, whereas in the synapsids it appears to have been the
efficient diaphragmatic breathing. These adaptations were possibly
critical to make it across the oxygen-low that accompanied the P/T
transition. The archosaurian lung was probably more efficient than the
corresponding breathing adaptations of the mammalian line. As a
consequence even in the low oxygen conditions they were able to maintain
higher metabolic rates. Thus, when the oxygen situation improved they
were able to grow to much large sizes than the synapsids. Further, the
increased metabolic rates also lead to both the synapsids and archosaurs
evolving more erect gaits.

The next wave of archosauriform radiation was that of the erythrosuchids
that were beyond doubt the apex predators of the age. They are known
from various Triassic sites and the first of them to emerge were the
primitive forms such as Fugusuchus from Asia and Garjainia from Russia.
They retained the low skulls with narrow snouts of the seen in the more
primitive proterosuchids. However, shortly thereafter more advanced
erythrosuchids emerged such as *Erythrosuchus* and *Vjushkovia* that
acquired higher skulls. The limbs of *Vjushkovia* suggest that it had
acquired a reasonably erect gait, and the vertebra of *Erythrosuchus*
suggest that air-sac system that invaded the bones, seen today in birds,
had already emerged. Some of them had skulls greater than a meter in
length with recurved teeth. This marked the stabilization of a predatory
pattern of swallowing large whole chunks of food after using the mouth
as the primary offensive organ in the archosaurs. The mammals
drastically differed in moving towards the development of an elaborate
food processing system with differentiated teeth. Along side the
erythrosuchids, a diverse group of archosauriforms were part of the
radiation underway by the Olenekian age of the early Triassic (249-245
Mya). One of the groups from this radiation was the euparkeriids that is
represented by *Osmolskina* from the early Triassic of Poland. These
occupied the niche of small predators and developed body armor that was
to be characteristic the archosaurs that followed. Another group was
that of the proterochampsids (*Proterochampsa*, *Tropidosuchus* and
*Chanaresuchus*), which invaded the aquatic niche converging to that
well-known superficially crocodile-like form assumed by many
archosauromorphs. An enigmatic form that might be related to the
proterochampsids, occupying a probably terrestrial or semi-aquatic niche
is Doswellia. This form is armored by an extensive osteoderm coat
probably even on its limbs and has two peculiar backward directed horns
coming of the squamosal bones. Another enigmatic form which is a
late-surviving descendant (seen in the late Triassic) of the primitive
archosauriform radiation is Vancleavea, which is an aquatic form with
reduced limbs. Its entire body is covered with osteoderms, the most
remarkable of which are the set of 30 vertical osteoderms on the tails
that form a laterally compressed tail fin. Vancleavea was also one of
the early archosauriforms to show clear heterodonty with a caniniform
tooth each on the premaxilla and maxilla. Though the proterochampsids,
Doswellia and Vancleavea are all more primitive than the crown group
archosaurs they are found in the late Triassic, well after the
representatives of the primitive archosauriform radiation, such as the
erythrosuchids, and the euparkeriids which are more advanced than them.
This suggests that there is a long gap in the fossil record of these
forms. The significance of this gap is considerable. With the discovery
of the ossified laterosphenoid in turtles by Bhullar, it appears even
more likely that the turtles were probably yet another group from this
primitive radiation of archosauriforms that was filling up the Triassic
ecosystems. Given the gap between when the primitive archosauriform
radiation should have taken off to the first turtle in the Late Triassic
it is possible that we are missing several intermediates. It is quite
possible that turtles were actually part of an early radiation of
armored and aquatic or semi-aquatic forms like Vancleavea, Doswellia and
the proterochampsids.

The point of origin of the crown group archosaurs is shrouded in
mystery. In the Middle Triassic Tanzanian fauna we have evidence for
both the dinosaur-line and the crocodile-line suggesting that they had
separated by then. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that they are likely
to be a sister group of the euparkeriid-lineage and we have evidence for
such forms from the early Olenekian age of the Triassic of Poland. Thus
it is clear that the crown group archosaurs had probably emerged as
early as the early Olenekian age. Likewise, Turfanosuchus and upper
Triassic Yonghesuchus could also be close to the of the crown-group
archosaurs. Thus, these forms were clearly part of a rapidly diverging
wave that further radiated from the early radiation of primitive
archosauriforms. The nature of this radiation is poorly understood –
certain fragmentary Russian fossils provide tantalizing hints of the
beginning of this radiation. “Tsylmosuchus” samariensis (Induan) and
“Tsylmosuchus” jakovlevi (early Olenekian) could be early members of
the crocodile line. Likewise two other Russian forms
Vytshegdosuchus(late Olenekian) and Donguschus (Anisian) might also be
early members of the crocodile line. Thus, there is some (not yet solid)
evidence that the crown group archosaurs might go back to the earliest
age of the Triassic, though most evidence points to the crocodile line.
However, the dinosaur line was all this time probably small in size and
perhaps not very numerous (?).

continued…
