+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "June 20, 2021"

+++
**Old Persian:** baga vazraka auramazdā, hya imām būmim adā, hya avam
asmānam adā, hya martiyam adā, hya šiyātim adā martiyahyā, hya
dārayavaum xšāyaθiyam akunauš, aivam parūvnām xšāyaθiyam, aivam parūvnām
framātāram, adam dārayavauš xšāyaθiya vazraka, xšāyaθiya xšāyaθiyānām,
xšāyaθiya dahyūnām vispazanānām, xšāyaθiya ahyāyā būmiyā, vazrakāyā
dūraiapiy vištāspahyā, puça haxāmanišiya pārsa pārsahyā, puça ariya
ariyaciça

This is the vulgate text of the DNa inscription (by Emperor Darius the
First at Naqsh-e-Rostam, circa 490 BCE). I will attempt a rendering of
this Old Persian (OPr) into Sanskrit \[Skt\]. Then we shall translate it
into English. A thing to note is that I no knowledge of the OPr
language. However, the striking intelligbility of the text caught me by
surprise and motivated me to write this post. This post might serve to
illustrate how much OPr someone who knows fluent Sanskrit (and some
Indo-Iranian linguistics) can understand. I will attempt to place a
cognate at every position rather than just translate meaning.

**Sanskrit:** bhagaḥ vājaḥ asuramedhaḥ, yat imām bhūmim adāt, yat amum
aśmānam adāt, yat martyam adāt, yad ānandam adāt martyāya, yat
dhāravasum kṣetāram akarot, ekam purūṇām kṣetāram, ekam purūṇām
pramātāram, aham dhāravasuḥ kṣetā vājaḥ, kṣetā kṣetṝṇām (\* kṣatriyaḥ
kṣatriyāṇām) , kṣetā dasyūnām viśvajanānām, kṣetā asyām bhūmyām vājāyām,
dūramapi viṣṭāśvasya putraḥ, sakhamanayaḥ pārasaḥ pārasasya, putraḥ
āryaḥ āryacitraḥ

**English:** Great is the god Ahura Mazda, who gave \[created\] this
earth, who gave that sky, who created mankind, whogave happiness to
mankind,who made Darius \[lit. bearing good\] the king,one king of
many,one overlord of many.I am Darius: great king,king of
kings,king of the lands of all men,king on this great earth,far and
wide, son of Hystaspes,an Achaemenid, a Persian, sonof a Persian, an
Aryan of Aryan descent.

***Notes**:* A few things to note in the translation. I tried my best to
literally reconstruct and reverse engineer each word back to its cognate
root or noun. If none existed, I made my own nouns \[like kṣetṛ from
√kṣi “to rule”\]. This caused some awkwardness, such as the word dasyu
\[enemy/slave in Skt\] being used to denote “land” \[cognate with dāhyu
\[land\] in OPr\]. I rendered the name “Darius” into Skt by calquing it.
I did the same for Achaemenid. Darius in OPr is dārayavahu \[lit. bearer
of good\]. This was easy to render into Skt as dhāravasu \[m\].
Achaemenid in OPr is haxamanishya \[lit. companionship minded person\]
which I rendered as sakhamanaya in Skt. I also calqued ahurāmāzda \[lit.
god of wisdom\] into asuramedha. I shifted the gender of medhā \> medha
using a bahuvrihi.  
  
Coming to the ease or quirks of the reading. I understood maybe 50% on
my first read and a lot more everytime I read a line closely trying to
mentally reverse engineer words into Skt. The relative pronoun hya gave
me trouble but I figured “great god ahura mazda, X gave this earth” was
the perfect place for a relative clause which solved this mystery. The
word šiyāti troubled me a lot though and I could not think of any
cognate \[either root or noun\]. I don’t think any exists so I looked up
the meaning in a dictionary and plugged in ānanda \[bliss\] for the Skt.
Now, I wasn’t sure what role avam played. I went with a safe bet that it
is related to asau/amu \[that, yonder – Skt\]. Asmāna of OPr did have a
cognate which is aśman but this is used only for a stone in RV. A closer
meaning is “cloud” but still not quite “sky” – But as it is a cognate,
it will do in line with the scope of my translation being word-for-word.
ariyaciça puzzled me for a while but the ingenuity struck me a lot once
figured out! \[āryacitra – in the image of an Aryan\].

