+++
title = "The \"Kashmirian\" ayyars"

+++
While there is some evidence from the early shrIvidyA and siddhAnta
tantric sundaranAtha (tirumUlar) was probably from kAshmIra or at least
had teachers from kAshmIra, we know little of him and his affiliation
with other smArta brAhmaNa-s of the drAviDa country. There a few
vaDama-s (Northern smArta-s of the drAviDa country) who believe that
they are from kAshmIra. That they were from there is of not much doubt,
but whether they form a single migration or came to Tamil Nad (and
Andhra) in multiple migrations has not been properly investigated. While
eventually we may have the opportunity to investigate these issue with
genetic markers, we cannot be so sure given that brahminical tradition
is fast eroding in the Tamil country. The smArtas are amongst the most
rapidly degenerating communities via varNa sankara, patita sAvitra and
other pAtakas.

Looking at inscriptions we find the following information:  
1\) The oldest layer of vaDamas from the tirunelveli region contain one
group of Kashmirian immigrants. This group appears to have come around
750-800 CE and settled specifically in the agrahAra-s associated with
the tiruvalishvaram temple. A pallavan incription in this temple clearly
attests the settling of these brAhmaNa-s in Tirunelveli. This group was
particularly important because they were critical in transmission of the
kubjikA tantras and the rahasya-s of the pashchimAnAya. kalhaNa mentions
that the confiscation of agrahAras by the king jayApIDa in the dynasty
of lalitAditya resulted in many brAhmaNas fleeing and this incident
might have been responsible for their southward dispersal.

2\) The second layer appears to have been related to the dispersal of an
illustrious lineage of Kashmirian brAhmaNa intellectuals who contributed
in different realms throughout length of the country. This appears to
have happened in the 1000s of CE. This general dispersal included 1)
uvaTa, the great vedic commentator who studied vedic grammar and the
shukla yajur veda (court of bhoja); 2) bilhaNa the writer and poet who
settled in the chAlukya court in karnATaka 3) the father-son-grandson
trio: bhAskara (minister), soThala (prime minister) and shAra\~Ngadeva
(author of the primary sangIta-ratnAkara, the epitome of taurIya gAna)
in karNATaka and maharAShTra during the yAdava reign; 4) somashambhu-
the illustrious siddhAnta tantric who settled in the Tamil country and
wrote one of the primary manuals used in the temple worship of shiva and
ritual performance of the mantra-mArga shaivas of the Urdhva-srotas. 5)
shrInivAsa bhaTTa- a savant of shrIvidyA who settled in the drAviDa
country and initiated several lineages of brAhmaNAs into shrIvidyA. The
brAhmaNAs associated with the latter have been incorporated both amongst
vaDaMas and shivAchArya in the TN and south-western Andhra.

In between there were the pAshupata kAshmIrAchAryas who settled in the
south, but do not appear to have contributed to the gene pool to the
best of my knowledge. The final wave appeared during the vijayanagaran
rule. This group included several lineages settled during the
viceroyship of lakShmaNa daNDanAyaka settled in northern TN. These clans
included several vedic experts who served as a priest in sacrifices
performed by luminaries like appaya dIkShita. Some these learned the
atharva veda in the south and returned to kAshmIra.

Some vaDamas connected to the lATa country might have also originally
included a few immigrants from kAshmIra. There is a small community of
vaDamas long-settled in Gujarat whose exact connection with these
migrations, if any, remains currently unknown to me. It appears that
bhAskara-rAya makhIndraâ€™s guru was of this lineage.
