+++
title = "Blowing the mammalian fuse"

+++
Since the time of manu we have tried to understand the relationships
between organisms. But even after realization of the modern evolutionary
theory we failed completely achieve this goal. Many of us are chipping
away at it, and the one thing that is really allowing us to do this are
the molecular phylogenies. What molecular phylogenies have shown is that
the the morphological evolutionary trees perform poorly beyond typically
obvious of relationships. This is true even within vertebrates and this
ever truer the further back we go into time. See the following cases
where molecular phylogenies came into action to bring order in the
gloom.  
1\) The hagfishes and lampreys were thought to represent
non-monophyletic successive outgroups to the gnathostome vertebrates.
But MPs showed that the agnathans form an unequivocal monophyletic
lineage with several shared features.  
2\) Turtles were generally thought to be anapsids with the exception of
Rieppel’s work. Even that did not place them in a precise location in
diapsids. Molecular phylogeny nailed their archosauromorph affinities
inside diapsida.  
3\) The false gharial Tomistoma was consistently placed away from the
true gharials in morphological analysis, but MPs showed that they were
after all sister taxa just as they appear to be to a casual observer.  
4\) Finally, the relationships that largely eluded morphological
analysis amongst placental mammals were uncovered by MPs: the
hippo-whale sister group relationship and the monophyly of afrotheria
that not a single paleontologist had even suspected.

The big lesson from this that must be remembered for the coming
discussion is that morphological analyses are really prone to problems
in the non-trivial zone. The cases mentioned above if carefully
reanalyzed suggests a certain element of human subjectivity in the
seemingly objective cladistic analysis of morphological characters–in
many cases the morphologists have subsequently reproduced the molecular
phylogenies by recoding their data.

Molecular phylogenies suggest that the extant placental mammals show 4
major evolutionary
[assemblages](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2006/03/some-musings-on-xenarthran-and.html):
1) Afrotheria- including predominantly African lineages, with striking
morphological diversity with forms like the golden moles(Afrosoricida),
Elephant shrews (Macroscelidea), hyraxes, elephants and manatees. 2)
[Xenarthra](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2006/03/some-musings-on-xenarthran-and.html)–
including all major south american mammals, armadillos, sloths and
anteaters. 3) Laurasiatheria, which includes the familiar orders of
carnivora, perissodactyla, artiodactyla (including whales), bats, and
eulipotyphlan insectivores. 4) Euarchontoglires including primates and
their sister group, the flying lemurs, the tree-shrews and rodents. An
important aspect of this phylogeny is that in most major assemblages we
have rather generalized “shrew-like” insectivoran forms. In Afrotheria
the elephant shrew, in Laurasiatheria, Solenodon, in Euarchontoglires
the tree-shrew. All these forms are in their generalized life-style,
size and behavior comparable, and in general form reminiscent of the
earliest Mesozoic eutherians like Eomaia or other early forms like
Cimolestes. What this would mean is that even after their separation the
major mammalian superorders possibly remained quite conservative in
gross morphology (shrew-like) and life-style. It was from such
precursors they appear to have repeatedly radiated to occupy all the
niches they do today.

The recently released analysis by Bininda-Emonds et al in the English
tabloid using a supertree and multigene molecular phylogeny suggests
that the four great placental superorders split within a 2.4 Myr
interval around 100 Myrs ago. They further go to suggest that nearly all
extant placental orders had emerged in an evolutionary explosion by 85
million years. Thus, they say that the higher order diversification of
the mammals was complete in the Mesozoic, coeval with the radiation of
angiosperm plants, temperature dip and fall in ocean oxygen. They argue
that the radiation of most mammalian orders was not due to ecological
release caused by extinction of non-avian dinosaurs in the K/T event.
The second major point they make was that though the orders radiated
early, the diversification into the extant ecological diversity within
these orders happened later, well after the K/T event, through the
Eocene and Oligocene. Some forms like
[cats](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2006/01/evolution-of-cats.html)
appear to have radiated even much later, close to our recent time.

In short these findings need some careful thought — but the so called
long fuse for the explosion intraorder diversity of extant forms is the
main issue to concentrate on. If this were true, I suspect that many
shrew-like forms from the Mesozoic and Paleocene may actually contain
the precursors of all our extant orders but go unnoticed due to the
deficiencies of morphological phylogeny–a future project for
paleontologists.
