+++
title = "The figure in the shadows"

+++
After the futile battle of khANDava, which to us was like the decline
into the sufferings of the kali age, we had climbed into the tower of
parIkShit. Having been driven away from there by fate we had landed in
rAjagrAma, ever shadowed by that ghoul of malapaTTana. We wandered long
ago like a performer of the kapALa vrata in the forests around the dasyu
shAla. kR^iShNa-mukha, khara-mukha and mala-tvacha were seated on the
wall at the rim and laughing loudly. We ran into the niShada and asked
him what lay beyond the yonder mist. He told 4 stories and the wheel of
kAla raced ahead. Down a deep tunnel-like alley were projected the
laughing three-some. We saw them in deep, and then they vanished into
nothingness. Then the niShAda smiled and said these bhrAtR^ivya-s will
be washed away like the rivals of sudAsa being washed away by the
paruShNi. But then there will rise the dreadful one, the ghoulish one;
the dream will show it. We went on a long ride on our ashva and crossed
the stream of go-mUtraka.  
We saw sujAtA and asked her the following cryptic question: “What will
your number be and when will it come ?” She replied: “it will be two and
end at dvAdashAnta. I will inform you in the most subtle of ways.” She
did so recently.  
We saw the kaushika and asked him: “When ?” He said: “When you are
burning in battle I alone shall be beside you, even as the
vaishvAmitra-s around rAmo bhArgava.”  
We saw kalashodbhava-suma\~NgalA and asked: “what is your number ?” She
said: “It will start just before dvAdashAnta. As for its full extant do
not ask.”

Then we stumbled into the senior bhArgava. He said: “the third hero has
broken forth, but why do the two ghouls chase their victims like the
beings sent forth by the kAshyapa to slay the bhAradvAja?”  
…  
We were nearing the end of a train journey. It was similar to the end of
another such journey at the end of the mirth and joy of dashAnta. It
ended and we went up the steep rock face near giri pAda that lay on the
opposite side of the city from the kumAra gR^iha. We saw vidrum then —
in a few days the flow of kAla had swept him aside as the flood on the
paruShNi bore the enemies of sudAsa. We survived, and emerged victorious
in battle. But then after getting down from this journey we did not know
who would be swept away.
