+++
title = "The Southern kekaya-s"

+++
The early kShatriya-s of the andhrApatha are important to understand the
origins and transmission of the early medieval kaumAra sect. They are
also critical to understand the peregrinations of kShatriya-s throughout
India and the role they played in the unification of the country. These
movements are also important to understand the early movements of the
pAshupata shaiva lineage into the southern country. We have earlier
alluded to the the role played by the ikShvAku-s of andhrApatha in the
development of the [kaumAra
sect](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/10/royal-kumara-worshippers.html)
in the south. We believe that this movement of the ikShvAkus and
associated clans into dakShiNA-patha was a key element of the entry of
the kaumAra religion into the drAviDa country, where it has lingered in
a peculiar form to this day even after it faded away in other parts of
India. The ikShvAku movement to the south is suggested by the
establishment of the principalities of ashvakas and mUlaka-s by members
of this dynasty on the river banks of the godAvarI, which were around
during the shatavAhana period. The fall of the shatavAhanas allowed many
of these gain territory, and in andhrApatha a line of ikShvAku-s gained
ground under the great king shAntamUla, the performer of vedic
sacrifices and the worshiper of kumAra.

Interestingly, D Sircar’s studies on inscriptions brought to light a
lineage of kekaya-s too in the southern country who lay to the West of
the southern ikShvAku-s centered around the chitradurga town in Mysore.
The kekaya-s are a member of the pa\~ncha jana as per traditional
testimony and are the descendants of anu. As per the testimony of the
veda, purANa-s and itihAsa-s they along with another anu lineage, the
mAdra-s, lay to the northwest of the sub-continent. Their great king
ashvapati kekaya was rAjarShi who taught many brAhmaNas. The rAmAyaNa
mentions them as in-laws of dasharatha and allies of the ikShvAku-s who
helped bharata and his sons takSha and puShkala in the wars against the
gandharas. The memory of their capital rAja-gR^iha in Balkh is recorded
by the Chinese agent Yuan Chwang.

The inscriptions pertaining to the southern branch mentions
“ikShvAkubhir api rAjarShibhiH kR^it AvAha vivAha– implying that they
exchanged both sons and daughters in marriage with the family of
ikShvAku rAjarShi-s. The use of the term rAjarShi strongly suggests that
they were performers of shrauta sacrifices. The kadamba king
viShNuvarman is mentioned as: “kaikeya-sutAyAm utapanna” implying that
his mother was a kekaya princess. In an inscription from 470 CE we have
the statement that the queen of the kadambas, wife of king
mR^igeshavarman, is kaikeya mahAkula prasUtA (born in the noble family
of the kekayas). Another inscription in Haldipur, Karnataka mentions the
wife of the pallava chief chaNDamahAsena, who was a great kaumAra, as
being from the kekaya kula. Their son was pallavarAja-gopAladeva. Thus
the kekayas appear to have had relationship with the other 3 major
southern dynasties, the ikShvAkus, pallavas and kadambas. Given that
powerful dynasties like the shatavAhanas, pallavas, kadambas,
viShNu-kuNDins and shAla\~NkAyanas never claimed origin from the
historic Aryan dynasties of the purANas, there is no reason to doubt
that the ikShvAkus and kekayas of south India were migrant versions of
the northern kShatriya dynasties. This suggests that after the rise of
the mauryan power in North India, many remnants of the old dynasties
started migrating outwards from their home zones, mainly towards
dakShiNApatha. In the south they seem to have initially survived in the
shadow of the shatavAhanas before coming of their own.

The end of the kekaya power seems to have come after the pallavas
destroyed them along with the kadambas in the battlefield of naNakAsa.
The chitradurga inscription mentions that their king shivanandavarman
was wounded mortally in the battle and after the destruction of the
kadamba king kR^iShNavarman, he lay on a darbha bed and waited for his
death. This inscription mentions that he was a parama-mAhesvara, or a
great pAshupata.
