+++
title = "Chasing oxymora"

+++
After the self-analysis by the muni and myself we discovered our
Achilles heels. But still drawn by the noose of mAyA I was seized by the
nishAchari. Lamenting my fate I once used the phrase “chasing oxymora”
to our friend. This perhaps ill-constructed phrase stuck due to the
fancy kaunDinyA took for it. I told her the tale of the yogin and
paused. She said two things: 1) the 8th cycle of yuga-s and 2) chasing
oxymora. Then the image came to our mind: That one who has passed was
endowed with good genes but after his luck had run out he was dragged by
vaivasvata and the pups of saramA were howling even as he made his
southward journey. Our mind went back to the 3rd and 4th cycles of
yuga-s, when we thought not of the coming of the son of vivasvAn, but
were full of aspirations that fluttered like the galliform-banners atop
a great mountain shrine of sharavanabhava. It was then one evening,
after having observed our vrata-s for three years, we were wandering in
a quite alley in the city of the mahArATTa king beside the RI. I was
supposed to spend the whole evening inside the musty rooms of RI
discussing intricacies of the poetry of Goethe – such whether the rose
in “Roslein auf der Heiden” was just a rose or something else more
interesting. Just then, smitashAlinI came up to me on her “ashva”. We
exchanged a few words and I thought to myself whether it made more sense
to pursue Goethe’s stab from the rose or to give myself to ephemera.
After all we reasoned to ourselves: The only way to be freed from
pashu-pAsha was to realize in totality that we were indeed pashu-s. So
she and me went to vendor with the dim lamp who sold bhR^ijika-s of
spinach leaves coated with flour. She bought me that delight of the
tongue – I realized to my horror that to this day I have not paid her
back for that. What ruin might the unpaid R^iNa-s bring to a brAhmaNa we
wondered? She said: Now that kR^iShNa-tvacha has passed beyond the
shades of aparAvati what are you up to? I said: I have been thinking of
the concept of the self-emergent autonomous agent and if it equates with
life. We had a philosophical discussion there after, the contents of
which find echoes in the writings of Stuart Kauffman – that
simultaneously brilliant and dogmatic thinker of the western world. In
the dim light, at the peak of our bodily strength, in exhilaration of
parity of company we felt a certain resonance that triggers inspiration.
For that period we could identify with the basis of why so many tantra-s
have the conversation of the bhairava and his shakti as the frame – we
felt like the bhairava and the shakti in conversation – or we where the
bhairava and the shakti in conversation. But sometime later we were to
realize that the Avesha was transient and we lacked the means of going
in and out of sAyujya padavI. Thus we remained bound. We went back the
memory lane to collect some of those thoughts and try to present them in
an updated form (not so much updated for philosophical content as actual
knowledge).

Autonomous agents: Organisms move acquire nutrition, sense and respond
to environmental changes, and modify the environment to suit their
needs. These actions which signal their ability to act on their own
behalf make them autonomous agents. Today, many autonomous agents exist
– computer programs (e.g. computer viruses), robots and of course
life. Of course robots and most programs that act as autonomous agents
are incapable to reproduction, which is a hallmark of life. Thus, life
is a special autonomous agent whose actions on its own behalf ultimately
include the ability to make more copies of itself. Given this idea of
the autonomous agent a series of philosophical questions came to us in
course of that conversation in the height of our bodily powers: Was life
the first autonomous agent to emerge in the universe?  
Is the emergence of autonomous agents expected – i.e. a matter of course
and predictable (even if only probabilistically) consequence of the
initial condition of the universe – should we surprised they emerged at
all?  
Was the independent emergence of autonomous agents common or rare in the
universe?  
Did all self emergent autonomous of the living type have a similar (not
same) type of hardware – i.e. certain type of molecules? As a corollary,
did all the autonomous agents with dissimilar hardware get created by
some other autonomous agents? Say we make self-reproducing robots they
will have a dissimilar hardware from us.  
On a similar note: Will we be able to distinguish designed autonomous
agents from those emerging from natural selection. Say we make a
genetically engineered bacterium and release it into the environment.
Few hundred years hence we might not be able to say that this organism
was engineered by another organism rather than emerging on its own is we
lost record of the engineering. So in a more general case over the
universe would we be able to distinguish engineered life seeded on a
planet from emergent life?  
What is the relationship between emergence of autonomous agents and
consciousness, if any?
