+++
title = "Long gone cephalopods"

+++
[![fossil\_cephalopods](https://i0.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3175/3023696809_f5b1e20030.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3023696809/ "fossil_cephalopods by somasushma, on Flickr")

Over the ages cephalopods have attained large sizes on many occasions.
The earlier Paleozoic radiations of cephalopods were dominated by the
various lineages called nautiloids. Of these, one lineage, which was
prevalent from the Ordovician to the Silurian, was Endoceratida, and
these included giant nautiloids like *Endoceras* which reached up to 4
meters and *Cameroceras* which is reputed to have reached over 10 meters
(in shell size). Thus, even before the vertebrates came to the fore as a
major faunal component these molluscs had reached enormous sizes, and
were the largest invertebrate predators of all times. But even after the
dominance of the vertebrates was established in course of the Devonian
large forms continued to emerge in other nautiloid lineages. The best
known of these is *Rayonnoceras* of the Actinoceratida clade that
attained shell sizes of 2-2.5 meters during the Carboniferous. However
one of the most successful lineages was Orthoceratida, which in turn is
believed to have spawned the Bactritida from which in turn the coleoids
and ammonites are believed to have emerged. The ammonites attained large
sizes with forms like *Parapuzosia* from the Cretaceous Campanian
reaching shell diameter of 2.5 meters. Even larger but apparently
unpublished ammonites have been reported in certain Canadian sites. A
Cretaceous coleoid *Tusoteuthis* probably reached about 8 meters
including tentacle length. Today the largest coleoids, the squids, like
the *Mesonychoteuthis* and *Architeuthis* are believed reach 13-14
meters including tentacles are amongst the most impressive marine
predators. *Enteroctopus* with tentacle length considered has been
recorded to reach over 6 meters. Thus, large cephalopods from different
lineages have been seen in practically every era, though different
lineages have declined or expanded over time. It is interesting to note
that the largest fishes and sharks do not vastly exceed the size of the
largest cephalopods if at all. However, tetrapods that returned to the
sea, like ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs and whales gave rise to some of the
largest ever animals. This might be related the inherent metabolic
limits of extracting oxygen from water as against using air.
