+++
title = "Frontline warriors"

+++
The charge of the Indian brigade has been consistently plagued with the
lack of proper frontline troops who can bear the cannon fire of uncouth,
wild-eyed, gutter-mouthed barbarians like Brett Lee, Mcgrath and
Pollock. In contrast, when India has to return the fire with the
occassional exception of the over-used field gun, Shrinath, the rest of
the guns typically fail to fire, or deliver noisy, but empty
thunderbolds like Agarkar. The result is the now familiar rout and
dispersal of Indian troops in any encounter with an average or better
opposition on battle fields outside the subcontinent. The two factors
are clearly linked: The inability to produce high velocity guns results
in the inability to produce warriors who can fight when high velocity
guns are being fired. As result the Indian army always teeters on the
slow lane and panics when the heavy guns go off on the maidan-i-jangs.

This brings us to one great mystery: Why are those frontline warriors
showing potential, often forsaken for third rate replacements who are as
such destined to shatter when confronted with the barbarian gunnery.
Take the brave warriors of yore, like Sadagopan Ramesh, Wookeri Raman,
etc all of whom had potential, but were replaced with flimsy defenders
like Rathore, Gandhi, Bangar and their ilk.

With no big guns in sight, and one more war with the Barbarians of
Southern Saxony coming up, one can only conjure up ghosts of the 92 and
99 . They have been seared into the Indian mind like the encounters on
the Panipat plain.
