+++
title = "Jinnah and Huntington"

+++
Often, certain Hindus labor under the belief that they have a superior
understanding of Christianism and Mohammedanism than the Christians and
Mohammedans themselves. This was never more clear than in the case of
Jinnah the founder of the Terrorist State of Pakistan. Eventhough Jinnah
was pretty lucid in explaining how the Two nation theory worked, the
Hindus completely failed to understand it. Even today many Hindus, both
secularvaadi and otherwise, believe that the two nation theory is
incorrect. What has been shown to be incorrect is the ridiculous
“martial races” theory that was mainly an European invention. The crux
of the issue is that, in the two nation theory, the person who who
proposes it, is the one controls the dialog. So when Mr. Jinnah told
Gandhi and Chachaji that there were two nations: Dar-ul-Momeen and
Dar-ul-Harb, he was in control of the dialog right from the begining. So
irrespective of whatever our Chacha or the Mahatma thought there were
going to be two nations. The response of the Nehru-Gandhi clique was of
course no different from the manner in which Hindus deal with
contentious issues amidst themselves. This made no sense in the context
of Jinnah because he was a part of Dar-ul-Momeen and idiots from
Dar-ul-Harb have no say in the matter.

Several years later came Huntington, who, in his now legendary slender
tome, provided a more generalized solution termed the clash of
civilizations. He is of course correct in his explanations regarding
civilizations based on Islam, Judaeo-Christianism, Marxism, and east
Asian imperialisms. However, when it comes to Hindu civilization he is a
little off mark because he is unable to grasp the fundamental structure
of Hindu thought. This Hindu thought is unable to grasp the
civilizational clash within its own constructs. In a sense it is like a
spherical geometry, unable to reproduce the world of the hyperbolic
geometry. The result of this construction of the Hindu world results in
a peculiar duality. On the positive side it results in Hindus soaring to
tremendous hights of intellectual achievement: you have the vasiShTha,
the pANini, the AryabhaTa, the nilakaNTha somayAji and many others. You
have the legendary Hindu tenacity to survive vicious life and death
struggle against the deadly force of Islam. On the other hand you have
the legendary apathy of India, an abundance of traitors willing to sell
the Hindu cause for money or even without rewards. This latter
phenomenon manifests as secularism in India. Another facet of this Hindu
existence is the profound inability of many modern Hindus to understand
why the Aryan invasion of India was a reality. They preserve the veda,
but are unable construct their own history in a satisfactory way.

It is time Hindus pay more careful attention to the existence of
alternative geometries where the relationships which are true in their
world may not exist. The late Ram Swarup had initiated this re-thinking
but his deep thoughts are yet to permeate through the Hindu masses.
