+++
title = "A note on the Tantric state among the chIna-s and recovery of a lost vainAyaka ritual"

+++
[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-sRPqhOm8Rbk/TxKOz3BdQZI/AAAAAAAACVI/NHufe1zHmVo/s400/chIna_vinAyaka.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/3a5WTBNu06MxSHCjgkAI89MTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

In 705 CE, amoghavajra was born in Samarkand to a brAhmaNa teacher from
either Prayag or Kashi and his Iranian wife. His father died when he was
10 years old and he moved to the chInadesha with his mother and uncle.
There he became a student of the great nAstika tAntrika vajrabodhi, a
brAhmaNa from Kanchipuram, who settled in chInadesha after a long
journey in the east. From Kerala, vajrabodhi had gone to Shrilanka and
from there he went to the Nicobar islands. From there he went to Sumatra
and finally reached Kwangchow, where he became a guru of the chIna
princess Tu-ku-kuei-fei. Along with amoghavajra and his Korean student
Hyecho praj\~nAvikrama he taught several aspects of the tAntrika lore to
numerous chIna students. In 730s amoghavajra succeeded vajrabodhi as the
guru of the realm. In 741 CE the nationalist legalistic Han faction had
an edict passed to kick out all Indian and Korean guru-s and students
from China. In this period amoghavajra went to Java and then to India to
learn under different AchAryas in the high universities of
bhAratavarSha. In 746 CE he was called back to chInadesha to perform
tAntrika rituals for the emperor of all chIna-s Xuan-zong and the
princess Hua-yang was made his adopted daughter. In 751 CE the chIna
army at peak of its military glory came to face to face with the Islamic
jihad at Talas. The result was disastrous for the former and the Tang
war machine met one of its worst defeats in a long time. This was
quickly followed by another drubbing at the hands of the Qarluq Turks
led by their yabghu Tun Bilge. On the other side of the chIna world, the
Tang generals attempted and invasion of Thailand and met yet another
crushing defeat at the hands of the rAjA of Thailand. This shook the
Tang empire paving the way for the eventual rebellion of the
Irano-Mongolian rokShana (An Lu-shan). In course of these events the
defense of the Tang border zones came under prince Wumin of Xiping, who
invited amoghavajra to perform abhichArika rituals. Fearing his tAntrika
rites, in course of his takeover of the chIna throne, rokShana’s
captured amoghavajra, while he was translating the tattva-saMgraha, a
yoga tantra. Subsequently, his patron prince Wumin was also captured and
killed by rokShana’s son. But in 757 CE the chIna forces defeated the
son of rokShana and killed him to restore Tang power, giving a chance
for amoghavajra to escape. However, shortly thereafter the chIna-s
suffered a defeat at the hand of the Uighur Turks and faced an attack
from the Tibetans. At this point the Tang emperor Su-zong called upon
amoghavajra to perform great tAntrika rituals to purify the palace of
the emperor and a jayAbhisheka for the survival of the Tang empire. In
these rituals he deployed secret mantra-s to the vinAyaka yAmala to
prevent vighna-s from afflicting the chIna-s. After the Tang revived
their fortunes in 760 CE, amoghavajra performed a complex tAntrika
ritual in which he crowned Su-zong as the chakravartin sArvabhauma.
Shortly thereafter, he was joined by a brAhmaNa from Kashmir named
praj\~nAchakra, whom he initiated into a secret ritual of the
chatur-vinAyaka-maNDala. In 765 CE he is supposed to have performed a
long abhichAra rite on behalf of Su-zong right using the ma\~njushrI
kumArabhUta mantra to kill the Uighur Kha’khan. Thus, amoghavajra became
a highly regarded tAntrika and was declared minister of the realm of the
chIna-s, and was declared praj\~nAkosha or the treasury of knowledge by
the chIna emperor. Both amoghavajra and his successor praj\~nAchakra
were rAja-guru-s for Su-zong and his successor Dai-zong (on whose behalf
amoghavajra had performed apotropaic rites when he was a general during
the rokShana rebellion).

One of the secret vidyA-s that he promulgated were a set of rituals to
gaNapati and his shakti whose originals appear to have been lost in
India. But they are of greatest significance in understanding the
gANapatya ritual; hence we describe them here. An account of the chIna
Hanguang mentions that he received dIkSha in the secret sAdhana of
gaNapati and his shakti from amoghavajra in 747 CE. He mentions that the
prayoga was so secret that neither the mantra-s nor the maNDala and
rites were recorded. The says the rites covered puShTika, shAntika,
vashIkaraNa, abhichArika, AkarShaNa, and Ayuvardhana, i.e. a particular
ShaTkarman encompassing both apotropaic, lifespan increasing and
attacking rituals. He only briefly elaborates on the root bIja of
vinAyaka being gaH (a nAstika form of the original gaM from the Astika
tradition). He then tries to provide a bauddha overlay to explain the
nature of vinAyaka – he claims that both vinAyaka and avalokiteshvara
emerged as emanations from the dharmakAya (the pervasive body) of the
cosmic buddha vairochana (the deity in vairochanAbhisaMbodhi tantra).
Then avalokiteshvara transformed into a female and became the shakti of
vinAyaka to pacify him. Hence, they are worshiped as a couple. Jing-se
in his vidhi provides a few further details of the transmission of
amoghavajra: He says that the vinAyaka-s might be worshiped as: 1) the
vinAyaka yAmala – where vinAyaka is conjoined with his shakti. In this
depiction his shakti is clearly depicted in a proboscicephalic form. It
is clear from the navArNa mUlamantra of the original gANapatya tradition
promulgated by the great AchArya herambhasuta in India (the element
“hastipishAchi likhe”) that this is what was originally intended,
although in the later period in India an entirely anthropomorphic shakti
became the norm.  
2\) the ShaDbhuja vinAyaka – this form is depicted above from the
original drawing of vajrabodhi or a copy there of. Tradition holds that
vajrabodhi was a skillful iconographic artist.  
3&4) are chaturbhuja vinAyaka-s.  
5\) The 4 seizing vinAyaka-s as ordained by the parishiShTha of the
atharvaveda and the mAnava gR^ihya sUtra of the maitrAyaNIya tradition.
This was already taken up by the nAstika-s and incorporated into the
subAhu-paripR^ichCha, a text from the [kriyA
tantra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/02/16/nastika-notes-2/)
layer.

It is regarding this last version of the 4 vinAyaka-s that
praj\~nAchakra the student of amoghavajra records a remarkable
ritual.This ritual is termed the ritual of the magical plates for the
deva Amoda sUrya (vinAyaka). He first makes the circular heaven plate
about 3-4 a\~Ngula-s in diameter and then the square earth plate with
its side 7 a\~Ngula-s from a white fragrant wood on an auspicious day.
He avoids seeing evil-doers when he is preparing and painting this
yantra. He fixes two handles to the heaven plate and connects the two
plates with an axial pin. On the heaven plate facing east he writes the
bIja AM in a leaf and visualizes a red Amoda-vinAyaka on a jade seat
with a red body and wrathful face. He is surrounded by many troops and
holds a vaiDUrya stone and a spike. To the south in a leaf he writes the
kUTa jI and visualizes Amoda kAma vinAyaka holding a modaka and a
radish, seated on a ruby throne. He is surrounded by 18 crore hordes
yelling like jackals. To the west in a leaf he inscribes hrIH and
conceives Amoda soma vinAyaka with 104 thousand crore troops. He is
seated on a tiger skin seat and is known as ekadanta. On the northern
side in a leaf the kUTa mA is inscribed and vAgIshvara gaNesha is
conceived seated on a and of the blue green color with his hands showing
the asi-mudra seated on a black stone throne with koTi-ayuta gaNa-s
around him. In the center of this plate he may place an image of rudra.
On the earth plate in the directions the following deities are inscribed
indra (E); agni (SE); yama (S); nirR^itI (SW); varuNa (W); vAyu (NW);
vaishravaNa (N); rudra (NE). These are surrounded by the 28 nakShatra-s
and 36 animals. He then displays the special vinAyaka mudra to call the
for vinAyaka-s. Then he invites the 4 seizing vinAyaka-s with the mantra
“OM vakratuNDAdipatye svAhA ||”. Then he deploys a certain vakratuNDa
mAlA mantra and displays a the vishva mudra. Then he shows the tejorAshI
mudra and invokes the deva-s in the earth plate and utters the
incantation (“OM shatrupramardine svAhA ||”). He then shows the
kuNDa-mudra and invokes the nakShatra-s and the 36 animals with a mantra
that we are unable to decipher. In the chIna transliteration it goes:
“OM chi-ri-an-gi-ru-ni-ye svAhA ||”. He then shows the vajra mudra and
invokes the multitude of gaNa-s of vinAyaka with a mAlA mantra. Then he
shows the bhakti mudra.

He performs a digbandha by tying a boundary thread all around the ritual
area and uttering the mantra: “OM ki ye ye ye huM ||”. To deploy the
yantra he rotates the vinAyaka on the heaven plate to coincide with a
deva on the earth plate. Then he casts and incantation for that
particular prayoga. This mantra is not entirely decipherable and ends in
huM huM kili kili hum phaT svAhA ||. It is accompanied by a display of
the a\~Nkusha and khaDga mudra.  
\-If he seeks to rise in stature then he may unites the sUrya vinAyaka
with indra.  
\-If he seeks to perform an abhichAra to cause fever to a shatru then he
may unite the sUrya vinAyaka with agni.  
\-If he seeks to get wealth then he may unite the soma vinAyaka with
vaishravaNa.  
\-If he wants to induce a person to love him he unites the soma vinAyaka
with vaishravaNa and invokes the nakShatra-s thereafter  
\-If he seeks to win a war then he unites the sUrya vinAyaka with rudra
and invokes the hordes of rudra.  
\-If one wants good crops he unites vAgIshvara vinAyaka with indra.  
\-If he wants to remove bad dreams he unites sUrya vinAyaka with yama.  
Thus, there are numerous prayoga-s for different purposes. It is said
that it was transmitted from India to China. The mantra manual ends with
an equation of the gaNapati-s on the heaven plate with the 4 seizing
vinAyaka-s.  
This text was also subsequently transmitted to Japan which had vigorous
[gANapatya
tradition](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/04/30/a-japanese-ganapatya-text/).

The recovery of this ritual from chIna sources is important because it
belongs to the class of texts associated with the transition from the
seizing vinAyaka-s to the classical vinAyaka-s. It is of interest to
note that the text describes the 4 vinAyaka-s of being of the same basic
substance. This is reminiscent of the the yAj\~navAlkya ritual stating
that the 4 or 6 seizing vinAyaka-s are essential manifestation of a
single vinAyaka, umAsuta.
