+++
title = "The irony of vAsudeva sArvabhauma"

+++
In the declining years of the Hindu world, in the late 1400s and first
half of 1500s lived a remarkable thinker vAsudeva sArvabhauma. The
intellectual feats of the paraMpara to which he belonged are one of the
forgotten flashes of a profound saMskR^ita tradition – a great
intellectual edifice of Hindu thought. Regarding vAsudeva what we have
are apocryphal hagiographies – often from those with vested interests in
putting him down – yet, they are sort of respectful to him, clearly
pointing to his towering intellectual stature. vAsudeva was the son a
brAhmaNa named maheshvara vishArada from a village near navadvIpa in the
va\~Nga country. There are accounts of his virtuoso memory in mithilA,
where he is said to have gone to study with pakShadhara mishra. Though
based on kANe’s dating it is more likely he was a student of ruchidatta,
a successor of pakShadhara \[Footnote 1\]. He is supposed to have
acquired an enormous knowledge across several branches of saMskR^ita
tradition and is said to have passed the most difficult test of the
mithilan school in which a page would be picked at random from any
shAstra by paNDita-s and and he would have to expound on it. It is said
they kept going until the hundredth time he expounded on the chosen
shAstra from memory. At that point they conferred on him the title
sArvabhauma. He founded the great navadvIpa school and eventually
attracted the attention of one of the few independent Hindu rulers of
the age – pratAparudra gajapati of kali\~Nga. He relocated to the
Orissan kingdom and remained the rest of his life in jagannAtha pUrI
teaching a large number of students.

Among his most prominent students was an interesting group: 1)
kR^iShNananda Agama-vAgIsha who wrote the great mantra manual the
bR^ihat-tantra-sAra and was one of the renowned tAntrika-s of his age.
2) raghunAtha tarka-shiromaNi the great exponent of nyAya of the
navadvIpa school. 3) raghunandana who wrote the commentary on Hindu law
based on dAya-vibhAga which became the mainstay of Hindu law in the
East. 4) chaitanya, the vaiShNava bhakti saint. It appears that the
partisans of chaitanya’s gauDIya tradition have used vAsudeva as an
idealized “opponent” of chaitanya, who was finally converted by him.
This appears to be a purely apocryphal account of the gauDIya tradition
– we almost feel that the hard logical tradition of vAsudeva
sArvabhauma produced a reactionary response on chaitanya, who swung all
the way to the other end of the Hindu spectrum, as a passionate
proponent of the bhaktimArga. It is indeed rather ironic that the
student of a great teacher becomes famous for propagating doctrines so
very contrasted to those of his teacher \[Footnote 2\]. Nevertheless,
the vast diversity of the knowledge of vAsudeva’s students in a sense
point to his own breadth of scholastic ability. For long we have felt
that there is a larger irony in terms of the tradition that vAsudeva
sArvabhauma represented. vAsudeva belonged the tradition of nyAya that
was revitalized by ga\~Ngesha. His legacy in this regard was passed on
to the one-eyed raghunAtha tarka-shiromaNi who in turn passed it to his
students like mathurAnAtha, harirAma and jagadIsha \[Footnote 1\].

They were in turn was succeeded by the great student of harirAma,
gadAdhara bhaTTa, who revived the syncretic vaisheShika discourse among
the proponents of navanyAya. He was a wide-ranging scholar who in
addition to his work in nava-nyAya was also an accomplished tAntrika who
wrote a multi-faceted work on the deployment of the navArNa mantra of
chaNDikA. However, we may say that gadadhAra’s greatest contribution was
the restoration of the true vaisheShika spirit into the system: It said
that as he lay dying his well-wishers asked him to think of the Ishvara,
the cause of the universe, that he might attain a favorable gati upon
death. He instead responded “pIlavaH pIlavaH pIlavaH ||” (atoms, atoms,
atoms; we see the triplication as his subscription of the vaisheShika
tryaNu instead of the dvyaNu typical of the nyAya tradition). The last
notable scholar in the line of gadAdhara was our coethnic annam bhaTTa
who composed the tarka-saMgraha. It is in examining this capstone
production of the great atomic tradition that we find a great irony: Did
most of our paNDita-s fail to comprehend what for us is a guiding
mahAvAkya: kANAdaM pANinIyaM cha sarva-shAstropakArakam || Some
traditional paNDita coethnics of mine, who are certainly great scholars
of saMskR^ita, interpret this vAkya as meaning: “Logic and grammar are
essential aids to understand any shAstra”. But we would interpret it
somewhat differently and certainly can defend the interpretation rather
firmly: “Atomic and pANinian analytical devices are essential aids to
understand any shAstra”. We take this to represent the essential spirit
of kaNAda, the promulgator of atomic thinking and paNini, the
promulgator of a certain analytical technique that uses axioms on one
side and principle of homology on the other (as expounded by his
commentator pata\~njali).

Now the system of vaisheShika and nyAya have two major frameworks for
knowledge: The atomism and logic. kanAda’s main thrust is the former,
while that of akShapAda is the latter. When vAsudeva sArvabhauma
revitalized the nyAya system by building on the school of ga\~Ngesha it
was the domain of the knowledge of logic that got emphasized. However,
it was not that the domain of the knowledge of matter was missing in
this revival – indeed it was expressed, just as it was emphasized by
kaNAda, by gadAdhara and annaM bhaTTa and even utilized rather clearly
by ga\~Ngesha in his explanation of sound waves in the
tattva-chintAmaNi. Yet, most of the exponents of the school focused
primarily on the domain of knowledge of logic rather than that of
matter. Thus, we have some of the most brilliant minds in one of the
last flash of Sanskritic tradition devote their energies to the
development of the knowledge of logic. No doubt they achieved some
rather deep insights in this regard, yet to us in a sense they are
boring and lacking a certain “fulfillment” in terms of explanatory
potential. This to us is the big irony – nyAya-vaisheShika had been
revived in times when the Hindu world was in rather dire straits under
the grip of the desert delusion and the some its best brains had been
applied to it, but they choose to expend it on the arid fields of logic
rather than the fertile pastures of the knowledge of matter. And all
this was despite the brilliant guiding principles being stated right
there in their texts.

We state these simple guiding principles \[Footnote 3\] that open the
tattva-saMgraha in full because we are of the opinion that these are
indeed sound basic principles for investigating the universe:

dravya-guNa-karma-sAmAnya-visheSha-samavAyaabhAvAH sapta padArthAH ||

This might be interpreted as: atomic or quantum entities, properties,
force (literally displacement or motion; force being its cause),
generalities, specifics, inherence, absence are the seven knowable
things (j\~neya) or validly cognizable things (prameya) or nameable
things (abhideya). We interpret dravya as atomic or quantum entities
rather than matter because this is how the nava-nyAya presentation of
annaM bhaTTa understands its. As will be seen in the next principle
dravya includes not just matter but also other entities that are
considered to exist as quanta or atoms (these terms should not be
confused with their meaning in modern science, but in their basic sense
as particles). This number of padArtha-s (7) is variable in different
presentations of the nyAya-vaisheShika school – some old expositors like
vAtsyAyana name 7, while the dasha-padArtha-shAstra names 10. However,
padArtha-s of this system sharply differ from that of shaMkArAdvaita:
two padArtha-s chit (consciousness) and achit (not-consciousness) or
rAmAnujavAda: which includes the above two and nArAyaNa.

tatra dravyANi
pR^ithivy-ap-tejo-vAyv-AkAsha-kAla-dig-Atma-manAmsi-navaiva ||

This might be interpreted as: Nine alone of these are the atomic
entities: solid, liquid, heat/light, gas, vacuum, time, space,
consciousness and mind. A questioner would have asked if mind deserves
the status of an independent atomic entity.

rUpa-rasa-gandha-sparsha-saMkhyA-parimANa-pR^ithaktva-saMyoga-vibhAga-paratva-aparatva-gurutva-dravatva-sneha-shabda-buddhi-sukha-duHkhechChA-dveSha-prayatna-dharmAdharma-saMskArAsh
chaturviMshati guNAH ||

This might be interpreted as: Form/color, taste, smell, touch, number,
magnitude, separate independent existence, conjunction (bond-forming),
disjunction (bond-breaking), distance, proximity, weight, fluidity,
viscosity, response to vibrations, cognition, pleasure, pain, desire,
dislike, volition, dharma, adharma, and tendency are the 24 qualities.
In our worldview these guNa-s are divided among the different quantum
entities(the dravya-s) with some limited to only to certain dravya-s.
Thus, the physical guNa-s (first 15) belong to matter, energy, vacuum,
time and space. Though not all of them have each of the physical guNa-s:
For example, fluidity and viscosity are limited to a subset like gases
and liquids. The qualia (16-20) in contrast solely belong to the atman,
whereas the last 4 belong to manas. However, saMskAra also applies to
the matter dravya-s as the concept of inertia. The view of pata\~njali
in his mahAbhAShya is:

kaH guNaH nAma | sattve nivishate .apaiti pR^ithag jAtiShu vartate |
Adheyash-cha akriyAjash-cha so .asattvaprakR^itir guNaH || upaiti anyat
| jahAti anyat | dR^iShTaH dravyAntareShu .api | vAchakaH
sarvali\~NgAnAm dravyAt anyaH guNaH smR^itaH |

Thus, the view of pata\~njali on the guNa might be interpreted as: The
guNa is something which inheres only in substance (or what may be mapped
on to dravya-s of nyAya-vaisheShikA), and under certain situations
ceases to be present, which is found in the different types of
substances, which is conserved in some cases not conserved in others.
This view of the vaiyAkaraNa-s is clearly inherited from that of
nyAya-vaisheShika.

utkShepaNa-avakShepaNa-Aku\~nchana-prasAraNa-gamanAni pa\~ncha karmANi
||

Actions are of five kinds causing displaced away from, towards,
contraction, expansion and movement from one place to another. The
vaisheShika doctrine emphasized karman as a pure physical concept.
Unfortunately, this clarity was lost in many of the other Hindu
doctrines and this latter influence became pervasive in the later
understanding of karman. Indeed, displacement was understood as a
vector; as the classical vaisheShika theorist prashastapAda states:
“dig-vishiShTa-kAryArambhakatvam cha visheShaH ||” implying that the
displacement is marked by a direction denoted by a particular
dimensional axis. The first four karma-s are understood to be
rectilinear displacements i.e. the displacement of the body away or
towards a given reference point or the expansion or contraction of the
body. The fifth is supposed to denote displacements where the direction
of displacement is not the same throughout the motion; as prashastapAda
states in his conception of physics:
yad-aniyata-dik-pradesha-samyoga-vibhAga-kAraNam tad-gamanam-iti | This
includes projectile, circular and harmonic displacements, which might be
due to restitutive or opposing forces, as prashastapAda and his
successors like vyomashiva deshika and shrIdhara state:
“…bhramaNa-patana-spandanAdInAm avarodhArtham gamana…”

It was through such an analysis of motion as a physical concept did
shrIdhara, the successor prashastapAda, arrive at a physical formulation
similar to Newton’s first law of motion in his nyAyakandali:

saMskAro yAvat patanaM anuvartate | yathA yathA chAsya kArya-karaNAt
shaktiH kShItate tathA tathA kArya-mandataramAdi bheda-bhinnam upajAyate
||

Here shrIdhara implies that as a force does work against the body’s
motion, the body slows down and comes to rest.

param aparaM cheti dvividhaM sAmAnyam ||

Generalities are of two types, inclusive and less inclusive.

nitya-dravya-vR^ittayo visheShAs tv anantA eva ||

On the other hand specifics reside in the conserved dravya-s and are
endless.

samavAyas tv eka eva ||  
However inherence is only one.

abhAvash chaturvidhaH | prAgabhAvaH pradhvaMsAbhAvo .atyantAbhAvo
.anyonyAbhAvash cheti ||

Absence is of 4 types; antecedent, through annihilation, absolute and
mutual.

Of the above we will only briefly comment on the point of generalities:
The naiyAyika-s define it using the technical term jAti or a set which
is comprised of elements termed vyakti-s. The sAmAnyam is a defining
property of the set that is conserved even when individual elements
might be created or destroyed. Related to this is an important principle
of nyAya, i.e. lAghava nyAya or parsimony of explanation that in the
west is often termed Ockham’s razor. As per nyAya, parsimony should be
the primary criterion for soundness of a hypothesis provided that it
does not contradict a more reliable principle. Thus, the naiyAyika-s
state that the hypothesis of a jAti should be proposed using the
criterion of lAghava nyAya as long as it is not contradicted by a
classification of greater reliability. So on…

Thus, the above principles based on the vaisheShika doctrine provided
the Hindus with a good working framework for the exploration and the
understanding of the universe. Indeed, this allowed them reach a fairly
good understanding of motion, momentum and force \[Footnote 4\]. Yet, in
large part the tendency was to move away from the “as is” exploration of
these principles towards debates in logic and formalism (an example
being raghunAtha tarkashiromaNi, in course of his attack on pakShadhara,
using the logical construct of infinite regress to argue for a certain
type atom called the truTi, without attempting to explore the subtle
vaisheShika concept of paramANu in terms of physical phenomena).We
embarked on writing this note because of two proximal reasons:

1\) the question arose in course of the
[kautukasaMgha](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/12/26/kautukasamgha/)
as to whether the loss of vaisheShika led to the loss of the framework
to understand the universe. Our answer was that currently we hold that
view that it was not exactly the case. Instead we see it as “the irony
of vAsudeva sArvabhauma”, wherein the revitalized nyAya-vaisheShika
tradition got obsessed with logic, formalism and metaphysics rather
expanding the realm of kaNAda’s thought that they faithfully transmitted
in their texts. In part this might have been triggered by the decline of
the more mechanical traditions such as those encapsulated by bhojadeva’s
samarA\~NgaNa sUtradhAra, rather than an extinguishing of the
nyAya-vaisheShika tradition itself.

2\) Sometime ago we were teaching in a course, which featured students
from across the leukosphere, East Asia and South America. As part of an
attempt to broaden the intellectual perspective of the students, in
addition to the specific science which was the focus of the course, the
students also got to see certain educative documentaries and
discussions, which the teachers might also choose to watch along with
them. I choose to watch the filming that occurred along with the
students during my slot in the course – it was a discussion on
philosophy of science, consciousness, mathematics and physics by a panel
of famous white and Jewish intellectuals in the fields of physics,
mathematics, computer science, biology and philosophy. The discourse
itself and the apprehensions of the students is a story in itself.
However, what struck us was a heated debate that occurred in course of
the discussion between the mathematicians and some of the scientists.
The mathematician argued thus: Since science uses mathematics
extensively a tool, and since Gödel’s incompleteness theorems precludes
all mathematics from having a complete and consistent set of axioms for
it, the foundations of the scientific enterprise itself is shaky. He
implied that one can never know if one has a theory of everything, so an
enterprise like physics trying to explain nature is logically
questionable. In this regard, one might also consult a parallel view
presented by Stephen Hawking based on Gödel’s theorems in his lecture
“Gödel and the end of physics”. Yet, several of us in different areas
of the scientific enterprise tend to hold that, be this as it might, the
construction of scientific theories based on finite principles brings us
closer to an understanding even it were an eternally incomplete one on
the grounds of logic. It was this debate which reminded us of the
obsession of the late nyAya-vaisheShika theorists on logic at the
expense of strengthening the finite principles for developing a theory
of the universe.

.oOo.oOo.oOo.oOo.oOo.

Footnote 1: The general hagiographic tradition holds that vAsudeva
indeed studied with jayadeva mishra who is known as pakShadhara. It is
said that vAsudeva’s student the one-eyed raghunAtha later went to
debate with the old pakShadhara in mithilA to uphold the name of the
navadvIpa school. The old paNdita derided raghunAtha: “indra has a
thousand eyes, rudra three and all others two, who are you the one eyed
one?” Nevertheless, he let raghunAtha in to his academy to attend his
lectures. On one occasion pakShadhara was challenged by raghunAtha and
the former was on the verge of defeat, when rather than answering
raghunAtha, pakShadhara insulted him using offensive language. Furious
over this, raghunAtha decided to kill pakShadhara and hid in his house
with a sword. That night he noticed that pakShadhara was relaxing on a
swing with his wife on the terrace. Slowly advancing raghunAtha hid
himself behind the doorpost and waited. There he heard pakShadhara’s
wife ask him if there was anything more beautiful than the autumn moon
that was shining upon them. pakShadhara responded that there was indeed
one – the mind of a young scholar from va\~Nga who had defeated him in a
debate earlier in the morning – his mind is brighter than the moon he
said. Then raghunAtha is said to have dropped his sword and ran and fell
at the feet of pakShadhara, who forgave his murderous intention. The
next day pakShadhara declared to his academy that raghunAtha was the
supreme paNDita of nyAya from then on. With that the center of nyAya
became the navadvIpa school, where raghunAtha and vAsudeva erected a
statue to honor the old pakShadhara.

Footnote 2: Yet, it is characteristic of the Hindu milieu that such
contrasting views coexist without much of a social rupture. Indeed,
reactionary vaiShNava bhakti has been a rather common phenomenon in
various parts of India in medieval history.

Footnote 3: These are indeed simple principles that must be taught to
children as annaM bhaTTa clarifies: “bAlAnAM sukhabodhAya krIyate
tarka-saMgrahaH |” For pleasurably enlightening children I have made the
tarka-saMgraha.

Footnote 4: One of the few modern authors who understood the true spirit
of nyAya-vaisheShika in terms of it being a physics was the great
va\~Nga intellectual Brajendranath Seal, with whom we found much
convergence in thinking on all these matters.
