+++
title = "The virile taittirIyaka’s jealousy"

+++
When we saw the putraka we noticed that he was the atavistic
manifestation of the great Fourier of Mangalagrama. While Fourier of
Mangalagrama was a dreaded bhrAtR^ivya, he was still a man of
extraordinary qualities. A mathematician, engineer, linguist and writer
in his secular existence was a personified mantramahodadhi when he was
still alive. His mantra-shAstra expertise could be countered by few– he
has crushed S’s amAtya with ease, he pierced MM’s spells despite their
great intensity and his valaga-s were un-defeated by most of us. My own
astra-s withered before him like the vAnara-s before kumbhakarNa. S and
I were overthrown like sAtyaki and bhImasena by bhagadatta mounted on
supritika, the muni was bound, and the third vIra’s ratha was pierced by
his buried valaga-s. His deployment of yakShiNI-s, mohinI-s and DAvI-s
were feared by all. But his mistimed shara was back-hurled by MM and he
was paralyzed. Then the virile taittirIyaka needled by Fourier’s sharas
also sent a prayoga his way, which finally sunk him. The putraka was
indeed a multidimensional atavism of the old Fourier, but he did no
possess an iota of the mantra shAstra of the old one. Hence, he was
merely a large rat snake compared to the king cobra that Fourier was.
With that Fourier’s mantra shAstra lineage had come to a complete close.

However, even the virile taittirIyaka could not protect his sUnu when
Fourier picked him out with a strong direct hit. The clever third vIra
having broken forth was victorious. Fourier’s chera magician friend and
buried valaga-s blocked the vIra twice. But the vIra who had fought in
many breath-taking battle grounds powdered them and marched ahead. He
was now standing like one possessed with the ojas of 10 vR^iShabha-s
surveying. Seeing this the virile taittirIyin felt like a lion hearing
the distant thundering roar of a rival lion. He hence turned hostile.
Even though equipped with the mantrashAstra he behaved like one
unacquainted with shiShTAchara and bellowed a boast in the sabha
deriding the third vIra and me, like a bull profusely signaling on
perceiving rival bulls. With this he hurt his ties with his own janAH.
