+++
title = "Giant volcanos and humans"

+++
Recent meteorological studies have suggested that the volcanic activity
of Pinatubo in 1991 in Philippines resulted in the increase in cold
fronts and flooding in the Midwest in 1992. Building on the data from
the volcanic eruption of Pinatubo there is some consensus that the “Year
without winter” in 1816 was a result of the Tambora eruption on 1815.
The noise of the Tambora explosion in Sumbawa, Indonesia was heard up to
2000 km away \! Its effect on North America and Europe was pretty strong
resulting in a major famine in the western world. However, people made
it past it and recovered strongly. One wonders if its effect in some way
contributed to the collapse of the Maharattas in India. Even bigger was
the Younger Toba Tuff eruption that is dated to around 74000 years BP.
This explosion is supposed to have discharged 2800 km³ of material, with
a notable portion of this being ejected into the atmosphere as tephra.
Consequently it is believed to have reduced the Earth’s temperature by
5°C and caused a volcanic winter. This, some workers speculate, caused
a major impact on human survival and caused a bottleneck in the human
population. But was this really so? In Africa we find no evidence for
Homo sapiens being affected by this explosion, nor do we find the Homo
neanderthalis being affected in Europe. In fact Tambora’s most severe
effects were on higher latitude regions — Europe. Yet, the Neanderthals
seem to have survived Toba without much effect.

Recent work at Jwalapuram in Andhra shows that the Toba eruption was
indeed a massive one, and resulted in a volcanic ash deposition as a 2-3
m layer in southern India. However, the striking observation made by
Petraglia et al was that in the Jwalapuram sites the signal of hominin
activity was unaltered by the eruption. Both before and after the
eruption a similar set of stone blade assemblages are found, and
interestingly these resemble South African Middle Stone Age tools rather
than those of Middle Paleolithic from coeval sites in Eurasia (e.g. the
[Levallois
technique](http://id-archserve.ucsb.edu/Anth3/Courseware/LithicTech/Movies/Levallois_Point.html)
or the [discoidal
technique](http://id-archserve.ucsb.edu/Anth3/Courseware/LithicTech/Movies/Disk_Core.html)
which are seen in the latter sites). Also found in the Jwalapuram site
was ochre used for body decoration, which resembles the ochre used in
African Middle Stone from the Blombos cave from around 77000 years BP.
So it seems that the far-reaching meteorological effects of Toba were
real, but it did not destroy the human population as previously
speculated. This suggests that the effects of volcanic climate shifts
can have much greater effects on settled, agriculture and livestock
based economies than stone age economies — fewer your dependencies
greater chance that you make it through any drastic change.

However, the bigger question is who were these hominins living in
Jwalapuram around 70-75000 years BP? In South Africa modern anatomy and
behavior is believed to have been present in the related cultures
producing comparable lithic artifacts. Thus, the relationship with the
African MSA suggests that they were representatives of modern Homo
sapiens who migrated out from South Africa. However, in the absence of
actual human fossils, rather than just stone tools, this issue remains
uncertain. This is especially so because Petraglia himself, based on
somewhat tenuous evidence, has argued before that in India the
replacement of Homo heidelbergensis was probably gradual (The famous
Narmada cranial fragment is believed to be H.heidelbergensis from around
250,000-300,000 years BP). Petraglia also argues that “symbolic”
representations (e.g beads and rock painting and art) emerged late and
gradually in the sub-continent as against sudden appearance Europe and
Africa. While the identification of the Jwalapuram tools as being made
by Homo sapiens seems plausible, the proposed date of 75,000 years or
before is earlier than what is generally accepted. For example, most
molecular studies using the mitochondrial M haplogroup, which is the
most dominant group in India, suggest a coalescence time of
60,000±10,000 yrs BP. Likewise, previous archaeological studies have
recovered actual human fossils from only around 31,000 years (the Shri
Lankan caves), though there are poorly studied assemblages of earlier
stone tools from main land India. So we cannot entirely rule out that
first wave from Africa to the subcontinent was an archaic Homo. If this
early wave was indeed H.sapiens, these might have been precursors of the
earliest Australians too. The early dates that have been proposed for
the Mungo man from Australia (though highly debated) could be then be
possible.

These observations also feed into the more general question: Was large
scale volcanism responsible for major extinctions at all? For example
the volcanic catastrophists believe that the K/T extinction, the great
Permian extinction were all linked to contemporary massive volcanism
like the Deccan traps or the Siberian traps respectively. Some have
argued that massive volcanism might have had a greater effect than
extra-terrestrial impacts, while others argue that at least the two
should produce comparable effects (climatic changes with fires and
severe winters) There is currently no evidence that anything the size of
Toba could have caused more than local extinction. However, more careful
analysis of faunal remains is a must to attain any conclusive results.
Of course flood volcanism could have a very different effect. At this
stage we really need more empirical data to link volcanism and
extinction conclusively.
