+++
title = "Confusing the sthūla and thexa0sūkṣma"
date = "2017-06-19"

+++
Many Hindus,as a friend noted,have a tendency to confuse the sthūla with
the sūkṣma even in matters of directions of narrative weaving and
geopolitics when it comes to narratives of our history,and the core
reasons behind them. A particular example is the tendency to freak out
on any suggestion that Aryans migrated to India(never mind that the
seeing of the mantras of the śruti occurred all within the Indian
subcontinent,which no one can deny). Of course,the (understandable)
reason for the uneasiness with this is that it is used as a stick to
beat Hindus with,calling them murderous Nazis,invaders,racial bigots(or
some form of that) from the very beginning of their existence(or theses
that extend in that direction). Most of them do not notice that even if
OIT was proved beyond any doubt,the direction of the narratives purveyed
by mlecchas and those who imbibe their ideologies would not change one
bit at all. They will still continue to either blame brahmins or the
entire society. Two examples in case would be DD Kosambi,who(along,or
despite,or because of his belief in the fact that Indo-Iranians came
from outside),noted about the genesis of brahmins

It seems that Kosambi was a little uncertain about the origin of the
brahmanas, but he firmly and consistently held that they originally
belonged to non-Aryan cultures and were very probably drawn from the
Indus valley
priests.[\[1\]](http://ddkosambi.blogspot.in/2008/12/dd-kosambi-on-religion.html)

None of this prevented him from calling the intellectual production of
āstika brahmins and everyone else like that of a mistletoe,which was
beautiful but parasitic.

Or Hegel,who held an Out of India theory,but whose [descriptions of
Hindu
philosophy](https://videshisutra.com/2015/11/03/hegel-on-india-and-hinduism/)
are a manual on how to misinterpret and misunderstand Indian philosophy.

What needs to be needed is a properly oriented narrative,regardless of
whether it is established that the descendants of
Indo-Iranians/Indo-Aryans populated India or the Indian subcontinent was
the Urheimat of the Indo-Europeans.


