+++
title = "RV 10.5"

+++
The Ṛgveda is replete with obscure sūkta-s but RV 10.5 might easily take
a place in the top tier of those. One might even ask why even attempt to
write a commentary on this. We admit we could be plainly wrong in
reading the words of our ancestors but the allure of attempting to
understand the recondite cannot be passed up. We know nothing of the
true composer of this sūkta for the anukramaṇi attributes it to the god
Trita Āptya, a watery deity of old IE provenance with cognates Thrita
and Thraetona Athvya in the Iranian world and Triton in the Greek world.
The sūkta itself is directed towards Agni.

ekaḥ samudro dharuṇo rayīṇām  
asmad dhṛdo bhūri-janmā vi caṣṭe \|  
siṣakty ūdhar niṇyor upastha  
utsasya madhye nihitam padaṃ veḥ \|\| 1

The one sea, the receptacle of all riches;  
he of many births from our heart looks on.  
He clings to the udder in the lap of the two hidden ones.  
In the midst of the fountain, the bird’s path is set down.

The opening ṛk is already fairly obscure. We believe the sea here is as
literal as it gets. In later Hindu tradition, the sea is seen as the
receptacle of riches and the same metaphor finds an early expression
here. Now, that sea is juxtaposed with one of many births. The deity of
the sūkta is given as Agni and there is no reason at all to doubt that —
although he is explicitly mentioned only in the final ṛk of the sūkta,
many epithets throughout the sūkta confirm him as the deity . Sāyaṇa
informs us that the many births of Agni correspond to this multiple
kindlings in the ritual altars of such as the Āhavanīya, the Gārhapatya
and the Dakṣiṇāgni in diverse yajña-s. This just one of the ways in
which Agni may be seen as having many births. Alternatively, in
mythological time he is again said to have many births — a possible
allegory for the precession of the equinoctial colure. However, the
twist in this sūkta is the “internalization” of the yajña, as Agni is
said to be in the heart of the ritualists. This takes us to the next
foot where he is said to “cling to the udder in the lap of the two
hidden ones”. Agni in the lap of the two parents can be a metaphor for
the two pieces of the ritual fire-drill or Dyaus and Pṛthivi in a cosmic
context. However, neither of them are hidden and this comes in the
context of the internalized yajña implied in the earlier foot. Hence, we
take hidden to mean something internal, probably the mind and the
intellect (which are not visible entities), whose action composes the
sūkta like Agni being generated by the fire-drill. Then in the final
foot, we come to Agni being identified as a bird and his path being set
down in the midst of the fountain. Sāyaṇa interprets this as Agni as the
lightning in the midst of the cloud. This is appears to be version of
the famous representation of Agni as Apām Napāt. However, we believe
that two distinct metaphors, one physical and one mental or internal,
are being intertwined here. The sea and the fountain are physical — they
are allusions to the famous fire in water, with the fountain as the
underwater plume associated with these fires. These sites in the Black
Sea-Caspian Sea region could have been accessed by the early
Indo-Europeans and those sightings left an impression on their
tradition.

samānaṃ nīḷaṃ vṛṣaṇo vasānāḥ  
saṃ jagmire mahiṣā arvatībhiḥ \|  
ṛtasya padaṃ kavayo ni pānti  
guhā nāmāni dadhire parāṇi \|\| 2

The virile ones dwell in the same nest,  
the buffaloes have come together with the mares,  
The kavi-s guard the seat of the natural law (ṛta),  
they have placed the highest names in concealment.

This may be interpreted as a metaphor for the feeding of the ritual fire
with oblations. The oblations are likened to the virile buffaloes, while
the mares are the tongues of Agni (seen as female Kālī, Karālī, etc).
This brings us to the famous imagery of the fire within water as the
Vaḍavāgni or the equine fire (something Sāyaṇa seems to intuitively
grasp), whose flames might be seen as the mares. The kavi-s here might
be seen as tending to Agni who is seen as the seat of the ṛta. Sāyaṇa
mentions the secret names to be Jātavedas, Vaiśvānara, etc which have
secret meanings.

ṛtāyinī māyinī saṃ dadhāte  
mitvā śiśuṃ jajñatur vardhayantī \|  
viśvasya nābhiṃ carato dhruvasya  
kaveś cit tantum manasā viyantaḥ \|\| 3

The two imbued with the truth and illusion conjoin,  
having measured \[him\] out, the two birthed the child, making him
grow,  
\[who is the\] nave of all that moves and stands still.  
Indeed they \[the beings\] with their mind seek the connection (lit:
thread) of the kavi \[Agni\].

Here we agree with Sāyaṇa’s interpretation that it refers to the birth
of the cosmic manifestation of Agni as the sun from his parents, the two
world-hemispheres. This is mirrored in the ritual by the generation of
Agni by the two parts of the fire-drill. In this solar form, he is seen
as a nave of all that moves and moves not and connection to him is
mentally sought by all beings.

ṛtasya hi vartanayaḥ sujātam  
iṣo vājāya pradivaḥ sacante \|  
adhīvāsaṃ rodasī vāvasāne  
ghṛtair annair vāvṛdhāte madhūnām \|\| 4

For the wheel-tracks of the law, the well-born one,  
refreshing offerings, for booty, serve from the days of yore,  
the world-hemispheres having worn the mantle,  
with ghee and honeyed food augment \[the child Agni\].

Here the world halves are explicitly mentioned; this clarifies the
reference to the cosmic Agni, i.e. sun. The ṛta’s wheel-tracks, i.e.
movements of celestial bodies like the sun further build this connection
and support the rendering of ṛta as the “natural law” which is manifest
in celestial movements that have continued since the ancient days. Them
following the cosmic Agni is intertwined with the metaphor of the
ritualists seeking booty serving Agni with refreshing offerings. The
mantle of the world-halves is a likely allusion to the days and nights.

sapta svasṝr aruṣīr vāvaśāno  
vidvān madhva uj jabhārā dṛśe kam \|  
antar yeme antarikṣe purājā  
icchan vavrim avidat pūṣaṇasya \|\| 5

Desirous \[of them\], the seven shining sisters,  
the knower (Agni), held up from the honey to be seen,  
He held \[them\] up within the mid-region, the earlier born one,  
seeking a mantle, he found that of the earth.

This ṛk is rather obscure. Sāyaṇa explains the seven sisters as the
seven tongues of Agni (Kālī, Karālī, etc) that he has held up within the
mid-region for all to see. However, the celestial connection hinted at
by the sisters being held up in the sky (?) suggests that it could be an
allusion to the Kṛttikā-s (Pleiades) the asterism associated with Agni.
. However, this interpretation will not hold if we strictly take
antarikṣa to be the atmosphere. We follow Sāyaṇa to take the adjective
aruṣīḥ to mean shining rather than red (which ironically would fit his
tongues interpretation better) Further, we also follow Sāyaṇa in
interpreting the obscure word Puṣaṇa as the Earth.

sapta maryādāḥ kavayas tatakṣus  
tāsām ekām id abhy aṃhuro gāt \|  
āyor ha skambha upamasya nīḷe  
pathāṃ visarge dharuṇeṣu tasthau \|\| 6

The kavi-s have fashioned the seven boundaries,  
just to one of those the troubled one has gone,  
in the nest of the highest Āyu, the pillar  
stands in foundations \[situated\] where the paths diverge.

Sāyaṇa takes the seven maryādā-s to be ethical strictures: sins like
killing a brāhmaṇa or bedding ones teacher’s wife, beer, etc lie outside
the boundaries of proper conduct. Indeed, this moral sense appears to be
in play when the same ṛk is deployed in the Atharvan marriage ceremony:
Kauśika-sutra 10.2.21: sapta maryādāḥ \[AV-vulgate 5.1.6\] ity uttarato
.agneḥ sapta lekhā likhati prācyaḥ \| To the north of the marital ritual
fire 7 lines are drawn towards the east. Then while reciting this ṛk,
the couple places a step on these lines to signify the ethical
strictures that accompany marriage. While this implication might be the
secondary sense of the first foot, we believe that its primary sense is
distinct. In the ritual sphere, it is an allusion to the seven
paridhi-s, the firesticks which enclose the fire. These in turn appear
to be a symbolic representation of celestial “boundaries” for the
purpose of the yajñ. This implied by the yajuṣ incantation that is
recited as paridhi-s are laid down (e.g. in Taittirīya Śruti): viśvāyur
asi pṛthivīṃ dṛṃ̐ha dhruvakṣid asy antarikṣaṃ dṛṃ̐hācyutakṣid asi divaṃ
dṛṃ̐ha agner bhasmāsy agneḥ purīṣam asi \|\| This incantation is for the
rite with three paridhi-s (madhyma, uttara and dakṣiṇa). They are
respectively associated with the earth, the atmosphere and the sky. The
seven-paridhi ritual might have likewise symbolized the six realms and
the central plane of one version of vaidika cosmography (speculation).
This ṛk returns to some of the themes found in the first and second
ṛk-s. The nest and the “dharuṇa”, here meaning the foundation, are
mentioned again. Āyu, in the general sense, may be understood as the
ancestor of the pañcajana-s, the son of Pururavas and Urvaśi. However,
when Agni is seen as the fire of Āyu-s, he is called the best of the
Āyu-s. This is made explicit in the ritual context in the Yajurveda by
the incantation (e.g. in the Taittirīya Śruti): vider agnir nabho
nāmāgne aṅgiro yo .asyāṃ pṛthivyām asyāsuṣā nāmnehi … Thus, the pillar
of Agni by the name Āyu, is the skambha referred to in this ṛk. It is
said to stand in the foundation where the paths diverge. Thus, the
pillar should be understood as the axial pillar with the divergent paths
being that of the gods (the northern path) and that of Yama with the
dead (the southern path). The point of divergence is of course the
equinoctial colure which intersects the plane on which the axis stands.

asac ca sac ca parame vyoman  
dakṣasya janmann aditer upasthe \|  
agnir ha naḥ prathamajā ṛtasya  
pūrva āyuni vṛṣabhaś ca dhenuḥ \|\|

Both the unmanifest and the manifest are in the primal sky,  
Dakṣa’s birth is in the womb of Aditi,  
Agni, indeed, for us is the first borne of the law,  
in his former life both bull and cow.

This last ṛk talks of the role of Agni back in time during the
cosmogonic period by giving a summary of what is covered in the famous
cosmogonic sūkta-s, like RV 10.72 and RV 10.129. Here the unmanifest
(literally the non-existent) and the manifest all that came into being
are said to exist in that primal sky (parame vyoman) just as in RV
10.129 (the famous Nāsadīya sūkta). The generation of beings is seen as
occurring with the Āditya Dakṣa being born from Aditi (and vice versa as
per RV 10.72). This posits initial cyclical reproductions of male from
female and vice versa. But it results in an apparent paradox of who came
first, the male or the female. The ṛṣi of this sūkta tries to break the
paradox by stating that it was Agni who was the first-born entity of the
ṛta, who in that former state was androgynous. Thus, the author invokes
hermaphroditic reproduction as the ancestral state. This was also the
position of Vaiśvāmitra-s of maṇḍala-3, who present a comparable set of
cosmogonic constructs in the context of Indra and Varuṇa (RV 3.38),
emerging from the god Tvaṣṭṛ, who in some ways is like the yavana
Kronos. They are said to have partitioned the hermaphroditic ancestral
bovine into male and female, similar to Zeus and Apollo cleaving the
hermaphrodites into separate sexes in the yavana world.

