+++
title = "Yajus incantations for the worship of Rudra from the Kāṭhaka ritualxa0manuals"
date = "2020-12-27"

+++
This article is available as a [pdf
document](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/katha_rudra-3.pdf).
The notes from it are appended below.

The loss of the northern and northwestern Kṛṣnayajurveda traditions due
to the Mohammedan depredations of Northern India (aided an abetted by
the predatory Anglospheric regimes) has been one the great tragedies
faced by Hindudom. Hence, it is rather important to collate and restore
whatever remains of these traditions, namely those belonging to the
Kaṭha and Kapiṣṭhala schools, which were once dominant in the greater
Panjab and Kashmir. In the 1940s, vidyābhāskara, vedāntaratna
Sūryakānta, saṃskṛtācārya of the Pañjāba-viśvavidyālaya, Lavapura
(modern Lahore) had collated several Kaṭha fragments that came from lost
texts outside of the relatively well-preserved saṃhitā. These came from
the lost brāhmaṇa and the surviving āraṇyaka, as well as the lost
mantrapāṭha of the Kaṭha-s that went with the sūtra-s of Laugākṣi.
Notable in this regard, were the following manuscripts that Sūryakānta
found in what is today the terrorist state: 1) A Śāradā manuscript which
was written in 1033 Vikrama-saṃvat, bright āṣāḍha aṣṭami (approximately
June of 1111 CE) in Gilgit. Ironically, this manuscript was found in the
possession of a mulla named Hafiz ar Rahman of the Panjab \[footnote 1\]
and contained 340 folios. This was an extensive paddhati with several
Kaṭha mantra-s and brāhmaṇa sections used in their late gṛhya rituals.
Another Śāradā manuscript, found in the possession of the same mulla, of
180 folios contains overlapping content from brāhmaṇa and mantra
material used in Kaṭha rituals. Finally, there was the D.A.V. college
manuscript with two parts of 189 and 169 folios respectively that was
again an extensive paddhati with overlapping material. The above
Rudra-mantra-s come in the sections labeled Rudra-mantrāḥ or
Śatādhyāya(Rudra)mantrāḥ and comprise their second division, coming
after the Śatarudrīya. The fate of these manuscripts after the
vivisection of India in 1947 CE remains unclear. In the past year, the
eGangotri trust has made freely available two independent texts which
span the mantra-s in question from the Raghunātha Mandira Sanskrit
collection, Jammu. One is a Śāradā manuscript of the Śatādhyāya-dīkṣa
and another is a print version of the Śatādhyāya produced in the 1920s
by the Kashmirian brāhmaṇa-s, Tārachanda Kaulā and Keśava Bhaṭṭa. These
have helped correct some problematic parts of the Sūryakānta texts.

The first part of this fragment is a rather important because is the
only occurrence of a variant version of this famous incantation to Rudra
found outside the Atharvaveda saṃhitā-s. The said incantation occurs as
sūkta 11.2 in the AV-vulgate (often taken to be the Śaunaka saṃhita) and
as sūkta 16.104 in the Paippalāda saṃhitā. In totality, the two AV
versions resemble each other more closely and have a more extensive set
of mantra-s. This clearly establishes that it was not a late acquisition
of the Kaṭha-s from the neighboring Paippalāda-s, who were also
prominent in the same region (e.g. the Kashmirian intellectual bhaṭṭa
Jayanta). Two further points are notable. This text is entirely
rhotacizing (e.g. arikravebhyaḥ) relative the fully or partial
lambdacizing AV saṃhitā-s (AV-vul: aliklavebhyaḥ; AV-P ariklavebhyaḥ).
On the other hand, it has mṛḷatam, mimicking the Ṛgveda dialect, instead
of the AV mṛḍatam. Similarly, this text shows the archaism of using the
RV-type dual form Bhavā-śarvā as opposed to the AV Bhavāśarvau. This was
likely originally part of the Kaṭha-mantrapāṭha which went the sūtra-s
of Laugākṣi.

It shares with the AV and Śāṅkhāyana-RV traditions, the conception of
Rudra in his twin form — Bhava and Śarva. In the Śāṅkhāyana-śrautasūtra
(4.20.1-2), Bhava and Śarva are called the sons of Rudra Mahādeva, thus
presenting them as ectypes of the Aśvin-s, who are the sons of Rudra in
the RV \[footnote 2\] and mirror the para-Vedic Skanda-Viśākha dyad who
are coupled with Rudra (e.g. in gṛhya-pariśiṣṭa-1 of the Kauthuma
Samaveda: oṃ rudraṃ skanda-viśākhayos tarpayāmi ।). In contrast, while
Bhava and Śarva are used as epithets of Rudra in other Yajurveda
traditions (e.g. Taittirīya), they are not presented as twins. This
suggests that the the Kaṭha tradition developed in proximity to the
locale where AV traditions original diversified in which the cult of the
twins Bhava and Śarva, like that of the Greek Dioscouri, was dominant.

The second part is homologous to the equivalent section of the
Aruṇa-praśna of the Taittirīya āraṇyaka, which is used in the
Āruṇaketukacayana ritual, where the bricks of the citi are replaced by
water-filled pots. It might have been part of an equivalent lost section
of the Kaṭha brāhmaṇa. It is largely equivalent to the TA version with a
few variants that we have retained due to consistency across Kaṭha
manuscripts. Variants of the final mantra are found as AV-vulgate
7.87.1; AV-P 20.33.7 and Taittirīya saṃhitā 5.5.9.3; Kaṭha saṃhitā
40.5.33. The Kaṭha version is oddly formed and unmetrical both in the
saṃhitā and across the prayoga manuals. Hence, we retain it as is
without emendation or metrical restoration based on the other saṃhitā-s.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

footnote 1: He could have descended from converted brāhmaṇa-s  
footnote 2:
<https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2020/01/12/the-asvin-s-and-rudra/>

