---
title: ON FANATICISM

---
<div>

[←](on_karma-yoga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](work_is_worship.htm)

  

## ON FANATICISM

There are fanatics of various kinds. Some people are wine fanatics and
cigar fanatics. Some think that if men gave up smoking cigars, the world
would arrive at the millennium. Women are generally amongst these
fanatics. There was a young lady here one day, in this class. She was
one of a number of ladies in Chicago who have built a house where they
take in the working people and give them music and gymnastics. One day
this young lady was talking about the evils of the world and said she
knew the remedy. I asked, "How do you know?" and she answered, "Have you
seen Hull House?" In her opinion, this Hull House is the one panacea for
all the evils that flesh is heir to. This will grow upon her. I am sorry
for her. There are some fanatics in India who think that if a woman
could marry again when her husband died, it would cure all evil. This is
fanaticism.

When I was a boy I thought that fanaticism was a great element in work,
but now, as I grow older, I find out that it is not.

There may be a woman who would steal and make no objection to taking
someone else's bag and going away with it. But perhaps that woman does
not smoke. She becomes a smoke fanatic, and as soon as she finds a man
smoking, she strongly disapproves of him, because he smokes a cigar.
There may be a man who goes about cheating people; there is no trusting
him; no woman is safe with him. But perhaps this scoundrel does not
drink wine. If so, he sees nothing good in anyone who drinks wine. All
these wicked things that he himself does are of no consideration. This
is only natural human selfishness and one-sidedness.

You must also remember that the world has God to govern it, and He has
not left it to our charity. The Lord God is its Governor and Maintainer,
and in spite of these wine fanatics and cigar fanatics, and all sorts of
marriage fanatics, it would go on. If all these persons were to die, it
would go on none the worse.

Do you not remember in your own history how the "Mayflower" people came
out here, and began to call themselves Puritans? They were very pure and
good as far as they went, until they began to persecute other people;
and throughout the history of mankind it has been the same. Even those
that run away from persecution indulge in persecuting others as soon as
a favourable opportunity to do so occurs.

In ninety cases out of a hundred, fanatics must have bad livers, or they
are dyspeptics, or are in some way diseased. By degrees even physicians
will find out that fanaticism is a kind of disease. I have seen plenty
of it. The Lord save me from it!

My experience comes to this, that it is rather wise to avoid all sorts
of fanatical reforms. This world is slowly going on; let it go slowly.
Why are you in a hurry? Sleep well and keep your nerves in good order;
eat right food, and have sympathy with the world. Fanatics only make
hatred. Do you mean to say that the temperance fanatic loves these poor
people who become drunkards? A fanatic is a fanatic simply because he
expects to get something for himself in return. As soon as the battle is
over, he goes for the spoil. When you come out of the company of
fanatics you may learn how really to love and sympathise. And the more
you attain of love and sympathy, the less will be your power to condemn
these poor creatures; rather you will sympathise with their faults. It
will become possible for you to sympathise with the drunkard and to know
that he is also a man like yourself. You will then try to understand the
many circumstances that are dragging him down, and feel that if you had
been in his place you would perhaps have committed suicide. I remember a
woman whose husband was a great drunkard, and she complained to me of
his becoming so. I replied, "Madam, if there were twenty millions of
wives like yourself, all husbands would become drunkards." I am
convinced that a large number of drunkards are manufactured by their
wives. My business is to tell the truth and not to flatter anyone. These
unruly women from whose minds the words *bear* and *forbear* are gone
for ever, and whose false ideas of independence lead them to think that
men should be at their feet, and who begin to howl as soon as men dare
to say anything to them which they do not like — such women are becoming
the bane of the world, and it is a wonder that they do not drive half
the men in it to commit suicide. In this way things should not go on.
Life is not so easy as they believe it to be; it is a more serious
business!

A man must not only have faith but intellectual faith too. To make a man
take up everything and believe it, would be to make him a lunatic. I
once had a book sent me, which said I must believe everything told in
it. It said there was no soul, but that there were gods and goddesses in
heaven, and a thread of light going from each of our heads to heaven!
How did the writer know all these things? She had been inspired, and
wanted me to believe it too; and because I refused, she said, "You must
be a very bad man; there is no hope for you!" This is fanaticism.

</div>
