---
title: WORK IS WORSHIP

---
<div>

[←](on_fanaticism.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](work_without_motive.htm)

  

## WORK IS WORSHIP

The highest man *cannot* work, for there is no binding element, no
attachment, no ignorance in him. A ship is said to have passed over a
mountain of magnet ore, and all the bolts and bars were drawn out, and
it went to pieces. It is in ignorance that struggle remains, because we
are all really atheists. Real theists cannot work. We are atheists more
or less. We do not see God or believe in Him. He is G-O-D to us, and
nothing more. There are moments when we think He is near, but then we
fall down again. When you see Him, who struggles for whom? Help the
Lord! There is a proverb in our language, "Shall we teach the Architect
of the universe how to build?" So those are the highest of mankind who
do not work. The next time you see these silly phrases about the world
and how we must all help God and do this or that for Him, remember this.
Do not think such thoughts; they are too selfish. All the work you do is
subjective, is done for your own benefit. God has not fallen into a
ditch for you and me to help Him out by building a hospital or something
of that sort. He allows you to work. He *allows* you to exercise your
muscles in this great gymnasium, not in order to help Him but that you
may help yourself. Do you think even an ant will die for want of your
help? Most arrant blasphemy! The world does not need you at all. The
world goes on you are like a drop in the ocean. A leaf does not move,
the wind does not blow without Him. Blessed are we that we are given the
privilege of working for Him, not of helping Him. Cut out this word
"help" from your mind. You cannot help; it is blaspheming. You are here
yourself at His pleasure. Do you mean to say, you help Him? You worship.
When you give a morsel of food to the dog, you worship the dog as God.
God is in that dog. He is the dog. He is all and in all. We are allowed
to worship Him. Stand in that reverent attitude to the whole universe,
and then will come perfect non-attachment. This should be your duty.
This is the proper attitude of work. This is the secret taught by
Karma-Yoga.

</div>
