---
title: WHO IS A REAL GURU?

---
<div>

[←](the_cosmos_and_the_self.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](on_art.htm)

  

## WHO IS A REAL GURU?

A real Guru is one who is born from time to time as a repository of
spiritual force which he transmits to future generations through
successive links of Guru and Shishya (disciple). The current of this
spirit-force changes its course from time to time, just as a mighty
stream of water opens up a new channel and leaves the old one for good.
Thus it is seen that old sects of religion grow lifeless in the course
of time, and new sects arise with the fire of life in them. Men who are
truly wise commit themselves to the mercy of that particular sect
through which the current of life flows. Old forms of religion are like
the skeletons of once mighty animals, preserved in museums. They should
be regarded with the due honour. They cannot satisfy the true cravings
of the soul for the Highest, just as a dead mango-tree cannot satisfy
the cravings of a man for luscious mangoes.

The one thing necessary is to be stripped of our vanities — the sense
that we possess any spiritual wisdom —  and to surrender ourselves
completely to the guidance of our Guru. The Guru only knows what will
lead us towards perfection. We are quite blind to it. We do not know
anything. This sort of humility will open the door of our heart for
spiritual truths. Truth will never come into our minds so long as there
will remain the faintest shadow of Ahamkâra (egotism). All of you should
try to root out this devil from your heart. Complete self-surrender is
the only way to spiritual illumination.

</div>
