---
title: THE EVILS OF ADHIKARIVADA

---
<div>

[←](the_sannyasin_and_the_householder.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](on_bhakti-yoga.htm)

  

## THE EVILS OF ADHIKARIVADA

In one of his question classes the talk drifted on to the Adhikârivâda,
or the doctrine of special rights and privileges, and Swamiji in
pointing out vehemently the evils that have resulted from it spoke to
the following effect:

With all my respects for the Rishis of yore, I cannot but denounce their
method in instructing the people. They always enjoined upon them to do
certain things but took care never to explain to them the reason for it.
This method was pernicious to the very core; and instead of enabling men
to attain the end, it laid upon their shoulders a mass of meaningless
nonsense. Their excuse for keeping the end hidden from view was that the
people could not have understood their real meaning even if they had
presented it to them, not being worthy recipients. The Adhikarivada is
the outcome of pure selfishness. They knew that by this enlightenment on
their special subject they would lose their superior position of
instructors to the people. Hence their endeavour to support this theory.
If you consider a man too weak to receive these lessons, you should try
the more to teach and educate him; you should give him the advantage of
more teaching, instead of less, to train up his intellect, so as to
enable him to comprehend the more subtle problems. These advocates of
Adhikarivada ignored the tremendous fact of the infinite possibilities
of the human soul. Every man is capable of receiving knowledge if it is
imparted in his own language. A teacher who cannot convince others
should weep on account of his own inability to teach the people in their
own language, instead of cursing them and dooming them to live in
ignorance and superstition, setting up the plea that the higher
knowledge is not for them. Speak out the truth boldly, without any fear
that it will puzzle the weak. Men are selfish; they do not want others
to come up to the same level of their knowledge, for fear of losing
their own privilege and prestige over others. Their contention is that
the knowledge of the highest spiritual truths will bring about confusion
in the understanding of the weak-minded men, and so the Shloka goes:

"न बुद्धिभेदं जनयेदज्ञानां कर्मसङ्गिनाम् ।  
        जोषयेत्सर्वकर्माणि विद्वान्युक्तः समाचरन् ॥" (३-२६)

— "One should not unsettle the understanding of the ignorant, attached
to action (by teaching them Jnâna): the wise man, himself steadily
acting, should engage the ignorant in all work" (Gita, III. 26).

I cannot believe in the self-contradictory statement that light brings
greater darkness. It is like losing life in the ocean of Sachchidânanda,
in the ocean of Absolute Existence and Immortality. How absurd!
Knowledge means freedom from the errors which ignorance leads to.
Knowledge paving the way to error! Enlightenment leading to confusion!
Is it possible? Men are not bold enough to speak out broad truths, for
fear of losing the respect of the people. They try to make a compromise
between the real, eternal truths and the nonsensical prejudices of the
people, and thus set up the doctrine that Lokâchâras (customs of the
people) and Deshâchâras (customs of the country) must be adhered to. No
compromise! No whitewashing! No covering of corpses beneath flowers!
Throw away such texts as, "तथापि लोकाचारः — Yet the customs of the
people have to be followed." Nonsense! The result of this sort of
compromise is that the grand truths are soon buried under heaps of
rubbish, and the latter are eagerly held as real truths. Even the grand
truths of the Gita, so boldly preached by Shri Krishna, received the
gloss of compromise in the hands of future generations of disciples, and
the result is that the grandest scripture of the world is now made to
yield many things which lead men astray.

This attempt at compromise proceeds from arrant downright cowardice. Be
bold! My children should be brave, above all. Not the least compromise
on any account. Preach the highest truths broadcast. Do not fear losing
your respect or causing unhappy friction. Rest assured that if you serve
truth in spite of temptations to forsake it, you will attain a heavenly
strength in the face of which men will quail to speak before you things
which you do not believe to be true. People will be convinced of what
you will say to them if you can strictly serve truth for fourteen years
continually, without swerving from it. Thus you will confer the greatest
blessing on the masses, unshackle their bondages, and uplift the whole
nation.

</div>
