---
title: ON JNANA-YOGA

---
<div>

[←](ishvara_and_brahman.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_cause_of_illusion.htm)

  

## ON JNANA-YOGA

All souls are playing, some consciously, some unconsciously. Religion is
learning to play consciously.

The same law which holds good in our worldly life also holds good in our
religious life and in the life of the cosmos. It is one, it is
universal. It is not that religion is guided by one law and the world by
another. The flesh and the devil are but degrees of difference from God
Himself.

Theologians, philosophers, and scientists in the West are ransacking
everything to get a proof that they live afterwards! What a storm in a
tea-cup! There are much higher things to think of. What silly
superstition is this, that you ever die! It requires no priests or
spirits or ghosts to tell us that we shall not die. It is the most
self-evident of all truths. No man can imagine his own annihilation. The
idea of immortality is inherent in man.

Wherever there is life, with it there is death. Life is the shadow of
death, and death, the shadow of life. The line of demarcation is too
fine to determine, too difficult to grasp, and most difficult to hold on
to.

I do not believe in eternal progress, that we are growing on ever and
ever in a straight line. It is too nonsensical to believe. There is no
motion in a straight line. A straight line infinitely projected becomes
a circle. The force sent out will complete the circle and return to its
starting place.

There is no progress in a straight line. Every soul moves in a circle,
as it were, and will have to complete it; and no soul can go so low but
that there will come a time when it will have to go upwards. It may
start straight down, but it has to take the upward curve to complete the
circuit. We are all projected from a common centre, which is God, and
will come back after completing the circuit to the centre from which we
started.

Each soul is a circle. The centre is where the body is, and the activity
is manifested there. You are omnipresent, though you have the
consciousness of being concentrated in only one point. That point has
taken up particles of matter and formed them into a machine to express
itself. That through which it expresses itself is called the body. You
are everywhere. When one body or machine fails you, the centre moves on
and takes up other particles of matter, finer or grosser, and works
through them. Here is man. And what is God? God is a circle with
circumference nowhere and centre everywhere. Every point in that circle
is living, conscious, active, and equally working. With our limited
souls only one point is conscious, and that point moves forward and
backward.

The soul is a circle whose circumference is nowhere (limitless), but
whose centre is in some body. Death is but a change of centre. God is a
circle whose circumference is nowhere, and whose centre is everywhere.
When we can get out of the limited centre of body, we shall realise God,
our true Self.

A tremendous stream is flowing towards the ocean, carrying little bits
of paper and straw hither and thither on it. They may struggle to go
back, but in the long run they; must flow down to the ocean. So you and
I and all nature are like these little straws carried in mad currents
towards that ocean of Life, Perfection, and God. We may struggle to go
back, or float against the current and play all sorts of pranks, but in
the long run we must go and join this great ocean of Life and Bliss.

Jnâna (knowledge) is "creedlessness"; but that does not mean that it
despises creeds. It only means that a stage above and beyond creeds has
been gained. The Jnâni (true philosopher) strives to destroy nothing but
to help all. All rivers roll their waters into the sea and become one.
So all creeds should lead to Jnana and become one. Jnana teaches that
the world should be renounced but not on that account abandoned. To live
in the world and not to be of it is the true test of renunciation.

I cannot see how it can be otherwise than that all knowledge is stored
up in us from the beginning. If you and I are little waves in the ocean,
then that ocean is the background.

There is really no difference between matter, mind, and Spirit. They are
only different phases of experiencing the One. This very world is seen
by the five senses as matter, by the very wicked as hell, by the good as
heaven, and by the perfect as God.

We cannot bring it to sense demonstration that Brahman is the only real
thing; but we can point out that this is the only conclusion that one
can come to. For instance, there must be this oneness in everything,
even in common things. There is the human generalisation, for example.
We say that all the variety is created by name and form; yet when we
want to grasp and separate it, it is nowhere. We can never see name or
form or causes standing by themselves. So this phenomenon is Mâyâ —
something which depends on the noumenon and apart from it has no
existence. Take a wave in the ocean. That wave exists so long as that
quantity of water remains in a wave form; but as soon as it goes down
and becomes the ocean, the wave ceases to exist. But the whole mass of
water does not depend so much on its form. The ocean remains, while the
wave form becomes absolute zero.

The real is one. It is the mind which makes it appear as many. When we
perceive the diversity, the unity has gone; and as soon as we perceive
the unity, the diversity has vanished. Just as in everyday life, when
you perceive the unity, you do not perceive the diversity. At the
beginning you start with unity. It is a curious fact that a Chinaman
will not know the difference in appearance between one American and
another; and you will not know the difference between different
Chinamen.

It can be shown that it is the mind which makes things knowable. It is
only things which have certain peculiarities that bring themselves
within the range of the known and knowable. That which has no qualities
is unknowable. For instance, there is some external world, X, unknown
and unknowable. When I look at it, it is X plus mind. When I want to
know the world, my mind contributes three quarters of it. The internal
world is Y plus mind, and the external world X plus mind. All
differentiation in either the external or internal world is created by
the mind, and that which exists is unknown and unknowable. It is beyond
the range of knowledge, and that which is beyond the range of knowledge
can have no differentiation. Therefore this X outside is the same as the
Y inside, and therefore the real is one.

God does not reason. Why should you reason if you know? It is a sign of
weakness that we have to go on crawling like worms to get a few facts,
and then the whole thing tumbles down again. The Spirit is reflected in
mind and in everything. It is the light of the Spirit that makes the
mind sentient. Everything is an expression of the Spirit; the minds are
so many mirrors. What you call love, fear, hatred, virtue, and vice are
all reflections of the Spirit. When the reflector is base, the
reflection is bad.

The real Existence is without manifestation. We cannot conceive It,
because we should have to conceive through the mind, which is itself a
manifestation. Its glory is that It is inconceivable. We must remember
that in life the lowest and highest vibrations of light we do not see,
but they are the opposite poles of existence. There are certain things
which we do not know now, but which we can know. It is due to our
ignorance that we do not know them. There are certain things which we
can never know, because they are much higher than the highest vibrations
of knowledge. But we are the Eternal all the time, although we cannot
know it. Knowledge will be impossible there. The very fact of the
limitations of the conception is the basis for its existence. For
instance, there is nothing so certain in me as my Self; and yet I can
only conceive of it as a body and mind, as happy or unhappy, as a man or
a woman. At the same time, I try to conceive of it as it really is and
find that there is no other way of doing it but by dragging it down; yet
I am sure of that reality. "No one, O beloved, loves the husband for the
husband's sake, but because the Self is there. It is in and through the
Self that she loves the husband. No one, O beloved, loves the wife for
the wife's sake, but in and through the Self." And that Reality is the
only thing we know, because in and through It we know everything else;
and yet we cannot conceive of It. How can we know the Knower? If we knew
It, It would not be the knower, but the known; It would be objectified.

The man of highest realisation exclaims, "I am the King of kings; there
is no king higher than I, I am the God of gods; there is no God higher
than II I alone exist, One without a second." This monistic idea of the
Vedanta seems to many, of course, very terrible, but that is on account
of superstition.

We are the Self, eternally at rest and at peace. We must not weep; there
is no weeping for the Soul. We in our imagination think that God is
weeping on His throne out of sympathy. Such a God would not be worth
attaining. Why should God weep at all? To weep is a sign of weakness, of
bondage.

Seek the Highest, always the Highest, for in the Highest is eternal
bliss. If I am to hunt, I will hunt the lion. If I am to rob, I will rob
the treasury of the king. Seek the Highest.

Oh, One that cannot be confined or described! One that can be perceived
in our heart of hearts! One beyond all compare, beyond limit,
unchangeable like the blue sky! Oh, learn the All, holy one I Seek for
nothing else!

Where changes of nature cannot reach, thought beyond all thought,
Unchangeable, Immovable; whom all books declare, all sages worship; Oh,
holy one, seek for nothing else!

Beyond compare, Infinite Oneness! No comparison is possible. Water
above, water below, water on the right, water on the left; no wave on
that water, no ripple, all silence; all eternal bliss. Such will come to
thy heart. Seek for nothing else!

Why weepest thou, brother? There is neither death nor disease for thee.
Why weepest thou, brother? There is neither misery nor misfortune for
thee. Why weepest thou, brother? Neither change nor death was predicated
of thee. Thou art Existence Absolute.

I know what God is — I cannot speak Him to you. I know not what God is —
how can I speak Him to you? But seest thou not, my brother, that thou
art He, thou art; He? Why go seeking God here and there? Seek not, and
that is God. Be your own Self.

Thou art Our Father, our Mother, our dear Friend. Thou bearest the
burden of the world. Help us to bear the burden of our lives. Thou art
our Friend, our Lover, our Husband, Thou art ourselves!

</div>
