---
title: THE CAUSE OF ILLUSION

---
<div>

[←](on_jnana-yoga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](evolution.htm)

  

## THE CAUSE OF ILLUSION

The question — what is the cause of Mâyâ (illusion)? — has been asked
for the last three thousand years; and the only answer is: when the
world is able to formulate a logical question, we shall answer it. The
question is contradictory. Our position is that the Absolute has become
this relative only apparently, that the Unconditioned has become the
conditioned only in Maya. By the very admission of the Unconditioned, we
admit that the Absolute cannot be acted upon by anything else. It is
uncaused, which means that nothing outside Itself can act upon It. First
of all, if It is unconditioned, It cannot have been acted upon by
anything else. In the Unconditioned there cannot be time, space, or
causation. That granted your question will be: "What caused that which
cannot be caused by anything to be changed into this?" Your question is
only possible in the conditioned. But you take it out of the
conditioned, and want to ask it in the Unconditioned. Only when the
Unconditioned becomes conditioned, and space, time, and causation come
in, can the question be asked. We can only say ignorance makes the
illusion. The question is impossible. Nothing can have worked on the
Absolute. There was no cause. Not that we do not know, or that we are
ignorant; but It is above knowledge, and cannot be brought down to the
plane of knowledge. We can use the words, "I do not know" in two senses.
In one way, they mean that we are lower than knowledge, and in the other
way, that the thing is above knowledge. The X-rays have become known
now. The very causes of these are disputed, but we are sure that we
shall know them. Here we can say we do not know about the X-rays. But
about the Absolute we cannot know. In the case of the X-rays we do not
know, although they are within the range of knowledge; only we do not
know them yet. But, in the other case, It is so much beyond know ledge
that It ceases to be a matter of knowing. "By what means can the Knower
be known?" You are always yourself and cannot objectify yourself. This
was one of the arguments used by our philosophers to prove immortality.
If I try to think I am lying dead, what have I to imagine? That I am
standing and looking down at myself, at some dead body. So that I cannot
objectify myself.

</div>
