---
title: EVOLUTION

---
<div>

[←](the_cause_of_illusion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](buddhism_and_vedanta.htm)

  

## EVOLUTION

(Some of the topics which precede and follow are taken from the answers
given by the Swami to questions  
 at afternoon talks with Harvard students on March 22 and 24, 1896.
There have also been added notes and selections from unpublished
lectures and discourses.)

In the matter of the projection of Akâsha and Prâna into manifested form
and the return to fine state, there is a good deal of similarity between
Indian thought and modern science. The moderns have their evolution, and
so have the Yogis. But I think that the Yogis' explanation of evolution
is the better one. "The change of one species into another is attained
by the infilling of nature." The basic idea is that we are changing from
one species to another, and that man is the highest species. Patanjali
explains this "infilling of nature" by the simile of peasants irrigating
fields. Our education and progression simply mean taking away the
obstacles, and by its own nature the divinity will manifest itself. This
does away with all the struggle for existence. The miserable experiences
of life are simply in the way, and can be eliminated entirely. They are
not necessary for evolution. Even if they did not exist, we should
progress. It is in the very nature of things to manifest themselves. The
momentum is not from outside, but comes from inside. Each soul is the
sum total of the universal experiences already coiled up there; and of
all these experiences, only those will come out which find suitable
circumstances.

So the external things can only give us the environments. These
competitions and struggles and evils that we see are not the effect of
the involution or the cause, but they are in the way. If they did not
exist, still man would go on and evolve as God, because it is the very
nature of that God to come out and manifest Himself. To my mind this
seems very hopeful, instead of that horrible idea of competition. The
more I study history, the more I find that idea to be wrong. Some say
that if man did not fight with man, he would not progress. I also used
to think so; but I find now that every war has thrown back human
progress by fifty years instead of hurrying it forwards. The day will
come when men will study history from a different light and find that
competition is neither the cause nor the effect, simply a thing on the
way, not necessary to evolution at all.

The theory of Patanjali is the only theory I think a rational man can
accept. How much evil the modern system causes! Every wicked man has a
licence to be wicked under it. I have seen in this country (America)
physicists who say that all criminals ought to be exterminated and that
that is the only way in which criminality can be eliminated from
society. These environments can hinder, but they are not necessary to
progress. The most horrible thing about competition is that one may
conquer the environments, but that where one may conquer, thousands are
crowded out. So it is evil at best. That cannot be good which helps only
one and hinders the majority. Patanjali says that these struggles remain
only through our ignorance, and are not necessary, and are not part of
the evolution of man. It is just our impatience which creates them. We
have not the patience to go and work our way out. For instance, there is
a fire in a theatre, and only a few escape. The rest in trying to rush
out crush one another down. That crush was not necessary for the
salvation of the building nor of the two or three who escaped. If all
had gone out slowly, not one would have been hurt. That is the case in
life. The doors are open for us, and we can all get out without the
competition and struggle; and yet we struggle. The struggle we create
through our own ignorance, through impatience; we are in too great a
hurry. The highest manifestation of strength is to keep ourselves calm
and on our own feet.

</div>
