---
title: LAW AND FREEDOM

---
<div>

[←](on_the_vedanta_philosophy.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_goal_and_the_methods_of_realisation.htm)

  

## LAW AND FREEDOM

The struggle never had meaning for the man who is free. But for us it
has a meaning, because it is name-and-form that creates the world.

We have a place for struggle in the Vedanta, but not for fear. All fears
will vanish when you begin to assert your own nature. If you think that
you are bound, bound you will remain. If you think you are free, free
you will be.

That sort of freedom which we can feel when we are yet in the phenomenal
is a glimpse of the real but not yet the real.

I disagree with the idea that freedom is obedience to the laws of
nature. I do not understand what it means. According to the history of
human progress, it is disobedience to nature that has constituted that
progress. It may be said that the conquest of lower laws was through the
higher. But even there, the conquering mind was only trying to be free;
and as soon as it found that the struggle was also through law, it
wanted to conquer that also. So the ideal was freedom in every case. The
trees never disobey law. I never saw a cow steal. An oyster never told a
lie. Yet they are not greater than man. This life is a tremendous
assertion of freedom; and this obedience to law, carried far enough,
would make us simply matter — either in society, or in politics, or in
religion. Too many laws are a sure sign of death. Wherever in any
society there are too many laws, it is a sure sign that that society
will soon die. If you study the characteristics of India, you will find
that no nation possesses so many laws as the Hindus, and national death
is the result. But the Hindus had one peculiar idea — they never made
any doctrines or dogmas in religion; and the latter has had the greatest
growth. Eternal law cannot be freedom, because to say that the eternal
is inside law is to limit it.

There is no purpose in view with God, because if there were some
purpose, He would be nothing better than a man. Why should He need any
purpose? If He had any, He would be bound by it. There would be
something besides Him which was greater. For instance, the carpet-weaver
makes a piece of carpet. The idea was outside of him, something greater.
Now where is the idea to which God would adjust Himself? Just as the
greatest emperors sometimes play with dolls, so He is playing with this
nature; and what we call law is this. We call it law, because we can see
only little bits which run smoothly. All our ideas of law are within the
little bit. It is nonsense to say that law is infinite, that throughout
all time stones will fall. If all reason be based upon experience, who
was there to see if stones fell five millions of years ago? So law is
not constitutional in man. It is a scientific assertion as to man that
where we begin, there we end. As a matter of fact, we get gradually
outside of law, until we get out altogether, but with the added
experience of a whole life. In God and freedom we began, and freedom and
God will be the end. These laws are in the middle state through which we
have to pass. Our Vedanta is the assertion of freedom always. The very
idea of law will frighten the Vedantist; and eternal law is a very
dreadful thing for him, because there would be no escape. If there is to
be an eternal law binding him all the time, where is the difference
between him and a blade of grass? We do not believe in that abstract
idea of law.

We say that it is freedom that we are to seek, and that that freedom is
God. It is the same happiness as in everything else; but when man seeks
it in something which is finite, he gets only a spark of it. The thief
when he steals gets the same happiness as the man who finds it in God;
but the thief gets only a little spark with a mass of misery. The real
happiness is God. Love is God, freedom is God; and everything that is
bondage is not God.

Man has freedom already, but he will have to discover it. He has it, but
every moment forgets it. That discovering, consciously or unconsciously,
is the whole life of every one. But the difference between the sage and
the ignorant man is that one does it consciously and the other
unconsciously. Every one is struggling for freedom — from the atom to
the star. The ignorant man is satisfied if he can get freedom within a
certain limit — if he can get rid of the bondage of hunger or of being
thirsty. But that sage feels that there is a stronger bondage which has
to be thrown off. He would not consider the freedom of the Red Indian as
freedom at all.

According to our philosophers, freedom is the goal. Knowledge cannot be
the goal, because knowledge is a compound. It is a compound of power and
freedom, and it is freedom alone that is desirable. That is what men
struggle after. Simply the possession of power would not be knowledge.
For instance, a scientist can send an electric shock to a distance of
some miles; but nature can send it to an unlimited distance. Why do we
not build statues to nature then? It is not law that we want but ability
to break law. We want to be outlaws. If you are bound by laws, you will
be a lump of clay. Whether you are beyond law or not is not the
question; but the thought that we are beyond law — upon that is based
the whole history of humanity. For instance, a man lives in a forest,
and never has had any education or knowledge. He sees a stone falling
down — a natural phenomenon happening — and he thinks it is freedom. He
thinks it has a soul, and the central idea in that is freedom. But as
soon as he knows that it must fall, he calls it nature — dead,
mechanical action. I may or may not go into the street. In that is my
glory as a man. If I am sure that I must go there, I give myself up and
become a machine. Nature with its infinite power is only a machine;
freedom alone constitutes sentient life.

The Vedanta says that the idea of the man in the forest is the right
one; his glimpse is right, but the explanation is wrong. He holds to
this nature as freedom and not as governed by law. Only after all this
human experience we will come back to think the same, but in a more
philosophical sense. For instance, I want to go out into the street. I
get the impulse of my will, and then I stop; and in the time that
intervenes between the will and going into the street, I am working
uniformly. Uniformity of action is what we call law. This uniformity of
my actions, I find, is broken into very short periods, and so I do not
call my actions under law. I work through freedom. I walk for five
minutes; but before those five minutes of walking, which are uniform,
there was the action of the will, which gave the impulse to walk.
Therefore man says he is free, because all his actions can be cut up
into small periods; and although there is sameness in the small periods,
beyond the period there is not the same sameness. In this perception of
non-uniformity is the idea of freedom. In nature we see only very large
periods of uniformity; but the beginning and end must be free impulses.
The impulse of freedom was given just at the beginning, and that has
rolled on; but this, compared with our periods, is much longer. We find
by analysis on philosophic grounds that we are not free. But there will
remain this factor, this consciousness that I am free. What we have to
explain is, how that comes. We will find that we have these two
impulsions in us. Our reason tells us that all our actions are caused,
and at the same time, with every impulse we are asserting our freedom.
The solution of the Vedanta is that there is freedom inside — that the
soul is really free — but that that soul's actions are percolating
through body and mind, which are not free.

As soon as we react, we become slaves. A man blames me, and I
immediately react in the form of anger. A little vibration which he
created made me a slave. So we have to demonstrate our freedom. They
alone are the sages who see in the highest, most learned man, or the
lowest animal, or the worst and most wicked of mankind, neither a man
nor a sage nor an animal, but the same God in all of them. Even in this
life they have conquered relativity, and have taken a firm stand upon
this equality. God is pure, the same to all. Therefore such a sage would
be a living God. This is the goal towards which we are going; and every
form of worship, every action of mankind, is a method of attaining to
it. The man who wants money is striving for freedom — to get rid of the
bondage of poverty. Every action of man is worship, because the idea is
to attain to freedom, and all action, directly or indirectly, tends to
that. Only, those actions that deter are to be avoided. The whole
universe is worshipping, consciously or unconsciously; only it does not
know that even while it is cursing, it is in another form worshipping
the same God it is cursing, because those who are cursing are also
struggling for freedom. They never think that in reacting from a thing
they are making themselves slaves to it. It is hard to kick against the
pricks.

If we could get rid of the belief in our limitations, it would be
possible for us to do everything just now. It is only a question of
time. If that is so, add power, and so diminish time. Remember the case
of the professor who learnt the secret of the development of marble and
who made marble in twelve years, while it took nature centuries.

</div>
