---
title: THE AIM OF RAJA-YOGA

---
<div>

[←](world-wide_unity.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](../questions_and_answers/discussion_at_the_graduate_philosophical.htm)

  

## THE AIM OF RAJA-YOGA

Yoga has essentially to do with the meditative side of religion, rather
than the ethical side, though, of necessity, a little of the latter has
to be considered. Men and women are growing to desire more than mere
revelation, so called. They want facts in their own consciousness. Only
through experience can there be any reality in religion. Spiritual facts
are to be gathered mostly from the superconscious state of mind. Let us
put ourselves into the same condition as did those who claim to have had
special experiences; then if we have similar experiences, they become
facts for us. We can see all that another has seen; a thing that
happened once can happen again, nay, *must*, under the same
circumstances. Raja-Yoga teaches us how to reach the superconscious
state. All the great religions recognise this state in some form; but in
India, special attention is paid to this side of religion. In the
beginning, some mechanical means may help us to acquire this state; but
mechanical means alone can never accomplish much. Certain positions,
certain modes of breathing, help to harmonise and concentrate the mind,
but with these must go purity and strong desire for God, or realisation.
The attempt to sit down and fix the mind on one idea and hold it there
will prove to most people that there is some need for help to enable
them to do this successfully. The mind has to be gradually and
systematically brought under control. The will has to be strengthened by
slow, continuous, and persevering drill. This is no child's play, no fad
to be tried one day and discarded the next. It is a life's work; and the
end to be attained is well worth all that it can cost us to reach it;
being nothing less than the realisation of our absolute oneness with the
Divine. Surely, with this end in view, and with the knowledge that we
can certainly succeed, no price can be too great to pay.

</div>
