+++
title = "RV 10.50.4"

+++
My pitAshrI and I had a discussion on the vaidika mantra-shAstra. The
practitioners of this business are supposed to learn a key insight on
the meaning and operation of the mantra when they receive the sAvitrI.
But often this does not happen in practice. Down the line this also
results in many a sAdhaka being mystified by vaidika mantra-s. It also
prevents them understanding the pervasive links between vaidika and
tAntrika mantra-shAstra. I presented an explanation in course of the
above-stated discussion. As a pramaNa we converged on the R^ik (RV
10.50.4), which certainly is one the keys to understanding the vaidika
mantra-shAstra. Understanding the vaidika dialect, especially of its
oldest layer as seen in the RV is a rather difficult task for anyone.
There are many usages that are not seen in the epic or the post-epic
classical form of the bhASha and to come close to what the vipra meant
one needs to try to understand these usages. Hence, many in the true
quest for the understanding of the vaidika mantra-shAstra present
vyAkaraNa as the primary key. If the vyAkaraNa is tackled then there
still lies the barrier of getting into the mind of the vipra. Here, the
actual ritual or karman as enjoined by the mImAmsaka is what allows one
to come close. Hence, we made a feeble attempt to use the proper
apparatus to tackle the R^ik:

*bhuvas tvam indra brahmaNA mahAn : bhuvo vishveShu savaneShu yaj\~niyaH
|  
bhuvo nR^IMsh chyautno vishvasmin bhare : jyeShThash cha mantro
vishva-charShaNe || RV 10.50.4**  
* bhuvaH(vedic form)=be/become; tvaM=you; indra=indra; brahmaNA
(brahman, instrumental)= by mantra; mahAn= magnified; bhuvaH=become;
vishveShu (locative plural, vishva)=in all; savaneShu (locative plural,
savana)=in soma pressings; yaj\~niyaH= the object of the ritual;
bhuvaH=become; nR^In (accusative plural, n.r)=men; chyautnaH=incite;
vishvasmin (locative singular, vishva)= in all; bhare (locative
singular, bhara)=in battle (as in viShvAmitra’s usage asmin bhare);
jyeShThaH= pre-eminent; cha=and; mantraH= mantra; vishva-charShaNi= all
folks.

You indra are magnified by the mantra (=brahman), you are the object of
ritual in all soma pressings; in all battles you incite men you are the
pre-eminent one and the mantra of all folks.  
i.e.  
The deva indra is praised by the mantra, the deva is the object of the
ritual, the deva is the subject inciting action, the deva is the regent
of all beings and \*the deva is the mantra itself\*. He, who performs
the mantra practice by being aware of this, sees it bear fruit. However,
the “being aware” part is most difficult for it require not only the
understanding of the vyAkaraNa to make sense of the shruti, but reaching
the state of awareness when practicing.
