+++
title = "The local vestiges of bhairavAchara: Sonari and Kandari"

+++
[We had earlier described the remnants of bhairava worship in
Mhasvad](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/01/26/mhasvad-the-lost-western-chalukya-s-and-the-exploits-of-kala-bhairava/)
and the local sthalAkhyAna, which to our knowledge is not found in any
saMskR^ita source. In that note we had allude to another place to the
east of the city of our youth, the hamlet of Sonari where another great
shrine of 8 bhairava-s exists. Now we shall take up the narrative of
that expedition. In the days of our childhood, we had once gone with our
pItAshrI to perform the visarjana of the son of rudra on the banks of
the river gomUtraka. On the opposite bank of the river we sighted an
octagonal temple and expressed our desire to go there. We crossed the
bridge and reached that shrine. Upon entering it, a deep fear gripped
both our sire and us, as in the dim light of evening hour the fierce
face of bhairava peered through the smoke of burning aguru, with the
eerie noise of a daMaru beaten by a local DavryA \[a Damaru-beating
ascetic in the mahArATTi language\] filling the place. It was our first
encounter with the essential presence of the bhairava who had been
worshiped in these regions at least since the age of the vAkATaka-s.
Much later, in the year of unbridled sahaja pleasure, during the
extended strike of the peons on account of which our college suspended
classes for good, Mis-creant came up to us and showed us some remarkable
pteridophytes she had collected. We too wished to acquire them and upon
inquiry she mentioned to us her trip with her gang of “higher society
friends” (as the kR^iShNashUdra called them) to the Malhargad fort. She
was willing to go there again with us but refused when we suggested that
we should take kR^iShNa-shUdra and chira-shUdra along for their
knowledge of the local vernacular and their skill with Ayudha-s. She
then left us to our alignments of the Ig domain and moved to join the
“higher society” gang.

Just then a new chaturtha brought along by kR^iShNa-shUdra came to make
conversation with us. He stated that he hailed from a hamlet south of
the great train route by which made our yearly journeys to the karnATa
country to the city of our birth. On further discussion, this shUdra of
pleasant speech informed us that his hamlet was several miles to the
west of the Malhargad fort and that he often went to the village of
Sonari near the fort to see some of his clansmen. Soon with him,
chira-shUdra and kR^iShNa-shUdra we were planning an expedition to these
regions. Mild though he was in conversation, he was no slouch with
Ayudha-s as others from those rude regions of the mahArATTa country. He
brought a deshIya nAlIka itself loaded with gola-s, while the other two
merely carried vR^ishchika-s for protection. Thus, with my
fellow-travelers we headed to the east, having a raucous conversation in
hindi on the “disputable” structure at Ayodhya and whether the founder
of the mahArATTa nation was a brigand or a national hero (not that we
differed much in our opinions on these issues). After more than a couple
of hours we reached the hamlet of Karmala, where our mahAraTTa landlords
held one of their sprawling ancestral possessions. From there, by the
occasional bus we reached the Sonari hamlet and proceeded to the fort
where the temples and the pteridophytes lay. The fort was one of the
last built by the mahArATTa-s and was constructed by a brAhmaNa
artillery officer of the peshvA mAdhavarao-I to guard a pass that could
be used by the Ghazi of Hyderabad to attack Pune. Lower down there is
the fortified palace of this artillery officer along with temples of
vinAyaka and viShNu constructed by him. On the way to the citadel amidst
a clump of several tall tamarind, mango and rain trees lie two temples –
one of the khaNDobA(to which the officer had endowed a huge sword as a
part of the vrata to build the fort) and another of the aShTa-bhairava.
In the latter, there are central icons in relief on the basaltic face of
the hill with fierce silver face masks for the bhairava (locally termed
bIrobA) and siddha-yogeshvarI (locally termed jogubAi). This
garbhAgR^iha is pretty old although there is no indication to say how
old. It is certainly older than 1680 CE when the only surviving
inscription from the region states that a mahAraTTa chieftain under
shivAjI had built the sabhA-gR^iha for the shrine. Tradition states that
nAtha ascetics have been visiting the shrine since the days of the
brother of j\~nAneshvara (a mahArATTi ascetic) who was initiated as a
nAtha yogin. In support of this contention we see a samAdhi of one his
brothers some 6-7 kilometers away from these shrine from late 1200 CE.

We then made long trek from the Sonari fort to the ridge of Kandari
where a remote, even older bhairava shrine exists. Here the shrine has
similar images on the face of the basaltic rock as seen in Sonari. The
rock itself is daubed with scarlet sindhUra with metal masks to mark out
the faces of saMhAra-bhairava and bhadra-kAlI. This shrine is considered
a local equivalent of Kashi by various tribesmen like fierce kohlI-s and
shepherds. The flag poles on the courtyard of this shrine are taken to
the shrine of Sonari in chitra paurNamAsya and then a ratha yAtra is
held there. We are not sure if any of this survives any more. Our chance
to learn more of these obscure shrines came from yet another
sthalAkhyAna composed by a R^igvedi brAhmaNa of the mudgala gotra from
these regions in the mahArATTi language. I have never come across it
anywhere else:

There had been a fierce fight between brahmA and rudra, in which the
latter had killed brahmA. As atonement for this pApa, rudra was roaming
in the form of bhairava from tIrtha to tIrtha observing the kapAlavrata.
With rudra no longer around bhadrakAlI decided to observe asceticism.
Around that time in the daNDaka forest lived four powerful asura-s by
the name bhaumAsura, kandAsura, suvarNAsura and prachaNDAsura who were
spreading terror all around. Wandering around bhadrakAlI came to the
vicinity of the rocky spur on which the fort of Sonari stands and
started performing tapasaya and yoga. When ever she would try to perform
a ritual suvarNAsura used to disrupt it and harass her routinely. As
suvarNa started making advances towards her, she told him that a being
would come who would marry her and kill him. Just then bhairava
wandering around reached the daNDaka. Here, bhaumasura challenged him
for a fight. The fierce bhairava attacked him with his khaTvA\~Nga and
killed him. Then taking up a horse he rode deeper into the forest in the
form of saMhAra-bhairava until he reached the domain of kandAsura. There
he was joined by his assistant the vetAla and the bhairava challenged
the asura. In the fierce fight that followed he killed the asura with
his trident. He stationed the vetAla at the boundary of the Kandari
village and created a stream there by piercing the ground with his
trident. Then his horse took a great leap. The mahArATTa-s show some
impression in the basalt there and state those are the footprints of the
bhairava-s horse during that leap. The horse landed in Sonari where he
saw bhadrakAlI and rushed to her and taking her up arranged for their
vivAha. She assumed the form of siddha-yogeshvarI upon the marriage.
After the marriage suvarNAsura was alarmed and started advancing with a
large army. The bhairava told his yogeshvarI that he will not show his
face to her again until he had killed the demon and set forth on his
horse. As he neared the battle field he summoned the 64 yoginI-s
dwelling in various shrines to assist him in the battle and they arrived
with several weapons. In the battle that followed the yoginI-s slew the
troops of the asura even as the bhairava engage suvarNa in a prolonged
bow battle. Finally, resolving to kill him the bhairava asked the 64
yoginI-s to drink up the asura-s blood. Then he brought down the asura
with a hail of arrows. Before dying the demon wished that the place
where he was killed be known after him and it thus became suvarNArI.
Then in a sword battle the bhairava slew prachaNDAsura. After this he
went to lohatIrtha (the river near Lohagad?) to wash his weapons. Then
he installed he yoginI-s back in their shrines and returned to
yogeshvarI.

The legend states that one of the 64 yoginI’s in the above narrative is
the yoginI, tvaritA (locally known as tukA-AI) who is enshrined in
Tuljapur. This yoginI is supposed to have brought from Rajasthan by
nAtha yogin-s. In support of this there are reports that a tvaritA
temple also known as tuljA exists in the Chittor fort in Rajasthan. In
this context it is of interest to note that the shrine in Maharashtra is
one of the family shrines of the clan of shivAjI. One wonders what
implications this has for the claims of the shishodia origins of
shivAjI. Another yoginI of this narrative, hastimukhA, with an
elephantine head, is enshrined much closer to Pune but in the same
general eastward direction as the road to Sonari. Several other yoginI-s
(locally called jogubAI-s) are in shrines scattered around this region.
We invoked two of these during the battle in year following the one in
which the above narrative took place.
