+++
title = "Geopolitics of the tantra age: an attempt at a blunt assessment"

+++
The va\~Nga-paNDita placed the following issue before ekanetra and me.
He had seen a somewhat convergent theory amongst both Hindus and
Hindu-haters. We lay this out as some kind of pUrva-pakSha for further
study.

\-The beginning in the gupta age and definitely in the period that
followed it there was a socio-religio-political development in
jambudvIpa that might be termed the “tantra age”. This was marked by the
rise in prominence of the tAntrika form of the mantra shAstra and its
deployment in rituals both of the lay Hindu (of course we include both
the nAstika-s and Astika-s in this term) society and the brahma-kShatra
elite. In many cases it even developed a mirror image of most of the
earlier vaidika lay and royal rituals and became even more prevalent
than those original vaidika rituals. This development of the tAntrika
mantra-shAstra also profoundly influenced the development of state
administration, and “secular” topics like medicine and chemistry. As a
consequence, by the 600s and 700s of CE, one might state that the Hindu
kingdoms were becoming tantric states. This tantric system also had a
larger geopolitical significance, as it spread from jambudvIpa to Tibet,
China, “Indo-China”, Mongolia, Japan, Malaysia and Indonesia. In each of
these places it started exerting considerable influence, converting some
these Asiatic states into tantric states comparable to the Indic models.
In other cases the tantric system established a symbiosis with the
endogenous models of the state became an underlying component. To the
west of jambudvIpa, in the lands of the diverse yavana-s, romAka-s and
mlechCha-s a related system to the tantric system was emerging under the
aegis of the Neo-platonic syncretism. Sadly, the viruses of the mind, in
the form of the two prophetic monotheistic delusions, spread out of the
Middle East destroying the development of this system and posing an
existential challenge to the rest of the world. This is a very brief
overview of the history to this point.

\-The main claim that was presented to us was that this tantric age was
a signal of the decadence of the Hindu world. As supporting evidence it
was suggested that not only states in jambudvIpa, but even those beyond
it decayed and collapsed when they chose to become tantric states. The
most recent of these was said to be Nepal – a late survivor from the
original tantric age – unable to adopt modernity due to the binding
baggage of the tantric state collapsed and was replaced by the
progressive ideology of democracy/socialism (in reality a covert version
of the Middle Eastern prophetic delusions). Before Nepal, Tibet, an
archetypal tantric state, was presented as having regressed under its
tantric ruler the Dalai Lama to a point of no return, from which it was
delivered via the conquest by the socialist warriors from chIna. Before
Tibet, Mongolia had more than once regressed to decadence after
converting to a tantric state – firstly the fall of the early Chingizids
was due to the adoption of the tantra. More recently, the collapse of
the Mongolian state before communism was also due to its primitiveness
stemming from the adoption of the tantric political model. Another
tantric state in jambudvIpa—Bhutan is likewise poised to decline and
perish. Thus, the model presented is that while the tantric states are
great for western “ologists” – tibetologists, mongologists, sinologists
and of course the indologists as anthropological samples of “pre-modern”
peoples, they are ruinous for the states and their inhabitants
themselves. Finally, building up this line of argument, we were informed
that bhArata’s own decline and eventual conquest by the civilizing
Moslems, those glorious green-robed well-springs of culture, was a
consequence of the wantonness of its own tantric states.

\-Modern deracinated “rationalists” chime in that the tantra with all
its superstitious hocus-pocus is the root cause of the lack of
“progress” in India (that is why these types like to term themselves
“progressives”). Interestingly, some of this resonates even with a
subset of practicing Hindus. These types will say that they follow a
higher form of the dharma, whereas the tantric form is somehow depraved.
In the more recent centuries even certain smArta-s have attributed the
heroic acts of “cleansing” the dharma of its tantric dross (or
alternatively cleansing the tantra of its depravity) to their great hero
sha\~Nkara-bhagavatpAda. Some of these same smArta-s also composed
kucha-mardana-s and shR^i\~Nga-bha\~Nga-s of tantric practices and
texts. Surprisingly, even the Sanskrit scholar’s historian daughter
(whose Hindu zeal caused us roma-harShaNa) told us in 1994 that whereas
charaka and sushruta are largely scientific the medieval physicians are
full of non-scientific tantric influence – clearly a sign of decay.
Against this background it is not unusual for people across the belief
spectrum to converge in their characterization of the tantric age.

….  
When va\~Nga-paNDita presented this pUrvapakSha (which is encapsulated
above) before us, we took off into a discussion of the early medieval
history of India and the developments therein. So many times in the days
of our youth we used to time-travel, leaving behind this world for that
of the past:  
\-440 CE, the upheavals in the central Asian realm set the Hunnic
movements in motion.  
\-443 CE a cavalry storm builds in the east and appears at the doors of
the Isaist Roman empire. This cavalry force of ultimately central Asian
origin besieged the now Serbian city of Nis with a formidable array of
battering rams and siege towers. As they broke through the town’s
defences, the Isaist Roman force defending found themselves no match to
the attack and was crushed. This was followed by the victorious march of
their leader Attila who advanced towards Constantinople destroying city
after city on his way. Only the walls of the city saved it from
destruction.  
\-454 CE The eastern wing of the Huns (commonly called the Ephthalites
or hUNa-s in saMskR^ita) marched straight against Iran. The Shah
Yazdigird sallied forth to counter them in north-eastern Iran. The
powerful Sassanian sipah met with a cavalry much more than it could
handle and was battered on the battlefield and fled in disarray with
heavy losses.  
–It was the early summer of the year 454 CE. In the city of kUbha in
gandhara, a band of bauddha bikShu-s noticed that their shaiva rivals
were packing up and getting ready to evacuate the pAShupata maTha. The
head muNDaka who normally avoided the jaTila-s asked why they were
packing up. The jaTila replied that a great storm was building on the
horizon and the evils of kali yuga were to come down upon the world. The
muNDaka smiled and walked on continuing his japa of the lokeshvara
mantra. Later in the day he noticed that the patrons were not arriving
at his vihAra. He stirred out to a neighboring vihAra where other
bauddha-s were had stopped their study of the sad-dharma-puNDarIka sUtra
because of some news that the king, the kedAra shAhIya had been defeated
midway to bAhlika and an army of mlechCha-s was advancing towards the
city. Sensing danger, the head muNDaka started organizing his flock to
flee south towards suvastu. But even before he could do so, he heard an
enormous clattering of hoofs and saw a great swirl of dust darkening the
horizon. With in minutes the students in the court yard and the door
keepers were rolling in the dust shot by arrows. The muNDaka ran inside
to invoke a protective mantra from subAhu-paripR^ichCha, but even as he
was entering into his ritual enclave a hideous warrior with a deformed
head struck off the muNDaka’s head with his scimitar. It rolled down and
fell near his altar. Another muNDaka was being threatened and asked to
reveal where the wealth given by the vaishya patrons was hidden. Having
bundled it up the victorious hUNa warriors uttered fierce cries and set
fire to the vihara. They circled around the burning campus shooting down
survivors who tried to flee the smoldering ruins. 

The hUNa-s rode rapidly through gandhara, southwards pillaging the towns
and slaughtering the inhabitants. A band of pAshupata shaiva ascetics
fleeing from this terror crossed the sindhu river and reached a military
outpost to the great emperor kumAragupta mahendrAditya. They brought
news of the terrifying advance of the hUNa-s. The military outpost
conveyed the message to the emperor who was holding court at Udayagiri.
He had already received an envoy from the Shah of Iran with a request to
supply elephants in the war against the hUNa-s, in addition to a request
for Hindu mercenaries to fight the Isaists. The news from a band of
bauddha refugees had also reached the emperor that the huNa-s were
already poised to ford the sindhu and launch a thrust into
bhAratavarSha. The emperor summoned his son the yuvarAja, skandagupta,
and asked him to lead the senA to oust the mlechCha-s from the land of
the Arya-s.  
![skanda\_udayagiri](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2009/04/skanda_udayagiri.png?w=640
"skanda_udayagiri") *Udayagiri skanda*  

After having made the military preparation for the advance into the
pa\~nchanada to quell the hUNa-s the prince sent a messenger to the
vAkATaka-s, his allies to send him a reserve force. Then he went to the
cave of Udayagiri, where the god after whom he had been named was
enshrined. The brAhmaNa-s drew a vijaya-maNDala and having placed the
consecrated kumbha-s at its corners led skandagupta to its center. Here
he was consecrated with the ShaDakSharI mantra and asked to lead his
troops even as the son of rudra led the devasenA against tAraka and
mahiSha. A homa was offered to mahAsena for the victory of the prince
with oblations of red sesame seeds. Blood red banners of kumAra were
erected in front of the great shrine in udayagiri. Each of the
sapta-mAtR^ikA-s were also offered bali-s to inspire the troops in
battle, even as the mAtR^ikA-s had attacked the hordes of shumbha and
nishumbha. The vAkATaka general leading the auxiliaries had invoked the
terrible bhairava and consecrated his sword in shmashAna for victory in
the impending battle. Thus having invoked the deva-s, four divisions of
the imperial army headed for the pa\~nchanada numbering around 60,000
men. The hUNa-s apparently had about 80-90,000 (the bauddha account of
this war given in the text chandra-garbha-paripR^ichCha gives the
exaggerated counts of the army of skandagupta being 200,000 and that of
the mlechCha-s being 300,000).

In the spring of 455 CE decisive encounters between skandagupta’s army
and those of the hUNa-s took place near the banks of the sindhu in its
middle reaches. The hUNa-s tried to deploy their favored tactic of
firing and riding. But the disciplined imperial infantry kept its
distance from the hUNa-s whose composite bows were affected by the
subcontinental climate. Then the Hindu long-bow corps went into action –
having greater range and power than the hUNa bows, and unaffected by the
climate it had a deadly effect. In the fierce encounters which are
described as having the din of the roaring ga\~NgA in spate (ga\~NgA
dhvaniH) the Hindu archers brought down the horse-borne hUNa-s even
before they could close in on the gupta warriors. After the hUNa charges
were repeatedly broken by the gupta infantry which had ambushed them,
skandagupta ordered the gupta cavalry to swoop on the mlechCha-s “like
garuDa-s on hUNa sarpa-s which had raised their hoods”. The sudden
cavalry counter attack took hUNa-s by surprised and they were
mercilessly put to sword. The khan of the hUNa-s ordered his men to ride
out in a rapid escape, but they were ambushed by another force of
infantry that skandagupta had pushed to their rear. With the reach of
the long-bow they were able to strike from a distance with hail of
cloth-yard shafts on the hUNa-s. Now they were utterly broken and the
surging gupta cavalry surrounded the khan of the hUNa-s and two other
tegins. Now khan and these tegins were summarily executed by skandagupta
(Thus we may reconstruct from the chandra-garbha-paripR^ichCha) thereby
ending this hUNa invasion.

The reason for taking off on this reconstructed narrative (other than
reliving a major fancy of our youth) was to illustrate the point that
the tantric age came to fore with in a period of major military
challenges faced by many of the world powers as a result of Central
Asian expansions into outer Eurasia and the rise of the monotheistic
mental infections. Iran fared relatively badly and eventually collapsed
probably because if faced the repeated blows from both the central
Asians and both the monotheists. The Isaists took a heavy beating from
both the central Asian invasions and their Islamic ideological cousins.
But the start in India was relatively good with a resounding overthrow
of the initial hUNa invasion. The religious background inspiring this
gupta achievement was to be a major template for the kings to follow –
and at its center lay the tantric system. In the centuries that followed
the trend of hUNa invasions piled on. After the death of budhagupta the
centralized imperial power of the gupta-s broke down, marking the shift
towards a multifocal political system in the subcontinent. Using the
opportunity the hUNa-s did break finally through into bhAratavarsha in
512 CE. The gupta general goparAja died fighting the hUNa-s in a fierce
battle and invaders spread all over northern India. But their ability to
occupy Indian territory was limited. Even in this era of
decentralization, the surviving gupta king nR^isiMha gupta bAlAditya and
a kshatriya of the aulikara clan, prakAshadharman, rose to the challenge
of organizing a campaign against the invaders and in 515 CE repulsed the
hUNa chief toramANa and prevented them from attacking the Indian
mainland. Around 520 CE the hUNa-s made another attempt by exploiting
the weakness of Kashmir after the fall of the gupta-s by invading and
occupying it. From there, they made a series of attempts to invade the
Indian mainland. But yashodharman a successor of prakAshadharman smashed
the hUNa-s and extirpated them and conquered the whole of northern
Indian by 530 CE. Further hUNa invasions happened in the next century
around 603-4 CE but they were again repulsed by harShavardhana and
rAjyavardhana. This was followed by the Arab invasions that we have
already described on these pages and the heroic resistance of the Hindu
rulers against them. Despite the success in the sindhu we should keep in
mind that these decentralized Hindu rulers kept the Arabs out of India
even as they destroyed Iran, central Asia and made a deep thrust into
Europe.

The tantric states of India were squarely behind these achievements. The
image of the warlike skanda and the 7 goddesses from the gupta imagery
at Udayagiri repeatedly comes up on the plates of various dynasties all
over India – the chAlukya-s describe their dynasty as protected by
kumAra and the 7 mAtR^ikA-s, so do the kadaMba-s. This imagery, as we
have shown before on these pages, lies at the root of the kula system.
The various shaiva systems were to inspire numerous dynasties throughout
this period in India and beyond (also discussed previously) – a key
point to note is that despite the decentralization the tantric system
was the glue that held India and allowed projection of its military and
cultural power beyond its boundaries.

Having said this, I stop this note here. The perceptions of the tantric
age as the cause or as a phase of decadence like many other historical
perceptions that have been thrust upon is unlikely to hold water. I will
try to next take up the case of the bauddha-s and Tibet separately.
