---
title: I

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/epistles_fourth_series_contents.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/018_sir.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/03_sir.htm)

## I

(Translated from [Bengali](b6027ae9001.pdf) )

*To Balaram Bose*

*Glory to Ramakrishna*

GHAZIPUR

*February 6, 1890*

RESPECTED SIR,

I have talked with Pavhari Baba. He is a wonderful saint — the
embodiment of humility, devotion, and Yoga. Although he is an orthodox
Vaishnava, he is not prejudiced against others of different beliefs. He
has tremendous love for Mahâprabhu Chaitanya, and he \[Pavhari Baba\]
speaks of Shri Ramakrishna as "an incarnation of God". He loves me very
much, and I am going to stay here for some days at his request.

Pavhari Baba can live in Samâdhi for from two to six months at a
stretch. He can read Bengali and has kept a photograph of Shri
Ramakrishna in his room. I have not yet seen him face to face, since he
speaks from behind a door, but I have never heard such a sweet voice. I
have many things to say about him but not just at present.

Please try to get a copy of *Chaitanya-Bhâgavata* for him and send it
immediately to the following address: Gagan Chandra Roy, Opium
Department, Ghazipur. Please don't forget.

Pavhari Baba is an ideal Vaishnava and a great scholar; but he is
reluctant to reveal his learning. His elder brother acts as his
attendant, but even he is not allowed to enter his room.

Please send him a copy of *Chaitanya-Mangala* also, if it is still in
print. And remember that if Pavhari Baba accepts your presents, that
will be your great fortune. Ordinarily, he does not accept anything from
anybody. Nobody knows what he eats or even what he does.

Please don't let it be known that I am here and don't send news of
anyone to me. I am busy with an important work.

Your servant,  
NARENDRA

[→](002_sir.htm)  
[Addressee→](002_sir.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/019_sir.htm)

</div>
