---
title: IX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](008_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/015_diwanji_saheb.htm)  
[←Addressee](008_mother.htm)

## IX

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

DETROIT,

*14 February 1894*.

DEAR MOTHER,

Arrived safely night before last at 1 o'clock a.m. The train was seven
hours late, being blocked by snowdrifts on the way. However, I enjoyed
the novelty of the sight: several men cutting and clearing the snow and
two engines tugging and pulling was a new sight to me.

Here I met Mr. Bagley, the youngest \[Paul F. Bagley\], waiting for me
at the station; and, it being very late in the night, Mrs.
Bagley[1](#fn1) had retired, but the daughters sat up for me.

They are very rich, kind and hospitable. Mrs. Bagley is especially
interested in India. The daughters are very good, educated and
good-looking. The eldest gave me a luncheon at a club where I met some
of the finest ladies and gentlemen of the city. Last evening there was a
reception given here in the house. Today I am going to speak for the
first time. Mrs. Bagley is a very nice and kind lady. I hope the
lectures will please her. With my love and regards for you all, I
remain,

Yours sincerely,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS — I have received a letter from Slayton[2](#fn2) in reply to that in
which I wrote to him that I cannot stay. He gives me hope. What is your
advice? I enclose the letter \[from Narasimhacharya\] in another
envelope.[3](#fn3)

  

Yours,  
V.

[→](010_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](010_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](010_mother.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Mrs. John Judson Bagley (1833 – 1898) was one of
    Detroit's most influential women, who had met Swami Vivekananda at
    the Parliament of Religions in Chicago. She was a great admirer and
    supporter of the Swami and was his hostess during this period. She
    honoured him with an enormous and gala reception to which the élite
    of Detroit were invited.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)The Slayton Lyceum Lecture Bureau of Chicago, with whom
    the Swami had signed a contract for three years. Later he broke the
    contract after noticing that the Bureau had been cheating him.
3.  [^](#fn3_1)Narasimhacharya of Madras was a delegate to the
    Parliament of Religions, held at Chicago in 1893, where he became
    acquainted with Swami Vivekananda. After the Parliament was over, he
    stayed for some months in the United States. He had written a letter
    to Swami Vivekananda from the Nicholson Hotel, Nashville, Tennessee,
    where he was stranded. The letter reads: "Dear Swami, I have come
    here, and without being able to get out am stopping; and I would be
    very much obliged if you would kindly send me $50 so that I can fix
    the whole thing and come over to Chicago, from which place I shall
    go back home. Please do so at once as I am in trouble. Hoping to
    hear from you soon, I remain, Yours sincerely, Narasimhacharya".  
    Swami Vivekananda mailed this letter to Mrs. G. W. Hale on February
    14, 1894, from Detroit with a line: "What do you advise, Mother?
    Vivekananda".  
