---
title: X

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](009_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](009_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](009_mother.htm)

## X

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

DETROIT,

*20 February 1894*.

DEAR MOTHER

My lectures here are over. I have made some very good friends here,
amongst them Mr. Palmer,[1](#fn1) President of the late World's Fair. I
am thoroughly disgusted with this Slayton[2](#fn2) business and am
trying hard to break loose. I have lost at least $5,000 by joining this
man. Hope you are all well. Mrs. Bagley and her daughters are very kind
to me. I hope to do some private lecturing here and then go to Ada and
then back to Chicago. It is snowing here this morning. They are very
nice people here, and the different clubs took a good deal of interest
in me.

It is rather wearisome, these constant receptions and dinners; and their
horrible dinners — a hundred dinners concentrated into one — and when in
a man's club, why, smoking on between the courses and then beginning
afresh. I thought the Chinese alone make a dinner run through half a day
with intervals of smoking!!

However, they are very gentlemanly men and, strange to say, an Episcopal
clergyman[3](#fn3) and a Jewish rabbi[4](#fn4) take great interest in me
and eulogize me. Now the man who got up the lectures here got at least a
thousand dollars. So in every place. And this is Slayton's duty to do
for me. Instead, he, the liar, had told me often that he has agents
everywhere and would advertise and do all that for me. And this is what
he is doing. His will be done. I am going home. Seeing the liking the
American people have for me, I could have, by this time, got a pretty
large sum. But Jimmy Mills[5](#fn5) and Slayton were sent by the Lord to
stand in the way. His ways are inscrutable.

However, this is a secret. President Palmer has gone to Chicago to try
to get me loose from this liar of a Slayton. Pray that he may succeed.
Several judges here have seen my contract, and they say it is a shameful
fraud and can be broken any moment; but I am a monk — no self-defence.
Therefore, I had better throw up the whole thing and go to India.

My love to Harriets, Mary, Isabelle, Mother Temple, Mr. Matthews, Father
Pope and you all.[6](#fn6)

  

Yours obediently,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](011_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](011_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](011_mother.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Mr. Thomas W. Palmer of Detroit was a rich businessman
    and statesman. In 1883 he was elected to the United States Senate
    and later became Minister to Spain (Minister Plenipotentiary or
    Ambassador). He was chosen President of the World's Fair Commission
    when the World's Columbian Exposition was organized at Chicago, in
    the 1890s. In all probability, it was the Parliament of Religions
    that he first came to know and admire Swami Vivekananda.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)The Slayton Lyceum Lecture Bureau of Chicago. On the
    cover of this letter someone, perhaps Mrs. Hale, had written: "Feb.
    22 President Palmer breaks the Slayton contract".
3.  [^](#fn3_1)Reverend Reed Stuart of the Unitarian Church, who was an
    admirer of the Swami.
4.  [^](#fn4_1)Rabbi Grossman of the Temple Beth El. On Sunday, February
    18, 1894, Rabbi Grossman spoke in his temple on "What Swami
    Vivekananda Has Taught Us". The Rabbi became Swami Vivekananda's
    devoted friend, and the Swami, during his visit to Detroit in 1896,
    lectured at the Rabbi's temple.
5.  [^](#fn5_1)Jimmy, or Irving, Mills might have been either an
    individual lecture agent or an agent of the Slayton Lyceum Lecture
    Bureau.
6.  [^](#fn6_1)"" Here, "Harriets" refers to Harriet McKindley and
    Harriet Hale; Harriet and Isabelle McKindley were the daughters of
    Mrs. Hale's sister. Harriet and Mary Hale were her own daughters.
    Swami Vivekananda used to address Mr. Hale's sister (Mrs. James
    Matthews) as "Mother Temple", Mr. G. W. Hale as "Father Pope" and
    Mrs. G. W. Hale as "Mother Church".
