---
title: XIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](012_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/017_babies.htm)  
[←Addressee](012_mother.htm)

## XIII

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

DETROIT

*16 March 1894*

DEAR MOTHER,

Since my last, there has been nothing of interest here. Except that Mr.
Palmer is a very hearty, jolly, good old man and very rich. He has been
uniformly kind to me. Tomorrow I go back to Mrs. Bagley's because I am
afraid she is rather uneasy at my long stay here. I am shrewd enough to
know that in every country in general, and America in particular, "she"
is the real operator at the nose string.

I am going to lecture here on Monday[1](#fn1) and in two places near the
town on Tuesday and Wednesday.[2](#fn2) I do not remember the lady you
refer me to,[3](#fn3) and she is in Lynn; what is Lynn, where on the
globe its position is — I do not know.[4](#fn4) I want to go to Boston.
What good would it do me by stopping at Lynn? Kindly give me a more
particular idea. Nor could I read the name of the lady at whose house
you say I met the lady. However, I am in no way very anxious. I am
taking life very easy in my natural way. I have no particular wish to go
anywhere, Boston or no Boston. I am just in a nice come-what-may mood.
Something should turn up, bad or good. I have enough now to pay my
passage back and a little sight-seeing to boot. As to my plans of
*work*, I am fully convinced that at the rate it is progressing I will
have to come back four or five times to put it in any shape.

As to informing others and doing good that way, I have failed to
persuade myself that I have really anything to convey to the world. So I
am very happy just now and quite at my ease. With almost nobody in this
vast house and a cigar between my lips, I am dreaming just now and
philosophising upon that *work* fever which was upon me. It is all
nonsense. I am nothing, the world is nothing, the Lord alone is the only
*worker*. We are simply tools in His hands etc., etc., etc. Have you got
the Alaska information? If so, kindly send it to me c/o Mrs. Bagley.

Are you coming to the East this summer? With eternal gratitude and love,

Your son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](014_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](014_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/14_sister.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)On Monday, March 19, Swami Vivekananda spoke at the
    Detroit Auditorium on "Buddhism, the Religion of the Light of Asia."
2.  [^](#fn2_1)On Tuesday, March 20, Swami Vivekananda delivered a
    lecture on Hinduism at Bay City, Michigan; and on Wednesday, March
    21, he spoke on the "Harmony of Religions at Saginaw, Michigan.
3.  [^](#fn3_1)Mrs. Francis W. Breed, a social leader of Lynn and the
    wife of an extremely wealthy boot and shoe manufacturer.
4.  [^](#fn4_1)Lynn, Massachusetts, a small industrial town on
    Massachusetts bay, ten miles north of Boston.
