---
title: XV

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](014_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/019_sister.htm)  
[←Addressee](014_mother.htm)

## XV

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

C/O DR. GUERNSEY  
528 FIFTH AVENUE  
NEW YORK

*2 April 1894*

DEAR MOTHER,

I am in New York. The gentleman \[Dr. Guernsey\] whose guest I am is a
very nice and learned and well-to-do man. He had an only son whom he
lost last July. Has only a daughter now. The old couple have received a
great shock, but they are pure and God-loving people and bear it
manfully. The lady of the house is very, very kind and good. They are
trying to help me as much as they can and they will do a good deal, I
have no doubt.

Awaiting further developments. This Thursday \[April 5\] they will
invite a number of the brainy people of the Union League Club and other
places of which the Doctor is a member, and see what comes out of it.
Parlour lectures are a great feature in this city, and more can be made
by each such lecture than even platform talks in other cities.

It is a very clean city. None of that black smoke tarring everyone in
five minutes; and the street in which the Doctor lives is a nice, quiet
one.

Hope the sisters are doing well and enjoying their music, both in the
opera and the parlour. I am sure I would have appreciated the music at
the opera about which Miss Mary wrote to me. I am sure the opera
musicians do not show the interior anatomy of their throats and lungs.

Kindly give brother Sam[1](#fn1) my deep love. I am sure he is bewaring
of the vidders.[2](#fn2) Some of the Baby Bagleys are going to Chicago.
They will go to see you, and I am sure you would like them very much.

Nothing more to write. With all respect, love and obedience,

Your son,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS — I have not to ask now for addresses. Mrs. Sherman (Mrs. Bagley’s
married daughter.) has given me a little book with A., B., C., etc.,
marks and has written under them all the addresses I need; and I hope to
write all the future addresses in the same manner. What an example of
self-help I am!![3](#fn3)

  

V.

[→](016_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](016_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/008_alasinga.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Sam Hale, younger brother of Mary and Harriet. He was
    then in Alaska.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)A reference in Charles Dickens' novel Pickwick Papers to
    a Mr. Weller, whose second marriage to a domineering widow prompted
    him to warn his son Sam: "Be careful o'widders all your life . . . ,
    Sammy".
3.  [^](#fn3_1)At the end of the letter, Mary Hale added the following
    note: "Dear Sam \[Hale\], be sure not to lose any of these letters,
    and return them as soon as possible. We miss you, awfully. Hope you
    are well and happy and bewaring of the vidders, as Swami says. Love
    to all. Affectionately your sister, Mary".
