---
title: XVI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](015_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/008_alasinga.htm)  
[←Addressee](015_mother.htm)

## XVI

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

\[C/O DR. EGBERT GUERNSEY  
528 FIFTH AVENUE\]  
NEW YORK

*10 April 1894*

DEAR MOTHER,

I just now received your letter. I have the greatest regard for the
Salvationists; in fact, they and the Oxford Mission gentlemen are the
only Christian missionaries for whom I have any regard at all. They live
with the people, as the people, and for the people of India. Lord bless
them. But I would be very, very sorry of any trick being played by them.
I never have heard of any *Lord* in India, much less in *Ceylon*. (Now
Sri Lanka.) The people of Ceylon and northern India differ more than
Americans and Hindus. Nor is there any connection between the Buddhist
priest and the Hindu. Our dress, manners, religion, food, language
differ entirely from southern India, much less to speak of Ceylon. You
know already that I could not speak a word of Narasimha's language!!
Although that was only *Madras*. Well, you have Hindu princesses; why
not a Lord, which is not a higher title.

There was a certain Mrs. Smith in Chicago.[1](#fn1) I met her at Mrs.
Stockham's. She has introduced me to the Guernseys. Dr. Guernsey is one
of the chief physicians of this city and is a very good old gentleman.
They are very fond of me and are very nice people. Next Friday I am
going to Boston. I have not been lecturing in New York at all. I will
come back and do some lecturing here.

For the last few days I was the guest of Miss Helen Gould — daughter of
the rich Gould[2](#fn2) — at her palatial country residence, an hour's
ride from the city. She has one of the most beautiful and large
green-houses in the world, full of all sorts of curious plants and
flowers. They are Presbyterians, and she is a very religious lady. I had
a very nice time there.

I met my friend Mr. Flagg (William Joseph Flagg.) several times. He is
flying merrily. There is another Mrs. Smith here who is very rich and
pious. She has invited me to dine today.

As for lecturing, I have given up raising money. I cannot degenerate
myself any more. When a certain purpose was in view, I could work; with
that gone I cannot earn for myself. I have sufficient for going back. I
have not tried to earn a penny here, and have refused some presents
which friends here wanted to make to me. Especially Flagg — I have
refused his money. I had in Detroit tried to refund the money back to
the donors, and told them that, there being almost no chance of my
succeeding in my enterprise, I had no right to keep their money; but
they refused and told me to throw that into the waters if I liked. But I
cannot take any more conscientiously. I am very well off, Mother.
Everywhere the Lord sends me kind persons and homes; so there is no use
of my going into beastly worldliness at all.

The New York people, though not so intellectual as the Bostonians, are,
I think, more sincere. The Bostonians know well how to take advantage of
everybody. And I am afraid even water cannot slip through their closed
fingers!!! Lord bless them!!! I have promised to go and I must go; but,
Lord, make me live with the sincere, ignorant and the poor, and not
cross the shadow of the hypocrites and tall talkers who, as my Master
used to say, are like vultures who soar high and high in their talks,
but the heart is really on a piece of carrion on the ground.

I would be the guest of Mrs. Breed for a few days and, after seeing a
little of Boston, I would come back to New York.

Hope the sisters are all right and enjoying their concerts immensely.
There is not much of music in this city. That is a blessing (?) Went to
see Barnum's circus the other day. It is no doubt a grand thing. I have
not been as yet downtown. This street is very nice and quiet.

I heard a beautiful piece of music the other day at Barnum's — they call
it a Spanish Serenada. Whatever it be, I liked it so much.
Unfortunately, Miss Guernsey is not given to much thumping, although she
has a good assortment of all the noisy stuffs in the world — and so she
could not play it, which I regret ever so much.

Yours obediently,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS — Most probably I will go to Annisquam as Mrs. Bagley's guest. She
has got a nice house there this summer. Before that, I will go back to
Chicago once more if I can.

V.

[→](017_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](017_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/16_professor.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Mrs. Arthur Smith. On April 24 Swami Vivekananda spoke
    before Mrs. Smith's "Conversation Circle" at the Waldorf Hotel in
    New York; his first known talk in that city.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)Mr. Jay Gould, one of the richest men in America. After
    his death in 1892, a part of his immense fortune was inherited by
    his daughter Helen.
