---
title: XX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](019_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](019_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](019_mother.htm)

## XX

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

HOTEL BELLEVUE EUROPEAN PLAN  
BEACON STREET, BOSTON

*14 May, 1894*

DEAR MOTHER,

Your letter was so, so pleasing instead of being long; I enjoyed every
bit of it.

I have received a letter from Mrs. Potter Palmer (Social queen of
Chicago who made Swami Vivekananda’s acquaintance at the Parliament of
Religions, in which she had been active. *Vide* [Complete
Works](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/042_sir.htm) , VI.) asking
me to write to some of my countrywomen about their society etc. I will
see her personally when I come to Chicago; in the meanwhile I will write
her all I know. Perhaps you have received $125 sent over from New York.
Tomorrow I will send another $100 from here. The Bostonians want to
grind their own axes!!

Oh, they are so, so dry — even girls talk dry metaphysics. Here is like
our *Benares* where all is dry, dry metaphysics!! Nobody here
understands "my Beloved". Religion to these people is reason, and
horribly stony at that. I do not care for anybody who cannot love my
"Beloved". Do not tell it to Miss Howe — she may be offended.

The pamphlet I did not send over because I do not like the quotations
from the Indian newspapers — especially, they give a haul over coal to
somebody. Our people so much dislike the Brâhmo Samâj that they only
want an opportunity to show it to them. I dislike it. Any amount of
enmity to certain persons cannot efface the good works of a life. And
then they were only children in Religion. They never were much of
religious men — i.e. they only wanted to talk and reason, and did not
struggle to see the Beloved; and until one does that I do not say that
he has any religion. He may have books, forms, doctrines, words,
reasons, etc., etc., but not religion; for that begins when the soul
feels the necessity, the want, the yearning after the "Beloved", and
never before. And therefore our society has no right to expect from them
anything more than from an ordinary "house-holder".

I hope to come to Chicago before the end of this month. Oh, I am so
tired.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](021_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](021_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/009_sharat.htm)

</div>
