---
title: XXV

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](024_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](024_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](024_mother.htm)

## XXV

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

SWAMPSCOTT, MASSACHUSETTS

*23 July 1894*

DEAR MOTHER

I think I have all your questions answered and you are in good humour
again.

I am enjoying this place very much; going to Greenacre today or tomorrow
and on our way back I intend to go to Annisquam, to Mrs. Bagley's — I
have written to her. Mrs. Breed (Mrs. Francis W. Breed of Lynn,
Massachusetts.) says, "You are very sensitive".

Now, I fortunately did not cash your check[1](#fn1) in New York. I
wanted to cash it here, when lo! you have not signed your name to it.
The Hindu is a dreamer no doubt, but when the Christian dreams he dreams
with a vengeance.

Do not be distressed. Somebody gave me plenty of money to move about. I
would be taken care of right along. I send herewith the cheque back to
you. I had a very beautiful letter from Miss Mary. My love to them.

What is Father Pope doing? Is it very hot in Chicago? I do not care for
the heat of this country. It is nothing compared to our India heat. I am
doing splendidly. The other day I had the summer cholera; and cramp,
etc. came to pay their calls to me. We had several hours nice talk and
groans and then they departed.

I am on the whole doing very well. Has the meerschaum pipe reached
Chicago?[2](#fn2) I had nice yachting, nice sea bathing, and am enjoying
myself like a duck. Miss Guernsey went home just now. I do not know what
more to write.

Lord bless you all.

Affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](026_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](026_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/024_babies.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)"" British spelling of "cheque" is also used in this
    letter.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)The Swami had purchased this pipe in New York as a gift
    for Mr. Hale.
