---
title: XXVIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](027_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/012_sister.htm)  
[←Addressee](027_mother.htm)

## XXVIII

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

C/O MRS. J. J. BAGLEY, ANNISQUAM

*20 August 1894*

DEAR MOTHER

Your letters just now reached me. I had some beautiful letters from
India. The letter from Ajit Singh (The Raja of Khetri, a very devoted
disciple of the Swami.) shows that the phonograph has not reached yet,
and it was dated 8th June. So I do not think it is time yet to get an
answer. I am not astonished at my friends' asking Cook & Sons to hunt
for me; I have not written for a long time.

I have a letter from Madras which says they will soon send money to
Narasimha (Narasimhacharya. *Vide* the letter dated [February 14,
1894](009_mother.htm).) — in fact, as soon as they get a reply to their
letter written to Narasimha. So kindly let Narasimha know it. The
photographs have not reached me — except two of Fishkill when I was
there last. Landsberg (Leon Landsberg. *Vide* the letter dated [June 28,
1894](022_mother.htm).) has kindly sent over the letters. From here I
will probably go over to Fishkill. The meerschaum[1](#fn1) was not sent
over by me direct, but I left it to the Guernseys. And they are a lazy
family in that respect.

I have beautiful letters from the sisters.

By the by, your missionaries try to make me a malcontent before the
English government in India, and the Lieutenant Governor of Bengal in a
recent speech hinted that the recent revival of Hinduism was against the
government. Lord bless the missionary. Everything is fair in love and
(religion?).

The word *Shri* means "of good fortune", "blessed", etc. Paramahamsa is
a title for a Sannyâsi who has reached the goal, i.e. realized God.
Neither am I blessed nor have I reached the goal; but they are
courteous, that is all. I will soon write to my brothers in India. I am
so lazy, and I cannot send over the newspaper nonsense day after day.

I want a little quiet, but it is not the will of the Lord, it seems. At
Greenacre I had to talk on an average 7 to 8 hours a day — that was
rest, if it ever was. But it was of the Lord, and that brings vigour
along with it.

I have not much to write, and I do not remember anything of what I said
or did all these places over. So I hope to be excused.

I will be here a few days more at least, and therefore I think it would
be better to send over my mail here.

I have now almost become dizzy through the perusal of a heavy and big
mail, so excuse my hasty scrawl.

Ever affectionately yours,  
SWAMI VIVEKANANDA.

[→](029_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](029_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](029_mother.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Swami Vivekananda had bought a meerschaum pipe in New
    York as a present for Mr. Hale.
