---
title: XLV

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](044_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/26_brahmananda.htm)  
[←Addressee](044_mother.htm)

## XLV

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

C/O MRS. OLE BULL  
168 BRATTLE STREET

CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

*6 December 1894*

DEAR MOTHER

I have not heard long from you. What is the matter with you? I am here
in Cambridge and will be here for three weeks to come and will have to
lecture and hold classes. Here is a Chicago lady, Mrs. \[Milward\]
Adams, who lectures on tone building etc.

Today we had a lecture from Lady Henry Somerset[1](#fn1) on Woman
Suffrage. Miss Willard[2](#fn2) of Chicago was here and Julia Ward Howe.

Col. Higginson, Dr. \[J. Estlin\] Carpenter of Eng. and many other
friends were present. Altogether it was a grand affair. I have received
a letter from India informing me that the phonograph was duly received.

I have sent part of my money to India and intend sending nearly the
whole of it very soon. Only, I will keep enough for the passage back.
Saw Mother Temple several times in New York. She was kind as usual. So
was Mrs. Spalding.

Sister Mary wrote me a letter from Brookline \[Massachusetts\]. I am
sure she would have enjoyed Lady Somerset's lecture so much. I wrote her
about it, but I have not heard from her yet.

I will go to see her the first day I get some time. I am very busy. Hope
the sisters at home are enjoying themselves. I will try to run into
Chicago for a few days if I can.

Please write me all about the holy family as soon as you get time.

Mrs. Guernsey was very ill and still so weak that she cannot get out of
her room.

Miss Helen Bagley[3](#fn3) was seized with diphtheria in New York and
suffered a good deal. She has recovered, however, and the Bagleys have
gone home to Detroit.

With my Love to you all, I remain,

Ever yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA

P.S. — Kindly send my India mail c/o Mrs. Sara Ole Bull, 168 Brattle
Street, Cambridge, Mass.

V.

[→](046_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](046_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/035_sister.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)President of the British Women's Temperence Union.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)Miss Frances Willard, founder and President of the
    World's Women's Christian Temperence Union.
3.  [^](#fn3_1)The daughter of Mrs. John Bagley.
