---
title: XLVI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](045_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/037_sister.htm)  
[←Addressee](045_mother.htm)

## XLVI

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

\[CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

*21 December 1894*\]

DEAR MOTHER,

I am glad that Haridas Viharidas (The Dewan of Junagadh.) has sent the
rugs. I am afraid they will take a long time to reach here. The Raja
(Maharaja Ajit Singh, the Raja of Khetri.) was very much pleased with
the phonograph, as he writes, and has heard my voice several times. Hope
he will bring it into life.

I have not seen Sister Mary yet, but hope to see her this week as I am
going away to New York next Tuesday. Cannot come by any means to Chicago
now, for I expect to go to Washington from New York and hope to be
pretty busy in New York.

If I can snatch up a few days between the lecture in Brooklyn on the
30th and the next series in New York, I will fly to Chicago for a few
days. If I had time just now, it would have been better for me, for the
half — fare ticket will expire after this month.

I have been kept very busy here this month so could not go to Boston
even for a day. Now I have time and hope to see Sister Mary.

How are the babies at home? Mrs. M. Adams of Chicago, who lectures on
voice building and walking etc., has been lecturing here all this time.
She is a very great lady in every respect and so intelligent. She knows
all of you and likes the "Hale girls" very much. Sister Isabel\[le\]
knows her especially, I think.

Do not you see, Mother — I am determined to work my project out. I *must
see the light*. India can cheer alone — but no money. In the East and
South I am getting slowly friends who will help me in my work, I am
sure, as they have done already. They all like me more and more.

I have made friends of Lady Somerset and Miss Willard, you will be glad
to know. So you see, Mother, you are the only attraction in Chicago; and
so long I am in this country, wherever you live is my home. As soon as I
have time I will run in to see you and the sisters. But I have no other
hopes in the West; nor will you advise me to destroy the *only* hope I
have of success in these parts of the country by giving it up and going
to Chicago to be idle as the day is long.

Mrs. Bull and a few other ladies here who are helping me on are not only
sincere and love me but they have the power to do as leaders of society.
Would that you had millions.

With my love to you all,

Your ever affectionate Son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](047_miss_thursby.htm)  
[Addressee→](049_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/024_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

</div>
