---
title: LVI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](055_friend.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/040_alasinga.htm)  
[←Addressee](054_mother.htm)

## LVI

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

54 W. 33  
NEW YORK

*16th May '95*

DEAR MOTHER,

Your kind note duly reached. The books have arrived safe and more are
coming. The Sanskrit books pay no duty, being classics. I expect a big
package from Khetri. The big packet was from the Raja of Khetri, sending
me an address from a meeting held of Rajput nobility at Mount Abu, for
my work in this country.

I do not know whether I will be able to come over to Chicago or not. I
am trying to get a free pass; in case I succeed I will come, else not.
Financially this winter's work was no success at all — I could barely
keep myself up — but spiritually very great. I am going to the Thousand
Islands for the summer to visit a friend and some of my pupils will be
there.

I have got plenty of books now to read from India, and I will be quite
engaged this summer.

The Khetri package will not arrive soon, so kindly make arrangements
that it will be received during your absence if you go away. \[There\]
will have to be paid a heavy duty for \[it,\] I am afraid.

Mrs. \[Florence\] Adams brought me the love from the \[Hale\] Sisters on
her way to Europe. She started this morning. A large package of books
also I expect soon. The original Upanishads — there is no duty on them.

I have had some trouble with my stomach; hope it will be over in a few
days.

With love to all, I am ever your affectionate Son,

VIVEKANANDA

[→](057_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](061_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/043_alasinga.htm)

</div>
