---
title: LXXX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](079_mrs_bull.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/066_friend.htm)

## LXXX

*To the Editor of* Light of the East

*1896*.

DEAR SIR,[1](#fn1)

Many thanks for your kindly sending me several copies of the *Light of
the East*. I wish the paper all success.

As you have asked for my suggestion \[that\] I can make towards
improving the paper — I must frankly state that in my life-long
experience in the work, I have always found "Occultism" injurious and
weakening to humanity. What we want is strength. We Indians, more than
any other race, want strong and vigorous thought. We have enough of the
superfine in all concerns. For centuries we have been stuffed with the
mysterious; the result is that our intellectual and spiritual digestion
is almost hopelessly impaired, and the race has been dragged down to the
depths of hopeless imbecility — never before or since experienced by any
other civilised community. There must be freshness and vigour of thought
behind to make a virile race. More than enough to strengthen the whole
world exists in the Upanishads. The Advaita is the eternal mine of
strength. But it requires to be *applied*. It must first be cleared of
the incrustation of scholasticism, and then in all its simplicity,
beauty and sublimity be taught over the length and breadth of the land,
as applied even to the minutest detail of daily life. "This is a very
large order"; but we must work towards it, nevertheless, as if it would
be accomplished to-morrow. Of one thing I am sure — that whoever wants
to help his fellow beings through genuine love and unselfishness will
work wonders.

Yours truly,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](081_mrs_bull.htm)  
[Chronology→](081_mrs_bull.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)This letter was published in the December 1896 issue of
    Light of the East, a well-known monthly journal of those days,
    published in Calcutta. The editor, Satishchandra Mukherjee, Swami
    Vivekananda's boyhood friend, was the third son of Ishanchandra, a
    very dear disciple of Shri Ramakrishna.
