---
title: LXXXIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](082_mrs_funkey.htm)  
[←Chronology](082_mrs_funkey.htm)  
[←Addressee](081_mrs_bull.htm)

## LXXXIII

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

228 W. 39TH STREET  
NEW YORK

*10 January 1896*

DEAR MRS. BULL,

I have received your letter and also another from the Secretary of the
Harvard Metaphysical Club.[1](#fn1)

I will be only too glad to come to Boston for the Harvard lecture
especially — but these are the difficulties in the way: First, the work
here will fall to pieces; secondly, I have begun to write in right
earnest. I want to finish some text books to be the basis of work when I
am gone. I want to hurry through four little text books before I go.

Of course it is impossible to come this month as the notices of the four
Sunday lectures are out. In the first week of February I have again a
lecture at Brooklyn at Dr. Janes's. My idea now is to make a tour to
Boston, Detroit, and Chicago in March and then come back to New York a
week or so and then start for England. In March I will be able to stay a
few weeks at each of these places. Of course it is true that \[as\] yet
I have no competent persons here to carry on the work like Sturdy in
England, nor any sincere friend to stand by me except you.

I will do anything you want me to, and if you think it is good for me to
come to Boston in February, I am ready.

Ever yours with gratitude, love, and blessings

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. I have not much faith in that Procopeia business, (The Procopeia
Club.) except as a nucleus to work from.

My love to Miss Hamlin and all the other friends there.

YOURS, V.

[→](084_christina.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/093_mrs_bull.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/068_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Most probably the graduate Philosophical Club of Harvard,
    before which Swami Vivekananda spoke in March 1896.
