---
title: LXV

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](064_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/044_mrs_sturges.htm)  
[←Addressee](064_mother.htm)

## LXV

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

C/O MISS DUTCHER  
THOUSAND ISLAND PARK

*30th August* \[*July*\] *'95*

DEAR MOTHER,

I was starting for Chicago, Thursday next \[August 1\], but your letter
stopped me. The letter and the package have safely arrived.

Write to me or wire if you want me to come to Chicago. I will then start
for Chicago next week, i.e. on Tuesday next \[August 6\]. I thought
Sister Mary was at home. When are the other babies coming? My going to
Europe is not yet settled finally. The babies have not written me a line
— not one of them.

Oh, Mother, my heart is so, so sad. The letters bring the news of the
death of Dewanji. Haridas Viharidas has left the body. He was as a
father to me. Poor man, he was the last 5 years seeking the retirement
from business life, and at last he got it but could not enjoy it long. I
pray that he may never come back again to this dirty hole they call the
Earth. Neither may he be born in heaven or any other horrid place. May
he never again wear a body — good or bad, thick or thin. What a humbug
and illusion this world is, Mother, what a mockery this life. I pray
constantly that all mankind will come to know the reality, i.e. God, and
this "Shop" here be closed for ever.

My heart is too full to write more. Write to me or wire if you like.

Your ever obedient Son,  
VIVEKANANDA

P.S. We will think of the coming package \[from the Maharaja of Khetri\]
in Chicago. How long will you be in Chicago? If it is only a week or so,
I need not come. I will meet you in New York. If more than that, I come
to see you.

Yours,  
V.

[→](066_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](066_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/048_friend.htm)

</div>
