---
title: XCVI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](095_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/103_mrs_bull.htm)

## XCVI

*A letter to the editor, which appeared in the July 11, 1896 issue of
the* Light

63, ST. GEORGE'S-ROAD, S.W.

SIR,

Allow me to put a few words in your estimable journal as comments on an
article in your paper dated July 4th. I must thank you without reserve
for the kind and friendly spirit manifested throughout the article
towards me and the philosophy I preach; but, as there is a fear of
misconstruction in one part of it — especially by my Spiritualistic
friends — I want to clear my position. The truth of correspondence
between the living and the dead is, I believe, in every religion, and
nowhere more than in the Vedantic sects of India, where the fact of
mutual help between the departed and the living has been made the basis
of the law of inheritance. I would be very sorry if I be mistaken as
antagonistic to any sect or form of religion, so far as they are
sincere. Nor do I hold that any system can ever be judged by the frauds
and failures that would naturally gather round every method under the
present circumstances. But, all the same, I cannot but believe that
every thoughtful person would agree with me when I affirm that people
should be warned of their dangers, with love and sympathy. The lecture
alluded to could but accidentally touch the subject of Spiritualism; but
I take this opportunity of conveying my deep admiration for the
Spiritualist community for the positive good they have done already, and
are doing still: (1) the preaching of a universal sympathy; (2) the
still greater work of helping the human race out of doctrines which
inculcate fear and not love. Ever ready to co-operate with, and at the
service of, all who are striving to bring the light of the spirit,

I remain yours sincerely,

VIVE KANANDA

[→](097_mrs_bull.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/062_dr_nanjunda_rao.htm)

</div>
