---
title: CXXVII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](126_your_highness.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/134_haripada.htm)  
[←Addressee](118_christina.htm)

## CXXVII

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, BELOOR, HOWRAH DIST.,

*25th October, 1898*.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

How are you? I am very anxious about your health. I have long not had
any letter from you.

My health again failed badly. I had, therefore, to leave Kashmir in
haste and come to Calcutta. The doctors say I ought not go tramping
again this winter. That is such a disappointment, you know. However, I
am coming to the U. S. this summer. Mrs. Bull and Miss MacLeod enjoyed
this year's trip to Kashmir immensely, and now they are having a glimpse
of the old monuments and buildings of Delhi, Agra, Jeypore \[Jaipur\],
etc.

Do write a nice, long letter if you have time, and do not work yourself
to death. Duty is duty, no doubt; but we have our duties, not only to
our mother etc., but to others also. Sometimes one duty asks for
physical sacrifice, whilst the other insists on great care for our
health. Of course, we follow the stronger motive, and \[I\] do not know
which will prove stronger in your case. Anyhow, take great care of your
body, now that your sisters have come to your help.

How do you manage the family? — the expenses etc? Write me all you like
to write. Give me a long chat, will you? Do!

I am getting better every day — and then the long months before I can
start for the U.S. Never mind, "Mother" knows what is best for us. She
will show the way. I am now in Bhakti. As I am growing old, Bhakti is
taking the place of Jnâna. Did you get the new *Awakened India*? How do
you like it?

Ever yours in the Lord,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](128_your_highness.htm)  
[Addressee→](132_christina.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/086_your_highness.htm)

</div>
