---
title: CXXIX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](128_your_highness.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/087_your_highness.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/087_your_highness.htm)

## CXXIX

*To Maharaja Ajit Singh, the Raja of Khetri*

MATH BELOOR  
HOWRAH DISTRICT

*1 December 1898*

YOUR HIGHNESS —

Your telegram has pleased me beyond description, and it is worthy of
your noble self. I herewith give you the details of what I want.

The lowest possible estimate of building a little home in Calcutta is at
least ten thousand rupees. With that it is barely possible to buy or
build a house in some out-of-the-way quarter of the town — a little
house fit for four or five persons to live in.

As for the expenses of living, the 100 Rs. a month your generosity is
supplying my mother is enough for her. If another 100 Rs. a month be
added to it for my lifetime for my expenses — which unfortunately this
illness has increased, and which, I hope, will not be for long a source
of trouble to you, as I expect only to live a few years at best — I will
be perfectly happy. One thing more will I beg of you — if possible, the
100 Rs. a month for my mother be made permanent, so that even after my
death it may regularly reach her. Or even if your Highness ever gets
reasons to stop your love and kindness for me, my poor old mother may be
provided \[for\], remembering the love you once had for a poor Sâdhu.

This is all. Do this little work amongst the many other noble deeds you
have done, knowing well whatever else can be proved or not, the power of
Karma is self-evident to all. The blessings of this good Karma shall
always follow you and yours. As for me, what shall I say — whatever I am
in the world has been almost all through your help. You made it possible
for me to get rid of a terrible anxiety and face the world and do some
work. It may be that you are destined by the Lord to be the instrument
again of helping yet grander work, by taking this load off my mind once
more.

But whether you do this or not, "once loved is always loved". Let all my
love and blessings and prayers follow you and yours, day and night, for
what I owe you already; and may the Mother, whose play is this universe
and in whose hands we are mere instruments, always protect you from all
evil.

Ever yours in the Lord,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](130_margot.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/088_your_highness.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/088_your_highness.htm)

</div>
