---
title: CXLIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](142_sister_christine.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/138_joe.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/145_dhira_mata.htm)

## CXLIII

*To Mrs. Ole Bull*

THE LYMES, WOODSIDE  
WIMBLEDON, ENGLAND

*6 August 1899*

MY DEAR MOTHER,

Your letter directed to Sturdy at hand. I am very thankful for your kind
words. As for me, I don't know what I am to do next or anything to do at
all. On board the steamer I was all right, but since landing \[I am\]
feeling quite bad again. As to mental worry, there has been enough of
late. The aunt whom you saw had a deep-laid plan to cheat me, and she
and her people contrived to sell me a house for 6,000 Rs., or £400, and
I bought \[it\] for my mother in good faith. Then they would not give me
possession, hoping that I would not go to court for the shame of taking
forcible possession as a Sannyasin.

I do not think *I have spent even one rupee from what you and others
gave me for the work*. Cap. Sevier gave me 8,000 Rs. with the express
desire of helping my mother. This money, it seems, has \[also\] gone to
the dogs. Beyond this, nothing has been spent on my family or even on
*my own personal* expenses — my food etc. being paid for by the Khetri
Raja, and more than half of that went to the Math every month. Only, if
Brahmananda spends some in the lawsuit \[against the aunt\], as I must
not be robbed that way — if he does, I will make it good anyway, if I
live to do it.

The money which I got in Europe and America by *lecturing* alone, I
spent just as I like; but every cent I got for the work has been
accounted for and is in the Math, and the whole thing ought to be clear
as daylight if Brahmananda never cheated me. I don't believe he will
ever cheat me. I got a letter at Aden from Saradananda that they were
preparing an account. I have not received any yet.

I have no plans yet, nor care to make any. Neither do I wish to work.
Let the Mother find other workers. I have my burden enough already.

Ever your devoted son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](144_isabel.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/147_mrs_bull.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/139_marie.htm)

</div>
