---
title: CXLVI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](145_christina.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/144_mary.htm)  
[←Addressee](095_mother.htm)

## CXLVI

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

RIDGELY MANOR

*5 October 1899*

MY DEAR MOTHER CHURCH,

Many, many thanks for your kind words.

I am so glad you are working on as ever. I am glad because the wave of
optimism has not caught you yet. It is all very well to say everything
is right, but that is apt to degenerate into a sort of *laissez-faire*.
I believe with you that the world is evil — made more hideous with a few
dashes of good.

All our works have only this value, that they awaken some to the reality
of this horror — and \[those\] flee for refuge to some place beyond,
which is called God, or Christ, or Brahma, or Buddha, etc. Names do not
make much difference.

Again, we must always remember ours is only to work — we never attain
results. How can we? Good can never be done without doing evil. We
cannot breathe a breath without killing thousands of poor little
animals. National prosperity is another name for death and degradation
to millions of other races. So is individual prosperity the beggaring of
many. The world is evil — and will ever remain so. It is its nature, and
cannot be changed — "Which one of you by taking thought . . ." etc.
(Matthew 6.27.)

Such is truth. The wisdom is therefore in renunciation, that is, to make
the Lord our all in all. Be a true Christian, Mother — like Christ,
renounce everything and let the heart and soul and body belong to Him
and Him alone. All this nonsense which people have built round Christ's
name is not His teaching. He taught to renounce. He never says the earth
is an enjoyable place. And your time has come to get rid of all vanities
— even the love of children and husband — and think of the Lord and Him
alone.

Ever your Son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](147_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](147_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](147_mother.htm)

</div>
