---
title: CLIX

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](158_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](158_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](154_christina.htm)

## CLIX

*To Sister Christine*

921 WEST 21ST STREET,  
LOS ANGELES,

*9th December 1899*.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

After all, it is good for me, and good for those I love, that I should
come here. Here at last in California! One of our poets says: "Where is
Benares, where is Kashmir, where Khorasan, where Gujarat! O Tulsi! thus,
man's past Karma drags him on". And I am here. After all it is best,
isn't it? Are you going to Boston? I am afraid you are not. I have not
unsettled any of your plans, have I? — unnecessary expenses? Well, if
any, I will make it up. Only the trouble is yours. I am ashamed of my
eccentricities. Well, how are you? What are you doing? How are things
going with you? Sleep if you can; it is better to sleep than get
awakened. I pray that all good may come to thee — all peace, all
strength to do and suffer. I have a great deal of strength to do, but
very little to suffer.

I am so selfish again, always thinking of my own sufferings and paying
no heed to others. Pray for me; send strong thoughts that I may have
strength to suffer. I know you will. Now, I mean to remain a few weeks
in this city. After that, "Mother" knows. I am physically much better
now than I have been for months. The weakness of the heart is nearly
gone. The dyspepsia is also much better, and \[there is\] very little. I
can walk miles now without feeling it in the heart. If this continues, I
expect to have a new lease on life. I am so, so sorry of asking you to
come to Boston and flying away. If you are there, I hope you will enjoy
the place and the meetings. If you have given it up — well, did you take
leave and not go to Boston? My! what a bungle! Well, I ask a thousand
pardons, if such is the case. Things must look brighter anyway, sooner
or later. What of these little, few days of life!

How is Mrs. Funke? Loads of love for her. How long a leave \[do\] you
get at Christmas? When does it begin? If you feel inclined and willing,
write me a long note, will you? But don't tell my friends my
whereabouts. I want to be off from the world for a time, if I can. Will
you kindly send Mr. Freer's address to Mrs. Bull? She needs it. I had a
lecture here last night. The hall was not crowded, as there was very
little ad\[vertisement\], but a fairly good — sized audience though. I
hope they were pleased. If I feel better, I am going to have classes in
this city soon. I am on the business path this time, you know. Want a
few dollars quick, if I can.

Ever yours in the Lord,  
VIVEKANANDA.

[→](160_brahmananda.htm)  
[Addressee→](161_christina.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/150_mrs_bull.htm)

</div>
