---
title: CLXIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](162_margo.htm)  
[←Chronology](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/157_mary.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/138_joe.htm)

## CLXIII

*To Miss Josephine MacLeod*

1231 PINE STREET  
SAN FRANCISCO.

*March 2nd 1900*

DEAR JOE —

Your note enclosing two from France and three from India just received.
I have had general good news and am happy.

Financially, I have got $300 in Los Angeles. About Mrs. Bowler,[1](#fn1)
she has about a hundred odd dollars in cash. Mrs. Hendrick and she have
not paid up as yet. That money — $300 in all — is with her. She will
send it to me whenever I write.

Rev. Benjamin Fay Mills,[2](#fn2) a very popular Unitarian preacher in
Oakland, invited me from here and paid the fare to San Francisco. I have
spoken twice in Oakland to 1500 people each time. Last time I got from
collection $30. I am going to have classes at 50 cents admission each.

San Francisco had one lecture the other night \[February 23\] at 50¢
each. It paid its expenses. This Monday \[Sunday?\] I am going to speak
free — after that a class.

I went to see Mrs. Hurst \[Hearst\].[3](#fn3) She was not at home. I
left a card — so with Prof. Le Conte.[4](#fn4)

Mary \[Hale\] writes that you wrote her of my coming any day to the
East. I don't know. Here I have a large following —ready — made by my
books. Will get some money, not much. St. Francis \[Francis Leggett\]
may put the money in the bank for me — but can that be done without my
signature? And I am here? It is good if it can be done. Did you see any
possibility of my books being sold for good to any publisher?

The French invitation[5](#fn5) is all right. But it seems impossible to
write any decent paper on the subject we chose. Because if I have to
lecture and make money, very little time will be left for anything else.
Again, I can not find any books (Sanskrit) here. So let me try to make a
little money if I can and go to France all the same, but send them no
paper. No scholarly work can be done in this haphazard and hurried
fashion. It means time and study.

Shall I write to Mr. \[Gerald\] Nobel an acknowledgement and thanks?
Write to me fully on these subjects if you can before you leave \[for
Europe\]. My health is going on the same way. The gas is there more or
less and this city is all climbing up\[hill\] — that tires me much.

With all love,

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA

P.S. Did anybody else respond to Mrs. Leggett's call?

[→](164_christina.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/160_joe.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/155_nivedita.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Mrs. Emeline F. Bowler, president of the Pasadena
    Shakespeare Club and a friend of Swami Vivekananda in southern
    California.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)Minister of the First Unitarian Church in Oakland, where
    Swami Vivekananda spoke several times.
3.  [^](#fn3_1)Mrs. Phoebe Apperson Hearst, mother of the newspaper
    tycoon William Randolph Hearst.
4.  [^](#fn4_1)Probably Joseph Le Conte, a well-known geologist, then in
    the seventies, and a professor at the University of California at
    Berkeley.
5.  [^](#fn5_1)An invitation to speak in September at the Congress of
    the History of Religions at the Paris Exposition.
