---
title: CLXVIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](167_margot.htm)  
[←Chronology](167_margot.htm)  
[←Addressee](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/173_dhira_mata.htm)

## CLXVIII

*To Mrs. Ole Bull (in London)*

SAN FRANCISCO

*18 May 1900*

MY DEAR MOTHER,

Many thanks for Joe's \[Miss Josephine MacLeod's\] and your letters. I
have again a bad relapse — and \[am\] struggling out of it. This time I
am perfectly certain that with me all diseases are nervous. I want rest
for two, three years — and not the least bit of work between. I will
take rest with the Seviers in the Himalayas.

Mrs. \[James Henry\] Sevier gave me 6,000 Rs. for family — this was
distributed between my cousin, aunt, etc. The 5,000 Rs. for buying the
house was borrowed from the Math funds. Do not stop the remittance you
send to my cousin, whatever Saradananda may say to the contrary. Of
course I do not know what he says.

I have long given up the idea of a little house on the Ganges, as I have
not the money.

But I have got some in Calcutta and some with the Leggetts, and if you
give a thousand more, that will be a fund for my own personal expenses
(as you know I never took Math money) as well as for my mother. Kindly
write to Saradananda to give up the little house plan. I am not going to
write any more for weeks yet — till I completely recover. I hope to get
over \[it\] in a few weeks from now — it was a terrible relapse. I am
with a Doctor friend \[Dr. Milburn H. Logan\], and he is taking every
care of me.

Tell Joe that going amongst different people with a message also does
not belong to the Sannyasin; for a Sannyasin, \[there\] is quiet and
retirement, scarcely seeing the face of man.

I am now ripe for that, physically at least. If I don't go into
retirement, nature will force me to it. Many thanks that temporal things
have been so well arranged by you.

With all love to Joe and yourself —

Your Son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](169_christina.htm)  
[Addressee→](185_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](169_christina.htm)

</div>
