---
title: XXIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](022_mother.htm)  
[←Chronology](022_mother.htm)  
[←Addressee](022_mother.htm)

## XXIII

*To Mrs. G. W. Hale*

C/O LEON LANDSBERG  
144 MADISON AVENUE  
NEW YORK

*1 July 1894*

DEAR MOTHER,

Hope you are settled down in peace by this time. The babies are doing
well in Mudville (Kenosha, Wisconsin) — in their nunnery, I am sure. It
is very hot here, but now and then a breeze comes up which cools it
down. I am now with Miss \[Mary A.\] Phillips. Will move off from here
on Tuesday to another place.

Here I find a quotation from a speech by Sir Monier Williams, professor
of Sanskrit in the Oxford University. It is very strange as coming from
one who every day expects to see the whole of India converted to
Christianity. "And yet it is a remarkable characteristic of Hinduism
that it neither requires nor attempts to make converts. Nor is it at
present by any means decreasing in numbers, nor is it being driven out
of the field by two such proselytizing religions as Mahomedanism \[sic\]
and Christianity. On the contrary, it is at present rapidly increasing.
And far more remarkable than this is that, it is all-receptive,
all-embracing and all-comprehensive. It claims to be the one religion of
humanity, of human nature, of the entire world. It cares not to oppose
the progress of Christianity nor of any other religion. For it has no
difficulty in including all other religions within its all-embracing
arms and ever-widening fold. And in real fact Hinduism has something to
offer which is suited to all minds. Its very strength lies in its
infinite adaptability to the infinite diversity of human characters and
human tendencies. It has its highly spiritual and abstract side suited
to the philosophical higher classes. Its practical and concrete side
suited to the man of affairs and the man of the world. Its aesthetic and
ceremonial side suited to the man of poetic feeling and imagination. Its
quiescent and contemplative side suited to the man of peace and lover of
seclusion.

"Indeed, the Hindus were Spinozists 2,000 years before the birth of
Spinoza, Darwinians centuries before the birth of Darwin, and
evolutionists centuries before the doctrine of evolution had been
accepted by the Huxleys of our time, and before any word like evolution
existed in any language of the world."

This, as coming from one of the staunchest defenders of Christianity, is
wonderful indeed. But he seems to have got the idea quite correct.

Now I am going to send up the orange coat today; as for the books that
came to me from Philadelphia, I do not think they are worthy of being
sent at all. I do not know what I am going to do next. Patiently wait
and resign myself unto His guidance — that is my motto. My love to you
all.

Your affectionate son,  
VIVEKANANDA

[→](024_mother.htm)  
[Addressee→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/022_mother.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/022_mother.htm)

</div>
