---
title: CCXXIV

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Letters – Fifth
Series](letters_fifth_series_contents.htm) /

[←](223_mademoiselle.htm)  
[←Chronology](223_mademoiselle.htm)  
[←Addressee](222_christine.htm)

## CCXXIV

*To Sister Christine*

THE MATH, BELUR, DIST. HOWRAH,

*27th May 1902*.

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

I am sorry I could not visit the mountains this time. My health, though
not improved as much as I \[had\] wished, is not bad. The liver has been
benefited — \[that\] is a great gain. The rains will commence very soon
in the hills. So it is useless for me to take all the trouble of that
terrible route.

I am so happy to learn the mountains are doing you good. Eat a lot,
sleep as much as you can, and get plump. Stuff yourself till you get
plump or you burst.

So the place did not suit Mr. Okakura \[Kakuzo\] — why? There must have
been something to annoy him very much that he left the place so
abruptly. Did he not like the scenery? Was it not sublime enough for
him? Or the Japanese do not like sublimity at all? They only like
beauty.

One of the boys writes that the little boy is getting disobedient etc.
Mrs. Sevier wants me to take him down. So I do. I have asked Sadananda
and another monk (whom I want for work here) to go to Almora and wait
for the monsoon, and when it breaks, to come down.

If you feel you are becoming the least burdensome to Mrs. Sevier, write
me immediately. It would be a sin to put further pressure on her — she
does so much for me. However, she likes you very much and writes that
you look be-au-ti-ful in saris.

I have just now two kids and three lambs added to the family. There was
one more kid, but he got himself drowned in the yellow fish tank. How is
Margot? Is she still there, or gone away with Mr. Okakura? How is she
pulling on with the boys?

What do you do the whole day? How do you pass the day? Write me all
details, and frequently; but do not expect long letters from me often.

Give my love to Mrs. Sevier, to Margot and the rest, and you may take a
few spoonfuls, if you like,

with only this,  
VIVEKANANDA.

PS — Have an eye on the little chap. The boys are already jealous of
him. They did spoil another boy that way before.

V.

[→](225_christine.htm)  
[Addressee→](225_christine.htm)  
[Chronology→](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/123_dhira_mata.htm)

</div>
