+++
title = "Bistahieversor, Haplocheirus and other recently announced dinosaurs"

+++
***Bistahieversor:*** A recent publication by Carr and Williamson
describes a new tyrannosauroid from the Late Cretaceous (Campanian) of
New Mexico. The work is accompanied by a phylogenetic analysis that
presents some interesting features. However, the paper appears to have
been in press for a long time and in the mean time several major finds
appear to have been published. Hence, it is useful to review this
tyrannosauroid in the context of the other finds. As noted earlier on
these pages, there has been tremendous progress in tyrannosauroid
phylogenetics that has been dramatically altering our knowledge of these
dinosaurs in the past few years. By combining the picture from the
current paper with other recent finds we get the following picture of
tyrannosauroid evolution:  
\-By around 165 Mya (i.e. the Bathonian age of the Jurassic) the
tyrannosauroids had split off from the other coelurosaurs and
diversified into multiple lineages of small predators. The more
primitive of these lineages was the proceratosaurid lineage with the
crested forms *Proceratosaurus* and *Guanlong*. The more derived lineage
was represented by *Iliosuchus*. They had also acquired a wide
distribution by the Middle Jurassic – *Proceratosaurus* from England;
*Guanlong* from China and *Iliosuchus* from North America.  
\-The same picture of primitive and derived tyrannosauroid lineages
existing side-by-side continues later in the Jurassic (approximately
150-155 Mya \~ Kimmeridgian age): We have the more primitive
*Tanycolagreus* co-existing with the more derived *Aviatyrannis* and
*Stokesosaurus*.  
\-In the early Cretaceous (130-125 Mya \~Barremian age) we see primitive
forms like *Dilong*, slightly more derived forms like *Eotyrannus* and
highly derived forms like *Raptorex*.  
\-Finally, in the late Cretaceous we observe that some relatively
primitive forms like *Bagaraatan* and a poorly described Asian form (cf.
*Alectrosaurus* in C\&W’s paper) are present along with a diverse
mélange of more derived form including the classical tyrannosaurids.
However, there is some fine structure in the patterns of tyrannosauroid
distribution in the late Cretaceous, the causes for which and
significance are currently entirely unclear. In the Campanian (\~75-80
Mya) of North America several distinct large derived tyrannosauroids
appear to have been prevalent, albeit in different parts of the
continent- We have *Appalachiosaurus* in the East, *Daspletosaurus*,
*Gorgosaurus* and *Albertosaurus* in the West, a new form in the south
from Utah (The BYU specimens still under study by C\&W) and
*Bistahieversor* still further south from the New Mexico region. In
contrast, information is still very patchy from the Campanian of Asia.
There is *Alectrosaurus olseni* proper (sensu Gilmore 1933) and another
from referred to *Alectrosaurus* (by Perle 1977), which are apparently
two distinct taxa that are still to be re-described properly by C\&W.
The latter is termed “Cf. Alectrosaurus” in the current paper. Both of
these appear more primitive than the derived forms mentioned above from
the Campanian of North America. In the Maastrichtian age, the last past
of the Cretaceous before the K/Pg extinction event, the picture seems to
change quite a bit. In North American a single derived form seems to be
present, i.e. *Tyrannosaurus* along side the some what less-derived
*Dryptosaurus* which might be related to *Alectrosaurus olseni*. In Asia
we have the small relatively primitive form *Bagaraatan* along side with
the crown group tyrannosaurids, *Alioramus* and *Tarbosaurus* that is
very closely related to *Tyrannosaurus*.

The current work of C\&W along with the other recent publications by
Senter, Rauhut et al, Brusatte et al and Sereno et al throw some light
on previously fairly obscure form. For example, we had always suspected
that Bagaraatan from Mongolia was a small tyrannosauroid. This receives
good support from C\&W’s work. Earlier Rauhut et al had described a
small, fragmentary dinosaur *Xinjiangovenator* from the Early Cretaceous
(\~Valanginian–Albian) of Asia and noted similarities with *Bagaraatan*.
We strongly suspect that this form might indeed be a tyrannosauroid that
is an earlier representative of the *Bagaraatan* lineage.
*Calamosaurus*, another highly fragmentary form detailed by Naish et al
from the Early Cretaceous (Barremian age) seems to have similarities
with primitive tyrannosauroids like *Dilong*. The pioneering zoologist
Lydekker (who incidentally set up the modern geological survey of India)
had described its similarities with *Coelurus*. A recent study of Senter
had shown that *Coelurus* might be a very primitive tyrannosauroid
itself. Hence, we have reasonable confidence that the obscure
*Calamosaurus* and *Coelurus* are indeed primitive tyrannosauroids. Thus
the long obscure history of this famous clade of dinosaurus appears to
be filling up.

However, the relationships of the forms more primitive than the
classical tyrannosaurids are currently in a degree of flux. Using the
theropod data matrix kindly sent to us last year by Prof. Senter along
with the new data we could discern the following:  
C\&W find *Guanlong* to group with *Monolophosaurus* a large primitive
theropod from the same formation. However, based on the new description
of *Monolophosaurus* by Brusatte et al and details of *Proceratosaurus*
offered by Rauhut et al we might say with some confidence that
*Guanlong* and *Proceratosaurus* indeed form a clade of primitive
tyrannosaurs. By tweaking Senter’s matrix we get *Coelurus* as an even
more primitive tyrannosaur although there is less confidence in this.
*Tanycolagreus* appears to be about as primitive as the proceratosaurids
mainly based on C\&W’s data. Even more derived is *Dilong*, which is a
sister group of the rest of the tyrannosaurids. *Calamosaurus* could be
related to the roughly coeval *Dilong* but is too fragmentary to assess
confidently. Even more derived than *Dilong* is an assemblage of unclear
interrelationships including *Stokesosaurus, Aviatyrannis, Iliosuchus,
Bagaraatan* and *Xinjiangovenator*. More derived than this *Eotyrannus*.
More derived than *Eotyrannus* is *Xiongguanlong*, Cf.*Alectrosaurus*
and *Dryptosaurus* and *Alectrosaurus olseni.* Even more derived is
*Raptorex*, which is a sister group of the “crown group
tyrannosauroids”. Inside the crown group tyrannosauroids we have
*Appalachiosaurus* as the most basal branch, followed by
*Bistahieversor*, which is sister group to the rest of the crown
tyrannosauroids. These currently include the basal
*Albertosaurus+Gorgosaurus, Alioramus*, the yet to be published Utah
form, *Daspletosaurus*, *Tyrannosaurus* and *Tarbosaurus*. Of these
lineages the most labile are the very primitive *Coelurus* and the
poorly described Cf. *Alectrosaurus* and *Alectrosaurus olseni*. Of
course the several other more primitive fragmentary forms could also
change positions.

C\&W also make functional inferences regarding tyrannosaurs predatory
behavior from anatomy. They consider the crown group tyrannosaurids
*Tarbosaurus, Tyrannosaurus, Daspletosaurus, Albertosaurus* and
*Gorgosaurus* to be deep-snouted. *Bistahieversor* is also seen as
deep-snouted just like its above cousins. In contrast, they consider
*Dilong, Appalachiosaurus, Alioramus, Xiongguanlong* and the like
shallow-snouted. *Eotyrannus*, the proceratosaurids, and *Raptorex* also
appear to be shallow snouted. The key distinguishing factor they point
out is the ratio of the height of the horizontal ramus of the maxilla to
the height of the antorbital fossa above it. The shallow-snouted forms
have a low ratio while the deep-snouted forms a higher ratio. Coprolite
evidence suggests that the deep-snouted tyrannosaurs like
*Tyrannosaurus* were bone-crushers that exerted massive bite forces to
smash their prey. Mechanical simulations also show that they could
easily pulverize bone exerting forces greater than 10000 N (the highest
in the dinosaur-line of archosaurs; of course certain crocodiles like
*Deinosuchus* were probably the champions beating all known dinosaurs
hands-down). This increase in maxillary height in the crown group
tyrannosauroids appears to be clearly an adaptation to exert these
bone-crushing forces. In contrast, the shallow-snouted forms clearly
could not rely on the bone-crushing bites of their cousins and evidently
had a different hunting strategy that we do not understand at all.

C\&W go on state that the shallow snouted form was the primitive
condition for tyrannosauroids and that the deep snouted version was a
derived feature that first emerged in *Bistahieversor*. This claim could
be technically right but the reality was more complicated. We have the
shallow snouted *Alioramus*, which is nested deep within the derived
tyrannosauroids and appears to be more derived than Bistahierversor.
This suggests that the snout morphology could have potentially reversed
to the shallow state from the original deep state at least in
*Alioramus*. This raises questions as to how often such transitions
happened in other parts of the tyrannosauroid tree. Secondly C\&W state
that the shallow snouted forms had much larger grasping arms than the
traditional tiny hands of the derived tyrannosauroids. These longer
hands they claim helped the shallow snouted forms to tackle prey with
their hands and thus the reliance on a heavy bite was not required. In
contrast, the deep snouted forms shifted to a head only approach to
predation thereby reducing the need of grasping arms which instead
became highly reduced two-fingered structures. But this proposal of C\&W
is not supported by any of the new data. Firstly, *Raptorex* and
*Alioramus* which are shallow snouted seem to have the reduced
two-fingered arms. The short arms had already emerged in Raptorex that
appears to have been a relatively small predator that is unlikely to
have adopted the bone-crushing heavy-bite approach of the derived forms.
On the other hand among the derived forms there are fairly large forms
like *Appalachiosaurus* that did not use the bone-crushing approach due
to their narrow snouts. Thus, the small armed morphology, deep snout,
size and the bone-crushing are not strongly correlated. These features
suggest that we have a major lacuna in our understanding of theropod
predatory strategies. In our opinion there appear to have been several
distinct strategies that may or may not overlap in the same organism: 1)
indeed in the primitive state the use of the longer arms was a major
mechanism. However, it does not appear that the arms were particularly
powerful as in *Allosaurus* or *Acrocanthosaurus*. So the primitive
tyrannosauroids possibly used their nimble grasping arms to hold small
prey and dispatch them with bites. 2) In some forms like *Dryptosaurus*,
the arms seem to have become more powerful with large claws and they
possible used these to tackle large prey. 3) In the crown group the
strategy seems to have shifted to a head-first approach. But at least
initially this approach was probably used only against relatively small
prey. The head-first approach was accompanied by a reduction of the arm
to the two-finger state. But by no means were these arms vestigial.
These tiny arms have been shown to have powerful musculature capable of
bearing enormous loads for their size. Thus, the arms were probably used
in way we do not fully understand to tackle struggling prey very close
to the body even as the head was engaging in the main attack. In this
respect these tyrannosauroid arms differed from the reduced arms of the
abelisaurs. In that clade too the skull appears to have become rather
deep, along with shortening of the snout, probably indicating the
independent emergence of a head-first predatory strategy. But in
abelisaurs the hands probably had a limited or non-existent role in
predation. 4) Finally within these short-armed, “head-first”
tyrannosauroids, starting probably with *Bistahieversor*, emerged the
heavy bite that allowed decimation of large prey with the head-first
approach. With that we had one of the most dramatic terrestrial
predators ever, but we still do not understand them too well.

***Haplocheirus:*** The story of the alvarezsaurs is a rather
fascinating one in dinosaurian evolution and Haplocheirus is beginning
to unveil the untold part of it. The first alvarezsaur fossil was
actually recovered by the notorious paleontologist OC Marsh, who thought
it was a species of Ornithomimus (O.minutus). Further remains were
recovered during the remarkable expeditions of the American adventurer
naturalist Andrews to Mongolia, which also uncovered Oviraptor,
Velociraptor, Saurornithoides, Pinacosaurus and Protoceratops. However,
these early finds remained largely ignored under the shadow of the more
famous discoveries of these expeditions. In the beginning of the 1990s
the veteran Argentinean fossil hunter Bonaparte unearthed a new
fragmentary dinosaur from the Santonian Age of the Late Cretaceous of
South America. He named this Alvarezsaurus and despite his lack of
formal training in evolutionary analysis he very perceptively noted the
relationship of this animal with the ornithomimosaurs. Later in the
1990s Perle et al discovered a more complete fossil of this lineage –
Mononykus olecranus from Mongolia. This fossil revealed for the first
time a dramatic feature of this group of dinosaurs – the arm was greatly
shortened, with the digits III and IV being greatly reduced but in
contrast digit II was massively developed into a strong spike-like
structure (in derived theropods with 3-fingered hands the digits I and V
are lost). The arm though short was powerfully built and equipped with
well-develop musculature to ply it as a jabbing device. The discovery of
Mononykus was followed by the discovery of several other forms from
various parts of the world including Shuvuuia, Parvicursor and Kol from
Mongolia, Patagonykus and Achillesaurus from South America, Albertonykus
(which probably is the same or closely related to Marsh’s O.minutus)
from North America and Heptasteornis from Europe.

However, since the discovery of Mononykus there was much
misunderstanding about the phylogenetic position of the alvarezsaurs.In
opposition to the original suggestion of Bonaparte (and in an implicit
sense also of Marsh) that the ornithomimosaurus and alvarezsaurs were
related, Chiappe et al claimed that the alvarezsaurs were birds more
derived than Archaeopteryx. They posited that the alvarezsaurs were
secondarily flightless birds with reduced arms. Another work by Zanno et
al suggested that they were not birds proper but one of the more basal
maniraptorans (i.e. dinosaurs that are closer to birds than to
ornithomimosaurs). Thus, they were claimed by Zanno et al to be just
outside of the clade containing birds, deinonychosaurs, oviraptorosaurs
(we suspect these are secondarily flightless birds) and
scansoriopterygids. But Sereno recovered them as a sister group of
ornithomimosaurs, thus providing first objective support for the older
hypothesis.In most evolutionary problems that depend on use of
morphological information for their resolution highly derived forms can
result in a potentially misleading picture. But the availability of
basal forms can often clear up such issues. It is in this context that
Haplocheirus becomes relevant

Haplocheirus reported by Choinierie et al is a basal alvarezsaur from
the Oxfordian age of the Late Jurassic of Asia. It comes from the
Shishugou formation of the Junggar Basin, which preserves a remarkable
slice of the Asiatic Late Jurassic fauna that includes several lineages
of theropods such as Limusaurus the ceratosaur with reduced limbs
(strangely reminiscent in a general sense of the limbs of the
alvarezsaurs of the late Cretaceous), the crested tyrannosaur Guanlong,
the crested basal tetanuran Monolophosaurus, a gigantic theropod only
known from a tooth, the basal ceratopsian Yinlong, the stegosaur
Jiangjunosaurus, a short-necked small sauropod Bellusaurus, some other
fragmentary sauropods, the fast-running crocodile Junggarsuchus and the
tritylodontid cynodont Bienotheroides. Even Haplocheirus was found
buried atop the skeleton of a crocodile that suggesting it was probably
a victim of a sauropod footprint death trap, similar to those in which
several small theropods from these beds were killed. The discovery of an
alvarezsaur from the late Jurassic greatly increases their temporal
range – the oldest previously confirmed alvarezsaur, Alvarezsaurus, was
from the late Cretaceous (it was certainly not older than the Coniacian
at its lower bound). Phylogenetic analysis clearly supports that
Haplocheirus was a basal alvarezsaur based on some distinct features of
the skull (long basipterygoid process of the basisphenoid bone) and
several features of the upper arm and the femur. Thus it appears that
the alvarezsaurs were part of the great coelurosaurian radiation that
was underway by the middle of the Jurassic at the latest. This explosive
radiation spawned several very recognizable lineages: 1) the
compsognathids; 2) tyrannosaurs; 3) ornithomimosaurs; 4) alvarezsaurs;
5) Ornitholestes; 6) therizinosaurs; 7) oviraptorosaurs; 8)
deinonychosaurs (troodontids+dromaeosaurs); 9) scansoriopterygids; 10)
birds. However, the inter-relationships between them can hardly be
considered as settled. In this regard the authors go on to claim that
their results support a relatively basal maniraptoran position for
alvarezsaurs with them being closer to birds. Of course their
maniraptora is rather inclusive as it includes the compsognathids (in
addition to Ornitholestes) as even more basal lineages. This immediately
smells rather fishy. In the text of the paper they state that their
illustrated phylogenetic hypothesis is only one step (\!) shorter than
the one in which the alvarezsaurs group with ornithomimosaurs. Clearly
the evidence for their maniraptoran alvarezsaurs is rather weak.

Rather examination of their matrix shows that it has many flawed
elements. Reapplying their data to Senter’s matrix after eliminating
these apparently flawed elements suggests that alvarezsaurs are not at
all maniraptorans but closer to the ornithomimosaurs. Further,
Haplocheirus goes a long way in clarifying the position of Nqwebasaurus
a previously enigmatic theropod from the Early Cretaceous
(Berriasian-Valanginian age) of South Africa. When using Senter’s matrix
for a phylogenetic analysis it emerges as the basalmost alvarezsaur or
as a sister taxon of Haplocheirus. Thus, the gap between the late
Cretaceous alvarezsaurs and the Jurassic ones is nicely bridged by
Nqwebasaurus and indicates the dispersal of the more primitive
alvarezsaurid morph in both the Laurasian and Gondwanan realms. It
suggests that ancestral condition of all major coelurosaurs was rather
similar in general terms: 1) Nqwebasaurus/Haplocheirus a representative
of the alvarezsaur-ornithomosaur lineage; 2) Ornitholestes of the
maniraptoran lineage; 3) Coelurus of the tyrannosaur lineage; 4)
Huaxiagnathus of the compsognathids. Further we find no evidence for
Gasosaurus from the middle Jurassic (\~Bathonian) of China to be a basal
coelurosaur; rather it could be an early carcharodontosauroid. Hence the
ancestral coelurosaur was a small predatory animal with well-developed
grasping hands that probably tackled small prey using the arms to deal
with them. This suggests that the hypothesis of Zanno et al that the
maniraptoran+ornithomimosaur clade of coelurosaurs was primitively
herbivorous or omnivorous is not really supported. Holtz claimed that
Rapator, known from a single carpal from Australia was a large
alvarezsaur. Salisbury on the other hand claimed that Rapator is related
to Nqwebasaurus. It is too fragmentary to make any conclusive comment at
all, but given that Nqwebasaurus comes out as a basal alvarezasaur it is
indeed possible that Rapator might belong to this part of the tree.It is
also possible that the tyrannosaurs, ornithomimosaurs and alvarezsaurs
form a basal clade of coelurosaurs, although the support for this is
limited \[Footnote 1\].

What Haplocheirus really contributes to is the better understanding of
the evolution of the enigmatic biology of the alvarezsaurs. The late
Cretaceous alvarezsaurs are tiny to small animals – from .4 to 2 meters
in length with long legs often approaching the arctometatarsalian
condition. This suggests that they were fast runners that probably used
their speed as the main means to evade predators. In almost comical
contrast were their highly shortened forelimbs that were initially
suggested by Chiappe et al as being specialized for digging. However,
this does not at all go well with the inference of their highly
cursorial lifestyle. Longrich was the first suggest a realistic
explanation for the Cretaceous alvarezasaur arms – they were used to jab
at termite galleries in wood and break through. He points out that just
as the mammals such pangolins and anteaters have a strong ulnar lever in
the arm, so do the Cretaceous alvarezsaurs. He noted that the jaws might
contain toothless regions, e.g. in the tip to jaws and suggested that
this might be an adaptation to allow the animal to extend its tongue in
and out to get the insects. He also noted that teeth of the Cretaceous
alvarezsaurs is clearly distinct from that of other theropods in being
simple sharp and lanceolate with a conical structure. This is typical of
modern mammals that might feed on social insects. The long snout of the
alvarezsaurs is also interpreted as being an adaptation to probe insect
galleries just as in the case of the anteater or the pangolin.

Molecular evidence suggests that the termites had diverged within the
cockroaches – the primary split in the cockroaches separated the
polyphagoid cockroaches from the rest. The remaining cockroaches split
up into the blattoid and blaberoid lineages. From the semi-social
blattoid cockroach, resembling the extant Cryptocercus, the termites
appear to have diverged. Studies of the termitologist K. Krishna suggest
that the divergence of the termites proper from the Cryptocercus lineage
had occurred by the Berriasian age of the Early Cretaceous. Evidence for
this comes in the form of indisputable fossil termite, Baissatermes from
Siberia. Subsequently, several termites are seen in the Cretaceous:
Khanitermes from the Aptian of Mongolia, Dharmatermes, Tanytermes,
Proelectrotermes and Mylacrotermes from the Albian of Burma, Meiatermes
from the Barremian of Europe, Mariconitermes, Meiatermes,
Cratomastotermes and Cratokalotermes from Aptian of Brazil and several
poorly studied forms including Mesotermopsis from the Early Cretaceous
of China. These Cretaceous termites bear several features of the extant
basal termites such as the mastotermitids, hodotermitids, termopsids and
kalotermitids but not the advanced mound-building termites. Consistent
with this, much of the evidence from the Cretaceous is of termites that
bore galleries in wood rather than the mound builders. This suggests
that Cretaceous saw a great radiation of the basal lineages of termites
and their global distribution. The termites today can occupy 5-10% of
all animal biomass in the tropics. Though today they are present only at
latitudes lower than 45 in the Cretaceous they probably had wider
spreads due to the warmer climates. Their ability to exploit a
previously untapped enormous carbon resource in the form of cellulose
probably led to their significant contribution to the Mesozoic biomass
in certain regions. So any animal that could exploit the termites was
likely to be ecologically successful. Thus, the Cretaceous alvarezsaur
radiation appears to have been an evolutionary response to the emergence
of eusociality in cockroaches that had happened by the early Cretaceous.
But prior to the Early Cretaceous the absence of such social insects
indicates that the life-style of the alvarezsaurs was necessarily
different – this is what is indicated by Haplocheirus.

All the three fingers of Haplocheirus are clearly well-developed. All
fingers bear claws and the flexor tubercles are well-developed. It also
has well-differentiated teeth on both the jaws – the maxilla has
serrated large teeth anteriorly and smaller ones posteriorly. The
dentary has anterior unserrated sub-conical teeth and posterior recurved
serrated teeth. While the exact nature of this specialization is
unclear, it is apparent that Haplocheirus was not a pure insectivore. A
subset of those features is also present in the basal forms apparently
related to it – Nqwebasaurus and Aniksosaurus, suggesting that in
essence the basal alvarezsaurs were small prey hunters just as all other
basal coelurosaurs. Yet Haplocheirus is a little more derived in having
a prominent olecranon process – not prominent in Nqwebasaurus and not
preserved in Aniksosaurus. The first finger is also already on the way
to the alvarezsaur state. So what was Haplocheirus up to? Perhaps in
addition to hunting small prey that was available on the surface, it was
also spending effort in extracting insects from inside tree trunks. The
extremely long finger III perhaps helped in probing and extracting
insects deep in barks, even as the finger II was used to dig up the
bark. Such a development also appears likely in the case of the
scansoriopterygid dinosaurs. Then as eusociality emerged in cockroaches
and became a major ecological force (the basal cockroaches might have
actually been the prey of basal alvarezsaurs like Haplocheirus) a
lineage of alvarezsaurs probably specialized in exclusively feeding on
them. Thus, the timing of the rise of the classical alvarezsaurs is
predicted to closely correspond to the expansion of the termites in the
early-middle Cretaceous. However, a more primitive lineage of
alvarezsaurs probably remained behind, at least in the Gondwanan
fragments, as small predators. In sense this history of the alvarezsaurs
is reminiscent of the emergence of the highly derived pangolins among
the laurasiatherian clade of predatory mammals – carnivora.

Footnote 1: In 2006 Martinez and Novas described a new theropod basd on
fragmentary remains from the late Cretaceous of Patagonia (\~Cenomanian
age) named Aniksosaurus that they identified as a basal coelurosaur. I
encountered this dinosaur in the book on South American dinosaurs by
Novas and somehow recovered his paper in an obscure journal. The animal
appears to have been a gregarious as at least 5 individuals were
preserved together although in a rather bad shape. The humerus of
Aniksosaurus while damaged has a dominant deltopectoral crest. A robust
humerus with strong development of the crest is reminiscent of the
well-developed crest in both Haplocheirus and Nqwebasaurus. This type of
humerus while seen in some more primitive theropods is not seen in the
ornithomimosaurs or some other basal coelurosaurs so it could be a
derived feature of the alvarezsaurs. The single robust and broad manual
claw of Aniksosaurus is also reminiscent of both Nqwebasaurus and
Haplocheirus. Again the prominent conical lateral condyle of the distal
end of the femur is comparable to Haplocheirus and is likely to be an
alvarezsaur synapomorphy. Thus, Aniksosaurus could be another member of
the basal alvarezsaur radiation. Interestingly, like the tyrannosaurs
Aniksosaurus has a strongly reduced supraacetabular crest.
