---
title: MEMOIRS OF EUROPEAN TRAVEL

---
<div>

[←](memoirs_of_european_travel_i.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Translation of
Writings](translation_of_writings_contents.htm) / [→](addenda.htm)

  

## MEMOIRS OF EUROPEAN TRAVEL

(*Translated from [Bengali](6092_memoirs_of_european_travel_ii.pdf)* )  
  
II

We have an adage among us that one that has a disc-like pattern on the
soles of his feet becomes a vagabond. I fear, I have my soles inscribed
all over with them. And there is not much room for probability, either.
I have tried my best to discover them by scrutinising the soles, but all
to no purpose — the feet have been dreadfully cracked through the
severity of cold, and no discs or anything of the kind could be traced.
However, when there is the tradition, I take it for granted that my
soles are full of those signs. But the results are quite patent — it was
my cherished desire to remain in Paris for some time and study the
French language and civilisation; I left my old friends and
acquaintances and put up with a new friend, a Frenchman of ordinary
means, who knew no English, and my French — well, it was something quite
extraordinary! I had this in mind that the inability to live like a dumb
man would naturally force me to talk French, and I would attain fluency
in that language in no time — but on the contrary I am now on a tour
through Vienna, Turkey, Greece, Egypt, and Jerusalem! Well, who can stem
the course of the inevitable! — And this letter I am writing to you from
the last remaining capital of Mohammedan supremacy — from
Constantinople!

I have three travelling companions — two of them French and the third an
American. The American is Miss MacLeod whom you know very well; the
French male companion is Monsieur Jules Bois, a famous philosopher and
litterateur of France; and the French lady friend is the world-renowned
singer, Mademoiselle Calvé. "Mister" is "Monsieur" in the French
language, and "Miss" is "Mademoiselle" — with a Z-sound. Mademoiselle
Calvé is the foremost singer — opera singer — of the present day. Her
musical performances are so highly appreciated that she has an annual
income of three to four lakhs of rupees, solely from singing. I had
previously been acquainted with her. The foremost actress in the West,
Madame Sarah Bernhardt, and the foremost singer, Calvé, are both of them
of French extraction, and both totally ignorant of English, but they
visit England and America occasionally and earn millions of dollars by
acting and singing. French is the language of the civilised world, the
mark of gentility in the West, and everybody knows it; consequently
these two ladies have neither the leisure nor the inclination to learn
English. Madame Bernhardt is an aged lady; but when she steps on the
stage after dressing, her imitation of the age and sex of the role she
plays is perfect! A girl or a boy — whatever part you want her to play,
she is an exact representation of that. And that wonderful voice! People
here say her voice has the ring of silver strings! Madame Bernhardt has
a special regard for India; she tells me again and again that our
country is "*trés ancien, tres civilisé*" — very ancient and very
civilised. One year she performed a drama touching on India, in which
she set up a whole Indian street-scene on the stage — men, women, and
children, Sadhus and Nagas, and everything — an exact picture of India!
After the performance she told me that for about a month she had visited
every museum and made herself acquainted with the men and women and
their dress, the streets and bathing ghats and everything relating to
India. Madame Bernhardt has a very strong desire to visit India. —
"*C'est mon rave*! — It is the dream of my life", she says. Again, the
Prince of Wales (His late Majesty King Edward VII, the then Prince of
Wales.) has promised to take her over to a tiger and elephant hunting
excursion. But then she said she must spend some two lakhs of rupees if
she went to India! She is of course in no want of money. "*La divine
Sarah*" — the divine Sarah — is her name; how can she want money, she
who never travels but by a special train! That pomp and luxury many a
prince of Europe cannot afford to indulge in! One can only secure a seat
for her performance by paying double the fees, and that a month in
advance! Well, she is not going to suffer want of money! But Sarah
Bernhardt is given to spending lavishly. Her travel to India is
therefore put off for the present.

Mademoiselle Calve will not sing this winter, she will take a rest and
is going to temperate climates like Egypt etc. I am going as her guest.
Calve has not devoted herself to music alone, she is sufficiently
learned and has a great love for philosophical and religious literature.
She was born amidst very poor circumstances; gradually, through her own
genius and undergoing great labour and much hardship, she has now
amassed a large fortune and has become the object of adoration of kings
and potentates!

There are famous lady singers, such as Madame Melba, Madame Emma Ames,
and others; and very distinguished singers, such as Jean de Reszke,
Plancon, and the rest — all of whom earn two or three lakhs of rupees a
year! But with Calvé's art is coupled a unique genius. Extraordinary
beauty, youth, genius, and a celestial voice — all these have conspired
to raise Calvé to the forefront of all singers. But there is no better
teacher than pain and poverty! That extreme penury and pain and hardship
of childhood, a constant struggle against which has won for Calvé this
victory, have engendered a remarkable sympathy and a profound
seriousness in her life. Again, in the West, there are ample
opportunities along with the enterprising spirit. But in our country,
there is a sad dearth of opportunities, even if the spirit of enterprise
be not absent. The Bengali woman may be keen after acquiring education,
but it comes to nought for want of opportunities. And what is there to
learn from in the Bengali language? At best some poor novels and dramas!
Then again, learning is confined at present to a foreign tongue or to
Sanskrit and is only for the chosen few. In these Western countries
there are innumerable books in the mother-tongue; over and above that,
whenever something new comes out in a foreign tongue, it is at once
translated and placed before the public.

Monsieur Jules Bois is a famous writer; he is particularly an adept in
the discovery of historical truths in the different religions and
superstitions. He has written a famous book putting into historical form
the devil-worship, sorcery, necromancy, incantation, and such other
rites that were in vogue in Mediaeval Europe, and the traces of those
that obtain to this day. He is a good poet, and is an advocate of the
Indian Vedantic ideas that have crept into the great French poets, such
as Victor Hugo and Lamartine and others, and the great German poets,
such as Goethe, Schiller, and the rest. The influence of Vedanta on
European poetry and philosophy is very great. Every good poet is a
Vedantin, I find; and whoever writes some philosophical treatise has to
draw upon Vedanta in some shape or other. Only some of them do not care
to admit this indebtedness, and want to establish their complete
originality, as Herbert Spencer and others, for instance. But the
majority do openly acknowledge. And how can they help it — in these days
of telegraphs and railways and newspapers? M. Jules Bois is very modest
and gentle, and though a man of ordinary means, he very cordially
received me as a guest into his house in Paris. Now he is accompanying
us for travel.

We have two other companions on the journey as far as Constantinople —
Père Hyacinthe and his wife. Père, i.e. Father Hyacinthe was a monk of a
strict ascetic section of the Roman Catholic Church. His scholarship,
extraordinary eloquence, and great austerities won for him a high
reputation in France and in the whole Catholic Order. The great poet,
Victor Hugo, used to praise the French style of two men — one of these
was Père Hyacinthe. At forty years of age Père Hyacinthe fell in love
with an American woman and eventually married her. This created a great
sensation, and of course the Catholic Order immediately gave him up.
Discarding his ascetic garb of bare feet and loose-fitting cloak, Père
Hyacinthe took up the hat, coat, and boots of the householder and became
— Monsieur Loyson. I, however, call him by his former name. It is an
old, old tale, and the matter was the talk of the whole continent. The
Protestants received him with honour, but the Catholics began to hate
him. The Pope, in consideration of his attainments, was unwilling to
part with him and asked him to remain a Greek Catholic priest, and not
abandon the Roman Church. (The priests of the Greek Catholic section are
allowed to marry but once, but do not get any high position). Mrs.
Loyson, however, forcibly dragged him out of the Pope's fold. In course
of time they had children and grandchildren; now the very aged Loyson is
going to Jerusalem to try to establish cordial relations among the
Christians and Mussulmans. His wife had perhaps seen many visions that
Loyson might possibly turn out to be a second Martin Luther and
overthrow the Pope's throne — into the Mediterranean. But nothing of the
kind took place; and the only result was, as the French say, that he was
placed between two stools. But Madame Loyson still cherishes her curious
day-dreams! Old Loyson is very affable in speech, modest, and of a
distinctly devotional turn of mind. Whenever he meets me, he holds
pretty long talks about various religions and creeds. But being of a
devotional temperament, he is a little afraid of the Advaita. Madame
Loyson's attitude towards me is, I fear, rather unfavourable. When I
discuss with the old man such topics as renunciation and monasticism
etc., all those long-cherished sentiments wake up in his aged breast,
and his wife most probably smarts all the while. Besides, all French
people, of both sexes, lay the whole blame on the wife; they say, "That
woman has spoilt one of our great ascetic monks!" Madame Loyson is
really in a sorry predicament — specially as they live in Paris, in a
Catholic country. They hate the very sight of a married priest; no
Catholic would ever tolerate the preaching of religion by a man with
family. And Madame Loyson has a bit of animus also. Once she expressed
her dislike of an actress, saying, "It is very bad of you to live with
Mr. So-and-so without marrying him". The actress immediately retorted,
"I am a thousand times better than you. I live with a common man; it may
be, I have not legally married him; whereas you are a great sinner — you
have made such a great monk break his religious vows! If you were so
desperately in love with the monk, why, you might as well live as his
attending maid; but why did you bring ruin on him by marrying him and
thus converting him into a householder?"

However I hear all and keep silent. But old Père Hyacinthe is a really
sweet-natured and peaceful man, he is happy with his wife and family —
and what can the whole French people have to say against this? I think,
everything would be settled if but his wife climbed down a bit. But one
thing I notice, viz. that men and women, in every country, have
different ways of understanding and judging things. Men have one angle
of vision, women another; men argue from one standpoint, women from
another. Men extenuate women and lay the blame on men; while women
exonerate men and heap all the blame on women.

One special benefit I get from the company of these ladies and gentlemen
is that, except the one American lady, no one knows English; talking in
English is wholly eschewed, (It is not etiquette in the West to talk in
company any language but one known to all party.) and consequently
somehow or other I have to talk as well as hear French.

From Paris our friend Maxim has supplied me with letters of introduction
to various places, so that the countries may be properly seen. Maxim is
the inventor of the famous Maxim gun — the gun that sends off a
continuous round of balls and is loaded and discharged automatically
without intermission. Maxim is by birth an American; now he has settled
in England, where he has his gun-factories etc. Maxim is vexed if
anybody alludes too frequently to his guns in his presence and says, "My
friend, have I done nothing else except invent that engine of
destruction?" Maxim is an admirer of China and India and is a good
writer on religion and philosophy etc. Having read my works long since,
he holds me in great — I should say, excessive — admiration. He supplies
guns to all kings and rulers and is well known in every country, though
his particular friend is Li Hung Chang, his special regard is for China
and his devotion, for Confucianism. He is in the habit of writing
occasionally in the newspapers, under Chinese pseudonyms, against the
Christians — about what takes them to China, their real motive, and so
forth. He cannot at all bear the Christian missionaries preaching their
religion in China! His wife also is just like her husband in her regard
for China and hatred of Christianity! Maxim has no issue; he is an old
man, and immensely rich.

The tour programme was as follows — from Paris to Vienna, and thence to
Constantinople, by rail; then by steamer to Athens and Greece, then
across the Mediterranean to Egypt, then Asia Minor, Jerusalem, and so
on. The "Oriental Express" runs daily from Paris to Constantinople, and
is provided with sleeping, sitting, and dining accommodations after the
American model. Though not perfect like the American cars, they are
fairly well furnished. I am to leave Paris by that train on October 24
(1900).

Today is the 23rd October; tomorrow evening I am to take leave of Paris.
This year Paris is a centre of the civilised world, for it is the year
of the Paris Exhibition, and there has been an assemblage of eminent men
and women from all quarters of the globe. The master-minds of all
countries have met today in Paris to spread the glory of their
respective countries by means of their genius. The fortunate man whose
name the bells of this great centre will ring today will at the same
time crown his country also with glory, before the world. And where art
thou, my Motherland, Bengal, in the great capital city swarming with
German, French, English, Italian, and other scholars? Who is there to
utter thy name? Who is there to proclaim thy existence? From among that
white galaxy of geniuses there stepped forth one distinguished youthful
hero to proclaim the name of our Motherland, Bengal — it was the
world-renowned scientist, Dr. (Later, Sir.) J. C. Bose! Alone, the
youthful Bengali physicist, with galvanic quickness, charmed the Western
audience today with his splendid genius; that electric charge infused
pulsations of new life into the half-dead body of the Motherland! At the
top of all physicists today is — Jagadish Chandra Bose, an Indian, a
Bengali! Well done, hero! Whichever countries, Dr. Bose and his
accomplished, ideal wife may visit, everywhere they glorify India — add
fresh laurels to the crown of Bengal. Blessed pair!

And the daily reunion of numbers of distinguished men and women which
Mr. Leggett brought about at an enormous expense in his Parisian
mansion, by inviting them to at-homes — that too ends today.

All types of distinguished personages — poets, philosophers, scientists,
moralists, politicians, singers, professors, painters, artists,
sculptors, musicians, and so on, of both sexes — used to be assembled in
Mr. Leggett's residence, attracted by his hospitality and kindness. That
incessant outflow of words, clear and limpid like a mountainfall, that
expression of sentiments emanating from all sides like sparks of fire,
bewitching music, the magic current of thoughts from master minds coming
into conflict with one another — which used to hold all spellbound,
making them forgetful of time and place — these too shall end.

Everything on earth has an end. Once again I took a round over the Paris
Exhibition today — this accumulated mass of dazzling ideas, like
lightning held steady as it were, this unique assemblage of celestial
panorama on earth!

It has been raining in Paris for the last two or three days. During all
this time the sun who is ever kind to France has held back his
accustomed grace. Perhaps his face has been darkened over with clouds in
disgust to witness the secretly flowing current of sensuality behind
this assemblage of arts and artists, learning and learned folk, or
perhaps he has hid his face under a pall of cloud in grief over the
impending destruction of this illusive heaven of particoloured wood and
canvas.

We too shall be happy to escape. The breaking up of the Exhibition is a
big affair; the streets of this heaven on earth, the Eden-like Paris,
will be filled with knee-deep mud and mortar. With the exception of one
or two main buildings, all the houses and their parts are but a display
of wood and rags and whitewashing — just as the whole world is! And when
they are demolished, the lime-dust flies about and is suffocating; rags
and sand etc. make the streets exceedingly dirty; and, if it rains in
addition, it is an awful mess.

In the evening of October 24 the train left Paris. The night was dark
and nothing could be seen. Monsieur Bois and myself occupied one
compartment — and early went to bed. On awakening from sleep we found we
had crossed the French frontier and entered German territory. I had
already seen Germany thoroughly; but Germany, after France, produces
quite a jarring effect. "On the one hand the moon is setting"
(यात्येकतोऽस्तशिखरं पतिरोषधीनां — From Kalidasa's *Shakuntalâ*.) — the
world-encompassing France is slowly consuming herself in the fire of
contemplated retribution — while on the other hand, centralised, young,
and mighty Germany has begun her upward march above the horizon with
rapid strides. On one side is the artistic workmanship of the
dark-haired, comparatively short-statured, luxurious, highly civilised
French people, to whom art means life; and on the other, the clumsy
daubing, the unskilful manipulation, of tawny-haired, tall, gigantic
German. After Paris there is no other city in the Western world;
everywhere it is an imitation of Paris — or at least an attempt at it.
But in France that art is full of grace and ethereal beauty, while in
Germany, England, and America the imitation is coarse and clumsy. Even
the application of force on the part of the French is beautiful, as it
were, whereas the attempt of the Germans to display beauty even is
terrible. The countenance of French genius, even when frowning in anger,
is beautiful; that of German genius, even when beaming with smiles,
appears frightful, as it were. French civilisation is full of nerve,
like camphor or musk — it volatilises and pervades the room in a moment;
while German civilisation is full of muscle, heavy like lead or mercury
— it remains motionless and inert wherever it lies. The German muscle
can go on striking small blows untiringly, till death; the French have
tender, feminine bodies, but when they do concentrate and strike, it is
a sledge-hammer blow and is irresistible.

The Germans are constructing after the French fashion big houses and
mansions, and placing big statues, equestrian figures, etc. on top of
them, but on seeing a double-storeyed German building one is tempted to
ask — is it a dwelling-house for men, or a stable for elephants and
camels, while one mistakes a five-storeyed French stable for elephants
and horses as a habitation for fairies.

America is inspired by German ideals; hundreds of thousand Germans are
in every town. The language is of course English, but nevertheless
America is being slowly Germanised. Germany is fast multiplying her
population and is exceptionally hardy. Today Germany is the dictator to
all Europe, her place is above all! Long before all other nations,
Germany has given man and woman compulsory education, making illiteracy
punishable by law, and today she is enjoying the fruits of that tree.
The German army is the foremost in reputation, and Germany has vowed to
become foremost in her navy also. German manufacture of commodities has
beaten even England! German merchandise and the Germans themselves are
slowly obtaining a monopoly even in the English colonies. At the behest
of the German Emperor all the nations have ungrudgingly submitted to the
lead of the German Generalissimo in the battle-fields of China!

The whole day the train rushed through Germany, till in the afternoon it
reached the frontiers of Austria, the ancient sphere of German
supremacy, but now an alien territory. There are certain troubles in
travelling through Europe. In every country enormous duties are levied
upon certain things, or some articles of merchandise are the monopoly of
the Government, as for instance, tobacco. Again, in Russia and Turkey,
you are totally forbidden to enter without a royal passport; a passport
you must always have. Besides, in Russia and Turkey, all your books and
papers will be seized; and when on perusal the authorities are satisfied
that there is nothing in them against the Russian or Turkish Government
and religion, then only they will be returned, otherwise they will all
be confiscated. In other countries your tobacco is a source of great
trouble. You must open your chest, and trunk and packages for inspection
whether they contain tobacco etc. or not. And to come to Constantinople
one has to pass through two big States — Germany and Austria, and many
petty ones; the latter had formerly been districts of Turkey, but later
on the independent Christian kings made a common cause and wrested as
many of these Christian districts from Mohammedan hands as they could.
The bite of these tiny ants is much worse than even that of the bigger
ones.

In the evening of October 25 the train reached Vienna, the capital of
Austria. The members of the royal family in Austria and Russia are
styled Archdukes and Archduchesses. Two Archdukes are to get down at
Vienna by this train; and until they have done so the other passengers
are not allowed to get down. So we had to wait. A few officers in laced
uniform and some soldiers with feathered caps were waiting for the
Archdukes, who got down surrounded by them. We too felt relieved and
made haste to get down and have our luggage passed. There were few
passengers, and it did not take us much time to show our luggage and
have it passed. A hotel had already been arranged for, and a man from
the hotel was waiting for us with a carriage. We reached the hotel duly.
It was out of the question to go out for sight-seeing during the night;
so the next morning we started to see the town. In all hotels, and
almost in all the countries of Europe except England and Germany, the
French fashion prevails. They eat twice a day like the Hindus; in the
morning by twelve o'clock, and in the evening by eight. Early in the
morning, that is, about eight or nine, they take a little coffee. Tea is
very little in vogue except in England and Russia. The morning meal is
called in French *déjeuner* — that is, breakfast, and the evening meal
*dîner* — that is, dinner. Tea is very much in use in Russia — it is too
cold, and China is near enough. Chinese tea is excellent, and most of it
goes to Russia. The Russian mode of drinking tea is also analogous to
the Chinese, that is, without mixing milk. Tea or coffee becomes
injurious like poison if you mix milk with it. The real tea-drinking
races, the Chinese, Japanese, Russians, and the inhabitants of Central
Asia, take tea without milk. Similarly, the original coffee-drinking
races, such as the Turks, drink coffee without milk. Only in Russia they
put a slice of lemon and a lump of sugar into the tea. The poor people
place a lump of sugar in the mouth and drink tea over it, and when one
has finished drinking, one passes that lump on to another, who repeats
the process.

Vienna is a small city after the model of Paris. But the Austrians are
German by race. The Austrian Emperor was hitherto the Emperor of almost
the whole of Germany. In the present times, owing to the far-sightedness
of King Wilhelm of Prussia, the wonderful diplomacy of his able
minister, Bismark, and the military genius of General Von Moltke, the
King of Prussia is the Emperor of the whole of Germany barring Austria.
Austria, shorn of her glory and robbed of her power, is somehow
maintaining her ancient name and prestige. The Austrian royal line — the
Hapsburg Dynasty — is the oldest and most aristocratic dynasty in
Europe. It was this Austrian dynasty which hitherto rules Germany as
Emperors — Germany whose princes are seated on the thrones of almost all
the countries of Europe, and whose petty feudatory chiefs even occupy
the thrones of such powerful empires as England and Russia. The desire
for that honour and prestige Austria still cherishes in full, only she
lacks the power. Turkey is called "the sick man" of Europe; then Austria
should be called "the sick dame". Austria belongs to the Catholic sect,
and until recently the Austrian Empire used to be called "the Holy Roman
Empire". Modern Germany has a preponderance of Protestants. The Austrian
Emperor has always been the right-hand man of the Pope, his faithful
follower, and the leader of the Roman Catholic sect. Now the Austrian
Emperor is the only Catholic Ruler in Europe; France, the eldest
daughter of the Catholic Church, is now a Republic, while Spain and
Portugal are downfallen! Italy has given only room enough for the Papal
throne to be established, robbing the Pope's entire splendour and
dominion; between the King of Italy and the Pope of Rome there is no
love lost, they cannot bear each other's sight. Rome, the capital of the
Pope, is now the capital of Italy. The King lives in the Pope's ancient
palace which he has seized, and the ancient Italian kingdom of the Pope
is now confined within the precincts of the Vatican. But the Pope has
still great influence in religious matters — and the chief supporter of
this is Austria. As a result of the struggle against Austria — against
the age-long thraldom of Austria, the ally of the Pope — up rose modern
Italy. Consequently Austria is against Italy — against, because she lost
her. Unfortunately, however, young Italy, under England's misdirection,
set herself to create a powerful army and navy. But where was the money?
So, involved in debt, Italy is on the way to ruin; and to her
misfortune, she brought on herself a fresh trouble by proceeding to
extend her empire in Africa. Defeated by the Abyssinian monarch, she has
sunk down, bereft of glory and prestige. Prussia in the meantime
defeated Austria in a great war and thrust her off to a great distance.
Austria is slowly dying, while Italy has similarly fettered herself by
the misuse of her new life.

The Austrian royal line is still the proudest of all European royal
families. It boasts of being a very ancient and very aristocratic
dynasty. The marriages and other connections of this line are contracted
with the greatest circumspection, and no such relationship can be
established with families that are not Roman Catholic. It was the
glamour of a connection with this line that led to the fall of Napoleon
the Great. Quaintly enough, he took it into his head to marry a daughter
of some noble royal family and found a great dynasty through a
succession of descendents. The hero who, questioned as to his pedigree,
had replied, "I owe the title to my nobility to none — I am to be the
founder of a great dynasty" — that is to say, that he would originate a
powerful dynasty, and that he was not born to glorify himself with the
borrowed plumes of some ancestor — that hero fell into this abyss of
family prestige.

The divorce of the Empress Josephine, the defeat of the Austrian Emperor
in battle and taking his daughter to wife, the marriage of Bonaparte in
great pomp with Marie Louise, the Princess of Austria, the birth of a
son, the installation of the new-born babe as the King of Rome, the fall
of Napoleon, the enmity of his father-in-law, Leipsic, Waterloo, St.
Helena, Empress Marie Louise living in her father's house with her
child, the marriage of Napoleon's royal consort with an ordinary
soldier, the death of his only son, the King of Rome, in the house of
his maternal grandfather — all these are well-known incidents of
history.

Fallen in a comparatively weakened condition, France is now ruminating
on her past glory — nowadays there are very many books on Napoleon.
Dramatists like Sardou are writing many dramas on Napoleon dead and
gone; and actresses like Madame Bernhardt and Réjane are performing
those plays every night before bumper houses. Recently Madame Bernhardt
has created a great attraction in Paris by playing a drama entitled
*L’aiglon* (the Young Eagle).

The young Eagle is the only son of Napoleon, practically interned in his
maternal grandfather's residence, the Palace of Vienna. The Austrian
Emperor's minister, the Machiavellian Metternich, is always careful not
to allow the tales of heroism of his father to enter into the boy's
mind. But a few of Bonaparte's veterans contrived to get themselves
admitted into the boy's service in the Schönbrunn Palace, incognito;
their idea was to somehow take the boy over to France and found the
Bonaparte line by driving out the Bourbons reinstated by the combined
European potentates. The child was the son of a great hero, and very
soon that latent heroism woke up in him to hear the glorious tales of
battle of his father. One day the boy fled from the Schönbrunn Palace
accompanied by the conspirators. But Metternich's keen intellect had
already scented the matter, and he cut off the journey. The son of
Bonaparte was carried back to the Schönbrunn Palace and the Young Eagle,
with his wings tied, as it were, very soon died of a broken heart!

This Schönbrunn Palace is an ordinary palace. Of course, the rooms etc.
are lavishly decorated; in one of them perhaps one meets with only
Chinese workmanship, in another only works of Hindu art, in a third the
productions of some other country, and so on; and the garden attached to
the Palace is very charming indeed. But all the people that now go to
visit this Palace go there with the object of seeing the room where
Bonaparte's son used to lie, or his study, or the room in which he died,
and so forth. Many thoughtless French men and women are interrogating
the guard, which room belonged to "*L’aiglon*", which bed did
"*L’aiglon*" use to occupy, and so on. What silly questions, these! The
Austrians only know that he was the son of Bonaparte, and the relation
was established by forcibly taking their girl in marriage; that hatred
they have not yet forgotten. The Prince was a grandchild of the Emperor,
and homeless, so they could not help giving him a shelter, but they
could give him no such title as "King of Rome"; only, being the grandson
of the Austrian Emperor, he was an Archduke, that was all. It may be
that you French people have now written a book on him, making him the
Young Eagle, and the addition of imaginary settings and the genius of
Madame Bernhardt have created a great interest in the story, but how
should an Austrian guard know that name? Besides, it has been written in
that book that the Austrian Emperor, following the advice of his
minister Metternich, in a way killed Napoleon's son!

Hearing the name "*L’aiglon*", the guard put on a long face and went on
showing the rooms and other things thoroughly disgusted at heart; what
else could he do? — it was too much for him to give up the tips.
Moreover, in countries like Austria etc., the military department is too
poorly paid, they have to live almost on a bare pittance; of course they
are allowed to go back home after a few years' service. The guard's
countenance darkened as an expression of his patriotism, but the hand
instinctively moved towards the tip. The French visitors put some silver
pieces into the guard's hand and returned home talking of "*L’aiglon*"
and abusing Metternich, while the guard shut the doors with a long
salute. In his heart he must have given sweet names to the ancestors of
the whole French people.

The thing most worth seeing in Vienna is the Museum, specially the
Scientific Museum, an institution of great benefit to the student. There
is a fine collection of the skeletons of various species of ancient
extinct animals. In the Art Gallery, paintings by Dutch artists form the
major portion. In the Dutch school, there is very little attempt at
suggestiveness; this school is famous for its exact copy of natural
objects and creatures. One artist has spent years over the drawing of a
basketful of fish, or a lump of flesh, or a tumbler of water — and that
fish, or flesh, or water in the tumbler is wonderful. But the female
figures of the Dutch school look just like athletes.

There is of course German scholarship and German intellectuality in
Vienna, but the causes which helped the gradual decay of Turkey are at
work here also — that is to say, the mixture of various races and
languages. The population of Austria proper speaks German; the people of
Hungary belong to the Tartar stock, and have a different language; while
there are some who are Greek-speaking and are Christians belonging to
the Greek Church. Austria has not the power to fuse together so many
different sects. Hence she has fallen.

In the present times a huge wave of nationalism is sweeping over Europe,
where people speaking the same tongue, professing the same religion, and
belonging to the same race want to unite together. Wherever such union
is being effectively accomplished, there is great power being
manifested; and where this is impossible, death is inevitable. After the
death of the present Austrian Emperor, (Francis Joseph II died in 1916)
Germany will surely try to absorb the German-speaking portion of the
Austrian Empire — and Russia and others are sure to oppose her; so there
is the possibility of a dreadful war. The present Emperor being very
old, that catastrophe may take place very early. The German Emperor is
nowadays an ally of the Sultan of Turkey; and when Germany will attempt
to seize Austrian territory, Turkey, which is Russia's enemy, will
certainly offer some resistance to Russia; so the German Emperor is very
friendly towards Turkey.

Three days in Vienna were sufficient to tire me. To visit Europe after
Paris is like tasting an inferior preparation after a sumptuous feast —
that dress, and style of eating, that same fashion everywhere;
throughout the land you meet with that same black suit, and the same
queer hat — disgusting! Besides, you have clouds above, and this swarm
of people with black hats and black coats below — one feels suffocated,
as it were. All Europe is gradually taking up that same style of dress,
and that same mode of living! It is a law of nature that such are the
symptoms of death! By hundreds of years of drill, our ancestors have so
fashioned us that we all clean our teeth, wash our face, eat our meals,
and do everything in the same way, and the result is that we have
gradually become mere automata; the life has gone out, and we are moving
about, simply like so many machines! Machines never say "yea" or "nay",
never trouble their heads about anything, they move on "in the way their
forefathers have gone", and then rot and die. The Europeans too will
share the same fate! "The course of time is ever changing! If all people
take to the same dress, same food, same manner of talking, and same
everything, gradually they will become like so many machines, will
gradually tread the path their forefathers have trod", and as an
inevitable consequence of that — they will rot and die!

On the 28th October, at 9 p.m., we again took that Orient Express train,
which reached Constantinople on the 30th. These two nights and one day
the train ran through Hungary, Serbia, and Bulgaria. The people of
Hungary are subjects of the Austrian Emperor, whose title, however, is
"Emperor of Austria and King of Hungary". The Hungarians and Turks are
of the same race, akin to the Tibetans. The Hungarians entered Europe
along the north of the Caspian Sea, while the Turks slowly occupied
Europe through the western borders of Persia and through Asia Minor. The
people of Hungary are Christians, and the Turks are Mohammedans, but the
martial spirit characteristic of Tartar blood is noticeable in both. The
Hungarians have fought again and again for separation from Austria and
are now but nominally united. The Austrian Emperor is King of Hungary in
name only. Their capital, Budapest, is a very neat and beautiful city.
The Hungarians are a pleasure-loving race and fond of music, and you
will find Hungarian bands all over Paris.

Serbia, Bulgaria, and the rest were districts of Turkey and have become
practically independent after the Russo-Turkish War; but the Sultan of
Turkey is yet their Emperor; and Serbia and Bulgaria have no right
regarding foreign affairs. There are three civilised nations in Europe —
the French, the Germans, and the English. The rest are almost as badly
off as we are, and the majority of them are so uncivilised that you can
find no race in Asia so degraded. Throughout Serbia and Bulgaria you
find the same mud houses, and people dressed in tattered rags, and heaps
of filth — and I was almost inclined to think I was back to India!
Again, as they are Christians, they must have a number of hogs; and a
single hog will make a place more dirty than two hundred barbarous men
will be able to do. Living in a mud house with mud roof, with tattered
rags on his person, and surrounded by hogs — there you have your Serb or
Bulgarian! After much bloodshed and many wars, they have thrown off the
yoke of Turkey; but along with this they have got a serious disadvantage
— they must construct their army after the European model, otherwise the
existence of not one of them is safe for a day. Of course, sooner or
later they will all one day be absorbed by Russia; but even this two
days' existence is impossible without an army. So they must have
conscription.

In an evil hour, did France suffer defeat from Germany. Through anger
and fear she made every citizen a soldier. Every man must serve for some
time in the army and learn the military science; there is no exemption
for anybody. He must have to live in the barracks for three years and
learn to fight, shouldering his gun, be he a millionaire by birth. The
government will provide for his food and clothing, and the salary will
be a centime (one pice) a day. After this he must be always ready for
active service for two years at his home; and another fifteen years he
must be ready to present himself for service at the first call. Germany
set a lion to fury, so she too had to be ready. In other countries also
conscription has been introduced in mutual dread of one another — so
throughout Europe, excepting only England. England, being an island, is
continually strengthening her navy, but who knows if the lessons of the
Boer War will not force her to introduce conscription. Russia has the
largest population of all, so she can amass the biggest army in Europe.
Now, the titular states, like Serbia and Bulgaria, which the European
Powers are creating by dismembering Turkey — they, too, as soon as they
are born, must have up-to-date trained and well-equipped armies and guns
etc. But ultimately who is to supply the funds? Consequently the
peasants have had to put on tattered rags — while in the towns you will
find soldiers dressed in gorgeous uniforms. Throughout Europe there is a
craze for soldiers — soldiers everywhere. Still, liberty is one thing
and slavery another; even best work loses its charm if one is forced to
do it by another. Without the idea of personal responsibility, no one
can achieve anything great. Freedom with but one meal a day and tattered
rags on is a million times better than slavery in gold chains. A slave
suffers the miseries of hell both here and hereafter. The people of
Europe joke about the Serbs and Bulgarians etc., and taunt them with
their mistakes and shortcomings. But can they attain proficiency all in
a day, after so many years of servitude? Mistakes they are bound to
commit — ay, by the hundreds — but they will learn through these
mistakes and set them right when they have learnt. Give him
responsibility and the weakest man will become strong, and the ignorant
man sagacious.

The train is traversing Hungary, Rumania, and other countries. Among the
races that inhabit the moribund Austrian Empire, the Hungarians yet
possess vitality. All the races of Europe, except one or two small ones,
belong to the great stock which European scholars term the Indo-European
or Aryan race. The Hungarians are among the few races which do not speak
a Sanskritic language. The Hungarians and Turks, as already stated,
belong to the same race. In comparatively modern times this very
powerful race established their sovereignty in Asia and Europe. The
country now called Turkistan, lying to the north of the Western
Himalayas and the Hindukush range, was the original home of the Turks.
The Turkish name for that country is Chagwoi. The Mogul dynasty of
Delhi, the present Persian royal line, the dynasty of the Turkish Sultan
of Constantinople, and the Hungarians have all gradually extended their
dominion from that country, beginning with India, and pushing right up
to Europe, and even today these dynasties style themselves as Chagwois
and speak a common language. Of course these Turks were uncivilised ages
ago, and used to roam with herds of sheep, horses, and cattle, taking
their wives and children and every earthly possession with them, and
encamp for some time wherever they could find enough pasture for their
beasts. And when grass and water ran short there, they used to remove
somewhere else. Even now many families of this race lead nomadic lives
in this way in Central Asia. They have got a perfect similarity with the
races of Central Asia as regards language, but some difference in point
of physiognomy. The Turk's face resembles that of the Mongolian in the
shape of the head and in the prominence of the cheek-bone, but the
Turk's nose is not flat, but rather long, and the eyes are straight and
large, though the space between the eyes of comparatively wide, as with
the Mongolians. It appears that from a long time past Aryan and Semitic
blood has found its way into this Turkish race. From time immemorial the
Turks have been exceedingly fond of war. And the mixture with them of
Sanskrit-speaking races and the people of Kandahar and Persia has
produced the war-loving races such as the Afghans, Khiljis, Hazaras,
Barakhais, Usufjais, etc., to whom war is a passion and who have
frequently oppressed India.

In very ancient times this Turkish race repeatedly conquered the western
provinces of India and founded extensive kingdoms. They were Buddhists,
or would turn Buddhists after occupying Indian territory. In the ancient
history of Kashmir there is mention of these famous Turkish Emperors,
Hushka, Yushka, and Kanishka. It was this Kanishka who founded the
Northern school of Buddhism called the Mahâyâna. Long after, the
majority of them took to Mohammedanism and completely devastated the
chief Buddhistic seats of Central Asia such as Kandahar and Kabul.
Before their conversion to Mohammedanism they used to imbibe the
learning and culture of the countries they conquered, and by
assimilating the culture of other countries would try to propagate
civilisation. But ever since they became Mohammedans, they have only the
instinct for war left in them; they have not got the least vestige of
learning and culture; on the contrary, the countries that come under
their sway gradually have their civilisation extinguished. In many
places of modern Afghanistan and Kandahar etc., there yet exist
wonderful Stupas, monasteries, temples and gigantic statues built by
their Buddhistic ancestors. As a result of Turkish admixture and their
conversion to Mohammedanism, those temples etc. are almost in ruins, and
the present Afghans and allied races have grown so uncivilised and
illiterate that far from imitating those ancient works of architecture,
they believe them to be the creation of supernatural spirits like the
Jinn etc., and are firmly convinced that such great undertakings are
beyond the power of man to accomplish. The principal cause of the
present degradation of Persia is that the royal line belongs to the
powerful, uncivilised Turkish stock, whereas the subjects are the
descendants of the highly civilised ancient Persians, who were Aryans.
In this way the Empire of Constantinople — the last political arena of
the Greeks and Romans, the descendants of civilised Aryans — has been
ruined under the blasting feet of powerful, barbarous Turkey. The Mogul
Emperors of India were the only exceptions to this rule; perhaps that
was due to an admixture of Hindu ideas and Hindu blood. In the
chronicles of Rajput bards and minstrels all the Mohammedan dynasties
who conquered India are styled as Turks. This is a very correct
appellation, for, or whatever races the conquering Mohammedan armies
might be made up, the leadership was always vested in the Turks alone.

What is called the Mohammedan invasion, conquest, or colonisation of
India means only this that, under the leadership of Mohammedan Turks who
were renegades from Buddhism, those sections of the Hindu race who
continued in the faith of their ancestors were repeatedly conquered by
the other section of that very race who also were renegades from
Buddhism or the Vedic religion and served under the Turks, having been
forcibly converted to Mohammedanism by their superior strength. Of
course, the language of the Turks has, like their physiognomy, been
considerably mixed up; specially those sections that have gone farthest
from their native place Chagwoi have got the most hybrid form of
language. This year the Shah of Persia visited the Paris Exhibition and
returned to his country by rail *via* Constantinople. Despite the
immense difference in time and place, the Sultan and the Shah talked
with each other in their ancient Turkish mother tongue. But the Sultan's
Turkish was mixed up with Persian, Arabic, and a few Greek words, while
that of the Shah was comparatively pure.

In ancient times these Chagwoi Turks were divided into two sections; one
was called the "white sheep", and the other, "black sheep". But these
sections started from their birthplace on the north of Kashmir, tending
their flocks of sheep and ravaging countries, till they reached the
shore of the Caspian Sea. The "white sheep" penetrated into Europe along
the north of the Caspian Sea and founded the Kingdom of Hungary, seizing
a fragment of the Roman Empire then almost in ruins, while the "black
sheep", advancing along the south of the Caspian Sea, gradually occupied
the western portion of Persia and, crossing the Caucasus, by degrees
made themselves masters of Arabian territory such as Asia Minor and so
forth; gradually they seized the throne of the Caliph, and bit by bit
annexed the small remnant of the western Roman Empire. In very remote
ages these Turks were great snake-worshippers. Most probably it was
these dynasties whom the ancient Hindus used to designate as Nagas and
Takshakas. Later on they became Buddhists; and afterwards they very
often used to embrace the religion of any particular country they might
conquer at any particular time. In comparatively recent times, of the
two sections we are speaking about, the "white sheep" conquered the
Christians and became converts to Christianity, while the "black sheep"
conquered the Mohammedans and adopted their religion. But in their
Christianity or Mohammedanism one may even now trace on research the
strata of serpent-worship and of Buddhism.

The Hungarians, though Turks by race and language, are Christians —
Roman Catholics — in religion. In the past, religious fanaticism had no
respect for any tie — neither the tie of language, nor that of blood,
nor that of country. The Hungarians are ever the deadly enemies of
Turkey; and but for the Hungarians' aid Christian states, such as
Austria etc., would not have been able to maintain their existence on
many an occasion. In modern times, owing to the spread of education and
the discovery of Linguistics and Ethnology, people are being more
attracted to the kinship of language and blood, while religious
solidarity is gradually slackening. So, among the educated Hungarians
and Turks, there is growing up a feeling of racial unity. Though a part
of the Austrian Empire, Hungary has repeatedly tried to cut off from
her. The result of many revolutions and rebellions has been that Hungary
is now only nominally a province of the Austrian Empire, but practically
independent in all respects. The Austrian Emperor is styled "the Emperor
of Austria and King of Hungary". Hungary manages all her internal
affairs independently of Austria and in these the subjects have full
power. The Austrian Emperor continues to be a titular leader here, but
even this bit of relation, it appears, will not last long. Skill in war,
magnanimity and other characteristic virtues of the Turkish race are
sufficiently present in the Hungarian also. Besides, not being converted
to Mohammedanism they do not consider such heavenly arts as music etc.
as the devil's snare, and consequently the Hungarians are great adepts
in music and are renowned for this all over Europe.

Formerly I had the notion that people of cold climates did not take hot
chillies, which was merely a bad habit of warm climate people. But the
habit of taking chillies, which we observed to begin with Hungary and
which reached its climax in Rumania and Bulgaria etc., appeared to me to
beat even your South Indians.

</div>
