---
title: 'MEMOIRS OF EUROPEAN TRAVEL

  ADDENDA'

---
<div>

[←](memoirs_of_european_travel_ii.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Translation of
Writings](translation_of_writings_contents.htm)
/ [→](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures/notes_of_class_talks/on_art.htm)

  

## MEMOIRS OF EUROPEAN TRAVEL ADDENDA

(These interesting jottings were found among Swamiji's papers — Ed.)  
(*Translated from [Bengali](6108_addenda.pdf)* )

The first view of Constantinople we had from the train. It is an ancient
city, with big drains running across the walls, narrow and crooked lanes
full of dirt, and wooden houses, etc., but in them there is a certain
beauty owing to their novelty. At the station we had great trouble over
our books. Mademoiselle Calvé and Jules Bois tried much, in French, to
reason with the octroi officers, which gradually led to a quarrel
between the parties. The head of the officers was a Turk, and his dinner
was ready; so the quarrel ended without further complications. They
returned all the books with the exception of two which they held back.
They promised to send them to the hotel immediately, which they never
did. We went round the town and bazar of Stamboul or Constantinople.
Beyond the Pont or creek is the Pera or foreigners' quarters, hotels,
etc., whence we got into a carriage, saw the town, and then took some
rest. In the evening we went to visit Woods Pasha, and the next day
started on an excursion along the Bosphorus in a boat. It was extremely
cold and there was a strong wind. So I and Miss MacLeod got down at the
first station. It was decided that we would cross over to Scutari and
see Pére Hyacinthe. Not knowing the language we engaged a boat by signs
merely, crossed over, and hired a carriage. On the way we saw the seat
of a Sufi Fakir. These Fakirs cure people's diseases, which they do in
the following manner. First they read a portion of their scriptures,
moving their body backward and forward; then they begin to dance and
gradually get a sort of inspiration, after which they heal the disease
by treading on the patient's body.

We had a long talk with Père Hyacinthe about the American Colleges,
after which we went to an Arab shop where we met a Turkish student. Then
we returned from Scutari. — We had found out a boat, but it failed to
reach its exact destination. However, we took a tram from the place
where we were landed and returned to our quarters at the hotel at
Stamboul. The Museum at Stamboul is situated where the ancient harem of
the Greek Emperors once stood. We saw some remarkable sarcophagi and
other things, and had a charming view of the city from above Topkhana. I
enjoyed taking fried chick peas here after such a long time, and had
spiced rice and some other dishes, prepared in the Turkish fashion.
After visiting the cemetery of Scutari we went to see the ancient walls.
Within the walls was the prison — a dreadful place. Next we met Woods
Pasha and started for the Bosphorus. We had our dinner with the French
chargé d'affaires and met a Greek Pasha and an Albanian gentleman. The
Police have prohibited Père Hyacinthe's lectures; so I too cannot
lecture. We saw Mr. Devanmall and Chobeji — a Gujarâti Brahmin. There
are a good many Indians here — Hindustanis, Mussalmans, etc. We had a
talk on Turkish Philosophy and heard of Noor Bey, whose grandfather was
a Frenchman. They say he is as handsome as a Kashmari. The women here
have got no purdah system and are very free. Prostitution is chiefly a
Mohammedan practice. We heard of Kurd Pasha and the massacre of
Armenians. The Armenians have really no country of their own, and those
countries which they inhabit have generally a preponderating Mohammedan
population. A particular tract called Armenia is unknown. The present
Sultan is constructing a Hamidian cavalry out of the Kurds who will be
trained in the manner of the Cossacks and they will be exempted from
conscription.

The Sultan called the Armenian and Greek Patriarchs and proposed to them
conscription as an alternative for payment of taxes. They might thus
serve to protect their motherland. They replied that if they went as
soldiers to fight and died by the side of the Mohammedans, there would
be some confusion about the interment of Christian soldiers. The
Sultan's rejoinder to this was that it might be remedied by providing
for both Mohammedan and Christian priests in each regiment, who would
conduct the funeral service together when in the exigencies of battle
the dead bodies of Christian and Mohammedan soldiers would have to be
buried in a heap all together, and there could possibly be no harm if
the souls of men of one religion heard in addition the funeral services
meant for those of the other religion. But the Christians did not agree
— so they continue to pay taxes. The surest reason of their not
acquiescing in the proposal was their fear lest by living with the
Mohammedans they might turn Mohammedan wholesale. The present Sultan of
Stamboul is a very hard-working man and he personally supervises
everything, including even the arrangement of amusements, such as
theatrical performances etc., in the palace. His predecessor, Murad, was
really a most unfit man, but the present Sultan is very intelligent. The
amount of improvement he has made in the condition of the State in which
he found it at his accession is simply wonderful. The Parliamentary
system will not be successful in this country.

At 10 in the morning we left Constantinople, passing a night and a day
on the sea, which was perfectly placid. By degrees we reached the Golden
Horn and the Sea of Marmora. In one of the islands of the Marmora we saw
a monastery of the Greek religion. Formerly there was ample opportunity
for religious education here, for it was situated between Asia on one
side and Europe on the other. While out in the morning on a visit of the
Mediterranean Archipelago we came across Professor Liper, whose
acquaintance I had already made in the Pachiappa College at Madras. In
one of the islands we came upon the ruins of a temple, which had
probably been dedicated to Neptune, judging from its position on the
sea-shore. In the evening we reached Athens, and after passing a whole
night under quarantine we obtained permission for landing in the
morning. Port Peiraeus is a small town, but very beautiful, having a
European air about it in all respects, except that one meets now and
then with one or two Greeks dressed in gowns. From there we drove five
miles to have a look at the ancient walls of Athens which used to
connect the city with the port. Then we went through the town; the
Acropolis, the hotels, houses, and streets, and all were very neat and
clean. The palace is a small one. The same day, again, we climbed the
hillock and had a view of the Acropolis, the temple of the Wingless
Victory, and the Parthenon, etc. The temple is made of white marble.
Some standing remains of columns also we saw. The next day we again went
to see these with Mademoiselle Melcarvi, who explained to us various
historical facts relating thereto. On the second day we visited the
temple of Olympian Zeus, Theatre Dionysius etc., as far as the
sea-shore. The third day we set out for Eleusis, which was the chief
religious seat of the Greeks. Here it was that the famous Eleusinian
Mysteries used to be played. The ancient theatre of this place has been
built anew by a rich Greek. The Olympian games too have been revived in
the present times. They are held at a place near Sparta, the Americans
carrying off the palm in them in many respects. But the Greeks won in
the race from that place to this theatre of Athens. This year they gave
undisputed proof of this trait of theirs in a competition with the Turks
also. At 10 a.m. on the fourth day we got on board the Russian steamer,
*Czar*, bound for Egypt. After reaching the dock we came to learn that
the steamer was to start at 4 a.m. — perhaps we were too early or there
would be some extra delay in loading the cargo. So, having no other
alternative, we went round and made a cursory acquaintance with the
sculpture of Ageladas and his three pupils, Phidias, Myron, and
Polycletus, who had flourished between 576 B.C. and 486 B.C. Even here
we began to feel the great heat. In a Russian ship the first class is
over the screw, and the rest is only deck — full of passengers, and
cattle, and sheep. Besides, no ice was available in this steamer.

From a visit to the Louvre Museum in Paris I came to understand the
three stages of Greek art. First, there was the Mycenoean art, then
Greek art proper. The Achaean kingdom had spread its sway over the
neighbouring islands and also mastered all the arts that flourished
there, being imported from Asia. Thus did art first make its appearance
in Greece. From the prehistoric times up to 776 B.C. was the age of the
Mycenoean art. This art principally engaged itself in merely copying
Asiatic art. Then from 776 B.C. to 146 B.C. was the age of Hellenic or
true Greek art. After the destruction of the Achaean Empire by the
Dorian race, the Greeks living on the continent and in the Archipelago
founded many colonies in Asia. This led to a close conflict between them
and Babylon and Egypt, which first gave rise to Greek art. This art in
course of time gave up its Asiatic tinge and applied itself to an exact
imitation of nature. The difference between Greek art and the art of
other countries consists in this, that the former faithfully delineates
the living phenomena of natural life.

From 776 B.C. to 475 B.C. is the age of Archaic Greek art. The figures
are yet stiff — not lifelike. The lips are slightly parted, as if always
in smiles. In this respect they resemble the works of Egyptian artists.
All the statues stand erect on their legs — quite stiff. The hair and
beard etc. and all carved in regular lines and the clothes in the
statues are all wrapped close round the body, in a jumble — not like
flowing dress.

Next to Archaic Greek art comes the age of Classic Greek art — from 475
B.C. to 323 B.C., that is to say, from the hegemony of Athens up to the
death of Alexander the Great. Peloponnesus and Attica were the states
where the art of this period flourished most. Athens was the chief city
of Attica. A learned French art critic has written, "(Classic) Greek art
at its highest development freed itself completely from the fetters of
all established canons and became independent. It then recognised the
art regulations of no country, nor guided itself according to them. The
more we study the fifth century B.C., so brilliant in its art
development — during which period all the perfect specimens of sculpture
were turned out — the more is the idea brought home to our mind that
Greek art owed its life and vigour to its cutting loose from the pale of
stereotyped rules". This Classic Greek art had two schools — first, the
Attic, and second, the Peloponnesian. In the Attic school, again, there
were two different types — the first was the outcome of the genius of
the gifted sculptor, Phidias, which a French scholar has described in
the following terms: "A marvel of perfection in beauty and a glorious
specimen of pure and sublime ideas, which will never lose their hold
upon the human mind". The masters in the second type of the Attic school
were Scopas and Praxiteles. The work of this school was to completely
divorce art from religion and keep it restricted to the delineation of
merely human life.

The chief exponents of the second or Peloponnesian school of Classic
Greek art were Polycletus and Lysippus. One of these was born in the
fifth century B.C., and the other in the fourth century B.C. They
chiefly aimed at laying down the rule that the proportion of the human
body must be faithfully reproduced in art.

From 323 B.C. to 146 B.C., that is, from the death of Alexander to the
conquest of Attica by the Romans, is the period of decadence in Greek
art. One notices in the Greek art of this period an undue attention to
gorgeous embellishments, and an attempt to make the statues unusually
large in bulk. Then at the time of the Roman occupation of Greece, Greek
art contented itself merely by copying the works of previous artists of
that country; and the only novelty there was, consisted in reproducing
exactly the face of some particular individual.

</div>
