+++
title = "Some personal reflections on Carl Gauss, Bernhard Riemann and associated matters"

+++
The biochemist Albert Szent-Györgyi had famously remarked that as he
successively, journeyed for a better understanding of life from cell
biology, to physiology, to pharmacology, to bacteriology, to
biochemistry, to physical chemistry to quantum mechanics he lost life
between his fingers. Having known this quote early, we followed a
different approach – we tried to recapitulate the deep insights from
each realm of science on their own terms, to the extant our intellect
allowed, and let them reflect in our mind off those gained from other
sciences. In the first phase of our intellectual development, outside of
our primary focus on the foundations of biology, our main interests lay
in lessons that could be learned from geometry. In that phase we had a
spotty interest in particular areas of physics, namely optics and
electromagnetism, primarily from an experimental viewpoint. We played
with lenses and electromagnets, and made telescopes. We also had
considerable interest in various aspects of observational astronomy in
this phase. This together with our growing urge to understand the
foundations of biochemistry, which was within the primary area of our
interests, made us visit the foundations of physics with renewed vigor
aided by the testosterone-fueled improvements in our modest mathematical
abilities. This marked the beginnings of the second phase of our
intellectual development. If in first phase marveled at the splendors of
the great minds of Newton, John Herschel, Carl Gauss and Leonhard Euler,
in the second phase the opposing figures of Bernhard Riemann and Hermann
von Helmholtz among others became the leading lights.

Albert Einstein made a rather profound remark in his Herbert Spencer
lecture (Which I would generally recommend anyone with interest to
read):  
“*If then it is the case that the axiomatic basis of theoretical physics
cannot be an inference from experience, but must be free invention, have
we any right to hope that we shall find the correct way? Still more does
this correct approach exist at all, save in our imagination? Have we any
right to hope that experience will guide us aright, when there are
theories (like classical mechanics) which agree with experience to a
very great extent, even without comprehending the subject in its depths?
To this I answer with complete assurance, that in my opinion there is
the correct path and, moreover, that it is in our power to find it. Our
experience up to date justifies us in feeling sure that in Nature is
actualized the ideal of mathematical simplicity. It is my conviction
that pure mathematical construction enables us to discover the concepts
and the laws connecting them, which give us the key to the understanding
of the phenomena of Nature. Experience can of course guide us in our
choice of serviceable mathematical concepts; it cannot possibly be the
source from which they are derived; experience of course remains the
sole criterion of the serviceability of a mathematical construction for
physics, but the truly creative principle resides in mathematics. In a
certain sense, therefore, I hold it to be true that pure thought is
competent to comprehend the real, as the ancients dreamed.*

*To justify this confidence of mine, I must necessarily avail myself of
mathematical concepts. The physical world is represented as a
four-dimensional continuum. If in this I adopt a Riemannian metric, and
look for the simplest laws which such a metric can satisfy, I arrive at
the relativistic gravitation-theory of empty space. If I adopt in this
space a vector-field, or in other words, the antisymmetrical
tensor-field derived from it, and if I look for the simplest laws which
such a field can satisfy, I arrive at the Maxwell equations for free
space.*”

There are two things that I would point to here: 1) When Einstein talks
about the “dream of the ancients” one may see it as an allusion to
physics emerging as some kind of real world reflection of a purely
“Platonic” mathematical realm – something consonant with what the old
ārya-s and yavana-s thought. 2) For his formulation it is not the
Euclidean space that provides the underlying mathematics but this
specific non-Euclidean one of Bernhard Riemann, which was the
culmination of the attempt to fathom the great mystery ensuing from the
fifth postulate of Euclidean geometry.

Now, if you were to take 100 random people on a street and ask them if
they knew of Albert Einstein or Bernhard Riemann, it is very probable
that significantly more know of the former than the latter. Yet, the
crown jewel of the former’s achievements might not have come about had
it not been for Riemann. In this context, the famous story of the
habilitation lecture of Bernhard Riemann is one that remains ever-fresh
to me from the time I first read about it in a musty library of a famous
scientific institute in India: Gauss was in what were the last years of
his life. Some his friends had already died and he himself felt a
decline in his health. Of his old friends only the pitāmaha-like
Alexander von Humboldt, the great explorer-scientist, stayed in regular
touch. In this state he was called upon to adjudge the habilitation
dissertation of his student Riemann. Riemann had prepared three topics
for the final dissertation lecture. Two were on physics relating to
electricity. He had deployed the device of partial differential
equations for developing a mathematical theory of electrical resistance
building on the experimental work of Ohm, Weber and the young Gustav
Kirchhoff. The last one, which he had prepared least, was on
non-Euclidean geometry titled: “On the Hypotheses Which Lie at the
Foundations of Geometry”. Gauss chose that one as the topic for his
talk. Riemann even expressed misgivings to his brother that it was the
lecture he had least prepared. Yet he went ahead and gave it, with the
old fox (the fox: was what some German students called Gauss for not
showing his rough work and producing his magnificent results as though
from thin air) listening from the back of the audience. Indeed, the only
one in the audience who could fathom the full depth and implications of
the remarkable mathematics being presented there was the old fox. On the
way out of the seminar Gauss remarked to his collaborator, the physicist
Wilhelm Weber, also one of Riemann’s teachers, that it was one the
highest works he had seen presented. The great man who was not given to
praise, leave alone the hyperbole, upon approving Riemann’s dissertation
for his habilitation remarked that he was “*a creative, active, truly
mathematical mind and \[had\] a gloriously fertile imagination.*” An
year later Gauss was dead but the foundations of new geometries beyond
that of Euclid, which Gauss himself was the pioneer of, had entered the
mainstream of the world of ideas. This moment was thus like what the
Hindu might see as the transition between Rāmo Bhārgava and Rāmo
Dāśarathi. Riemann was truly a fitting successor of Gauss and might
have even gone on to be a second Gauss or Euler had it not been for his
relatively early death which followed few years after that of Gauss at
the age of 39.

In that the life of Riemann (and if one is interested there is detailed
biography by Detlef Laugwitz of the man but does not say much of his
work in physics) was one of those tragic tales of the type that touches
you somewhere deep within. There parallels with two other mathematicians
of the highest class who died young: Niels Abel (aged 26) and Srinivasa
Ramanujan (aged 32). The parallels to Srinivasa Ramanujan are most
poignant to us (down to the famed zeta function) but there are also
differences that I attribute to the larger Hindu tragedy. Even as
Riemann was publishing his most important work the Hindus were in the
midst of a conflict that was to culminate in a catastrophic defeat and
90 further years of barbarous mleccha rule. It was after this that in
the Kumbhaghoṇa shorn of its old brahma luster that Ramanujan operated.
While he might have had various peers who could have at least resonated
a bit with him, the atmosphere of the Hindu world was one of isolation.
While Ramanujan had to make do with just Carr’s notes, Riemann could
access at the age of 14 the 900 page textbook on the number theory by
the well-known French mathematician Legendre which he finished off in 6
days\! Riemann had met Gauss early in his life and had access to the
intellectual inputs of peers/teachers like Dirichlet (himself student of
Fourier of transform fame, Ohm and Gauss), the Weber brothers, Jacobi,
Steiner, Eisenstein, and Listing, each a mahārathin in himself and a
larger intellectual sphere that included the atirathin-s like von
Helmholtz and Kirchhoff. This gave him exposure to a wide range of
issues at the cutting edge of science that allowed a more complete
development of his thought and interests in terms of application of
mathematics to scientific problems. We believe that had Ramanujan been
in a comparable system he too might have shone forth across multiple
fields of inquiry. However, such has not come to fruit in the modern
Hindu world and the few beginnings that might have been made, like that
of the savant Ashutosh Mukherjee, eventually came to naught.

With our limited abilities we were able to only get a limited glimpse of
Riemann, even as with Ramanujan, but those glimpses were enough to bring
home to us the height of the pinnacle on which he stood. Our first
Riemannian encounter came from the remarkable zeta function – After a
major curricular examination we had the much needed free-time to explore
more interesting things in a carefree way – something that only the
sheltered days of youth allow you to do. We fought our way through
various functions from a book of our father’s till we arrived at the
zeta. When for the first time we wrote code to visualize in the complex
plane it was a divine experience – especially to see those zeroes dot
the critical line and to use them to recapitulate the prime
distribution. We then again briefly encountered him in the study of
[continuous but undifferentiable
functions](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/03/26/some-visions-of-infinity-from-the-past-and-our-times/)
which lay at the foundation of fractal geometry.

The second encounter was even harder to fathom. Our father had informed
us in our childhood of the existence of non-Euclidean geometries while
reading out to us the biography of Gauss. But in his usual style after
providing the very basic sketch of these alternative geometries had said
it was up to us whether we got to it or not. We were always enthralled
and puzzled by the the famed bhujā-koṭi-karṇa-nyāya (attributed in the
west to yavana Pythagoras), which from early on we understood to be the
pillar of our perception of the world as we saw it. No wonder it was
enshrined in the śrauta altars. It is the equivalent of the fifth
postulate of Euclid which defines the geometry of everyday life. Though
Euclid came to be seen as infallible in the minds of mathematical
practitioners and philosophers for ages there was discomfort with the
parallel postulate or the fifth postulate concerning parallel lines. The
great yavana-sarvajña Posidonius (among other things an early critic of
ekarākṣasonmāda) was the first to suspect that the fifth postulate was
not an axiom as the rest of the postulates but merely a theorem that
could be proven based on the rest. We hear from Proclus that Ptolemy
next tried to prove the postulate based on the remaining axioms but
Proclus showed that Ptolemy had ended up making a hidden assumption
which was same as the fifth postulate. Proclus himself attempted proving
it by developing a new statement that given a line and a point outside
it only one line could be drawn through that point parallel to the
original one. However, this was also circular in that the above
statement was no different from the original statement of the fifth
postulate by Euclid. Nevertheless, this formulation of Proclus presented
the postulate in a form that was to play an important role in
understanding the fundamental issues concerning the fifth postulate.
More than a millennium later this version of Proclus was rediscovered by
the Scottish mathematician Playfair. These problems of circularity in
the yavana attempts all became clear when the Platonist [Thabit ibn
Kurra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/08/28/the-makings-of-islamic-science/)
of Harran investigated these proofs, but the quest for proof did not
stop and failed attempts piled with the undying hope that the fifth
postulate would be proved as a theorem. Among the last of these failed
attempts was that of the famous French mathematician Legendre who
thought he had finally proved it.

It was then that Gauss in his teens, who by then had already made great
strides in geometry beyond what anyone had done in the last 1500 years,
took on the challenge of proving the fifth postulate. He initially
approached it like the rest before him thinking it was a theorem that
could be proved. In his university days he was joined in this quest by
his then friend Wolfgang Bolyai, who too was obsessed with the proof.
But few years after his famous Disquisitiones arithmeticae had been
written the revolutionary idea dawned on Gauss that there was no
question of proving the fifth postulate. He began by taking the first
alternative to Proclus’ formulation that not just one parallel line
could be drawn to a given line from a point outside it but more than one
parallel line could be drawn. Using this as an axiom replacing the
Euclid’s fifth he discovered that, most remarkably, there was no
inconsistency at all but a new geometry, like the world of Viśvāmitra,
independent of that based on Euclid’s axiom arose from it. The ghost of
Posidonius and quest of Proclus had finally been brought to rest. Gauss,
however, chose not to publish it – in all likelihood because of the
finality of Euclidean geometry having been impressed on the European
world by thinkers like Kant. Importantly, by his twenties Gauss was
already a celebrity and he stood to lose face in a big way if there
happened to be some misapprehension on his part in dethroning the unique
position of Euclidean geometry. He also felt that other mathematicians
were not mature enough to understand the profoundness of what he had
uncovered. So other than discussing it in a letter to his acquaintance
Taurinus, a German lawyer who claimed to have proven the fifth postulate
in 1814 CE, he did not publish it.

Gauss instead kept working and publishing on other more tangible issues
that in a deep way related to this problem. In addition to his role as a
professor of mathematics, he also doubled as a surveyor of the
Hannoverian kingdom. In course of wading through marshes while
conducting the geographical survey of the land he contemplated on the
measurement of curvature of a curve. Earlier Leonhard Euler had provided
a formulation using the osculating circle to capture the curvature of a
curve at every point – the osculating circle to a curve has the same
curvature as the curve at a given point. We studied this concept in our
youth after our father introduced us to the [curves known as
evolutes](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2016/06/06/ovals-drops-tops-eights-pears-and-the-like/).
The centers of the osculating circles of a given curve lie on another
curve known as its evolute which can be constructed as the envelop of
normals of a given curve. Thus, by drawing the circle with center on
this envelop and touching the curve at the point of its intersection
with the corresponding normal we get the osculating circle. Gauss
further developed this concept for a 3-dimensional curve like the
surface of the earth (an ellipsoid) that he was measuring. For such a
surface one can conceive a tangent plane at any given point and the
vector perpendicular to that plane is the normal vector of the surface
at a given point. Infinite planes contain this normal vector and section
the surface into corresponding normal-section curves. Two of these
sections will respectively contain the maximal and minimal curvature
i.e. smallest and biggest osculating circles. Gauss defined their
product as the intrinsic curvature of the surface (the Gaussian
curvature). While this curvature, thus defined, is based on the
embedding of the surface in 3D Euclidean space, Gauss showed in a
remarkable theorem that it can be measured independent of the embedding
using just distances and angles on the surface itself. In intuitive
terms this can be understood by the idea that a plane piece of paper
cannot be rolled into a sphere without crumpling and a sphere cannot be
flattened into a plane piece of paper (i.e. changing distance and angle
relationships).

![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/osculating_hypotrochoid.jpg)

*The osculating circles of a hypotrochoid defining its 10-cusped
evolute: something we studied in our teens.*

With this work it became clear to Gauss that the Euclidean geometry was
that of a surface of zero intrinsic curvature. Now a surface with
constant negative curvature was what allowed Gauss to develop the
geometry where the Proclus’ statement regarding parallel lines was
replaced by one where more than one parallel line could pass through a
given point that did not lie on a line – hyperbolic geometry. When we
first learnt of this we were mystified and struggled to come to terms
with. But then an elegant device invented by the Italian mathematician
Beltrami and French polymath Henri Poincare came to our aid. This is a
simple 2D representation of this geometry in our familiar Euclidean
space in the form of a circular disc where the circumference of the disc
represents the infinite horizon of hyperbolic space. Let us take any two
points A and B on that disc. Those points can be reflected on the
circumference of the disc. The circle which passes through A and B and
and their above-stated reflections yields a circular arc that passes
through A and B and terminates on the circumference of the disc. This is
now a straight line in hyperbolic geometry. Now we can see how more than
one parallel line will pass through a given point C not on
![\\overleftrightarrow{AB}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Coverleftrightarrow%7BAB%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\overleftrightarrow{AB}"). With three points one can now construct a
hyperbolic triangle on this disc and visualize how the sum of angles of
a triangle in this geometry will be less than ![\\pi
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cpi+&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\pi "). Wondering, rather presciently, if the geometry of space itself
might be non-Euclidean, Gauss devised an instrument to measure the
angles between light beams traveling from three distant towns. He hoped
to empirically measure if the triangle formed by the beams might have
hyperbolic angles suggesting that light travels through curved space
along a geodesic rather than a straight line of Euclidean space.
However, the results were inconclusive and the true understanding of
this needed something that lay beyond his own investigations.

![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/hyperbolic.png)

*Beltrami-Poincare construction showing the hyperbolic line through
points A and B with more than one parallel lines passing through a point
C outside it*

![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/hyperbolic_triangle.png)

*A Beltrami-Poincare construction of a triangle in hyperbolic geometry*

The foundations of that deeper knowledge was to come from the
revolutionary efforts of Riemann which were first presented in the
hablitation lecture mentioned above. While Gauss had used the
alternative of many parallel lines through a point as the alternative to
the form of the fifth postulate of Proclus, there was one more
possibility namely that of no parallel line existing through a given
point outside a line. This alternative had been rejected by all earlier
workers because it corresponded to spherical geometry and the line would
effectively become a great circle on the sphere. This violated the
second axiom of Euclid that a segment can be infinitely extended to
produce a line. But Riemann suggested that rather than infinite it might
be considered to be unbounded, i.e. a segment can be extended over and
over in an unbounded manner on a spherical surface. Thus, by replacing
the infinite line of the second axiom with the unbounded line and fifth
postulate with the axiom that no line parallel to a given line can be
drawn through a given point Riemann discovered the foundations of a new
geometry on a surface with positive curvature – elliptical geometry.
Here the sum of angles of a triangle added up to more than ![\\pi
](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cpi+&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0
"\\pi "). More generally, he presented a unified foundation for geometry
where the deviations from the bh-k-k nyāya served as the basic
principle. Notably, Riemann did not stop there and extended its
implications into the realm of the physical universe. In 1854 CE he
suggested that human intuition based on empirical data from every day
existence allowed one to conceive an infinite physical space where
Euclidean geometry’s axioms could be realized. However, he indicated
that a space of infinite extent presented difficulties for cosmology.
Hence, it could be possible that our universe is a 3D space (3D manifold
to use his precise concept) with constant positive curvature.
Presciently he sought to create a foundation for physics based on such a
geometry which could present a unified view “without making a difference
between between gravity, electricity, magnetism or the equilibrium of
temperature.” Moreover, he believed that this pursuit would uncover the
link between gravity and light in process providing the first
electromagnetic theory for light building on Kirchhoff’s ideas. What
more he had in these realm of investigations we do not entirely know for
his thoughts in this direction died with him and had to wait till
Poincare and Einstein brought them to fruition.

One of the most noteworthy points about this story relates to the
consequence of Gauss following his maxim of “pauca sed matura” (“few but
ripe”) with respect to publication. Within 2-3 decades of his discovery
of hyperbolic geometry it was independently or at least partly
independently rediscovered by Janos Bolyai the son of his then friend
Wolfgang Bolyai, the Russian scientist-mathematician Nikolai
Lobachevsky, and in Germany itself nearly rediscovered by Friedrich
Wachter, Ferdinand Schweikart and his nephew Franz Taurinus. It is
notable that except for Lobachevsky all the rest had an edge to Gauss
directly or indirectly. Yet the historians of science place their
discoveries as having in large part an independent element.

In the case of Janos Bolyai there is a even an element of tragedy which
is often blamed on Gauss. His father Wolfgang had obsessed over this
problem for a while, right from when he was a fellow student at
university with Gauss. His father wrote to Gauss of his young son
describing him as thus: “*a healthy and very beautiful child, with a
good disposition, black hair and eyebrows, and burning deep blue eyes,
which at times sparkle like two jewels.*” This boy at went on to master
calculus and Newtonian mechanics by the age of 13, and even though his
father warned him of taking up the proof of the 5th postulate he went
ahead to attack it. While yet in his teens he realized that the path
ahead lay in taking an approach similar to that which Gauss had taken
and by the age of 21 had more or less arrived at hyperbolic geometry. He
declared to his father that he had: “*…out of nothing I have created a
strange new universe…*” Having worked it up into brief paper of 24 pages
he had it published as an appendix to his father’s voluminous work. His
father keen to get his friend’s opinion sent it over to Gauss, who
responded by saying: “*…to praise it would amount to praising myself;
for the entire content of the work, the path which your son has taken,
the results to which he is led, coincide almost exactly with my own
meditations which have occupied my mind for from thirty to thirty-five
years.*” But Gauss concluded with acknowledging that he had not wished
to publish his work in his lifetime and praised Janos Bolyai’s
achievement by saying: *“So I am greatly surprised to be spared this
effort, and am overjoyed that it happens to be the son of my old friend
who outstrips me in such a remarkable way.*” Gauss right away also wrote
to his former student Gerling with praise similar to what he accorded
Riemann much later: “*I regard this young geometer Bolyai as a genius of
the first order.*”

Yet the brilliant younger Bolyai on receiving the news of Gauss’
reception of his work from his father became unhinged. He believed that
his father might have leaked the material to Gauss before publication
and that Gauss duly plagiarized it. He never published anything
thereafter a lived an unsung life as a fighter in the Hungarian army. He
nevertheless left behind a voluminous body of unpublished work including
some on the geometry of complex numbers which was prescient in many
ways. Many have tended to take the side of Bolyai as the tragic hero
against Gauss but there is little by way of history to support those
allegations. On the other hand one can also fully understand Bolyai’s
perception of the event because he saw his discovery as bringing him
great honor only to learn that Gauss did not see anything new in it.
Later upon learning that Lobachevsky too had reached the same conclusion
from his father through Gauss he reflected on the strange independent
simultaneity of these events but was hardly pleased.

This was not the last time it was to happen in science. Even with famous
discoveries like the theory of evolution by Darwin and Wallace we
encounter a similar situation. Then again we see a similar scenario with
Poincare and Einstein. In each case the specific dynamic was different.
In the case of the fifth postulate it was an ancient problem for which
the ancients had no correct path beyond the formulation of Proclus which
could have been used to proceed ahead. But all of sudden more than a
millennium later there was a near simultaneous crystallization of
several parallel solutions. In the case of natural selection at least
two distinct sets of ancient authors first the [sāṃkhya sages like
Vasiṣṭha and Yājñavalkya on one hand and
Empedocles](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/05/02/empedocles-and-vasishtha-agrigentum-and-mithila/)
on the other arrived at some early formulation of the idea. But for
millennia there after there was a hiatus with no major development in
either tradition, though the marūnmatta scientist Al Biruni noticed with
some curiosity the Hindu formulation in his account of Vāsudeva and the
Bhārata war. Then suddenly we see a crystallization of the theory in its
breakthrough form with Darwin and Wallace.

In our own lives we have seen this dynamic play out on number of
occasions. There is something of great significance which you discover
and around the same time there might be equivalent discoveries by
others. Some of these turn out to be plain plagiarisms of our own work
but others are genuinely independent. Thus, it almost feels as if we all
merely individual vessels of a single super-mind that chances upon the
discovery at a given point in time (though I fully acknowledge more
mundane explanations can as well explain this phenomenon). Looking at it
this way one might gain that dispassionate view of one’s place in
history even as the one which Kalhaṇa spoke off in the rising and
sinking of the waves of the kings of Kashmir. Yet, as with the
discoverers of non-Euclidean geometries who gets the credit can be very
varied. You may not get it even if you were the first to announce your
findings. Ones fate can span the whole spectrum from a Wachter to a
Lobachevsky. Much of this depends on one’s personal fate an system in
which one is working. In the case of the Hindu researchers the absence
of a national system like the Sanskrit cosmopolis of their heydays means
they mostly perish unknown – a fate which even someone like Ramanujan
only narrowly escaped. Despite being in the then back-waters it was
Lobachevsky’s luck to get the lion’s share of the credit with his
aggressive reworkings and translations published in French and German.
Overshadowed by Gauss, the Germans and Bolyai mostly wilted away.
However, in the case of Bolyai at least he was destined for much
posthumous fame. In the case of Wachter his early death at the age 25
despite some praise from Gauss resulted in the loss of any claim in the
honor that could have been his. Indeed, even as one is close to
ascending the pīṭha of the sarvajña Vaivasvata could drag you away.

Thus indeed came the end of Riemann. Afflicted by disease he went to the
warm clime of Italy in the last summer of his life. Dedekind, the last
student of Gauss and peer of Riemann writes: “*His strength declined
rapidly, and he himself felt that his end was near. But still, the day
before his death, resting under a fig tree, his soul filled with joy at
the glorious landscape, he worked on his final work which unfortunately,
was left unfinished.*” This last work was what was to place Riemann on
the path of the sarvajña – it was his foray into biophysics – a study of
the mechanism of the vertebrate ear. Studying the anatomy of the middle
ear based on his rival von Helmholtz’s work he reasoned that there must
be a physical quantity inherent in the geometry of the wave pattern that
remains invariant as its transmitted from the eardrum to the cochlea. He
identified this invariant as timbre and proposed that the auditory
apparatus transmits to the fluid of the inner ear the variation in air
pressure at every moment at a constant ratio of amplification (from
Ritchey’s account of Riemann’s ear work). Penetrating various domains of
knowledge with deep philosophical vision, in some ways like the yavana
Plato of yore, Riemann took with him to his grave many ideas that were
ahead of his age.
