---
title: III

---
<div>

[←](002_panditji_maharaj.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](004_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/039_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](004_alasinga.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/011_alasinga.htm) Addressee
[»](004_alasinga.htm)

## III

ORIENTAL HOTEL  
YOKOHAMA.  
*10th July, 1893*.

DEAR ALASINGA, BALAJI, G. G., BANKING CORPORATION, AND ALL MY MADRAS
FRIENDS,

Excuse my not keeping you constantly informed of my movements. One is so
busy every day, and especially myself who am quite new to the life of
possessing things and taking care of them. That consumes so much of my
energy. It is really an awful botheration.

From Bombay we reached Colombo. Our steamer remained in port for nearly
the whole day, and we took the opportunity of getting off to have a look
at the town. We drove through the streets, and the only thing I remember
was a temple in which was a very gigantic Murti (image) of the Lord
Buddha in a reclining posture, entering Nirvâna....

The next station was Penang, which is only a strip of land along the sea
in the body of the Malaya Peninsula. The Malayas are all Mohammedans and
in old days were noted pirates and quite a dread to merchantmen. But now
the leviathan guns of modern turreted battleships have forced the
Malayas to look about for more peaceful pursuits. On our way from Penang
to Singapore, we had glimpses of Sumatra with its high mountains, and
the Captain pointed out to me several places as the favourite haunts of
pirates in days gone by. Singapore is the capital of the Straits
Settlements. It has a fine botanical garden with the most splendid
collection of palms. The beautiful fan-like palm, called the traveller's
palm, grows here in abundance, and the bread-fruit tree everywhere. The
celebrated mangosteen is as plentiful here as mangoes in Madras, but
mango is nonpareil. The people here are not half so dark as the people
of Madras, although so near the line. Singapore possesses a fine museum
too.

Hong Kong next. You feel that you have reached China, the Chinese
element predominates so much. All labour, all trade seems to be in their
hands. And Hong Kong is real China. As soon as the steamer casts anchor,
you are besieged with hundreds of Chinese boats to carry you to the
land. These boats with two helms are rather peculiar. The boatman lives
in the boat with his family. Almost always, the wife is at the helms,
managing one with her hands and the other with one of her feet. And in
ninety per cent of cases, you find a baby tied to her back, with the
hands and feet of the little Chin left free. It is a quaint sight to see
the little John Chinaman dangling very quietly from his mother's back,
whilst she is now setting with might and main, now pushing heavy loads,
or jumping with wonderful agility from boat to boat. And there is such a
rush of boats and steamlaunches coming in and going out. Baby John is
every moment put into the risk of having his little head pulverised,
pigtail and all; but he does not care a fig. This busy life seems to
have no charm for him, and he is quite content to learn the anatomy of a
bit of rice-cake given to him from time to time by the madly busy
mother. The Chinese child is quite a philosopher and calmly goes to work
at an age when your Indian boy can hardly crawl on all fours. He has
learnt the philosophy of necessity too well. Their extreme poverty is
one of the causes why the Chinese and the Indians have remained in a
state of mummified civilisation. To an ordinary Hindu or Chinese,
everyday necessity is too hideous to allow him to think of anything
else.

Hong Kong is a very beautiful town. It is built on the slopes of hills
and on the tops too, which are much cooler than the city. There is an
almost perpendicular tramway going to the top of the hill, dragged by
wire-rope and steam-power.

We remained three days at Hong Kong and went to see Canton, which is
eighty miles up a river. The river is broad enough to allow the biggest
steamers to pass through. A number of Chinese steamers ply between Hong
Kong and Canton. We took passage on one of these in the evening and
reached Canton early in the morning. What a scene of bustle and life!
What an immense number of boats almost covering the waters! And not only
those that are carrying on the trade, but hundreds of others which serve
as houses to live in. And quite a lot of them so nice and big! In fact,
they are big houses two or three storeys high, with verandahs running
round and streets between, and all floating!

We landed on a strip of ground given by the Chinese Government to
foreigners to live in. Around us on both sides of the river for miles
and miles is the big city — a wilderness of human beings, pushing,
struggling, surging, roaring. But with all its population, all its
activity, it is the dirtiest town I saw, not in the sense in which a
town is called dirty in India, for as to that not a speck of filth is
allowed by the Chinese to go waste; but because of the Chinaman, who
has, it seems, taken a vow never to bathe! Every house is a shop, people
living only on the top floor. The streets are very very narrow, so that
you almost touch the shops on both sides as you pass. At every ten paces
you find meat-stalls, and there are shops which sell cat's and dog's
meat. Of course, only the poorest classes of Chinamen eat dog or cat.

The Chinese ladies can never be seen. They have got as strict a zenana
as the Hindus of Northern India; only the women of the labouring classes
can be seen. Even amongst these, one sees now and then a woman with feet
smaller than those of your youngest child, and of course they cannot be
said to walk, but hobble.

I went to see several Chinese temples. The biggest in Canton is
dedicated to the memory of the first Buddhistic Emperor and the five
hundred first disciples of Buddhism. The central figure is of course
Buddha, and next beneath Him is seated the Emperor, and ranging on both
sides are the statues of the disciples, all beautifully carved out of
wood.

From Canton I returned back to Hong Kong, and from thence to Japan. The
first port we touched was Nagasaki. We landed for a few hours and drove
through the town. What a contrast! The Japanese are one of the
cleanliest peoples on earth. Everything is neat and tidy. Their streets
are nearly all broad, straight, and regularly paved. Their little houses
are cage-like, and their pine-covered evergreen little hills form the
background of almost every town and village. The short-statured,
fair-skinned, quaintly-dressed Japs, their movements, attitudes,
gestures, everything is picturesque. Japan is the land of the
picturesque! Almost every house has a garden at the back, very nicely
laid out according to Japanese fashion with small shrubs, grass-plots,
small artificial waters, and small stone bridges.

From Nagasaki to Kobe. Here I gave up the steamer and took the
land-route to Yokohama, with a view to see the interior of Japan.

I have seen three big cities in the interior — Osaka, a great
manufacturing town, Kyoto, the former capital, and Tokyo, the present
capital. Tokyo is nearly twice the size of Calcutta with nearly double
the population.

No foreigner is allowed to travel in the interior without a passport.

The Japanese seem now to have fully awakened themselves to the necessity
of the present times. They have now a thoroughly organised army equipped
with guns which one of their own officers has invented and which is said
to be second to none. Then, they are continually increasing their navy.
I have seen a tunnel nearly a mile long, bored by a Japanese engineer.

The match factories are simply a sight to see, and they are bent upon
making everything they want in their own country. There is a Japanese
line of steamers plying between China and Japan, which shortly intends
running between Bombay and Yokohama.

I saw quite a lot of temples. In every temple there are some Sanskrit
Mantras written in Old Bengali characters. Only a few of the priests
know Sanskrit. But they are an intelligent sect. The modern rage for
progress has penetrated even the priesthood. I cannot write what I have
in my mind about the Japs in one short letter. Only I want that numbers
of our young men should pay a visit to Japan and China every year.
Especially to the Japanese, India is still the dreamland of everything
high and good. And you, what are you? . . . talking twaddle all your
lives, vain talkers, what are you? Come, see these people, and then go
and hide your faces in shame. A race of dotards, you lose your caste if
you come out! Sitting down these hundreds of years with an
ever-increasing load of crystallised superstition on your heads, for
hundreds of years spending all your energy upon discussing the
touchableness or untouchableness of this food or that, with all humanity
crushed out of you by the continuous social tyranny of ages — what are
you? And what are you doing now? . . . promenading the sea-shores with
books in your hands — repeating undigested stray bits of European
brainwork, and the whole soul bent upon getting a thirty-rupee
clerkship, or at best becoming a lawyer — the height of young India's
ambition — and every student with a whole brood of hungry children
cackling at his heels and asking for bread! Is there not water enough in
the sea to drown you, books, gowns, university diplomas, and all?

Come, be men! Kick out the priests who are always against progress,
because they would never mend, their hearts would never become big. They
are the offspring of centuries of superstition and tyranny. Root out
priest craft first. Come, be men! Come out of your narrow holes and have
a look abroad. See how nations are on the march! Do you love man? Do you
love your country? Then come, let us struggle for higher and better
things; look not back, no, not even if you see the dearest and nearest
cry. Look not back, but forward!

India wants the sacrifice of at least a thousand or her young men — men,
mind, and not brutes. The English Government has been the instrument,
brought over here by the Lord, to break your crystallised civilisation,
and Madras supplied the first men who helped in giving the English a
footing. How many men, unselfish, thorough-going men, is Madras ready
now to supply, to struggle unto life and death to bring about a new
state of things sympathy for the poor, and bread to their hungry mouths,
enlightenment to the people at large — and struggle unto death to make
men of them who have been brought to the level of beasts, by the tyranny
of your forefathers? 

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Calm and silent and steady work, and no newspaper humbug, no
name-making, you must always remember.

V.

</div>
