---
title: VII

---
<div>

[←](006_haripada.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](008_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](006_haripada.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/015_diwanji_saheb.htm)  

## VII

C/O GEORGE W. HALE ESQ.,  
541 DEARBORN AVENUE, CHICAGO,  
*24th January, 1894*.

DEAR FRIENDS, (His disciples in Madras)

Your letters have reached me. I am surprised that so much about me has
reached you. The criticism you mention of the *Interior* is not to be
taken as the attitude of the American people. That paper is almost
unknown here, and belongs to what they call a "blue-nose Presbyterian
paper", very bigoted. Still all the "blue-noses" are not ungentlemanly.
The American people, and many of the clergy, are very hospitable to me.
That paper wanted a little notoriety by attacking a man who was being
lionised by society. That trick is well known here, and they do not
think anything of it. Of course, our Indian missionaries may try to make
capital out of it. If they do, tell them, "Mark, Jew, a judgment has
come upon you!" Their old building is tottering to its foundation and
must come down in spite of their hysterical shrieks. I pity them — if
their means of living fine lives in India is cut down by the influx of
oriental religions here. But not one of their leading clergy is ever
against me. Well, when I am in the pond, I must bathe thoroughly.

I send you a newspaper cutting of the short sketch of our religion which
I read before them. Most of my speeches are extempore. I hope to put
them in book form before I leave the country. I do not require any help
from India, I have plenty here. Employ the money you have in printing
and publishing this short speech; and translating it into the
vernaculars, throw it broadcast; that will keep us before the national
mind. In the meantime do not forget our plan of a central college, and
the starting from it to all directions in India. Work hard. . . .

About the women of America, I cannot express my gratitude for their
kindness. Lord bless them. In this country, women are the life of every
movement, and represent all the culture of the nation, for men are too
busy to educate themselves.

I have received Kidi's letters. With the question whether caste shall go
or come I have nothing to do. My idea is to bring to the door of the
meanest, the poorest, the noble ideas that the human race has developed
both in and out of India, and let them think for themselves. Whether
there should be caste or not, whether women should be perfectly free or
not, does not concern me. "Liberty of thought and action is the only
condition of life, of growth and well-being." Where it does not exist,
the man, the race, the nation must go down.

Caste or no caste, creed or no creed, any man, or class, or caste, or
nation, or institution which bars the power of free thought and action
of an individual — even so long as that power does not injure others —
is devilish and must go down.

My whole ambition in life is to set in motion a machinery which will
bring noble ideas to the door of everybody, and then let men and women
settle their own fate. Let them know what our forefathers as well as
other nations have thought on the most momentous questions of life. Let
them see specially what others are doing now, and then decide. We are to
put the chemicals together, the crystallization will be done by nature
according to her laws. Work hard, be steady, and have faith in the Lord.
Set to work, I am coming sooner or later. Keep the motto before you —
"Elevation of the masses without injuring their religion".

Remember that the nation lives in the cottage. But, alas! nobody ever
did anything for them. Our modern reformers are very busy about widow
remarriage. Of course, I am a sympathiser in every reform, but the fate
of a nation does not depend upon the number of husbands their widows
get, but upon the *condition of the masses*. Can you raise them? Can you
give them back their lost individuality without making them lose their
innate spiritual nature? Can you become an occidental of occidentals in
your spirit of equality, freedom, work, and energy, and at the same time
a Hindu to the very backbone in religious culture and instincts? This is
to be done and *we will do it*. You are all *born to do it*. Have faith
in yourselves, great convictions are the mothers of great deeds. Onward
for ever! Sympathy for the poor, the downtrodden, even unto death — this
is our motto.

Onward, brave lads!

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. Do not publish this letter; but there is no harm in preaching the
idea of elevating the masses by means of a central college, and bringing
education as well as religion to the door of the poor by means of
missionaries trained in this college. Try to interest everybody.

I send you a few newspaper cuttings — only from the very best and
highest. The one by Dr. Thomas is very valuable as written by one of
the, if not the leading clergymen of America. The *Interior* with all
its fanaticism and thirst for notoriety was bound to say that I was the
public favourite. I cut a few lines from that magazine also.

V.

</div>
