---
title: VIII

---
<div>

[←](007_friends.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](009_sharat.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/015_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/016_mother.htm)  
[«](005_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](010_alasinga.htm)

## VIII

NEW YORK,  
*9th April, 1894*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

I got your last letter a few days ago. You see I am so very busy here,
and have to write so many letters every day, that you cannot expect
frequent communications from me. But I try my best to keep you in touch
with whatever is going on here. I will write to Chicago for one of the
books on the Parliament of Religions to be sent over to you. But by this
time you have got two of my short speeches.

Secretary Saheb writes me that I must come back to India, because that
is my field. No doubt of that. But my brother, we are to light a torch
which will shed a lustre over all India. So let us not be in a hurry;
everything will come by the grace of the Lord. I have lectured in many
of the big towns of America, and have got enough to pay my passage back
after paying the awful expenses here. I have made a good many friends
here, some of them very influential. Of course, the orthodox clergymen
are against me; and seeing that it is not easy to grapple with me, they
try to hinder, abuse, and vilify me in every way; and Mazoomdar has come
to their help. He must have gone mad with jealousy. He has told them
that I was a big fraud, and a rogue! And again in Calcutta he is telling
them that I am leading a most sinful life in America, specially
unchaste! Lord bless him! My brother, no good thing can be done without
obstruction. It is only those who persevere to the end that succeed. . .
. I believe that the Satya Yuga (Golden Age) will come when there will
be one caste, one Veda, and peace and harmony. This idea of Satya Yuga
is what would revivify India. Believe it. One thing is to be done if you
can do it. Can you convene a big meeting in Madras, getting Ramnad or
any such big fellow as the President, and pass a resolution of your
entire satisfaction at my representation of Hinduism here, and send it
to the *Chicago Herald*, *Inter-Ocean*, and the *New York Sun*, and the
*Commercial Advertiser* of Detroit (Michigan). Chicago is in Illinois.
*New York Sun* requires no particulars. Detroit is in the State of
Michigan. Send copies to Dr. Barrows, Chairman of the Parliament of
Religions, Chicago. I have forgotten his number, but the street is
Indiana Avenue. One copy to Mrs. J. J. Bagley of Detroit, Washington
Ave.

Try to make this meeting as big as possible. Get hold of all the big
bugs who must join it for their religion and country. Try to get a
letter from the Mysore Maharaja and the Dewan approving the meeting and
its purpose — so of Khetri — in fact, as big and noisy a crowd as you
can.

The resolution would be of such a nature that the Hindu community of
Madras, who sent me over, expressing its entire satisfaction in my work
here etc.

Now try if it is possible. This is not much work. Get also letters of
sympathy from all parts you can and print them and send copies to the
American papers — as quickly as you can. That will go a long way, my
brethren. The B— S— fellows here are trying to talk all sorts of
nonsense. We must stop their mouths as fast as we can.

Up boys, and put yourselves to the task! If you can do that, I am sure
we will be able to do much in future. Old Hinduism for ever! Down with
all liars and rogues! Up, up, my boys, we are sure to win!

As to publishing my letters, such parts as ought to be published may be
published for our friends till I come. When once we begin to work, we
shall have a tremendous "boom", but I do not want to talk without
working. I do not know, but G. C. Ghosh and Mr. Mitra of Calcutta can
get up all the sympathisers of my late Gurudeva to do the same in
Calcutta. If they can, so much the better. Ask them, if they can, to
pass the same resolutions in Calcutta. There are thousands in Calcutta
who sympathise with our movement. However I have more faith in you than
in them.

Nothing more to write.

Convey my greetings to all our friends — for whom I am always praying.

Yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
