---
title: X

---
<div>

[←](009_sharat.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](011_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/21_adhyapakji.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/021_mother.htm)  
[«](008_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](011_alasinga.htm)

## X

CHICAGO,  
*28th May, 1894*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

I could not reply to your note earlier, because I was whirling to and
fro from New York to Boston, and also I awaited Narasimha's letter. I do
not know when I am going back to India. It is better to leave everything
in the hands of Him who is at my back directing me. Try to work without
me, as if I never existed. Do not wait for anybody or anything. Do
whatever you can. Build your hope on none. Before writing about myself,
I will tell you about Narasimha. He has proved a complete failure. . . .
However he wrote to me for help in the last stage, and I will try to
help him as much as is in my power. Meanwhile you tell his people to
send money as soon as they can for him to go over. . . . He is in
distress. Of course I will see that he does not starve.

I have done a good deal of lecturing here.... The expenses here are
terrible; money has to fly, although I have been almost always taken
care of everywhere by the nicest and the highest families.

I do not know whether I shall go away this summer or not. Most probably
not. In the meantime try to organise and push on our plans. Believe you
can do everything. Know that the Lord is with us, and so, onward, brave
souls!

I have had enough appreciation in my own country. Appreciation or no
appreciation, sleep not, slacken not. You must remember that not a bit
even of our plans has been as yet carried out.

Act on the educated young men, bring them together, and organise them.
Great things can be done by great sacrifices only. No selfishness, no
name, no fame, yours or mine, nor my Master's even! Work, work the idea,
the plan, my boys, my brave, noble, good souls — to the wheel, to the
wheel put your shoulders! Stop not to look back for name, or fame, or
any such nonsense. Throw self overboard and work. Remember, "The grass
when made into a rope by being joined together can even chain a mad
elephant." The Lord's blessings on you all! His power be in you all— as
I believe it is *already*. "Wake up, stop not until the goal is
reached", say the Vedas. Up, up, the long night is passing, the day is
approaching, the wave has risen, nothing will be able to resist its
tidal fury. The spirit, my boys, the spirit; the love, my children, the
love; the faith, the belief; and fear not! The greatest sin is fear.

My blessings on all. Tell all the noble souls in Madras who have helped
our cause that I send them my eternal love and gratitude, but I beg of
them not to slacken. Throw the idea broadcast. Do not be proud; do not
insist upon anything dogmatic; do not go against anything — ours is to
put chemicals together, the Lord knows how and when the crystal will
form. Above all, be not inflated with my success or yours. Great works
are to be done; what is this small success in comparison with what is to
come? Believe, believe, the decree has gone forth, the fiat of the Lord
has gone forth — India must rise, the masses and the poor are to be made
happy. Rejoice that you are the chosen instruments in His hands. The
flood of spirituality has risen. I see it is rolling over the land
resistless, boundless, all-absorbing. Every man to the fore, every good
will be added to its forces, every hand will smooth its way, and glory
be unto the Lord! . . .

I do not require any help. Try to get up a fund, buy some
magic-lanterns, maps, globes, etc., and some chemicals. Get every
evening a crowd of the poor and low, even the Pariahs, and lecture to
them about religion first, and then teach them through the magic-lantern
and other things, astronomy, geography, etc., in the dialect of the
people. Train up a band of fiery young men. Put your fire in them and
gradually increase the organization, letting it widen and widen its
circle. Do the best you can, do not wait to cross the river when the
water has all run down. Printing magazines, papers, etc., are good, no
doubt, but actual work, my boys even if infinitesimal, is better than
eternal scribbling and talking. Call a meeting at Bhattacharya's. Get a
little money and buy those things I have just now stated, hire a hut,
and go to work. Magazines are secondary, but this is primary. You must
have a hold on the masses. Do not be afraid of a small beginning, great
things come afterwards. Be courageous. Do not try to lead your brethren,
but serve them. The brutal mania for leading has sunk many a great ship
in the waters of life. Take care especially of that, i.e. be unselfish
even unto death, and work. I could not write all I was going to say, but
the Lord will give you all understanding, my brave boys. At it, my boys!
Glory unto the Lord! . . .

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
