---
title: XI

---
<div>

[←](010_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](012_sister.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/023_sisters.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/024_mother.htm)  
[«](010_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](013_alasinga.htm)

## XI

U. S. A.,  
*11th July, 1894*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

You must never write to me anywhere else but 541 Dearborn Ave., Chicago.
Your last letter has travelled the whole country to come to me, and this
was only because I am so well known. Some of the resolutions are to be
sent to Dr. Barrows with a letter thanking him for his kindness to me
and asking him to publish the letter in some American newspapers — as
that would be the best refutation of the false charges of the
missionaries that I do not represent anybody. Learn business, my boy. We
will do great things yet! Last year I only sowed the seeds; this year I
mean to reap. In the meanwhile, keep up as much enthusiasm as possible
in India. Let Kidi go his own way. He will come out all right in time. I
have taken his responsibility. He has a perfect right to his own
opinion. Make him write for the paper; that will keep him in good
temper! My blessings on him.

Start the journal and I will send you articles from time to time. You
must send a paper and a letter to Professor J. H. Wright of Harvard
University, Boston, thanking him as having been the first man who stood
as my friend and asking him to publish it in the papers, thus giving the
lie to the missionaries.

In the Detroit lecture I got $900, i.e. Rs. 2,700. In other lectures, I
earned in one, $2,500, i.e. Rs. 7,500 in one hour, but got only 200
dollars! I was cheated by a roguish Lecture Bureau. I have given them
up. I spent a good deal here; only about $3,000 remains.

I shall have to print much matter next year. I am going regularly to
work. . . . The sheer power of the *will* will do everything. . . . You
must organise a society which should regularly meet, and write to me
about it as often as you can. In fact, get up as much enthusiasm as you
can. Only, *beware* of falsehood. Go to work, my boys, the fire will
come to you! The faculty of organisation is entirely absent in our
nature, but this has to be infused. The great secret is — absence of
jealousy. Be always ready to concede to the opinions of your brethren,
and try always to conciliate. That is the whole secret. Fight on
bravely! Life is short! Give it up to a great cause. Why do you not
write anything about Narasimha? He is almost starving. I gave him
something. Then he went over to somewhere, I do not know where, and does
not write. Akshaya is a good boy. I like him very much. No use
quarrelling with the Theosophists. Do not go and tell them all I write
to you. . . . Theosophists are our pioneers, do you know? Now Judge is a
Hindu and Col. a Buddhist, and Judge is the ablest man here. Now tell
the Hindu Theosophists to support Judge. Even if you can write Judge a
letter, thanking him as a co-religionist and for his labours in
presenting Hinduism before Americans; that will do his heart much good.
We must not join any sect, but we must sympathise and work with each. .
. . Work, work — conquer all by your love! . . .

Try to expand. Remember the *only sign of life* is motion and growth.
You must send the passed resolution to Dr. J. H. Barrows. . ., Dr. Paul
Carus. . ., Senator Palmer. . ., Mrs. J. J. Bagley. . ., it must come
officially. . . . I write this because I do not think you know the ways
of foreign nations. . . . Keep on steadily. So far we have done
wonderful things. Onward, brave souls, we will gain! Organise and found
societies and go to work, that is the only way.

At this time of the year there is not much lecturing to be done here; so
I will devote myself to my pen and write. I shall be hard at work all
the time, and then, when the cold weather comes and people return to
their homes, I shall begin lecturing again and at the same time organise
societies.

My love and blessings to you all. I never forget anybody, though I do
not write often. Then again, I am now, continuously travelling, and
letters have to be redirected from one place to another.

Work hard. Be holy and pure and the fire will come.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
