---
title: XII

---
<div>

[←](011_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](013_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/025_sisters.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/028_mother.htm)  
[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/18_sister.htm) Addressee
[»](016_sister.htm)

## XII

ANNISQUAM,  
*20th August, 1894*.

DEAR SISTER, (Isabelle McKindley)

Your very kind letter duly reached me at Annisquam. I am with the
Bagleys once more. They are kind as usual. Professor Wright was not
here. But he came day before yesterday and we have very nice time
together. Mr. Bradley of Evanston, whom you have met at Evanston, was
here. His sister-in-law had me sit for a picture several days and had
painted me. I had some very fine boating and one evening overturned the
boat and had a good drenching — clothes and all.

I had very very nice time at Greenacre. They were all so earnest and
kind people. Fanny Hartley and Mrs. Mills have by this time gone back
home I suppose.

From here I think I will go back to New York. Or I may go to Boston to
Mrs. Ole Bull. Perhaps you have heard of Mr. Ole Bull, the great
violinist of this country. She is his widow. She is a very spiritual
lady. She lives in Cambridge and has a fine big parlour made of woodwork
brought all the way from India. She wants me to come over to her any
time and use her parlour to lecture. Boston of course is the great field
for everything, but the Boston people as quickly take hold of anything
as give it up; while the New Yorkers are slow, but when they get hold of
anything they do it with a mortal grip.

I have kept pretty good health all the time and hope to do in the
future. I had no occasion yet to draw on my reserve, yet I am rolling on
pretty fair. And I have given up all money-making schemes and will be
quite satisfied with a bite and a shed and work on.

I believe you are enjoying your summer retreat. Kindly convey my best
regards and love to Miss Howe and Mr. Frank Howe.

Perhaps I did not tell you in my last how I slept and lived and preached
under the trees and for a few days at least found myself once more in
the atmosphere of heaven.

Most probably I will make New York my centre for the next winter; and as
soon as I fix on that, I will write to you. I am not yet settled in my
ideas of remaining in this country any more. I cannot settle anything of
that sort. I must bide my time. May the Lord bless you all for ever and
ever is the constant prayer of your ever affectionate brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
