---
title: XIII

---
<div>

[←](012_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](014_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/030_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/026_sister.htm)  
[«](011_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](014_alasinga.htm)

## XIII

U. S. A.,  
*31st August, 1894*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

I just now saw an editorial on me about the circular from Madras in the
*Boston Transcript*. Nothing has reached me yet. They will reach me soon
if you have sent them already. So far you have done wonderfully, my boy.
Do not mind what I write in some moments of nervousness. One gets
nervous sometimes alone in a country 15,000 miles from home, having to
fight every inch of ground with orthodox inimical Christians. You must
take those into consideration, my brave boy, and work right along.

Perhaps you have heard from Bhattacharya that I received a beautiful
letter from G. G. His address was scrawled in such a fashion as to
become perfectly illegible to me. So I could not reply to him direct.
But I have done all that he desired. I have sent over my photograph and
written to the Raja of Mysore. Now I have sent a phonograph to Khetri
Raja. . . .

Now send always Indian newspapers about me to me over here. I want to
read them in the papers themselves — do you know? Now lastly, you must
write to me all about Mr. Charu Chandra who has been so kind to me. Give
him my heartfelt thanks; but (between you and me) I unfortunately do not
remember him. Would you give me particulars?

The Theosophists here now like me, but they are 650 in all!! There are
the Christian Scientists. All of them like me. They are about a million.
I work with both, but join none, and will with the Lord's grace would
them both after the true fashion; for they are after all mumbling half
realised truth. Narasimha, perhaps, by the time this reaches you, will
get the money etc.

I have received a letter from *Cat*, but it requires a book to answer
all his queries. So I send him my blessings through you and ask you to
remind him that we agree to differ — and see the harmony of contrary
points. So it does not matter what he believes in; he must act. Give my
love to Balaji, G. G., Kidi, Doctor, and to all our friends and all the
great and patriotic souls, who were brave and noble enough to sink their
differences for their country's cause.

With a magazine or journal or organ — you become the Secretary thereof.
You calculate the cost of starting the magazine and the work, how much
the least is necessary to start it, and then write to me giving name and
address of the Society, and I will send you money myself, and not only
that, I will get others in America to subscribe annually to it
liberally. So ask them of Calcutta to do the same. Give me Dharmapala's
address. He is a great and good man. He will work wonderfully with us.
Now organise a little society. You will have to take charge of the whole
movement, not as a *leader*, but as a *servant*. Do you know, the least
show of leading destroys everything by rousing jealousy?

Accede to everything. Only try to retain all of my friends together. Do
you see? And work slowly up. Let G. G. and others, who have no immediate
necessity for earning something, do as they are doing, i.e. casting the
idea broadcast. G. G. is doing well at Mysore. That is the way. Mysore
will be in time a great stronghold.

I am now going to write my *mems* in a book and *next* winter will go
about this country organising *societies* here. This is a great field of
work, and everything done here prepares *England*. So far you have done
very well indeed, my brave boy — all strength shall be given to you.

I have now Rs. 9,000 with me, part of which I will send over to you for
the organisation; and I will get many people to send money to you in
Madras yearly, half-yearly, or monthly. You now start a Society and a
journal and the necessary apparatus. This must be a secret amongst only
a few — but at the same time try to collect funds from Mysore and
elsewhere to build a temple in Madras which should have a library and
some rooms for the office and the preachers who should be Sannyâsins,
and for Vairâgis (men of renunciation) who may chance to come. Thus we
shall progress inch by inch. This is a great field for my work, and
everything done here prepares the way for my coming work in England. . .
.

You know the greatest difficulty with me is to keep or even to touch
money. It is disgusting and debasing. So you must organise a Society to
take charge of the practical and pecuniary part of it. I have friends
here who take care of all my monetary concerns. Do you see? It will be a
wonderful relief to me to get rid of horrid money affairs. So the sooner
you organise yourselves and you be ready as secretary and treasurer to
enter into direct communication with my friends and sympathisers here,
the better for you and me. Do that quickly, and write to me. Give the
society a non-sectarian name. . . Do you write to my brethren at the
Math to organise in a similar fashion. . . . Great things are in store
for you Alasinga. Or if you think proper, you get some of the big folks
to be named as office-bearers of the Society, while you work in the real
sense. Their name will be a great thing. If your duties are too severe
and do not let you have any time, let G. G. do the business part, and by
and by I hope to make you independent of your college work so that you
may, without starving yourself and family, devote your whole soul to the
work. So work, my boys, work! The rough part of the work has been
smoothened and rounded; now it will roll on better and better every
year. And if you can simply keep it going well until I come to India,
the work will progress by leaps and bounds. Rejoice that you have done
so much. When you feel gloomy, think what has been done within the last
year. How, rising from nothing, we have the eyes of the world fixed upon
us now. Not only India, but the world outside, is expecting great things
of us. Missionaries or M — or foolish officials — none will be able to
resist truth and love and sincerity. Are you sincere? unselfish even
unto death? and loving? Then fear not, not even death. Onward, my lads!
The whole world requires Light. It is expectant! India alone has that
Light, not in magic, mummery, and charlatanism, but in the teaching of
the glories of the spirit of real religion — of the highest spiritual
truth. That is why the Lord has preserved the race through all its
vicissitudes unto the present day. Now the time has come. Have faith
that you are all, my brave lads, born to do great things! Let not the
barks of puppies frighten you — no, not even the thunderbolts of heaven
— but stand up and work!

Ever yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
