---
title: XIV

---
<div>

[←](013_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](015_kidi.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/035_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](015_kidi.htm)  
[«](013_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](017_alasinga.htm)

## XIV

U. S. A.,  
*21st September, 1894*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

. . . I have been continuously travelling from place to place and
working incessantly, giving lectures, holding classes, etc.

I have not been able to write yet for my proposed book. Perhaps I may be
able to take it in hand later on. I have made some nice friends here
amongst the liberal people, and a few amongst the orthodox. I hope to
return soon to India — I have had enough of this country and especially
as too much work is making me nervous. The giving of too many public
lectures and constant hurry have brought on this nervousness. I do not
care for this busy, meaningless, money-making life. So you see, I will
soon return. Of course, there is a growing section with whom I am very
popular, and who will like to have me here all the time. But I think I
have had enough of newspaper blazoning and humbugging of a public life.
I do not care the least for it. . . .

There is no hope for money for our project here. It is useless to hope.
No large number of men in any country do good out of mere sympathy. The
few who really give money in the Christian lands often do so through
priestcraft and fear of hell. So it is as in our Bengali proverb, "Kill
a cow and make a pair of shoes out of the leather and give them in
charity to a Brahmana". So it is here, and so everywhere; and then, the
Westerners are miserly in comparison to our race. I sincerely believe
that the Asians are the most charitable race in the world, only they are
very poor.

I am going to live for a few months in New York. That city is the head,
hand, and purse of the country. Of course, Boston is called the
Brahmanical city, and here in America there are hundreds of thousands
that sympathise with me. . . . The New York people are very open. I will
see what can be done there, as I have some very influential friends.
After all, I am getting disgusted with this lecturing business. It will
take a long time for the Westerners to understand the higher
spirituality, Everything is £. s. d. to them. If a religion brings them
money or health or beauty or long life, they will all flock to it,
otherwise not. . . .

Give to Balaji, G. G., and all of our friends my best love.

Yours with everlasting love,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
