---
title: XVII

---
<div>

[←](016_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](018_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/048_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/037_mother.htm)  
[«](014_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](018_alasinga.htm)

## XVII

U. S. A.  
*27th September, 1894*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

. . . One thing I find in the books of my speeches and sayings published
in Calcutta. Some of them are printed in such a way as to savour of
political views; whereas I am no politician or political agitator. I
care only for the Spirit — when that is right everything will be righted
by itself.... So you must warn the Calcutta people that no political
significance be ever attached falsely to any of my writings or sayings.
What nonsense I . . . I heard that Rev. Kali Charan Banerji in a lecture
to Christian missionaries said that I was a political delegate. If it
was said publicly, then publicly ask the Babu for me to write to any of
the Calcutta papers and prove it, or else take back his foolish
assertion. This is their trick! I have said a few harsh words in honest
criticism of Christian governments in general, but that does not mean
that I care for, or have any connection with politics or that sort of
thing. Those who think it very grand to print extracts from those
lectures and want to prove that I am a political preacher, to them I
say, "Save me from my friends." . . .

. . . Tell my friends that a uniform silence is all my answer to my
detractors. If I give them tit for tat, it would bring us down to a
level with them. Tell them that truth will take care of itself, and that
they are not to fight anybody for me. They have much to learn yet, and
they are only children. They are still full of foolish golden dreams —
mere boys!

. . .This nonsense of public life and newspaper blazoning has disgusted
me thoroughly. I long to go back to the Himalayan quiet.

Ever yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
