---
title: XVIII

---
<div>

[←](017_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](019_vehemia.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/037_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/038_mother.htm)  
[«](017_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](021_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

## XVIII

U. S. A.,  
*29th September, 1894*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

You all have done well, my brave unselfish children. I am so proud of
you. . . . Hope and do not despair. After such a start, if you despair
you are a fool. . . .

Our field is India, and the value of foreign appreciation is in rousing
India up. That is all. . . . We must have a strong base from which to
spread. . . . Do not for a moment quail. Everything will come all right.
It is will that moves the world.

You need not be sorry, my son, on account of the young men becoming
Christians. What else can they be under the existing social bondages,
especially in Madras? Liberty is the first condition of growth. Your
ancestors gave every liberty to the soul, and religion grew. They put
the body under every bondage, and society did not grow. The opposite is
the case in the West — every liberty to society, none to religion. Now
are falling off the shackles from the feet of Eastern society as from
those of Western religion.

Each again will have its type; the religious or introspective in India,
the scientific or out-seeing in the West. The West wants every bit of
spirituality through social improvement. The East wants every bit of
social power through spirituality. Thus it was that the modern reformers
saw no way to reform but by first crushing out the religion of India.
They tried, and they failed. Why? Because few of them ever studied their
own religion, and not *one* ever *underwent* the training necessary to
understand the *Mother of all religions*. I claim that no destruction of
religion is necessary to improve the Hindu society, and that this state
of society exists not on account of religion, but because religion has
not been applied to society as it should have been. This I am ready to
prove from our old books, every word of it. This is what I teach, and
this is what we must struggle all our lives to carry out. But it will
take time, a long time to study. Have patience and
work. उध्दरेदात्मनात्मानम् — Save yourself by yourself.

Yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. The present Hindu society is organised only for spiritual men, and
hopelessly crushes out everybody else. Why? Where shall they go who want
to enjoy the world a little with its frivolities? Just as our religion
takes in all, so should our society. This is to be worked out by first
understanding the true principles of our religion and then applying them
to society. This is the slow but sure work to be done.

V.

</div>
