---
title: XX

---
<div>

[←](019_vehemia.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](021_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](019_vehemia.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/041_miss_thursby.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/016_sister.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/038_miss_bell.htm)

## XX

WASHINGTON,  
C/O MRS. T. TOTTEN.  
1708 W I STREET,  
*26th* (?) *October, 1894*.

DEAR SISTER, (Isabelle McKindley)

Excuse my long silence; but I have been regularly writing to Mother
Church. I am sure you are all enjoying this nice cool weather. I am
enjoying Baltimore and Washington very much. I will go hence to
Philadelphia. I thought Miss Mary was in Philadelphia, and so I wanted
her address. But as she is in some other place near Philadelphia, I do
not want to give her the trouble to come up to see me, as Mother Church
says.

The lady with whom I am staying is Mrs. Totten, a niece of Miss Howe. I
will be her guest more than a week yet; so you may write to me to her
care.

I intend going over to England this winter somewhere in January or
February. A lady from London with whom one of my friends is staying has
sent an invitation to me to go over as her guest; and from India they
are urging me every day to come back.

How did you like Pitoo in the cartoon? Do not show it to anybody. It is
too bad of our people to caricature Pitoo that way.

I long ever so much to hear from you, but take a little more care to
make your letter just a bit more distinct. Do not be angry for the
suggestion.

Your ever loving brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
