---
title: XXVIII

---
<div>

[←](027_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](029_gg.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/057_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_4/writings_prose/a_plan_of_work_for_india.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/057_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee
[»](031_ole_bull.htm)

## XXVIII

541 DEARBORN AVENUE,  
CHICAGO,  
*3rd January, 1895*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

I lectured at Brooklyn last Sunday, Mrs. Higgins gave a little reception
the evening I arrived, and some of the prominent members of the Ethical
Society including Dr. Jain \[Janes\] were there. Some of them thought
that such Oriental religious subjects will not interest the Brooklyn
public.

But the lecture, through the blessings of the Lord, proved a tremendous
success. About 800 of the *élite* of Brooklyn were present, and the very
gentlemen who thought it would not prove a success are trying for
organising a series in Brooklyn. The New York course for me is nearly
ready, but I do not wish to fix the dates until Miss Thursby comes to
New York. As such Miss Phillips who is a friend of Miss Thursby's and
who is arranging the New York course for me will act with Miss Thursby
in case she wants to get up something in New York.

I owe much to the Hale family and I thought to give them a little
surprise by dropping in on New Year's day. I am trying to get a new gown
here. The old gown is here, but it is so shrunken by constant washings
that it is unfit to wear in public. I am almost confident of finding the
exact thing in Chicago.

I hope your father is all right by this time.

With my love to Miss Farmer, Mr. and Mrs. Gibbons and the rest of the
holy family, I am ever yours,

Affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. I saw Miss Couring at Brooklyn. She was as kind as ever. Give her my
love if you write her soon.

</div>
