---
title: XXXI

---
<div>

[←](030_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](032_sister.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/047_miss_thursby.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/038_miss_bell.htm)  
[«](028_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/060_mrs_bull.htm)

## XXXI

BROOKLYN,  
*20th January, 1895*.

(*Written to Mrs. Ole Bull whom Swamiji called "Dhirâ Mâtâ", the "Steady
Mother" on the occasion of the loss of her father.*)

. . . I had a premonition of your father's giving up the old body and it
is not my custom to write to anyone when a wave of would-be inharmonious
Mâyâ strikes him. But these are the great turning points in life, and I
know that you are unmoved. The surface of the sea rises and sinks
alternately, but to the observant soul — the child of light — each
sinking reveals more and more of the depth and of the beds of pearls and
coral at the bottom. Coming and going is all pure delusion. The soul
never comes nor goes. Where is the place to which it shall go when all
space is *in the soul*? When shall be the time for entering and
departing when all time is *in the soul*?

The earth moves, causing the illusion of the movement of the sun; but
the sun does not move. So Prakriti, or Maya, or Nature, is moving,
changing, unfolding veil after veil, turning over leaf after leaf of
this grand book — while the witnessing soul drinks in knowledge,
unmoved, unchanged. All souls that ever have been, are, or shall be, are
all in the present tense and — to use a material simile — are all
standing at one geometrical point. Because the idea of space does occur
in the soul, therefore all that were ours, are ours, and will *be* ours,
*are* always with us, *were* always with us, and *will* be always with
us. We are in them. They are in us. Take these cells. Though each
separate, they are all nevertheless inseparably joined at A B. There
they are one. ![](031_diagram.jpg)Each is an individual, yet all are one
at the axis A B. None can escape from that axis, and however broken or
torn the circumference, yet by standing at the axis, we may enter any
one of the chambers. This axis is the Lord. There we are one with Him,
all in all, and all in God.

The cloud moves across the face of the moon, creating the illusion that
the moon is moving. So nature, body, matter moves on, creating the
illusion that the soul is moving. Thus we find at last that, that
instinct (or inspiration?) which men of every race, whether high or low,
have had to feel, viz the presence of the departed about them, is true
intellectually also.

Each soul is a star, and all stars are set in that infinite azure, that
eternal sky, the Lord. There is the root, the reality, the real
individuality of each and all. Religion began with the search after some
of these stars that had passed beyond our horizon, and ended in finding
them all in God, and ourselves in the same place. The whole secret is,
then, that your father has given up the old garment he was wearing and
is standing where he was through all eternity. Will he manifest another
such garment in this or any other world? I sincerely pray that he may
not, until he does so in full consciousness. I pray that none may be
dragged anywhither by the unseen power of his own past actions. I pray
that all may be free, that is to say, may know that they are free. And
if they are to dream again, let us pray that their dreams be all of
peace and bliss. . . .

Yours etc.,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
