---
title: XXXVII

---
<div>

[←](036_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](038_s.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/27_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/039_friend.htm)  
[«](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/27_alasinga.htm) Addressee
[»](039_alasinga.htm)

## XXXVII

U. S. A.,  
*4th April, 1895*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

Your letter just to hand. You need not be afraid of anybody's attempting
to hurt me. So long as the Lord protects me I shall be impregnable. Your
ideas of America are very hazy. . . . This is a huge country, the
majority do not care much about religion. . . . Christianity holds its
ground as a mere patriotism, and nothing more.

. . . Now my son, do not lose courage. . . . Send me the
*Vedanta-Sutras* and the Bhâshyas (commentaries) of all the sects.... I
am in His hands. What is the use of going back to India? India cannot
further my ideas. This country takes kindly to my ideas. I will go back
when I get the Command. In the meanwhile, do you all gently and
patiently work. If anybody attacks me, simply ignore his existence. . .
. My idea is for you to start a Society where people could be taught the
Vedas and the Vedanta, with the commentaries. Work on this line at
present. . . . Know that every time you feel weak, you not only hurt
yourself but also the Cause. Infinite faith and strength are the only
conditions of success.

Be cheerful. . . . Hold on to your own ideal. . . . Above all, never
attempt to guide or rule others, or, as the Yankees say, "boss" others.
Be the servant of all.

Ever yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
