---
title: XLIII

---
<div>

[←](042_kidi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](044_mrs_sturges.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/048_sister.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/061_mother.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/043_alasinga.htm) Addressee
[»](049_alasinga.htm)

## XLIII

U. S. A.,  
*1st July, 1895*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

I received your missionary book and the Ramnad photos. I have written to
the Raja as well as the Dewan at Mysore. The missionary pamphlet must
have reached here long ago, as the Ramabai circle controversy with Dr.
Janes savoured of it, it seems. Now you need not be afraid of anything.
There is one misstatement in that pamphlet. I never went to a big hotel
in this country, and very few times to any other. At Baltimore, the
small hotels, being ignorant, would not take in a black man, thinking
him a negro. So my host, Dr. Vrooman, had to take me to a larger one,
because they knew the difference between a negro and a foreigner. Let me
tell you, Alasinga, that you have to defend yourselves. Why do you
behave like babies? If anybody attacks your religion, why cannot, you
defend it? As for me, you need not be afraid, I have more friends than
enemies here, and in this country one-third are Christians, and only a
small number of the educated care about the missionaries. Again, the
very fact of the missionaries being against anything makes the educated
like it. They are less of a power here now, and are becoming less so
every day. If their attacks pain you, why do you behave like a petulant
child and refer to me? . . . Cowardice is no virtue.

Here I have already got a respectable following. Next year I will
organise it on a working basis, and then the work will be carried on.
And when I am off to India, I have friends who will back me here and
help me in India too; so you need not fear. So long as you shriek at the
missionary attempts and jump without being able to do anything, I laugh
at you; you are little dollies, that is what you are. . . . What can
Swami do for old babies!!

I know, my son, I shall have to come and manufacture men out of you. I
know that India is only inhabited by women and eunuchs. So do not fret.
I will have to get means to work there. I do not put myself in the hands
of imbeciles. You need not worry, do what little you can. I have to work
alone from top to bottom. . . . "This Âtman (Self) is not to be reached
by cowards." You need not be afraid for me. The Lord is with me, you
defend yourselves only and show me you can do that; and I will be
satisfied. Don't bother me any more with what any one says about me. I
am not waiting to hear any fool's judgment of me. You babies, great
results are attained only by great patience, great courage, and great
attempts. . . . Kidi's mind is taking periodic somersaults, I am afraid.
. . .

The brave alone do great things, not the cowards. Know once for all, you
faithless ones, that I am in the hands of the Lord. So long as I am pure
and His servant, not a hair of my head will be touched. . . . Do
something for the nation, then they will help you, then the nation will
be with you. Be brave, be brave! Man dies but once. My disciples must
not be cowards.

Ever yours with love,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
