---
title: XLIV

---
<div>

[←](043_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](045_mother.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/064_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/065_mother.htm)

## XLIV

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK,  
*29th* (*July?*)*, 1895.*

  
A glorious time to you, dear Mother (Mrs. William Sturges.) and I am
sure this letter will find you in all health. Many thanks for the $50
you sent; it went a long way.

We have had such a nice time here. Two ladies came up all the way from
Detroit to be with us here. They are so pure and good. I am going from
the Thousand Island to Detroit and thence to Chicago.

Our class in New York is going on, and they have carried it bravely on,
although I was not there.

By the by, the two ladies who have come from Detroit were in the class,
and unfortunately were mighty frightened with imps and other persons of
that ilk. They have been taught to put a little salt, just a little, in
burning alcohol, and if there is a black precipitate, that must be the
impurities showing the presence of the imps. However, these two ladies
had too much fright from the imps. It is said that these imps are
everywhere filling the whole universe. Father Leggett must be awfully
downcast at your absence, as I did not hear from him up to date. Well,
it is better to let grief have its way. So I do not bother him any more.

Aunt Joe Joe must have had a terrible time at sea. All is well that ends
well.

The babies (Hollister and Alberta — then at school in Germany) must be
enjoying their stay in Germany very much. My shiploads of love to them.

We all here send you love, and I wish you a life that will be like a
torch to generations to come.

Your son,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
