---
title: XLV

---
<div>

[←](044_mrs_sturges.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](046_friend.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/062_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](046_friend.htm)

## XLV

C/O MISS DUTCHER,  
THOUSAND ISLAND PARK,  
*July, 1895*.

DEAR MOTHER, (Mrs. Betty Sturges.)

I am sure you are in New York by this time, and that it is not very hot
there now.

We are having great times here. Marie Louise arrived yesterday. So we
are exactly seven now including all that have come yet.

All the sleep of the world has come upon me. I sleep at least two hours
during the day and sleep through the whole night as a piece of log. This
is a reaction, I think, from the sleeplessness of New York. I am also
writing and reading a little, and have a class every morning after
breakfast. The meals are being conducted on the strictest vegetarian
principles, and I am fasting a good deal.

I am determined that several pounds of my fat shall be off before I
leave. This is a Methodist place, and they will have their camp meeting
in August. It is a very beautiful spot, but I am afraid it becomes too
crowded during the season.

Miss Joe Joe's fly-bite has been cured completely by this time, I am
sure Where is . . . Mother? Kindly give her my best regards when you
write her next.

I will always look back upon the delightful time I had at Percy, and
always thank Mr. Leggett for that treat I shall be able to go to Europe
with him. When you meet him next, kindly give him my eternal love and
gratitude. The world is always bettered by the love of the likes of him.

Are you with your friend, Mrs. Dora (long German name). She is a noble
soul, a genuine Mahâtmâ (great soul). Kindly give her my love and
regards.

I am in a sort of sleepy, lazy, happy state now and do not seem to
dislike it. Marie Louise brought a little tortoise from New York, her
pet. Now, arriving here, the pet found himself surrounded with his
natural element. So by dint of persistent tumbling and crawling, he has
left the love and fondlings of Marie Louise far, far behind. She was a
little sorry at first, but we preached liberty with such a vigour that
she had to come round quick

May the Lord bless you and yours for ever and ever is the constant
prayer of

VIVEKANANDA

PS. Joe Joe did not send the birch bark book. Mrs. Bull was very glad to
have the one I had sent her.

I had a large number of very beautiful letters from India Everything is
all right there. Send my love to the babies on the other side — the real
"innocents abroad".

V.

</div>
