---
title: IL

---
<div>

[←](048_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](050_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/071_sister_christine.htm)
Chronology [»](050_mrs_bull.htm)  
[«](043_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](052_alasinga.htm)

## IL

U. S. A.,  
*August 1895*.

By the time this reaches you, dear Alasinga, I shall be in Paris. . . .
I have done a good deal of work this year and hope to do a good deal
more in the next. Don't bother about the missionaries. It is quite
natural that they should cry. Who does not when his bread is dwindling
away? The missionary funds have got a big gap the last two years, and it
is on the increase. However, I wish the missionaries all success. So
long as you have love for God and Guru and faith in truth, nothing can
hurt you, my son. But the loss of any of these is dangerous. You have
remarked well; my ideas are going to work in the West better than in
India. . . . I have done more for India than India ever did for me. . .
. I believe in truth, the Lord sends me workers by the scores wherever I
go — and they are not like the . . . disciples either — they are ready
to give up their lives for their Guru. Truth is my God, the universe my
country I do not believe in duty. Duty is the curse of the Samsâri
(householder), not for the Sannyâsin. Duty is humbug. I am free, my
bonds are cut; what care I where this body goes or does not go. You have
helped me well right along. The Lord will reward you. I sought praise
neither from India nor from America, nor do I seek such bubbles. I have
a truth to teach, I, the child of God And He that gave me the truth will
send me fellow workers from the earth's bravest and best. You Hindus
will see in a few years what the Lord does in the West. You are like the
Jews of old — dogs in the manger, who neither eat nor allow others to
eat. You have no religion your God is the kitchen, your Bible the
cooking-pots. . . . You are a few brave lads. . . . Hold on, boys, no
cowards among my children. . . . Are great things ever done smoothly?
Time, patience, and indomitable will must show. I could have told you
many things that would have made your heart leap, but I will not. I want
iron wills and hearts that do not know how to quake. Hold on. The Lord
bless you.

Ever yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
