---
title: L

---
<div>

[←](049_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](051_friend.htm)

  

[«](049_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_7/epistles_third_series/30_rakhal.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/063_mother.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/070_mother.htm)

## L

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK,  
*August, 1895*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

. . . Now here is another letter from Mr. Sturdy I send it over to you.
See how things are being prepared ahead. Don't you think this coupled
with Mr. Leggett's invitation as a divine call? I think so and am
following it. I am going by the end of August with Mr. Leggett to Paris,
and then I go to London.

What little can be done for my brethren and my work is all the help I
want from you now. I have done my duty to my people fairly well. Now for
the world that gave me this body — the country that gave me the ideas,
the humanity which allows me to be one of them!

The older I grow, the more I see behind the idea of the Hindus that
*man* is the greatest of all beings. So say the Mohammedans too. The
angels were asked by Allah to bow down to Adam. Iblis did not, and
therefore he became Satan. This earth is higher than all heavens; this
is the greatest school in the universe; and the Mars or Jupiter people
cannot be higher than we, because they cannot communicate with us. The
only so-called higher beings are the departed, and these are nothing but
men who have taken another body. This is finer, it is true, but still a
*man-body*, with hands and feet, and so on. And they live on this earth
in another Âkâsha, without being absolutely invisible. They also think,
and have consciousness, and everything else like us. So they also are
men, so are the Devas, the angels. But man alone becomes *God*; and they
all have to become men again in order to become God. . . .

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
