---
title: LVIII

---
<div>

[←](057_blessed_and_beloved.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](059_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](057_blessed_and_beloved.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/086_miss_thursby.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/069_alasinga.htm) Addressee
[»](059_alasinga.htm)

## LVIII

U. S. A.,  
*17th February, 1896*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

. . . I have used some very harsh words in my letters, which you ought
to excuse, as you know, I get nervous at times. The work is terribly
hard; and the more it is growing, the harder it is becoming. I need a
long rest very badly. Yet a great work is before me in England.

Have patience, my son — it will grow beyond all your expectations. . . .
Every work has got to pass through hundreds of difficulties before
succeeding. Those that persevere will see the light, sooner or later.

I have succeeded now in rousing the very heart of the American
civilisation, New York, but it has been a terrific struggle. . . . I
have spent nearly, all I had on this New York work and in England. Now
things are in such a shape that they will go on. Just as I am writing to
you, every one of my bones is paining after last afternoon's long Sunday
public lecture. Then you see, to put the Hindu ideas into English and
then make out of dry philosophy and intricate mythology and queer
startling psychology, a religion which shall be easy, simple, popular,
and at the same time meet the requirements of the highest minds — is a
task only those can understand who have attempted it. The dry, abstract
Advaita must become living — poetic — in everyday life; out of
hopelessly intricate mythology must come concrete moral forms; and out
of bewildering Yogi-ism must come the most scientific and practical
psychology — and all this must be put in a form so that a child may
grasp it. That is my life's work. The Lord only knows how far I shall
succeed. "To work we have the right, not to the fruits thereof." It is
hard work, my boy, hard work! To keep one's self steady in the midst of
this whirl of Kâma-Kânchana (lust and gold) and hold on to one's own
ideals, until disciples are moulded to conceive of the ideas of
realisation and perfect renunciation, is indeed difficult work, my boy.
Thank God, already there is great success. I cannot blame the
missionaries and others for not understanding me — they hardly ever saw
a man who did not care in the least about women and money. At first they
could not believe it to be possible; how could they? You must not think
that the Western nations have the same ideas of chastity and purity as
the Indians. Their equivalents are virtue and courage. . . . People are
now flocking to me. Hundreds have now become convinced that there are
men who can really control their bodily desires; and reverence and
respect for these principles are growing. All things come to him who
waits. May you be blessed for ever and ever!

Yours with love,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
