---
title: LXIV

---
<div>

[←](063_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](065_blessed_and_beloved.htm)

  

[«](063_alasinga.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/081_goodwin.htm)  
[«](063_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](067_alasinga.htm)

## LXIV

SWITZERLAND,  
*8th August, 1896*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

Since writing to you a few days ago I have found my way to let you know
that I am in a position to do this for the *Brahmavadin*. I will give
you Rs. 100 a month for a year or two, i.e. £60 or £70 a year, i.e. as
much as would cover Rs. 100 a month. That will set you free to work for
the *Brahmavadin* and make it a better success. Mr. Mani Iyer and a few
friends can help in raising fund that would cover the printing etc. What
is the income from subscription? Can these be employed to pay the
contributors and get a fine series of articles? It is not necessary that
everybody should understand all that is written in the *Brahmavadin*,
but that they must subscribe from patriotism and good Karma — the Hindus
I mean.

Several things are necessary. First there should be strict integrity.
Not that I even hint that any of you would digress from it, but the
Hindus have a peculiar slovenliness in business matters, not being
sufficiently methodical and strict in keeping accounts etc.

Secondly, entire devotion to the cause, knowing that your SALVATION
depends upon making the *Brahmavadin* a success. Let this paper be your
Ishtadevata, and then you will see how success comes. I have already
sent for Abhedânanda from India. I hope there will be no delay with him
as it was with the other Swami. On receipt of this letter you send me a
clear account of all the income and the expenses of the *Brahmavadin* so
that I may judge from it what best can be done. Remember that perfect
purity, disinterestedness, and obedience to the Guru are the secret of
all success. . . .

A big foreign circulation of a religious paper is impossible. It must be
supported by the Hindus if they have any sense of virtue or gratitude
left to them.

By the by, Mrs. Annie Besant invited me to speak at her Lodge, on
Bhakti. I lectured there one night. Col. Olcott also was there. I did it
to show my sympathy for all sects. . . . Our countrymen must remember
that in things of the Spirit we are the teachers, and not foreigners —
but in things of the world we ought to learn from them.

I have read Max Müller's article, which is a good one, considering that
when he wrote it, six months ago, he had no material except Mazoomdar's
leaflet. Now he writes me a long and nice letter offering to write a
book on Shri Ramakrishna. I have already supplied him with much
material, but a good deal more is needed from India.

Work on! Hold on! Be brave! Dare anything and everything!

. . . It is all misery, this Samsâra, don't you see!

Yours with blessings and love,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
