---
title: LXV

---
<div>

[←](064_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](066_nanjunda_rao.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/083_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Chronology [»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/106_shashi.htm)  
[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/083_blessed_and_beloved.htm)
Addressee [»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/084_friend.htm)

## LXV

LUCERNE,  
*23rd August, 1896*.

BLESSED AND BELOVED, (E. T. Sturdy)

Today I received a letter from India written by Abhedânanda that in all
probability he had started on the 11th August by the B.I.S.N.,
"S.S.Mombassa". He could not get an earlier steamer; else he would have
started earlier. In all probability he would be able to secure a passage
on the Mombassa. The Mombassa will reach London about the 15th of
September. As you already know, Miss Müller changed the date of my
visiting Deussen to the 19th September. I shall not be in London to
receive Abhedananda. He is also coming without any warm clothing; but I
am afraid by that time it will begin to cool in England, and he will
require at least some underwear and an overcoat. You know all about
these things much better than I. So kindly keep a look out for this
Mombassa. I expect also another letter from him.

I am suffering from a very bad cold indeed. I hope by this time Mohin's
money from the Raja has arrived to your care. If so, I do not want the
money I gave him back. You may give him the whole of it.

I had some letters from Goodwin and Sâradânanda. They are doing well.
Also one from Mrs. Bull regretting that you and I could not be
corresponding members of some Society, she is founding at Cambridge. I
do remember to have written to her about your and my non-acquiescence in
this membership. I have not yet been able to write even a line. I had
not a moment's time even to read, climbing up hill and going down dale
all the time. We will have to begin the march again in a few days.
Kindly give my love to Mohin and Fox when you see them next.

With love to all our friends,

Yours ever,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
