---
title: LXIX

---
<div>

[←](068_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](070_indian_mirror.htm)

  

[«](068_alasinga.htm) Chronology [»](070_indian_mirror.htm)  
[«](068_alasinga.htm) Addressee [»](071_alasinga.htm)

## LXIX

C/O E. T. STURDY, ESQ.,  
39 VICTORIA STREET, LONDON,  
*28th October, 1896*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

. . . I am not yet sure what month I shall reach India. I will write
later about it. The new Swami (Swami Abhedananda) delivered his maiden
speech yesterday at a friendly society's meeting. It was good and I
liked it; he has the making of a good speaker in him, I am sure.

. . . You have not yet brought out the — . . Again, books must be cheap
for India to have a large sale; the types must be bigger to satisfy the
public. . . . You can very well get out a cheap edition of  — if you
like. I have not reserved any copyright on it purposely. You have missed
a good opportunity by not getting out the — book earlier, but we Hindus
are so slow that when we have done a work, the opportunity has already
passed away, and thus we are the losers. Your — book came out after a
year's talk! Did you think the Western people would wait for it till
Doomsday? You have lost three-fourths of the sale by this delay. . . .
That Haramohan is a fool, slower than you, and his printing is
diabolical. There is no use in publishing books that way; it is cheating
the public, and should not be done. I shall most probably return to
India accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Sevier, Miss Müller, and Mr. Goodwin.
Mr. and Mrs. Sevier are probably going to settle in Almora at least for
some time, and Goodwin is going to become a Sannyâsin. He of course will
travel with me. It is he to whom we owe all our books. He took shorthand
notes of my lectures, which enabled the books to be published. . . . All
these lectures were delivered on the spur of the moment, without the
least preparation, and as such, they should be carefully revised and
edited. . . .Goodwin will have to live with me. . . . He is a strict
vegetarian.

Yours with love,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. I have sent a little note to the *Indian Mirror* today about Dr.
Barrows and how he should be welcomed. You also write some good words of
welcome for him in the *Brahmavadin*. All here send love.

V.

</div>
