---
title: LXXII

---
<div>

[←](071_alasinga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm) / [→](073_madam.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/113_mrs_bull.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/114_lalaji.htm)  
[«](071_alasinga.htm) Addressee

## LXXII

39 VICTORIA STREET,  
LONDON, S. W.,  
*20th November, 1896*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

I am leaving England on the 16th of December for Italy, and shall catch
the North German Lloyd S. S. Prinz Regent Luitpold at Naples. The
steamer is due at Colombo on the 14th of January next.

I intend to see a little of Ceylon, and shall then go to Madras. I am
being accompanied by three English friends — Capt. and Mrs. Sevier and
Mr. Goodwin. Mr. Sever and his wife are going to start a place near
Almora in the Himalayas which I intend to make my Himalayan Centre, as
well as a place for Western disciples to live as Brahmachârins and
Sannyâsins. Goodwin is an unmarried young man who is going to travel and
live with me, he is like a Sannyasin.

I am very desirous to reach Calcutta before the birth day festival of
Shri Ramakrishna. . . . My present plan of work is to start two centres,
one in Calcutta and the other in Madras, in which to train up young
preachers. I have funds enough to start the one in Calcutta, which being
the scene of Shri Ramakrishna's life-work, demands my first attention.
As for the Madras one, I expect to get funds in India.

We will begin work with these three centres; and later on, we will get
to Bombay and Allahabad. And from these points, if the Lord is pleased,
we will invade not only India, but send over bands of preachers to every
country in the world. That should be our first duty. Work on with a
heart. 39 Victoria will be the London headquarters for some time to
come, as the work will be carried on there. Sturdy had a big box of
*Brahmavâdin* I did not know before. He is now canvassing subscribers
for it.

Now we have got one Indian magazine in English fixed. We can start some
in the vernaculars also. Miss M. Noble of Wimbledon is a great worker.
She will also canvass for both the Madras papers. She will write you.
These things will grow slowly but surely. Papers of this kind are
supported by a small circle of followers. Now they cannot be expected to
do too many things at a time — they have to buy the books, find the
money for the work in England, subscribers for the paper here, and then
subscribe to Indian papers. It is too much. It is more like trading than
teaching. Therefore you must wait, and yet I am sure there will be a few
subscribers here. Again, there must be work for the people here to do
when I am gone, else the whole thing will go to pieces. Therefore there
must be a paper here, so also in America by and by. The Indian papers
are to be supported by the Indians. To make a paper equally acceptable
to all nationalities means a staff of writers from all nations; and that
means at least a hundred thousand rupees a year.

You must not forget that my interests are *international* and not Indian
alone. I am in good health; so is Abhedananda.

With all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
