---
title: LXXVI

---
<div>

[←](075_doctor_shashi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](077_sharat_chandra.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/124_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/125_shuddhananda.htm)

## LXXVI

ALMORA,  
*1st June, 1897*.

DEAR MR.—,

The objections you show about the Vedas would be valid if the word Vedas
meant Samhitâs. The word Vedas includes the three parts, the Samhitas,
the Brâhmanas, and the Upanishads, according to the universally received
opinion in India. Of these, the first two portions, as being the
ceremonial parts, have been nearly put out of sight; the Upanishads have
alone been taken up by all our philosophers and founders of sects.

The idea that the Samhitas are the only Vedas is very recent and has
been started by the late Swâmi Dayânanda. This opinion has not got any
hold on the orthodox population.

The reason of this opinion was that Swami Dayananda thought he could
find a consistent theory of the whole, based on a new interpretation of
the Samhitas, but the difficulties remained the same, only they fell
back on the Brahmanas. And in spite of the theories of interpretation
and interpolation a good deal still remains.

Now if it is possible to build a consistent religion on the Samhitas, it
is a thousand times more sure that a very consistent and harmonious
faith can be based upon the Upanishads, and moreover, here one has not
to go against the already received national opinion. Here all the
Âchâryas (Teachers) of the past would side with you, and you have a vast
scope for new progress.

The Gita no doubt has already become the Bible of Hinduism, and it fully
deserves to be so; but the personality of Krishna has become so covered
with haze that it is impossible today to draw any life-giving
inspiration from that *life*. Moreover, the present age requires new
modes of thought and new life.

Hoping this will help you in thinking along these lines.

I am yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
