---
title: CXIX

---
<div>

[←](118_rakhal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Epistles – First
Series](epistles_first_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](120_swami_brahmananda.htm)

  

[«](118_rakhal.htm) Chronology [»](120_swami_brahmananda.htm)  
[«](118_rakhal.htm) Addressee [»](120_swami_brahmananda.htm)

## CXIX

(Translated from [Bengali](b8548e5119.pdf) )

GOPAL LAL VILLA,  
BENARES (VARANASI) CANTONMENT,  
*21st February, 1902*.

MY DEAR RAKHAL,

I received a letter from you just now. If mother and grandmother desire
to come, send them over. It is better to get away from Calcutta now when
the season of plague is on. There is wide-spread plague in Allahabad; I
do not know if it will spread to Varanasi this time . . . . Tell Mrs.
Bull from me that a tour to Ellora and other places involves a difficult
journey, and it is now very hot. Her body is so tired that it is not
proper to go on a tour at present. It is several days since I received a
letter from "Uncle" (Mr. Okakura was endearingly so called. "Kura"
approximating to "Khurhâ" in Bengali which means uncle; Swamiji out of
fun calls him uncle.). The last news was that he had gone to Ajanta.
Mahant also has not replied, perhaps he will do so with the reply to
Raja Pyari Mohan's letter. . . .

Write me in detail about the matter of the Nepal Minister. Give my
special love and blessings to Mrs. Bull, Miss MacLeod, and all others.
My love and greetings to you, Baburam (Swami Premananda), and all
others. Has Gopal Dada (Swami Advaitananda) got the letter? Kindly look
after the goat a bit.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. All the boys here send you their respectful salutations.

</div>
