---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](01_wednesday_june_19.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](03_monday_june_24.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SUNDAY, *June 23, 1895*.

Be brave and be sincere; then follow any path with devotion, and you
*must* reach the Whole. Once lay hold of one link of the chain, and the
whole chain must come by degrees. Water the roots of the tree (that is,
reach the Lord), and the whole tree is watered; getting the Lord, we get
all.

One-sidedness is the bane of the world. The more sides you can develop
the more souls you have, and you can see the universe through all souls
— through the Bhakta (devotee) and the Jnâni (philosopher). Determine
your own nature and stick to it. Nishthâ (devotion to one ideal) is the
only method for the beginner; but with devotion and sincerity it will
lead to all. Churches, doctrines, forms, are the hedges to protect the
tender plant, but they must later be broken down that the plant may
become a tree. So the various religions, Bibles, Vedas, dogmas — all are
just tubs for the little plant; but it must get out of the tub. Nishthâ
is, in a manner, placing the plant in the tub, shielding the struggling
soul in its path. . . .

Look at the "ocean" and not at the "wave"; see no difference between ant
and angel. Every worm is the brother of the Nazarene. How say one is
greater and one less? Each is great in his own place. We are in the sun
and in the stars as much as here. Spirit is beyond space and time and is
everywhere. Every mouth praising the Lord is my mouth, every eye seeing
is my eye. We are confined nowhere; we are not body, the universe is our
body. We are magicians waving magic wands and creating scenes before us
at will. We are the spider in his huge web, who can go on the varied
strands wheresoever he desires. The spider is now only conscious of the
spot where he is, but he will in time become conscious of the whole web.
We are now conscious only where the body is, we can use only one brain;
but when we reach ultraconsciousness, we know all, we can use all
brains. Even now we can "give the push" in consciousness, and it goes
beyond and acts in the superconscious.

We are striving "to be" and nothing more, no "I" ever — just pure
crystal, reflecting all, but ever the same, When that state is reached,
there is no more doing; the body becomes a mere mechanism, pure without
care for it; it cannot become impure.

Know you are the Infinite, then fear must die. Say ever, "I and my
Father are one."

\*    \*    \*

In time to come Christs will be in numbers like bunches of grapes on a
vine; then the play will be over and will pass out — as water in a
kettle beginning to boil shows first one bubble, then another then more
and more, until all is in ebullition and passes out as steam. Buddha and
Christ are the two biggest "bubbles" the world has yet produced. Moses
was a tiny bubble, greater and greater ones came. Sometime, however, all
will be bubbles and escape; but creation, ever new, will bring new water
to go through the process all over again.

</div>
