---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](03_monday_june_24.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](05_wednesday_june_26.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

TUESDAY, *June 25, 1895*.

After every happiness comes misery; they may be far apart or near. The
more advanced the soul, the more quickly does one follow the other.
*What we want is neither happiness nor misery*. Both make us forget our
true nature; both are chains — one iron, one gold; behind both is the
Atman, who knows neither happiness nor misery. These are *states* and
states must ever change; but the nature of the Soul is bliss, peace,
unchanging. We have not to get it, we have it; only wash away the dross
and see it.

Stand upon the Self, then only can we truly love the world. Take a very,
very high stand; knowing our universal nature, we must look with perfect
calmness upon all the *panorama* of the world. It is but baby's play,
and we know that, so cannot be disturbed by it. If the mind is pleased
with praise, it will be displeased with blame. All pleasures of the
senses or even of the mind are evanescent but within ourselves is the
one true unrelated pleasure, dependent upon nothing. It is perfectly
free, it is bliss. *The more our bliss is within, the more spiritual we
are*. The pleasure of the Self is what the world calls religion.

The internal universe, the *real*, is infinitely greater than the
external, which is only a shadowy projection of the true one. This world
is neither true nor untrue, it is the shadow of truth. "Imagination is
the gilded shadow of truth", says the poet.

We enter into creation, and then for us it becomes living. Things are
dead in themselves; only we give them life, and then, like fools, we
turn around and are afraid of them, or enjoy them. But be not like
certain fisher-women, who, caught in a storm on their way home from
market, took refuge in the house of a florist. They were lodged for the
night in a room next to the garden where the air was full of the
fragrance of flowers. In vain did they try to rest, until one of their
number suggested that they wet their fishy baskets and place them near
their heads. Then they all fell into a sound sleep.

The world is our fish basket, we must not depend upon it for enjoyment.
Those who do are the Tâmasas or the bound. Then there are the Râjasas or
the egotistical, who talk always about "I", "I". They do good work
sometimes and may become spiritual. But the highest are the Sâttvikas,
the introspective, those who live only in the Self. These three
qualities, Tamas, Rajas, and Sattva (idleness, activity, and
illumination), are in everyone, and different ones predominate at
different times.

Creation is not a "making" of something, it is the struggle to regain
the equilibrium, as when atoms of cork are thrown to the bottom of a
pail of water and rush to rise to the top, singly or in clusters. *Life
is and must be accompanied by evil*. A little evil is the source of
life; the little wickedness that is in the world is very good; for when
the balance is regained, the world will end, because sameness and
destruction are one. When this world goes, good and evil go with it; but
when we can transcend this world, we get rid of both good and evil and
have bliss.

There is no possibility of ever having pleasure without pain, good
without evil; for living itself is just the lost equilibrium. What we
want is freedom, not life, nor pleasure, nor good. Creation is infinite,
without beginning and without end — the ever-moving ripple in an
infinite lake. There are yet unreached depths and others where the
equilibrium has been regained; but the ripple is always progressing, the
struggle to regain the balance is eternal. Life and death are only
different names for the same fact, the two sides of the one coin. Both
are Maya, the inexplicable state of striving at one time to live, and a
moment later to die. Beyond this is the true nature, the Atman. While we
recognise a God, it is really only the Self which we have separated
ourselves from and worship as outside of us; but it is our true Self all
the time — the one and only God.

To regain the balance we must counteract Tamas by Rajas; then conquer
Rajas by Sattva, the calm beautiful state that will grow and grow until
all else is gone. Give up bondage; become a son, be free, and then you
can "see the Father", as did Jesus. Infinite strength is religion and
God. Avoid weakness and slavery. You are only a soul, *if* you are free;
there is immortality for you, *if* you are free; there is God, *if* He
is free. . . .

The world for me, not I for the world. Good and evil are our slaves, not
we theirs. It is the nature of the brute to remain where he is (not to
progress); it is the nature of man to seek good and avoid evil; it is
the nature of God to seek neither, but just to be eternally blissful.
Let us be God! Make the heart like an ocean, go beyond all the trifles
of the world, be mad with joy even at evil; see the world as a picture
and then enjoy its beauty, knowing that nothing affects you. Children
finding glass beads in a mud puddle, that is the good of the world. Look
at it with calm complacency; see good and evil as the same — both are
merely "God's play"; enjoy all.

\*    \*    \*

My Master used to say, "All is God; but tiger-God is to be shunned. All
water is water; but we avoid dirty water for drinking."

The whole sky is the censer of God, and sun and moon are the lamps. What
temple is needed? All eyes are Thine, yet Thou hast not an eye; all
hands are Thine; yet Thou hast not a hand.

Neither seek nor avoid, take what comes. It is liberty to be affected by
nothing; do not merely endure, be unattached. Remember the story of the
bull. A mosquito sat long on the horn of a certain bull. Then his
conscience troubled him, and he said, "Mr. Bull, I have been sitting
here a long time, perhaps I annoy you. I am sorry, I will go away." But
the bull replied, "Oh no, not at all! Bring your whole family and live
on my horn; what can you do to me?"

</div>
