---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](05_wednesday_june_26.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](07_friday_june_28.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

THURSDAY, *June 27, 1895*. (*The Swami brought the New Testament this
morning and talked again on the book of John*.)

Mohammed claimed to be the "Comforter" that Christ promised to send. He
considered it unnecessary to claim a supernatural birth for Jesus. Such
claims have been common in all ages and in all countries. All great men
have claimed gods for their fathers.

Knowing is only relative; we can be God, but never *know* Him. Knowledge
is a lower state; Adam's fall was when he came to "know". Before that he
was God, he was truth, he was purity. We are our own faces, but can see
only a reflection, never the real thing. We are love, but when we think
of it, we have to use a phantasm, which proves that matter is only
externalised thought.[1](#fn1)

Nivritti is turning aside from the world. Hindu mythology says that the
four first-created  (The four first-created were Sanaka, Sanandana,
Sanâtana, and Sanatkumâra.) were warned by a Swan (God Himself) that
manifestation was only secondary; so they remained without creating. The
meaning of this is that expression is degeneration, because Spirit can
only be expressed by the letter and then the "letter killeth" (Bible, 2
Cor. III. 6.); yet principle is bound to be clothed in matter, though we
know that later we shall lose sight of the real in the covering. Every
great teacher understands this, and that is why a continual succession
of prophets has to come to show us the principle and give it a new
covering suited to the times. My Master taught that religion is one; all
prophets teach the same; but they can only present the principle in a
form; so they take it out of the old form and put it before us in a new
one. When we free ourselves from name and form, especially from a body —
when we need no body, good or bad — then only do we escape from bondage.
Eternal progression is eternal bondage; annihilation of form is to be
preferred. We must get free from any body, even a "god-body". God is the
only real existence, there cannot be two. There is but One Soul, and I
am That.

Good works are only valuable as a means of escape; they do good to the
doer, never to any other.

Knowledge is mere classification. When we find many things of the same
kind we call the sum of them by a certain name and are satisfied; we
discover "facts", never "why". We take a circuit in a wider field of
darkness and think we know something! No "why" can be answered in this
world; for that we must go to God. The Knower can never be expressed; it
is as when a grain of salt drops into the ocean, it is at once merged in
the ocean.

Differentiation creates; homogeneity or sameness is God. Get beyond
differentiation; then you conquer life and death and reach eternal
sameness and are in God, are God. Get freedom, even at the cost of life.
All lives belong to us as leaves to a book; but we are unchanged, the
Witness, the Soul, upon whom the impression is made, as when the
impression of a circle is made upon the eyes when a firebrand is rapidly
whirled round and round. The Soul is the unity of all personalities, and
because It is at rest, eternal, unchangeable. It is God, Atman. It is
not life, but It is coined into life. It is not pleasure, but It is
manufactured into pleasure. . . .

Today God is being abandoned by the world because He does not seem to be
doing enough for the world. So they say, "Of what good is He?" Shall we
look upon God as a mere municipal authority?

All we can do is to put down all desires, hates, differences; put down
the lower self, commit mental suicide, as it were; keep the body and
mind pure and healthy, but only as instruments to help us to God; that
is their only true use. Seek truth for truth's sake alone, look not for
bliss. It may come, but do not let that be your incentives. Have no
motive except God. Dare to come to Truth even through hell.

1.  [^](#txt1)Since the knower can know only his reflection and not
    himself, he is ever unknowable. So knowledge is distinct and
    separate from the knower, and as such it is externalised thought or
    thought standing outside the knower as a separate entity. Since the
    knower goes by the name of Spirit that which is distinct and
    separate from it should go by the name of Matter. Hence the Swami
    says, "Matter is only externalised thought."

</div>
