---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](09_sunday_june_30.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](11_tuesday_july_2.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

MONDAY, *July 1, 1895*. (*Shri Ramakrishna Deva*)

Shri Ramakrishna was the son of a very orthodox Brahmin, who would
refuse even a gift from any but a special caste of Brahmins; neither
might he work, nor even be a priest in a temple, nor sell books, nor
serve anyone. He could only have "what fell from the skies" (alms), and
even then it must not come through a "fallen" Brahmin. Temples have no
hold on the Hindu religion; if they were all destroyed, religion would
not be affected a grain. A man must only build a house for "God and
guests", to build for himself would be selfish; therefore he erects
temples as dwelling places for God.

Owing to the extreme poverty of his family, Shri Ramakrishna was obliged
to become in his boyhood a priest in a temple dedicated to the Divine
Mother, also called Prakriti, or Kâli, represented by a female figure
standing with feet on a male figure, indicating that until Maya lifts,
we can know nothing. Brahman is neuter, unknown and unknowable, but to
be objectified He covers Himself with a veil of Maya, becomes the Mother
of the Universe, and so brings forth the creation. The prostrate figure
(Shiva or God) has become Shava (dead or lifeless) by being covered by
Maya. The Jnâni says, "I will uncover God by force" (Advaitism); but the
dualist says, "I will uncover God by praying to Mother, begging Her to
open the door to which She alone has the key."

The daily service of the Mother Kali gradually awakened such intense
devotion in the heart of the young priest that he could no longer carry
on the regular temple worship. So he abandoned his duties and retired to
a small woodland in the temple compound, where he gave himself up
entirely to meditation. These woods were on the bank of the river Ganga;
and one day the swift current bore to his very feet just the necessary
materials to build him a little enclosure. In this enclosure he stayed
and wept and prayed, taking no thought for the care of his body or for
aught except his Divine Mother. A relative fed him once a day and
watched over him. Later came a Sannyasini or lady ascetic, to help him
find his "Mother". Whatever teachers he needed came to him unsought;
from every sect some holy saint would come and offer to teach him and to
each he listened eagerly. But he worshipped only Mother; all to him was
Mother.

Shri Ramakrishna never spoke a harsh word against anyone. So beautifully
tolerant was he that every sect thought that he belonged to them. He
loved everyone. To him all religions were true. He found a place for
each one. He was free, but free in love, not in "thunder". The mild type
creates, the thundering type spreads. Paul was the thundering type to
spread the light. (And it has been said by many that Swami Vivekananda
himself was a kind of St. Paul to Shri Ramakrishna.)

The age of St. Paul, however, is gone; we are to be the new lights for
this day. A self-adjusting organisation is the great need of our time.
When we can get one, that will be the last religion of the world. The
wheel must turn, and we should help it, not hinder. The waves of
religious thought rise and fall, and on the topmost one stands the
"prophet of the period". Ramakrishna came to teach the religion of
today, constructive, not destructive. He had to go afresh to Nature to
ask for facts, and he got scientific religion which never says
"believe", but "see"; "I see, and you too can see." Use the same means
and you will reach the same vision. God will come to everyone, harmony
is within the reach of all. Shri Ramakrishna's teachings are "the gist
of Hinduism"; they were not peculiar to him. Nor did he claim that they
were; he cared naught for name or fame.

He began to preach when he was about forty; but he never went out to do
it. He waited for those who wanted his teachings to come to him. In
accordance with Hindu custom, he was married by his parents in early
youth to a little girl of five, who remained at home with her family in
a distant village, unconscious of the great struggle through which her
young husband was passing. When she reached maturity, he was already
deeply absorbed in religious devotion. She travelled on foot from her
home to the temple at Dakshineswar where he was then living; and as soon
as she saw him, she recognised what he was, for she herself was a great
soul, pure and holy, who only desired to help his work, never to drag
him down to the level of the Grihastha (householder).

Shri Ramakrishna is worshipped in India as one of the great
Incarnations, and his birthday is celebrated there as a religious
festival. . . .

A curious round stone is the emblem of Vishnu, the omnipresent. Each
morning a priest comes in, offers sacrifice to the idol, waves incense
before it, then puts it to bed and apologises to God for worshipping Him
in that way, because he can only conceive of Him through an image or by
means of some material object. He bathes the idol, clothes it, and puts
his divine self into the idol "to make it alive".

\*    \*    \*

There is a sect which says, "It is weakness to worship only the good and
beautiful, we ought also to love and worship the hideous and the evil."
This sect prevails all over Tibet, and they have no marriage. In India
proper they cannot exist openly, but organise secret societies. No
decent men will belong to them except *sub rosa*. Thrice communism was
tried in Tibet, and thrice it failed. They use Tapas and with immense
success as far as power is concerned.

Tapas means literally "to burn". It is a kind of penance to "heat" the
higher nature. It is sometimes in the form of a sunrise to sunset vow,
such as repeating Om all day incessantly. These actions will produce a
certain power that you can convert into any form you wish, spiritual or
material. This idea of Tapas penetrates the whole of Hindu religion. The
Hindus even say that God made Tapas to create the world. It is a mental
instrument with which to do everything. "Everything in the three worlds
can be caught by Tapas." . . .

People who report about sects with which they are not in sympathy are
both conscious and unconscious liars. A believer in one sect can rarely
see truth in others.

\*    \*    \*

A great Bhakta (Hanuman) once said when asked what day of the month it
was, "God is my eternal date, no other date I care for."

</div>
