---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](10_monday_july_1.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](12_wednesday_july_3.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

TUESDAY, *July 2, 1895*. (*The Divine Mother*.)

Shâktas worship the Universal Energy as Mother, the sweetest name they
know; for the mother is the highest ideal of womanhood in India. When
God is worshipped as "Mother", as Love, the Hindus call it the
"right-handed" way, and it leads to spirituality but never to material
prosperity. When God is worshipped on His terrible side, that is, in the
"left-handed" way, it leads usually to great material prosperity, but
rarely to spirituality; and eventually it leads to degeneration and the
obliteration of the race that practices it.

Mother is the first manifestation of power and is considered a higher
idea than father. With the name of Mother comes the idea of Shakti,
Divine Energy and Omnipotence, just as the baby believes its mother to
be all-powerful, able to do anything. The Divine Mother is the Kundalini
("coiled up" power) sleeping in us; without worshipping Her we can never
know ourselves. All-merciful, all-powerful, omnipresent are attributes
of Divine Mother. She is the sum total of the energy in the universe.
Every manifestation of power in the universe is "Mother". She is life,
She is intelligence, She is Love. She is in the universe yet separate
from it. She is a person and can be seen and known (as Shri Ramakrishna
saw and knew Her). Established in the idea of Mother, we can do
anything. She quickly answers prayer.

She can show; Herself to us in any form at any moment. Divine Mother can
have form (Rupa) and name (Nâma) or name without form; and as we worship
Her in these various aspects we can rise to pure Being, having neither
form nor name.

The sum total of all the cells in an organism is one person; so each
soul is like one cell and the sum of them is God, and beyond that is the
Absolute. The sea calm is the Absolute; the same sea in waves is Divine
Mother. She is time, space, and causation. God is Mother and has two
natures, the conditioned and the unconditioned. As the former, She is
God, nature, and soul (man). As the latter, She is unknown and
unknowable. Out of the Unconditioned came the trinity — God, nature, and
soul, the triangle of existence. This is the Vishishtâdvaitist idea.

A bit of Mother, a drop, was Krishna, another was Buddha, another was
Christ. The worship of even one spark of Mother in our earthly mother
leads to greatness. Worship Her if you want love and wisdom.

</div>
