---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](16_monday_july_8.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](18_wednesday_july_10.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

TUESDAY, *July 9, 1895*.

Man as Atman is really free; as man he is bound, changed by every
physical condition. As man, he is a machine with an idea of freedom; but
this human body is the best and the human mind the highest mind there
is. When a man attains to the Atman state, he can take a body, making it
to suit himself; he is above law. This is a statement and must be
proved. Each one must prove it for himself; we may satisfy ourselves,
but we cannot satisfy another. Râja-Yoga is the only science of religion
that can be demonstrated; and only what I myself have proved by
experience, do I teach. The full ripeness of reason is intuition, but
intuition cannot antagonise reason.

Work purifies the heart and so leads to Vidyâ (wisdom). The Buddhists
said, doing good to men and to animals were the only works; the Brahmins
said that worship and all ceremonials were equally "work" and purified
the mind. Shankara declares that "all works, good and bad, are against
knowledge". Actions tending to ignorance are sins, not directly, but as
causes, because they tend to increase Tamas and Rajas. With Sattva only,
comes wisdom. Virtuous deeds take off the veil from knowledge, and
knowledge alone can make us see God.

Knowledge can never be created, it can only be discovered; and every man
who makes a great discovery is inspired. Only, when it is a spiritual
truth he brings, we call him a prophet; and when it is on the physical
plane, we call him a scientific man, and we attribute more importance to
the former, although the source of all truth is one.

Shankara says, Brahman is the *essence, the reality of all knowledge*,
and that all manifestations as knower, knowing, and known are mere
imaginings in Brahman. Ramanuja attributes consciousness to God; the
real monists attribute nothing, not even existence in any meaning that
we can attach to it. Ramanuja declares that God is the essence of
conscious knowledge. Undifferentiated consciousness, when
differentiated, becomes the world. . . .

Buddhism, one of the most philosophical religions in the world, spread
all through the populace, the common people of India. What a wonderful
culture there must have been among the Aryans twenty-five hundred years
ago, to be able to grasp ideas!

Buddha was the only great Indian philosopher who would not recognise
caste, and not one of his followers remains in India. All the other
philosophers pandered more or less to social prejudices; no matter how
high they soared, still a bit of the vulture remained in them. As my
Master used to say, "The vulture soars high out of sight in the sky, but
his eye is ever on a bit of carrion on the earth."

\*    \*    \*

The ancient Hindus were wonderful scholars, veritable living
encyclopaedias. They said, "Knowledge in books and money in other
people's hands is like no knowledge and no money at all."

Shankara was regarded by many as an incarnation of Shiva.

</div>
