---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](17_tuesday_july_9.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](19_thursday_july_11.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

WEDNESDAY, *July 10, 1895*.

There are sixty-five million Mohammedans in India, some of them
Sufis.[1](#fn1) Sufis identify man with God, and through them this idea
came into Europe. They say, "I am that Truth"; but they have an
*esoteric* as well as an *exoteric* doctrine, although Mohammed himself
did not hold it.

"*Hashshashin*"[2](#fn2) has become our word "assassin", because an old
sect of Mohammedanism killed nonbelievers as a part of its creed.

A pitcher of water has to be present in the Mohammedan worship as a
symbol of God filling the universe.

The Hindus believe that there will be ten Divine Incarnations. Nine have
been and the tenth is still to come.

\*    \*    \*

Shankara sometimes resorts to sophistry in order to prove that the ideas
in the books go to uphold his philosophy. Buddha was more brave and
sincere than any teacher. He said: "Believe no book; the Vedas are all
humbug. If they agree with me, so much the better for the books. I am
the greatest book; sacrifice and prayer are useless." Buddha was the
first human being to give to the world a complete system of morality. He
was good for good's sake, he loved for love's sake.

Shankara says: God is to be reasoned on, because the Vedas say so.
Reason helps inspiration; books and realised reason — or individualized
perception — both are proofs of God. The Vedas are, according to him, a
sort of incarnation of universal knowledge. The proof of God is that He
brought forth the Vedas, and the proof of the Vedas is that such
wonderful books could only have been given out by Brahman. They are the
mine of all knowledge, and they have come out of Him as a man breathes
out air; therefore we know that He is infinite in power and knowledge.
He may or may not have created the world, that is a trifle; to have
produced the Vedas is more important! The world has come to know God
through the Vedas; no other way there is.

And so universal is this belief, held by Shankara, in the
all-inclusiveness of the Vedas that there is even a Hindu proverb that
if a man loses his cow, he goes to look for her in the Vedas!

Shankara further affirms that obedience to ceremonial is not knowledge.
Knowledge of God is independent of moral duties, or sacrifice or
ceremonial, or what we think or do not think, just as the stump is not
affected when one man takes it for a ghost and another sees it as it is.

Vedanta is necessary because neither reasoning nor books can show us
God. He is only to be realised by superconscious perception, and Vedanta
teaches how to attain that. You must get beyond personal God (Ishvara)
and reach the Absolute Brahman. God is the perception of every being: He
is all there is to he perceived. That which says "I" is Brahman, but
although we, day and night, perceive Him; we do not know that we are
perceiving Him. As soon as we become aware of this truth, all misery
goes; so we must get knowledge of the truth. Reach unity; no more
duality will come. But knowledge does not come by sacrifice, but by
seeking, worshipping, knowing the Atman.

Brahmavidyâ is the highest knowledge, knowing the Brahman; lower
knowledge is science. This is the teaching of the Mundakopanishad or the
Upanishad for Sannyâsins. There are two sorts of knowledge — principal
and secondary. The unessential is that part of the Vedas dealing with
worship and ceremonial, also all secular knowledge. The essential is
that by which we reach the Absolute. It (the Absolute) creates all from
Its own nature; there is nothing to cause, nothing outside. It is all
energy, It is all there is. He who makes all sacrifices to himself, the
Atman, he alone knows Brahman. Fools think outside worship the highest;
fools think works can give us God. Only those who go through the
Sushumnâ (the "path" of the Yogis) reach the Atman. They must go to a
Guru to learn. Each part has the same nature as the whole; all springs
from the Atman. Meditation is the arrow, the whole soul going out to God
is the bow, which speeds the arrow to its mark, the Atman. As finite, we
can never express the Infinite, but we are the Infinite. Knowing this we
argue with no one.

Divine wisdom is to be got by devotion, meditation, and chastity. "Truth
alone triumphs, and not untruth. Through truth alone the way is spread
to Brahman" — where alone love and truth are.

1.  [^](#txt1)The influence of Hinduism upon Mohammedanism in India gave
    rise to the sect known as Sufis.
2.  [^](#txt2)The name of a military and religious order existing in
    Syria in the 11th century and notorious for the number of secret
    murders committed by its members in obedience to the will of their
    chief. The literal meaning of the word is "Hashish-eater" and was
    applied to the order because of their habitual use of this special
    drug to fortify the murderers for their task.

</div>
