---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](18_wednesday_july_10.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](20_friday_july_12.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

THURSDAY, *July 11, 1895*.

Without mother-love no creation could continue. Nothing is entirely
physical, nor yet entirely metaphysical; one presupposes the other and
explains the other. All Theists agree that there is a background to this
visible universe, they differ as to the nature or character of that
background. Materialists say there is no background.

In all religions the superconscious state is identical. Hindus,
Christians, Mohammedans, Buddhists, and even those of no creed, all have
the very same experience when they transcend the body. . . .

The purest Christians in the world were established in India by the
Apostle Thomas about twenty-five years after the death of Jesus. This
was while the Anglo-Saxons were still savages, painting their bodies and
living in caves. The Christians in India once numbered about three
millions, but now there are about one million.

Christianity is always propagated by the sword. How wonderful that the
disciples of such a gentle soul should kill so much! The three
missionary religions are the Buddhist, Mohammedan, and Christian. The
three older ones, Hinduism, Judaism and Zoroastrianism, never sought to
make converts. Buddhists never killed, but converted three-quarters of
the world at one time by pure gentleness.

The Buddhists were the most logical agnostics. You can really stop
nowhere between nihilism and absolutism. The Buddhists were
intellectually all-destroyers, carrying their theory to its ultimate
logical issue. The Advaitists also worked out their theory to its
logical conclusion and reached the Absolute — one identified Unit
Substance out of which all phenomena are being manifested. Both
Buddhists and Advaitists have a feeling of identity and non-identity at
the same time; one of these feelings must be false, and the other true.
The nihilist puts the reality in non-identity, the realist puts the
reality in identity; and this is the fight which occupies the whole
world. This is the "tug-of-war".

The realist asks, "How does the nihilist get any idea of identity?" How
does the revolving light appear a circle? A point of rest alone explains
motion. The nihilist can never explain the genesis of the delusion that
there is a background; neither can the idealist explain how the One
becomes the many. The only explanation must come from beyond the
sense-plane; we must rise to the superconscious, to a state entirely
beyond sense-perception. That metaphysical power is the further
instrument that the idealist alone can use. He can experience the
Absolute; the man Vivekananda can resolve himself into the Absolute and
then come back to the man again. For him, then the problem is solved and
secondarily for others, for he can show the way to others. Thus religion
begins where philosophy ends. The "good of the world" will be that what
is now superconscious for us will in ages to come be the conscious for
all. Religion is therefore the highest work the world has; and because
man has unconsciously felt this, he has clung through all the ages to
the idea of religion.

Religion, the great milch cow, has given many kicks, but never mind, it
gives a great deal of milk. The milkman does not mind the kick of the
cow which gives much milk. Religion is the greatest child to be born,
the great "moon of realisation"; let us feed it and help it grow, and it
will become a giant. King Desire and King Knowledge fought, and just as
the latter was about to be defeated, he was reconciled to Queen
Upanishad and a child was born to him, Realisation, who saved the
victory to him. (From the *Prabodha-chandrodaya*, a Vedantic Sanskrit
masque.)

Love concentrates all the power of the will without effort, as when a
man falls in love with a woman.

The path of devotion is natural and pleasant. Philosophy is taking the
mountain stream back to its force. It is a quicker method but very hard.
Philosophy says, "Check everything." Devotion says, "Give the stream,
have eternal self-surrender." It is a longer way, but easier and
happier.

"Thine am I for ever; henceforth whatever I do, it is Thou doing it. No
more is there any me or mine."

"Having no money to give, no brains to learn, no time to practice Yoga,
to Thee, O sweet One, I give myself, to Thee my body and mind."

No amount of ignorance or wrong ideas can put a barrier between the soul
and God. Even if there be no God, still hold fast to love. It is better
to die seeking a God than as a dog seeking only carrion. Choose the
highest ideal, and give your life up to that. "Death being so certain,
it is the highest thing to give up life for a great purpose."

Love will painlessly attain to philosophy; then after knowledge comes
Parâbhakti (supreme devotion).

Knowledge is critical and makes a great fuss over everything; but Love
says, "God will show His real nature to me" and accepts all.

                           RABBIA

        Rabbia, sick upon her bed,  
        By two saints was visited —  
        Holy Malik, Hassan wise —  
        Men of mark in Moslem eyes.

        Hassan said, "Whose prayer is pure  
        Will God's chastisements endure."  
        Malik, from a deeper sense  
        Uttered his experience:  
        "He who loves his master's choice  
        Will in chastisement *rejoice*."

        Rabbia saw some selfish will  
        In their maxims lingering still,  
        And replied "O men of grace,  
        He who sees his Master's face,  
        Will not in his prayers recall  
        That he is chastised at all !"

                                                        — *Persian Poem*

</div>
