---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](24_tuesday_july_16.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](26_thursday_july_18.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

WEDNESDAY, *July 17, 1895*.

Râmânuja divides the universe into Chit, Achit, and Ishvara — man,
nature, and God; conscious, subconscious, and superconscious. Shankara,
on the contrary, says that Chit, the soul, is the same as God. God *is*
truth, *is* knowledge, *is* infinity; these are not qualities. Any
thought of God is a qualification, and all that can be said of Him is
"Om tat sat".

Shankara further asks, can you see existence separate from everything
else? Where is the differentiation between two objects? Not in
sense-perception, else all would be one in it. We have to perceive in
sequence. In getting knowledge of what a thing is, we get also something
which it is not. The differentiae are in the memory and are got by
comparison with what is stored there. Difference is not in the nature of
a thing, it is in the brain. Homogeneous one is outside, differentiae
are inside (in the mind); so the idea of "many" is the creation of the
mind.

Differentiae become qualities when they are separate but joined in one
object. We cannot say positively what differentiation is. All that we
see and feel about things is pure and simple existence, "*isness*". All
else is in us. Being is the only positive proof we have of anything. All
differentiation is really "secondary reality", as the snake in the rope,
because the serpent, too, had a certain reality, in that *something* was
seen although misapprehended. When the knowledge of the rope becomes
negative, the knowledge of the snake becomes positive, and vice versa;
but the fact that you see only one does not prove that the other is
non-existent. The idea of the world is an obstruction covering the idea
of God and is to be removed, but it does have an existence.

Shankara says again, perception is the last proof of existence. It is
self-effulgent and self-conscious, because to go beyond the senses we
should still need perception. Perception is independent of the senses,
of all instruments, unconditioned. There can be no perception without
consciousness; perception has self-luminosity, which in a lesser degree
is called consciousness. Not one act of perception can be unconscious;
in fact, consciousness is the nature of perception. Existence and
perception are one thing, not two things joined together. That which
needs no cause is infinite; so, as perception is the last proof of
itself, it is eternal. It is always subjective; perception itself is its
own perceiver. Perception is not in the mind, but perception brings
mind. It is absolute, the only knower, so perception is really the
Atman. Perception itself perceives, but the Atman cannot be a knower,
because a "knower" becomes such by the action of knowledge; but,
Shankara says, "This Atman is not I", because the consciousness "I am"
(Aham) is not in the Atman. We are but the reflections of that Atman;
and Atman and Brahman are one.

When you talk and think of the Absolute, you have to do it in the
relative; so all these logical arguments apply. In Yoga, perception and
realisation are one. Vishishtâdvaita, of which Ramanuja is the exponent,
is seeing partial unity and is a step toward Advaita. Vishishta means
differentiation. Prakriti is the nature of the world, and change comes
upon it. Changeful thoughts expressed in changeful words can never prove
the Absolute. You reach only something that is minus certain qualities,
not Brahman Itself; only a verbal unification, the highest abstraction,
but not the nonexistence of the relative.

</div>
