---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](36_monday_july_29.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](38_wednesday_july_31.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

TUESDAY, *July 30, 1895*.

Christs and Buddhas are simply occasions upon which to objectify our own
inner powers. We really answer our own prayers.

It is blasphemy to think that if Jesus had never been born, humanity
would not have been saved. It is horrible to forget thus the divinity in
human nature, a divinity that must come out. Never forget the glory of
human nature. We are the greatest God that ever was or ever will be.
Christs and Buddhas are but waves on the boundless ocean which *I am*.
Bow down to nothing but your own higher Self. Until you know that you
are that very God of gods, there will never be any freedom for you.

All our past actions are really good, because they lead us to what we
ultimately become. Of whom to beg? I am the real existence, and all else
is a dream save as it is I. I am the whole ocean; do not call the little
wave you have made "I"; know it for nothing but a wave. Satya kâma
(lover of truth) heard the inner voice telling him, "You are the
infinite, the universal is in you. Control yourself and listen to the
voice of your true Self."

The great prophets who do the fighting have to be less perfect than
those who live silent lives of holiness, thinking great thoughts and so
helping the world. These men, passing out one after another, produce as
final outcome the man of power who preaches.

\*            \*            \*

Knowledge exists, man only discovers it. The Vedas are the eternal
knowledge through which God created the world. They talk high philosophy
— the highest — and make this tremendous claim. . . .

Tell the truth boldly, whether it hurts or not. Never pander to
weakness. If truth is too much for intelligent people and sweeps them
away, let them go; the sooner the better. Childish ideas are for babies
and savages; and these are not all in the nursery and the forests, some
of them have fallen into the pulpits.

It is bad to stay in the church after you are grown up spiritually. Come
out and die in the open air of freedom.

All progression is in the relative world. The human form is the highest
and man the greatest being, because here and now we can get rid of the
relative world entirely, can actually attain freedom, and this is the
goal. Not only we can, but some have reached perfection; so no matter
what finer bodies come, they could only be on the relative plane and
could do no more than we, for to attain freedom is all that can be done.

The angels never do wicked deeds, so they never get punished and never
get saved. Blows are what awaken us and help to break the dream. They
show us the insufficiency of this world and make us long to escape, to
have freedom. . . .

A thing dimly perceived we call by one name; the same thing when fully
perceived we call by another. The higher the moral nature, the higher
the perception and the stronger the will.

TUESDAY AFTERNOON.

The reason of the harmony between thought and matter is that they are
two sides of one thing, call it "x", which divides itself into the
internal and the external.

The English word "paradise" comes from the Sanskrit *para-desa*, which
was taken over into the Persian language and means literally "the land
beyond", or the other world. The old Aryans always believed in a soul,
never that man was the body. Their heavens and hells were all temporary,
because no effect can outlast its cause and no cause is eternal;
therefore all effects must come to an end.

The whole of the Vedanta Philosophy is in this story: Two birds of
golden plumage sat on the same tree. The one above, serene, majestic,
immersed in his own glory; the one below restless and eating the fruits
of the tree, now sweet, now bitter. Once he ate an exceptionally bitter
fruit, then he paused and looked up at the majestic bird above; but he
soon forgot about the other bird and went on eating the fruits of the
tree as before. Again he ate a bitter fruit, and this time he hopped up
a few boughs nearer to the bird at the top. This happened many times
until at last the lower bird came to the place of the upper bird and
lost himself. He found all at once that there had never been two birds,
but that he was all the time that upper bird, serene, majestic, and
immersed in his own glory.

</div>
