---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](38_wednesday_july_31.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](40_friday_august_2.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

THURSDAY, *August 1, 1895*.

The real Guru is the one through whom we have our spiritual descent. He
is the channel through which the spiritual current flows to us, the link
which joins us to the whole spiritual world. Too much faith in
personality has a tendency to produce weakness and idolatry, but intense
love for the Guru makes rapid growth possible, he connects us with the
internal Guru. Adore your Guru if there be real truth in him; that
Guru-bhakti (devotion to the teacher) will quickly lead you to the
highest.

Sri Ramakrishna's purity was that of a baby. He never touched money in
his life, and lust was absolutely annihilated in him. Do not go to great
religious teachers to learn physical science, their whole energy has
gone to the spiritual. In Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa the man was all
dead and only God remained; he actually could not see sin, he was
literally "of purer eyes than to behold iniquity". The purity of these
few Paramahamsa (Monks of the highest order) is all that holds the world
together. If they should all die out and leave it, the world would go to
pieces. They do good by simply being, and they know it not; they just
are. . . .

Books suggest the inner light and the method of bringing that out, but
we can only understand them when we have earned the knowledge ourselves.
When the inner light has flashed for you, let the books go, and look
only within. You have in you all and a thousand times more than is in
all the books. Never lose faith in yourself, you can do anything in this
universe. Never weaken, all power is yours.

If religion and life depend upon books or upon the existence of any
prophet whatsoever, then perish all religion and books! Religion is in
us. No books or teachers can do more than help us to find it, and even
without them we can get all truth within. You have gratitude for books
and teachers without bondage to them; and worship your Guru as God, but
do not obey him blindly; love him all you will, but think for yourself.
No blind belief can save you, work out your own salvation. Have only one
idea of God — that He is an eternal help.

Freedom and highest love must go together, then neither can become a
bondage. We can give nothing to God; He gives all to us. He is the Guru
of Gurus. Then we find that He is the "Soul of our souls", our very
Self. No wonder we love Him, He is the Soul of our souls; whom or what
else can we love? We want to be the "steady flame, burning without heat
and without smoke". To whom can you do good, when you see only God? You
cannot do good to God! All doubt goes, all is, "sameness". If you do
good at all, you do it to yourself; feel that the receiver is the higher
one. You serve the other because you are lower than he, not because he
is low and you are high. Give as the rose gives perfume, because it is
its own nature, utterly unconscious of giving.

The great Hindu reformer, Raja Ram Mohan Roy, was a wonderful example of
this unselfish work. He devoted his whole life to helping India. It was
he who stopped the burning of widows. It is usually believed that this
reform was due entirely to the English; but it was Raja Ram Mohan Roy
who started the agitation against the custom and succeeded in obtaining
the support of the Government in suppressing it. Until he began the
movement, the English had done nothing. He also founded the important
religious Society called the Brahmo-Samaj, and subscribed a hundred
thousand dollars to found a university. He then stepped out and told
them to go ahead without him. He cared nothing for fame or for results
to himself.

THURSDAY AFTERNOON.

There are endless series of manifestations, like "merry-go-round", in
which the souls ride, so to speak. The series are eternal; individual
souls get out, but the events repeat themselves eternally; and that is
how one's past and future can be read, because all is really present.
When the soul is in a certain chain, it has to go through the
experiences of that chain. From one series souls go to other series;
from some series they escape for ever by realising that they are
Brahman. By getting hold of one prominent event in a chain and holding
on to it, the whole chain can be dragged in and read. This power is
easily acquired, but it is of no real value; and to practise it takes
just so much from our spiritual forces. Go not after these things,
worship God.

</div>
