---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](40_friday_august_2.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](42_sunday_august_4.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SATURDAY, *August 3, 1895*.

Individuals who are to get freedom in this life have to live thousands
of years in one lifetime. They have to be ahead of their times, but the
masses can only crawl. Thus we have Christs and Buddhas. . . .

There was once a Hindu queen, who so much desired that all her children
should attain freedom in this life that she herself took all the care of
them; and as she rocked them to sleep, she sang always the one song to
them — "Tat tvam asi, Tat tvam asi" ("That thou art, That thou art").

Three of them became Sannyasins, but the fourth was taken away to be
brought up elsewhere to become a king. As he was leaving home, the
mother gave him a piece of paper which he was to read when he grew to
manhood. On that piece of paper was written, "God alone is true. All
else is false. The soul never kills or is killed. Live alone or in the
company of holy ones." When the young prince read this, he too at once
renounced the world and became a Sannyasin.

Give up, renounce the world. Now we are like dogs strayed into a kitchen
and eating a piece of meat, looking round in fear lest at any moment
some one may come and drive them out. Instead of that, be a king and
know you own the world. This never comes until you give it up and it
ceases to bind. Give up mentally, if you do not physically. Give up from
the heart of your hearts. Have Vairâgya (renunciation). This is the real
sacrifice, and without it, it is impossible to attain spirituality. Do
not desire, for what you desire you get, and with it comes terrible
bondage. It is nothing but bringing "noses on us,"[1](#fn1) as in the
case of the man who had three boons to ask. We never get freedom until
we are self-contained. "Self is the Saviour of self, none else."

Learn to feel yourself in other bodies, to know that we are all one.
Throw all other nonsense to the winds. Spit out your actions, good or
bad, and never think of them again. What is done is done. Throw off
superstition. Have no weakness even in the face of death. Do not repent,
do not brood over past deeds, and do not remember your good deeds; be
*âzâd*  (free). The weak, the fearful, the ignorant will never reach
Atman. You cannot undo, the effect must come, face it, but be careful
never to do the same thing again. Give up the burden of all deeds to the
Lord; give all, both good and bad. Do not keep the good and give only
the bad. God helps those who do *not* help themselves.

"Drinking the cup of desire, the world becomes mad." Day and night never
come together, so desire and the Lord can never come together. Give up
desire.

\*            \*            \*

There is a vast difference between saying "food, food" and eating it,
between saying "water, water" and drinking it. So by merely repeating
the words "God, God" we cannot hope to attain realisation. We must
strive and practise.

Only by the wave falling back into the sea can it become unlimited,
never as a wave can it be so. Then after it has become the sea, it can
become the wave again and as big a one as it pleases. Break the
identification of yourself with the current and know that you are free.

True philosophy is the systematising of certain perceptions. Intellect
ends where religion begins. Inspiration is much higher than reason, but
it must not contradict it. Reason is the rough tool to do the hard work;
inspiration is the bright light which shows us all truth. The will to do
a thing is not necessarily inspiration. . . .

Progression in Maya is a circle that brings you back to the starting
point; but you start ignorant and come to the end with all knowledge.
Worship of God, worship of the holy ones, concentration and meditation,
and unselfish work, these are the ways of breaking away from Maya's net;
but we must first have the strong desire to get free. The flash of light
that will illuminate the darkness for us is in us; it is the knowledge
that is our nature — there is no "birthright", we were never born. All
that we have to do is to drive away the clouds that cover it.

Give up all desire for enjoyment in earth or heaven. Control the organs
of the senses and control the mind. Bear every misery without even
knowing that you are miserable. Think of nothing but liberation. Have
faith in Guru, in his teachings, and in the surety that you can get
free. Say "Soham, Soham" whatever comes. Tell yourself this even in
eating, walking, suffering; tell the mind this incessantly — that what
we see never existed, that there is only "I". Flash — the dream will
break! Think day and night, this universe is zero, only God is. Have
intense desire to get free.

All relatives and friends are but "old dry wells"; we fall into them and
get dreams of duty and bondage, and there is no end. Do not create
illusion by *helping* anyone. It is like a banyan tree, that spreads on
and on. If you are a dualist, you are a fool to try to help God. If you
are a monist, you know that you are God; where find duty? You have no
duty to husband, child, friend. Take things as they come, lie still, and
when your body floats, go; rise with the rising tide, fall with falling
tide. Let the body die; this idea of body is but a worn-out fable. "Be
still and know that you are God."

The present only is existent. There is no past or future even in
thought, because to think it, you have to make it the present. Give up
everything, and let it float where it will. This world is all a
delusion, do not let it fool you again. You have known it for what it is
not, now know it for what it is. If the body is dragged anywhere, let it
go; do not care where the body is. This tyrannical idea of duty is a
terrible poison and is destroying the world.

Do not wait to have a harp and rest by degrees; why not take a harp and
begin here? Why wait for heaven? Make it here. In heaven there is no
marrying or giving in marriage; why not begin at once and have none
here? The yellow robe of the Sannyasin is the sign of the free. Give up
the beggar's dress of the world; wear the flag of freedom, the ochre
robe.

1.  [^](#txt1)A poor man was, once able to propitiate a certain god who
    gave him three boons to ask along with three throws of dice. The
    happy man communicated this news to his wife who at once told him to
    cast for wealth first. To this the man said, "We both have very ugly
    little noses, for which people laugh at us. Let us first cast for
    beautiful aquiline noses." But the wife was for wealth first and so
    she caught hold of his hand to prevent him from throwing the dice.
    The man hastily snatched his hand away and at once threw the dice
    exclaiming, "Let us both have beautiful noses and nothing but
    noses." All at once both their bodies were covered over with many
    beautiful noses, but they proved to be such a great nuisance to them
    that both of them agreed to throw for the second time asking for
    their removal. It was done, but they also lost their own little ones
    by that! There was only one more boon to ask. Having lost their
    noses they looked uglier than before. They wanted to have two
    beautiful noses, but they feared to be questioned about their
    transformation lest they should be regarded by all to be two big
    fools who could not mend their circumstances even with the help of
    three boons. So both of them agreed to get back their ugly little
    noses and the dice was accordingly cast.

</div>
