---
title: 'RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO

  (A DISCIPLE)'

---
<div>

[←](41_saturday_august_3.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Inspired
Talks](inspired_talks_contents.htm) / [→](43_monday_august_5.htm)

  

## RECORDED BY MISS S. E. WALDO (A DISCIPLE)

SUNDAY, *August 4, 1895*.

"Whom the ignorant worship, Him I preach unto thee."

This one and only God is the "knownest" of the known. He is the one
thing we see everywhere. All know their own Self, all know, "I am", even
animals. All we know is the projection of the Self. Teach this to the
children, they can grasp it. Every religion has worshipped the Self,
even though unconsciously, because there is nothing else.

This indecent clinging to life as we know it here, is the source of all
evil. It causes all this cheating and stealing. It makes money a god and
all vices and fears ensue. Value nothing material and do not cling to
it. If you cling to nothing, not even life, then there is no fear. "He
goes from death to death who sees many in this world." There can be no
physical death for us and no mental death, when we see that all is one.
All bodies are mine; so even body is eternal, because the tree, the
animal, the sun, the moon, the universe itself is my body; then how can
it die? Every mind, every thought is mine, then how can death come? The
Self is never born and never dies. When we realise this, all doubts
vanish. "I am, I know, I love" — these can never be doubted. There is no
hunger, for all that is eaten is eaten by me. If a hair falls out, we do
not think we die; so if one body dies, it is but a hair falling. . . .

The superconscious is God, is beyond speech beyond thought, beyond
consciousness. . . . There are three states, — brutality (Tamas),
humanity (Rajas), and divinity (Sattva). Those attaining the highest
state simply are.  Duty dies there; they only love and as a magnet draw
others to them. This is freedom. No more you do moral acts, but whatever
you do is moral. The Brahmavit (knower of God) is higher than all gods.
The angels came to worship Jesus when he had conquered delusion and had
said, "Get thee behind me, Satan." None can help a Brahmavit, the
universe itself bows down before him. His every desire is fulfilled, his
spirit purifies others; therefore worship the Brahmavit if you wish to
attain the highest. When we have the three great "gifts of God" — a
human body, intense desire to be free, and the help of a great soul to
show us the way — then liberation is certain for us. Mukti is ours.

\*            \*            \*

Death of the body for ever is Nirvana. It is the negative side and says,
"I am not this, nor this, nor this." Vedanta takes the further step and
asserts the positive side — Mukti or freedom. "I am Existence absolute,
Knowledge absolute, Bliss absolute, I am He", this is Vedanta, the
cap-stone of the perfect arch.

The great majority of the adherents of Northern Buddhism believe in
Mukti and are really Vedantists. Only the Ceylonese accept Nirvana as
annihilation.

No belief or disbelief can kill the "I". That which comes with belief
and goes with disbelief is only delusion. Nothing teaches the Atman. "I
salute my own Self." "Self-illuminated, I salute myself, I am Brahman."
The body is a dark room; when we enter it, it becomes illuminated, it
becomes alive. Nothing can ever affect the illumination; it cannot be
destroyed. It may be covered, but never destroyed.

\*            \*            \*

At the present time God should be worshipped as "Mother", the Infinite
Energy. This will lead to purity, and tremendous energy will come here
in America. Here no temples weigh us down, no one suffers as they do in
poorer countries. Woman has suffered for aeons, and that has given her
infinite patience and infinite perseverance. She holds on to an idea. It
is this which makes her the support of even superstitious religions and
of the priests in every land, and it is this that will free her. We have
to become Vedantists and live this grand thought; the masses must get
it, and only in free America can this be done. In India these ideas were
brought out by individuals like Buddha, Shankara, and others, but the
masses did not retain them. The new cycle must see the masses living
Vedanta, and this will have to come through women.

"Keep the beloved beautiful Mother in the heart of your hearts with all
care."

"Throw out everything but the tongue, keep that to say, "Mother,
Mother!"

"Let no evil counsellors enter; let you and me, my heart, alone see
Mother."

"Thou art beyond all that lives!"

"My Moon of life, my Soul of soul!"

SUNDAY AFTERNOON.

Mind is an instrument in the hand of Atman, just as body is an
instrument in the hand of mind. Matter is motion outside, mind is motion
inside. All change begins and ends in time. If the Atman is
unchangeable, It must be perfect; if perfect, It must be infinite; and
if It be infinite, It must be only One; there cannot be two infinites.
So the Atman, the Self, can be only One. Though It seems to be various,
It is really only One. If a man were to go toward the sun, at every step
he would see a different sun, and yet it would be the same sun after
all.

*Asti*, "isness", is the basis of all unity; and just as soon as the
basis is found, perfection ensues. If all colour could be resolved into
one colour, painting would cease. The perfect oneness is rest; we refer
all manifestations to one Being. Taoists, Confucianists, Buddhists,
Hindus, Jews, Mohammedans, Christians, and Zoroastrians, all preached
the golden rule and in almost the same words; but only the Hindus have
given the rationale, because they saw the reason: Man must love others
because those others are himself. There is but One.

Of all the great religious teachers the world has known, only Lao-tze,
Buddha, and Jesus transcended the golden rule and said, "Do good to your
enemies", "Love them that hate you."

Principles exist; we do not create them, we only discover them. . . .
Religion consists solely in realisation. Doctrines are methods, not
religion. All the different religions are but applications of the one
religion adapted to suit the requirements of different nations. Theories
only lead to fighting; thus the name of God that ought to bring peace
has been the cause of half the bloodshed of the world. Go to the direct
source. Ask God what He is. Unless He answers, He is not; but every
religion teaches that He does answer.

Have something to say for yourself, else how can you have any idea of
what others have said? Do not cling to old superstitions; be ever ready
for new truths. "Fools are they who would drink brackish water from a
well that their forefathers have digged and would not drink pure water
from a well that others have digged." Until we realise God for
ourselves, we can know nothing about Him. Each man is perfect by his
nature; prophets have manifested this perfection, but it is potential in
us. How can we understand that Moses saw God unless we too see Him? If
God ever came to anyone, He will come to me. I will go to God direct;
let Him talk to me. I cannot take belief as a basis; that is atheism and
blasphemy. If God spake to a man in the deserts of Arabia two thousand
years ago, He can also speak to me today, else how can I know that He
has not died? Come to God any way you can; only come. But in coming do
not push anyone down.

The knowing ones must have pity on the ignorant. One who knows is
willing to give up his body even for an ant, because he knows that the
body is nothing.

</div>
