+++
title = "shrI vidyAraNaya yati and his shrIvidyArNava"

+++
The shrIvidyArNava is an excellent tAntric manual that was used as
textbook for mantra shAstra instruction amongst certain brahminical
schools. It contains 2 halves called pUrva and uttara ardha-s of 18
chapters called shvAsas each. It runs into 1459 devanagari print pages
to give an idea of its size. It is a digest for a wide range of material
from ancient tantras that appear to be lost. One of these is the
kukkuTeshvara tantra, whose prayogas are still remembered by several
practioners even if only in fragments. The other archaic tantras cited
by it include : 1) kulArNava 2) vAmakeshvara 3) yoginI hR^idya 4)
tantra-rAja 5) pheTkAriNi 6) the yAmalas 7) bR^ihadnIlA 8)
siddha-sarasvatI 9) pi\~Ngala mata 10) pA\~nchrAtra saMhitAs 11)
kulaprakAsha 12) dakshiNAmurti saMhitA 13) bhairava tantras 14)
kAlimata. Interestingly it also cites digests of vaiShNava tantric
material outside of the classical pA\~ncharAtra. These include 1)
shrikrama nArAyaNIya and 2) bR^ihat nArAyaNIya. It also cites secondary
tantric encyclopedia such as the shAradA-tilakaM. In its general form
the shrividyArNava is a relatively late digest coming at the end of a
long line of such texts including prapa\~nchasAra, shAradA tilakaM,
mantramahodadhi, bR^ihat-tantrasAra, mantrArNava and tantrasArasaMgraha.

It is attributed to shrI vidyAraNaya yati, a sannyAsi. We had a
discussion on this text and the author. A few upAsakas from South India
believe that this is the same as the guru of harihara and bukka the
revivers of the Hindu struggle against the army of Islam. However, R
believes that he was a northerner from the Himalayas. Another southern
smArta settled in vArAnasi also believes that he was seen near prayAg
and vArANsi where he initiated many into the fold. I suspect we know
very little about this vidyAraNaya and it is quite possible that he was
indeed distinct from the South Indian vidyAraNya. There are several
identical sections between mantra mahodadhi and shrIvidyArNava,
tenuously supporting an origin in the vArAnasi region, although we
cannot be sure if they were necessarily close in time. Of course I
ignore the Indological consensus on this matter, for it hot air and
conceit passing as scholarship.

The argument by the northerners regarding his origins go thus: He
himself records in the section on guru-shishya choice that he was a
student of pragalbhAcharya himself the student of the great brAhmin
viShNusharman. Thus we have:  
viShNusharman-\>pragalbhAchArya-\>vidyAraNya yati  

Clearly, this is not the nyAya savant pragalbhAchArya of the later nyAya
tradition in Navadvipa. Further, R informs me that in Himachal Pradesh
and Kashmir tradition has it that vidyAraNya yati completed his work in
1070 AD after the death of the great tantric kShemarAja of the trika
school. vidyAraNya yatI’s extensive knowledge of vaiShNava material of
an archaic type is believed to connect him to the Himalayan tantric
vaiShNavas whose famed AchArya was shrI mahAbala paNdita from shrInagara
in Kashmir with followers in both Jambupura (Jammu) and Kashmir. One
lineage from him was:  
mahAbala-\>AchArya pANdita-\>shrI kR^iShNa paNDita-\> lakShmaNa
deshikendra (the illustrious tantric who compiled the prayogas of the
shAradA tilakaM).  

As an aside in another direction lakShmaNa deshikendra was also seen as
the successor for the syncretic trika-kaula schools of tantricism:  
vasugupta (of shiva sUtra fame)-\>somAnanda-\> utpaladeva -\>
(rAmakaNTha?)-\> lakShmaNa deshikendra-\>abhinavagupta (0f tantrAloka
fame). 

Some dispute this lineage as being a created by rAghavabhaTTa the
commentator on deshikendra’s works. deshikendra put together the
prayogas of the shArada tilakaM by 1010 AD ( Note that Kashmir had
scored a spectacular victory against Mahmud Ghaznavi under the rajan
saMgrAma deva at that time and was safe from Mohammedan pestilence for a
while). vidyAraNya yati cites the work of lakShmaNa deshikendra
extensively, so he must be after him. Hence, it is believed that there
was a distinct lineage from deshikendra that included viShNu sharman and
lead to vidyAraNya yati. At least this is not inconsistent with the
traditional date for the shrIvidyArNava amongst the northerners. Its
emphasis on Kashi is another point to note- it is believed that this may
have a link to utpaladeva’s ancestors hailing from Kashi in the days of
rajan lalitAditya.

The muni provided me with a South Indian story for the shrIvidyArNava:
vidyAraNya was meditating in central India (near a bagalAmukhi sthala)
when a brahmarAkshasa attacked him. He pacified it with food and water
and it lead him to sage kR^ishNa dvaipAyana who was making an unseen
journey to the city of kAlabhairava. vidyAraNaya apparently asked vyAsa
for the tantra and was revealed the shrIvidyArNava. 

Another more earthy
explanation by the southerners is that vidyAraNya went to Kashi to learn
from the stated pragalbhAcharya. We find this a little strange, given
that the Matha at Shringeri is believed to have anyhow traditionally
followed the prapa\~nchasAra, the tantric manual edited by shankara
bhagavatpAda. So he would have anyhow been initiated by his local
teachers into this rather than go to Kashi for his tantric lessons. We
find no evidence for a pragalbhAchArya. But it is pointed out that it is
not uncommon to have two tantric teachers the same time.

What ever the case- the evidence is somewhat in favor of the northern
origins of this vidyAraNya yati, though I am not sure that a directional
connection with lakShmaNa deshikendra can be made without further
investigation. What ever the tradition which is accepted it is the
mantra mahodadhi that borrows from shrIvidyArNava and not the other way
around.
