+++
title = "Su-lu Khan’s heroic struggle against the army of Islam"

+++
When one glances at the map of central Asia one sees Samarqand, Khorezm,
Khorasan, Khotan and Bokhara, all once great centers of Indo-Iranian
culture, now civilizational tragedies under the mushroom cloud of the
Islamic terror. The Turkic struggle against Islam is one of the
forgotten chapters of history that needs to be repeatedly brought home.
We had earlier seen how the Kha’khans of the Turkic tribes like the
Uighur and Blue Turks had fought various Islamic Ghazis. But one of the
most heroic struggles of the Central Asian Turks against the terrifying
atrocities of Islam was due the Tuergish Turks under their great Khan
Su-lu.

In 715 CE the armies of the fierce Chinese general Liu Hsiu-Ching
attacked the province of Ferghana and Khujanda and exterminated the
population of the city by systematically decapitating them. This was the
opening of the war between the Chinese, Arabs and Tibetans, in which the
Chinese had asserted their aggressive expansionist intensions in Central
Asia. But just then an unexpected factor enter the picture. The Tuergish
Turks who had been feudatories of the great Blue Turk Khans like
Qapaghan Kha’khan and Kuel-tegin were unified and reorganized militarily
under Khan Su-lu. He had unified two divisions known as the Yellow Bone
and Black Bone clans. The Arabs called him the “Father of the strife” as
he stood in the path of their great expansion. He sent an embassy to the
Chinese emperor stating that the was a free ruler now who no longer
acknowledged Chinese or Blue Turk rule and that he had organized an army
of 200,000 horsemen to challenge their power if required. The Chinese
emperor to avoid a sending a new army westwards, accepted their
independence. In 717 CE Su-lu declared himself Kha’Khan of the Turks and
began espionage operations in Chinese territory.

The Arabs under the Kalif Umar bin Abd al-Aziz sent a message to all
central Asian territories under the Arab control or their neighbors that
all Kafirs should forthwith forfeit their foreskins or else they will be
killed. Those who had accepted Dhimmi status by paying up Jaziya will be
further tormented unless they accepted Islam when they would freed of
all these disadvantages. The neighbors who would not submit to Islam
were threatened with immediate Jihad. This clearly shows that the
Moslems were primarily aiming to force Islam on the people, not just
raid them for monetary gains. The Arabs sent bands of Islamists under
Abdullah al Hanafi to subvert the Tibetans and spread Islam in their
midst and another Arab army attacked the Uch-Turfan. This latter army
was beaten back by the Qarluq Turks and forced to retreat. At the same
time Su-lu led his hordes to seize the major central Asian outpost of
the Chinese, Suyab. The pagan Indianized inhabitants of Central Asia-
Turks and Iranians, as well as surviving Zoroasterians and Sogdhians
were alarmed at the Arab call for conversion to Islam and the threat of
Jihad and turned to China for help. But typical to the Chinese attitude
no help was forth coming. Instead Su-lu came to their aid. In 719 the
Arab raiders entered Sogdiana and forcibly converted several Bauddha
Turkic chiefs of the province to Islam under swordpoint. When the Kalif
died in Arabia, the Turkic chiefs and a local Hindu chief named Devasti
renounced Islam and drove out all Mullahs and Fuckihs operating in their
territory. They soon spread the word that people who had been forced
into the terrible delusion of the Arabs should forsake it and return to
the dharma. The Mullahs declared that the apostates must be brutally
done to death and incited a huge ghazi army to attack Sogdiana. Su-lu
the lord of the Tuergish Turks came to the aid of the dharma and the
sangha, he collected a major army of Turks under his general Kuel Chur
and dispatched him to support the Kafirs against the Army of Islam, in
spring 721 AD. Kuel Chur cut down an advancing Jihadi division at Qasr
al-Bahili and cut off the supply routes for the Arabs from Samarqand.
The Tuergish general then laid the classical Turk-Mongol trap for the
main Arab army using the feigned retreat. The Arabs fell in to ambush
when from the side suddenly a hail of arrows rained on them destroying
the army of Islam. Thus the Moslems faced their first major defeat
against the pagan Turks and the Moslem Dayis were rounded up and put to
death.

The territory upto the fortified Samarqand was liberated of Moslem
terror by the action of Khan Su-lu by the end of 721 CE. The Kalif
dispatched the Ghazi Amr al-Harashi and an army of Mujahidins to kill
the Bauddha and Hindu chiefs in the regions and destroy Khan Su-lu.
Seeing the Moslem storm on the horizon the Zoroastrian chiefs Kaarzang
and Jalang, the Bauddha Turk Kasshin and the Hindu chief Devasti decided
to defend from the fort of Khujanda. Al-Harashi’s Jihadis swarmed the
region in Middle of 722 CE. Another local chief aluTAr who was defending
the region betrayed the other chiefs to the Moslems. Knowning that there
was not much of a chance the they entered battle with the Jihadis in
722AD. The Moslem general immediately opened negotiations to reach a
settlement. The unsupecting chiefs came down for the negotiations and as
they were taking place, al-Harashi gave the signal to his Mujahids to
kill the Kafirs. The Moslems pounced on them right away, brutally
murdered them and then 7000 of their followers. The merchants with them
were captured and tortured till they gave up all their possessions. The
savgery of the slaughter in this treacherous assault sent a terrifying
message to the non-Moslems of the region. They learnt that they were
dealing with an enemy like none before– one whose word could not be
trusted and who was exceedingly cruel. The Islamic records gloat over
the killing of the Kafirs in Khujanda (see TabarI 2.1446 for a poetic
account for the massacres).

Several survivors among Devasti’s, Kasshin’s and Kaarzang’s people fled
to Khan Su-lu with the news of the new Moslem invasion. Su-lu organized
them into a special corps, which greatly distinguished itself in the
subsequent battles against the Moslems. He immediately decided to take
retaliatory steps to stop the Jihad from blowing over the entire area.
In 723 CE, Khan Su-lu was sent an ambassador by the Moslems with the
message: convert to Islam, hand over the idols of deities and the
survivors of the Khujanda massacre or face war. He did not reply
anything to the ambassador and asked him to retire to his tent. Next day
at dawn the Moslem ambassador was woken up and asked to ride with the
Khan to a mountain top in a forested zone in his territory. There Khan
Su-lu signaled to one of his body guard. He immediately unfurled a flag
and immediately 10,000 men fully armed cased in armor came out assembled
with their horses. They then unfurled a flag each. For each flag that
was unfurled 10 fully armed horsemen emerged and 100,000 horsemen
assembled in the plains below and raised the Turkic war cries. Su-lu
then asked his guards to dismiss the Arab ambassador. The message was
clear, though the Khan had not opened his mouth.

In spring 723 with the first notice of the thaw in winter the Arabs
initiated the Jihad. The Moslems were ambushed by the Tuergish Turk army
under Su-lu close to the Oxus. The Turks soon surrounded them on three
sides and pinned them against swelling river on fourth. The Moslems came
under severe fire from the Turkic archers who harried them with
fire-tipped arrows and used whistling arrows to signal their movements.
In desperation the Jihadis tried to ford the river at wide point and
many were drowned. The rest on the banks were mopped up by the Turkic
cavalry charge ordered by Su-lu. The Kalif in fury over this defeat
ordered a new army to conduct the Jihad of extermination against the
Kafirs of Central Asia. For this he chose the notorious Ghazi Muslim bin
Sayyid and sent him at the head of a huge army to devastate the region.

In 724 CE the Jihadis attacked the city of Akshikath in Ferghana and
plundered it after slaughtering the inhabitants. They take considerable
pleasure in narrating how they destroyed the idols and burnt down the
temples (“Bhutkhanas”). The Moslems marched into the countryside and
ransacked it by cutting down trees and burning everything on their path.
Alarmed at their aggressive response, the Tuergish Kha’khan took
immediate action. Su-lu personally lead a major division of his army
while another army under his son constantly harried the Arabs by a
series of hit and run raids. The objective of these attacks was to force
the Army of Islam to march in the direction of the other Tuergish
division waiting in ambush. This proved a successful move; Su-lu kept
avoiding any direct encounter with Moslems till they were sufficiently
harried by the division under his son to the point of exhasperation. At
a well-timed moment he moved a branch of his army to cut off the water
supply to the Moslems from the Arab-held stronghold of Khujanda. This
set the resulted in the great defeat of the Arabs, remembered by the
Moslem chronicles as the “Battle of the Day of Thirst”. As they were
desperate without water, Su-lu swooped in, striking hard with his
well-armed cavalry. The Jihadis fought frantically, but a Turkic archer
shot a well-aimed arrow to knock down their general Muslim bin Sayyid.
With that the Tuergish completely routed them and only a small number of
survivors escaped to make it alive to the fort of Khujanda. This battle
was a turning point in the control of Transoxiana: the Tuergish had
become the dominant force and the Arabs were clearly on the defensive.
This halted the frenetic spread of Islam through central Asia an gave
brief breathing space for the pagans of the land.

But the Tuergish faced a new danger from the East in the form of the
aggressive Chinese imperialism, which was also religiously intolerant.
The wife of Khan Su-lu sent an ambassador to China to stop persecution
of pagans and various streams of the Bauddha matas different from those
of the Chinas. Hsuan-Tsung, the imperialist Chinese emperor asked his
favorite general Tu to kill the envoy and destroy a Tuergish trading
party and called the Tuergish Kha’Khan a bandit. This duly sparked of a
conflict with between the Turks and the Chinas. The Chinas moved armies
rapidly to the West to first attack Tibet and thereby outflank the
Turks. The Tibetans suffered heavily at the hands of the Chinese and
formed an alliance with the Tuergish. Su-lu hatched a plan to seek
revenge for the Chinese actions and dispatched an army to raid the
Chinese territory and draw the Chinese general I-chen into an ambush. He
was also attacked simultaneously by the Tibetan army under their
resourceful commander Chog-ro-Manporje. The Chinese were beaten back and
at the same time one of their greatest generals, Wang Chun Cho was
killed by the Uighur Turks. In 730 AD realizing that the war in the West
was not favoring the Chinese, Hsuan Tsung diplomatically entered into
peace negotiations with the Tuergish. However, this was only on the
surface, because he was hatching a secret strategy to destroy them
completely. Hsuan Tsung sent envoys to the Arabs, asking them to ally
with the Chinas against the Tuergish. The Kalif had now sent Ashras al
Sulami to strengthen the Moslem force and avenge the old defeats. Al
Sulami was particularly violent on the people of Sogdhiana and
persecuted non-Moslems and tortured them in numerous ways.

In the mean time a band of Parsis along with their last ruler in
absentia, Kushraw, a descendent of the last Sassanian emperor Yazdigird
III who were in Tukharistan also appealed to Khan Su-lu to help them
against their eternal enemies, the Arabs, who were bent on destroying
him. Su-lu acted decisively, by gathering his Turkic hordes as well as
other pagan chiefs and the Parsis under Kushraw attacking al Sulami. The
Moslems were worsted and driven out almost entirely from Sogdhiana. The
Moslem armies were put to sword in various encounters and the temples
broken by them were revived. Only the fortified city of Samarqand and
the Kamarja fort remained in Moslem hands. However, Turko-Mongols were
far from state they achieved under Chingiz Khan, to storm heavily
fortified strongholds. Still Su-lu besieged Kamarja and during the siege
the Moslems made many attempts to kill him using marksmen on the walls.
Though most attempts failed as he was well-protected by strong armor
except for his eyes, Su-lu was finally shot on his arm in course of he
conflict and injured. Kushraw the Parsi prince was also killed by an
arrow. Disheartened by these the Tuergish failed to take Kamarga.
Despite these setbacks Su-lu still controlled practically all of
Transoxiana and restored peace and religious freedom which had been
shattered by the Moslems. The Tibetans and Tuergish sealed an alliance
through the marriage of Su-lu with the Tibetan princess Dron ma lod.
Tuergish then aided the Tibetans in inflicting a series of defeats on
Chinese armies harassing the Tibetan troops and conquered the Wakhan
corridor. The Arabs and Chinese met in 735 to destory the Tuergish
through a combined attack. The Chinese first invaded the Tibetans to
block them from aiding the Tuergish, and inflicted heavy losses on them.
Su-lu sent a division to aid the Tibetans but Chinas crushed that
division, with the Moslems sending the Chinas reinforcements. But the
Tibetan general Chog-ro-Manporje combined with Su-lu’s second division
to attack the Jihadis under Assad bin Abdullah the new Ghazi sent by the
Kalif to destroy the Kafirs. The Arabs were defeated and the Chinese
without aid from the Western front ceased operations after devastating
northern Tibetan territories.

Bin Abdullah then waged a Jihad on the pagan city of Navakath and
started slaying the inhabitants. Su-lu in a hasty march from Suyab
arrived. He at first deftly cut the Arab supply line from Navakath.
Without supplies for a while, they started crossing the Oxus, to
replenish their stores and forces. Su-lu set a trap for them and the
second time attacked them while crossing the river and destroyed the
flotillas and pontoon bridges used by the Moslems. The Arabs sustained
heavy losses and fled in disarray. Su-lu then attacked bin Abdullah’s
camp and plundered it, even as the Ghazi barely escaped with life. Bin
Abdullah sent another army force against the Turks, but Khan Su-lu
ambushed it and wiped it out. bin Abdullah retreated to Balkh and left
Khorasan undefended. Su-lu fiercely attacked Khorasan with the aim of
driving out the Arabs for good. However, they again proved pretty
ineffective in taking the highly fortified citadel of Khulm from where
the Moslems were defending. Su-lu with a small mobile force of just 4000
men tried to launch a surprise attack on Balkh and take it in the height
of winter, when the Arabs rarely fought. However, sadly for him the
Chinese agents figured out his plan and informed the Moslems well in
advance. The Moslems were ready for the small mobile force of Su-lu as
it by-passed Balkh and try to take it in the rear. bin Abdullah kept a
large army waiting for the Turks at Kharistan. With the element of
surprise gone, Su-lu was totally out of wind and had to fight
desperately for survival against the numerically superior, motivated
Jihadi army. He barely cut his way out of their cordon and retreated
with heavy losses to Tukharistan. There he started regrouping his hordes
for a renewed campaign when unexpected events transpired.

Kuel Chur, the general of the Tuergish army and Khan Su-lu were playing
a game of back-gammon with the stake being a pheasant. Su-lu won the
stake but Kuel Chur refused to give him the bird. A fight broke out
between them in which Kuel Chur and his men killed Su-lu.

This was not just the death of one man but the death-blow to the
Tuergish nation, and any possibility of a defense against Islam’s
oppressive spread into central Asia. With that the Tuergish nation and
the many pagan states of Transoxiana and Sogdiana were open to the
imperialist China and Moslem troops that poured in for the final
contest.
