+++
title = "The Jaziya revolt of Dilli"

+++
There are many accounts of the Jaziya incident floating around in
literature, but the account by the official apologist (Khafi Khan) of
Awrangzeb is the clearest and from the horse’s mouth. In consultation
with his mullahs Awranzeb imposed Jaziya on all dhimmis in the Mogol
empire. Under earlier Moslem tyrants, the brahmins were helped with
their Jaziya by various vaishyas in and around Delhi, but Awrangzeb made
it clear that the brahmins should pay it themselves and get two whacks
from the tax-collector’s cane while paying. A vast throng of Hindus of
Delhi and the environs assembled below the Shahi Jharokha begging the
Padishaw to revoke the Jaziya as Akbar had done. The Padishaw asked them
get lost. The coming Friday they resorted to an initially peaceful
protest. The Hindu gathered in thousands on the road to the Jami Masjid
where the Padishaw went for his namaaz and protested the imposition of
Jaziya. Awrangzeb called his elephant division and behind it placed his
heavy cavalry and asked them charge the Hindu crowds. The Hindus
continued to protest and hundreds of them were killed by the elephants
and yet more cut down by the cavalry charge that followed. These
protests and similar strikes by Awrangzeb went on for several days.
Hundreds were killed daily by the repeated elephant charges on the
peacefully protesting Hindus and streets of Delhi were heaped with
corpses and smeared with blood. Khafi Khan reports that the protestors
were mainly unarmed vaishyas, artisans, workmen and brahmins. Finally a
few mustered courage and threw sticks at the Padishaw on two occasions.
Once they managed to hurl bricks at him but his body guards took the
blows and Awrangzeb was saved. The protests soon spread through India-
they were particularly severe in Malwa and Burhanpur. Just then an
earthquake struck in Sindh killing thousands and the local Hindus begged
for revoking the Jaziya, but Awrang asked them to pay it or face death
as Kaffirs. One Rajput captain in the Mogol Army, Subh Karn Rao was
asked by a Moslem collector to pay Jaziya. He drew his sword and killed
the tax-collector, resulting in much furore. But the Mogols fearing a
major revolt merely demoted Rao. Near Delhi another Moslem
tax-collector’s beard and hair were pulled out he was sent back with
his own hair as the Jaziya.

However, in the end Awarangzeb suppressed these revolts by simply
bringing in the army to kill anyone who protested.
