+++
title = "mAdhyamikA the average bhAratIya nArI"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/average_nari3.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/average_nari3.jpg)[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/average_nari.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/average_nari.jpg)[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/average_nari4.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/average_nari4.jpg)

Three views of mAdhyamikA with slightly different corrections for noise

Finally, we did get to the average bhAratIya nArI business because ST
maintained a database of our classmate’s photos from a certain period in
a quaint little thing called the autograph book. Since it might have
looked inappropriate to prying parents or their spies in those halcyon
days, ST sadly only had the mugs of the women. Initially, rAmanujavAdin,
K and the Sikh objected that this database may not be appropriate
because there is a bias towards feminine ugliness in the “Science
Stream” i.e those taking a combination of
physics-chemistry-biology-mathematics. The ladies (ST and R) were
furious and did not want to give us the database on hearing this. But we
pacified them they were uttamarupA-s amongst bhAratIya nArI-s, without
equals in the class (we weeded out some but are afraid to mention the
reasons – luckily R and ST happily participated). We were left with 16,
which included the whole range from “style-mAmIs”, the true surUpA-s,
and some in my opinion borderline or even tending to durmukhI. Then we
pitched them into SQUIRLZ MORPH and out came the mAdhymikA the average
bhAratIya nArI. All the guys said: “not bad”. The ladies seemed to agree
but felt they looked better. Finally, a subset of us are saffron
Hindoos- so we asked how can the nArI go without a tilaka and
accordingly gave mAdhymikA one.

Below is the average using only 6 strI-s of brAhmaNa descent (1 from
Tamil Nad, 2 Maharastra, 1 Himachal, 1 Uttar Pradesh, 1 Gujarat- pretty
diverse sample).

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/brahmana_narI2.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/brahmana_narI2.jpg)[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/brahmana_narI4.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/brahmana_narI4.jpg)[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/brahmana_narI3.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/brahmana_narI3.jpg)
