+++
title = "New anomuran crustacean"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/Kiwa_hirsuta.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/Kiwa_hirsuta.jpg)

The jewel of the clan of the foes of the foremost of the amAvasus
brought to my attention that a remarkable new anomuran crustacean was
discovered. Anomurans are a sister group of the crabs or the
Brachyurans. Whereas the Brachyurans have a very conservative body plan-
the traditional bauplan of the “classical” crabs, the anomurans show a
great diversity of body shapes. Within the anomurans we have a clade
formed by the squat lobsters (galatheids and chirostylids) and the
porcelain “crabs” (Porcellanids). Then there is the clade formed by the
hermit crabs and king crabs (Paguroidea) with the former dwelling in
molluscan shells. Then there is the basal clade of Hippoids or the mole
crabs. Given the frequent occurrence of the “crab”-like morphology
within the Anomuran clade it is likely that this morphology was
primitive to the whole clade combining the Brachyurans and Anomurans,
and that the Anomurans have diverged into various different forms.

The new Anomuran, Kiwa hirsuta was found in hydrothermal vents near the
Easter Island is marked by number of unusual features. It has degenerate
eyes, white body and is extremely hirsute with a dense fur of setae on
its chelicipeds and walking legs. The setae bear a dense growth of
filamentous bacteria sulfur-utilizing bacteria. The exact role of these
bacteria is unclear but it appears to be related to suriving in the
sulfur-rich environments of the hydrothermal vents either to provide
nutrients or to detoxify the emissions from the vent. Since it was found
eating mussels, it is does not seem to rely entirely on the bacteria for
food, unlike the vestimentiferans. Other Anomurans from hydrothermal
vents, Paragiopagurus, a hermit crab and Shinkaia, a galatheid squat
lobster also have such setal mats that bear bacterial colonies on them.
Herein, we may be seeing the associations that of bacteria and animals
that only underline my contention that the bacteria are the primary
engines of biochemical novelty with the other lifeforms merely using
them directly or indirectly. It is conceivable that there is indeed
lateral gene transfer between these bacteria and the animals.

Phylogenetic analysis suggests that Kiwa hirsuta is indeed a sister
group to the clade including the squat lobsters, porcellain crabs, to
the exclusion of the obscure South American freshwater Aeglids. Sadly
the authors did not use Lomis hirta, the hairy stone crab in their
phylogeny, which also belongs to the Anomuran clade.  
**
