+++
title = "Visualizing shivAjI’s svarAjya"

+++
Long ago in my school days I accessed a book by a marATha scholar in
which he had carefully catalogued all the battles of shivAjI. These
battles comprise a most remarkable series of events in the struggle of
the Hindu nation against the army of Islam. So I decided to visualize
them in different ways and drew a series of graphs. I hope to recreate
some of these here to review that journey.

The first graph illustrates the chronological density of the battles
that were fought during the foundation of the svarAjya.

![](https://spreadsheets.google.com/oimg?key=0AmaG9ycvsc7tdC1oX0F3UWVCMWZjVVpYdXFNRWRrU2c&oid=1&zx=fat7hu-3tj9l)

In 1644, shivAjI, still in his teens, conquered the stronghold atop the
mountain of kauNDinya and followed it up seizing rohidA. This rohidA is
not too far away from the hill of Rairi atop which sits the old shiva
temple of rAireshvara.The current structure is from the marATha period
but in the interior one can see an old temple of at least yAdava period.
It was on the li\~Nga here in Rairi that shivAjI performed an abhisheka
with his own blood to take the vrata of the war for svarAjya.We know
that shortly after this he adopted his ambitious seal with the shloka in
saMskR^ita:  
pratipach-chandra-rekheva vardhiShnur vishva-vanditA |  
shAhasUnoH shivasyaiShA mudrA bhadrAya rAjate ||  
Like the sliver of the first day moon will grow, thus \[will grow\] the
universal respect for this seal of Shaha’s son shiva which shines forth
as a mark of protection.

The early quiescence might be related to lack of data on his early
battles in mahArAShTra between 1650-55. We known that he was
strengthening his defences by building new forts such as Vijaydurg that
was completed in 1653 and noticed and took in the full breadth of the
Isaistic threat from the Europeans. To counter this he initiated
building of a navy with great foresight. He also tried to diplomatically
negotiate with hostile parties like sambhAjI mohite, the black Africans
of Janjira, and Mogols to stave off any attack during this phase of
build up. He also sent a letter with a dakShiNa to a brAhmaNa named
siddheshvara bhaTTa of Chakan to perform abhichAra rituals on his
behalf. Starting 1656 with his military build up complete he initiated a
wide range of campaigns. The period of quiescence of 1663 marks the
invasion of mahArAShTra by the Mogol army under Shaista Khan who
occupied most of the marATha territory forcing shivAjI to retreat and
play the waiting game till he suddenly launched his commando attack to
strike the Khan. The next phase of quiescence was at the end of 1667 and
in 1668 when jaisingh was poisoned to death by Awrangzeb and shivAjI
successfully negotiated the submission and payment of tribute of the
Adil Shah (Sep 1667), the Portuguese (Dec 1667) and the year long
ceasefire with the Mogols in (Mar 1668).

The second graph gives a break-down of the battles as per shivAjI’s
principal adversaries

![](https://spreadsheets.google.com/oimg?key=0AmaG9ycvsc7tdC1oX0F3UWVCMWZjVVpYdXFNRWRrU2c&oid=2&zx=1p5t3i-iqi1yp)

The third graph gives a picture of how shivAjI’s military focus changed
over his reign.

![](https://spreadsheets.google.com/oimg?key=0AmaG9ycvsc7tdC1oX0F3UWVCMWZjVVpYdXFNRWRrU2c&oid=5&zx=e08c04-tqwenj)

The above two pictures show that shivAjI devoted roughly equal energy in
terms of battles fought against his two principal Mohammedan adversaries
– this, of course as they say, is history. However, while he struggled
constantly with the local Adil Shah, the struggles with the Mogols were
more episodic. While he devoted relatively lower energy to the Isaistic
Europeans, he clearly realized their potential to cause danger and at
the same time appreciated trade with them. The conflict with the
Europeans has been underplayed in histories written during the Isaist
occupation of bhArata. In 1659 he initially negotiated for a peaceful
trade agreement with the Portuguese during which he bought an expensive
German-made sword from them that served him well in many encounters. But
their waging holy war on the Hindus and demolition of temples all the
way from Shri Lanka to the Gujarat coast made shivAjI exert himself to
protect Hindus from their monstrous atrocities and wished to eventually
sweep them off Goa. Later in 1659 he occupied positions close to Bassein
and Chaul and sent warships to launch a sortie on the Portuguese. The
viceroy of Goa sent an alarm to the king of Portugal after this raid on
their outposts. In 1660 he built the sea fort of  Suvarnadurg to launch
further attacks on the Isaists and recruited the black naval officer
Siddi Misri to strengthen his naval artillery. The English intelligence
dispatch sent by Abbe Carre mentions that shivAjI had started a
cartography division to prepare accurate maps of both the land and coast
in preparation of occupying strategic geography along the coastline. In
early 1660, shivAjI attacked the port of Dabhol and conquered it from
the Adil Shahi governor Mohammed Sharif. But Sharif and Fazl Khan took 3
ships belonging to Afzal Khan, who had been killed earlier, with the
help of the British commandant Revington to their coastal outpost of
Rajapur. With the English siding with the Moslems shivAjI sent a force
under dorojI to attack Rajapur. He rapidly defeated the English force
and Revington fled for his life on a ship, while his assistant Gifford
was arrested and released upon paying a fine. Few months latter
Revington returned to the scene as a collaborator of the black ghazi
Siddi Jauhar (in those days apparently there was no white identity?) and
helped the Moslem forces with an artillery squadron and powerful bombs
to undermine the fortification of Panhala. In course of the battle they
planted the English flag proudly on the flanks of Panhala, despite
shivAjI sending them a message to stay away from Indian conflicts as
foreign traders. In 1661 despite being attacked severely from the north
by the Mogol horde, shivAjI decided to teach the British a firm lesson.
He dispatched his brAhmaNa officer somnAth paNDit to take Rajapur and
capture the English officials. Having crushed the English and destroyed
their settlement he arrested Revington and his officers. Revington fell
ill and shivAjI released him for treatment, but he died on reaching the
English trading post in Surat. Finally, two years later after paying
24,000 hons the English were released under the condition that they
would only stick to trade.

The fourth graph gives the distribution of the number of battles in
which shivAjI and his generals led as the principal field commander in
different phases of his career.

![](https://spreadsheets.google.com/oimg?key=0AmaG9ycvsc7tdC1oX0F3UWVCMWZjVVpYdXFNRWRrU2c&oid=6&zx=bmleya-31yl7m)

The mark of a true king is that he leads his men in person. Throughout
his career the rAjan led his men in person being the field commander in
numerous battles. In his earliest days, he even fought personally on the
field and even killed or struck down adversaries with his own hands –
e.g. the encounter with Musa Khan and his remarkable commando attack on
Shaista Khan. The above picture shows the succession of his commanders:
In his earliest days raghunAth korDe, a senior warrior assisted him
considerably especially in campaigns against renegade Hindus, like the
mauryan at Javli. Then netAjI pALkar became the chief of staff until he
was captured, converted to Mohammedanism and dispatched to Afghanistan.
Then pratAprav gujjar became the next chief of staff, who died in the
mad charge at Bahlol Khan at Nessari. In the interim shivAjI appointed
his half-brother AnandrAv bhosle to lead the forces. AnandrAv had the
unusual command of a haft-hazAri, though he was not officially ever made
the chief. However, in many encounters he was the de facto field
commander but often not the official one. In the final phase of
shivAjI’s career he appointed hambirrav mohite as the chief of the
army and he continued even after shivAjI’s death till his own death in
the great battle of Wai against the Mogols. Early in his career he
dismissed the inept shamrao paNDit and replaced him with moro tryaMbak
paNDit. This move was most fruitful, as the brAhmaNa prime minister
proved effective in many aspects, an administrator, fort-designer and
field commander leading shivAjI’s armies to some of their best
victories. It is interesting to note that the school textbooks in my
days completely downplayed his role. The reasons for this are hardly
surprising to the astute.
