---
title: THE PARIS CONGRESS OF THE HISTORY OF RELIGIONS

---
<div>

[←](ramakrishna.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
4](../volume_4_contents.htm) / [Translations:
Prose](translation_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](knowledge_its_source_and_acquirement.htm)

  

## THE PARIS CONGRESS OF THE HISTORY OF RELIGIONS

(Translated from [Bengali](6038_paris.pdf) from a Paris letter written
to the *Udbodhana*.)

In the Paris Exhibition, the Congress of the History of Religions
recently sat for several days together. At the Congress, there was no
room allowed for the discussions on the doctrines and spiritual views of
any religion; its purpose was only to inquire into the historic
evolution of the different forms of established faiths, and along with
it other accompanying facts that are incidental to it. Accordingly, the
representation of the various missionary sects of different religions
and their beliefs was entirely left out of account in this Congress. The
Chicago Parliament of Religions was a grand affair, and the
representatives of many religious sects from all parts of the world were
present at it. This Congress, on the other hand, was attended only by
such scholars as devote themselves to the study of the origin and the
history of different religions. At the Chicago Parliament the influence
of the Roman Catholics was great, and they organised it with great hopes
for their sect. The Roman Catholics expected to establish their
superiority over the Protestants without much opposition; by proclaiming
their glory and strength and laying the bright side of their faith
before the assembled Christians, Hindus, Buddhists, Mussulmans, and
other representatives of the world-religions and publicly exposing their
weakness, they hoped to make firm their own position. But the result
proving otherwise, the Christian world has been deplorably hopeless of
the reconciliation of the different religious systems; so the Roman
Catholics are now particularly opposed to the repetition of any such
gathering. France is a Roman Catholic country; hence in spite of the
earnest wish of the authorities, no religious congress was convened on
account of the vehement opposition on the part of the Roman Catholic
world.

The Congress of the History of Religions at Paris was like the Congress
of Orientalists which is convened from time to time and at which
European scholars, versed in Sanskrit, Pali, Arabic, and other Oriental
languages, meet; only the antiquarianism of Christianity was added to
this Paris Congress.

From Asia only three Japanese Pandits were present at the Congress. From
India there was the Swami Vivekananda.

The conviction of many of the Sanskrit scholars of the West is that the
Vedic religion is the outcome of the worship of the fire, the sun, and
other awe-inspiring objects of natural phenomena.

Swami Vivekananda was invited by the Paris Congress to contradict this
conviction, and he promised to read a paper on the subject. But he could
not keep his promise on account of ill health, and with difficulty was
only able to be personally present at the Congress, where he was most
warmly received by all the Western Sanskrit scholars, whose admiration
for the Swami was all the greater as they had already gone through many
of his lectures on the Vedanta.

At the Congress, Mr. Gustav Oppert, a German Pandit, read a paper on the
origin of the Shâlagrâma-Shilâ. He traced the origin of the Shalagrama
worship to that of the emblem of the female generative principle.
According to him, the Shiva-Linga is the phallic emblem of the male and
the Shalagrama of the female generative principle. And thus he wanted to
establish that the worship of the Shiva-Linga and that of the Shalagrama
— both are but the component parts of the worship of Linga and Yoni! The
Swami repudiated the above two views and said that though he had heard
of such ridiculous explanations about the Shiva-Linga, the other theory
of the Shalagrama-Shila was quite new and strange, and seemed groundless
to him.

The Swami said that the worship of the Shiva-Linga originated from the
famous hymn in the Atharva-Veda Samhitâ sung in praise of the
Yupa-Stambha, the sacrificial post. In that hymn a description is found
of the beginningless and endless Stambha or Skambha, and it is shown
that the said Skambha is put in place of the eternal Brahman. As
afterwards the Yajna (sacrificial) fire, its smoke, ashes, and flames,
the Soma plant, and the ox that used to carry on its back the wood for
the Vedic sacrifice gave place to the conceptions of the brightness of
Shiva's body, his tawny matted-hair, his blue throat, and the riding on
the bull of the Shiva, and so on — just so, the Yupa-Skambha gave place
in time to the Shiva-Linga, and was deified to the high Devahood of Shri
Shankara. In the Atharva-Veda Samhita, the sacrificial cakes are also
extolled along with the attributes of the Brahman.

In the *Linga Purâna*, the same hymn is expanded in the shape of
stories, meant to establish the glory of the great Stambha and the
superiority of Mahâdeva.

Again, there is another fact to be considered. The Buddhists used to
erect memorial topes consecrated to the memory of Buddha; and the very
poor, who were unable to build big monuments, used to express their
devotion to him by dedicating miniature substitutes for them. Similar
instances are still seen in the case of Hindu temples in Varanasi and
other sacred places of India where those, who cannot afford to build
temples, dedicate very small temple-like constructions instead. So it
might be quite probable that during the period of Buddhistic ascendancy,
the rich Hindus, in imitation of the Buddhists, used to erect something
as a memorial resembling their Skambha, and the poor in a similar manner
copied them on a reduced scale, and afterwards the miniature memorials
of the poor Hindus became a new addition to the Skambha.

One of the names of the Buddhist Stupas (memorial topes) is
Dhâtu-garbha, that is, "metal-wombed". Within the Dhatu-garbha, in small
cases made of stone, shaped like the present Shalagrama, used to be
preserved the ashes, bones, and other remains of the distinguished
Buddhist Bhikshus, along with gold, silver, and other metals. The
Shalagrama-Shilas are natural stones resembling in form these
artificially-cut stone-cases of the Buddhist Dhatu-garbha, and thus
being first worshipped by the Buddhists, gradually got into Vaishnavism,
like many other forms of Buddhistic worship that found their way into
Hinduism. On the banks of the Narmadâ and in Nepal, the Buddhistic
influence lasted longer than in other parts of India; and the remarkable
coincidence that the Narmadeshvara Shiva-Linga, found on the banks of
the Narmadâ and hence so called, and the Shalagrama-Shilas of Nepal are
given preference to by the Hindus to those found elsewhere in India is a
fact that ought to be considered with respect to this point of
contention.

The explanation of the Shalagrama-Shila as a phallic emblem was an
imaginary invention and, from the very beginning, beside the mark. The
explanation of the Shiva-Linga as a phallic emblem was brought forward
by the most thoughtless, and was forthcoming in India in her most
degraded times, those of the downfall of Buddhism. The filthiest
Tântrika literature of Buddhism of those times is yet largely found and
practiced in Nepal and Tibet.

The Swami gave another lecture in which he dwelt on the historic
evolution of the religious ideas in India, and said that the Vedas are
the common source of Hinduism in all its varied stages, as also of
Buddhism and every other religious belief in India. The seeds of the
multifarious growth of Indian thought on religion lie buried in the
Vedas. Buddhism and the rest of India's religious thought are the
outcome of the unfolding and expansion of those seeds, and modern
Hinduism also is only their developed and matured form. With the
expansion or the contraction of society, those seeds lie more or less
expanded at one place or more or less contracted at another.

He said a few words about the priority of Shri Krishna to Buddha. He
also told the Western scholars that as the histories of the royal
dynasties described in the *Vishnu Purâna* were by degrees being
admitted as proofs throwing light on the ways of research of the
antiquarian, so, he said, the traditions of India were all true, and
desired that Western Sanskrit scholars, instead of writing fanciful
articles, should try to discover their hidden truths.

Professor Max Müller says in one of his books that, whatever
similarities there may be, unless it be demonstrated that some one Greek
knew Sanskrit, it cannot be concluded that ancient India helped ancient
Greece in any way. But it is curious to observe that some Western
savants, finding several terms of Indian astronomy similar to those of
Greek astronomy, and coming to know that the Greeks founded a small
kingdom on the borders of India, can clearly read the help of Greece on
everything Indian, on Indian literature, Indian astronomy, Indian
arithmetic. Not only so; one has been bold enough to go so far as to
declare that all Indian sciences as a rule are but echoes of the Greek!

On a single Sanskrit Shloka — म्लेच्छा वै यवनाः तेषु एषा विद्या
प्रतिष्ठिता। ऋषिवत् तेऽपि पूज्यन्ते ... — "The Yavanas are Mlechchhas,
in them this science is established, (therefore) even they deserve
worship like Rishis, . . ." — how much the Westerners have indulged
their unrestrained imagination! But it remains to be shown how the above
Shloka goes to prove that the Aryas were taught by the Mlechchhas. The
meaning may be that the learning of the Mlechchha disciples of the Aryan
teachers is praised here, only to encourage the Mlechchhas in their
pursuit of the Aryan science.

Secondly, when the germ of every Aryan science is found in the Vedas and
every step of any of those sciences can be traced with exactness from
the Vedic to the present day, what is the necessity for forcing the
far-fetched suggestion of the Greek influence on them? "What is the use
of going to the hills in search of honey if it is available at home?" as
a Sanskrit proverb says.

Again, every Greek-like word of Aryan astronomy can be easily derived
from Sanskrit roots. The Swami could not understand what right the
Western scholars had to trace those words to a Greek source, thus
ignoring their direct etymology.

In the same manner, if on finding mention of the word Yavanikâ (curtain)
in the dramas of Kâlidâsa and other Indian poets, the Yâvanika (Ionian
or Greek) influence on the whole of the dramatic literature of the time
is ascertained, then one should first stop to compare whether the Aryan
dramas are at all like the Greek. Those who have studied the mode of
action and style of the dramas of both the languages must have to admit
that any such likeness, if found, is only a fancy of the obstinate
dreamer, and has never any real existence as a matter of fact. Where is
that Greek chorus? The Greek Yavanika is on one side of the stage, the
Aryan diametrically on the other. The characteristic manner of
expression of the Greek drama is one thing, that of the Aryan quite
another. There is not the least likeness between the Aryan and the Greek
dramas: rather the dramas of Shakespeare resemble to a great extent the
dramas of India. So the conclusion may also be drawn that Shakespeare is
indebted to Kalidasa and other ancient Indian dramatists for all his
writings, and that the whole Western literature is only an imitation of
the Indian.

Lastly, turning Professor Max Müller's own premisses against him, it may
be said as well that until it is demonstrated that some one Hindu knew
Greek some time one ought not to talk even of Greek influence.

Likewise, to see Greek influence in Indian sculpture is also entirely
unfounded.

The Swami also said that the worship of Shri Krishna is much older than
that of Buddha, and if the Gitâ be not of the same date as the
Mahâbhârata, it is surely much earlier and by no means later. The style
of language of the Gita is the same as that of the Mahabharata. Most of
the adjectives used in the Gita to explain matters spiritual are used in
the Vana and other Parvans of the Mahabharata, respecting matters
temporal. Such coincidence is impossible without the most general and
free use of those words at one and the same time. Again, the line of
thought in the Gita is the same as in the Mahabharata; and when the Gita
notices the doctrines of all the religious sects of the time, why does
it not ever mention the name of Buddhism?

In spite of the most cautious efforts of the writers subsequent to
Buddha, reference to Buddhism is not withheld and appears somewhere or
other, in some shape or other, in histories, stories, essays, and every
book of the post-Buddhistic literature. In covert or overt ways, some
allusion is sure to be met with in reference to Buddha and Buddhism. Can
anyone show any such reference in the Gita? Again, the Gita is an
attempt at the reconciliation of all religious creeds, none of which is
slighted in it. Why, it remains to be answered, is Buddhism alone denied
the tender touch of the Gita-writer?

The Gita wilfully scorns none. Fear? — Of that there is a conspicuous
absence in it. The Lord Himself, being the interpreter and the
establisher of the Vedas, never hesitates to even censure Vedic rash
presumptuousness if required. Why then should He fear Buddhism?

As Western scholars devote their whole life to one Greek work, let them
likewise devote their whole life to one Sanskrit work, and much light
will flow to the world thereby. The Mahabharata especially is the most
invaluable work in Indian history; and it is not too much to say that
this book has not as yet been even properly read by the Westerners.

After the lecture, many present expressed their opinions for or against
the subject, and declared that they agreed with most of what the Swami
had said, and assured the Swami that the old days of Sanskrit
Antiquarianism were past and gone. The views of modern Sanskrit scholars
were largely the same as those of the Swami's, they said. They believed
also that there was much true history in the Puranas and the traditions
of India

Lastly, the learned President, admitting all other points of the Swami's
lecture, disagreed on one point only, namely, on the contemporaneousness
of the Gita with the Mahabharata. But the only reason he adduced was
that the Western scholars were mostly of the opinion that the Gita was
not a part of the Mahabharata.

The substance of the lecture will be printed in French in the General
Report of the Congress.

</div>
