+++
title = "The struggle against Qamar-ad-din."

+++
The heartland of the Chagadai khanate- Mogholistan lay in the land
bounded by the Ili River that drains into the Balkhash lake in the north
and the many branched Tarim river that drains into the Lob Nor lake. On
the Ili in its middle course was the important city of Almalik that was
once founded by the Uighur ka’Khans and was the center of their power.
While just north of the Tarim river in a diagonal towards the Balkhash
lay the 3 cities of Kucha, Sairam and Alma-Ata that was just beyond the
Issyk Kul lake. These cities were all that remained of once prolific
Indic colonies on the Silk route founded by the great Maharaja Vima
Taktu and his successors. The Chagadai khan Tughlaq Timur had appointed
his mighty ulus beg (supreme amir) Bulaji as the governor of the
province to the south of the Tarim river including Kashgar, Yarkhand and
Khotan. After Bulaji’s death his brother converted to Islam and came to
be known as Qamar-ad-din. He watched with interest and envy the rise of
Timur-i-lang in the neighboring province. After Tughlaq Timur’s son
Ilyaas Khwaja returned from Samarkand driven back by horse plague Qamar
decided to take the initiative and slaughtered Ilyaas Khwaja and his
family barring one brother who escaped and declared himself Khan. The
islamized Qamar was a strange mixture of a rational scholar and a fierce
warrior. He was learned in many languages such as his native Chagadai
turki in which he always wrote, Persian, Arabic and Russian and had a
special liking for astronomy in the tradition of his predecessors like
Hulegu and Qublai. Thus there was direct conflict of interests and
personalities between him and Timur who was also similarly learned and
war-like. At first he and Timur signed a treaty of non-aggression but
Timur watching his competitor grow in stature came up with an excuse for
aggression. He declared that Qamar was not a legitimate khan as he was
no direct descendant of Chingiz and had usurped the Chagadai throne.
With this excuse he marched straight from Tashkent with a large force
and captured Sairam from Qamar with a swift strike. He then attacked
Talas and captured it from Qamar after badly beating his forces in
fierce battle and plundered the region rustling a large number of horses
from his adversaries. While these campaigns of Timur are very poorly
known, they were rather arduous as they were fought in very difficult
terrain against a powerful adversary who had similar steppe horsemen as
Timur. Timur then attacked the fort of Tokmak and Qamar fled north
towards the Ala-Tau highlands where once atyarAti jAnaMtapi, the Aryan
monarch had campaigned. Timur sent his son Jahangir to ambush him from
behind and beaten in the struggle Qamar’s men scattered along the Ili
river. Timur now clamped down on the region and devastated all the
habitations so completely that there are no traces of these cities
mentioned in the Mongol histories. In this charge he surprised Qamar’s
camp and looted it, capturing the princess Dilshad Agha the daughter of
Qamar-ad-Din. Declaring that there was no ‘greater woman in the mulk’ he
added her to his own growing harem. Then he triumphantly returned to
Samarkand only to realize that Qamar had sacked the province of Fergana
in the meantime with a rapid assault. Timur hastened after refreshing
his forces and chased Qamar out of Fergana. Qamar kept fleeing and drew
Timur up to the Tien Shan region where he ambushed him. Timur was caught
with a small band of body guards, at the head of a raiding party, by
Qamar’s cavalry. The text of the history of the Mongols of central Asia
by Mirza Haider describes the battle; Timur fought after he ran out of
arrows. He had shot his way and came close to his attackers. He then
hurled his lasso and brought some riders down. The lifting his battle
axe with his one functional hand, he hacked his way in a hand to hand
struggle with Qamar’s men. Then felled from his horse he drew his sword
and deflecting darts raining on him with his shield he hurled a lance at
Qamar who fell in an attempt to deflect it. In the chaos that followed
he cut his away to a dry stream bed and crawled all night till he
reached his party. Then wasting no time he returned with his army and
pounded Qamar ad-din and put him to flight. In the meantime Jahangir his
eldest son died in Samarkand (1376) from infection of an wound received
in the campaign and his death was followed by a rebellion in the city.
Timur savagely crushed the insurrection and returned to mountains near
the Issyk Kul lake to and attacked Qamar who was prowling there. He
chased him around the lake but failed to capture him. He sent another
force to the Issyk Kul but failed to capture Qamar yet again.

In 1389 in a decisive bid to eliminate Qamar once and for all Timur
marched into the region of the Balkash lake and sent out mobile
squadrons to comb the entire region destroying every supporter or Qamar.
These squadrons went on a march of destruction right into the Altai
regions along the river Irtysh, but Qamar having outwitted them and
turning south tried to take on Timur. The latter moved to strike but
there was something else to surprise him from the south. In the region
of the Lob Nor lake the sole survivor of the Chagadai khanate, Khan
Khizr Khwaaja who had fled south along with Qamar’s nephew, Kudaidad,
son of Bulaji appeared with a force to threaten Timur. In the harsh
politics of the Steppe there was no comprise between any party; thus
even though Khizr and Kudaidad were Qamar’s arch rivals they had no
truck with Timur. Timur swiftly acted knowing that Qamar was incapable
of a direct assault on his van and moved across the Tien’Shan massif
with great rapidity towards Turfan to first deal with Khizr. On the way
he found the Uighurs had assembled a civilization in the steppes that
eschewed violence and lived by the principles of Buddhism in Sairam and
Qara’Shahar. Timur saw in them ultimate kaffirs and incited his men not
to waste the opportunity of the great Jihad on the idolaters. The
Uighurs were now a mere shadow of their great past and were now
militarily deadened by the renunciatory teachings of Buddhism. They made
no iron weapons but bronze statues of the Bodhisattva and their leader
no bore no likeness to their great khans of yore but was a
peace-mongering Idiqut like the modern Dalai Lama. Timur fell upon them
with the utmost ferocity simply erasing their kingdom with pure
slaughter. Unable to defend themselves before the ghazis the Uighurs
fled in every direction, but Timur’s squadrons caught them wherever they
went and slit their throats. The survivors were forcibly converted to
Islam or tortured to death. Thus the Uighur culture passed out on the
sands of the Gobi into scrolls of history. Timur then smashed the army
of Khizr Khwaaja in a matter of an hour and took the devastation into
the Gobi where he declared himself a true successor of Chingiz Ka’khan.
Having taken possession of the maal (note the origin of the Hindi word
for belongings) of every living being in the region he returned to
Samarqand with his trail of naukers. He sent his son Omar Sheik to
devastate Uch Turfan and keeping pressing Qamar out of every refuge.
Finally in 1390, Timur’s squadrons drove Qamar along the Irtysh river
into the taiga from where he never returned again; presumably perishing
in the cold. After this Khizr surrendered to Timur and Kudaidad
negotiated a deal between them. Timur seized Khizr’s daughter and added
her to his harem. This was a political move of immense importance
because this made Timur a legitimate member of the Chingizid family by
marriage. In return he gave Khizr nominal control over the cities of
Aksu, Kucha and Yarkhand. After Khizr’s death the inhabitants of these
cities fortified themselves and gave themselves to the Chinese as
trading protectorates. Seeing their wealth increase and the presence of
Chinese officials and merchants, Timur sent his young grandson Mirza
Iskander on his first campaign of complete destruction of these cities.
Having destroyed the cities of Bai and Kucha, Iskander charged on the
fort of Aksu. Iskander inaugurated his new ‘Tops’ (firepots or cannons)
on the fort and savagely bombarded battlements. The embattled
inhabitants gave up and handed over the Chinese to Iskander who had them
roasted to death. The victorious prince returned to Samarqand after
ravaging the fort of Andizhan.
