+++
title = "The rise of Timur-i-Leng"

+++
As I stated before I have begun my compilation of the history of the
Turko-Mongol conqueror Timur i lang from a variety of scholarly sources.
Understanding Timur has several dimensions for the connoisseurs of
history that include grasping the complexity of modern day Asia’s fate,
the spread of Islamic terror and culture and even a lesson for all the
many mere mortals trying to reenact Timur’s tumultuous passage through
Asia on their own small scales in their own spheres. Key to
understanding the phenomenon called Timur who was very different from
his military predecessor Chingiz ka’Khan is the final phase of Chagadai
khanate following the death of Khan Tarmashirin (Dharmashri). The
Chagadai Khanate following the end of Tarmashirin on falling from a
horse was in state of chaos due to the indifferent success in their
raids against the Turkish Sultans of Delhi. The Mongolian Chagadai
Horde’s power now shifted to the hands of two Tribal alliances led by
descendants of the original Baaghaturs and Noyats of Chingiz khan. The
Southern One in Afghanistan and Tajikistan was led by the Qara’unas
tribe under the Turkic Amir Qazaghan and the two Mongol tribes Apardi
and Arlat. The Northern alliance in the Chagadai heartland was dominated
by the Mongol tribes: Yasa’uri, Barlas and Jalair. The last one being
the tribe from which Jelme one of the great field commanders of Chingiz
had emerged. The Amir Qazaghan taking advantage of the chaos marched
against the Chagadai Khan Qazan and routed him in the battle near
Samarkand. He placed his son as he ruler of Samarkand and returned to
northern Afghanistan. He then marched against the Rajputs of Bhatnir and
Lahore to wage a Jihad on the infidels in 1351. Having routed them, he
their king killed Chandradeva Kapa, looted thousands of golden paisas
and signed a treaty with Mohd. b. Tughlaq to send auxiliaries to aid his
son, the vicious Firoz Shah Tughlaq, to take Delhi. Then Qazaghan
marched on Herat with Apardi and Arlat cavalry in the van guard and
decimated the infidels (one wonders who?) of the city as the Mongol
troops enriched themselves with plunder. As Qazaghan was returning from
Herat, a Mongol adventurer named bin Borolday assassinated him.
Qazaghan’s son Abdallah declared himself Amir of Samarkand and marched
against Khorezem to take over territory from the Northern alliance. An
independent Mongol adventurer Bayan Suldus who was the warlord of the
city of Shadman north of Samarkand and Hajji Beg Barlas the Mongol amir
of Kesh south of Samarkand formed an alliance to retaliate against
Abdallah and his Qara’unas Turks. They routed him and suffocated most of
his family in bags and took hold of his ulus. They parceled it out
amidst themselves and declared Bayan Suldus an Amir; after which Bayan
whiled his time away in the drinking.

At this point the Chagadai Mongols re-grouped under their new Khan,
Tughlaq Timur who invaded this part of Central Asia, Transoxiana, in
1360 with his cavalry. Most of the northern alliance meekly joined him
and participated in raiding and pillaging the cities in the regions. The
only Mongol tribe that stood against him was that of Hajji Barlas, who
fled in terror when the Chagadai cavalry swept through the land. His
nephew, a young brigand named Timur joined the raiding Chagadais and
represented himself as the true representative of the Barlas clan
submitted himself to Khan Tughlaq Timur. Pleased to find an authentic
representative of the clan of Qarachar Barlas who was a general of his
ancestor Chingiz ka’khan, Tughlaq appointed the young Timur as Amir in
place of his uncle Hajji Barlas. This was the rising of the new sun on
the Central Asian horizon. Timur quickly entrusted his trusted fellow
brigands Dawood Dughlat and Abbas Kipchak, the former a Mongol and the
latter a Turk to gather an army of cavalry adventurers who were willing
to go out on raiding expeditions. He unified the Jalair and yasa’uri
tribes of Mongols and formed an alliance with the Turk Mir Hussain, Amir
of Kabul who was the only survivor of the Qara’unas clan of Qazaghan.
They then marched on Bayan Suldus and evicted him from Shadman. Quickly
regrouping they raided the Malik of Badakhshan in Afghanistan to pay
their troops and ravaged the countryside. Then Hajji Barlas to regain
control over the Barlas Amirate played clever politics and made Timur’s
Mongol followers to join him instead. He also broke the alliance of the
yasa’uri tribe and forced Timur to meekly return to him. At this point
the Chagadai Khan Tughlaq Timur insisted that the Amirs were misbehaving
in Transoxiana and he swept down again with his cavalry stamped the amir
of the Mongol Jalair tribe to death and routed Hajji Barlas, who while
fleeing was crushed under a cart by some turkish warlords. Timur again
submitted to the Khan and was affirmed as amir. However the Mongol Khan
feeling that the amirs were still misbehaving beheaded Bayan Suldus and
confiscated the possessions of Timur and Mir Hussain, who fled in terror
to Khorasan. They decided to take part in the military politics Seistan
(Northern Pakistan and Eastern Iran) by aiding one Malik against
another. Timur silently returned to the Mongol territory and recruited
adventurers and fellow brigands for his Seistan expedition and leading a
force of 1000 cavalry decided to settle a local conflict in Seistan. The
battle with the Tajik and Pathan chieftains proved disastrous as Timur,
early on in the battle, fell from his horse. He was immediately shot on
the shoulder and hip and thigh by crescent-headed arrows that destroyed
his ligaments. He reeled and hid under a dead horse till the battle
lines withdrew and dragged himself to Mir Hussain’s tent. Thus about the
age of 30, Timur found himself crippled with injury and infection with
most of his tribal prestige on the brink of obliteration and would
hardly have been expected to rise to be a figure noted in the sands of
time. In spite of this he doughtily raised himself and re-entered the
fray playing tribal politics to wean a large number of dissident Mongol
warriors of various tribes to his side from that of Khan Tughlaq Timur.
Similarly Mir Hussain was cultivating his Turkic tribal loyalties in
Balkh. Timur then felt himself strong enough to take on Tughlaq Timur
and re-entered Transoxiana in collaboration with Hussain a large force
of tribal cavalry and even a division of infantry plunderers. They
fought the Chagadai army with much application but the outcome was
indecisive. At this point Tughlaq Timur passed away after heavy
drinking, one night, and the Chagadai cavalry retreated into inner
Moghlistan. Hussain moved quickly and declared himself senior amir in a
quriltai on the steppes much to Timur’s consternation. Timur however
stayed away from Hussain and quietly played politics to undermine his
support from his troops. In he mean time the Chagadais re-grouped under
Khan Ilyaas Khwaja and reinvaded Transoxiana with a force of 15000
horse. Timur and Hussain went forth to counter him and were smashed on
the upper Oxus in 1365 by the charging hordes and lost many of their men
and animals.

Hussain and Timur once out of power regrouped and retreated south when
they heard that due a horse disease the Chagadais had retreated back to
Moghlistan. Road to Samarkand now remained open. Once the plague
subsided Hussain and Timur rushed back to Samarkand through some clever
trickery forced the maliks of Samarkand to let them in. Once in, they
assassinated all the maliks in in cold blood and placed their headless
corpses on gibbets to warn the city about the dangers of antagonizing
them. Hussain started re-asserting himself and laying a plot with the
Mongol tribal leaders tried to oust Timur from the head of his
confederation. Timur tried to collect a band of Mongols and some Shiite
adventurers from Iran and oppose Hussain, but the latter played his
politics well and on the eve of the show down Timur found all his
following, except some of his cousins and personal friends, had gone
over to Hussain. With Hussain attacking Timur was forced to retreat to
Khorasan. Here Timur acted quickly by first politicking with the Turkish
tribal chiefs of Iran and getting them over to his side. He then played
on the local islamic maliks to supply him with troops and made a
lightning raid on Kesh and Karshi to wrest them from Hussain. Timur then
galloped over 3 days to towards the Fortified city of Bukhara held by
Hussain. It was heavily guarded but at mid night he wedged chisels on
the ramparts and started scaling noiseless lameness and all with a band
of 500 hundred trusted men and got onto the walls. He surprised the
defenders and having thrown them down raided a stable and took hold of
the horses and launched an attack on the citadel. By morning Timur had
hacked his way to the top and unfurled his flag on Bukhara. Hussain
retaliated by sweeping down with his entire Turkic Qara’unas horde aided
by the Apardi and Arlat Mongols. Timur seeing the vast ranks advancing
towards Bukhara retreated from the city to Khorasan and from there to
Taskent. At Tashkent he signed a treaty with Khan Ilyaas Khwaja to get
aid of the Chagadais against Hussain. Hussain’s spies informed him of
the impending invasion and he, terrified by the new sent the pious
mullahs of his court to Timur to buy peace. This was exactly what Timur
wanted, he immediately portrayed himself as the guardian of the
Mohammedans and ejaculating verses of the Quran declared himself as the
arbitrator of peace between Hussain and the Kaffir Mongols of
Mogolistan. Timur now demanded his fiefdom and having established
himself in it bought over or murdered the amirs who were plotting
against him. Thus he weakened the support base for Hussain while he
started heavily arming his own Mongol garrisons. The Ghor Turk garrisons
of Kabul suddenly rose in revolt in Kabul that was directly in Mir
Hussain’s control due to his oppressive taxation. He appealed to Timur
for aid, who swiftly moved in, smashed the Afghan rebels and beheaded
them enmass. Then rapidly assaulting the Badakhshan province of
Afghanistan Timur destroyed the rebellious factions of Turks trying to
establish their own kingdoms. With these campaigns he showed who was the
real master in both Transoxiana and the Afghan provinces. Hussain took
fright of Timur’s overbearing presence and retreated to the fort of
Balkh and started ruling from there. Timur repeatedly rousing the
peoples passions as the true guardian of Allah’s cult led a series of
intrigues undermining the Qara’unas hordes. He incited rebellion against
Hussain on issues of taxation created discontent amidst his amirs.
Hussain asked the Maliks of Kunduz and Badakhshan to report to him on
Timur’s actions and busied himself with the local intrigues.

Timur appeared as though moving to the Amu darya river from Kesh when he
suddenly disbanded his troops. Hussain’s informers thought he was
wintering near Termez and had dismissed his troops on leave to go home.
Timur suddenly appeared near the fortifications of Kunduz and seven
divisions of cavalry and a division of infantry sappers materialized
beside him as though from nowhere. The garrison of Kunduz was
overpowered in a midnight assault from all sides and butchered or put to
flight. Timur rapidly followed it up by another raid on Badakhshan this
time destroying the whole Qara’unas garrison and moved on towards Balkh
with relentless marches through the highlands. Hussain was completely
surprised and fearing certain defeat surrendered. Timur shedding
crocodile tears over their past friendship and piously spouting the
Quran at every juncture asked Hussain to atone by making a pilgrimage to
Mecca. On the way Hussain’s throat was piously slit open by Timur’s
executioners and he was left to die. Timur ordered the massacre of the
population of Balkh and had the heads placed on the ramparts of the
sacked city. Timur at this point had cleared arisen from the ordinary
brigand, to the junior partner of Mir Hussain the lord of Balkh, to the
supreme power of Central Asia. Thus at the age of 35 Timur declared
himself the great protector of the Chingizid Law, the yasa of the
Mongols as well as a ghazi to wage jihad on the infidels. He never made
himself khan. Instead he placed a puppet descendent of Chingiz,
Soyurghatmish as the khan and ruled in his name as the exalted Sultan.
However this puppet khan was no more than his political prisoner that
established his credibility in the Mongol world. Here he differs from
the great Chingiz in not setting a new standard by himself. Then Timur
turned his attention towards the Qipchak khanate where the Turks under
Hussain Sufi had established a new kingdom taking advantage of the
weakness of the Mongols. He invaded the province of Kath that surrounded
the modern city of Urgench and laid siege to the fortifications. Hussain
Sufi was shot down while inspecting the blockade and his brother Yusuf
Sufi fled as Timur attacked their camp and captured women including
Sufi’s daughter Khanzade “the highest beauty in Mulk”. Timur piously
handed her over to his son Jahangir’s harem. In 1375 Timur found Yusuf
had incited a rebellion in SamarQand and Timur crisscrossed the region
smashing rebellious vassals for a full 4 years. At the end of this he
burst through the gates of the Urgench fort leading the charge from the
front. Yusuf tried to retreat but Timur chased him with great fury and
personally fought him putting him flight and he supposedly died of the
very shock of Timur galloping after him. Urgench was taken and its
population was slaughtered to man by the slitting of the throats as
Timur piously explained to the Ulema that he was putting the fear of
Allah into people’ minds.
