---
title: CHAPTER III

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Excerpts from Sister
Nivedita's Book](excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book_contents.htm) /

[←](chapter_ii.htm)

## CHAPTER III

MORNING TALKS AT ALMORA

PLACE: Almora.

TIME: May and June, 1898.

The first morning the talk was that of the central ideals of
civilization — in the West, truth; in the East, chastity. He justified
Hindu marriage customs as springing from the pursuit of this ideal and
from the woman's need of protection, in combination. And he traced out
the relation of the whole subject to the philosophy of the Absolute.

Another morning he began by observing that as there were four main
castes — Brahmin, Kshatriya, Bâniyâ \[Vaishya\], Shudra — so there were
four great national functions: the religious or priestly, fulfilled by
the Hindus; the military, by the Roman Empire; the mercantile, by
England today; and the democratic, by America in the future. And here he
launched off into a glowing prophetic forecast of how America would yet
solve the problems of the Shudra — the problems of freedom and
co-operation — and turned to relate to a non-American listener the
generosity of the arrangements which that people had attempted to make
for their aborigines.

Again it would be an eager *résumé* of the history of India or of the
Moguls, whose greatness never wearied him. Every now and then throughout
the summer he would break out into descriptions of Delhi and Agra. Once
he described the Taj as "a dimness, and again a dimness, and there — a
grave!"

Another time he spoke of Shah Jehan, and then, with a burst of
enthusiasm: "Ah! *He* was the glory of his line! A feeling for and
discrimination of beauty that are unparalleled in history. And an artist
himself! I have seen a manuscript illuminated by him which is one of the
art treasures of India. What a genius!"

Oftener still, it was Akbar of whom he would tell, almost with tears in
his voice and a passion easier to understand, beside that undomed tomb,
open to sun and wind — the grave of Secundra at Agra.

But all the more universal forms of human feeling were open to the
Master. In one mood he talked of China as if she were the treasure-house
of the world, and told us of the thrill with which he saw inscriptions
in old Bengali (Kutil?) characters over the doors of Chinese temples.

Few things could be more eloquent of the vagueness of Western ideas
regarding Oriental peoples than the fact that one of his listeners
alleged untruthfulness as a notorious quality of that race. . . . The
Swami would have none of it. Untruthfulness! Social rigidity! What were
these, except very, very relative terms? And as to untruthfulness in
particular, could commercial life or social life or any other form of
co-operation go on for a day if men did not trust men? Untruthfulness as
a necessity of etiquette? And how was that different from the Western
idea? Is the Englishman always glad and always sorry at the proper
place? But there is still a difference of degree? Perhaps — but only of
degree!

Or he might wander as far afield as Italy, that "greatest of the
countries of Europe — land of religion and of art; alike of imperial
organization and of Mazzini; mother of ideas, of culture and of freedom!

One day it was Shivaji and the Mahrattas and the year's wandering as a
Sannyâsin that won him home to Raigarh. "And to this day", said the
Swami, "authority in India dreads the Sannyasin, lest he conceals
beneath his yellow garb another Shivaji".

Often the enquiry "Who and what are the Aryans?" absorbed his attention;
and holding that their origin was complex, he would tell us how in
Switzerland he had felt himself to be in China, so like were the types.
He believed too that the same was true of some parts of Norway. Then
there were scraps of information about countries and physiognomies, an
impassioned tale of the Hungarian scholar who traced the Huns to Tibet,
and lies buried in Darjeeling and so on. . . .

Sometimes the Swami would deal with the rift between Brahmins and
Kshatriyas, painting the whole history of India as a struggle between
the two and showing that the latter had always embodied the rising,
fetter-destroying impulses of the nation. He could give excellent reason
too for the faith that was in him that the Kâyasthas of modern Bengal
represented the pre-Mauryan Kshatriyas. He would portray the two
opposing types of culture: the one, classical, intensive and saturated
with an ever-deepening sense of tradition and custom; the other,
defiant, impulsive and liberal in its outlook. It was part of a
deep-lying law of the historic development that Râma, Krishna and Buddha
had all arisen in the kingly, and not in the priestly caste. And in this
paradoxical moment Buddhism was reduced to a caste-smashing formula — "a
religion invented by the Kshatriyas" as a crushing rejoinder to
Brahminism!

That was a great hour indeed when he spoke of Buddha; for, catching a
word that seemed to identify him with its anti—Brahminical spirit, an
uncomprehending listener said, "Why, Swami, I did not know that you were
a Buddhist!

"Madam", he said, rounding on her, his whole face aglow with the
inspiration of that name, "I am the servant of the servants of the
servants of Buddha. Who was there ever like him? — the Lord — who never
performed one action for himself — with a heart that embraced the whole
world! So full of pity that he — prince and monk — would give his life
to save a little goat! So loving that he sacrificed himself to the
hunger of a tigress! — to the hospitality of a pariah and blessed him!
And he came into my room when I was a boy and I fell at his feet! For I
knew it was the Lord Himself!

Many times he spoke of Buddha in this fashion, sometimes at Belur and
sometimes afterwards. And once he told us the story of Ambâpâli, the
beautiful courtesan who feasted him. . . .

National feeling did not have it all its own way. For one morning when
the chasm seemed to be widest, there was a long talk on Bhakti — that
perfect identity with the Beloved that the devotion of Ray Ramananda,
the Bengali nobleman, before Chaitanya so beautifully illustrates:

Four eyes met. There were changes in two souls.  
And now I cannot remember whether he is a man  
And I a woman, or he a woman and I a man!  
All I know is, there were two, Love came, and

there is one!

It was that same morning that he talked of the Babists of Persia, in
their era of martyrdom — of the woman who inspired and the man who
worshipped and worked. And doubtless then he expatiated on that theory
of his — somewhat quaint and surprising to unaccustomed minds, not so
much for the matter of the statement as for the explicitness of the
expression — of the greatness and goodness of the young, who can love
without seeking personal expression for their love, and their high
potentiality.

Another day coming at sunrise when the snows could be seen,
dawn-lighted, from the garden, it was Shiva and Umâ on whom he dwelt —
and that was Shiva up there, the white snow-peaks, and the light that
fell upon Him was the Mother of the World! For a thought on which at
this time he was dwelling much was that God is the Universe — not within
it or outside it and not the universe God or the image of God, but He
it, and the All.

Sometimes all through the summer he would sit for hours telling us
stories, those cradle-tales of Hinduism whose function is not at all
that of our nursery fictions, but much more like the man-making myths of
the old Hellenic world. Best of all these I thought was the story of
Shuka, and we looked on the Shiva-mountains and the bleak scenery of
Almora the evening we heard it for the first time. . . .

Shuka was indeed the Swami's saint. He was the type, to him, of that
highest realization to which life and the world are merely play. Long
after, we learned how Shri Ramakrishna had spoken of him in his boyhood
as "my Shuka". And never can I forget the look, as of one gazing far
into depths of joy, with which he once stood and quoted the words of
Shiva in praise of the deep spiritual significance of the Bhagavad-Gitâ
and of the greatness of Shuka: "I know the real meaning of the teachings
of the Bhagavad-Gita, and Shuka knows, and *perhaps* Vyâsa knows — a
little!"

Another day in Almora the Swami talked of the great humanizing lives
that had arisen in Bengal, at the long inrolling wash of the first wave
of modern consciousness on the ancient shores of Hindu culture. Of Ram
Mohan Roy we had already heard from him at Naini Tal. And now of the
Pundit Vidyâsâgar he exclaimed, "There is not a man of my age in
northern India on whom his shadow has not fallen!" It was a great joy to
him to remember that these men and Shri Ramakrishna had all been born
within a few miles of each other.

The Swami introduced Vidyasagar to us now as "the hero of widow
remarriage and of the abolition of polygamy". But his favourite story
about him was of that day when he went home from the Legislative
Council, pondering over the question of whether or not to adopt English
dress on such occasions. Suddenly someone came up to a fat Mogul who was
proceeding homewards in leisurely and pompous fashion in front of him,
with the news "Sir, your house is on fire!" The Mogul went neither
faster nor slower for this information, and presently the messenger
contrived to express a discreet astonishment, whereupon his master
turned on him angrily. "Wretch!" he said. "Am I to abandon the gait of
my ancestors because a few sticks happen to be burning?" And Vidyasagar,
walking behind, determined to stick to the Châdar, Dhoti and sandals,
not even adopting coat and slippers.

The picture of Vidyasagar going into retreat for a month for the study
of the Shâstras, when his mother had suggested to him the remarriage of
child-widows, was very forcible. "He came out of his retirement of
opinion that they were *not* against such remarriage, and he obtained
the signatures of the pundits that they agreed in this opinion. Then the
action of certain native princes led the pundits to abandon their own
signatures so that, had the government not determined to assist the
movement, it could not have been carried — and now", added the Swami,
"the difficulty has an economic rather than a social basis".

We could believe that a man who was able to discredit polygamy by moral
force alone, was "intensely spiritual". And it was wonderful indeed to
realize the Indian indifference to a formal creed when we heard how this
giant was driven by the famine of 1864 — when 140,000 people died of
hunger and disease — to have nothing more to do with God and become
entirely agnostic in thought.

With this man, as one of the educators of Bengal, the Swami coupled the
name of David Hare, the old Scotsman and atheist to whom the clergy of
Calcutta refused Christian burial. He had died of nursing an old pupil
through cholera. So his own boys carried his dead body and buried it in
a swamp and made the grave a place of pilgrimage. That place has now
become College Square, the educational centre, and his school is now
within the university. And to this day Calcutta students make pilgrimage
to the tomb.

On this day we took advantage of the natural turn of the conversation to
cross-question the Swami as to the possible influence that Christianity
might have exerted over himself. He was much amused to hear that such a
statement had been hazarded, and told us with much pride of his only
contact with missionary influences, in the person of his old Scotch
master, Mr. Hastie. This hot-headed old man lived on nothing and
regarded his room as his boys' home as much as his own. It was he who
had first sent the Swami to Shri Ramakrishna, and towards the end of his
stay in India he used to say, "Yes, my boy, you were right, you were
right! — It is true that all is God!" "I am *proud* of him!" cried the
Swami. "But I don't think you could say that he had Christianized me
much!" . . .

We heard charming stories too on less serious subjects. There was the
lodging-house in an American city, for instance, where he had had to
cook his own food, and where he would meet in the course of operations
"an actress who ate roast turkey every day, and a husband and wife who
lived by making ghosts". And when the Swami remonstrated with the
husband and tried to persuade him to give up deceiving people, saying,
"You *ought* not to do this!" the wife would come up behind and say
eagerly, "Yes, sir! That's just what I tell him; for he makes all the
ghosts, and Mrs. Williams takes all the money!"

He told us also of a young engineer, an educated man, who, at a
spiritualistic gathering, "when the fat Mrs. Williams appeared from
behind the screen as his thin mother, exclaimed, 'Mother dear, how you
*have* grown in the spirit-world!' "

"At this", said the Swami, "my heart broke, for I thought there could be
no hope for the man". But never at a loss, he told the story of a
Russian painter who was ordered to paint the pic ture of a peasant's
dead father, the only description given being, "Man! Don't I tell you he
had a wart on his nose?" When at last, therefore, the painter had made a
portrait of some stray peasant and affixed a large wart to the nose, the
picture was declared to be ready, and the son was told to come and see
it. He stood in front of it, greatly overcome, and said, "Father!
Father! How changed you are since I saw you last!" After this, the young
engineer would never speak to the Swami again, which showed at least
that he could see the point of a story. But at this the Hindu monk was
genuinely astonished.

In spite of such general interests, however, the inner strife grew high,
and the thought pressed on the mind of one of the older members of our
party that the Master himself needed service and peace. Many times he
spoke with wonder of the torture of life, and who can say how many signs
there were of bitter need? A word or two was spoken — little, but enough
— and he, after many hours, came back and told us that he longed for
quiet and would go alone to the forests and find soothing.

And then, looking up, he saw the young moon shining above us, and he
said, "The Mohammedans think much of the new moon. Let us also, with the
new moon, begin a new life!" And he blessed his daughter with a great
blessing so that she, thinking that her old relationship was broken, nor
dreaming that a new and deeper life was being given to it, knew only
that the hour was strange and passing sweet. . . .

MAY 25

He went. It was Wednesday. And on Saturday he came back. He had been in
the silence of the forests ten hours each day, but on returning to his
tent in the evenings he had been surrounded with so much eager
attendance as to break the mood, and he had fled. Yet he was radiant. He
had discovered in himself the old-time Sannyasin, able to go barefoot
and endure heat, cold and scanty fare, unspoilt by the West. . . .

JUNE 2.

. . . . . .

And then, as we sat working on Friday morning the telegram came, a day
late, that said: "Goodwin died last night at Ootacamund". Our poor
friend had, it appeared, been one of the first victims of what was to
prove an epidemic of typhoid fever. And it seemed that with his last
breath he had spoken of the Swami and longed for his presence by his
side.

JUNE 5.

On Sunday evening the Swami came home. Through our gate and over the
terrace his way brought him, and there we sat and talked with him a
moment. He did not know our news, but a great darkness hung over him
already, and presently he broke the silence to remind us of that saint
who had called the cobra's bite "messenger from the Beloved", one whom
he had loved second only to Shri Ramakrishna himself. "I have just", he
said, "received a letter that says: 'Pavhari Baba has completed all his
sacrifices with the sacrifice of his own body. He has burnt himself in
his sacrificial fire'". "Swami!" exclaimed someone from amongst his
listeners. "Wasn't that very wrong?"

"How can I tell?" said the Swami, speaking in great agitation. "He was
too great a man for me to judge. He knew himself what he was doing."

Very little was said after this, and the party of monks passed on. Not
yet had the other news been broken.

JUNE 6.

Next morning he came early in a great mood. He had been up, he said
afterwards, since four. And one went out to meet him and told him of Mr.
Goodwin's death. The blow fell quietly. Some days later he refused to
stay in the place where he had received it, and complained of the
weakness that brought the image of his most faithful disciple constantly
into his mind. It was no more manly, he protested, to be thus ridden by
one's memory than to retain the characteristics of the fish or the dog.
Man must conquer this illusion and know that the dead are here beside us
and with us as much as ever. It is their absence and separation that are
a myth. And then he would break out again with some bitter utterance
against the folly of imagining Personal Will to guide the universe. "As
if", he exclaimed, "it would not be one's right and duty to fight such a
God and slay Him for killing Goodwin! And Goodwin, if he had lived,
could have done so much!" And in India one was free to recognize this as
the most religious, because the most unflinchingly truthful, mood of
all!

And while I speak of this utterance, I may perhaps put beside it another
that I heard a year later, spoken out of the same fierce wonder at the
dreams with which we comfort ourselves. "Why!" he said then. "Every
petty magistrate and officer is allowed his period of retirement and
rest. Only God, the Eternal Magistrate, must sit judging forever and
never go free!"

But in these first hours the Swami was calm about his loss, and sat down
and chatted quietly with us. He was full that morning of Bhakti passing
into asceticism, the divine passion that carries the soul on its high
tides far out of reach of persons, yet leaves it again struggling to
avoid those sweet snares of personality.

What he said that morning of renunciation proved a hard gospel to one of
those who listened, and when he came again she put it to him as her
conviction that to love without attachment involved no pain, and was in
itself ideal.

He turned on her with a sudden solemnity. "What is this idea of Bhakti
without renunciation?" he said. "It is most pernicious!" And standing
there for an hour or more, he talked of the awful self-discipline that
one must impose on oneself if one would indeed be unattached, of the
requisite nakedness of selfish motives, and of the danger that at any
moment the most flower-like soul might have its petals soiled with the
grosser stains of life. He told the story of an Indian nun who was asked
when a man could be certain of safety on this road, and who sent back
for answer a little plate of ashes. For the fight against passion was
long and fierce, and at any moment the conqueror might become the
conquered. . . .

. . . Weeks afterwards in Kashmir, when he was again talking in some
kindred fashion, one of us ventured to ask him if the feeling he thus
roused were not that worship of pain that Europe abhors as morbid.

"Is the worship of pleasure, then, so noble?" was his immediate answer.
"But indeed", he added after a pause, "we worship neither pain nor
pleasure. We seek through either to come at that which transcends them
both".

JUNE 9.

This Thursday morning there was a talk on Krishna. It was characteristic
of the Swami's mind, and characteristic also of the Hindu culture from
which he had sprung, that he could lend himself to the enjoyment and
portrayal of an idea one day that the next would see submitted to a
pitiless analysis and left slain upon the field. He was a sharer to the
full in the belief of his people that, provided an idea was spiritually
true and consistent, it mattered very little about its objective
actuality. And this mode of thought had first been suggested to him in
his boyhood by his own master. He had mentioned some doubt as to the
authenticity of a certain religious history. "What!" said Shri
Ramakrishna. "Do you not then think that those who could conceive such
ideas must have been the thing itself?"

The existence of Krishna, then, like that of Christ, he often told us
"in the general way" he doubted. Buddha and Mohammed alone amongst
religious teachers had been fortunate enough to have "enemies as well as
friends", so that their historical careers were beyond dispute. As for
Krishna, he was the most shadowy of all. A poet, a cowherd, a great
ruler, a warrior and a sage had all perhaps been merged in one beautiful
figure holding the Gitâ in his hand.

But today Krishna was "the most perfect of the Avatâras". And a
wonderful picture followed of the charioteer who reined in his horses
while he surveyed the field of battle and in one brief glance noted the
disposition of the forces, at the same moment that he commenced to utter
to his royal pupil the deep spiritual truths of the Gita.

And indeed as we went through the countrysides of northern India this
summer, we had many chances of noting how deep this Krishna myth had set
its mark upon the people. The songs that dancers chanted as they danced
in the roadside hamlets were all of Râdhâ and Krishna. And the Swami was
fond of a statement, as to which we, of course, could have no opinion,
that the Krishna-worshippers of India had exhausted the possibilities of
the romantic motive in lyric poetry. . . .

But throughout these days the Swami was fretting to be away and alone.
The place where he had heard of Mr. Goodwin's loss was intolerable to
him, and letters to be written and received constantly renewed the
wound. He said one day that Shri Ramakrishna, while seeming to be all
Bhakti, was really within all Jnana; but he himself, apparently all
Jnana, was full of Bhakti, and that thereby he was apt to be as weak as
any woman.

One day he carried off a few faulty lines of someone's writing and
brought back a little poem, which was sent to the widowed mother as his
memorial of her son. . . . \[*Vide* ["Requiescat in
Pace"](../../volume_4/writings_poems/requiescat_in_pace.htm) , *Complete
Works*, IV\]

And then, because there was nothing left of the original and he feared
that she who was corrected (because *her* lines had been "in three
metres") might be hurt, he expatiated, long and earnestly upon the
theme, that it was so much greater to feel poetically than merely to
string syllables together in rhyme and metre.[1](#fn1) He might be very
severe on a sympathy or an opinion that seemed in his eyes sentimental
or false. But an effort that failed found always in the Master its
warmest advocate and tenderest defence.

And how happy was that acknowledgment of the bereaved mother to him when
in the midst of her sorrow she wrote and thanked him for the character
of his influence over the son who had died so far away!

JUNE 10.

It was our last afternoon at Almora that we heard the story of the fatal
illness of Shri Ramakrishna. Dr. Mahendra Lal Sarkar had been called in
and had pronounced the disease to be cancer of the throat, leaving the
young disciples with many warnings as to its infectious nature. Half an
hour later "Naren", as he then was, came in and found them huddled
together discussing the dangers of the case. He listened to what they
had been told and then, looking down, saw at his feet the cup of gruel
that had been partly taken by Shri Ramakrishna and which must have
contained in it the germs of the fatal discharges of mucus and pus, as
it came out in his baffled attempts to swallow the thing on account of
the stricture of the food-passage in the throat. He picked it up and
drank from it before them all. Never was the infection of cancer
mentioned amongst the disciples again.

[→](chapter_iv.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)In the original manuscript of the book Sister Nivedita
    added the following note:   "In obedience to the beloved wish of S.
    Sara, I give here the original lines:   Speed forth, lonely Soul,
    upon thy star-strewn path, Spread, lonely soul, upon thy meditative
    way, Freed from the mists of time and sense — Ascend;   Service
    complete and service accepted, from Thy home in the deep heart of
    Love Transcendent find Incense and flowers and music fill thy place
    behind thee, Rest, weary soul!   Severed all bonds that held thee,
    ended thy quest — Then lost in the ocean — one with the Life
    Immortal. Peace, happy soul!   "'It has three metres' — said the
    Master. Again, he said, 'The line that really strikes the poetic
    note is that — "Thy home in the deep heart of Love Transcendent
    find"'."  
