---
title: CHAPTER V

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Excerpts from Sister
Nivedita's Book](excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book_contents.htm) /

[←](chapter_iv.htm)

## CHAPTER V

ON THE WAY TO BARAMULLA

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda, Gurubhais, and a party of Europeans and
disciples, amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady Mother"; one whose
name was Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: From Bareilly to Baramulla, Kashmir.

TIME: June 14 to 20, 1898.

JUNE 14.

We entered the Punjab next day, and great was the Swami's excitement at
the fact. It almost seemed as if he had been born there, so close and
special was his love for this province. He talked of the girls at their
spinning wheels listening to the "So'ham! So'ham!" — I am He! I am He!
Then, by a swift transition he turned to the far past and unrolled for
us the great historic panorama of the advance of the Greeks on the
Indus, the rise of Chandragupta and the development of the Buddhistic
empire. He was determined this summer to find his way to Attock and see
with his own eyes the spot at which Alexander was turned back. He
described to us the Gandhara sculptures, which he must have seen in the
Lahore Museum the year before, and lost himself in indignant repudiation
of the absurd European claim that India had ever sat at the feet of
Greece in things artistic.

Then there were flying glimpses of long-expected cities — Ludhiana,
where certain trusty English disciples had lived as children; Lahore,
where his Indian lectures had ended; and so on. We came too upon the dry
gravel beds of many rivers and learnt that the space between one pair
was called the Doab and the area containing them all, the Punjab. 

It was at twilight, crossing one of these stony tracts, that he told us
of that great vision which came to him years ago, while he was still new
to the ways of the life of a monk, giving back to him, as he always
afterwards believed, the ancient mode of Sanskrit chanting.

"It was evening", he said, "in that age when the Aryans had only reached
the Indus. I saw an old man seated on the bank of the great river. Wave
upon wave of darkness was rolling in upon him, and he was chanting from
the Rig-Veda. Then I awoke and went on chanting. They were the tones
that we used long ago".

. . . Those who were constantly preoccupied with imagination regarding
their own past always aroused his contempt. But on this occasion of
telling the story, he gave a glimpse of it from a very different point
of view.

"Shankarâchârya", he was saying, "had caught the rhythm of the Vedas,
the national cadence. Indeed I always imagine", he went on suddenly with
dreamy voice and far-away look, "I always imagine that he had some
vision such as mine when he was young, and recovered the ancient music
that way. Anyway, his whole life's work is nothing but that, the
throbbing of the beauty of the Vedas and Upanishads". . . .

From Rawalpindi to Murree we went by tonga, and there we spent some days
before setting out for Kashmir. Here the Swami came to the conclusion
that any effort which he might make to induce the orthodox to accept a
European as a fellow-disciple, or in the direction of woman's education,
had better be made in Bengal. The distrust of the foreigner was too
strong in Punjab to admit of work succeeding there. He was much occupied
by this question from time to time, and would sometimes remark on the
paradox presented by the Bengali combination of political antagonism to
the English, and readiness to love and trust. . . .

JUNE 18.

. . . . . .

Most of the afternoon we were compelled by a storm to spend indoors; and
a new chapter was opened at Dulai in our knowledge of Hinduism, for the
Swami told us gravely and frankly of its modern abuses and spoke of his
own uncompro mising hostility to those evil practices which pass under
the name of Vâmâchâra.

When we asked how Shri Ramakrishna — who never could bear to condemn the
hope of any man — had looked at these things, he told us that "the old
man" had said, "Well, well! But every house may have a scavengers'
entrance!" And he pointed out that all sects of diabolism in any country
belonged to this class. . . .

JUNE 19.

We took it in turns to drive with the Swami in his tonga, and this next
day seemed full of reminiscence.

He talked of Brahmavidyâ, the vision of the One, the Alone — Real, and
told how love was the only cure for evil. He had had a schoolfellow who
grew up and became rich, but lost his health. It was an obscure disease,
sapping his energy and vitality daily, yet altogether baffling the skill
of the doctors. At last, because he knew that the Swami had always been
religious, and men turn to religion when all else fails, he sent to beg
him to come to him. When the Master reached him a curious thing
happened. There came to his mind a text: "Him the Brahmin conquers who
thinks that he is separate from the Brahmin. Him the Kshatriya conquers
who thinks that he is separate from the Kshatriya. And him the universe
conquers who thinks that he is separate from the universe". And the sick
man grasped this and recovered. "And so", said the Swami, "though I
often say strange things and angry things, yet remember that in my heart
I never seriously mean to preach anything but love! All these things
will come right only when we realize that we love each other".

Was it then, or the day before, that talking of the great God, he told
us how when he was a child his mother would sigh over his naughtiness
and say, "So many prayers and austerities, and instead of a good soul,
Shiva has sent me you!" till he was hypnotized into a belief that he was
really one of Shiva's demons. He thought that for a punishment he had
been banished for a while from Shiva's heaven, and that his one effort
in life must be to go back there.

His first act of sacrilege, he told us once, had been committed at the
age of five when he embarked on a stormy argument with his mother, to
the effect that when his right hand was soiled with eating, it would be
cleaner to lift his tumbler of water with the left. For this or similar
perversities her most drastic remedy was to put him under the water tap
and, while cold water was pouring over his head, to say "Shiva! Shiva!"
This, he said, never failed of its effect. The prayer would remind him
of his exile, and he would say to himself, "No, no, not this time
again!" and so return to quiet and obedience.

He had a surpassing love for Mahâdeva, and once he said of the Indian
women of the future that if, amidst their new tasks, they would only
remember now and then to say "Shiva! Shiva!" it would be worship enough.
The very air of the Himalayas was charged for him with the image of that
"eternal meditation" that no thought of pleasure could break. And he
understood, he said, for the first time this summer, the meaning of the
nature-story that made the Ganges fall on the head of the great God, and
wander in and out amongst His matted locks before She found an outlet on
the plains below. He had searched long, he said, for the words that the
rivers and waterfalls uttered, amongst the mountains, before he had
realized that it was the eternal cry "Bom! Bom! Hara! Hara!" 

"Yes!" he said of Shiva one day, "He is the great God — calm, beautiful,
and silent! And I am His great worshipper".

Again his subject was marriage, as the type of the soul's relation to
God. "This is why", he exclaimed, "though the love of a mother is in
some ways greater, yet the whole world takes the love of man and woman
as the type. *No other has such tremendous idealizing power*. The
beloved actually becomes what he is imagined to be. This love transforms
its object".

Then the talk strayed to national types, and he spoke of the joy with
which the returning traveller greets once more the sight of the men and
women of his own country. The whole of life has been a subconscious
education to enable one to understand in these every faintest ripple of
expression in face and form.

And again we passed a group of Sannyâsins going on foot, and he broke
out into fierce invective against asceticism as "savagery" . . . . But
the sight of wayfarers doing slow miles on foot in the name of their
ideals seemed to rouse in his mind a train of painful associations, and
he grew impatient on behalf of humanity at "the torture of religion".
Then again the mood passed as suddenly as it had arisen and gave place
to the equally strong statement of the conviction that were it not for
this "savagery", luxury would have robbed man of all his manliness.

We stopped that evening at Uri Dak bungalow, and in the twilight we all
walked in the meadows and the bazaar. How beautiful the place was! A
little mud fortress — exactly of the European feudal pattern — overhung
the footway as it swept into a great open theatre of field and hill.
Along the road above the river lay the bazaar, and we returned to the
bungalow by a path across the fields, past cottages in whose gardens the
roses were in bloom. As we came, too, it would happen that here and
there some child more venturesome than others would play with us.

JUNE 20.

The next day, driving through the most beautiful part of the pass and
seeing cathedral rocks and an old ruined temple of the sun, we reached
Baramulla. The legend is that the Vale of Kashmir was once a lake and
that at this point the Divine Boar pierced the mountains with his tusks
and let the Jhelum go free. Another piece of geography in the form of
myth. Or is it also prehistoric history?

[→](chapter_vi.htm)

</div>
