---
title: CHAPTER X

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Excerpts from Sister
Nivedita's Book](excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book_contents.htm) /

[←](chapter_ix.htm)

## CHAPTER X

THE SHRINE OF AMARNATH

PLACE: Kashmir.

TIME: July 29 to August 8, 1898.

JULY 29.

From this time we saw very little of the Swami. He was full of
enthusiasm about the pilgrimage and lived mostly on one meal a day,
seeking no company much, save that of Sâdhus. Sometimes he would come to
a camping-ground, beads in hand. Tonight two of the party went roaming
about Bawan, which was like a village fair, all modified by a religious
tendency centering in the sacred springs. Afterwards with Dhira Mata it
was possible to go and listen at the tent door to the crowd of
Hindi-speaking Sadhus who were plying the Swami with questions.

On Thursday we reached Pahalgam and camped down at the lower end of the
valley. We found that the Swami had to encounter high opposition over
the question of our admission at all. He was supported by the Naked
Swamis, one of whom said, "It is true you have this strength, Swamiji,
but you ought not to manifest it!" He yielded at the word. That
afternoon, however, he took his daughter round the camp to be blessed,
which really meant to distribute alms — and whether because he was
looked upon as rich or because he was recognized as strong, the next day
our tents were moved up to a lovely knoll at the head of the camp. . . .

JULY 30.

. . . . . .

How beautiful was the route to the next halt, Chandanwari! There we
camped on the edge of a ravine. It rained all afternoon, and I was
visited by the Swami only for a five-minutes' chat. But I received
endless touching little kindnesses from the servants and other pilgrims.
. . .

. . . Close to Chandanwari the Swami insisted on my doing my first
glacier on foot and took care to point out every detail of interest. A
tremendous climb of some thousands of feet was the next experience. Then
a long walk along a narrow path that twisted round mountain after
mountain, and finally another steep climb. At the top of the first
mountain, the ground was simply carpeted with edelweiss. Then the road
passed five hundred feet above Sheshnag with its sulky water, and at
last we camped in a cold damp place amongst the snow-peaks, 18,000 feet
high. The firs were far below, and all afternoon and evening the coolies
had to forage for juniper in all directions. The Tahsildar's, Swami's
and my own tents were all close together, and in the evening a large
fire was lighted in front. But it did not burn well, and many feet below
lay the glacier. I did not see the Swami after we camped.

Panchatarani — the place of the five streams — was not nearly such a
long march. Moreover, it was lower than Sheshnag, and the cold was dry
and exhilarating. In front of the camp was a dry riverbed, all gravel,
and through this ran five streams, in all of which it was the duty of
the pilgrim to bathe, walking from one to the other in wet garments.
Contriving to elude observation completely, Swamiji nevertheless
fulfilled the law to the last letter in this respect. . . .

At these heights we often found ourselves in great circles of
snow-peaks, those mute giants that have suggested to the Hindu mind the
idea of the ash-encovered God.

AUGUST 2.

On Tuesday, August the 2nd, the great day of Amarnath, the first batch
of pilgrims must have left the camp at two! We left by the light of the
full moon. The sun rose as we went down the narrow valley. It was not
too safe at this part of the journey. But when we left our Dandies and
began to climb, the real danger began. . . . Then, having at last
reached the bottom of the farther slope, we had to toil along the
glacier mile after mile to the cave. . . .

The Swami, exhausted, had by this time fallen behind. . . . He came at
last and with a word sent me on; he was going to bathe. Half an hour
later he entered the cave. With a smile he knelt first at one end of the
semi-circle, then at the other. The place was vast, large enough to hold
a cathedral; and the great ice-Shiva, in a niche of deepest shadow,
seemed as if throned on its own base. A few minutes passed, and then he
turned to leave the cave.

To him, the heavens had opened. He had touched the feet of Shiva. He had
had to hold himself tight, he said afterwards, lest he "should swoon
away". But so great was his physical exhaustion that a doctor said
afterwards that his heart ought to have stopped beating, but had
undergone a permanent enlargement instead. How strangely near fulfilment
had been those words of his Master, "When he realizes who and what he
is, he will give up this body!"

"I have enjoyed it so much!" he said half an hour afterwards, as he sat
on a rock above the stream-side, eating lunch with the kind Naked Swami
and me. "I thought the ice Linga was Shiva Himself. And there were no
thievish Brahmins, no trade, nothing wrong. It was all worship. I never
enjoyed any religious place so much!"

Afterwards he would often tell of the overwhelming vision that had
seemed to draw him almost into its vertex. He would talk of the poetry
of the white ice-pillar; and it was he who suggested that the first
discovery of the place had been by a party of shepherds, who had
wandered far in search of their flocks one summer day and had entered
the cave to find themselves before the unmelting ice, in the presence of
the Lord Himself. He always said too that the grace of Amarnath had been
granted to him there, not to die till he himself should give consent.
And to me he said, "You do not now understand. But you have made the
pilgrimage, and it will go on working. Causes must bring their effects.
You will understand better afterwards. The effects will come".

How beautiful was the road by which we returned next morning to
Pahalgam! We struck tents that night immediately on our return to them
and camped later for the night in a snowy pass a whole stage further on.
We paid a coolie a few annas here to push on with a letter; but when we
actually arrived next afternoon we found that this had been quite
unnecessary, for all morning long relays of pilgrims had been passing
the tents and dropping in, in the most friendly manner, to give the
others news of us and our impending arrival. In the morning we were up
and on the way long before dawn. As the sun rose before us, while the
moon went down behind, we passed above the Lake of Death, into which
about forty pilgrims had been buried one year by an avalanche which
their hymns had started. After this we came to the tiny goat-path down
the face of a steep cliff by which we were able to shorten the return
journey so much. This was little better than a scramble, and everyone
had perforce to do it on foot. At the bottom the villagers had something
like breakfast ready. Fires were burning, Chapatties baking, and tea was
ready to be served out. From this time on parties of pilgrims would
leave the main body at each parting of the ways, and the feeling of
solidarity that had grown up amongst us all throughout the journey
became gradually less and less.

That evening on the knoll above Pahalgam, where a great fire of
pine-logs was lighted and Dhurries spread, we all sat and talked. Our
friend the Naked Swami joined us and we had plenty of fun and nonsense,
but presently, when all had gone save our own little party, we sat on
with the great moon overhead and the towering snows and rushing rivers
and the mountain-pines. And the Swami talked of Shiva and the cave and
the great verge of vision.

AUGUST 8.

We started for Islamabad next day, and on Monday morning as we sat at
breakfast, we were towed safely into Srinagar.

[→](chapter_xi.htm)

</div>
