---
title: CHAPTER XI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Excerpts from Sister
Nivedita's Book](excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book_contents.htm) /

[←](chapter_x.htm)

## CHAPTER XI

AT SRINAGAR ON THE RETURN JOURNEY

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda and a party of Europeans and disciples,
amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady Mother"; one whose name was
Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: Kashmir — Srinagar.

TIME: August 9 to August 13, 1898.

AUGUST 9.

At this time the Master was always talking of leaving us. And when I
find the entry "The river is pure that flows, the monk is pure that
goes", I know exactly what it means — the passionate outcry "I am always
so much better when I have to undergo hardships and beg my bread", the
longing for freedom and the touch of the common people, the picture of
himself making a long circuit of the country on foot and meeting us
again at Baramulla for the journey home.

His family of boat-people, whom he had staunchly befriended through two
seasons, left us today. Afterwards he would refer to the whole incident
of their connection with him as proof that even charity and patience
could go too far.

AUGUST 10.

It was evening, and we all went out to pay some visit. On the return he
called his disciple Nivedita to walk with him across the fields. His
talk was all about the work and his intentions in it. He spoke of the
inclusiveness of his conception of the country and its religions; of his
own distinction as being solely in his desire to make Hinduism active,
aggressive, a missionary faith; of "don't-touch-ism" as the only thing
he repudiated. Then he talked with depth of feeling of the gigantic
spirituality of many of those who were most orthodox. India wanted
practicality, but she must never let go her hold on the old meditative
life for that. "To be as deep as the ocean and as broad as the sky",
Shri Ramakrishna has said, was the ideal. But this profound inner life
in the soul encased within orthodoxy is the result of an accidental, not
an essential, association. "And if we set ourselves right here, the
world will be right, for are we not all one? Ramakrishna Paramahamsa was
alive to the depths of his being, yet on the outer plane he was
perfectly active and capable."

And then of that critical question of the worship of his own master, "My
own life is guided by the enthusiasm of that great personality, but
others will decide for themselves how far this is true for them.
Inspiration is not filtered out to the world through one man".

AUGUST 11.

There was occasion this day for the Swami to rebuke a member of this
party for practising palmistry. It was a thing he said that everyone
desired, yet all India despised and hated. Yes, he said, in reply to a
little special pleading, even of character-reading he disapproved. "To
tell you the truth, I should have thought even your incarnation more
honest if he and his disciples had not performed miracles. Buddha
unfrocked a monk for doing it." Later, talking on the subject to which
he had now transferred his attention, he spoke with horror of the
display of the least of it as sure to bring a terrible reflex.

AUGUST 12 AND 13.

The Swami had now taken a Brahmin cook. Very touching had been the
arguments of the Amarnath Sâdhus against his willingness to let even a
Mussulman cook for him. "Not in the land of Sikhs at least, Swamiji",
they had said, and he had at last consented. But for the present he was
worshipping his little Mohammedan boat-child as Umâ. Her whole idea of
love was service, and the day he left Kashmir she, tiny one, was fain to
carry a tray of apples for him all the way to the tonga herself. He
never forgot her, though he seemed quite indifferent at the time. In
Kashmir itself he was fond of recalling the time when she saw a blue
flower on the towing path and sitting down before it, and striking it
this way and that, "was alone with that flower for twenty minutes".

There was a piece of land by the riverside on which grew three
chennaars, towards which our thoughts turned with peculiar love at this
time. For the Mahârâjâ was anxious to give it to Swamiji, and we all
pictured it as a centre of work in the future — work which should
realize the great idea of "by the people, for the people, as a joy to
worker and to served".

In view of Indian feeling about a homestead blessed by women, it had
been suggested that we should go and annex the site by camping there for
a while. One of our party, moreover, had a personal wish for special
quiet at this time. So it was decided that we should establish "a
women's Math", as it were, before the Maharaja should require the land
to confer it on the Swami. And this was possible because the spot was
one of the minor camping grounds used by Europeans.

[→](chapter_xii.htm)

</div>
