---
title: BUDDHISTIC INDIA

---
<div>

[←](reports_in_american_newspapers/the_women_of_india.htm)
[Home](../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) /
[Volume 3](volume_3_contents.htm)
/ [→](../volume_4/addresses_on_bhakti-yoga/the_preparation.htm)

  

## BUDDHISTIC INDIA

(Reproduced from the *Swami Vivekananda Centenary Memorial Volume*,
published by the Swami Vivekananda Centenary, Calcutta, in 1963. The
additions in square brackets have been made for purposes of
clarification. Periods indicate probable omissions. — *Publisher*.)

(*Delivered at the Shakespeare Club, Pasadena, California, on February
2, 1900*)

Buddhistic India is our subject tonight. Almost all of you, perhaps,
have read Edwin Arnold's poem on the life of Buddha, and some of you,
perhaps, have gone into the subject with more scholarly interest, as in
English, French and German, there is quite a lot of Buddhistic
literature. Buddhism itself is the most interesting of subjects, for it
is the first historical outburst of a world religion. There have been
great religions before Buddhism arose, in India and elsewhere, but, more
or less, they are confined within their own races. The ancient Hindus or
ancient Jews or ancient Persians, every one of them had a great
religion, but these religions were more or less racial. With Buddhism
first begins that peculiar phenomenon of religion boldly starting out to
conquer the world. Apart from its doctrines and the truths it taught and
the message it had to give, we stand face to face with one of the
tremendous cataclysms of the world. Within a few centuries of its birth,
the barefooted, shaven-headed missionaries of Buddha had spread over all
the then known civilised world, and they penetrated even further — from
Lapland on the one side to the Philippine Islands on the other. They had
spread widely within a few centuries of Buddha's birth; and in India
itself, the religion of Buddha had at one time nearly swallowed up
two-thirds of the population.

The whole of India was never Buddhistic. It stood outside. Buddhism had
the same fate as Christianity had with the Jews; the majority of the
Jews stood aloof. So the old Indian religion lived on. But the
comparison stops here. Christianity, though it could not get within its
fold all the Jewish race, itself took the country. Where the old
religion existed — the religion of the Jews — that was conquered by
Christianity in a very short time and the old religion was dispersed,
and so the religion of the Jews lives a sporadic life in different parts
of the world. But in India this gigantic child was absorbed, in the long
run, by the mother that gave it birth, and today the very name of Buddha
is almost unknown all over India. You know more about Buddhism than
ninety-nine per cent of the Indians. At best, they of India only know
the name — "Oh, he was a great prophet, a great Incarnation of God" —
and there it ends. The island of Ceylon remains to Buddha, and in some
parts of the Himalayan country, there are some Buddhists yet. Beyond
that there are none. But \[Buddhism\] has spread over all the rest of
Asia.

Still, it has the largest number of followers of any religion, and it
has indirectly modified the teachings of all the other religions. A good
deal of Buddhism entered into Asia Minor. It was a constant fight at one
time whether the Buddhists would prevail or the later sects of
Christians. The \[Gnostics\] and the other sects of early Christians
were more or less Buddhistic in their tendencies, and all these got
fused up in that wonderful city of Alexandria, and out of the fusion
under Roman law came Christianity. Buddhism in its political and social
aspect is even more interesting than its \[doctrines\] and dogmas; and
as the first outburst of the tremendous world-conquering power of
religion, it is very interesting also.

I am mostly interested in this lecture in India as it has been affected
by Buddhism; and to understand Buddhism and its rise a bit, we have to
get a few ideas about India as it existed when this great prophet was
born.

There was already in India a vast religion with an organised scripture —
the Vedas; and these Vedas existed as a mass of literature and not a
book — just as you find the Old Testament, the Bible. Now, the Bible is
a mass of literature of different ages; different persons are the
writers, and so on. It is a collection. Now, the Vedas are a vast
collection. I do not know whether, if the texts were all found — nobody
has found all the texts, nobody even in India has seen all the books —
if all the books were known, this room would contain them. It is a huge
mass of literature, carried down from generation to generation from God,
who gave the scriptures. And the idea about the scriptures in India
became tremendously orthodox. You complain of your orthodoxies in
book-worship. If you get the Hindus' idea, where will you be? The Hindus
think the Vedas are the direct knowledge of God, that God has created
the whole universe in and through the Vedas, and that the whole universe
exists because it is in the Vedas. The cow exists outside because the
word "cow" is in the Vedas; man exists outside because of the word in
the Vedas. Here you see the beginning of that theory which later on
Christians developed and expressed in the text: "In the beginning was
the Word and the Word was with God " It is the old, ancient theory of
India. Upon that is based the whole idea of the scriptures. And mind,
every word is the power of God. The word is only the external
manifestation on the material plane. So, all this manifestation is just
the manifestation on the material plane; and the Word is the Vedas, and
Sanskrit is the language of God. God spoke once. He spoke in Sanskrit,
and that is the divine language. Every other language, they consider, is
no more than the braying of animals; and to denote that they call every
other nation that does not speak Sanskrit \[Mlechchhas\], the same word
as the barbarians of the Greeks. They are braying, not talking, and
Sanskrit is the divine language.

Now, the Vedas were not written by anybody; they were eternally
coexistent with God. God is infinite. So is knowledge, and through this
knowledge is created the world. Their idea of ethics is \[that a thing
is good\] because the law says so. Everything is bounded by that book —
nothing \[can go\] beyond that, because the knowledge of God — you
cannot get beyond that. That is Indian orthodoxy.

In the latter part of the Vedas, you see the highest, the spiritual. In
the early portions, there is the crude part. You quote a passage from
the Vedas — "That is not good", you say. "Why?" "There is a positive
evil injunction" — the same as you see in the Old Testament. There are
numbers of things in all old books, curious ideas, which we would not
like in our present day. You say: "This doctrine is not at all good;
why, it shocks my ethics!" How did you get your idea? \[Merely\] by your
own thought? Get out! If it is ordained by God, what right have you to
question? When the Vedas say, "Do not do this; this is immoral", and so
on, no more have you the right to question at all. And that is the
difficulty. If you tell a Hindu, "But our Bible does not say so", \[he
will reply\] "Oh, your Bible! it is a babe of history. What other Bible
could there be except the Vedas? What other book could there be? All
knowledge is in God. Do you mean to say that He teaches by two or more
Bibles? His knowledge came out in the Vedas. Do you mean to say that He
committed a mistake, then? Afterwards, He wanted to do something better
and taught another Bible to another nation? You cannot bring another
book that is as old as Vedas. Everything else — it was all copied after
that." They would not listen to you. And the Christian brings the Bible.
They say: "That is fraud. God only speaks once, because He never makes
mistakes."

Now, just think of that. That orthodoxy is terrible. And if you ask a
Hindu that he is to reform his society and do this and that, he says:
"Is it in the books? If it is not, I do not care to change. You wait. In
five \[hundred\] years more you will find this is good." If you say to
him, "This social institution that you have is not right", he says, "How
do you know that?" Then he says: "Our social institutions in this matter
are the better. Wait five \[hundred\] years and your institutions will
die. The test is the survival of the fittest. You live, but there is not
one community in the world which lives five hundred years together. Look
here! We have been standing all the time." That is what they would say.
Terrible orthodoxy! And thank God I have crossed that ocean.

This was the orthodoxy of India. What else was there? Everything was
divided, the whole society, as it is today, though in a much more
rigorous form then — divided into castes. There is another thing to
learn. There is a tendency to make castes just \[now\] going on here in
the West. And I myself — I am a renegade. I have broken everything. I do
not believe in caste, individually. It has very good things in it. For
myself, Lord help me! I would not have any caste, if He helps me. You
understand what I mean by caste, and you are all trying to make it very
fast. It is a hereditary trade \[for\] the Hindu. The Hindu said in
olden times that life must be made easier and smoother. And what makes
everything alive? Competition. Hereditary trade kills. You are a
carpenter? Very good, your son can be only a carpenter. What are you? A
blacksmith? Blacksmithing becomes a caste; your children will become
blacksmiths. We do not allow anybody else to come into that trade, so
you will be quiet and remain there. You are a military man, a fighter?
Make a caste. You are a priest? Make a caste. The priesthood is
hereditary. And so on. Rigid, high power! That has a great side, and
that side is \[that\] it really rejects competition. It is that which
has made the nation live while other nations have died — that caste. But
there is a great evil: it checks individuality. I will have to be a
carpenter because I am born a carpenter; but I do not like it. That is
in the books, and that was before Buddha was born. I am talking to you
of India as it was before Buddha. And you are trying today what you call
socialism! Good things will come; but in the long run you will be a
\[blight\] upon the race. Freedom is the watchword. Be free! A free
body, a free mind, and a free soul! That is what I have felt all my
life; I would rather be doing evil freely than be doing good under
bondage.

Well, these things that they are crying for now in the West, they have
done ages before there. Land has been nationalised . . . by thousands
all these things. There is blame upon this hide-bound caste. The Indian
people are intensely socialistic. But, beyond that, there is a wealth of
individualism. They are as tremendously individualistic — that is to
say, after laying down all these minute regulations. They have regulated
how you should eat, drink, sleep, die! Everything is regulated there;
from early morning to when you go to bed and sleep, you are following
regulations and law. Law, law. Do you wonder that a nation should
\[live\] under that? Law is death. The more of the law in a country, the
worse for the country. \[But to be an individual\] we go to the
mountains, where there is no law, no government. The more of law you
make, the more of police and socialism, the more of blackguards there
are. Now this tremendous regulation of law \[is\] there. As soon as a
child is born, he knows that he is born a slave: slave to his caste,
first; slave to his nation, next. Slave, slave, slave. Every action -
his drinking and his eating. He must eat under a regular method; this
prayer with the first morsel, this prayer with the second, that prayer
with the third, and that prayer when he drinks water. Just think of
that! Thus, from day to day, it goes on and on.

But they were thinkers. They knew that this would not lead to real
greatness. So they left a way out for them all. After all, they found
out that all these regulations are only for the world and the life of
the world. As soon as you do not want money \[and\] you do not want
children — no business for this world — you can go out entirely free.
Those that go out thus were called Sannyasins — people who have given
up. They never organised themselves, nor do they now; they are a free
order of men and women who refuse to marry, who refuse to possess
property, and they have no law — not even the Vedas bind them. They
stand on \[the\] top of the Vedas. They are \[at\] the other pole
\[from\] our social institutions. They are beyond caste. They have grown
beyond. They are too big to be bound by these little regulations and
things. Only two things \[are\] necessary for them: they must not
possess property and must not marry. If you marry, settle down, or
possess property, immediately the regulations will be upon you; but if
you do not do either of these two, you are free. They were the living
gods of the race, and ninety-nine per cent of our great men and women
were to be found among them.

In every country, real greatness of the soul means extraordinary
individuality, and that individuality you cannot get in society. It
frets and fumes and wants to burst society. If society wants to keep it
down, that soul wants to burst society into pieces. And they made an
easy channel. They say: "Well, once you get out of society, then you may
preach and teach everything that you like. We only worship you from a
distance. So there were the tremendous, individualistic men and women,
and they are the highest persons in all society. If one of those
yellow-clad shaven-heads comes, the prince even dare not remain seated
in his presence; he must stand. The next half hour, one of these
Sannyasins might be at the door of one of the cottages of the poorest
subjects, glad to get only a piece of bread. And he has to mix with all
grades; now he sleeps with a poor man in his cottage; tomorrow \[he\]
sleeps on the beautiful bed of a king. One day he dines on gold plates
in kings' palaces; the next day, he has not any food and sleeps under a
tree. Society looks upon these men with great respect; and some of them,
just to show their individuality, will try to shock the public ideas.
But the people are never shocked so long as they keep to these
principles: perfect purity and no property.

These men, being very individualistic, they are always trying new
theories and plans — visiting in every country. They must think
something new; they cannot run in the old groove. Others are all trying
to make us run in the old groove, forcing us all to think alike. But
human nature is greater than any human foolishness. Our greatness is
greater than our weakness; the good things are stronger than the evil
things. Supposing they succeeded in making us all think in the same
groove, there we would be — no more thought to think; we would die.

Here was a society which had almost no vitality, its members pressed
down by iron chains of law. They were forced to help each other. There,
one was under regulations \[that were\] tremendous: regulations even how
to breathe: how to wash face and hands; how to bathe; how to brush the
teeth; and so on, to the moment of death. And beyond these regulations
was the wonderful individualism of the Sannyasin. There he was. And
every days new sect was rising amongst these strong, individualistic men
and women. The ancient Sanskrit books tell about their standing out — of
one woman who was very quaint, queer old woman of the ancient times; she
always had some new thing; sometimes \[she was\] criticised, but always
people were afraid of her, obeying her quietly. So, there were those
great men and women of olden times.

And within this society, so oppressed by regulations, the power was in
the hands of the priests. In the social scale, the highest caste is
\[that of\] the priest, and that being a business — I do not know any
other word, that is why I use the word "priest". It is not in the same
sense as in this country, because our priest is not a man that teaches
religion or philosophy. The business of a priest is to perform all these
minute details of regulations which have been laid down The priest is
the man who helps in these regulations. He marries you; to your funeral
he comes to pray. So at all the ceremonies performed upon a man or a
woman, the priest must be there. In society the ideal is marriage.
\[Everyone\] must marry. It is the rule. Without marriage, man is not
able to perform any religious ceremony; he is only half a man; \[he\] is
not competent to officiate — even the priest himself cannot officiate as
a priest, except he marries. Half a man is unfit within society.

Now, the power of the priests increased tremendously. . . . The general
policy of our national law-givers was to give the priests this honour.
They also had the same socialistic plan \[you are\] just ready to
\[try\] that checked them from getting money. What \[was\] the motive?
Social honour. Mind you, the priest in all countries is the highest in
the social scale, so much so in India that the poorest Brahmin is
greater than the greatest king in the country, by birth. He is the
nobleman in India. But the law does not allow him ever to become rich.
The law grinds him down to poverty — only, it gives him this honour. He
cannot do a thousand things; and the higher is the caste in the social
scale, the more restricted are its enjoyments. The higher the caste, the
less the number of kinds of food that man can eat, the less the amount
of food that man may eat, the less the number of occupations \[he may\]
engage in. To you, his life would be only a perpetual train of hardships
— nothing more than that. It is a perpetual discipline in eating,
drinking, and everything; and all \[penalties\] which are required from
the lower caste are required from the higher ten times more. The lowest
man tells a lie; his fine is one dollar. A Brahmin, he must pay, say, a
hundred dollars — \[for\] he knows better.

But this was a grand organisation to start with. Later on, the time came
when they, these priests, began to get all the power in their hands; and
at last they forgot the secret of their power: poverty. They were men
whom society fed and clad so that they might simply learn and teach and
think. Instead of that, they began to spread out their hands to clutch
at the riches of society. They became "money-grabbers" — to use your
word — and forgot all these things.

Then there was the second caste, the kingly caste, the military. Actual
power was in their hands. Not only so — they have produced all of our
great thinkers, and not the Brahmins. It is curious. All our great
prophets, almost without one exception, belong to the kingly caste. The
great man Krishna was also of that caste; Rama, he also, and all our
great philosophers, almost all \[sat\] on the throne; thence came all
the great philosophers of renunciation. From the throne came the voice
that always cried, "Renounce". These military people were their kings;
and they \[also\] were the philosophers; they were the speakers in the
Upanishads. In their brains and their thought, they were greater than
the priests they were more powerful, they were the kings - and yet the
priests got all the power and: tried to tyrannise over them. And so that
was going on: political competition between the two castes, the priests
and the kings.

Another phenomenon is there. Those of you that have been to hear the
first lecture already know that in India there are two great races: one
is called the Aryan; the other, the non-Aryan. It is the Aryan race that
has the three castes; but the whole of the rest are dubbed with one
name, Shudras — no caste. They are not Aryans at all. (Many people came
from outside of India, and they found the Shudras \[there\], the
aborigines of the country). However it may be, these vast masses of
non-Aryan people and the mixed people among them, they gradually became
civilised and they began to scheme for the same rights as the Aryans.
They wanted to enter their schools and their colleges; they wanted to
take the sacred thread of the Aryans; they wanted to perform the same
ceremonies as the Aryans, and wanted to have equal rights in religion
and politics like the Aryans. And the Brahmin priest, he was the great
antagonist of such claims. You see, it is the nature of priests in every
country — they are the most conservative people, naturally. So long as
it is a trade, it must be; it is to their interest to be conservative.
So this tide of murmur outside the Aryan pale, the priests were trying
to check with all their might. Within the Aryan pale, there was also a
tremendous religious ferment, and \[it was\] mostly led by this military
caste.

There was already the sect of Jains \[who are a\] conservative \[force\]
in India \[even\] today. It is a very ancient sect. They declared
against the validity of the scriptures of the Hindus, the Vedas. They
wrote some books themselves, and they said: "Our books are the only
original books, the only original Vedas, and the Vedas that now are
going on under that name have been written by the Brahmins to dupe the
people." And they also laid the same plan. You see, it is difficult for
you to meet the arguments of the Hindus about the scriptures. They also
claimed \[that\] the world has been created through those books. And
they were written in the popular language. The Sanskrit, even then, had
ceased to be a spoken language — \[it had\] just the same relation \[to
the spoken language\] as Latin has to modern Italian. Now, they wrote
all their books in Pali; and when a Brahmin said, "Why, your books are
in Pali! ", they said, "Sanskrit is a language of the dead."

In their methods and manners they were different. For, you see, these
Hindu scriptures, the Vedas, are a vast mass of accumulation — some of
them crude — until you come to where religion is taught, only the
spiritual. Now, that was the portion of the Vedas which these sects all
claimed to preach. Then, there are three steps in the ancient Vedas:
first, work; second, worship; third, knowledge. When a man purifies
himself by work and worship, then God is within that man. He has
realised He is already there. He only can have seen Him because the mind
has become pure. Now, the mind can become purified by work and worship.
That is all. Salvation is already there. We don't know it. Therefore,
work, worship, and knowledge are the three steps. By work, they mean
doing good to others. That has, of course, something in it, but mostly,
as to the Brahmins, work means to perform these elaborate ceremonials:
killing of cows and killing of bulls, killing of goats and all sorts of
animals, that are taken fresh and thrown into the fire, and so on. "Now"
declared the Jains, "that is no work at all, because injuring others can
never be any good work"; and they said; "This is the proof that your
Vedas are false Vedas, manufactured by the priests, because you do not
mean to say that any good book will order us \[to be\] killing animals
and doing these things. You do not believe it. So all this killing of
animals and other things that you see in the Vedas, they have been
written by the Brahmins, because they alone are benefited. It is the
priest only \[who\] pockets the money and goes home. So, therefore, it
is all priest-craft."

It was one of their doctrines that there cannot be any God: "The priests
have invented God, that the people may believe in God and pay them
money. All nonsense! there is no God. There is nature and there are
souls, and that is all. Souls have got entangled into this life and got
round them the clothing of man you call a body. Now, do good work." But
from that naturally came the doctrine that everything that is matter is
vile. They are the first teachers of asceticism. If the body is the
result of impurity, why, therefore the body is vile. If a man stands on
one leg for some time — "All right, it is a punishment". If the head
comes up bump against a wall — "Rejoice, it is a very good punishment".
Some of the great founders of the \[Franciscan Order\] — one of them St.
Francis — were going to a certain place to meet somebody; and St.
Francis had one of his companions with him, and he began to talk as to
whether \[the person\] would receive them or not, and this man suggested
that possibly he would reject them. Said St. Francis: "That is not
enough, brother, but if, when we go and knock at the door, the man comes
and drives us away, that is not enough. But if he orders us to be bound
and gives us a thorough whipping, even that is not enough. And then, if
he binds us hand and foot and whips us until we bleed at every pore and
throws us outside in the snow, that would be enough."

These \[same\] ascetic ideas prevailed at that time. These Jains were
the first great ascetics; but they did some great work. "Don't injure
any and do good to all that you can, and that is all the morality and
ethics, and that is all the work there is, and the rest is all nonsense
— the Brahmins created that. Throw it all away." And then they went to
work and elaborated this one principle all through, and it is a most
wonderful ideal: how all that we call ethics they simply bring out from
that one great principle of non-injury and doing good.

This sect was at least five hundred years before Buddha, and he was five
hundred and fifty years before Christ (The dates of the Jaina and Buddha
were not known accurately in those days.). Now the whole of the animal
creation they divide into five sections: the lowest have only one organ,
that of touch; the next one, touch and taste; the next, touch, taste,
and hearing; the next, touch, taste, hearing, and sight. And the next,
the five organs. The first two, the one-organ and the two-organ, are
invisible to the naked eye, and they are everywhere in water. A terrible
thing, killing these \[low forms of life\]. This bacteriology has come
into existence in the modern world only in the last twenty years and
therefore nobody knew anything about it. They said, the lowest animals
are only one-organ, touch; nothing else. The next greater \[were\] also
invisible. And they all knew that if you boiled water these animals were
ail killed. So these monks, if they died of thirst, they would never
kill these animals by drinking water. But if \[a monk\] stands at your
door and you give him a little boiled water, the sin is on you of
killing the animals — and he will get the benefit. They carry these
ideas to ludicrous extremes. For instance, in rubbing the body — if he
bathes — he will have to kill numbers of animalcules; so he never
bathes. He gets killed himself; he says that is all right. Life has no
care for him; he will get killed and save life.

These Jains were there. There were various other sects of ascetics; and
while this was going on, on the one hand, there was the political
jealousy between the priests and the kings. And then these different
dissatisfied sects \[were\] springing up everywhere. And there was the
greater problem: the vast multitudes of people wanting the same rights
as the Aryans, dying of thirst while the perennial stream of nature went
flowing by them, and no right to drink a drop of water.

And that man was born — the great man Buddha. Most of you know about
him, his life. And in spite of all the miracles and stories that
generally get fastened upon any great man, in the first place, he is one
of the most historical prophets of the world. Two are very historical:
one, the most ancient, Buddha, and the other, Mohammed, because both
friends and foes are agreed about them. So we are perfectly sure that
there were such persons. As for the other persons, we have only to take
for granted what the disciples say — nothing more. Our Krishna — you
know, the Hindu prophet — he is very mythological. A good deal of his
life, and everything about him, is written only by his disciples; and
then there seem to be, sometimes, three or four men, who all loom into
one. We do not know so clearly about many of the prophets; but as to
this man, because both friends and foes write of him, we are sure that
there was such a historical personage. And if we analyse through all the
fables and reports of miracles and stories that generally are heaped
upon a great man in this world, we will find an inside core; and all
through the account of that man, he never did a thing for himself —
never! How do you know that? Because, you see, when fables are fastened
upon a man, the fables must be tinged with that man's general character.
Not one fable tried to impute any vice or any immorality to the man.
Even his enemies have favourable accounts.

When Buddha was born, he was so pure that whosoever looked at his face
from a distance immediately gave up the ceremonial religion and became a
monk and became saved. So the gods held a meeting. They said, "We are
undone". Because most of the gods live upon the ceremonials. These
sacrifices go to the gods and these sacrifices were all gone. The gods
were dying of hunger and \[the reason for\] it was that their power was
gone. So the gods said: "We must, anyhow, put this man down. He is too
pure for our life." And then the gods came and said: "Sir, we come to
ask you something. We want to make a great sacrifice and we mean to make
a huge fire, and we have been seeking all over the world for a pure spot
to light the fire on and could not find it, and now we have found it. If
you will lie down, on your breast we will make the huge fire."
"Granted," he says, "go on." And the gods built the fire high upon the
breast of Buddha, and they thought he was dead, and he was not. And then
they went about and said, "We are undone." And all the gods began to
strike him. No good. They could not kill him. From underneath, the voice
comes: "Why \[are you\] making all these vain attempts?" "Whoever looks
upon you becomes purified and is saved, and nobody is going to worship
us." "Then, your attempt is vain, because purity can never be killed."
This fable was written by his enemies, and yet throughout the fable the
only blame that attaches to Buddha is that he was so great a teacher of
purity.

About his doctrines, some of you know a little. It is his doctrines that
appeal to many modern thinkers whom you call agnostics He was a great
preacher of the brotherhood of mankind: "Aryan or non-Aryan, caste or no
caste, and sects or no sects, every one has the same right to God and to
religion and to freedom. Come in all of you." But as to other things, he
was very agnostic. "Be practical." There came to him one day five young
men, Brahmin born, quarrelling upon a question. They came to him to ask
him the way to truth. And one said: "My people teach this, and this is
the way to truth." The other said: "I have been taught this, and this is
the only way to truth." "Which is the right way, sir?" "Well, you say
your people taught this is truth and is the way to God?" "Yes." "But did
you see God?" "No, sir." "Your father?" "No, sir." "Your grandfather?"
"No, sir." "None of them saw God?" "No" "Well, and your teachers —
neither \[any\] of them saw God?" "No." And he asked the same to the
others. They all declared that none had seen God. "Well," said Buddha,
"in a certain village came a young man weeping and howling and crying:
'Oh, I love her so! oh my, I love her so!' And then the villagers came;
and the only thing he said was he loved her so. 'Who is she that you
love?' 'I do not know.' 'Where does she live?' 'I do not know' — but he
loved her so. 'How does she look?' 'That I do not know; but oh, I love
her so.'" Then asked Buddha: "Young man, what would you call this young
man?" "Why, sir, he was a fool!" And they all declared: "Why, sir, that
young man was certainly a fool, to be crying and all that about a woman,
to say he loved her so much and he never saw her or knew that she
existed or anything?" "Are you not the same? You say that this God your
father or your grandfather never saw, and now you are quarrelling upon a
thing which neither you nor your ancestors ever knew, and you are trying
to cut each other's throats about it." Then the young men asked: "What
are we to do?" "Now, tell me: did your father ever teach that God is
ever angry?" "No, sir." "Did your father ever teach that God is evil?"
"No, sir, He is always pure." "Well, now, if you are pure and good and
all that, do you not think that you will have more chance to come near
to that God than by discussing all this and trying to cut each other's
throats? Therefore, say I: be pure and be good; be pure and love
everyone." And that was \[all\].

You see that non-killing of animals and charity towards animals was an
already existing doctrine when he was born; but it was new with him —
the breaking down of caste, that tremendous movement. And the other
thing that was new: he took forty of his disciples and sent them all
over the world, saying, "Go ye; mix with all races and nations and
preach the excellent gospel for the good of all, for the benefit of
all." And, of course, he was not molested by the Hindus. He died at a
ripe old age. All his life he was a most stern man: he never yielded to
weakness. I do not believe many of his doctrines; of course, I do not. I
believe that the Vedantism of the old Hindus is much more thoughtful, is
a grander philosophy of life. I like his method of work, but what I like
\[most\] in that man is that, among all the prophets of mankind, here
was a man who never had any cobwebs in his brain, and \[who was\] sane
and strong. When kingdoms were at his feet, he was still the same man,
maintaining "I am a man amongst men."

Why, the Hindus, they are dying to worship somebody. You will find, if
you live long enough, I will be worshipped by our people. If you go
there to teach them something, before you die you will be worshipped.
Always trying to worship somebody. And living in that race, the
world-honoured Buddha, he died always declaring that he was but man.
None of his adulators could draw from him one remark that he was
anything different from any other man.

Those last dying words of his always thrilled through my heart. He was
old, he was suffering, he was near his death, and then came the despised
outcaste — he lives on carrion, dead animals; the Hindus would not allow
them to come into cities — one of these invited him to a dinner and he
came with his disciples, and the poor Chanda, he wanted to treat this
great teacher according to what he thought would be best; so he had a
lot of pig's flesh and a lot of rice for him, and Buddha looked at that.
The disciples were all \[hesitating\], and the Master said: "Well, do
not eat, you will be hurt." But he quietly sat down and ate. The teacher
of equality must eat the \[outcaste\] Chanda's dinner, even the pig's
flesh. He sat down and ate it.

He was already dying. He found death coming on, and he asked, "Spread
for me something under this tree, for I think the end is near." And he
was there under the tree, and he laid himself down; he could not sit up
any more. And the first thing he did, he said: "Go to that Chanda and
tell him that he has been one of my greatest benefactors; for his meal,
I am going to Nirvâna." And then several men came to be instructed, and
a disciple said, "Do not go near now, the Master is passing away". And
as soon as he heard it, the Lord said, "Let them come in". And somebody
else came and the disciples would not \[let them enter\]. Again they
came, and then the dying Lord said: "And O, thou Ananda, I am passing
away. Weep not for me. Think not for me. I am gone. Work out diligently
your own salvation. Each one of you is just what I am. I am nothing but
one of you. What I am today is what I made myself. Do you struggle and
make yourselves what I am. . . ."

These are the memorable words of Buddha: "Believe not because an old
book is produced as an authority. Believe not because your father said
\[you should\] believe the same. Believe not because other people like
you believe it. Test everything, try everything, and then believe it,
and if you find it for the good of many, give it to all." And with these
words, the Master passed away.

See the sanity of the man. No gods, no angels, no demons — nobody.
Nothing of the kind. Stern, sane, every brain-cell perfect and complete,
even at the moment of death. No delusion. I do not agree with many of
his doctrines. You may not. But in my opinion — oh, if I had only one
drop of that strength! The sanest philosopher the world ever saw. Its
best and its sanest teacher. And never that man bent before even the
power of the tyrannical Brahmins. Never that man bent. Direct and
everywhere the same: weeping with the miserable, helping the miserable,
singing with the singing, strong with the strong, and everywhere the
same sane and able man.

And, of course, with all this I can \[not\] understand his doctrine. You
know he denied that there was any soul in man — that is, in the Hindu
sense of the word. Now, we Hindus all believe that there is something
permanent in man, which is unchangeable and which is living through all
eternity. And that in man we call Atman, which is without beginning and
without end. And \[we believe\] that there is something permanent in
nature \[and that we call Brahman, which is also without beginning and
without end\]. He denied both of these. He said there is no proof of
anything permanent. It is all a mere mass of change; a mass of thought
in a continuous change is what you call a mind. ... The torch is leading
the procession. The circle is a delusion. \[Or take the example of a
river.\] It is a continuous river passing on; every moment a fresh mass
of water passing on. So is this life; so is all body, so is all mind.

Well, I do not understand his doctrine — we Hindus never understood it.
But I can understand the motive behind that. Oh, the gigantic motive!
The Master says that selfishness is the great curse of the world; that
we are selfish and that therein is the curse. There should be no motive
for selfishness. You are \[like a river\] passing \[on\] — a continuous
phenomenon. Have no God; have no soul; stand on your feet and do good
for good's sake — neither for fear of punishment nor for \[the sake of\]
going anywhere. Stand sane and motiveless. The motive is: I want to do
good, it is good to do good. Tremendous! Tremendous! I do not sympathise
with his metaphysics at all; but my mind is jealous when I think of the
moral force. Just ask your minds which one of you can stand for one
hour, able and daring like that man. I cannot for five minutes. I would
become a coward and want a support. I am weak — a coward. And I warm to
think of this tremendous giant. We cannot approach that strength. The
world never saw \[anything\] compared to that strength. And I have not
yet seen any other strength like that. We are all born cowards. If we
can save ourselves \[we care about nothing else\]. Inside is the
tremendous fear, the tremendous motive, all the time. Our own
selfishness makes us the most arrant cowards; our own selfishness is the
great cause of fear and cowardice. And there he stood: "Do good because
it is good; ask no more questions; that is enough. A man made to do good
by a fable, a story, a superstition — he will be doing evil as soon as
the opportunity comes. That man alone is good who does good for good's
sake, and that is the character of the man."

"And what remains of man?" was asked of the Master. "Everything —
everything. But what is in the man? Not the body not the soul, but
character. And that is left for all ages. All that have passed and died,
they have left for us their characters, eternal possessions for the rest
of humanity; and these characters are working — working all through."
What of Buddha? What of Jesus of Nazareth? The world is full of their
characters. Tremendous doctrine!

Let us come down a little — we have not come to the subject at all.
(*Laughter*.) I must add not a few words more this evening. ...

And then, what he did. His method of work: organisation. The idea that
you have today of church is his character. He left the church. He
organised these monks and made them into a body. Even the voting by
ballot is there five hundred and sixty years before Christ. Minute
organization. The church was left and became a tremendous power, and did
great missionary work in India and outside India. Then came, three
hundred years after, two hundred years before Christ, the great emperor
Asoka, as he has been called by your Western historians, the divinest of
monarchs, and that man became entirely converted to the ideas of Buddha,
and he was the greatest emperor of the world at that time. His
grandfather was a contemporary of Alexander, and since Alexander's time,
India had become more intimately connected with Greece. ... Every day in
Central Asia some inscription or other is being found. India had
forgotten all about Buddha and Asoka and everyone. But there were
pillars, obelisks, columns, with ancient letters which nobody could
read. Some of the old Mogul emperors declared they would give millions
for anybody to read those; but nobody could. Within the last thirty
years those have been read; they are all written in Pali.

The first inscription is: ". . ."

And then he writes this inscription, describing the terror and the
misery of war; and then he became converted to religion. Then said he:
"Henceforth let none of my descendants think of acquiring glory by
conquering other races. If they want glory, let them help other races;
let them send teachers of sciences and teachers of religion. A glory won
by the sword is no glory at all." And next you find how he is sending
missionaries even to Alexandria.... You wonder that you find all over
that part of the country sects rising immediately, called Theraputae,
Essenes, and all those — extreme vegetarians, and so on. Now this great
Emperor Asoka built hospitals for men and for animals. The inscriptions
show they are ordering hospitals, building hospitals for men and for
animals. That is to say, when an animal gets old, if I am poor and
cannot keep it any longer, I do not shoot it down for mercy. These
hospitals are maintained by public charity. The coasting traders pay so
much upon every hundredweight they sell, and all that goes to the
hospital; so nobody is touched. If you have a cow that is old — anything
— and do not want to keep it, send it to the hospital; they keep it,
even down to rats and mice and anything you send. Only, our ladies try
to kill these animals sometimes, you know. They go in large numbers to
see them and they bring all sorts of cakes; the animals are killed many
times by this food. He claimed that the animals should be as much under
the protection of the government as man. Why should animals be allowed
to be killed? \[There\] is no reason. But he says, before prohibiting
the killing of animals for food even, \[people\] must be provided with
all sorts of vegetables. So he sent and collected all kinds of
vegetables and planted them in India; and then, as soon as these were
introduced, the order was: henceforth, whosoever kills an animal will be
punished. A government is to be a government; the animals must be
protected also. What business has a man to kill a cow, a goat, or any
other animal for food?

Thus Buddhism was and did become a great political power in India.
Gradually it also fell to pieces — after all, this tremendous missionary
enterprise. But to their credit it must be said, they never took up the
sword to preach religion. Excepting the Buddhistic religion, there is
not one religion in the world which could make one step without
bloodshed — not one which could get a hundred thousand converts just by
brain power alone. No, no. All through. And this is just what you are
going to do in the Philippines. That is your method. Make them religious
by the sword. That is what your priests are preaching. Conquer and kill
them that they may get religion. A wonderful way of preaching religion!

You know how this great emperor Asoka was converted. This great emperor
in his youth was not so good. \[He had a brother.\] And the two brothers
quarrelled and the other brother defeated this one, and the emperor in
vengeance wanted to kill him. The emperor got the news that he had taken
shelter with a Buddhistic monk. Now, I have told you how our monks are
very holy; no one would come near them. The emperor himself came. He
said, "Deliver the man to me" Then the monk preached to him: "Vengeance
is bad. Disarm anger with love. Anger is not cured by anger, nor hatred
by hatred. Dissolve anger by love. Cure hatred by love. Friend, if for
one evil thou returnest another, thou curest not the first evil, but
only add one evil more to the world." The emperor said: "That is all
right, fool that you are. Are you ready to give your life — to give your
life for that man?" "Ready, sir." And he came out. And the emperor drew
his sword, and he said: "Get ready." And just \[as he\] was going to
strike, he looked at the face of the man. There was not a wink in those
eyes. The emperor stopped, and he said: "Tell me, monk, where did you
learn this strength, poor beggar, not to wink?" And then he preached
again. "Go on, monk", he said, "That is nice", he said. Accordingly, he
\[fell under\] the charm of the Master — Buddha's charm.

There have been three things in Buddhism: the Buddha himself, his law,
his church. At first it was so simple. When the Master died, before his
death, they said: "What shall we do with you?" "Nothing." "What
monuments shall we make over you?" He said: "Just make a little heap if
you want, or just do not do anything." By and by, there arose huge
temples and all the paraphernalia. The use of images was unknown before
then. I say they were the first to use images. There are images of
Buddha and all the saints, sitting about and praying. All this
paraphernalia went on multiplying with this organisation. Then these
monasteries became rich. The real cause of the downfall is here.
Monasticism is all very good for a few; but when you preach it in such a
fashion that every man or woman who has a mind immediately gives up
social life, when you find over the whole of India monasteries, some
containing a hundred thousand monks, sometimes twenty thousand monks in
one building — huge, gigantic buildings, these monasteries, scattered
all over India and, of course, centres of learning, and all that — who
were left to procreate progeny, to continue the race? Only the
weaklings. All the strong and vigorous minds went out. And then came
national decay by the sheer loss of vigour.

I will tell you of this marvellous brotherhood. It is great. But theory
and idea is one thing and actual working is another thing. The idea is
very great: practicing non­resistance and all that, but if all of us go
out in the street and practice non-resistance, there would be very
little left in this city. That is to say, the idea is all right, but
nobody has yet found a practical solution \[as to\] how to attain it.

There is something in caste, so far as it means blood; such a thing as
heredity there is, certainly. Now try to \[understand\] — why do you not
mix your blood with the Negroes, the American Indians? Nature will not
allow you. Nature does not allow you to mix your blood with them. There
is the unconscious working that saves the race. That was the Aryan's
caste. Mind you, I do not say that they are not equal to us. They must
have the same privileges and advantages, and everything; but we know
that if certain races mix up, they become degraded. With all the strict
caste of the Aryan and non-Aryan, that wall was thrown down to a certain
extent, and hordes of these outlandish races came in with all their
queer superstitions and manners and customs. Think of this: not decency
enough to wear clothes, eating carrion, etc. But behind him came his
fetish, his human sacrifice, his superstition, his diabolism. He kept it
behind, \[he remained\] decent for a few years. After that he brought
all \[these\] things out in front. And that was degrading to the whole
race. And then the blood mixed; \[intermarriages\] took place with all
sorts of unmixable races. The race fell down. But, in the long run it
proved good. If you mix up with Negroes and American Indians, surely
this civilisation will fall down. But hundreds and hundreds years after,
out of this mixture will come a gigantic race once more, stronger than
ever; but, for the time being, you have to suffer. The Hindus believe —
that is a peculiar belief, I think; and I do not know, I have nothing to
say to the contrary, I have not found anything to the contrary — they
believe there was only one civilised race: the Aryan. Until he gives his
blood, no other race can be civilised. No teaching will do. The Aryan
gives his blood to a race, and then it becomes civilised. Teaching alone
will not do. He would be an example in your country: would you give your
blood to the Negro race? Then he would get higher culture.

The Hindu loves caste. I may have little taint of that superstition — I
do not know. I love the Master's ideal. Great! But, for me, I do not
think that the working was very practical; and that was one of the great
causes that led to the downfall of the Indian nation, in the long run.
But then it brought about this tremendous fusion. Where so many
different races are all fusing, mingling — one man white like you, or
yellow, while another man as black as I am, and all grades between these
two extremes, and each race keeping their customs, manners, and
everything — in the long run a fusion is taking place, and out of this
fusion surely will come a tremendous upheaval; but, for the time being,
the giant must sleep. That is the effect of all such fusion.

When Buddhism went down that way, there came they inevitable reaction.
There is but one entity in the wholes world. It is a unit world. The
diversity is only eye-service. It is all one. The idea of unity and what
we call monism — without duality — is the idea in India. This doctrine
has: been always in India; \[it was\] brought forward whenever
materialism and scepticism broke down everything. When Buddhism broke
down everything by introducing all sorts of foreign barbarians into
India — their manners and customs and things — there was a reaction, and
that reaction was led by a young monk \[Shankarâchârya\]. And
\[instead\] of preaching new doctrines and always thinking new thoughts
and making sects, he brought back the Vedas to life: and modern Hinduism
has thus an admixture of ancient Hinduism, over which the Vedantists
predominate. But, you see, what once dies never comes back to life, and
those ceremonials of \[Hinduism\] never came back to life. You will be
astonished if I tell you that, according to the old ceremonials, he is
not a good Hindu who does not eat beef. On certain occasions he must
sacrifice a bull and eat it. That is disgusting now. However they may
differ from each other in India, in that they are all one — they never
eat beef. The ancient sacrifices and the ancient gods, they are all
gone; modern India belongs to the spiritual part of the Vedas.

Buddhism was the first sect in India. They were the first to say: "Ours
is the only path. Until you join our church, you cannot be saved." That
was what they said: "It is the correct path." But, being of Hindu blood,
they could not be such stony-hearted sectarians as in other countries.
There will be salvation for you: nobody will go wrong for ever. No, no.
\[There was\] too much of Hindu blood in them for that. The heart was
not so stony as that. But you have to join them.

But the Hindu idea, you know, is not to join anybody. Wherever you are,
that is a point from which you can start to the centre. All right. It —
Hinduism — has this advantage: its secret is that doctrines and dogmas
do not mean anything; what you are is what matters. If you talk all the
best philosophies the world ever produced, \[but\] if you are a fool in
your behaviour, they do not count; and if in your behaviour you are
good, you have more chances. This being so, the Vedantist can wait for
everybody. Vedantism teaches that there is but one existence and one
thing real, and that is God. It is beyond all time and space and
causation and everything. We can never define Him. We can never say what
He is except \[that\] He is Absolute Existence, Absolute Knowledge,
Absolute Blissfulness. He is the only reality. Of everything He is the
reality; of you and me, of the wall and of \[everything\] everywhere. It
is His knowledge upon which all our knowledge depends: it is His
blissfulness upon which depends our pleasure; and He is the only
reality. And when man realises this, he knows that "I am the only
reality, because I am He — what is real in me is He also". So that when
a man is perfectly pure and good and beyond all grossness, he finds, as
Jesus found: "I and my Father are one." The Vedantist has patience to
wait for everybody. Wherever you are, this is the highest: "I and my
Father are one." Realise it. If an image helps, images are welcome. If
worshipping a great man helps you, worship him. If worshipping Mohammed
helps you, go on. Only be sincere; and if you are sincere, says
Vedantism, you are sure to be brought to the goal. None will be left.
Your heart, which contains all truth, will unfold itself chapter after
chapter, till you know the last truth, that "I and my Father are one".
And what is salvation? To live with God. Where? Anywhere. Here this
moment. One moment in infinite time is quite as good as any other
moment. This is the old doctrine of the Vedas, you see. This was
revived. Buddhism died out of India. It left its mark on their charity,
its animals, etc. in India; and Vedantism is reconquering India from one
end to the other.

</div>
