+++
title = "Philosophizing on magnetic sight"

+++
I wanted to document the great victory of the Hindu armies in the land
of Karroo. After the memories of 1983 which are faint, almost going back
to our infancy, this is the only time we have displayed any notable
valor in battle with the two Rajput warriors on the helm putting to
sword the Anglo-Saxons, the peerless pirates from down under, the
Voortrekkers and finally the bloody-eyed al-ghazis. But then I was
talking to people who make little sense of cricket. But R and I had a
long talk that starting from Steve Irwin’s crocodiles, passed through a
three part BBC documentary on reptiles, then through cryptochromes whose
ancient origins we had nailed, and finally took a philosophical turn on
to consciousness. I would have liked to capture the various elements of
it, both scientific and philosophical, but for now just a few points for
we are like the haunted man chased by a vetAla.

“vedA yo vInAm padam antarikSheNa patatAm |” (shunaHshepa Ajigarti in RV
1.25.7a)  
\[varuNa\] knows the migratory path of the birds through the atmosphere

“sarvA vA iyaM vayobhyo naktaM dR^iShe dIpyate | tasmAd imAM vayAMsi
naktaM nAdhy Asate | ya evaM vidvAn agniM chinute praty eva tiShTya abhi
disho jayati |” TS 5.6.4  
A  
All this (earth) in the eyes of the birds shines at night, therefore at
night birds do not rest here. He who knowing this piles a fire finds
support, and conquers all the quarters.

How do the birds manage their great feats of navigation, which need no
further dilation ? How do they manage to home so accurately?

I believe the main reason why we fail to understand this well is because
we apparently lack the magnetic sense. We have sight so we recognize an
eye when we see it another animal or for that matter even in an alga
like Chlamydomonas. We smell and taste so we can recognize the
chemoreception in other organisms, we hear and we feel various stimuli
via skin and sense stretch thus we are able to recognize auditory and
tactile receptors elsewhere in the living world. These senses tend to
dominant our conscious experience. There are two other senses that are
less obtrusive on the consciousness — being filtered out most of the
time. One of them strongly impinges on the consciousness, when altered —
the balance sense. The other one, proprioception, while apparently
filtered out does seem to contribute to the sense of I, an important
part of conscious experience. But when it comes to magnetic sense most
of us do not know what that is, and hence lack that experience to easily
recognize its receptors in other animals.

Yet we have come to realize over the ages that it is one of the primary
forces behind avian migration and homing.  
continued …
