+++
title = "The sense of pArokSha and anumAna"

+++
What constitutes the meeting of the minds with a vipra (used in the
sense of the vedic kavI, not used in the sense of the varNa)? We
wondered about this many a time. The vipra is one who has the sharp
sense of anumAna and can express satya as a pArokSha vAkya or a kAvya.
The true meeting of minds with vipra-s happens only when the other
person understands the style of pArokSha vAkya-s and kAvya-s. Thus, when
the two such converse one might have what can be called a brahmodaya.
Hence, brahmodaya is the form in which vedic knowledge was transmitted.

In my existence there have been few with whom I have had this
intersection. With such even if the level of knowledge is different the
meeting can occur. First and foremost it was it was the learned muni
whose path was set apart by the great wielder of the vajra who is hymned
by all the great vipra-s of yore: “yas tigmashR^i\~Ngo vR^iShabho na
bhImA ekaH kR^iShTIsh chyAvayati pra vishvAH”. The muni alone can grasp
some of the flights of the mind and can express these as kAvya if
required like the kavI-s of yore. We can delight in vAkya-saMdoha and
darshana-vAda.

Other having come in our orbit have begun to feel this intersection with
us, but other despite coming in our orbit fail to do so. It is rarely
among strI-s that such an intersection can happen — by default they do
not see the pArokSha but see only the sthUla all the time. mAtashrI
could sense the pArokSha but was limited in the sense of anumAna.
tailodakA had anumAna but lacked pArokSha and was hence limited. but
kalashajA has them all, like the promulgator of the ardha-tryambaka
vidyA.

Those who live in the realm of pArokSha cannot mix well with those who
do not, for the pursuits of the rest seem too crass. But they can
observe the rest and look at these from afar like a naturalist observing
snails.
