+++
title = "The maNDala graph for R^iShi-sharing"

+++
The strict R^ishi-sharing graph between the 10 RV maNDalas (click on
figure to enlarge)

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rx7grMEvi7I/AAAAAAAAAPk/vob11WJntfk/s320/maNDala_graph.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rx7grMEvi7I/AAAAAAAAAPk/vob11WJntfk/s1600-h/maNDala_graph.jpg)

The blue lines represent jamadagni who is only a co-author of a single
sUktaM in maNDala 3.  
\-Note the dense clustering between 8,9,10,1  
\-Note the lack of clustering of family books 2,3,4,6,7  
\-Note tendency of family books 5 and 8 to overlap with each other and
with 1,8,9 in particular.

The R^igvedic family books can be divided into two types: 2,3,4,6,7
which have few R^iShis and the majority of sUkta-s are compositions of a
single dominant R^ishi. The coherence of these books in terms of the
language and refrains, do support the contention that they were indeed
composed by in large part by single dominant R^iShis. Book 5 and 8, in
contrast, are more composite pieces with several R^iShis belong to a
single clan (atri and kaNva respectively) and potentially spanning a
large time range. They also incorporate more material from R^iShis of
other clans than do the former type of family book.

This seems to suggest two different themes in family book collection: 1)
The first one (type-I family books) where a single R^iShi composes a
large number of hymns to various deva-s and various ritual contexts. For
example, viShvamitra has compositions in the context of various rituals
like raising the yupa-stambha (3.8), agni-praNayana(3.27), sAmidheni
(3.27), AprI (3.4) and mAdhyandina savana (3.32). On the other hand
vasiShTha has hymns to every devatA of the vedic pantheon and likewise
encompassing various ritual contexts. This would mean that these
maNDala-s were generated by a single author, who was more or less
recreating new recitations for a wide swath of the archaic shrauta
ritual. 2) In the second theme (type-II family books) seen in 5, 8 we do
not see a single author composing a wide range or sukta-s and a given
author might cover only one rite. Likewise the author might merely cover
one or a few deities in his(her) sUkta-s or produce collective
vaishvadeva hymns. For example, vasushruta Atreya composed the AprI for
the atri-s (5.5), dyumna-vishvacharShaNi atreya composed their agni
praNyana hymn (5.23),and the woman R^iShikA vishvavArA atreyI composed
their sAmidheni (5.28). A very prominent R^iShi of this clan the early
astronomer shyAvAshva Atreya composed 12 sUkta-s but of them 10 are to
the maruts and 2 to savitA. Only atri bhauma the founding father of this
clan cover a large number of devatA-s. The atri-s also incorporate
sUkta-s of different a\~Ngirasa-s, kashyapa-s, a vasiShTha and a
possible vaishvamitra. The kANva-s, likewise, incorporate other
a\~Ngirasa-s clans, bhArgava-s, atreya-s, kashyapa-s and mana
maitravaruNi. What this implies is that in the case of book 5 and 8 the
tendency was to collate compositions over time by different authors
rather than create a whole new set for much of the ritual sequence. They
also were not averse to collecting material from gotra-s other than
their own and incorporating it into the family book.

maNDala 9 stands out as the hub in the above graph with connections to
every other book. However, it is most connected to maNDala-s 8, 1, 10
and 5 and least connected to the type I family books mentioned above. In
part while this reflects the fact that all these books have a large
number of R^iShi-s, there is also high inter-connectivity between most
of these books which are highly connected to 9. This suggests that all
these books shared a certain process in their creation and editorial
history. This is best illustrated in the case of maNDala 1 and 9 which
not only share several authors but also exhibit synteny and similar
spatial clustering of authors. The first 4 collections in both maNDala 1
and 9 are : madhuchChandas, medhAtithi, shunaHshepa and hiraNyastUpa.
Down the line kaNva, praskaNva, nodhas, parAshara, kutsa, kashyapa,
ambarIsha/vArshagirA are clustered together in both 1 and 9. While a
similar synteny is not seen with the other books their authors are
certainly shared with 9.

In contrast, the main authors of the type I family books do not tend to
show any presence, or a very limited presence (mostly in the composite
sUkta-s attributed to multiple R^iShis) in book 9, despite their copious
single author compositions in their own book. For example, vAmadeva
gautama, the main author of book 4, is absent from book 9, with only the
ikShvAku emperor trasadasyu from book 4 contributing to book 9.
Similarly, gR^itsamada contributes to single fragment of 3 R^ik-s within
a much large composite sUktaM (9.86), and likewise vishvAmitra’s and
bharadvAja’s only contributions are single tR^icha-s in 9.67 .
vasiShTha, who is the most prolific vedic R^iShi too is very limited in
his contributions to book 9. It is only the descendants of the type-I
family books who contribute to book 9 — thus, we see later members
vasiShTha, vishvAmitra, bharadvAja clans here. This distinction also
extends to some early authors seen in book 1 : e.g. vasiShTha’s brother
agastya and the pUru king paruchChepa daivodAsi– It is only their
descendants, rather than themselves who are in book 9. Thus the type I
family books and their equivalent upa-maNDala-s of book 1 appear to
represent a tradition who hardly composed any specialized pavamAna soma
hymns, but only their descendants appear to have taken up this practice.

An examination of the remaining authors of book 9 fills in the remain
parts of the puzzle. The single most prolific clan in maNDala 9 are the
kAshyapa-s with 34 sUkta-s. They have a solid colinear block of 20
sUkta-s, which includes the AprI sUktaM of their gotra. This suggests
that at its heart maNDala 9 began not as a soma maNDala but as the
family book of the kAshyapa-s. Their AprI is unique in having pavamAna
soma in place of one or both forms of agni- i.e. tanu napAt or
narAshaMsa. This suggests ( as also proposed by Shrikant Talageri) that
kAshyapa-s had a unique sacrificial tradition based primarily on soma
rite rather than the fire rite. It thus appears that they were one of
the main popularizers of the pavamAna rite during the evolution of the
classical shrauta system.

The remaining prominent authors of the maNDala 9 are of course the
atri-s overlapping with book 5 and kANva-s overlapping with book 1 and 8
and a group of “new” bhR^igu-a\~Ngiras who do not have a notable
presence elsewhere in the R^ig with the exception of 8 and 10. These
bhR^igu-a\~Ngiras contribute about 30 sUkta-s, distinct from those of
the atri-s and kANva-s The atri-s and kANva-s are clearly specifically
interacting clans. Both of them were ritualists for the Iranian rulers
of the rushama clan (8.3, 8.4, 8.51 and 8.30). The atri-s also mention
kaNva-s as being hotar-s in sacrifices with them (5.41.4). Hindu
tradition also records the love-hate relationship between the bhR^igu-s
and atri-s and the shrauta ritual tradition records a chatur-rAtra rite
where an atri initiated the bhR^igu aurva in to a soma ritual. Thus,
these clans indeed seem to belong to a linked system. However, a point
to note about the “new” bhR^igu-a\~Ngiras in book 9 is that, like the
atri-s and kAshyapa-s, they preserve several sUkta-s of their ancient
ancestors of a much older layer like the great R^iShi ushanA kAvya, who
is remembered as one of the early ritualists and his father kavI
bhArgava. This suggests that the bhR^igu-s and some of these new
a\~Ngiras were also ancient soma ritualists. But, unlike the kashyapa-s
they also had the fire ritual which is at the heart of the main shrauta
tradition.

Several models could explain these observations but we believe the
following seems plausible. There were two traditions in the early
shrauta period: 1) A compositional mode in which each main director of
rites composed a new set of hymns, which he used during his tenure for
all his major shrauta actions and recited these with his assistants. 2)
The editorial mode in which the director of rites collected hymns from
his ancestors and memorized them rather than composing fresh collections
for everything. He might supplement these merely with pavamAna litanies
or a few new ones to show his standing as a vipra. The former spawned
the type-I family books and the latter the type-II family books. We
suspect that zarathuShTra represented an Iranian equivalent of the
type-I activity.

The type-II authors were also linked with formalization of specialized
pavamAna soma rite which became the basis for the soma ritual of the
classical soma yAga. It is likely they composed their soma-sUkta-s as
lyrics on which sAman-s were sung which became the basis of the
collections of the bahiSh pavamAna and Arbhava pavamAna songs. At their
core these pavamAna litanies have the ancient soma hymns of ushanA
kAvya, kavi bhArgava, early kashyapa-s and manu. They are padded with
more recent litanies of the descendants of vasiShTha and vishvAmitra
along with those of late a\~Ngira clans like the kapi-s and
vaikhAnasa-s. This shows that the pavamAna songs of the 3-fold soma
pressings in the classical shrauta ritual arose from a process of
amalgamation around an ancient core with inclusion of new material to
more or less account for all major brahmin families. This amalgamation
of ancient R^ishi-s of certain clans and descendants of the type-I
family book R^iShi-s suggests that an atri-kAshyapa-bhR^igu-a\~Ngira
alliance introduced these to the latter at a later point. It was only
after the amalgamation did the extant maNDala 9 and 1 emerge and their
descendants then put together maNDala 10 by means of their new
compositions amalgamated again with other assorted old material. A
further round of this was again seen in the creation of the khila of the
RV. In doing this they were merely following the precedence set by the
atri-s and kaNva-s in composing their family books. It spatial and
temporal terms, I suspect the pavamAna transition actually represent a
second influx of new Indo-Aryan settlers from the more north-western
zones of modern Afghanistan. This was prior to the rise of the
kuru-pa\~nchAla confederation but probably coeval with the rise of the
pUru-s (perhaps under bharata daushyanti).

Post-script  
In course of my vedic education I gradually reached these conclusions. I
wanted to put this down for long, but then in the middle there was
Talageri’s work and that of some white Indologists. Both of these while
seeing some of these elements had their own problems. I was mentally
distracted by the need to rebutt their theories, but then I thought it
was just not worth it. Anyone who studies the veda, and does not dismiss
Hindu tradition as meaningless, can see that what I outline above is the
essence of the whole thing, and is about as much as we can draw in a
cursory analysis. Of course there are numerous specific points
concerning specific aspects of the shrauta ritual and to some extant the
gR^ihya rituals that we might cover if we feel so inclined in the
reminder of our life. All this we fear would become extinct in our clan
with me, who is the last somapAyin in my current family.
