+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "March 23, 2021"

+++
Some notes on the mahabharata and its historicity for future reference.

-   mention of chinas.(chin dynasty/qin that unified china around 200
    BCE\~)
-   mention of antioch. (founded 300 BCE).
-   mention of writing (do not write the vedas, vedAnaM lekhakAH te vai
    niryagaminaH)
-   mention of scribes (ganakalekhkāḥ)
-   the term nāstikya for heterodox philosophies. no specific mention of
    bauddha.
-   overwhelmingly anusthup meter (90%), identified with shudras in the
    taittiriya samhita and explicitly even mentioned that itihasa and
    purana are for women and shudras in the bhagvatam.
-   some postulate the trishtup meters of the Mbh are a “core bharata”
    epic. trishtup is meter of kshatriyas. gayatri of brahmins. trishtup
    meter over-represented in karna parva.
-   krishna devakiputra in the chhandogaya? (800-900 BCE). puraakaalasya
    viiraaryaH.
-   panini (4th century BCE, mention of panini as a friend of the nanda
    minister in MKK). mentions yuddhishthira, arjuna and vasudeva.
    strongest claims for a pre 3-4th century BCE bharata epic core.
-   explicit mention within the Mbh of a bharata core (24\~k verses) and
    later expanded mahabharata when measured against the 4 vedas, it
    outweighed them (is this a reference to books?).
-   oral recitation in assemblies just like the greek epics.
    unquestionable oral recitation for a long time.
-   the word pustaka is a loan word from sogdian. sogdian indicates NW
    Gandhara contacts of writing and books.
-   arjuna-krishna vs karna-salya has a direct parallel in the irish
    epic in cuchulainnn-laeg vs ferdiad. ferdiad is a lost foster
    brother of cuchulainn too. like karna. strong IE links across
    continents.
-   draupadi kidnapped by jayadratha is a direct comparison with helen
    of troy kidnapped and announcing her captors names to legitimize the
    “ kshatriya abduction vivaha”
-   conscious evidence of syncretizing vedic lore with the bharata epic.
    arjuna is indra, krishna is vishnu, bhishma is dyaus. etc. possible
    10 kings battle core as witzel says? is it a coincidence the kurus
    have 2 capitals? (cf- puru sub tribe tension).
-   what is the influence of greek epic?
-   ramayana calls itself a kavya, mahabharata as an itihasa. very
    conscious. 13 references to kavya in ramayana. none of itihasa
-   ramopakhyana ends without the uttara kanda.

