+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "March 29, 2021"

+++
`aho bhavatyA mantrasya pidhAnena vayaM hatAHnidhanena hi karNasya pIDitAH sma sabAndhavAH`

Ah.. You might just as well have killed us now by revealing this.
Kinsmen, the lot of us, were already tormented by the death of Karṇa

`abhimanyorvinAshena draupadeyavadhena cha pA~nchAlAnAM cha nAshena kurUNAM patanena cha `  
  
Tormented by the slaying of Abhimanyu & the sons of Draupadi. Tormented
by the destruction of the Pāñcāla-s & the fall of the Kuru-s  
`tataH shataguNaM duHkhamidaM mAmaspR^ishadbhR^isham karNamevAnushochanhi dahyAmyagnAvivAhitaH`
  
  
And now.. a sorrow a hundred times greater I feel crawling up my body.
While I mourn Karṇa, I burn as if I stood in a fire myself.  
  
`na hi sma ki~nchidaprApyaM bhavedapi divi sthitam na cha sma vaishasaM ghoraM kauravAntakaraM bhavet `  
  
Nothing was unbobtainable for us, not even if it had been in heaven
itself. And this terrible destruction and end of the Kuru would not have
been.  
  
`evaM vilapya bahulaM dharmarAjo yudhiShThiraH vinada~nshanakai rAjaMshchakArAsyodakaM prabhuH `  
  
In this manner, the righetous king Yudhiṣṭhira mourned manyfold. Then
the lord, slowly performed the last rites, as he filled the space with
his cries.  
`tato vineduH sahasA strIpuMsAstatra sarvashaH abhito ye sthitAstatra tasminnudakakarmaNi`
  
  
Then, men and women from all sides there cried violently as he
\[Yudhiṣṭḥira\] did the last rites in the water.  
`tata AnAyayAmAsa karNasya saparichChadam striyaH kurupatirdhImAnbhrAtuH premNA yudhiShThiraH`
  
  
Then, the intelligent Lord of the Kuru-s \[Yudhiṣṭḥira\], due to love
for his brother, had the wives of Karṇa in their dresses brought
there.  
`sa tAbhiH saha dharmAtmA pretakR^ityamanantaram kR^itvottatAra ga~NgAyAH salilAdAkulendriyaH`
  
  
With Karṇa’s wives, Yudhiṣṭhira – the one with dharma in his soul,
performed the funeral rites. Having done this, with his senses agitated,
he emerged from the waters of the Ganga

