+++
title = "Kala Bhairava Jayanti"
date = "November 26, 2017"

+++
![23376372_10159591018745574_6752020645756061323_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/23376372_10159591018745574_6752020645756061323_n.jpg?w=676)  
*\[Author’s note: this piece was penned on the night of the 10th-11th of
November 2017 in the course of an all-night devotional vigil\]*

Tonight marks the Hindu observance of KalaBhairava Jayanti – the
Creation, but also the Victory \[same word – जयन्ति \] of Kala Bhairava,
a Fearsome Destroyer emanation of Lord Shiva Whose name would translate
rather approximately to the Terrifying Blackness of Time-Death \[this
rather unwieldy rendering being the result of the Sanskrit word ‘Kala’
simultaneously meaning ‘Black’, ‘Death’, and ‘Time’ – as can also be
seen in the rather famous lines quoted by Oppenheimer at the Nuclear
Test at Trinity Sands, wherein it’s more properly \*Time\* that is the
Destroyer of Worlds … for Time, after all, erodes and kills \*all\*, in
the end\]. \[An additional, somewhat more ‘figurative’ rendering has
Kala Bhairava as ‘Who Even Death Is Terrified Of’ – which further
connotates the protective role of Lord Bhairava for the pious Devotee
and the Temple \[in particular, the Shakti Peetha sites\]; and, in
particular, the City of Varanasi, where the Pious go to die.\]

![23434796_10159590804870574_9155360317773958200_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/23434796_10159590804870574_9155360317773958200_n.jpg?w=676)

To be sure, there are many Aspects and Emanations of Mahadeva that are
rather strongly associated with the notion of ‘Terror’. Sri Rudra, for
instance, is described in the Vedas as ‘Dreaded’ and as the horrifying
Howling of the Storm Wind \[with the adjective ‘Aghora’ of Lord Shiva,
made up of the components ‘A-‘ as a negation, and ‘Ghora’ meaning
‘frightening’, being straight-up used to specifically invoke Mahadeva’s
\*non-terrifying\* ‘side’\]; whilst Veerabhadra, as the carryer out of
the brutal massacre at the Sacrifice of Daksha in reaction to the death
of Lord Shiva’s Wife – Lady Sati – is also frequently depicted in a
manner which conveys a sense of the fear surely felt by the impious and
disrespectful in His presence … prior to the decapitations, anyway.

![23319396_10159590764695574_8258723467281338680_n
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/23319396_10159590764695574_8258723467281338680_n-1.jpg?w=676)  
Yet Kala Bhairav stands out amongst these – not least because the reason
and purpose for His emanation, as cited in the Shiva Mahapuranam, is the
Slaying of a God. And not just any God, either. One of the mighty
Trimurti – Lord Brahma.

According to the Legend, a dispute had arisen between Lords Brahma and
Vishnu over whom among them was truly the supreme. This lead to the
appearance of Lord Shiva to mediate between Them – pointing out that by
the encoded ‘blueprints of the universe’ \[the Vedas – simply referring
to Them here as ‘scriptural authority’ does not adequately convey the
appropriate connotation\] He was, in fact, the Absolute \[this incident
is also related in a number of sources, often with some form of ‘test’
being promulgated wherein the other members of the Trimurti attempt to
best each other and exceed Lord Shiva – for instance, the story of
Mahadev transforming into a Linga pillar of infinite height and
challenging Vishnu and Brahma to race to find the ends, with Vishnu
eventually concluding that such a thing cannot be done while Brahma
instead attempts to cheat and lie about succeeding\].

![shivalinga](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/shivalinga.jpg?w=676)

An arrogant Deity in the extreme \[this characteristic \*also\* attested
in a number of other sources – and on occasion leading to overt sinful
conduct\], Lord Brahma refused to accept this fact, and instead
scornfully attempted to countermand it; arguing both that Lord Shiva,
due to His lifestyle and characteristics could not possibly be the
sanctic Absolute – and that, in any case, as Lord Brahma was evidently
‘capable’ of assuming some of Lord Shiva’s duties and divine portfolio
\[which Brahma then started doing – causing quite some problems for the
Universe at large in His ignorance\], if Lord Shiva was the Absolute
then so too was Brahma by equivalency. Brahma concluded His blasphemy by
mockingly offering Lord Shiva ‘protection’ in exchange for His
submission.

Needless to say, Lord Shiva was \*not\* amused – particularly in light
of the aspersions cast by Brahma upon the nature and virtue of His Wife.
And in a blaze of blinding light, created the Bhairava to bring the
swift execution of justice to the situation.

Now here, accounts differ somewhat – some say that Lord Kala Bhairava
was emanated as a result of Mahadeva ripping off a fingernail, which
thus turned into the resultant Destroyer; others that the role of the
fingernail in this tale is as the implement of Kala Bhairava by which
Lord Brahma was decapitated \[as in, Kala Bhairava’s fingernail\].

![Bhairava_Brahma](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/bhairava_brahma.jpg?w=676)

Whichever version is gone with, the plain import is clear – that Lord
Shiva and His Instrument possess more power in the nail of one finger
than the self-professed charlatan “Absolute” of Lord Brahma in this
story.

\[Another version, found in the Skanda Purana, has the censure meted out
to Lord Brahma occurring as a punishment for His attempting to commit
incest; with Lord Shiva acting to protect Brahma’s Daughter from Her
Father’s abhorrent advances.\].

And Lord Brahma was Decapitated as a result, and as a lesson. \[Although
this was not fatal, given that prior to this, Brahma was in possession
of five heads rather than the now-current four\] \[The symbolic
importance of this being that Sri Rudra is often depicted with five
heads, with Lord Brahma being reduced in number of heads from this
number to a lesser one helping to underscore the difference in Their
potency and the immanent superiority of Lord Shiva\] \[An additional
layer of symbolism in this incident concerns the traditional meaning of
‘decapitation’ within Hindu iconography as the severing of the ego, thus
allowing for progression towards Enlightenment – as can be seen, for
instance, with some readings of the depiction of Ma Chhinnamasta, for
instance; Phrased this way, the destruction of Lord Brahma’s arrogance
and egotism is a necessary and positive act \*for\* Lord Brahma and one
which He ought be thankful for, as it clears the way for further
progression and development\].

However, this is not where the story ends.

![23380120_10159590988255574_1432296494019320591_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/23380120_10159590988255574_1432296494019320591_n.jpg?w=676)

Lord Brahma, as one would probably expect, had the status of a Brahmin;
and by decapitating Him, even as a necessary action of Divine
ordination, Kala Bhairava had committed the Sin of Brahmanicide
\[Brahmahatya – which winds up being personified as a frightening female
figure that directly pursues Bhairava until the Sin is expiated at the
City of Varanasi, where a Temple to Lord Kala Bhairava stands today\].

![பிட்சாடனர்](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/e0aeaae0aebfe0ae9fe0af8de0ae9ae0aebee0ae9fe0aea9e0aeb0e0af8d.jpg?w=676)

The remedy for this was a period of wandering as a mendicant
\[‘Bhikshatana’\] beggar, using the Skull of Brahma – which had become
stuck to His hand as a visual sign of His crime – as a begging-bowl
\[‘Kapala’\] to ask for alms \[a practice replicated in some measure by
the ‘Kapalika’ \[‘Skull-Men’\] sect of Shaivites ; many of whom, at
least originally, were actually carryiing out a criminal sentence of
spending twelve years as such for inadvertently killing a Brahmin,
before its subsequent evolution into a devotional path of sorts\] and
eventual absolution upon reaching the City of Kashi, which the
Brahmahatya pursuer was unable to enter. \[For this reason, also, Lord
Bhairava is often prayed to as a patron-protector of travellers –
particularly at night.\]

![45d3cbf5e27339bb4279cb2fcd6ee003
(2)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/45d3cbf5e27339bb4279cb2fcd6ee003-2.jpg?w=676)

During this period of wandering, Lord Kala Bhairava also slays
Vishvaksena, the seneschal \[or General\] of Lord Vishnu’s realm and
armies for attempting to obstruct His quest, before engaging in dialogue
with Lord Vishnu about the nature of His Sin and reality.

Accounts differ as to the precise nature of the attempted assistance
rendered by Lord Vishnu to Bhairava at this point; with some suggesting
that Lord Vishnu offers His Own blood to attempt to fill the skull-cup
with, and others instead having Lord Vishnu split open one of Bhairava’s
veins to do likewise. Wherever the blood flew from, however, it is
insufficient to fill the cup regardless of how much is poured in or for
how long – thus representing the difficulty of applying ‘quick fixes’ or
self-sought (ab)solutions of improper nature in cases where wrongdoing
must be amended for.

The dialogue continues, with Lord Kala Bhairava making the astute
observation \[according to at least one source, anyway\] that the alms
given to the truly pious beneficiary/beggar do not lead him to corrupt
habits, intoxication, and worldly-ensnarement – but rather, aid and
facilitate the pursuit of Truth.

![23319296_10159591016890574_7989416334439550126_n
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/23319296_10159591016890574_7989416334439550126_n-1.jpg?w=676)

This culminates in Lord Vishnu realizing that even despite the seemingly
‘degenerate’ outward appearance and habits of Bhairava \[as an
extension, somewhat, of same of Lord Shiva\], and His \[self-imposed,
effectively\] status as an egregious Sinner – that nevertheless, Lord
Shiva is the Supreme, with these outer elements not impeding,
contaminating or ‘weighing down’ the actual truth and essence of
Mahadeva. \[For His part, Lord Vishnu is acknowledged as the foremost
disciple of Lord Shiva – something which turns up in a number of,
perhaps peculiarly, Vaishnava texts as well\]

![ShivaVishnuChakra](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/shivavishnuchakra.jpg?w=676)

Vishnu then directs Kala Bhairava to head to Varanasi, the present-day
Hindu City of the Dead \[which is also an actual city, located on the
banks of the Ganges in Uttar Pradesh, in case you were wondering\] –
also known as ‘Kashi’, the ‘City of Light’ – in order to perform the
appropriate penitential ritual there and at last be free from His
Kapalika burden-of-obligation.

![bhairava4](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/bhairava4.jpg?w=676)

This, Bhairava does; with the Brahmahatya fading into the ground after
following Him to the gates of the city, and the Skull of Brahma also
falling from His hand at the place now known as ‘Kapalamochana’ –
‘Liberation from the Skull’\].

![Shiva_and_Ganga_in_Varanasi
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/shiva_and_ganga_in_varanasi-1.jpg?w=676)

The Kala Bhairava is said to remain in Varanasi to this day as an
especial protector of the City, and also its continual population of
pilgrims and death-seekers \[it is considered the best and appropriate
place to die by many Hindus, with funeral pyres lighting the banks of
the Ganges nightly\]. On this particular night, annually, the Kala
Bhairava Murti in the Temple to Him in Varanasi is fully-uncovered \[It
is usually veiled apart from the Head for most of the year\], and
adorned with a Mundamala \[‘Skull-Necklace’\] of silver.

![varanasi-india-fueneral-pyre
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/varanasi-india-fueneral-pyre-1.jpg?w=676)

Elsewhere in the world, Kala Bhairava Jayanti is observed by Hindus with
all-night vigils, the chanting of particular devotional liturgies, and
\[perhaps rather interestingly\] performing acts of kindness to dogs –
as a dog is the Vahana \[‘mount’ or ‘vehicle’\] of Bhairava.

![bhairava5
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/bhairava5-1.jpg?w=676)

It is thought that, in-line with Kala Bhairava’s example, that proper
penance performed \[and properly meant\] in Kashi, and within His sight,
is capable of providing absolution for even the more egregious of sins
commitable by mortal man.

![16997680_10158305207075574_8092720783670492661_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/16997680_10158305207075574_8092720783670492661_n.jpg?w=676)

And while the necessity of following infringement and violation of
propriety with appropriate conduct to ‘set things right’ is an obvious
moral for the story of Bhairava, that is only the most ‘obvious’ insight
to be gained here. The Supremacy of Lord Shiva, and His occasionally
somewhat ‘indirect’ or seemingly-arduous methods for bestowing
(eventual) Enlightenment upon all, is another one.

![61347_10153836888440574_540770847_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/61347_10153836888440574_540770847_n.jpg?w=676)

But looking closer, and particularly at specific parts of the Myth, we
also see that the Truth can be found in seemingly unexpected places – as
Vishnu notes upon realizing that despite appearing as a sinner, this is
precisely what Lord Shiva is … and, for that matter, what Lord Brahma is
forced to acknowledge & realize even after directly scoffing at the
notion of the Supreme being engaged in the lifestyle and outer habits of
Mahadev. Alongside this, the idea of the Truth being Terrifying in some
instances \[particularly if we continually refuse to face (up to) it –
whereupon this denial can have potentially deadly results of escalating
severity\], is plainly demonstrated.

![15107374_10157814953690574_2523762402955179820_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/15107374_10157814953690574_2523762402955179820_n.jpg?w=676)

We also see that no being – whether God or man – can outrun the
consequences of His actions; we can instead only choose how to respond
to them. This may seem a peculiar maxim to draw out from the Myth, given
Kala Bhairava literally spends the latter part of the Legend outpacing
His pursuer, the Brahmahatya – and yet, the reality of the situation is
that not only did Bhairava have to \*run from\* this \[i.e. the pursuit
and resultant wandering was a ‘consequence’ that could not be simply
eschewed and easily gotten out of\], but that only the proper ritual
penitence in the proper place \[i.e. righteous action to ‘set things
right’ and ‘equalize’ the aforementioned sin and ‘consequence’\] was
capable of abjuring the much-feared ‘consequence’ in question. And thus,
the necessity of so doing – was a consequence, itself.

![15134603_10157814954190574_8079515975224721478_n.jpg](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/15134603_10157814954190574_8079515975224721478_n.jpg?w=676)

Finally, it is worth noting the subtle Eschatological and nomenclaturial
symbolism in the Myth and Entity of Kala Bhairava.

![15095721_10157815009560574_1532219389147794002_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/15095721_10157815009560574_1532219389147794002_n.jpg?w=676)

For it cannot have been unintentional that the God of Creation \[so to
speak\] – Lord Brahma – would find Himself lain low by Time. This echos
both the notion of that which is created \[including our material
universe\] eventually eroding and being destroyed through the progress
of ‘Time’; as well as recalling the role of Maha Kali at the ‘End of
Time’, wherein She plays a key role in unmaking the Great Work which
Lord Brahma has \[in some tellings of the Hindu cosmological /
cosmogonical \[more properly speaking\] understanding\]\] set into
motion. Which also, itself, recalls the Role of Lord Shiva as the
Destroyer – responsible for unmaking and bringing to an end Creation in
order to ‘clear the space’ for the next Cycle to Begin. \[‘Everything
That Has A Beginning Has An End’ – and one which comes with,
appropriately enough,
‘Time’![](https://www.facebook.com/images/emoji.php/v9/f9f/1/16/1f61b.png)😛\]
\[This also suggests , dependent upon one’s Metaphysical inclination,
another illustration of Lord Shiva’s superiority over Lord Brahma – in
that this tacitly connects with the eschewing of the mortal-material
world for that which is greater, supreme, eternal. As after the
Dissolution of the World, all that is left is the Absolute .! \]

![17191200_10158352365540574_5890262335687998121_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/17191200_10158352365540574_5890262335687998121_n.jpg?w=676)

And as applies the Name – well, what is it that we humans tend to fear.
“Death” is certainly an obvious one \[the transcension of which is often
considered an important part of the ‘improving’ of a soul – as revealed
through Lord Brahma becoming more enlightened following His decapitation
\[i.e. ‘moving past’ losing His head and ‘ego’ \[at least somewhat\]\].
But so too is ‘Blackness’ – whether in the sense of the ‘unknown’, or
the dark night which might effectively shroud same \[see also, for
instance, the NavaDurga KalaRatri for a similar embodiment of concept
here\]; yet as we can see from both Kala Bhairava, as well as other
associated Aspects and Divinities, Truth and Wisdom can quite frequently
be found out there in same. Even if we might initially resile from its
prospect thence.

![tumblr_osh4z22tFF1siv4kao1_400](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/tumblr_osh4z22tff1siv4kao1_400.jpg?w=676)

We also tend, inevitably \[appropriate word there\], to fear Time and
more especially Its Passsage; as this is the keenest revealer of the
impermance of our decidedly mortal existences – as well as, on a more
macroscopic level, the ‘Unmaker Of All Things’. \[It is, after all, ‘The
Fire In Which We Burn’ – KaalAgniRudraya.\]. The notion of ‘Wasted
Time’, or ‘Squandered Years’ \[although in a bit of an inversion, on
occasion, not so much “Misspent Youth” as the gulf between said youth
and the present-day self, eroded \*by\* Time\] also tends to scare,
although as a perhaps necessary impeller towards proper action and
better use of this most precious of resources \[thus, once again,
showing the necessary and indeed, even noble role of Terror\].

![23319075_10159591042650574_806485329202043070_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/23319075_10159591042650574_806485329202043070_n.jpg?w=676)

All of this, then, even without getting into some of the more ..
‘creative’ etymologies and meanings that some sages have put forward for
Name of Kala Bhairava , helps to show why we meditate upon Lord Shiva As
Bhairava on this particular night.

![7 (1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/7-1.jpg?w=676)

ॐ कालाकालाय विधमहे,  
कालाअथीथाया धीमहि,  
तन्नो काल भैरवा प्रचोदयात ll

ॐ कालभैरवाय नमः

ॐ नमः शिवाय
