+++
title = "On mAnasika pUjA"
date = "2019-05-28"

+++
<https://twitter.com/Better_Not_Shar/status/1133063165472755719>

mAnasika pUjA is not a substitute for the external rituals. Are we yogis
that we can ignore/shut out all sensory inputs from our various indriyas
and surroundings and do the pUjA in our current states just mAnasika?An
example of how all the senses were directed towards nArAyaNa is the
example of mahArAja ambarISha given in the link.(Using the ISKCON
translation because I am lazy)

sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor

vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane

karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu

śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane dṛśau

tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe ‘ṅga-saṅgamam

ghrāṇaṁ ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe

śrīmat-tulasyā rasanāṁ tad-arpite

pādau hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe

śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane

kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā

yathottamaśloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ

Mahārāja Ambarīṣa always engaged his mind in meditating upon the lotus
feet of Kṛṣṇa, his words in describing the glories of the Lord, his
hands in cleansing the Lord’s temple, and his ears in hearing the words
spoken by Kṛṣṇa or about Kṛṣṇa. He engaged his eyes in seeing the Deity
of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’s temples and Kṛṣṇa’s places like Mathurā and Vṛndāvana,
he engaged his sense of touch in touching the bodies of the Lord’s
devotees, he engaged his sense of smell in smelling the fragrance of
tulasī offered to the Lord, and he engaged his tongue in tasting the
Lord’s prasāda. He engaged his legs in walking to the holy places and
temples of the Lord, his head in bowing down before the Lord, and all
his desires in serving the Lord, twenty-four hours a day. Indeed,
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa never desired anything for his own sense
gratification. He engaged all his senses in devotional service, in
various engagements related to the Lord. This is the way to increase
attachment for the Lord and be completely free from all material
desires.



All these to keep one’s mind while doing the ritual of pUjA,japa,etc to
establish the prescence of the devatA in the mind. Are those who claim
mAnasika pUjA can be done merely due to lack of effort in shuchi/correct
dravya/ityAdi yogins /have reached that quality of being absorbed in
your devatA all your time?If yes,I have no objections.
