+++
title = "On Hotee Vidyalankar and other learned brAhmaNaxa0ladies"
date = "2019-05-11"

+++
Copying from Halley Gowami because some things deserve a more permanent
media than a Facebook post

![18815165_1379391695464085_8999940936417102641_o](https://padmavajrablog.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/18815165_1379391695464085_8999940936417102641_o.jpg?w=739)

” Some ladies recieved higher education and managed to rise to great
hieghts ! Amongst such rare women , Hotee Vidyalankar , Hotu Vidyalankar
, Anandamayee Devi (1752 — 1772) and Priyamvada Devi (16th cent–17th
cent) stands out .  
Hotee Vidyalankar was the most famous of them all . Born to ‘kulin’
brahmin family she was a widow from childhood . She became an authority
on Sanskrit grammer , poetry , Smriti , Navya-nyay and established her
own ‘chatuspathi’ ( centers of higher learning ) at Varanasi ! Brahman
Pandits bestowed her with the title of Vidyalankar . She died at an
advanced age in the year 1810 .

Hotu Vidyalankar’s real name was Rupamanjari . She was not a brahmin ,
but her father , Narayan Das noticed her exceptional intellgence and
sent her at the ‘chatuspaathi’ of a brahmin pandit . There Rupamanjari
mastered Ayurved , Grammer and other branches of studies . Her fame
spread far and wide and students used to come from far off places to
learn or get opinions on Ayurved , charak samhita and grammer .
Ayurvedic doctors of the age used to consult her on matters of medicine
! Rupamanjari never married and kept her head shaven with a ‘shikha’ (
Chuda / tuft of hair ) and dressed as a man . She died 100 years of age
at 1875 . ”

Someone in the comments mentions that Narayan Sanyal wrote a book
রূপমঞ্জরী on haTI vidyAla\~Nkara.


