---
title: MIRACLES

---
<div>

[←](../epistles_first_series/123_dhira_mata.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 5](../volume_5_contents.htm)
/ [Interviews](interviews_contents.htm)
/ [→](an_indian_yogi_in_london.htm)

  

## MIRACLES

(*The Memphis Commercial, 15th January, 1894*)

Asked by the reporter for his impressions of America, he said:

"I have a good impression of this country especially of the American
women. I have especially remarked on the absence of poverty in America."

The conversation afterward turned to the subject of religions. Swami
Vive Kananda expressed the opinion that the World's Parliament of
Religions had been beneficial in that it had done much toward broadening
ideas.

"What", asked the reporter, "is the generally accepted view held by
those of your faith as to the fate after death of one holding the
Christian religion?"

"We believe that if he is a good man he will be saved. Even an atheist,
if he is a good man, we believe must be saved. That is our religion. We
believe all religions are good, only those who hold them must not
quarrel."

Swami Vive Kananda was questioned concerning the truthfulness of the
marvelous stories of the performance of wonderful feats of conjuring,
levitation, suspended animation, and the like in India. Vive Kananda
said:

"We do not believe in miracles at all but that apparently strange things
may be accomplished under the operation of natural laws. There is a vast
amount of literature in India on these subjects, and the people there
have made a study of these things.

"Thought-reading and the foretelling of events are successfully
practiced by the Hathayogis.

"As to levitation, I have never seen anyone over come gravitation and
rise by will into the air, but I have seen many who were trying to do
so. They read books published on the subject and spend years trying to
accomplish the feat. Some of them in their efforts nearly starve
themselves and become so thin that if one presses his finger upon their
stomachs he can actually feel the spine.

"Some of these Hathayogis live to a great age."

The subject of suspended animation was broached and the Hindu monk told
the *Commercial* reporter that he himself had known a man who went into
a sealed cave, which was then closed up with a trap door, and remained
there for many years without food. There was a decided stir of interest
among those who heard this assertion. Vive Kananda entertained not the
slightest doubt of the genuineness of this case. He says that in the
case of suspended animation, growth is for the time arrested. He says
the case of the man in India who was buried with a crop of barley raised
over his grave and who was finally taken out still alive is perfectly
well authenticated. He thinks the studies which enabled persons to
accomplish that feat were suggested by the hibernating animals.

Vive Kananda said that he had never seen the feat which some writers
have claimed has been accomplished in India, of throwing a rope into the
air and the thrower climbing up the rope and disappearing out of sight
in the distant heights.

A lady present when the reporter was interviewing the monk said some one
had asked her if he, Vive Kananda, could perform wonderful tricks, and
if he had been buried alive as a part of his installation in the
Brotherhood. The answer to both questions was a positive negative. "What
have those things to do with religion?" he asked. "Do they make a man
purer? The Satan of your Bible is powerful, but differs from God in not
being pure."

Speaking of the sect of Hathayoga, Vive Kananda said there was one
thing, whether a coincidence or not, connected with the initiation of
their disciples, which was suggestive of the one passage in the life of
Christ. They make their disciples live alone for just forty days.

</div>
