---
title: AN INDIAN YOGI IN LONDON

---
<div>

[←](miracles.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Interviews](interviews_contents.htm)
/ [→](indias_mission.htm)

  

## AN INDIAN YOGI IN LONDON

(*The Westminster Gazette, 23rd October, 1895*)

Indian philosophy has in recent years had a deep and growing fascination
for many minds, though up to the present time its exponents in this
country have been entirely Western in their thought and training, with
the result that very little is really known of the deeper mysteries of
the Vedanta wisdom, and that little only by a select few. Not many have
the courage or the intuition to seek in heavy translations, made greatly
in the interests of philologists, for that sublime knowledge which they
really reveal to an able exponent brought up in all the traditions of
the East.

It was therefore with interest and not without some curiosity, writes a
correspondent, that I proceeded to interview an exponent entirely novel
to Western people in the person of the Swami Vivekananda, an actual
Indian Yogi, who has boldly undertaken to visit the Western world to
expound the traditional teaching which has been handed down by ascetics
and Yogis through many ages and who In pursuance of this object,
delivered a lecture last night in the Princes' Hall.

The Swami Vivekananda is a striking figure with his turban (or
mitre-shaped black cloth cap) and his calm but kindly features.

On my inquiring as to the significance, if any, of his name, the Swami
said: "Of the name by which I am now known (Swami Vivekananda), the
first word is descriptive of a Sannyâsin, or one who formally renounces
the world, and the second is the title I assumed — as is customary with
all Sannyasins — on my renunciation of the world, it signifies,
literally, 'the bliss of discrimination'."

"And what induced you to forsake the ordinary course of the world,
Swami?" I asked.

"I had a deep interest in religion and philosophy from my childhood," he
replied, "and our books teach renunciation as the highest ideal to which
man can aspire. It only needed the meeting with a great Teacher —
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa — to kindle in me the final determination to
follow the path he himself had trod, as in him I found my highest ideal
realised."

"Then did he found a sect, which you now represent?"

"No", replied the Swami quickly. "No, his whole life was spent in
breaking down the barriers of sectarianism and dogma. He formed no sect.
Quite the reverse. He advocated and strove to establish absolute freedom
of thought. He was a great Yogi."

"Then you are connected with no society or sect in this country? Neither
Theosophical nor Christian Scientist, nor any other?"

"None whatever!" said the Swami in clear and impressive tones. (His face
lights up like that of a child, it is so simple, straightforward and
honest.) "My teaching is my own interpretation of our ancient books, in
the light which my Master shed upon them. I claim no supernatural
authority. Whatever in my teaching may appeal to the highest
intelligence and be accepted by thinking men, the adoption of that will
be my reward." "All religions", he continued, "have for their object the
teaching either of devotion, knowledge, or Yoga, in a concrete form.
Now, the philosophy of Vedanta is the abstract science which embraces
all these methods, and this it is that I teach, leaving each one to
apply it to his own concrete form. I refer each individual to his own
experiences, and where reference is made to books, the latter are
procurable, and may be studied by each one for himself. Above all, I
teach no authority proceeding from hidden beings speaking through
visible agents, any more than I claim learning from hidden books or
manuscripts. I am the exponent of no occult societies, nor do I believe
that good can come of such bodies. Truth stands on its own authority,
and truth can bear the light of day."

"Then you do not propose to form any society. Swami?" I suggested.

"None; no society whatever. I teach only the Self hidden in the heart of
every individual and common to all. A handful of strong men knowing that
Self and living in Its light would revolutionise the world, even today,
as has been the case by single strong men before each in his day."

"Have you just arrived from India?" I inquired — for the Swami is
suggestive of Eastern suns.

"No," he replied, "I represented the Hindu religion at the Parliament of
Religions held at Chicago in 1893. Since then I have been travelling and
lecturing in the United States. The American people have proved most
interested audiences and sympathetic friends, and my work there has so
taken root that I must shortly return to that country."

"And what is your attitude towards the Western religions, Swami?"

"I propound a philosophy which can serve as a basis to every possible
religious system in the world, and my attitude towards all of them is
one of extreme sympathy — my teaching is antagonistic to none. I direct
my attention to the individual, to make him strong, to teach him that he
himself is divine, and I call upon men to make themselves conscious of
this divinity within. That is really the ideal — conscious or
unconscious — of every religion."

"And what shape will your activities take in this country?"

"My hope is to imbue individuals with the teachings to which I have
referred, and to encourage them to express these to others in their own
way; let them modify them as they will; I do not teach them as dogmas;
truth at length must inevitably prevail.

"The actual machinery through which I work is in the hands of one or two
friends. On October 22, they have arranged for me to deliver an address
to a British audience at Princes' Hall, Piccadilly, at 8-30 p.m. The
event is being advertised. The subject will be on the key of my
philosophy — 'Self-Knowledge'. Afterwards I am prepared to follow any
course that opens — to attend meetings in people's drawing-rooms or
elsewhere, to answer letters, or discuss personally. In a mercenary age
I may venture to remark that none of my activities are undertaken for a
pecuniary reward."

I then took my leave from one of the most original of men that I have
had the honour of meeting.

</div>
