---
title: INDIA AND ENGLAND

---
<div>

[←](indias_mission.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Interviews](interviews_contents.htm)
/ [→](indian_missionarys_mission_to_england.htm)

  

## INDIA AND ENGLAND

(*India, London, 1896*)

During the London season, Swami Vivekananda has been teaching and
lecturing to considerable numbers of people who have been attracted by
his doctrine and philosophy. Most English people fancy that England has
the practical monopoly of missionary enterprise, almost unbroken save
for a small effort on the part of France. I therefore sought the Swami
in his temporary home in South Belgravia to enquire what message India
could possibly send to England, apart from the remonstrances she has too
often had to make on the subject of home charges, judicial and executive
functions combined in one person, the settlement of expenses connected
with Sudanese and other expeditions.

"It is no new thing", said the Swami composedly, "that India should send
forth missionaries. She used to do so under the Emperor Asoka, in the
days when the Buddhist faith was young, when she had something to teach
the surrounding nation."

"Well, might one ask why she ever ceased doing so, and why she has now
begun again?"

"She ceased because she grew selfish, forgot the principle that nations
and individuals alike subsist and prosper by a system of give and take.
Her mission to the world has always been the same. It is spiritual, the
realm of introspective thought has been hers through all the ages;
abstract science, metaphysics, logic, are her special domain. In
reality, my mission to England is an outcome of England's to India. It
has been hers to conquer, to govern, to use her knowledge of physical
science to her advantage and ours. In trying to sum up India's
contribution to the world, I am reminded of a Sanskrit and an English
idiom. When you say a man dies, your phrase is, 'He gave up the ghost',
whereas we say, 'He gave up the body'. Similarly, you more than imply
that the body is the chief part of man by saying it possesses a soul.
Whereas we say a man is a soul and possesses a body. These are but small
ripples on the surface, yet they show the current of your national
thought. I should like to remind you how Schopenhauer predicted that the
influence of Indian philosophy upon Europe would be as momentous when it
became well known as was the revival of Greek and Latin learning at the
close of the Dark Ages. Oriental research is making great progress; a
new world of ideas is opening to the seeker after truth."

"And is India finally to conquer her conquerors?"

"Yes, in the world of ideas. England has the sword, the material world,
as our Mohammedan conquerors had before her. Yet Akbar the Great became
practically a Hindu; educated Mohammedans, the Sufis, are hardly to be
distinguished from the Hindus; they do not eat beef, and in other ways
conform to our usages. Their thought has become permeated by ours."

"So, that is the fate you foresee for the lordly Sahib? Just at this
moment he seems to be a long way off it."

"No, it is not so remote as you imply. In the world of religious ideas,
the Hindu and the Englishman have much in common, and there is proof of
the same thing among other religious communities. Where the English
ruler or civil servant has had any knowledge of India's literature,
especially her philosophy, there exists the ground of a common sympathy,
a territory constantly widening. It is not too much to say that only
ignorance is the cause of that exclusive — sometimes even contemptuous —
attitude assumed by some."

"Yes, it is the measure of folly. Will you say why you went to America
rather than to England on your mission?"

"That was a mere accident — a result of the World's Parliament of
Religions being held in Chicago at the time of the World's Fair, instead
of in London, as it ought to have been. The Raja of Mysore and some
other friends sent me to America as the Hindu representative. I stayed
there three years, with the exception of last summer and this summer,
when I came to lecture in London. The Americans are a great people, with
a future before them. I admire them very much, and found many kind
friends among them. They are less prejudiced than the English, more
ready to weigh and examine a new idea, to value it in spite of its
newness. They are most hospitable too; far less time is lost in showing
one's credentials, as it were. You travel in America, as I did, from
city to city, always lecturing among friends. I saw Boston, New York,
Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Des Moines, Memphis, and numbers of
other places."

"And leaving disciples in each of them?"

"Yes, disciples, but not organizations. That is no part of my work. Of
these there are enough in all conscience. Organisations need men to
manage them; they must seek power, money, influence. Often they struggle
for domination, and even fight."

"Could the gist of this mission of yours be summed up in a few words? Is
it comparative religion you want to preach?"

"It is really the philosophy of religion, the kernel of all its outward
forms. All forms of religion have an essential and a non-essential part.
If we strip from them the latter, there remains the real basis of all
religion, which all forms of religion possess in common. Unity is behind
them all. We may call it God, Allah, Jehovah, the Spirit, Love; it is
the same unity that animates all life, from its lowest form to its
noblest manifestation in man. It is on this unity that we need to lay
stress, whereas in the West, and indeed everywhere, it is on the
non-essential that men are apt to lay stress. They will fight and kill
each other for these forms, to make their fellows conform. Seeing that
the essential is love of God and love of man, this is curious, to say
the least."

"I suppose a Hindu could never persecute."

"He never yet has done so; he is the most tolerant of all the races of
men. Considering how profoundly religious he is, one might have thought
that he would persecute those who believe in no God. The Jains regard
such belief as sheer delusion, yet no Jain has ever been persecuted. In
India the Mohammedans were the first who ever took the sword."

"What progress does the doctrine of essential unity make in England?
Here we have a thousand sects."

"They must gradually disappear as liberty and knowledge increase. They
are founded on the nonessential, which by the nature of things cannot
survive. The sects have served their purpose, which was that of an
exclusive brotherhood on lines comprehended by those within it.
Gradually we reach the idea of universal brotherhood by flinging down
the walls of partition which separate such aggregations of individuals.
In England the work proceeds slowly, possibly because the time is not
yet ripe for it; but all the same, it makes progress. Let me call your
attention to the similar work that England is engaged upon in India.
Modern caste distinction is a barrier to India's progress. It narrows,
restricts, separates. It will crumble before the advance of ideas.

"Yet some Englishmen, and they are not the least sympathetic to India
nor the most ignorant of her history, regard caste as in the main
beneficent. One may easily be too much Europeanised. You yourself
condemn many of our ideals as materialistic."

"True. No reasonable person aims at assimilating India to England; the
body is made by the thought that lies behind it. The body politic is
thus the expression of national thought, and in India, of thousands of
years of thought. To Europeanise India is therefore an impossible and
foolish task: the elements of progress were always actively present in
India. As soon as a peaceful government was there, these have always
shown themselves. From the time of the Upanishads down to the present
day, nearly all our great Teachers have wanted to break through the
barriers of caste, i.e. caste in its degenerate state, not the original
system. What little good you see in the present caste clings to it from
the original caste, which was the most glorious social institution.
Buddha tried to re-establish caste in its original form. At every period
of India's awakening, there have always been great efforts made to break
down caste. But it must always be *we* who build up a new India as an
effect and continuation of her past, assimilating helpful foreign ideas
wherever they may be found. Never can it be they; growth must proceed
from within. All that England can do is to help India to work out her
own salvation. All progress at the dictation of another, whose hand is
at India's throat, is valueless in my opinion. The highest work can only
degenerate when slave-labour produces it."

"Have you given any attention to the Indian National Congress movement?"

"I cannot claim to have given much; my work is in another part of the
field. But I regard the movement as significant, and heartily wish it
success. A nation is being made out of India's different races. I
sometimes think they are no less various than the different peoples of
Europe. In the past, Europe has struggled for Indian trade, a trade
which has played a tremendous part in the civilisation of the world; its
acquisition might almost be called a turning-point in the history of
humanity. We see the Dutch, Portuguese, French, and English contending
for it in succession. The discovery of America may be traced to the
indemnification the Venetians sought in the far distant West for the
loss they suffered in the East."

"Where will it end?"

"It will certainly end in the working out of India's homogeneity, in her
acquiring what we may call democratic ideas. Intelligence must not
remain the monopoly of the cultured few; it will be disseminated from
higher to lower classes. Education is coming, and compulsory education
will follow. The immense power of our people for work must be utilised.
India's potentialities are great and will be called forth."

"Has any nation ever been great without being a great military power?"

"Yes," said the Swami without a moment's hesitation, "China has. Amongst
other countries, I have travelled in China and Japan. Today, China is
like a disorganised mob; but in the heyday of her greatness she
possessed the most admirable organisation any nation has yet known Many
of the devices and methods we term modern were practiced by the Chinese
for hundreds and even thousands of years. Take competitive examination
as an illustration."

"Why did she become disorganized?"

"Because she could not produce men equal to the system. You have the
saying that men cannot be made virtuous by an Act of Parliament; the
Chinese experienced it before you. And that is why religion is of deeper
importance than politics, since it goes to the root, and deals with the
essential of conduct."

"Is India conscious of the awakening that you allude to?"

"Perfectly conscious. The world perhaps sees it chiefly in the Congress
movement and in the field of social reform; but the awakening is quite
as real in religion, though it works more silently."

"The West and East have such different ideals of life. Ours seems to be
the perfecting of the social state. Whilst we are busy seeing to these
matters, Orientals are meditating on abstractions. Here has Parliament
been discussing the payment of the Indian army in the Sudan. All the
respectable section of the Conservative press has made a loud outcry
against the unjust decision of the Government, whereas you probably
think the whole affair not worth attention."

"But you are quite wrong", said the Swami, taking the paper and running
his eyes over extracts from the Conservative Journals. "My sympathies in
this matter are naturally with my country. Yet it reminds one of the old
Sanskrit proverb: 'You have sold the elephant, why quarrel over the
goad?' India always pays. The quarrels of politicians are very curious.
It will take ages to bring religion into politics."

"One ought to make the effort very soon all the same."

"Yes, it is worth one's while to plant an idea in the heart of this
great London, surely the greatest governing machine that has ever been
set in motion. I often watch it working, the power and perfection with
which the minutest vein is reached, its wonderful system of circulation
and distribution. It helps one to realise how great is the Empire and
how great its task. And with all the rest, it distributes thought. It
would be worth a man's while to place some ideas in the heart of this
great machine, so that they might circulate to the remotest part."

The Swami is a man of distinguished appearance. Tall, broad, with fine
features enhanced by his picturesque Eastern dress, his personality is
very striking. By birth, he is a Bengali, and by education, a graduate
of the Calcutta University. His gifts as an orator are high. He can
speak for an hour and a half without a note or the slightest pause for a
word.

C. S. B.

</div>
