---
title: INDIAN MISSIONARY'S MISSION TO ENGLAND

---
<div>

[←](india_and_england.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Interviews](interviews_contents.htm)
/ [→](with_the_swami_vivekananda_at_madura.htm)

  

## INDIAN MISSIONARY'S MISSION TO ENGLAND

(*The Echo, London, 1896*)

. . . I presume that in his own country the Swami would live under a
tree, or at most in the precincts of a temple, his head shaved, dressed
in the costume of his country. But these things are not done in London,
so that I found the Swami located much like other people, and, save that
he wears a long coat of a dark orange shade, dressed like other mortals
likewise. He laughingly related that his dress, especially when he wears
a turban, does not commend itself to the London street arab, whose
observations are scarcely worth repeating. I began by asking the Indian
Yogi to spell his name very slowly. . . .

"Do you think that nowadays people are laying much stress on the
non-essential?"

"I think so among the backward nations, and among the less cultured
portion of the civilised people of the West. Your question implies that
among the cultured and the wealthy, matters are on a different footing.
So they are; the wealthy are either immersed in the enjoyment of health
or grubbing for more. They, and a large section of the busy people, say
of religion that it is rot, stuff, nonsense, and they honestly think so
The only religion that is fashionable is patriotism and Mrs. Grundy.
People merely go to church when they are marrying or burying somebody."

"Will your message take them oftener to church?"

"I scarcely think it will. Since I have nothing whatever to do with
ritual or dogma; my mission is to show that religion is everything and
in everything. . . . And what can we say of the system here in England?
Everything goes to show that Socialism or some form of rule by the
people, call it what you will, is coming on the boards. The people will
certainly want the satisfaction of their material needs, less work, no
oppression, no war, more food. What guarantee have we that this or any
civilisation will last, unless it is based on religion, on the goodness
of man? Depend on it, religion goes to the root of the matter. If it is
right, all is right."

"It must be difficult to get the essential, the metaphysical, part of
religion into the minds of the people. It is remote from their thoughts
and manner of life."

"In all religions we travel from a lesser to a higher truth, never from
error to truth. There is a Oneness behind all creation, but minds are
very various. 'That which exists is One, sages call It variously.' What
I mean is that one progresses from a smaller to a greater truth. The
worst religions are only bad readings of the froth. One gets to
understand bit by bit. Even devil-worship is but a perverted reading of
the ever-true and immutable Brahman. Other phases have more or less of
the truth in them. No form of religion possesses it entirely."

"May one ask if you originated this religion you have come to preach to
England?"

"Certainly not. I am a pupil of a great Indian sage, Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa. He was not what one might call a very learned man, as some
of our sages are, but a very holy one, deeply imbued with the spirit of
the Vedanta philosophy. When I say philosophy, I hardly know whether I
ought not to say religion, for it is really both. You must read
Professor Max Müller's account of my Master in a recent number of the
*Nineteenth Century*. Ramakrishna was born in the Hooghly district in
1836 and died in 1886. He produced a deep effect on the life of Keshab
Chandra Sen and others. By discipline of the body and subduing of the
mind he obtained a wonderful insight into the spiritual world. His face
was distinguished by a childlike tenderness, profound humility, and
remarkable sweetness of expression. No one could look upon it unmoved."

"Then your teaching is derived from the Vedas?"

"Yes, Vedanta means the end of the Vedas, the third section or
Upanishads, containing the ripened ideas which we find more as germs in
the earlier portion. The most ancient portion of the Vedas is the
Samhitâ, which is in very archaic Sanskrit, only to be understood by the
aid of a very old dictionary, the Nirukta of Yâska."

"I fear that we English have rather the idea that India has much to
learn from us; the average man is pretty ignorant as to what may be
learnt from India."

"That is so, but the world of scholars know well how much is to be
learnt and how important the lesson. You would not find Max Müller,
Monier Williams, Sir William Hunter, or German Oriental scholars making
light of Indian abstract science."

. . . The Swami gives his lecture at 39 Victoria Street. All are made
welcome, and as in ancient apostolic times, the new teaching is without
money and without price. The Indian missionary is a man of exceptionally
fine physique; his command of English can only be described as perfect.

C. S. B.

</div>
