---
title: WITH THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA AT MADURA

---
<div>

[←](indian_missionarys_mission_to_england.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 5](../volume_5_contents.htm)
/ [Interviews](interviews_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_abroad_and_the_problems_at_home.htm)

  

## WITH THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA AT MADURA

(*The Hindu, Madras, February, 1897*)

*Q*. — The theory that the universe is false seems to be understood in
the following senses: (a) the sense in which the duration of perishing
forms and names is infinitesimally small with reference to eternity; (b)
the sense in which the period between any two Pralayas (involution of
the universe) is infinitesimally small with reference to eternity; (c)
the sense in which the universe is ultimately false though it has an
apparent reality at present, depending upon one sort of consciousness,
in the same way as the idea of silver superimposed on a shell or that of
a serpent on a rope, is true for the time being, and, in effect, is
dependent upon a particular condition of mind; (d) the sense in which
the universe is a phantom just like the son of a barren woman or like
the horns of a hare.

In which of these senses is the theory understood in the Advaita
philosophy?

*A*. — There are many classes of Advaitists and each has understood the
theory in one or the other sense. Shankara taught the theory in the
sense (c), and it is his teaching that the universe, as it appears, is
real for all purposes for every one in his present consciousness, but it
vanishes when the consciousness assumes a higher form. You see the trunk
of a tree standing before you, and you mistake it for a ghost. The idea
of a ghost is for the time being real, for it works on your mind and
produces the same result upon it as if it were a ghost. As soon as you
discover it to be a stump, the idea of the ghost disappears. The idea of
a stump and that of the ghost cannot co-exist, and when one is present,
the other is absent.

*Q*. — Is not the sense (d) also adopted in some of the writings of
Shankara?

*A*. — No. Some other men who, by mistake, carried Shankara's notion to
an extreme have adopted the sense (d) in their writing. The senses (a)
and (b) are peculiar to the writings of some other classes of Advaita
philosophers but never received Shankara's sanction.

*Q*. — What is the cause of the apparent reality?

*A*. — What is the cause of your mistaking a stump for a ghost? The
universe is the same, in fact, but it is your mind that creates various
conditions for it.

*Q*. — What is the true meaning of the statement that the Vedas are
beginningless and eternal? Does it refer to the Vedic utterances or the
statements contained in the Vedas? If it refers to the truth involved in
such statements, are not the sciences, such as Logic, Geometry,
Chemistry, etc., equally beginningless and eternal, for they contain an
everlasting truth?

*A*. — There was a time when the Vedas themselves were considered
eternal in the sense in which the divine truths contained therein were
changeless and permanent and were only revealed to man. At a subsequent
time, it appears that the utterance of the Vedic hymns with the
knowledge of its meaning was important, and it was held that the hymns
themselves must have had a divine origin. At a still later period the
meaning of the hymns showed that many of them could not be of divine
origin, because they inculcated upon mankind performance of various
unholy acts, such as torturing animals, and we can also find many
ridiculous stories in the Vedas. The correct meaning of the statement
"The Vedas are beginningless and eternal" is that the law or truth
revealed by them to man is permanent and changeless. Logic, Geometry,
Chemistry, etc., reveal also a law or truth which is permanent and
changeless, and in that sense they are also beginningless and eternal.
But no truth or law is absent from the Vedas, and I ask any one of you
to point out to me any truth which is not treated of in them.

*Q*. — What is the notion of Mukti, according to the Advaita philosophy,
or in other words, is it a conscious state? Is there any difference
between the Mukti of the Advaitism and the Buddhistic Nirvâna?

*A*. — There is a consciousness in Mukti, which we call
superconsciousness. It differs from your present consciousness. It is
illogical to say that there is no consciousness in Mukti. The
consciousness is of three sorts — the dull, mediocre, and intense — as
is the case of light. When vibration is intense, the brilliancy is so
very powerful as to dazzle the sight itself and in effect is as
ineffectual as the dullest of lights. The Buddhistic Nirvana must have
the same degree of consciousness whatever the Buddhists may say. Our
definition of Mukti is affirmative in its nature, while the Buddhistic
Nirvana has a negative definition.

*Q*. — Why should the unconditioned Brahman choose to assume a condition
for the purpose of manifestation of the world's creation?

*A*. — The question itself is most illogical. Brahman is
*Avângmanasogocharam*, meaning that which is incapable of being grasped
by word and mind. Whatever lies beyond the region of space, time and
causation cannot be conceived by the human mind, and the function of
logic and enquiry lies only within the region of space, time, and
causation. While that is so, it is a vain attempt to question about what
lies beyond the possibilities of human conception.

*Q*. — Here and there attempts are made to import into the Purânas
hidden ideas which are said to have been allegorically represented.
Sometimes it is said that the Puranas need not contain any historical
truth, but are mere representations of the highest ideals illustrated
with fictitious characters. Take for instance, Vishnupurâna, Râmâyana,
or Bhârata. Do they contain historical veracity or are they mere
allegorical representations of metaphysical truths, or are they
representations of the highest ideals for the conduct of humanity, or
are they mere epic poems such as those of Homer?

*A*. — Some historical truth is the nucleus of every Purana. The object
of the Puranas is to teach mankind the sublime truth in various forms;
and even if they do not contain any historical truth, they form a great
authority for us in respect of the highest truth which they inculcate.
Take the Râmâyana, for illustration, and for viewing it as an authority
on building character, it is not even necessary that one like Rama
should have ever lived. The sublimity of the law propounded by Ramayana
or Bharata does not depend upon the truth of any personality like Rama
or Krishna, and one can even hold that such personages never lived, and
at the same time take those writings as high authorities in respect of
the grand ideas which they place before mankind. Our philosophy does not
depend upon any personality for its truth. Thus Krishna did not teach
anything new or original to the world, nor does Ramayana profess
anything which is not contained in the Scriptures. It is to be noted
that Christianity cannot stand without Christ, Mohammedanism without
Mohammed, and Buddhism without Buddha, but Hinduism stands independent
of any man, and for the purpose of estimating the philosophical truth
contained in any Purana, we need not consider the question whether the
personages treated of therein were really material men or were
fictitious characters. The object of the Puranas was the education of
mankind, and the sages who constructed them contrived to find some
historical personages and to superimpose upon them all the best or worst
qualities just as they wanted to, and laid down the rules of morals for
the conduct of mankind. Is it necessary that a demon with ten heads
(Dashamukha) should have actually lived as stated in the Ramayana? It is
the representation of some truth which deserves to be studied, apart
from the question whether Dashamukha was a real or fictitious character.
You can now depict Krishna in a still more attractive manner, and the
description depends upon the sublimity of your ideal, but there stands
the grand philosophy contained in the Puranas.

*Q*. — Is it possible for a man, if he were an adept, to remember the
events connected with his past incarnations? The physiological brain,
which he owned in his previous incarnation, and in which the impressions
of his experience were stored, is no longer present. In this birth he is
endowed with a new physiological brain, and while that is so, how is it
possible for the present brain to get at the impressions received by
another apparatus which is not existence at present?

*Swami* — What do you mean by an adept?

*Correspondent* — One that has developed the hidden powers of his
nature.

*Swami* — I cannot understand how the hidden powers can be developed. I
know what you mean, but I should always desire that the expressions used
are precise and accurate. You may say that the powers hidden are
uncovered. It is possible for those that have uncovered the hidden
powers of their nature to remember the incidents connected with their
past incarnations, for their present brain had its Bija (seed) in the
Sukshma man after death.

*Q*. — Does the spirit of Hinduism permit the proselytism of strangers
into it? And can a Brâhmin listen to the exposition of philosophy made
by a Chandâla?

*A*. — Proselytism is tolerated by Hinduism. Any man, whether he be a
Shudra or Chandala, can expound philosophy even to a Brahmin. The truth
can be learnt from the lowest individual, no matter to what caste or
creed he belongs.

Here the Swami quoted Sanskrit verses of high authority in support of
his position.

The discourse ended, as the time appointed in the programme for his
visiting the Temple had already arrived. He accordingly took leave of
the gentlemen present and proceeded to visit the Temple.

</div>
