---
title: "THE MISSIONARY WORK OF THE FIRST HINDU\nSANNYASIN TO THE WEST \nAND\nHIS PLAN\n\
  OF REGENERATION OF INDIA"

---
<div>

[←](the_abroad_and_the_problems_at_home.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm)
/ [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Interviews](interviews_contents.htm)
/ [→](reawakening_of_hinduism.htm)

  

## THE MISSIONARY WORK OF THE FIRST HINDU SANNYASIN TO THE WEST AND HIS PLAN OF REGENERATION OF INDIA

(*Madras Times, February, 1897*)

For the past few weeks, the Hindu public of Madras have been most
eagerly expecting the arrival of Swami Vivekananda, the great Hindu monk
of world-wide fame. At the present moment his name is on everybody's
lips. In the school, in the college, in the High Court, on the marina,
and in the streets and bazars of Madras, hundreds of inquisitive spirits
may be seen asking when the Swami will be coming. Large numbers of
students from the mofussil, who have come up for the University
examinations are staying here, awaiting the Swami, and increasing their
hostelry bills, despite the urgent call of their parents to return home
immediately. In a few days the Swami will be in our midst. From the
nature of the receptions received elsewhere in this Presidency, from the
preparations being made here, from the triumphal arches erected at
Castle Kernan, where the "Prophet" is to be lodged at the cost of the
Hindu public, and from the interest taken in the movement by the leading
Hindu gentlemen of this city, like the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Subramaniya
Iyer, there is no doubt that the Swami will have a grand reception. It
was Madras that first recognised the superior merits of the Swami and
equipped him for Chicago. Madras will now have again the honour of
welcoming the undoubtedly great man who has done so much to raise the
prestige of his motherland. Four year ago, when the Swami arrived here,
he was practically an obscure individual. In an unknown bungalow at St.
Thome he spent nearly two months, all along holding conversations on
religious topics and teaching and instructing all comers who cared to
listen to him. Even then a few educated young men with "a keener eye"
predicted that there was something in the man, "a power", that would
lift him above all others, that would pre-eminently enable him to be the
leader of men. These young men, who were then despised as "misguided
enthusiasts", "dreamy revivalists", have now the supreme satisfaction of
seeing their Swami, as they love to call him, return to them with a
great European and American fame. The mission of the Swami is
essentially spiritual. He firmly believes that India, the motherland of
spirituality, has a great future before her. He is sanguine that the
West will more and more come to appreciate what he regards as the
sublime truths of Vedanta. His great motto is "Help, and not Fight"
"Assimilation, and not Destruction", "Harmony and Peace, and not
Dissension". Whatever difference of opinion followers of other creeds
may have with him, few will venture to deny that the Swami has done
yeoman's service to his country in opening the eyes of the Western world
to "the good in the Hindu". He will always be remembered as the first
Hindu Sannyâsin who dared to cross the sea to carry to the West the
message of what he believes in as a religious peace.

A representative of our paper interviewed the Swami Vivekananda, with a
view to eliciting from him an account of the success of his mission in
the West. The Swami very courteously received our representative and
motioned him to a chair by his side. The Swami was dressed in yellow
robes, was calm, serene, and dignified, and appeared inclined to answer
any questions that might be put to him. We have given the Swami's words
as taken down in shorthand by our representative.

"May I know a few particulars about your early life?" asked our
representative.

The Swami said: "Even while I was a student at Calcutta, I was of a
religious temperament. I was critical even at that time of my life, mere
words would not satisfy me. Subsequently I met Ramakrishna Paramahamsa,
with whom I lived for a long time and under whom I studied. After the
death of my father I gave myself up to travelling in India and started a
little monastery in Calcutta. During my travels, I came to Madras, where
I received help from the Maharaja of Mysore and the Raja of Ramnad."

"What made Your Holiness carry the mission of Hinduism to Western
countries?"

"I wanted to get experience. My idea as to the keynote of our national
downfall is that we do not mix with other nations — that is the one and
the sole cause. We never had opportunity to compare notes. We were
Kupa-Mandukas (frogs in a well)."

"You have done a good deal of travelling in the West?"

"I have visited a good deal of Europe, including Germany and France, but
England and America were the chief centres of my work. At first I found
myself in a critical position, owing to the hostile attitude assumed
against the people of this country by those who went there from India. I
believe the Indian nation is by far the most moral and religious nation
in the whole world, and it would be a blasphemy to compare the Hindus
with any other nation. At first, many fell foul of me, manufactured huge
lies against me by saying that I was a fraud, that I had a harem of
wives and half a regiment of children. But my experience of these
missionaries opened my eyes as to what they are capable of doing in the
name of religion. Missionaries were nowhere in England. None came to
fight me. Mr. Lund went over to America to abuse me behind my back, but
people would not listen to him. I was very popular with them. When I
came back to England, I thought this missionary would be at me, but the
*Truth* silenced him. In England the social status is stricter than
caste is in India. The English Church people are all gentlemen born,
which many of the missionaries are not. They greatly sympathised with
me. I think that about thirty English Church clergymen agree entirely
with me on all points of religious discussion. I was agreeably surprised
to find that the English clergymen, though they differed from me, did
not abuse me behind my back and stab me in the dark. There is the
benefit of caste and hereditary culture."

"What has been the measure of your success in the West?"

"A great number of people sympathised with me in America — much more
than in England. Vituperation by the low-caste missionaries made my
cause succeed better. I had no money, the people of India having given
me my bare passage-money, which was spent in a very short time. I had to
live just as here on the charity of individuals. The Americans are a
very hospitable people. In America one-third of the people are
Christians, but the rest have no religion, that is they do not belong to
any of the sects, but amongst them are to be found the most spiritual
persons. I think the work in England is sound. If I die tomorrow and
cannot send any more Sannyasins, still the English work will go on. The
Englishman is a very good man. He is taught from his childhood to
suppress all his feelings. He is thickheaded, and is not so quick as the
Frenchman or the American. He is immensely practical. The American
people are too young to understand renunciation. England has enjoyed
wealth and luxury for ages. Many people there are ready for
renunciation. When I first lectured in England I had a little class of
twenty or thirty, which was kept going when I left, and when I went back
from America I could get an audience of one thousand. In America I could
get a much bigger one, as I spent three years in America and only one
year in England. I have two Sannyasins — one in England and one in
America, and I intend sending Sannyasins to other countries.

"English people are tremendous workers. Give them an idea, and you may
be sure that that idea is not going to be lost, provided they catch it.
People here have given up the Vedas, and all your philosophy is in the
kitchen. The religion of India at present is 'Don't-touchism' — that is
a religion which the English people will never accept. The thoughts of
our forefathers and the wonderful life-giving principles that they
discovered, every nation will take. The biggest guns of the English
Church told me that I was putting Vedantism into the Bible. The present
Hinduism is a degradation. There is no book on philosophy, written
today, in which something of our Vedantism is not touched upon — even
the works of Herbert Spencer contain it. The philosophy of the age is
Advaitism, everybody talks of it; only in Europe, they try to be
original. They talk of Hindus with contempt, but at the same time
swallow the truths given out by the Hindus. Professor Max Müller is a
perfect Vedantist, and has done splendid work in Vedantism. He believes
in re-incarnation."

"What do you intend doing for the regeneration of India?"

"I consider that the great national sin is the neglect of the masses,
and that is one of the causes of our downfall. No amount of politics
would be of any avail until the masses in India are once more well
educated, well fed, and well cared for. They pay for our education, they
build our temples, but in return they get kicks. They are practically
our slaves. If we want to regenerate India, we must work for them. I
want to start two central institutions at first — one at Madras and the
other at Calcutta — for training young men as preachers. I have funds
for starting the Calcutta one. English people will find funds for my
purpose.

"My faith is in the younger generation, the modern generation, out of
them will come my workers. They will work out the whole problem, like
lions. I have formulated the idea and have given my life to it. If I do
not achieve success, some better one will come after me to work it out,
and I shall be content to struggle. The one problem you have is to give
to the masses their rights. You have the greatest religion which the
world ever saw, and you feed the masses with stuff and nonsense. You
have the perennial fountain flowing, and you give them ditch-water. Your
Madras graduate would not touch a low-caste man, but is ready to get out
of him the money for his education. I want to start at first these two
institutions for educating missionaries to be both spiritual and secular
instructors to our masses. They will spread from centre to centre, until
we have covered the whole of India. The great thing is to have faith in
oneself, even before faith in God; but the difficulty seems to be that
we are losing faith in ourselves day by day. That is my objection
against the reformers. The orthodox have more faith and more strength in
themselves, in spite of their crudeness; but the reformers simply play
into the hands of Europeans and pander to their vanity. Our masses are
gods as compared with those of other countries. This is the only country
where poverty is not a crime. They are mentally and physically handsome;
but we hated and hated them till they have lost faith in themselves.
They think they are born slaves. Give them their rights, and let them
stand on their rights. This is the glory of the American civilization.
Compare the Irishman with knees bent, half-starved, with a little stick
and bundle of clothes, just arrived from the ship, with what he is,
after a few months' stay in America. He walks boldly and bravely. He has
come from a country where he was a slave to a country where he is a
brother.

"Believe that the soul is immortal, infinite and all-powerful. My idea
of education is personal contact with the teacher - Gurugriha-Vâsa.
Without the personal life of a teacher there would be no education. Take
your Universities. What have they done during the fifty years of their
existences. They have not produced one original man. They are merely an
examining body. The idea of the sacrifice for the common weal is not yet
developed in our nation."

"What do you think of Mrs. Besant and Theosophy?"

"Mrs. Besant is a very good woman. I lectured at her Lodge in London. I
do not know personally much about her. Her knowledge of our religion is
very limited; she picks up scraps here and there; she never had time to
study it thoroughly. That she is one of the most sincere of women, her
greatest enemy will concede. She is considered the best speaker in
England. She is a Sannyâsini. But I do not believe in Mahâtmâs and
Kuthumis. Let her give up her connection with the Theosophical Society,
stand on her own footing, and preach what she thinks right."

Speaking of social reforms, the Swami expressed himself about
widow-marriage thus: "I have yet to see a nation whose fate is
determined by the number of husbands their widows get."

Knowing as he did that several persons were waiting downstairs to have
an interview with the Swami, our representative withdrew, thanking the
Swami for the kindness with which he had consented to the journalistic
torture.

The Swami, it may be remarked, is accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. J. H.
Sevier, Mr. T. G. Harrison, a Buddhist gentleman of Colombo, and Mr. J.
J. Goodwin. It appears that Mr. and Mrs. Sevier accompany the Swami with
a view to settling in the Himalayas, where they intend building a
residence for the Western disciples of the Swami, who may have an
inclination to reside in India. For twenty years, Mr. and Mrs. Sevier
had followed no particular religion, finding satisfaction in none of
those that were preached; but on listening to a course of lectures by
the Swami, they professed to have found a religion that satisfied their
heart and intellect. Since then they have accompanied the Swami through
Switzerland, Germany, and Italy, and now to India. Mr. Goodwin, a
journalist in England, became a disciple of the Swami fourteen months
ago, when he first met him at New York. He gave up his journalism and
devotes himself to attending the Swami and taking down his lectures in
shorthand. He is in every sense a true "disciple", saying that he hopes
to be with the Swami till his death.

</div>
