---
title: FIRST PUBLIC LECTURE IN THE EAST

---
<div>

[←](../para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion/conclusion.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](vedantism.htm)

  

## FIRST PUBLIC LECTURE IN THE EAST

(*Delivered in Colombo*)

After his memorable work in the West, Swami Vivekananda landed at
Colombo on the afternoon of January 15, 1897, and was given a right
royal reception by the Hindu community there. The following address of
welcome was then presented to him:

SRIMAT VIVEKANANDA SWAMI

REVERED SIR,

In pursuance of a resolution passed at a public meeting of the Hindus of
the city of Colombo, we beg to offer you a hearty welcome to this
Island. We deem it a privilege to be the first to welcome you on your
return home from your great mission in the West.

We have watched with joy and thankfulness the success with which the
mission has, under God's blessing, been crowned. You have proclaimed to
the nations of Europe and America the Hindu ideal of a universal
religion, harmonising all creeds, providing spiritual food for each soul
according to its needs, and lovingly drawing it unto God. You have
preached the Truth and the Way, taught from remote ages by a succession
of Masters whose blessed feet have walked and sanctified the soil of
India, and whose gracious presence and inspiration have made her,
through all her vicissitudes, the Light of the World.

To the inspiration of such a Master, Shri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa Deva,
and to your self-sacrificing zeal, Western nations owe the priceless
boon of being placed in living contact with the spiritual genius of
India, while to many of our own countrymen, delivered from the glamour
of Western civilisation, the value of Our glorious heritage has been
brought home.

By your noble work and example you have laid humanity under an
obligation difficult to repay, and you have shed fresh lustre upon our
Motherland. We pray that the grace of God may continue to prosper you
and your work, and

We remain, Revered Sir,  
Yours faithfully,  
for and on behalf of the Hindus of Colombo,  
P. COOMARA SWAMY,  
*Member of the Legislative Council of Ceylon,*  
*Chairman of the Meeting.*  
A. KULAVEERASINGHAM, *Secretary*.

*Colombo, January, 1897*.

The Swami gave a brief reply, expressing his appreciation of the kind
welcome he had received. He took advantage of the opportunity to point
out that the demonstration had not been made in honour of a great
politician, or a great soldier, or a millionaire, but of a begging
Sannyâsin, showing the tendency of the Hindu mind towards religion. He
urged the necessity of keeping religion as the backbone of the national
life if the nation were to live, and disclaimed any personal character
for the welcome he had received, but insisted upon its being the
recognition of a principle.

On the evening of the 16th the Swami gave the following public lecture
in the Floral Hall:

What little work has been done by me has not been from any inherent
power that resides in me, but from the cheers, the goodwill, the
blessings that have followed my path in the West from this our very
beloved, most sacred, dear Motherland. Some good has been done, no
doubt, in the West, but specially to myself; for what before was the
result of an emotional nature, perhaps, has gained the certainty of
conviction and attained the power and strength of demonstration.
Formerly I thought as every Hindu thinks, and as the Hon. President has
just pointed out to you, that this is the Punya Bhumi, the land of
Karma. Today I stand here and say, with the conviction of truth, that it
is so. If there is any land on this earth that can lay claim to be the
blessed Punya Bhumi, to be the land to which all souls on this earth
must come to account for Karma, the land to which every soul that is
wending its way Godward must come to attain its last home, the land
where humanity has attained its highest towards gentleness, towards
generosity, towards purity, towards calmness, above all, the land of
introspection and of spirituality — it is India. Hence have started the
founders of religions from the most ancient times, deluging the earth
again and again with the pure and perennial waters of spiritual truth.
Hence have proceeded the tidal waves of philosophy that have covered the
earth, East or West, North or South, and hence again must start the wave
which is going to spiritualise the material civilisation of the world.
Here is the life-giving water with which must be quenched the burning
fire of materialism which is burning the core of the hearts of millions
in other lands. Believe me, my friends, this is going to be.

So much I have seen, and so far those of you who are students of the
history of races are already aware of this fact. The debt which the
world owes to our Motherland is immense. Taking country with country,
there is not one race on this earth to which the world owes so much as
to the patient Hindu, the mild Hindu. "The mild Hindu" sometimes is used
as an expression of reproach; but if ever a reproach concealed a
wonderful truth, it is in the term, "the mild Hindu", who has always
been the blessed child of God. Civilisations have arisen in other parts
of the world. In ancient times and in modern times, great ideas have
emanated from strong and great races. In ancient and in modern times,
wonderful ideas have been carried forward from one race to another. In
ancient and in modern times, seeds of great truth and power have been
cast abroad by the advancing tides of national life; but mark you, my
friends, it has been always with the blast of war trumpets and with the
march of embattled cohorts. Each idea had to be soaked in a deluge of
blood. Each idea had to wade through the blood of millions of our
fellow-beings. Each word of power had to be followed by the groans of
millions, by the wails of orphans, by the tears of widows. This, in the
main, other nations have taught; but India has for thousands of years
peacefully existed. Here activity prevailed when even Greece did not
exist, when Rome was not thought of, when the very fathers of the modern
Europeans lived in the forests and painted themselves blue. Even
earlier, when history has no record, and tradition dares not peer into
the gloom of that intense past, even from then until now, ideas after
ideas have marched out from her, but every word has been spoken with a
blessing behind it and peace before it. We, of all nations of the world,
have never been a conquering race, and that blessing is on our head, and
therefore we live.

There was a time when at the sound of the march of big Greek battalions
the earth trembled. Vanished from off the face of the earth, with not
every a tale left behind to tell, gone is that ancient land of the
Greeks. There was a time when the Roman Eagle floated over everything
worth having in this world; everywhere Rome's power was felt and pressed
on the head of humanity; the earth trembled at the name of Rome. But the
Capitoline Hill is a mass of ruins, the spider weaves its web where the
Caesars ruled. There have been other nations equally glorious that have
come and gone, living a few hours of exultant and exuberant dominance
and of a wicked national life, and then vanishing like ripples on the
face of the waters. Thus have these nations made their mark on the face
of humanity. But we live, and if Manu came back today he would not be
bewildered, and would not find himself in a foreign land. The same laws
are here, laws adjusted and thought out through thousands and thousands
of years; customs, the outcome of the acumen of ages and the experience
of centuries, that seem to be eternal; and as the days go by, as blow
after blow of misfortune has been delivered upon them, such blows seem
to have served one purpose only, that of making them stronger and more
constant. And to find the centre of all this, the heart from which the
blood flows, the mainspring of the national life, believe me when I say
after my experience of the world, that it is here.

To the other nations of the world, religion is one among the many
occupations of life. There is politics, there are the enjoyments of
social life, there is all that wealth can buy or power can bring, there
is all that the senses can enjoy; and among all these various
occupations of life and all this searching after something which can
give yet a little more whetting to the cloyed senses — among all these,
there is perhaps a little bit of religion. But here, in India, religion
is the one and the only occupation of life. How many of you know that
there has been a Sino-Japanese War? Very few of you, if any. That there
are tremendous political movements and socialistic movements trying to
transform Western society, how many of you know? Very few indeed, if
any. But that there was a Parliament of Religions in America, and that
there was a Hindu Sannyâsin sent over there, I am astonished to find
that even the cooly knows of it. That shows the way the wind blows,
where the national life is. I used to read books written by
globe-trotting travellers, especially foreigners, who deplored the
ignorance of the Eastern masses, but I found out that it was partly true
and at the same time partly untrue. If you ask a ploughman in England,
or America, or France, or Germany to what party he belongs, he can tell
you whether he belongs to the Radicals or the Conservatives, and for
whom he is going to vote. In America he will say whether he is
Republican or Democrat, and he even knows something about the silver
question. But if you ask him about his religion, he will tell you that
he goes to church and belongs to a certain denomination. That is all he
knows, and he thinks it is sufficient.

Now, when we come to India, if you ask one of our ploughmen, "Do you
know anything about politics?" He will reply, "What is that?" He does
not understand the socialistic movements, the relation between capital
and labour, and all that; he has never heard of such things in his life,
he works hard and earns his bread. But you ask, "What is your religion?"
he replies, "Look here, my friend, I have marked it on my forehead." He
can give you a good hint or two on questions of religion. That has been
my experience. That is our nation's life.

Individuals have each their own peculiarities, and each man has his own
method of growth, his own life marked out for him by the infinite past
life, by all his past Karma as we Hindus say. Into this world he comes
with all the past on him, the infinite past ushers the present, and the
way in which we use the present is going to make the future. Thus
everyone born into this world has a bent, a direction towards which he
must go, through which he must live, and what is true of the individual
is equally true of the race. Each race, similarly, has a peculiar bent,
each race has a peculiar *raison d'être*, each race has a peculiar
mission to fulfil in the life of the world. Each race has to make its
own result, to fulfil its own mission. Political greatness or military
power is never the mission of our race; it never was, and, mark my
words, it never will be. But there has been the other mission given to
us, which is to conserve, to preserve, to accumulate, as it were, into a
dynamo, all the spiritual energy of the race, and that concentrated
energy is to pour forth in a deluge on the world whenever circumstances
are propitious. Let the Persian or the Greek, the Roman, the Arab, or
the Englishman march his battalions, conquer the world, and link the
different nations together, and the philosophy and spirituality of India
is ever ready to flow along the new-made channels into the veins of the
nations of the world. The Hindu's calm brain must pour out its own quota
to give to the sum total of human progress. India's gift to the world is
the light spiritual.

Thus, in the past, we read in history that whenever there arose a greet
conquering nation uniting the different races of the world, binding
India with the other races, taking her out, as it were, from her
loneliness and from her aloofness from the rest of the world into which
she again and again cast herself, that whenever such a state has been
brought about, the result has been the flooding of the world with Indian
spiritual ideas. At the beginning of this century, Schopenhauer, the
great German philosopher, studying from a not very clear translation of
the Vedas made from an old translation into Persian and thence by a
young Frenchman into Latin, says, "In the whole world there is no study
so beneficial and so elevating as that of the Upanishads. It has been
the solace of my life, it will be the solace of my death." This great
German sage foretold that "The world is about to see a revolution in
thought more extensive and more powerful than that which was witnessed
by the Renaissance of Greek Literature", and today his predictions are
coming to pass. Those who keep their eyes open, those who understand the
workings in the minds of different nations of the West, those who are
thinkers and study the different nations, will find the immense change
that has been produced in the tone, the procedure, in the methods, and
in the literature of the world by this slow, never-ceasing permeation of
Indian thought.

But there is another peculiarity, as I have already hinted to you. We
never preached our thoughts with fire and sword. If there is one word in
the English language to represent the gift of India to the world, if
there is one word in the English language to express the effect which
the literature of India produces upon mankind, it is this one word,
"fascination". It is the opposite of anything that takes you suddenly;
it throws on you, as it were, a charm imperceptibly. To many, Indian
thought, Indian manners; Indian customs, Indian philosophy, Indian
literature are repulsive at the first sight; but let them persevere, let
them read, let them become familiar with the great principles underlying
these ideas, and it is ninety-nine to one that the charm will come over
them, and fascination will be the result. Slow and silent, as the gentle
dew that falls in the morning, unseen and unheard yet producing a most
tremendous result, has been the work of the calm, patient, all-suffering
spiritual race upon the world of thought.

Once more history is going to repeat itself. For today, under the
blasting light of modern science, when old and apparently strong and
invulnerable beliefs have been shattered to their very foundations, when
special claims laid to the allegiance of mankind by different sects have
been all blown into atoms and have vanished into air, when the
sledge-hammer blows of modern antiquarian researches are pulverising
like masses of porcelain all sorts of antiquated orthodoxies, when
religion in the West is only in the hands of the ignorant and the
knowing ones look down with scorn upon anything belonging to religion,
here comes to the fore the philosophy of India, which displays the
highest religious aspirations of the Indian mind, where the grandest
philosophical facts have been the practical spirituality of the people.
This naturally is coming to the rescue, the idea of the oneness of all,
the Infinite, the idea of the Impersonal, the wonderful idea of the
eternal soul of man, of the unbroken continuity in the march of beings,
and the infinity of the universe. The old sects looked upon the world as
a little mud-puddle and thought that time began but the other day. It
was there in our old books, and only there that the grand idea of the
infinite range of time, space, and causation, and above all, the
infinite glory of the spirit of man governed all the search for
religion. When the modern tremendous theories of evolution and
conservation of energy and so forth are dealing death blows to all sorts
of crude theologies, what can hold any more the allegiance of cultured
humanity but the most wonderful, convincing, broadening, and ennobling
ideas that can be found only in that most marvellous product of the soul
of man, the wonderful voice of God, the Vedanta?

At the same time, I must remark that what I mean by our religion working
upon the nations outside of India comprises only the principles, the
background, the foundation upon which that religion is built. The
detailed workings, the minute points which have been worked out through
centuries of social necessity, little ratiocinations about manners and
customs and social well-being, do not rightly find a place in the
category of religion. We know that in our books a clear distinction is
made between two sets of truths. The one set is that which abides for
ever, being built upon the nature of man, the nature of the soul, the
soul's relation to God, the nature of God, perfection, and so on; there
are also the principles of cosmology, of the infinitude of creation, or
more correctly speaking — projection, the wonderful law of cyclical
procession, and so on — these are the eternal principles founded upon
the universal laws in nature. The other set comprises the minor laws
which guided the working of our everyday life They belong more properly
to the Purânas, to the Smritis, and not to the Shrutis. These have
nothing to do with the other principles. Even in our own nation these
minor laws have been changing all the time. Customs of one age, of one
Yuga, have not been the customs of another, and as Yuga comes after
Yuga, they will still have to change. Great Rishis will appear and lead
us to customs and manners that are suited to new environments.

The great principles underlying all this wonderful, infinite, ennobling,
expansive view of man and God and the world have been produced in India.
In India alone man has not stood up to fight for a little tribal God,
saying "My God is true and yours is not true; let us have a good fight
over it." It was only here that such ideas did not occur as fighting for
little gods. These great underlying principles, being based upon the
eternal nature of man, are as potent today for working for the good of
the human race as they were thousands of years ago, and they will remain
so, so long as this earth remains, so long as the law of Karma remains,
so long as we are born as individuals and have to work out our own
destiny by our individual power.

And above all, what India has to give to the world is this. If we watch
the growth and development of religions in different races, we shall
always find this that each tribe at the beginning has a god of its own.
If the tribes are allied to each other, these gods will have a generic
name, as for example, all the Babylonian gods had. When the Babylonians
were divided into many races, they had the generic name of Baal, just as
the Jewish races had different gods with the common name of Moloch; and
at the same time you will find that one of these tribes becomes superior
to the rest, and lays claim to its own king as the king over all.
Therefrom it naturally follows that it also wants to preserve its own
god as the god of all the races. Baal-Merodach, said the Babylonians,
was the greatest god; all the others were inferior. Moloch-Yahveh was
the superior over all other Molochs. And these questions had to be
decided by the fortunes of battle. The same struggle was here also. In
India the same competing gods had been struggling with each other for
supremacy, but the great good fortune of this country and of the world
was that there came out in the midst of the din and confusion a voice
which declared एकं सद्विप्रा बहुधा वदन्ति — "That which exists is One;
sages call It by various names." It is not that Shiva is superior to
Vishnu, not that Vishnu is everything and Shiva is nothing, but it is
the same one whom you call either Shiva, or Vishnu, or by a hundred
other names. The names are different, but it is the same one. The whole
history of India you may read in these few words. The whole history has
been a repetition in massive language, with tremendous power, of that
one central doctrine. It was repeated in the land till it had entered
into the blood of the nation, till it began to tingle with every drop of
blood that flowed in its veins, till it became one with the life, part
and parcel of the material of which it was composed; and thus the land
was transmuted into the most wonderful land of toleration, giving the
right to welcome the various religions as well as all sects into the old
mother-country.

And herein is the explanation of the most remarkable phenomenon that is
only witnessed here — all the various sects, apparently hopelessly
contradictory, yet living in such harmony. You may be a dualist, and I
may be a monist. You may believe that you are the eternal servant of
God, and I may declare that I am one with God Himself; yet both of us
are good Hindus. How is that possible? Read then एकं सद्विप्रा बहुधा
वदन्ति — "That which exists is One; sages call It by various names."
Above all others, my countrymen, this is the one grand truth that we
have to teach to the world. Even the most educated people of other
countries turn up their noses at an angle of forty-five degrees and call
our religion idolatry. I have seen that; and they never stopped to think
what a mass of superstition there was in their own heads. It is still so
everywhere, this tremendous sectarianism, the low narrowness of the
mind. The thing which a man has is the only thing worth having; the only
life worth living is his own little life of dollar-worship and
mammon-worship; the only little possession worth having is his own
property, and nothing else. If he can manufacture a little clay nonsense
or invent a machine, that is to be admired beyond the greatest
possessions. That is the case over the whole world in spite of education
and learning. But education has yet to be in the world, and civilisation
— civilisation has begun nowhere yet. Ninety-nine decimal nine per cent
of the human race are more or less savages even now. We may read of
these things in books, and we hear of toleration in religion and all
that, but very little of it is there yet in the world; take my
experience for that. Ninety-nine per cent do not even think of it. There
is tremendous religious persecution yet in every country in which I have
been, and the same old objections are raised against learning anything
new. The little toleration that is in the world, the little sympathy
that is yet in the world for religious thought, is practically here in
the land of the Aryan, and nowhere else. It is here that Indians build
temples for Mohammedans and Christians; nowhere else. If you go to other
countries and ask Mohammedans or people of other religions to build a
temple for you, see how they will help. They will instead try to break
down your temple and you too if they can. The one great lesson,
therefore, that the world wants most, that the world has yet to learn
from India, is the idea not only of toleration, but of sympathy. Well
has it been said in the *Mahimnah-stotra*: "As the different rivers,
taking their start from different mountains, running straight or
crooked, at last come unto the ocean, so, O Shiva, the different paths
which men take through different tendencies, various though they appear,
crooked or straight, all lead unto These." Though they may take various
roads, all are on the ways. Some may run a little crooked, others may
run straight, but at last they will all come unto the Lord, the One.
Then and then alone, is your Bhakti of Shiva complete when you not only
see Him in the Linga, but you see Him everywhere. He is the sage, he is
the lover of Hari who sees Hari in everything and in everyone. If you
are a real lover of Shiva, you must see Him in everything and in
everyone. You must see that every worship is given unto Him whatever may
be the name or the form; that all knees bending towards the Caaba, or
kneeling in a Christian church, or in a Buddhist temple are kneeling to
Him whether they know it or not, whether they are conscious of it or
not; that in whatever name or form they are offered, all these flowers
are laid at His feet; for He is the one Lord of all, the one Soul of all
souls. He knows infinitely better what this world wants than you or I.
It is impossible that all difference can cease; it must exist; without
variation life must cease. It is this clash, the differentiation of
thought that makes for light, for motion, for everything.
Differentiation, infinitely contradictory, must remain, but it is not
necessary that we should hate each other therefore; it is not necessary
therefore that we should fight each other.

Therefore we have again to learn the one central truth that was preached
only here in our Motherland, and that has to be preached once more from
India. Why? Because not only is it in our books, but it runs through
every phase of our national literature and is in the national life. Here
and here alone is it practiced every day, and any man whose eyes are
open can see that it is practiced here and here alone. Thus we have to
teach religion. There are other and higher lessons that India can teach,
but they are only for the learned. The lessons of mildness, gentleness,
forbearance, toleration, sympathy, and brotherhood, everyone may learn,
whether man, woman, or child, learned or unlearned, without respect of
race, caste, or creed. "They call Thee by various names; Thou art One."

</div>
