---
title: VEDANTISM

---
<div>

[←](first_public_lecture_in_the_east_%28colombo%29.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_pamban.htm)

  

## VEDANTISM

The following address of welcome from the Hindus of Jaffna was presented
to Swami Vivekananda:

SRIMAT VIVEKANANDA SWAMI

REVERED SIR,

We, the inhabitants of Jaffna professing the Hindu religion, desire to
offer you a most hearty welcome to our land, the chief centre of
Hinduism in Ceylon, and to express our thankfulness for your kind
acceptance of our invitation to visit this part of Lanka.

Our ancestors settled here from Southern India, more than two thousand
years ago, and brought with them their religion, which was patronised by
the Tamil kings of Jaffna; but when their government was displaced by
that of the Portuguese and the Dutch, the observance of religious rites
was interfered with, public religious worship was prohibited, and the
Sacred Temples, including two of the most far-famed Shrines, were razed
to the ground by the cruel hand of persecution. In spite of the
persistent attempts of these nations to force upon our forefathers the
Christian religion, they clung to their old faith firmly, and have
transmitted it to us as the noblest of our heritages Now under the rule
of Great Britain, not only has there been a great and intelligent
revival, but the sacred edifices have been, and are being, restored.

We take this opportunity to express our deep-felt gratitude for your
noble and disinterested labours in the cause of our religion in carrying
the light of truth, as revealed in the Vedas, to the Parliament of
Religions, in disseminating the truths of the Divine Philosophy of India
in America and England, and in making the Western world acquainted with
the truths of Hinduism and thereby bringing the West in closer touch
with the East. We also express our thankfulness to you for initiating a
movement for the revival of our ancient religion in this materialistic
age when there is a decadence of faith and a disregard for search after
spiritual truth.

We cannot adequately express our indebtedness to you for making the
people of the West know the catholicity of our religion and for
impressing upon the minds of the savants of the West the truth that
there are more things in the Philosophy of the Hindus than are dreamt of
in the Philosophy of the West.

We need hardly assure you that we have been carefully watching the
progress of your Mission in the West and always heartily rejoicing at
your devotedness and successful labours in the field of religion. The
appreciative references made by the press in the great centres of
intellectual activity, moral growth, and religious inquiry in the West,
to you and to your valuable contributions to our religious literature,
bear eloquent testimony to your noble and magnificent efforts.

We beg to express our heartfelt gratification at your visit to our land
and to hope that we, who, in common with you, look to the Vedas as the
foundation of all true spiritual knowledge, may have many more occasions
of seeing you in our midst.

May God, who has hitherto crowned your noble work with conspicuous
success, spare you long, giving you vigour and strength to continue your
noble Mission.

We remain, Revered Sir,

Yours faithfully,

. . .

for and on behalf of the HINDUS OF JAFFNA.

An eloquent reply was given, and on the following evening the Swami
lectured on *Vedantism*, a report of which is here appended:

The subject is very large and the time is short; a full analysis of the
religion of the Hindus is impossible in one lecture. I will, therefore,
present before you the salient points of our religion in as simple
language as I can. The word Hindu, by which it is the fashion nowadays
to style ourselves, has lost all its meaning, for this word merely meant
those who lived on the other side of the river Indus (in Sanskrit,
Sindhu). This name was murdered into Hindu by the ancient Persians, and
all people living on the other side of the river Sindhu were called by
them Hindus. Thus this word has come down to us; and during the
Mohammedan rule we took up the word ourselves. There may not be any harm
in using the word of course; but, as I have said, it has lost its
significance, for you may mark that all the people who live on this side
of the Indus in modern times do not follow the same religion as they did
in ancient times. The word, therefore, covers not only Hindus proper,
but Mohammedans, Christians, Jains, and other people who live in India.
I therefore, would not use the word Hindu. What word should we use then?
The other words which alone we can use are either the Vaidikas,
followers of the Vedas, or better still, the Vedantists, followers of
the Vedanta. Most of the great religions of the world owe allegiance to
certain books which they believe are the words of God or some other
supernatural beings, and which are the basis of their religion. Now of
all these books, according to the modern savants of the West, the oldest
are the Vedas of the Hindus. A little understanding, therefore, is
necessary about the Vedas.

This mass of writing called the Vedas is not the utterance of persons.
Its date has never been fixed, can never be fixed, and, according to us,
the Vedas are eternal. There is one salient point which I want you to
remember, that all the other religions of the world claim their
authority as being delivered by a Personal God or a number of personal
beings, angels, or special messengers of God, unto certain persons;
while the claim of the Hindus is that the Vedas do not owe their
authority to anybody, they are themselves the authority, being eternal —
the knowledge of God. They were never written, never created, they have
existed throughout time; just as creation is infinite and eternal,
without beginning and without end, so is the knowledge of God without
beginning and without end. And this knowledge is what is meant by the
Vedas (*Vid* to know). The mass of knowledge called the Vedanta was
discovered by personages called Rishis, and the Rishi is defined as a
Mantra-drashtâ, a seer of thought; not that the thought was his own.
Whenever you hear that a certain passage of the Vedas came from a
certain Rishi never think that he wrote it or created it out of his
mind; he was the seer of the thought which already existed; it existed
in the universe eternally. This sage was the discoverer; the Rishis were
spiritual discoverers.

This mass of writing, the Vedas, is divided principally into two parts,
the Karma Kânda and the Jnâna Kânda — the work portion and the knowledge
portion, the ceremonial and the spiritual. The work portion consists of
various sacrifices; most of them of late have been given up as not
practicable under present circumstances, but others remain to the
present day in some shape or other. The main ideas of the Karma Kanda,
which consists of the duties of man, the duties of the student, of the
householder, of the recluse, and the various duties of the different
stations of life, are followed more or less down to the present day. But
the spiritual portion of our religion is in the second part, the Jnana
Kanda, the Vedanta, the end of the Vedas, the gist, the goal of the
Vedas. The essence of the knowledge of the Vedas was called by the name
of Vedanta, which comprises the Upanishads; and all the sects of India —
Dualists, Qualified-Monists, Monists, or the Shaivites, Vaishnavites,
Shâktas, Sauras, Gânapatyas, each one that dares to come within the fold
of Hinduism — must acknowledge the Upanishads of the Vedas. They can
have their own interpretations and can interpret them in their own way,
but they must obey the authority. That is why we want to use the word
Vedantist instead of Hindu. All the philosophers of India who are
orthodox have to acknowledge the authority of the Vedanta; and all our
present-day religions, however crude some of them may appear to be,
however inexplicable some of their purposes may seem, one who
understands them and studies them can trace them back to the ideas of
the Upanishads. So deeply have these Upanishads sunk into our race that
those of you who study the symbology of the crudest religion of the
Hindus will be astonished to find sometimes figurative expressions of
the Upanishads — the Upanishads become symbolised after a time into
figures and so forth. Great spiritual and philosophical ideas in the
Upanishads are today with us, converted into household worship in the
form of symbols. Thus the various symbols now used by us, all come from
the Vedanta, because in the Vedanta they are used as figures, and these
ideas spread among the nation and permeated it throughout until they
became part of their everyday life as symbols.

Next to the Vedanta come the Smritis. These also are books written by
sages, but the authority of the Smritis is subordinate to that of the
Vedanta, because they stand in the same relation with us as the
scriptures of the other religions stand with regard to them. We admit
that the Smritis have been written by particular sages; in that sense
they are the same as the scriptures of other religions, but these
Smritis are not final authority. If there is any thing in a Smriti which
contradicts the Vedanta, the Smriti is to be rejected — its authority is
gone. These Smritis, we see again, have varied from time to time. We
read that such and such Smriti should have authority in the Satya Yuga,
such and such in the Tretâ Yuga, some in the Dwâpara Yuga, and some in
the Kali Yuga, and so on. As essential conditions changed, as various
circumstances came to have their influence on the race, manners and
customs had to be changed, and these Smritis, as mainly regulating the
manners and customs of the nation, had also to be changed from time to
time. This is a point I specially ask you to remember. The principles of
religion that are in the Vedanta are unchangeable. Why? Because they are
all built upon the eternal principles that are in man and nature; they
can never change. Ideas about the soul, going to heaven, and so on can
never change; they were the same thousands of years ago, they are the
same today, they will be the same millions of years hence. But those
religious practices which are based entirely upon our social position
and correlation must change with the changes in society. Such an order,
therefore, would be good and true at a certain period and not at
another. We find accordingly that a certain food is allowed at one time
and not another, because the food was suitable for that time; but
climate and other things changed various other circumstances required to
be met, so the Smriti changed the food and other things. Thus it
naturally follows that if in modern times our society requires changes
to be made, they must be met, and sages will come and show us the way
how to meet them; but not one jot of the principles of our religion will
be changed; they will remain intact.

Then there are the Purânas. पुराणं पञ्चलक्षणम् — which means, the
Puranas are of five characteristics — that which treats of history, of
cosmology, with various symbological illustration of philosophical
principles, and so forth. These were written to popularise the religion
of the Vedas. The language in which the Vedas are written is very
ancient, and even among scholars very few can trace the date of these
books. The Puranas were written in the language of the people of that
time, what we call modern Sanskrit. They were then meant not for
scholars, but for the ordinary people; and ordinary people cannot
understand philosophy. Such things were given unto them in concrete
form, by means of the lives of saints and kinds and great men and
historical events that happened to the race etc. The sages made use of
these things to illustrate the eternal principles of religion.

There are still other books, the Tantras. These are very much like
Puranas in some respects, and in some of them there is an attempt to
revive the old sacrificial ideas of the Karma Kanda.

All these books constitute the scriptures of the Hindus. When there is
such a mass of sacred books in a nation and a race which has devoted the
greatest part of its energies to the thought of philosophy and
spirituality (nobody knows for how many thousands of years), it is quite
natural that there should be so many sects; indeed it is a wonder that
there are not thousands more. These sects differ very much from each
other in certain points. We shall not have time to understand the
differences between these sects and all the spiritual details about
them; therefore I shall take up the common grounds, the essential
principles of all these sects which every Hindu must believe.

The first is the question of creation, that this nature, Prakriti, Mâyâ
is infinite, without beginning. It is not that this world was created
the other day, not that a God came and created the world and since that
time has been sleeping; for that cannot be. The creative energy is still
going on. God is eternally creating — is never at rest. Remember the
passage in the Gita where Krishna says, "If I remain at rest for one
moment, this universe will be destroyed." If that creative energy which
is working all around us, day and night, stops for a second, the whole
thing falls to the ground. There never was a time when that energy did
not work throughout the universe, but there is the law of cycles,
Pralaya. Our Sanskrit word for creation, properly translated, should be
*projection* and *not creation*. For the word creation in the English
language has unhappily got that fearful, that most crude idea of
something coming out of nothing, creation out of nonentity,
non-existence becoming existence, which, of course, I would not insult
you by asking you to believe. Our word, therefore, is projection. The
whole of this nature exists, it becomes finer, subsides; and then after
a period of rest, as it were, the whole thing is again projected
forward, and the same combination, the same evolution, the same
manifestations appear and remain playing, as it were, for a certain
time, only again to break into pieces, to become finer and finer, until
the whole thing subsides, and again comes out. Thus it goes on backwards
and forwards with a wave-like motion throughout eternity. Time, space,
and causation are all within this nature. To say, therefore, that it had
a beginning is utter nonsense. No question can occur as to its beginning
or its end. Therefore wherever in our scriptures the words beginning and
end are used, you must remember that it means the beginning and the end
of one particular cycle; no more than that.

What makes this creation? God. What do I mean by the use of the English
word God? Certainly not the word as ordinarily used in English — a good
deal of difference. There is no other suitable word in English. I would
rather confine myself to the Sanskrit word Brahman. He is the general
cause of all these manifestations. What is this Brahman? He is eternal,
eternally pure, eternally awake, the almighty, the all-knowing, the
all-merciful, the omnipresent, the formless, the partless. He creates
this universe. If he is always creating and holding up this universe,
two difficulties arise. We see that there is partiality in the universe.
One person is born happy, and another unhappy; one is rich, and another
poor; this shows partiality. Then there is cruelty also, for here the
very condition of life is death. One animal tears another to pieces, and
every man tries to get the better of his own brother. This competition,
cruelty, horror, and sighs rending hearts day and night is the state of
things in this world of ours. If this be the creation of a God, that God
is worse than cruel, worse than any devil that man ever imagined. Ay!
says the Vedanta, it is not the fault of God that this partiality
exists, that this competition exists. Who makes it? We ourselves. There
is a cloud shedding its rain on all fields alike. But it is only the
field that is well cultivated, which gets the advantage of the shower;
another field, which has not been tilled or taken care of cannot get
that advantage. It is not the fault of the cloud. The mercy of God is
eternal and unchangeable; it is we that make the differentiation. But
how can this difference of some being born happy and some unhappy be
explained? They do nothing to make out that differences! Not in this
life, but they did in their last birth and the difference is explained
by this action in the previous life.

We now come to the second principle on which we all agree, not only all
Hindus, but all Buddhists and all Jains. We all agree that life is
eternal. It is not that it has sprung out of nothing, for that cannot
be. Such a life would not be worth having. Everything that has a
beginning in time must end in time. Of life began but yesterday, it must
end tomorrow, and annihilation is the result. Life must have been
existing. It does not now require much acumen to see that, for all the
sciences of modern times have been coming round to our help,
illustrating from the material world the principles embodied in our
scriptures. You know it already that each one of us is the effect of the
infinite past; the child is ushered into the world not as something
flashing from the hands of nature, as poets delight so much to depict,
but he has the burden of an infinite past; for good or evil he comes to
work out his own past deeds. That makes the differentiation. This is the
law of Karma. Each one of us is the maker of his own fate. This law
knocks on the head at once all doctrines of predestination and fate and
gives us the only means of reconciliation between God and man. We, we,
and none else, are responsible for what we suffer. We are the effects,
and we are the causes. We are free therefore. If I am unhappy, it has
been of my own making, and that very thing shows that I can be happy if
I will. If I am impure, that is also of my own making, and that very
thing shows that I can be pure if I will. The human will stands beyond
all circumstance. Before it — the strong, gigantic, infinite will and
freedom in man — all the powers, even of nature, must bow down, succumb,
and become its servants. This is the result of the law of Karma.

The next question, of course, naturally would be: What is the soul? We
cannot understand God in our scriptures without knowing the soul. There
have been attempts in India, and outside of India too, to catch a
glimpse of the beyond by studying external nature, and we all know what
an awful failure has been the result. Instead of giving us a glimpse of
the beyond, the more we study the material world, the more we tend to
become materialised. The more we handle the material world, even the
little spirituality which we possessed before vanishes. Therefore that
is not the way to spirituality, to knowledge of the Highest; but it must
come through the heart, the human soul. The external workings do not
teach us anything about the beyond, about the Infinite, it is only the
internal that can do so. Through soul, therefore, the analysis of the
human soul alone, can we understand God. There are differences of
opinion as to the nature of the human soul among the various sects in
India, but there are certain points of agreement. We all agree that
souls are without beginning and without end, and immortal by their very
nature; also that all powers, blessing, purity, omnipresence,
omniscience are buried in each soul. That is a grand idea we ought to
remember. In every man and in every animal, however weak or wicked,
great or small, resides the same omnipresent, omniscient soul. The
difference is not in the soul, but in the manifestation. Between me and
the smallest animal, the difference is only in manifestation, but as a
principle he is the same as I am, he is my brother, he has the same soul
as I have. This is the greatest principle that India has preached. The
talk of the brotherhood of man becomes in India the brotherhood of
universal life, of animals, and of all life down to the little ants —
all these are our bodies. Even as our scripture says, "Thus the sage,
knowing that the same Lord inhabits all bodies, will worship every body
as such." That is why in India there have been such merciful ideas about
the poor, about animals, about everybody, and everything else. This is
one of the common grounds about our ideas of the soul.

Naturally, we come to the idea of God. One thing more about the soul.
Those who study the English language are often deluded by the words,
soul and mind. Our Âtman and soul are entirely different things. What we
call Manas, the mind, the Western people call soul. The West never had
the idea of soul until they got it through Sanskrit philosophy, some
twenty years ago. The body is here, beyond that is the mind, yet the
mind is not the Atman; it is the fine body, the Sukshma Sharira, made of
fine particles, which goes from birth to death, and so on; but behind
the mind is the Atman, the soul, the Self of man. It cannot be
translated by the word soul or mind, so we have to use the word Atman,
or, as Western philosophers have designated it, by the word Self.
Whatever word you use, you must keep it clear in your mind that the
Atman is separate from the mind, as well as from the body, and that this
Atman goes through birth and death, accompanied by the mind, the Sukshma
Sharira. And when the time comes that it has attained to all knowledge
and manifested itself to perfection, then this going from birth to death
ceases for it. Then it is at liberty either to keep that mind, the
Sukshma Sharira, or to let it go for ever, and remain independent and
free throughout all eternity. The goal of the soul is freedom. That is
one peculiarity of our religion. We also have heavens and hells too; but
these are not infinite, for in the very nature of things they cannot be.
If there were any heavens, they would be only repetitions of this world
of ours on a bigger scale, with a little more happiness and a little
more enjoyment, but that is all the worse for the soul. There are many
of these heavens. Persons who do good works here with the thought of
reward, when they die, are born again as gods in one of these heavens,
as Indra and others. These gods are the names of certain states. They
also had been men, and by good work they have become gods; and those
different names that you read of, such as Indra and so on, are not the
names of the same person. There will be thousands of Indras. Nahusha was
a great king, and when he died, he became Indra. It is a position; one
soul becomes high and takes the Indra position and remains in it only a
certain time; he then dies and is born again as man. But the human body
is the highest of all. Some of the gods may try to go higher and give up
all ideas of enjoyment in heavens; but, as in this world, wealth and
position and enjoyment delude the vast majority, so do most of the gods
become deluded also, and after working out their good Karma, they fall
down and become human beings again. This earth, therefore, is the Karma
Bhumi; it is this earth from which we attain to liberation. So even
these heavens are not worth attaining to.

What is then worth having? Mukti, freedom. Even in the highest of
heavens, says our scripture, you are a slave; what matters it if you are
a king for twenty thousand years? So long as you have a body, so long as
you are a slave to happiness, so long as time works on you, space works
on you, you are a slave. The idea, therefore, is to be free of external
and internal nature. Nature must fall at your feet, and you must trample
on it and be free and glorious by going beyond. No more is there life;
therefore more is there death. No more enjoyment; therefore no more
misery. It is bliss unspeakable, in destructible, beyond everything.
What we call happiness and good here are but particles of that eternal
Bliss. And this eternal Bliss is our goal.

The soul is also sexless; we cannot say of the Atman that it is a man or
a woman. Sex belongs to the body alone. All such ideas, therefore, as
man or woman, are a delusion when spoken with regard to the Self, and
are only proper when spoken of the body. So are the ideas of age. It
never ages; the ancient One is always the same. How did It come down to
earth? There is but one answer to that in our scriptures. Ignorance is
the cause of all this bondage. It is through ignorance that we have
become bound; knowledge will cure it by taking us to the other side. How
will that knowledge come? Through love, Bhakti; by the worship of God,
by loving all beings as the temples of God. He resides within them.
Thus, with that intense love will come knowledge, and ignorance will
disappear, the bonds will break, and the soul will be free.

There are two ideas of God in our scriptures — the one, the personal;
and the other, the impersonal. The idea of the Personal God is that He
is the omnipresent creator, preserver, and destroyer of everything, the
eternal Father and Mother of the universe, but One who is eternally
separate from us and from all souls; and liberation consists in coming
near to Him and living in Him. Then there is the other idea of the
Impersonal, where all those adjectives are taken away as superfluous, as
illogical and there remains an impersonal, omnipresent Being who cannot
be called a knowing being, because knowledge only belongs to the human
mind. He cannot be called a thinking being, because that is a process of
the weak only. He cannot be called a reasoning being, because reasoning
is a sign of weakness. He cannot be called a creating being, because
none creates except in bondage. What bondage has He? None works except
for the fulfilment of desires; what desires has He? None works except it
be to supply some wants; what wants has He? In the Vedas it is not the
word "He" that is used, but "It", for "He" would make an invidious
distinction, as if God were a man. "It", the impersonal, is used, and
this impersonal "It" is preached. This system is called the Advaita.

And what are our relations with this Impersonal Being? — that we are He.
We and He are one. Every one is but a manifestation of that Impersonal,
the basis of all being, and misery consists in thinking of ourselves as
different from this Infinite, Impersonal Being; and liberation consists
in knowing our unity with this wonderful Impersonality. These, in short,
are the two ideas of God that we find in our scriptures.

Some remarks ought to be made here. It is only through the idea of the
Impersonal God that you can have any system of ethics. In every nation
the truth has been preached from the most ancient times — love your
fellow-beings as yourselves — I mean, love human beings as yourselves.
In India it has been preached, "love all beings as yourselves"; we make
no distinction between men and animals. But no reason was forthcoming,
no one knew why it would be good to love other beings as ourselves. And
the reason, why, is there in the idea of the Impersonal God; you
understand it when you learn that the whole world is one — the oneness
of the universe — the solidarity of all life — that in hurting any one I
am hurting myself, in loving any one I am loving myself. Hence we
understand why it is that we ought not to hurt others. The reason for
ethics, therefore, can only be had from this ideal of the Impersonal
God. Then there is the question of the position of the Personal God in
it. I understand the wonderful flow of love that comes from the idea of
a Personal God, I thoroughly appreciate the power and potency of Bhakti
on men to suit the needs of different times. What we now want in our
country, however, is not so much of weeping, but a little strength. What
a mine of strength is in this Impersonal God, when all superstitions
have been thrown overboard, and man stands on his feet with the
knowledge — I am the Impersonal Being of the world! What can make me
afraid? I care not even for nature's laws. Death is a joke to me. Man
stands on the glory of his own soul, the infinite, the eternal, the
deathless — that soul which no instruments can pierce, which no air can
dry, nor fire burn, no water melt, the infinite, the birthless, the
deathless, without beginning and without end, before whose magnitude the
suns and moons and all their systems appear like drops in the ocean,
before whose glory space melts away into nothingness and time vanishes
into non-existence. This glorious soul we must believe in. Out of that
will come power. Whatever you think, that you will be. If you think
yourselves weak, weak you will be; if you think yourselves strong,
strong you will be; if you think yourselves impure, impure you will be;
if you think yourselves pure, pure you will be. This teaches us not to
think ourselves as weak, but as strong, omnipotent, omniscient. No
matter that I have not expressed it yet, it is in me. All knowledge is
in me, all power, all purity, and all freedom. Why cannot I express this
knowledge? Because I do not believe in it. Let me believe in it, and it
must and will come out. This is what the idea of the Impersonal teaches.
Make your children strong from their very childhood; teach them not
weakness, nor forms, but make them strong; let them stand on their feet
— bold, all-conquering, all-suffering; and first of all, let them learn
of the glory of the soul. That you get alone in the Vedanta — and there
alone. It has ideas of love and worship and other things which we have
in other religions, and more besides; but this idea of the soul is the
life-giving thought, the most wonderful. There and there alone is the
great thought that is going to revolutionist the world and reconcile the
knowledge of the material world with religion.

Thus I have tried to bring before you the salient points of our religion
— the principles. I have only to say a few words about the practice and
the application As we have seen, under the circumstances existing in
India, naturally many sects must appear. As a fact, we find that there
are so many sects in India, and at the same time we know this mysterious
fact that these sects do not quarrel with each other. The Shaivite does
not say that every Vaishnavite is going to be damned, nor the
Vaishnavite that every Shaivite will be damned. The Shaivite says, this
is my path, and you have yours; at the end we must come together. They
all know that in India. This is the theory of Ishta. It has been
recognised in the most ancient times that there are various forms of
worshipping God. It is also recognised that different natures require
different methods. Your method of coming to God may not be my method,
possibly it might hurt me. Such an idea as that there is but one way for
everybody is injurious, meaningless, and entirely to be avoided. Woe
unto the world when everyone is of the same religious opinion and takes
to the same path. Then all religions and all thought will be destroyed.
Variety is the very soul of life. When it dies out entirely, creation
will die. When this variation in thought is kept up, we must exist; and
we need not quarrel because of that variety. Your way is very good for
you, but not for me. My way is good for me, but not for you My way is
called in Sanskrit, my "Ishta". Mind you, we have no quarrel with any
religion in the world. We have each our Ishta. But when we see men
coming and saying, "This is the only way", and trying to force it on us
in India, we have a word to say; we laugh at them. For such people who
want to destroy their brothers because they seem to follow a different
path towards God — for them to talk of love is absurd. Their love does
not count for much. How can they preach of love who cannot bean another
man to follow a different path from their own? If that is love, what is
hatred? We have no quarrel with any religion in the world, whether it
teaches men to worship Christ, Buddha, or Mohammed, or any other
prophet. "Welcome, my brother," the Hindu says, "I am going to help you;
but you must allow me to follow my way too. That is my Ishta. Your way
is very good, no doubt; but it may be dangerous for me. My own
experience tells me what food is good for me, and no army of doctors can
tell me that. So I know from my own experience what path is the best for
me." That is the goal, the Ishta, and, therefore, we say that if a
temple, or a symbol, or an image helps you to realise the Divinity
within, you are welcome to it. Have two hundred images if you like. If
certain forms and formularies help you to realise the Divine, God speed
you; have, by all means, whatever forms, and whatever temples, and
whatever ceremonies you want to bring you nearer to God. But do not
quarrel about them; the moment you quarrel, you are not going Godward,
you are going backward, towards the brutes.

These are a few ideas in our religion. It is one of inclusion of every
one, exclusion of none. Though our castes and our institutions are
apparently linked with our religion, they are not so. These institutions
have been necessary to protect us as a nation, and when this necessity
for self-preservation will no more exist, they will die a natural death.
But the older I grow, the better I seem to think of these time-honoured
institutions of India. There was a time when I used to think that many
of them were useless and worthless; but the older I grew, the more I
seem to feel a diffidence in cursing any one of them, for each one of
them is the embodiment of the experience of centuries. A child of but
yesterday, destined to die the day after tomorrow, comes to me and asks
me to change all my plans; and if I hear the advice of that baby and
change all my surroundings according to his ideas, I myself should be a
fool, and no one else. Much of the advice that is coming to us from
different countries is similar to this. Tell these wiseacres: "I will
hear you when you have made a stable society yourselves. You cannot hold
on to one idea for two days, you quarrel and fail; you are born like
moths in the spring and die like them in five minutes. You come up like
bubbles and burst like bubbles too. First form a stable society like
ours. First make laws and institutions that remain undiminished in their
power through scores of centuries. Then will be the time to talk on the
subject with you, but till then, my friend, you are only a giddy child."

I have finished what I had to say about our religion. I will end by
reminding you of the one pressing necessity of the day. Praise be to
Vyâsa, the great author of the Mahâbhârata, that in this Kali Yuga there
is one great work. The Tapas and the other hard Yogas that were
practiced in other Yugas do not work now. What is needed in this Yuga is
giving, helping others. What is meant by Dana? The highest of gifts is
the giving of spiritual knowledge, the next is the giving of secular
knowledge, and the next is the saving of life, the last is giving food
and drink. He who gives spiritual knowledge, saves the soul from many
end many a birth. He who gives secular knowledge opens the eyes of human
beings towards spiritual knowledge, and far below these rank all other
gifts, even the saving of life. Therefore it is necessary that you learn
this and note that all other kinds of work are of much less value than
that of imparting spiritual knowledge. The highest and greatest help is
that given in the dissemination of spiritual knowledge. There is an
eternal fountain of spirituality in our scriptures, and nowhere on
earth, except in this land of renunciation, do we find such noble
examples of practical spirituality. I have had a little experience of
the world. Believe me, there is much talking in other lands; but the
practical man of religion, who has carried it into his life, is here and
here alone. Talking is not religion; parrots may talk, machines may talk
nowadays. But show me the life of renunciation, of spirituality, of
all-suffering, of love infinite. This kind of life indicates a spiritual
man. With such ideas and such noble practical examples in our country,
it would be a great pity if the treasures in the brains and hearts of
all these great Yogis were not brought out to become the common property
of every one, rich and poor, high and low; not only in India, but they
must be thrown broadcast all over the world. This is one of our greatest
duties, and you will find that the more you work to help others, the
more you help yourselves. The one vital duty incumbent on you, if you
really love your religion, if you really love your country, is that you
must struggle hard to be up and doing, with this one great idea of
bringing out the treasures from your closed books and delivering them
over to their rightful heirs.

And above all, one thing is necessary. Ay, for ages we have been
saturated with awful jealousy; we are always getting jealous of each
other. Why has this man a little precedence, and not I? Even in the
worship of God we want precedence, to such a state of slavery have we
come. This is to be avoided. If there is any crying sin in India at this
time it is this slavery. Every one wants to command, and no one wants to
obey; and this is owing to the absence of that wonderful Brahmacharya
system of yore. First, learn to obey. The command will come by itself.
Always first learn to be a servant, and then you will be fit to be a
master. Avoid this jealousy and you will do great works that have yet to
be done. Our ancestors did most wonderful works, and we look back upon
their work with veneration and pride. But we also are going to do great
deeds, and let others look back with blessings and pride upon us as
their ancestors. With the blessing of the Lord every one here will yet
do such deeds that will eclipse those of our ancestors, great and
glorious as they may have been.

</div>
