---
title: ADDRESS AT THE RAMESWARAM TEMPLE ON REAL WORSHIP

---
<div>

[←](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_pamban.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_ramnad.htm)

  

## ADDRESS AT THE RAMESWARAM TEMPLE ON REAL WORSHIP

A visit was subsequently paid to the Rameswaram Temple, where the Swami
was asked to address a few words to the people who had assembled there.
This he did in the following terms:

It is in love that religion exists and not in ceremony, in the pure and
sincere love in the heart. Unless a man is pure in body and mind, his
coming into a temple and worshipping Shiva is useless. The prayers of
those that are pure in mind and body will be answered by Shiva, and
those that are impure and yet try to teach religion to others will fail
in the end. External worship is only a symbol of internal worship; but
internal worship and purity are the real things. Without them, external
worship would be of no avail. Therefore you must all try to remember
this.

People have become so degraded in this Kali Yuga that they think they
can do anything, and then they can go to a holy place, and their sins
will be forgiven. If a man goes with an impure mind into a temple, he
adds to the sins that he had already, and goes home a worse man than
when he left it. Tirtha (place of pilgrimage) is a place which is full
of holy things and holy men. But if holy people live in a certain place,
and if there is no temple there, even that is a Tirtha. If unholy people
live in a place where there may be a hundred temples, the Tirtha has
vanished from that place. And it is most difficult to live in a Tirtha;
for if sin is committed in any ordinary place it can easily be removed,
but sin committed in a Tirtha cannot be removed. This is the gist of all
worship — to be pure and to do good to others. He who sees Shiva in the
poor, in the weak, and in the diseased, really worships Shiva; and if he
sees Shiva only in the image, his worship is but preliminary. He who has
served and helped one poor man seeing Shiva in him, without thinking of
his caste, or creed, or race, or anything, with him Shiva is more
pleased than with the man who sees Him only in temples.

A rich man had a garden and two gardeners. One of these gardeners was
very lazy and did not work; but when the owner came to the garden, the
lazy man would get up and fold his arms and say, "How beautiful is the
face of my master", and dance before him. The other gardener would not
talk much, but would work hard, and produce all sorts of fruits and
vegetables which he would carry on his head to his master who lived a
long way off. Of these two gardeners, which would be the more beloved of
his master? Shiva is that master, and this world is His garden, and
there are two sorts of gardeners here; the one who is lazy,
hypocritical, and does nothing, only talking about Shiva's beautiful
eyes and nose and other features; and the other, who is taking care of
Shiva's children, all those that are poor and weak, all animals, and all
His creation. Which of these would be the more beloved of Shiva?
Certainly he that serves His children. He who wants to serve the father
must serve the children first. He who wants to serve Shiva must serve
His children — must serve all creatures in this world first. It is said
in the Shâstra that those who serve the servants of God are His greatest
servants. So you will bear this in mind.

Let me tell you again that you must be pure and help any one who comes
to you, as much as lies in your power. And this is good Karma. By the
power of this, the heart becomes pure (Chitta-shuddhi), and then Shiva
who is residing in every one will become manifest. He is always in the
heart of every one. If there is dirt and dust on a mirror, we cannot see
our image. So ignorance and wickedness are the dirt and dust that are on
the mirror of our hearts. Selfishness is the chief sin, thinking of
ourselves first. He who thinks, "I will eat first, I will have more
money than others, and I will possess everything", he who thinks, "I
will get to heaven before others I will get Mukti before others" is the
selfish man. The unselfish man says, "I will be last, I do not care to
go to heaven, I will even go to hell if by doing so I can help my
brothers." This unselfishness is the test of religion. He who has more
of this unselfishness is more spiritual and nearer to Shiva. Whether he
is learned or ignorant, he is nearer to Shiva than anybody else, whether
he knows it or not. And if a man is selfish, even though he has visited
all the temples, seen all the places of pilgrimage, and painted himself
like a leopard, he is still further off from Shiva.

</div>
