---
title: REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT RAMNAD

---
<div>

[←](address_at_the_rameshwaram_temple_on_real_worship.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_paramakudi.htm)

  

## REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT RAMNAD

At Ramnad the following address was presented to Swami Vivekananda by
the Raja:

His Most Holiness,

Sri Paramahamsa, Yati-Râja, Digvijaya-Kolâhala, Sarvamata-Sampratipanna,
Parama-Yogeeswara, Srimat Bhagavân Sree Ramakrishna Paramahamsa
Karakamala Sanjâta, Râjâdhirâja-Sevita, SREE VIVEKANANDA SWAMI, MAY IT
PLEASE YOUR HOLINESS,

We, the inhabitants of this ancient and historic Samsthânam of Sethu
Bandha Rameswaram, otherwise known as Râmanâthapuram or Ramnad, beg,
most cordially, to welcome you to this, our motherland. We deem it a
very rare privilege to be the first to pay your Holiness our heartfelt
homage on your landing in India, and that, on the shores sanctified by
the footsteps of that great Hero and our revered Lord — Sree Bhagavân
Râmachandra.

We have watched with feelings of genuine pride and pleasure the
unprecedented success which has crowned your laudable efforts in
bringing home to the master-minds of the West the intrinsic merits and
excellence of our time-honoured and noble religion. You have with an
eloquence that is unsurpassed and in language plain and unmistakable,
proclaimed to and convinced the cultured audiences in Europe and America
that Hinduism fulfils all the requirements of the ideal of a universal
religion and adapts itself to the temperament and needs of men and women
of all races and creeds. Animated purely by a disinterested impulse,
influenced by the best of motives and at considerable self-sacrifice,
Your Holiness has crossed boundless seas and oceans to convey the
message of truth and peace, and to plant the flag of India's spiritual
triumph and glory in the rich soil of Europe and America. Your Holiness
has, both by precept and practice, shown the feasibility and importance
of universal brotherhood. Above all, your labours in the West have
indirectly and to a great extent tended to awaken the apathetic sons and
daughters of India to a sense of the greatness and glory of their
ancestral faith, and to create in them a genuine interest in the study
and observance of their dear and priceless religion

We feel we cannot adequately convey in words our feelings of gratitude
and thankfulness to your Holiness for your philanthropic labours towards
the spiritual regeneration of the East and the West. We cannot close
this address without referring to the great kindness which your Holiness
has always extended to our Raja, who is one of your devoted disciples,
and the honour and pride he feels by this gracious act of your Holiness
in landing first on his territory is indescribable.

In conclusion, we pray to the Almighty to bless your Holiness with long
life, and health, and strength to enable you to carry on the good work
that has been so ably inaugurated by you.

With respects and love,

We beg to subscribe ourselves,

Your Holiness' most devoted and obedient

DISCIPLES and SERVANTS.

RAMNAD,

*25th January*, *1897*.

The Swami's reply follows in extenso:

  
The longest night seems to be passing away, the sorest trouble seems to
be coming to an end at last, the seeming corpse appears to be awaking
and a voice is coming to us — away back where history and even tradition
fails to peep into the gloom of the past, coming down from there,
reflected as it were from peak to peak of the infinite Himalaya of
knowledge, and of love, and of work, India, this motherland of ours — a
voice is coming unto us, gentle, firm, and yet unmistakable in its
utterances, and is gaining volume as days pass by, and behold, the
sleeper is awakening! Like a breeze from the Himalayas, it is bringing
life into the almost dead bones and muscles, the lethargy is passing
away, and only the blind cannot see, or the perverted will not see, that
she is awakening, this motherland of ours, from her deep long sleep.
None can desist her any more; never is she going to sleep any more; no
outward powers can hold her back any more; for the infinite giant is
rising to her feet.

Your Highness and gentlemen of Ramnad, accept my heartfelt thanks for
the cordiality and kindness with which you have received me. I feel that
you are cordial and kind, for heart speaks unto heart better than any
language of the mouth; spirit speaks unto spirit in silence, and yet in
most unmistakable language, and I feel it in my heart of hearts. Your
Highness of Ramnad, if there has been any work done by my humble self in
the cause of our religion and our motherland in the Western countries,
if any little work has been done in rousing the sympathies of our own
people by drawing their attention to the inestimable jewels that, they
know not, are lying deep buried about their own home — if, instead of
dying of thirst and drinking dirty ditch water elsewhere out of the
blindness of ignorance, they are being called to go and drink from the
eternal fountain which is flowing perennially by their own home — if
anything has been done to rouse our people towards action, to make them
understand that in everything, religion and religion alone is the life
of India, and when that goes India will die, in spite of politics, in
spite of social reforms, in spite of Kubera's wealth poured upon the
head of every one of her children — if anything has been done towards
this end, India and every country where any work has been done owe much
of it to you, Raja of Ramnad. For it was you who gave me the idea first,
and it was you who persistently urged me on towards the work. You, as it
were, intuitively understood what was going to be, and took me by the
hand, helped me all along, and have never ceased to encourage me. Well
is it, therefore, that you should be the first to rejoice at my success,
and meet it is that I should first land in your territory on my return
to India.

Great works are to be done, wonderful powers have to be worked out, we
have to teach other nations many things, as has been said already by
your Highness. This is the motherland of philosophy, of spirituality,
and of ethics, of sweetness, gentleness, and love. These still exist,
and my experience of the world leads me to stand on firm ground and make
the bold statement that India is still the first and foremost of all the
nations of the world in these respects. Look at this little phenomenon.
There have been immense political changes within the last four or five
years. Gigantic organizations undertaking to subvert the whole of
existing institutions in different countries and meeting with a certain
amount of success have been working all over the Western world. Ask our
people if they have heard anything about them. They have heard not a
word about them. But that there was a Parliament of Religions in
Chicago, and that there was a Sannyasin sent over from India to that
Parliament, and that he was very well received and since that time has
been working in the West, the poorest beggar has known. I have heard it
said that our masses are dense, that they do not want any education, and
that they do not care for any information. I had at one time a foolish
leaning towards that opinion myself, but I find experience is a far more
glorious teacher than any amount of speculation, or any amount of books
written by globe-trotters and hasty observers. This experience teaches
me that they are not dense, that they are not slow, that they are as
eager and thirsty for information as any race under the sun; but then
each nation has its own part to play, and naturally, each nation has its
own peculiarity and individuality with which it is born. Each
represents, as it were, one peculiar note in this harmony of nations,
and this is its very life, its vitality. In it is the backbone, the
foundation, and the bed-rock of the national life, and here in this
blessed land, the foundation, the backbone, the life-centre is religion
and religion alone. Let others talk of politics, of the glory of
acquisition of immense wealth poured in by trade, of the power and
spread of commercialism, of the glorious fountain of physical liberty;
but these the Hindu mind does not understand and does not want to
understand. Touch him on spirituality, on religion, on God, on the soul,
on the Infinite, on spiritual freedom, and I assure you, the lowest
peasant in India is better informed on these subjects than many a
so-called philosopher in other lands. I have said, gentlemen, that we
have yet something to teach to the world. This is the very reason, the
*raison d'être*, that this nation has lived on, in spite of hundreds of
years of persecution, in spite of nearly a thousand year of foreign rule
and foreign oppression. This nation still lives; the *raison d'être* is
it still holds to God, to the treasure-house of religion and
spirituality.

In this land are, still, religion and spirituality, the fountains which
will have to overflow and flood the world to bring in new life and new
vitality to the Western and other nations, which are now almost borne
down, half-killed, and degraded by political ambitions and social
scheming. From out of many voices, consonant and dissentient, from out
of the medley of sounds filling the Indian atmosphere, rises up supreme,
striking, and full, one note, and that is renunciation. Give up! That is
the watchword of the Indian religions. This world is a delusion of two
days. The present life is of five minutes. Beyond is the Infinite,
beyond this world of delusion; let us seek that. This continent is
illumined with brave and gigantic minds and intelligences which even
think of this so called infinite universe as only a mud-puddle; beyond
and still beyond they go. Time, even infinite time, is to them but
non-existence. Beyond and beyond time they go. Space is nothing to them;
beyond that they want to go, and this going beyond the phenomenal is the
very soul of religion. The characteristic of my nation is this
transcendentalism, this struggle to go beyond, this daring to tear the
veil off the face of nature and have at any risk, at any price, a
glimpse of the beyond. That is our ideal, but of course all the people
in a country cannot give up entirely. Do you want to enthuse them, then
here is the way to do so. Your talks of politics, of social
regeneration, your talks of money-making and commercialism — all these
will roll off like water from a duck's back. This spirituality, then, is
what you have to teach the world. Have we to learn anything else, have
we to learn anything from the world? We have, perhaps, to gain a little
in material knowledge, in the power of organisation, in the ability to
handle powers, organising powers, in bringing the best results out of
the smallest of causes. This perhaps to a certain extent we may learn
from the West. But if any one preaches in India the ideal of eating and
drinking and making merry, if any one wants to apotheosise the material
world into a God, that man is a liar; he has no place in this holy land,
the Indian mind does not want to listen to him. Ay, in spite of the
sparkle and glitter of Western civilisation, in spite of all its polish
and its marvellous manifestation of power, standing upon this platform,
I tell them to their face that it is all vain. It is vanity of vanities.
God alone lives. The soul alone lives. Spirituality alone lives. Hold on
to that.

Yet, perhaps, some sort of materialism, toned down to our own
requirements, would be a blessing to many of our brothers who are not
yet ripe for the highest truths. This is the mistake made in every
country and in every society, and it is a greatly regrettable thing that
in India, where it was always understood, the same mistake of forcing
the highest truths on people who are not ready for them has been made of
late. My method need not be yours. The Sannyasin, as you all know, is
the ideal of the Hindu's life, and every one by our Shâstras is
compelled to give up. Every Hindu who has tasted the fruits of this
world must give up in the latter part of his life, and he who does not
is not a Hindu and has no more right to call himself a Hindu. We know
that this is the ideal — to give up after seeing and experiencing the
vanity of things. Having found out that the heart of the material world
is a mere hollow, containing only ashes, give it up and go back. The
mind is circling forward, as it were, towards the senses, and that mind
has to circle backwards; the Pravritti has to stop and the Nivritti has
to begin. That is the ideal. But that ideal can only be realised after a
certain amount of experience. We cannot teach the child the truth of
renunciation; the child is a born optimist; his whole life is in his
senses; his whole life is one mass of sense-enjoyment. So there are
childlike men in every society who require a certain amount of
experience, of enjoyment, to see through the vanity of it, and then
renunciation will come to them. There has been ample provision made for
them in our Books; but unfortunately, in later times, there has been a
tendency to bind every one down by the same laws as those by which the
Sannyasin is bound, and that is a great mistake. But for that a good
deal of the poverty and the misery that you see in India need not have
been. A poor man's life is hemmed in and bound down by tremendous
spiritual and ethical laws for which he has no use. Hands off! Let the
poor fellow enjoy himself a little, and then he will raise himself up,
and renunciation will come to him of itself. Perhaps in this line, we
can be taught something by the Western people; but we must be very
cautious in learning these things. I am sorry to say that most of the
examples one meets nowadays of men who have imbibed the Western ideas
are more or less failures.

There are two great obstacles on our path in India, the Scylla of old
orthodoxy and the Charybdis of modern European civilisation. Of these
two, I vote for the old orthodoxy, and not for the Europeanised system;
for the old orthodox man may be ignorant, he may be crude, but he is a
man, he has a faith, he has strength, he stands on his own feet; while
the Europeanised man has no backbone, he is a mass of heterogeneous
ideas picked up at random from every source — and these ideas are
unassimilated, undigested, unharmonised. He does not stand on his own
feet, and his head is turning round and round. Where is the motive power
of his work? — in a few patronizing pats from the English people. His
schemes of reforms, his vehement vituperations against the evils of
certain social customs, have, as the mainspring, some European
patronage. Why are some of our customs called evils? Because the
Europeans say so. That is about the reason he gives. I would not submit
to that. Stand and die in your own strength, if there is any sin in the
world, it is weakness; avoid all weakness, for weakness is sin, weakness
is death. These unbalanced creatures are not yet formed into distinct
personalities; what are we to call them - men, women, or animals? While
those old orthodox people were staunch and were men. There are still
some excellent examples, and the one I want to present before you now is
your Raja of Ramnad. Here you have a man than whom there is no more
zealous a Hindu throughout the length and breadth of this land; here you
have a prince than whom there is no prince in this land better informed
in all affairs, both oriental and occidental, who takes from every
nation whatever he can that is good. "Learn good knowledge with all
devotion from the lowest caste. Learn the way to freedom, even if it
comes from a Pariah, by serving him. If a woman is a jewel, take her in
marriage even if she comes from a low family of the lowest caste." Such
is the law laid down by our great and peerless legislator, the divine
Manu. This is true. Stand on your own feet, and assimilate what you can;
learn from every nation, take what is of use to you. But remember that
as Hindus everything else must be subordinated to our own national
ideals. Each man has a mission in life, which is the result of all his
infinite past Karma. Each of you was born with a splendid heritage,
which is the whole of the infinite past life of your glorious nation.
Millions of your ancestors are watching, as it were, every action of
yours, so be alert. And what is the mission with which every Hindu child
is born? Have you not read the proud declaration of Manu regarding the
Brahmin where he says that the birth of the Brahmin is "for the
protection of the treasury of religion"? I should say that *that* is the
mission not only of the Brahmin, but of every child, whether boy or
girl, who is born in this blessed land "for the protection of the
treasury of religion". And every other problem in life must be
subordinated to that one principal theme. That is also the law of
harmony in music. There may be a nation whose theme of life is political
supremacy; religion and everything else must become subordinate to that
one great theme of its life. But here is another nation whose great
theme of life is spirituality and renunciation, whose one watchword is
that this world is all vanity and a delusion of three days, and
everything else, whether science or knowledge, enjoyment or powers,
wealth, name, or fame, must be subordinated to that one theme. The
secret of a true Hindu's character lies in the subordination of his
knowledge of European sciences and learning, of his wealth, position,
and name, to that one principal theme which is inborn in every Hindu
child — the spirituality and purity of the race. Therefore between these
two, the case of the orthodox man who has the whole of that life-spring
of the race, spirituality, and the other man whose hands are full of
Western imitation jewels but has no hold on the life-giving principle,
spirituality — of these, I do not doubt that every one here will agree
that we should choose the first, the orthodox, because there is some
hope in him — he has the national theme, something to hold to; so he
will live, but the other will die. Just as in the case of individuals,
if the principle of life is undisturbed, if the principal function of
that individual life is present, any injuries received as regards other
functions are not serious, do not kill the individual, so, as long as
this principal function of our life is not disturbed, nothing can
destroy our nation. But mark you, if you give up that spirituality,
leaving it aside to go after the materialising civilisation of the West,
the result will be that in three generations you will be an extinct
race; because the backbone of the nation will be broken, the foundation
upon which the national edifice has been built will be undermined, and
the result will be annihilation all round.

Therefore, my friends, the way out is that first and foremost we must
keep a firm hold on spirituality — that inestimable gift handed down to
us by our ancient forefathers. Did you ever hear of a country where the
greatest kings tried to trace their descent not to kings, not to
robber-barons living in old castles who plundered poor travellers, but
to semi-naked sages who lived in the forest? Did you ever hear of such a
land? This is the land. In other countries great priests try to trace
their descent to some king, but here the greatest kings would trace
their descent to some ancient priest. Therefore, whether you believe in
spirituality or not, for the sake of the national life, you have to get
a hold on spirituality and keep to it. Then stretch the other hand out
and gain all you can from other races, but everything must be
subordinated to that one ideal of life; and out of that a wonderful,
glorious, future India will come — I am sure it is coming — a greater
India than ever was. Sages will spring up greater than all the ancient
sages; and your ancestors will not only be satisfied, but I am sure,
they will be proud from their positions in other worlds to look down
upon their descendants, so glorious, and so great.

Let us all work hard, my brethren; this is no time for sleep. On our
work depends the coming of the India of the future. She is there ready
waiting. She is only sleeping. Arise and awake and see her seated here
on her eternal throne, rejuvenated, more glorious than she ever was —
this motherland of ours. The idea of God was nowhere else ever so fully
developed as in this motherland of ours, for the same idea of God never
existed anywhere else. Perhaps you are astonished at my assertion; but
show me any idea of God from any other scripture equal to ours; they
have only clan-Gods, the God of the Jews, the God of the Arabs, and of
such and such a race, and their God is fighting the Gods of the other
races. But the idea of that beneficent, most merciful God, our father,
our mother, our friend, the friend of our friends, the soul of our
souls, is here and here alone. And may He who is the Shiva of the
Shaivites, the Vishnu of the Vaishnavites, the Karma of the Karmis, the
Buddha of the Buddhists, the Jina of the Jains, the Jehovah of the
Christians and the Jews, the Allah of the Mohammedans, the Lord of every
sect, the Brahman of the Vedantists, He the all-pervading, whose glory
has been known only in this land — may He bless us, may He help us, may
He give strength unto us, energy unto us, to carry this idea into
practice. May that which we have listened to and studied become food to
us, may it become strength in us, may it become energy in us to help
each other; may we, the teacher and the taught, not be jealous of each
other! Peace, peace, peace, in the name of Hari!

</div>
