---
title: REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT PARAMAKUDI

---
<div>

[←](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_ramnad.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_shivaganga_and_manamadura.htm)

  

## REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT PARAMAKUDI

Paramakudi was the first stopping-place after leaving Ramnad, and there
was a demonstration on a large scale, including the presentation of the
following address:

SREEMAT VIVEKANANDA SWAMI

We, the citizens of Paramakudi, respectfully beg to accord your Holiness
a most hearty welcome to this place after your successful spiritual
campaign of nearly four years in the Western world.

We share with our countrymen the feelings of joy and pride at the
philanthropy which prompted you to attend the Parliament of Religions
held at Chicago, and lay before the representatives of the religious
world the sacred but hidden treasures of our ancient land. You have by
your wide exposition of the sacred truths contained in the Vedic
literature disabused the enlightened minds of the West of the prejudices
entertained by them against our ancient faith, and convinced them of its
universality and adaptability for intellects of all shades and in all
ages.

The presence amongst us of your Western disciples is proof positive that
your religious teachings have not only been understood in theory, but
have also borne practical fruits. The magnetic influence of your august
person reminds us of our ancient holy Rishis whose realisation of the
Self by asceticism and self-control made them the true guides and
preceptors of the human race.

In conclusion, we most earnestly pray to the All-Merciful that your
Holiness may long be spared to continue to bless and spiritualist the
whole of mankind.

With best regards.

We beg to subscribe ourselves,

Your Holiness' most obedient and devoted DISCIPLES and SERVANTS.

In the course of his reply the Swami said:

It is almost impossible to express my thanks for the kindness and
cordiality with which you have received me. But if I may be permitted to
say so, I will add that my love for my country, and especially for my
countrymen, will be the same whether they receive me with the utmost
cordiality or spurn me from the country. For in the Gitâ Shri Krishna
says — men should work for work's sake only, and love for love's sake.
The work that has been done by me in the Western world has been very
little; there is no one present here who could not have done a hundred
times more work in the West than has been done by me. And I am anxiously
waiting for the day when mighty minds will arise, gigantic spiritual
minds, who will be ready to go forth from India to the ends of the world
to teach spirituality and renunciation — those ideas which have come
from the forests of India and belong to Indian soil alone.

There come periods in the history of the human race when, as it were,
whole nations are seized with a sort of world-weariness, when they find
that all their plans are slipping between their fingers, that old
institutions and systems are crumbling into dust, that their hopes are
all blighted and everything seems to be out of joint. Two attempts have
been made in the world to found social life: the one was upon religion,
and the other was upon social necessity. The one was founded upon
spirituality, the other upon materialism; the one upon
transcendentalism, the other upon realism. The one looks beyond the
horizon of this little material world and is bold enough to begin life
there, even apart from the other. The other, the second, is content to
take its stand on the things of the world and expects to find a firm
footing there. Curiously enough, it seems that at times the spiritual
side prevails, and then the materialistic side — in wave-like motions
following each other. In the same country there will be different tides.
At one time the full flood of materialistic ideas prevails, and
everything in this life — prosperity, the education which procures more
pleasures, more food — will become glorious at first and then that will
degrade and degenerate. Along with the prosperity will rise to white
heat all the inborn jealousies and hatreds of the human race.
Competition and merciless cruelty will be the watchword of the day. To
quote a very commonplace and not very elegant English proverb, "Everyone
for himself, and the devil take the hindmost", becomes the motto of the
day. Then people think that the whole scheme of life is a failure. And
the world would be destroyed had not spirituality come to the rescue and
lent a helping hand to the sinking world. Then the world gets new hope
and finds a new basis for a new building, and another wave of
spirituality comes, which in time again declines. As a rule,
spirituality brings a class of men who lay exclusive claim to the
special powers of the world. The immediate effect of this is a reaction
towards materialism, which opens the door to scores of exclusive claims,
until the time comes when not only all the spiritual powers of the race,
but all its material powers and privileges are centred in the hands of a
very few; and these few, standing on the necks of the masses of the
people, want to rule them. Then society has to help itself, and
materialism comes to the rescue.

If you look at India, our motherland, you will see that the same thing
is going on now. That you are here today to welcome one who went to
Europe to preach Vedanta would have been impossible had not the
materialism of Europe opened the way for it. Materialism has come to the
rescue of India in a certain sense by throwing open the doors of life to
everyone, by destroying the exclusive privileges of caste, by opening up
to discussion the inestimable treasures which were hidden away in the
hands of a very few who have even lost the use of them. Half has been
stolen and lost; and the other half which remains is in the hands of men
who, like dogs in the manger, do not eat themselves and will not allow
others to do so. On the other hand, the political systems that we are
struggling for in India have been in Europe for ages, have been tried
for centuries, and have been found wanting. One after another, the
institutions, systems, and everything connected with political
government have been condemned as useless; and Europe is restless, does
not know where to turn. The material tyranny is tremendous. The wealth
and power of a country are in the hands of a few men who do not work but
manipulate the work of millions of human beings. By this power they can
deluge the whole earth with blood. Religion and all things are under
their feet; they rule and stand supreme. The Western world is governed
by a handful of Shylocks. All those things that you hear about —
constitutional government, freedom, liberty, and parliaments — are but
jokes.

The West is groaning under the tyranny of the Shylocks, and the East is
groaning under the tyranny of the priests; each must keep the other in
check. Do not think that one alone is to help the world. In this
creation of the impartial Lord, He has made equal every particle in the
universe. The worst, most demoniacal man has some virtues which the
greatest saint has not; and the lowest worm may have certain things
which the highest man has not. The poor labourer, who you think has so
little enjoyment in life, has not your intellect, cannot understand the
Vedanta Philosophy and so forth; but compare your body with his, and you
will see, his body is not so sensitive to pain as yours. If he gets
severe cuts on his body, they heal up more quickly than yours would. His
life is in the senses, and he enjoys there. His life also is one of
equilibrium and balance. Whether on the ground of materialism, or of
intellect, or of spirituality, the compensation that is given by the
Lord to every one impartially is exactly the same. Therefore we must not
think that we are the saviours of the world. We can teach the world, a
good many things, and we can learn a good many things from it too. We
can teach the world only what it is waiting for. The whole of Western
civilisation will crumble to pieces in the next fifty years if there is
no spiritual foundation. It is hopeless and perfectly useless to attempt
to govern mankind with the sword. You will find that the very centres
from which such ideas as government by force sprang up are the very
first centres to degrade and degenerate and crumble to pieces. Europe,
the centre of the manifestation of material energy, will crumble into
dust within fifty years if she is not mindful to change her position, to
shift her ground and make spirituality the basis of her life. And what
will save Europe is the religion of the Upanishads.

Apart from the different sects, philosophies, and scriptures, there is
one underlying doctrine — the belief in the soul of man, the Âtman —
common to all our sects: and that can change the whole tendency of the
world. With Hindus, Jains, and Buddhists, in fact everywhere in India,
there is the idea of a spiritual soul which is the receptacle of all
power. And you know full well that there is not one system of philosophy
in India which teaches you that you can get power or purity or
perfection from outside; but they all tell you that these are your
birthright, your nature. Impurity is a mere superimposition under which
your real nature has become hidden. But the real *you* is already
perfect, already strong. You do not require any assistance to govern
yourself; you are already self-restrained. The only difference is in
knowing it or not knowing it. Therefore the one difficulty has been
summed up in the word, Avidyâ. What makes the difference between God and
man, between the saint and the sinner? Only ignorance. What is the
difference between the highest man and the lowest worm that crawls under
your feet? Ignorance. That makes all the difference. For inside that
little crawling worm is lodged infinite power, and knowledge, and purity
— the infinite divinity of God Himself. It is unmanifested; it will have
to be manifested.

This is the one great truth India has to teach to the world, because it
is nowhere else. This is spirituality, the science of the soul. What
makes a man stand up and work? Strength. Strength is goodness, weakness
is sin. If there is one word that you find coming out like a bomb from
the Upanishads, bursting like a bomb-shell upon masses of ignorance, it
is the word fearlessness. And the only religion that ought to be taught
is the religion of *fearlessness*. Either in this world or in the world
of religion, it is true that fear is the sure cause of degradation and
sin. It is fear that brings misery, fear that brings death, fear that
breeds evil. And what causes fear? Ignorance of our own nature. Each of
us is heir-apparent to the Emperor of emperors; are of the substance of
God Himself. Nay, according to the Advaita, we are God Himself though we
have forgotten our own nature in thinking of ourselves as little men. We
have fallen from that nature and thus made differences — I am a little
better than you, or you than I, and so on. This idea of oneness is the
great lesson India has to give, and mark you, when this is understood,
it changes the whole aspect of things, because you look at the world
through other eyes than you have been doing before. And this world is no
more a battlefield where each soul is born to struggle with every other
soul and the strongest gets the victory and the weakest goes to death.
It becomes a playground where the Lord is playing like a child, and we
are His playmates, His fellow-workers. This is only a play, however
terrible, hideous, and dangerous it may appear. We have mistaken its
aspect. When we have known the nature of the soul, hope comes to the
weakest, to the most degraded, to the most miserable sinner. Only,
declares your Shâstra, despair not. For you are the same whatever you
do, and you cannot change your nature. Nature itself cannot destroy
nature. Your nature is pure. It may be hidden for millions of aeons, but
at last it will conquer and come out. Therefore the Advaita brings hope
to every one and not despair. Its teaching is not through fear; it
teaches, not of devils who are always on the watch to snatch you if you
miss your footing — it has nothing to do with devils — but says that you
have taken your fate in your own hands. Your own Karma has manufactured
for you this body, and nobody did it for you. The Omnipresent Lord has
been hidden through ignorance, and the responsibility is on yourself.
You have not to think that you were brought into the world without your
choice and left in this most horrible place, but to know that you have
yourself manufactured your body bit by bit just as you are doing it this
very moment. You yourself eat; nobody eats for you. You assimilate what
you eat; no one does it for you. You make blood, and muscles, and body
out of the food; nobody does it for you. So you have done all the time.
One link in a chain explains the infinite chain. If it is true for one
moment that you manufacture your body, it is true for every moment that
has been or will come. And all the responsibility of good and evil is on
you. This is the great hope. What I have done, that I can undo. And at
the same time our religion does not take away from mankind the mercy of
the Lord. That is always there. On the other hand, He stands beside this
tremendous current of good and evil. He the bondless, the ever-merciful,
is always ready to help us to the other shore, for His mercy is great,
and it always comes to the pure in heart.

Your spirituality, in a certain sense, will have to form the basis of
the new order of society. If I had more time, I could show you how the
West has yet more to learn from some of the conclusions of the Advaita,
for in these days of materialistic science the ideal of the Personal God
does not count for much. But yet, even if a man has a very crude form of
religion and wants temples and forms, he can have as many as he likes;
if he wants a Personal God to love, he can find here the noblest ideas
of a Personal God such as were never attained anywhere else in the
world. If a man wants to be a rationalist and satisfy his reason, it is
also here that he can find the most rational ideas of the Impersonal.

</div>
