---
title: REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT MADURA

---
<div>

[←](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_shivaganga_and_manamadura.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_mission_of_the_vedanta.htm)

  

## REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT MADURA

(Spelt now as Madurai)

The Swami was presented with an address of welcome by the Hindus of
Madura, which read as follows:

MOST REVERED SWAMI,

We, the Hindu Public of Madura, beg to offer you our most heartfelt and
respectful welcome to our ancient and holy city. We realise in you a
living example of the Hindu Sannyasin, who, renouncing all worldly ties
and attachments calculated to lead to the gratification of the self, is
worthily engaged in the noble duty of living for others and endeavouring
to raise the spiritual condition of mankind. You have demonstrated in
your own person that the true essence of the Hindu religion is not
necessarily bound up with rules and rituals, but that it is a sublime
philosophy capable of giving peace and solace to the distressed and
afflicted.

You have taught America and England to admire that philosophy and that
religion which seeks to elevate every man in the best manner suited to
his capacities and environments. Although your teachings have for the
last three years been delivered in foreign lands, they have not been the
less eagerly devoured in this country, and they have not a little tended
to counteract the growing materialism imported from a foreign soil.

India lives to this day, for it has a mission to fulfil in the spiritual
ordering of the universe. The appearance of a soul like you at the close
of this cycle of the Kali Yuga is to us a sure sign of the incarnation
in the near future of great souls through whom that mission will be
fulfilled.

Madura, the seat of ancient learning, Madura the favoured city of the
God Sundareshwara, the holy Dwadashântakshetram of Yogis, lags behind no
other Indian city in its warm admiration of your exposition of Indian
Philosophy and in its grateful acknowledgments of your priceless
services for humanity.

We pray that you may be blessed with a long life of vigour and strength
and usefulness.

The Swami replied in the following terms:

I wish I could live in your midst for several days and fulfil the
conditions that have just been pointed out by your most worthy Chairman
of relating to you my experiences in the West and the result of all my
labours there for the last four years. But, unfortunately, even Swamis
have bodies; and the continuous travelling and speaking that I have had
to undergo for the last three weeks make it impossible for me to deliver
a very long speech this evening. I will, therefore, satisfy myself with
thanking you very cordially for the kindness that has been shown to me,
and reserve other things for some day in the future when under better
conditions of health we shall have time to talk over more various
subjects than we can do in so short a time this evening. Being in
Madura, as the guest of one of your well-known citizens and noblemen,
the Raja of Ramnad, one fact comes prominently to my mind. Perhaps most
of you are aware that it was the Raja who first put the idea into my
mind of going to Chicago, and it was he who all the time supported it
with all his heart and influence. A good deal, therefore, of the praise
that has been bestowed upon me in this address, ought to go to this
noble man of Southern India. I only wish that instead of becoming a Raja
he had become a Sannyasin, for that is what he is really fit for.

Wherever there is a thing really needed in one part of the world, the
complement will find its way there and supply it with new life. This is
true in the physical world as well as in the spiritual. If there is a
want of spirituality in one part of the world, and at the same time that
spirituality exists elsewhere, whether we consciously struggle for it or
not, that spirituality will find its way to the part where it is needed
and balance the inequality. In the history of the human race, not once
or twice, but again and again, it has been the destiny of India in the
past to supply spirituality to the world. We find that whenever either
by mighty conquest or by commercial supremacy different parts of the
world have been kneaded into one whole race and bequests have been made
from one corner to the other, each nation, as it were, poured forth its
own quota, either political, social, or spiritual. India's contribution
to the sum total of human knowledge has been spirituality, philosophy.
These she contributed even long before the rising of the Persian Empire;
the second time was during the Persian Empire; for the third time during
the ascendancy of the Greeks; and now for the fourth time during the
ascendancy of the English, she is going to fulfil the same destiny once
more. As Western ideas of organization and external civilisation are
penetrating and pouring into our country, whether we will have them or
not, so Indian spirituality and philosophy are deluging the lands of the
West. None can resist it, and no more can we resist some sort of
material civilization from the West. A little of it, perhaps, is good
for us, and a little spiritualisation is good for the West; thus the
balance will be preserved. It is not that we ought to learn everything
from the West, or that they have to learn everything from us, but each
will have to supply and hand down to future generations what it has for
the future accomplishment of that dream of ages — the harmony of
nations, an ideal world. Whether that ideal world will ever come I do
not know, whether that social perfection will ever be reached I have my
own doubts; whether it comes or not, each one of us will have to work
for the idea as if it will come tomorrow, and as if it only depends on
his work, and his alone. Each one of us will have to believe that every
one else in the world has done his work, and the only work remaining to
be done to make the world perfect has to be done by himself. This is the
responsibility we have to take upon ourselves.

In the meanwhile, in India there is a tremendous revival of religion.
There is danger ahead as well as glory; for revival sometimes breeds
fanaticism, sometimes goes to the extreme, so that often it is not even
in the power of those who start the revival to control it when it has
gone beyond a certain length. It is better, therefore, to be forewarned.
We have to find our way between the Scylla of old superstitious
orthodoxy and the Charybdis of materialism — of Europeanism, of
soullessness, of the so-called reform — which has penetrated to the
foundation of Western progress. These two have to be taken care of. In
the first place, we cannot become Western; therefore imitating the
Westerns is useless. Suppose you can imitate the Westerns, that moment
you will die, you will have no more life in you. In the second place, it
is impossible. A stream is taking its rise, away beyond where time
began, flowing through millions of ages of human history; do you mean to
get hold of that stream and push it back to its source, to a Himalayan
glacier? Even if that were practicable, it would not be possible for you
to be Europeanised. If you find it is impossible for the European to
throw off the few centuries of culture which there is in the West, do
you think it is possible for you to throw off the culture of shining
scores of centuries? It cannot be. We must also remember that in every
little village-god and every little superstition custom is that which we
are accustomed to call our religious faith. But local customs are
infinite and contradictory. Which are we to obey, and which not to obey?
The Brâhmin of Southern India, for instance, would shrink in horror at
the sight of another Brahmin eating meat; a Brahmin in the North thinks
it a most glorious and holy thing to do — he kills goats by the hundred
in sacrifice. If you put forward your custom, they are equally ready
with theirs. Various are the customs all over India, but they are local.
The greatest mistake made is that ignorant people always think that this
local custom is the essence of our religion.

But beyond this there is a still greater difficulty. There are two sorts
of truth we find in our Shâstras, one that is based upon the eternal
nature of man — the one that deals with the eternal relation of God,
soul, and nature; the other, with local circumstances, environments of
the time, social institutions of the period, and so forth. The first
class of truths is chiefly embodied in our Vedas, our scriptures; the
second in the Smritis, the Puranas. etc. We must remember that for all
periods the Vedas are the final goal and authority, and if the Purânas
differ in any respect from the Vedas, that part of the Puranas is to be
rejected without mercy. We find, then, that in all these Smritis the
teachings are different. One Smriti says, this is the custom, and this
should be the practice of this age. Another one says, this is the
practice of this age, and so forth. This is the Âchâra which should be
the custom of the Satya Yuga, and this is the Achara which should be the
custom of the Kali Yuga, and so forth. Now this is one of the most
glorious doctrines that you have, that eternal truths, being based upon
the nature of man, will never change so long as man lives; they are for
all times, omnipresent, universal virtues. But the Smritis speak
generally of local circumstances, of duties arising from different
environments, and they change in the course of time. This you have
always to remember that because a little social custom is going to be
changed you are not going to lose your religion, not at all. Remember
these customs have already been changed. There was a time in this very
India when, without eating beef, no Brahmin could remain a Brahmin; you
read in the Vedas how, when a Sannyasin, a king, or a great man came
into a house, the best bullock was killed; how in time it was found that
as we were an agricultural race, killing the best bulls meant
annihilation of the race. Therefore the practice was stopped, and a
voice was raised against the killing of cows. Sometimes we find existing
then what we now consider the most horrible customs. In course of time
other laws had to be made. These in turn will have to go, and other
Smritis will come. This is one fact we have to learn that the Vedas
being eternal will be one and the same throughout all ages, but the
Smritis will have an end. As time rolls on, more and more of the Smritis
will go, sages will come, and they will change and direct society into
better channels, into duties and into paths which accord with the
necessity of the age, and without which it is impossible that society
can live. Thus we have to guide our course, avoiding these two dangers;
and I hope that every one of us here will have breadth enough, and at
the same time faith enough, to understand what that means, which I
suppose is the inclusion of everything, and not the exclusion. I want
the intensity of the fanatic plus the extensity of the materialist. Deep
as the ocean, broad as the infinite skies, that is the sort of heart we
want. Let us be as progressive as any nation that ever existed, and at
the same time as faithful and conservative towards our traditions as
Hindus alone know how to be.

In plain words, we have first to learn the distinction between the
essentials and the non-essentials in everything. The essentials are
eternal, the non-essentials have value only for a certain time; and if
after a time they are not replaced by something essential, they are
positively dangerous. I do not mean that you should stand up and revile
all your old customs and institutions. Certainly not; you must not
revile even the most evil one of them. Revile none. Even those customs
that are now appearing to be positive evils, have been positively
life-giving in times past; and if we have to remove these, we must not
do so with curses, but with blessings and gratitude for the glorious
work these customs have done for the preservation of our race. And we
must also remember that the leaders of our societies have never been
either generals or kings, but Rishis. And who are the Rishis? The Rishi
as he is called in the Upanishads is not an ordinary man, but a
Mantra-drashtâ. He is a man who sees religion, to whom religion is not
merely book-learning, not argumentation, nor speculation, nor much
talking, but actual realization, a coming face to face with truths which
transcend the senses. This is Rishihood, and that Rishihood does not
belong to any age, or time, or even to sects or caste. Vâtsyâyana says,
truth must be realised; and we have to remember that you, and I, and
every one of us will be called upon to become Rishis; and we must have
faith in ourselves; we must become world-movers, for everything is in
us. We must see Religion face to face, experience it, and thus solve our
doubts about it; and then standing up in the glorious light of Rishihood
each one of us will be a giant; and every word falling from our lips
will carry behind it that infinite sanction of security; and before us
evil will vanish by itself without the necessity of cursing any one,
without the necessity of abusing any one, without the necessity of
fighting any one in the world. May the Lord help us, each one of us
here, to realise the Rishihood for our own salvation and for that of
others!

</div>
