---
title: THE MISSION OF THE VEDANTA

---
<div>

[←](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_madura.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_madras.htm)

  

## THE MISSION OF THE VEDANTA

On the occasion of his visit to Kumbakonam, the Swamiji was presented
with the following address by the local Hindu community:

REVERED SWAMIN,

On behalf of the Hindu inhabitants of this ancient and religiously
important town of Kumbakonam, we request permission to offer you a most
hearty welcome on your return from the Western World to our own holy
land of great temples and famous saints and sages. We are highly
thankful to God for the remarkable success of your religious mission in
America and in Europe, and for His having enabled you to impress upon
the choicest representatives of the world's great religions assembled at
Chicago that both the Hindu philosophy and religion are so broad and so
rationally catholic as to have in them the power to exalt and to
harmonise all ideas of God and of human spirituality.

The conviction that the cause of Truth is always safe in the hands of
Him who is the life and soul of the universe has been for thousands of
years part of our living faith; and if today we rejoice at the results
of your holy work in Christian lands, it is because the eyes of men in
and outside of India are thereby being opened to the inestimable value
of the *spiritual* heritage of the *preeminently religious* Hindu
nation. The success of your work has naturally added great lustre to the
already renowned name of your great Guru; it has also raised us in the
estimation of the civilised world; more than all, it has made us feel
that we too, as a people, have reason to be proud of the achievements of
our past, and that the absence of telling aggressiveness in our
civilisation is in no way a sign of its exhausted or decaying condition.
With clear-sighted, devoted, and altogether unselfish workers like you
in our midst, the future of the Hindu nation cannot but be bright and
hopeful. May the God of the universe who is also the great God of all
nations bestow on you health and long life, and make you increasingly
strong and wise in the discharge of your high and noble function as a
worthy teacher of Hindu religion and philosophy.

A second address was also presented by the Hindu students of the town.

The Swami then delivered the following address on the Mission of the
Vedanta:

A very small amount of religious work performed brings a large amount of
result. If this statement of the Gita wanted an illustration, I am
finding every day the truth of that great saying in my humble life. My
work has been very insignificant indeed, but the kindness and the
cordiality of welcome that have met me at every step of my journey from
Colombo to this city are simply beyond all expectation. Yet, at the same
time, it is worthy of our traditions as Hindus, it is worthy of our
race; for here we are, the Hindu race, whose vitality, whose
life-principle, whose very soul, as it were, is in religion. I have seen
a little of the world, travelling among the races of the East and the
West; and everywhere I find among nations one great ideal which forms
the backbone, so to speak, of that race. With some it is politics, with
others it is social culture; others again may have intellectual culture
and so on for their national background. But this, our motherland, has
religion and religion alone for its basis, for its backbone, for the
bed-rock upon which the whole building of its life has been based. Some
of you may remember that in my reply to the kind address which the
people of Madras sent over to me in America, I pointed out the fact that
a peasant in India has, in many respects, a better religious education
than many a gentleman in the West, and today, beyond all doubt, I myself
am verifying my own words. There was a time when I did feel rather
discontented at the want of information among the masses of India and
the lack of thirst among them for information, but now I understand it.
Where their interest lies, there they are more eager for information
than the masses of any other race that I have seen or have travelled
among. Ask our peasants about the momentous political changes in Europe,
the upheavals that are going on in European society — they do not know
anything of them, nor do they care to know; but the peasants, even in
Ceylon, detached from India in many ways, cut off from a living interest
in India — I found the very peasants working in the fields there were
already acquainted with the fact that there had been a Parliament of
Religions in America, that an Indian Sannyasin had gone over there, and
that he had had some success.

Where, therefore, their interest is, there they are as eager for
information as any other race; and religion is the one and sole interest
of the people of India. I am not just now discussing whether it is good
to have the vitality of the race in religious ideals or in political
ideals, but so far it is clear to us that, for good or for evil, our
vitality is concentrated in our religion. You cannot change it. You
cannot destroy it and put in its place another. You cannot transplant a
large growing tree from one soil to another and make it immediately take
root there. For good or for evil, the religious ideal has been flowing
into India for thousands of years; for good or for evil, the Indian
atmosphere has been filled with ideals of religion for shining scores of
centuries; for good or for evil, we have been born and brought up in the
very midst of these ideas of religion, till it has entered into our very
blood and tingled with every drop in our veins, and has become one with
our constitution, become the very vitality of our lives. Can you give
such religion up without the rousing of the same energy in reaction,
without filling the channel which that mighty river has cut out for
itself in the course of thousands of years? Do you want that the Gangâ
should go back to its icy bed and begin a new course? Even if that were
possible, it would be impossible for this country to give up her
characteristic course of religious life and take up for herself a new
career of politics or something else. You can work only under the law of
least resistance, and this religious line is the line of least
resistance in India. This is the line of life, this is the line of
growth, and this is the line of well-being in India — to follow the
track of religion.

Ay, in other countries religion is only one of the many necessities in
life. To use a common illustration which I am in the habit of using, my
lady has many things in her parlour, and it is the fashion nowadays to
have a Japanese vase, and she must procure it; it does not look well to
be without it. So my lady, or my gentleman, has many other occupations
in life, and also a little bit of religion must come in to complete it.
Consequently he or she has a little religion. Politics, social
improvement, in one word, this world, is the goal of mankind in the
West, and God and religion come in quietly as helpers to attain that
goal. Their God is, so to speak, the Being who helps to cleanse and to
furnish this world for them; that is apparently all the value of God for
them. Do you not know how for the last hundred or two hundred years you
have been hearing again and again out of the lips of men who ought to
have known better, from the mouths of those who pretend at least to know
better, that all the arguments they produce against the Indian religion
is this — that our religion does not conduce to well-being in this
world, that it does not bring gold to us, that it does not make us
robbers of nations, that it does not make the strong stand upon the
bodies of the weak and feed themselves with the life-blood of the weak.
Certainly our religion does not do that. It cannot send cohorts, under
whose feet the earth trembles, for the purpose of destruction and
pillage and the ruination of races. Therefore they say — what is there
in this religion? It does not bring any grist to the grinding mill, any
strength to the muscles; what is there in such a religion?

They little dream that that is the very argument with which we prove out
religion, because it does not make for this world. Ours is the only true
religion because, according to it, this little sense-world of three
days' duration is not to be made the end and aim of all, is not to be
our great goal. This little earthly horizon of a few feet is not that
which bounds the view of our religion. Ours is away beyond, and still
beyond; beyond the senses, beyond space, and beyond time, away, away
beyond, till nothing of this world is left and the universe itself
becomes like a drop in the transcendent ocean of the glory of the soul.
Ours is the true religion because it teaches that God alone is true,
that this world is false and fleeting, that all your gold is but as
dust, that all your power is finite, and that life itself is oftentimes
an evil; therefore it is, that ours is the true religion. Ours is the
true religion because, above all, it teaches renunciation and stands up
with the wisdom of ages to tell and to declare to the nations who are
mere children of yesterday in comparison with us Hindus — who own the
hoary antiquity of the wisdom, discovered by our ancestors here in India
— to tell them in plain words: "Children, you are slaves of the senses;
there is only finiteness in the senses, there is only ruination in the
senses; the three short days of luxury here bring only ruin at last.
Give it all up, renounce the love of the senses and of the world; that
is the way of religion." Through renunciation is the way to the goal and
not through enjoyment. Therefore ours is the only true religion.

Ay, it is a curious fact that while nations after nations have come upon
the stage of the world, played their parts vigorously for a few moments,
and died almost without leaving a mark or a ripple on the ocean of time,
here we are living, as it were, an eternal life. They talk a great deal
of the new theories about the survival of the fittest, and they think
that it is the strength of the muscles which is the fittest to survive.
If that were true, any one of the aggressively known old world nations
would have lived in glory today, and we, the weak Hindus, who never
conquered even one other race or nation, ought to have died out; yet we
live here three hundred million strong! (A young English lady once told
me: What have the Hindus done? They never even conquered a single race!)
And it is not at all true that all its energies are spent, that atrophy
has overtaken its body: that is not true. There is vitality enough, and
it comes out in torrents and deluges the world when the time is ripe and
requires it.

We have, as it were, thrown a challenge to the whole world from the most
ancient times. In the West, they are trying to solve the problem how
much a man can possess, and we are trying here to solve the problem on
how little a man can live. This struggle and this difference will still
go on for some centuries. But if history has any truth in it and if
prognostications ever prove true, it must be that those who train
themselves to live on the least and control themselves well will in the
end gain the battle, and that those who run after enjoyment and luxury,
however vigorous they may seem for the moment, will have to die and
become annihilated. There are times in the history of a man's life, nay,
in the history of the lives of nations, when a sort of world-weariness
becomes painfully predominant. It seems that such a tide of
world-weariness has come upon the Western world. There, too, they have
their thinkers, great men; and they are already finding out that this
race after gold and power is all vanity of vanities; many, nay, most of
the cultured men and women there, are already weary of this competition,
this struggle, this brutality of their commercial civilisation, and they
are looking forward towards something better. There is a class which
still clings on to political and social changes as the only panacea for
the evils in Europe, but among the great thinkers there, other ideals
are growing. They have found out that no amount of political or social
manipulation of human conditions can cure the evils of life. It is a
change of the soul itself for the better that alone will cure the evils
of life. No amount of force, or government, or legislative cruelty will
change the conditions of a race, but it is spiritual culture and ethical
culture alone that can change wrong racial tendencies for the better.
Thus these races of the West are eager for some new thought, for some
new philosophy; the religion they have had, Christianity, although good
and glorious in many respects, has been imperfectly understood, and is,
as understood hitherto, found to be insufficient. The thoughtful men of
the West find in our ancient philosophy, especially in the Vedanta, the
new impulse of thought they are seeking, the very spiritual food and
drink for which they are hungering and thirsting. And it is no wonder
that this is so.

I have become used to hear all sorts of wonderful claims put forward in
favour of every religion under the sun. You have also heard, quite
within recent times, the claims put forward by Dr. Barrows, a great
friend of mine, that Christianity is the only universal religion. Let me
consider this question awhile and lay before you my reasons why I think
that it is Vedanta, and Vedanta alone that can become the universal
religion of man, and that no other is fitted for the role. Excepting our
own almost all the other great religions in the world are inevitably
connected with the life or lives of one or more of their founders. All
their theories, their teachings, their doctrines, and their ethics are
built round the life of a personal founder, from whom they get their
sanction, their authority, and their power; and strangely enough, upon
the historicity of the founder's life is built, as it were, all the
fabric of such religions. If there is one blow dealt to the historicity
of that life, as has been the case in modern times with the lives of
almost all the so-called founders of religion — we know that half of the
details of such lives is not now seriously believed in, and that the
other half is seriously doubted — if this becomes the case, if that rock
of historicity, as they pretend to call it, is shaken and shattered, the
whole building tumbles down, broken absolutely, never to regain its lost
status.

Every one of the great religions in the world excepting our own, is
built upon such historical characters; but ours rests upon principles.
There is no man or woman who can claim to have created the Vedas. They
are the embodiment of eternal principles; sages discovered them; and now
and then the names of these sages are mentioned — just their names; we
do not even know who or what they were. In many cases we do not know who
their fathers were, and almost in every case we do not know when and
where they were born. But what cared they, these sages, for their names?
They were the preachers of principles, and they themselves, so far as
they went, tried to become illustrations of the principles they
preached. At the same time, just as our God is an Impersonal and yet a
Personal God, so is our religion a most intensely impersonal one — a
religion based upon principles — and yet with an infinite scope for the
play of persons; for what religion gives you more Incarnations, more
prophets and seers, and still waits for infinitely more? The *Bhâgavata*
says that Incarnations are infinite, leaving ample scope for as many as
you like to come. Therefore if any one or more of these persons in
India's religious history, any one or more of these Incarnations, and
any one or more of our prophets proved not to have been historical, it
does not injure our religion at all; even then it remains firm as ever,
because it is based upon principles, and not upon persons. It is in vain
we try to gather all the peoples of the world around a single
personality. It is difficult to make them gather together even round
eternal and universal principles. If it ever becomes possible to bring
the largest portion of humanity to one way of thinking in regard to
religion, mark you, it must be always through principles and not through
persons. Yet as I have said, our religion has ample scope for the
authority and influence of persons. There is that most wonderful theory
of Ishta which gives you the fullest and the freest choice possible
among these great religious personalities. You may take up any one of
the prophets or teachers as your guide and the object of your special
adoration; you are even allowed to think that he whom you have chosen is
the greatest of the prophets, greatest of all the Avatâras; there is no
harm in that, but you must keep to a firm background of eternally true
principles. The strange fact here is that the power of our Incarnations
has been holding good with us only so far as they are illustrations of
the principles in the Vedas. The glory of Shri Krishna is that he has
been the best preacher of our eternal religion of principles and the
best commentator on the Vedanta that ever lived in India.

The second claim of the Vedanta upon the attention of the world is that,
of all the scriptures in the world, it is the one scripture the teaching
of which is in entire harmony with the results that have been attained
by the modern scientific investigations of external nature. Two minds in
the dim past of history, cognate to each other in form and kinship and
sympathy, started, being placed in different routes. The one was the
ancient Hindu mind, and the other the ancient Greek mind. The former
started by analysing the internal world. The latter started in search of
that goal beyond by analysing the external world. And even through the
various vicissitudes of their history, it is easy to make out these two
vibrations of thought as tending to produce similar echoes of the goal
beyond. It seems clear that the conclusions of modern materialistic
science can be acceptable, harmoniously with their religion, only to the
Vedantins or Hindus as they are called. It seems clear that modern
materialism can hold its own and at the same time approach spirituality
by taking up the conclusions of the Vedanta. It seems to us, and to all
who care to know, that the conclusions of modern science are the very
conclusions the Vedanta reached ages ago; only, in modern science they
are written in the language of matter. This then is another claim of the
Vedanta upon modern Western minds, its rationality, the wonderful
rationalism of the Vedanta. I have myself been told by some of the best
Western scientific minds of the day, how wonderfully rational the
conclusions of the Vedanta are. I know one of them personally who
scarcely has time to eat his meal or go out of his laboratory, but who
yet would stand by the hour to attend my lectures on the Vedanta; for,
as he expresses it, they are so scientific, they so exactly harmonise
with the aspirations of the age and with the conclusions to which modern
science is coming at the present time.

Two such scientific conclusions drawn from comparative religion, I would
specially like to draw your attention to: the one bears upon the idea of
the universality of religions, and the other on the idea of the oneness
of things. We observe in the histories of Babylon and among the Jews an
interesting religious phenomenon happening. We find that each of these
Babylonian and Jewish peoples was divided into so many tribes, each
tribe having a god of its own, and that these little tribal gods had
often a generic name. The gods among the Babylonians were all called
Baals, and among them Baal Merodach was the chief. In course of time one
of these many tribes would conquer and assimilate the other racially
allied tribes, and the natural result would be that the god of the
conquering tribe would be placed at the head of all the gods of the
other tribes. Thus the so-called boasted monotheism of the Semites was
created. Among the Jews the gods went by the name of Molochs. Of these
there was one Moloch who belonged to the tribe called Israel, and he was
called the Moloch-Yahveh or Moloch-Yava. In time, this tribe of Israel
slowly conquered some of the other tribes of the same race, destroyed
their Molochs, and declared its own Moloch to be the Supreme Moloch of
all the Molochs. And I am sure, most of you know the amount of
bloodshed, of tyranny, and of brutal savagery that this religious
conquest entailed. Later on, the Babylonians tried to destroy this
supremacy of Moloch-Yahveh, but could not succeed in doing so.

It seems to me, that such an attempt at tribal self-assertion in
religious matters might have taken place on the frontiers and India
also. Here, too, all the various tribes of the Aryans might have come
into conflict with one another for declaring the supremacy of their
several tribal gods; but India's history was to be otherwise, was to be
different from that of the Jews. India alone was to be, of all lands,
the land of toleration and of spirituality; and therefore the fight
between tribes and their gods did not long take place here. For one of
the greatest sages that was ever born found out here in India even at
that distant time, which history cannot reach, and into whose gloom even
tradition itself dares not peep — in that distant time the sage arose
and declared, एकं सद् विप्रा बहुधा वदन्ति — "He who exists is one; the
sages call Him variously." This is one of the most memorable sentences
that was ever uttered, one of the grandest truths that was ever
discovered. And for us Hindus this truth has been the very backbone of
our national existence. For throughout the vistas of the centuries of
our national life, this one idea — एकं सद् विप्रा बहुधा वदन्ति — comes
down, gaining in volume and in fullness till it has permeated the whole
of our national existence, till it has mingled in our blood, and has
become one with us. We live that grand truth in every vein, and our
country has become the glorious land of religious toleration. It is here
and here alone that they build temples and churches for the religions
which have come with the object of condemning our own religion. This is
one very great principle that the world is waiting to learn from us. Ay,
you little know how much of intolerance is yet abroad. It struck me more
than once that I should have to leave my bones on foreign shores owing
to the prevalence of religious intolerance. Killing a man is nothing for
religion's sake; tomorrow they may do it in the very heart of the
boasted civilisation of the West, if today they are not really doing so.
Outcasting in its most horrible forms would often come down upon the
head of a man in the West if he dared to say a word against his
country's accepted religion. They talk glibly and smoothly here in
criticism of our caste laws. If you go, to the West and live there as I
have done, you will know that even some of the biggest professors you
hear of are arrant cowards and dare not say, for fear of public opinion,
a hundredth part of what they hold to be really true in religious
matter.

Therefore the world is waiting for this grand idea of universal
toleration. It will be a great acquisition to civilisation. Nay, no
civilisation can long exist unless this idea enters into it. No
civilisation can grow unless fanatics, bloodshed, and brutality stop. No
civilisation can begin to lift up its head until we look charitably upon
one another; and the first step towards that much-needed charity is to
look charitably and kindly upon the religious convictions of others. Nay
more, to understand that not only should we be charitable, but
positively helpful to each other, however different our religious ideas
and convictions may be. And that is exactly what we do in India as I
have just related to you. It is here in India that Hindus have built and
are still building churches for Christians and mosques for Mohammedans.
That is the thing to do. In spite of their hatred, in spite of their
brutality, in spite of their cruelly, in spite of their tyranny, and in
spite of the vile language they are given to uttering, we will and must
go on building churches for the Christians and mosques for the
Mohammedans until we conquer through love, until we have demonstrated to
the world that love alone is the fittest thing to survive and not
hatred, that it is gentleness that has the strength to live on and to
fructify, and not mere brutality and physical force.

The other great idea that the world wants from us today, the thinking
part of Europe, nay, the whole world — more, perhaps, the lower classes
than the higher, more the masses than the cultured, more the ignorant
than the educated, more the weak than the strong — is that eternal grand
idea of the spiritual oneness of the whole universe. I need not tell you
today, men from Madras University, how the modern researches of the West
have demonstrated through physical means the oneness and the solidarity
of the whole universe; how, physically speaking, you and I, the sun,
moon, and stars are but little waves or waveless in the midst of an
infinite ocean of matter; how Indian psychology demonstrated ages ago
that, similarly, both body and mind are but mere names or little
waveless in the ocean of matter, the Samashti; and how, going one step
further, it is also shown in the Vedanta that behind that idea of the
unity of the whole show, the real Soul is one. There is but one Soul
throughout the universe, all is but One Existence. This great idea of
the real and basic solidarity of the whole universe has frightened many,
even in this country. It even now finds sometimes more opponents than
adherents. I tell you, nevertheless, that it is the one great
life-giving idea which the world wants from us today, and which the mute
masses of India want for their uplifting, for none can regenerate this
land of ours without the practical application and effective operation
of this ideal of the oneness of things.

The rational West is earnestly bent upon seeking out the rationality,
the *raison d' être* of all its philosophy and its ethics; and you all
know well that ethics cannot be derived from the mere sanction of any
personage, however great and divine he may have been. Such an
explanation of the authority of ethics appeals no more to the highest of
the world's thinkers; they want something more than human sanction for
ethical and moral codes to be binding, they want some eternal principle
of truth as the sanction of ethics. And where is that eternal sanction
to be found except in the only Infinite Reality that exists in you and
in me and in all, in the Self, in the Soul? The infinite oneness of the
Soul is the eternal sanction of all morality, that you and I are not
only brothers — every literature voicing man's struggle towards freedom
has preached that for you — but that you and I are really one. This is
the dictate of Indian philosophy. This oneness is the rationale of all
ethics and all spirituality. Europe wants it today just as much as our
downtrodden masses do, and this great principle is even now
unconsciously forming the basis of all the latest political and social
aspirations that are coming up in England, in Germany, in France, and in
America. And mark it, my friends, that in and through all the literature
voicing man's struggle towards freedom, towards universal freedom, again
and again you find the Indian Vedantic ideals coming out prominently. In
some cases the writers do not know the source of their inspiration, in
some cases they try to appear very original, and a few there are, bold
and grateful enough to mention the source and acknowledge their
indebtedness to it.

When I was in America, I heard once the complaint made that I was
preaching too much of Advaita, and too little of dualism. Ay, I know
what grandeur, what oceans of love, what infinite, ecstatic blessings
and joy there are in the dualistic love-theories of worship and
religion. I know it all. But this is not the time with us to weep even
in joy; we have had weeping enough; no more is this the time for us to
become soft. This softness has been with us till we have become like
masses of cotton and are dead. What our country now wants are muscles of
iron and nerves of steel, gigantic wills which nothing can resist, which
can penetrate into the mysteries and the secrets of the universe, and
will accomplish their purpose in any fashion even if it meant going down
to the bottom of the ocean and meeting death face to face. That is what
we want, and that can only be created, established, and strengthened by
understanding and realising the ideal of the Advaita, that ideal of the
oneness of all. Faith, faith, faith in ourselves, faith, faith in God —
this is the secret of greatness. If you have faith in all the three
hundred and thirty millions of your mythological gods, and in all the
gods which foreigners have now and again introduced into your midst, and
still have no faith in yourselves, there is no salvation for you. Have
faith in yourselves, and stand up on that faith and be strong; that is
what we need. Why is it that we three hundred and thirty millions of
people have been ruled for the last one thousand years by any and every
handful of foreigners who chose to walk over our prostrate bodies?
Because they had faith in themselves and we had not. What did I learn in
the West, and what did I see behind those frothy sayings of the
Christian sects repeating that man was a fallen and hopelessly fallen
sinner? There I saw that inside the national hearts of both Europe and
America reside the tremendous power of the men's faith in themselves. An
English boy will tell you, "I am an Englishman, and I can do anything."
The American boy will tell you the same thing, and so will any European
boy. Can our boys say the same thing here? No, nor even the boy's
fathers. We have lost faith in ourselves. Therefore to preach the
Advaita aspect of the Vedanta is necessary to rouse up the hearts of
men, to show them the glory of their souls. It is, therefore, that I
preach this Advaita; and I do so not as a sectarian, but upon universal
and widely acceptable grounds.

It is easy to find out the way of reconciliation that will not hurt the
dualist or the qualified monist. There is not one system in India which
does not hold the doctrine that God is within, that Divinity resides
within all things. Every one of our Vedantic systems admits that all
purity and perfection and strength are in the soul already. According to
some, this perfection sometimes becomes, as it were, contracted, and at
other times it becomes expanded again. Yet it is there. According to the
Advaita, it neither contracts nor expands, but becomes hidden and
uncovered now and again. Pretty much the same thing in effect. The one
may be a more logical statement than the other, but as to the result,
the practical conclusions, both are about the same; and this is the one
central idea which the world stands in need of, and nowhere is the want
more felt than in this, our own motherland.

Ay, my friends, I must tell you a few harsh truths. I read in the
newspaper how, when one of our fellows is murdered or ill-treated by an
Englishman, howls go up all over the country; I read and I weep, and the
next moment comes to my mind the question: Who is responsible for it
all? As a Vedantist I cannot but put that question to myself. The Hindu
is a man of introspection; he wants to see things in and through
himself, through the subjective vision. I, therefore, ask myself: Who is
responsible? And the answer comes every time: Not the English; no, they
are not responsible; it is we who are responsible for all our misery and
all our degradation, and we alone are responsible. Our aristocratic
ancestors went on treading the common masses of our country underfoot,
till they became helpless, till under this torment the poor, poor people
nearly forgot that they were human beings. They have been compelled to
be merely hewers of wood and drawers of water for centuries, so much so,
that they are made to believe that they are born as slaves, born as
hewers of wood and drawers of water. With all our boasted education of
modern times, if anybody says a kind word for them, I often find our men
shrink at once from the duty of lifting them up, these poor downtrodden
people. Not only so, but I also find that all sorts of most demoniacal
and brutal arguments, culled from the crude ideas of hereditary
transmission and other such gibberish from the Western world, are
brought forward in order to brutalise and tyrannise over the poor all
the more. At the Parliament of Religions in America, there came among
others a young man, a born Negro, a real African Negro, and he made a
beautiful speech. I became interested in the young man and now and then
talked to him, but could learn nothing about him. But one day in
England, I met some Americans; and this is what they told me. This boy
was the son of a Negro chief who lived in the heart of Africa, and that
one day another chief became angry with the father of this boy and
murdered him and murdered the mother also, and they were cooked and
eaten; he ordered the child to be killed also and cooked and eaten; but
the boy fled, and after passing through great hardships and having
travelled a distance of several hundreds of miles, he reached the
seashore, and there he was taken into an American vessel and brought
over to America. And this boy made that speech! After that, what was I
to think of your doctrine of heredity!

Ay, Brâhmins, if the Brahmin has more aptitude for learning on the
ground of heredity than the Pariah, spend no more money on the Brahmin's
education, but spend all on the Pariah. Give to the weak, for there all
the gift is needed. If the Brahmin is born clever, he can educate
himself without help. If the others are not born clever, let them have
all the teaching and the teachers they want. This is justice and reason
as I understand it. Our poor people, these downtrodden masses of India,
therefore, require to hear and to know what they really are. Ay, let
every man and woman and child, without respect of caste or birth,
weakness or strength, hear and learn that behind the strong and the
weak, behind the high and the low, behind every one, there is that
Infinite Soul, assuring the infinite possibility and the infinite
capacity of all to become great and good. Let us proclaim to every soul:
उत्तिष्ठत जाग्रत प्राप्य वरान्निबोधत — Arise, awake, and stop not till
the goal is reached. Arise, awake! Awake from this hypnotism of
weakness. *None* is really weak; the soul is infinite, omnipotent, and
omniscient. Stand up, assert yourself, proclaim the God within you, do
not deny Him! Too much of inactivity, too much of weakness, too much of
hypnotism has been and is upon our race. O ye modern Hindus,
de-hypnotise yourselves. The way to do that is found in your own sacred
books. Teach yourselves, teach every one his real nature, call upon the
sleeping soul and see how it awakes. Power will come, glory will come,
goodness will come, purity will come, and everything that is excellent
will come when this sleeping soul is roused to self-conscious activity.
Ay, if there is anything in the Gita that I like, it is these two
verses, coming out strong as the very gist, the very essence, of
Krishna's teaching — "He who sees the Supreme Lord dwelling alike in all
beings, the Imperishable in things that perish, he sees indeed. For
seeing the Lord as the same, everywhere present, he does not destroy the
Self by the Self, and thus he goes to the highest goal."

Thus there is a great opening for the Vedanta to do beneficent work both
here and elsewhere. This wonderful idea of the sameness and omnipresence
of the Supreme Soul has to be preached for the amelioration and
elevation of the human race here as elsewhere. Wherever there is evil
and wherever there is ignorance and want of knowledge, I have found out
by experience that all evil comes, as our scriptures say, relying upon
differences, and that all good comes from faith in equality, in the
underlying sameness and oneness of things. This is the great Vedantic
ideal. To have the ideal is one thing, and to apply it practically to
the details of daily life is quite another thing. It is very good to
point out an ideal, but where is the practical way to reach it?

Here naturally comes the difficult and the vexed question of caste and
of social reformation, which has been uppermost for centuries in the
minds of our people. I must frankly tell you that I am neither a
caste-breaker nor a mere social reformer. I have nothing to do directly
with your castes or with your social reformation. Live in any caste you
like, but that is no reason why you should hate another man or another
caste. It is love and love alone that I preach, and I base my teaching
on the great Vedantic truth of the sameness and omnipresence of the Soul
of the Universe. For nearly the past one hundred years, our country has
been flooded with social reformers and various social reform proposals.
Personally, I have no fault to find with these reformers. Most of them
are good, well-meaning men, and their aims too are very laudable on
certain points; but it is quite a patent fact that this one hundred
years of social reform has produced no permanent and valuable result
appreciable throughout the country. Platform speeches have been made by
the thousand, denunciations in volumes after volumes have been hurled
upon the devoted head of the Hindu race and its civilisation, and yet no
good practical result has been achieved; and where is the reason for
that? The reason is not hard to find. It is in the denunciation itself.
As I told you before, in the first place, we must try to keep our
historically acquired character as a people. I grant that we have to
take a great many things from other nations, that we have to learn many
lessons from outside; but I am sorry to say that most of our modern
reform movements have been inconsiderate imitations of Western means and
methods of work; and that surely will not do for India; therefore, it is
that all our recent reform movements have had no result.

In the second place, denunciation is not at all the way to do good. That
there are evils in our society even a child can see; and in what society
are there no evils? And let me take this opportunity, my countrymen, of
telling you that in comparing the different races and nations of the
world I have been among, I have come to the conclusion that our people
are on the whole the most moral and the most godly, and our institutions
are, in their plan and purpose, best suited to make mankind happy. I do
not, therefore, want any reformation. My ideal is growth, expansion,
development on national lines. As I look back upon the history of my
country, I do not find in the whole world another country which has done
quite so much for the improvement of the human mind. Therefore I have no
words of condemnation for my nation. I tell them, "You have done well;
only try to do better." Great things have been done in the past in this
land, and there is both time and room for greater things to be done yet.
I am sure you know that we cannot stand still. If we stand still, we
die. We have either to go forward or to go backward. We have either to
progress or to degenerate. Our ancestors did great things in the past,
but we have to grow into a fuller life and march beyond even their great
achievements. How can we now go back and degenerate ourselves? That
cannot be; that must not be; going back will lead to national decay and
death. Therefore let us go forward and do yet greater things; that is
what I have to tell you.

I am no preacher of any momentary social reform. I am not trying to
remedy evils, I only ask you to go forward and to complete the practical
realisation of the scheme of human progress that has been laid out in
the most perfect order by our ancestors. I only ask you to work to
realise more and more the Vedantic ideal of the solidarity of man and
his inborn divine nature. Had I the time, I would gladly show you how
everything we have now to do was laid out years ago by our ancient
law-givers, and how they actually anticipated all the different changes
that have taken place and are still to take place in our national
institutions. They also were breakers of caste, but they were not like
our modern men. They did not mean by the breaking of caste that all the
people in a city should sit down together to a dinner of beef-steak and
champagne, nor that all fools and lunatics in the country should marry
when, where, and whom they chose and reduce the country to a lunatic
asylum, nor did they believe that the prosperity of a nation is to be
gauged by the number of husbands its widows get. I have yet to see such
a prosperous nation.

The ideal man of our ancestors was the Brahmin. In all our books stands
out prominently this ideal of the Brahmin. In Europe there is my Lord
the Cardinal, who is struggling hard and spending thousands of pounds to
prove the nobility of his ancestors, and he will not be satisfied until
he has traced his ancestry to some dreadful tyrant who lived on a hill
and watched the people passing by, and whenever he had the opportunity,
sprang out on them and robbed them. That was the business of these
nobility-bestowing ancestors, and my Lord Cardinal is not satisfied
until he can trace his ancestry to one of these. In India, on the other
hand, the greatest princes seek to trace their descent to some ancient
sage who dressed in a bit of loin cloth, lived in a forest, eating roots
and studying the Vedas. It is there that the Indian prince goes to trace
his ancestry. You are of the high caste when you can trace your ancestry
to a Rishi, and not otherwise.

Our ideal of high birth, therefore, is different from, that of others.
Our ideal is the Brahmin of spiritual culture and renunciation. By the
Brahmin ideal what do I mean? I mean the ideal Brahmin-ness in which
worldliness is altogether absent and true wisdom is abundantly present.
That is the ideal of the Hindu race. Have you not heard how it is
declared that he, the Brahmin, is not amenable to law, that he has no
law, that he is not governed by kings, and that his body cannot be hurt?
That is perfectly true. Do not understand it in the light thrown upon it
by interested and ignorant fools, but understand it in the light of the
true and original Vedantic conception. If the Brahmin is he who has
killed all selfishness and who lives and works to acquire and propagate
wisdom and the power of love — if a country is altogether inhabited by
such Brahmins, by men and women who are spiritual and moral and good, is
it strange to think of that country as being above and beyond all law?
What police, what military are necessary to govern them? Why should any
one govern them at all? Why should they live under a government? They
are good and noble, and they are the men of God; these are our ideal
Brahmins, and we read that in the Satya Yuga there was only one caste,
and that was the Brahmin. We read in the Mahâbhârata that the whole
world was in the beginning peopled with Brahmins, and that as they began
to degenerate, they became divided into different castes, and that when
the cycle turns round, they will all go back to that Brahminical origin.
This cycle is turning round now, and I draw your attention to this fact.
Therefore our solution of the caste question is not degrading those who
are already high up, is not running amuck through food and drink, is not
jumping out of our own limits in order to have more enjoyment, but it
comes by every one of us, fulfilling the dictates of our Vedantic
religion, by our attaining spirituality, and by our becoming the ideal
Brahmin. There is a law laid on each one of you in this land by your
ancestors, whether you are Aryans or non-Aryans, Rishis or Brahmins, or
the very lowest outcasts. The command is the same to you all, that you
must make progress without stopping, and that from the highest man to
the lowest Pariah, every one in this country has to try and become the
ideal Brahmin. This Vedantic idea is applicable not only here but over
the whole world. Such is our ideal of caste as meant for raising all
humanity slowly and gently towards the realisation of that great ideal
of the spiritual man who is non-resisting, calm, steady, worshipful,
pure, and meditative. In that ideal there is God.

How are these things to be brought about? I must again draw your
attention to the fact that cursing and vilifying and abusing do not and
cannot produce anything good. They have been tried for years and years,
and no valuable result has been obtained. Good results can be produced
only through love, through sympathy. It is a great subject, and it
requires several lectures to elucidate all the plans that I have in
view, and all the ideas that are, in this connection, coming to my mind
day after day I must, therefore, conclude, only reminding you of this
fact that this ship of our nation, O Hindus, has been usefully plying
here for ages. Today, perhaps, it has sprung a leak; today, perhaps, it
has become a little worn out. And if such is the case, it behaves you
and me to try our best to stop the leak and holes. Let us tell our
countrymen of the danger, let them awake and help us. I will cry at the
top of my voice from one part of this country to the other, to awaken
the people to the situation and their duty. Suppose they do not hear me,
still I shall not have one word of abuse for them, not one word of
cursing. Great has been our nation's work in the past; and if we cannot
do greater things in the future, let us have this consolation that we
can sink and die together in peace. Be patriots, love the race which has
done such great things for us in the past. Ay, the more I compare notes,
the more I love you, my fellow-countrymen; you are good and pure and
gentle. You have been always tyrannised over, and such is the irony of
this material world of Mâyâ. Never mind that; the Spirit will triumph in
the long run. In the meanwhile let us work and let us not abuse our
country, let us not curse and abuse the weather-beaten and work-worn
institutions of our thrice-holy motherland. Have no word of condemnation
even for the most superstitious and the most irrational of its
institutions, for they also must have served some good in the past.
Remember always that there is not in the world any other country whose
institutions are really better in their aims and objects than the
institutions of this land. I have seen castes in almost every country in
the world, but nowhere is their plan and purpose so glorious as here. If
caste is thus unavoidable, I would rather have a caste of purity and
culture and self-sacrifice, than a caste of dollars. Therefore utter no
words of condemnation. Close your lips and let your hearts open. Work
out the salvation of this land and of the whole world, each of you
thinking that the entire burden is on your shoulders. Carry the light
and the life of the Vedanta to every door, and rouse up the divinity
that is hidden within every soul. Then, whatever may be the measure of
your success, you will have this satisfaction that you have lived,
worked, and died for a great cause. In the success of this cause,
howsoever brought about, is centred the salvation of humanity here and
hereafter.

</div>
