---
title: REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT MADRAS

---
<div>

[←](the_mission_of_the_vedanta.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](my_plan_of_campaign.htm)

  

## REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT MADRAS

When the Swami Vivekananda arrived at Madras an address of welcome was
presented to him by the Madras Reception Committee. It read as follows:

REVERED SWAMIN,

On behalf of your Hindu co-religionists in Madras, we offer you a most
hearty welcome on the occasion of your return from your Religious
Mission in the West. Our object in approaching you with this address is
not the performance of any merely formal or ceremonial function; we come
to offer you the love of our hearts and to give expression to our
feeling of thankfulness for the services which you, by the grace of God,
have been able to render to the great cause of Truth by proclaiming
India's lofty religious ideals.

When the Parliament of Religions was organised at Chicago, some of our
countrymen felt naturally anxious that our noble and ancient religion
should be worthily represented therein and properly expounded to the
American nation, and through them to the Western world at large. It was
then our privilege to meet you and to realise once again, what has so
often proved true in the history of nations, that with the hour rises
the man who is to help forward the cause of Truth. When you undertook to
represent Hinduism at the Parliament of Religions, most of us felt, from
what we had known of your great gifts, that the cause of Hinduism would
be ably upheld by its representative in that memorable religious
assembly. Your representation of the doctrines of Hinduism at once
clear, correct, and authoritative, not only produced a remarkable
impression at the Parliament of Religions itself, but has also led a
number of men and women even in foreign lands to realise that out of the
fountain of Indian spirituality refreshing draughts of immortal life and
love may be taken so as to bring about a larger, fuller, and holier
evolution of humanity than has yet been witnessed on this globe of ours.
We are particularly thankful to you for having called the attention of
the representatives of the World's Great Religions to the characteristic
Hindu doctrine of the Harmony and Brotherhood of Religions. No longer is
it possible for really enlightened and earnest men to insist that Truth
and Holiness are the exclusive possessions of any particular locality or
body of men or system of doctrine and discipline, or to hold that any
faith or philosophy will survive to the exclusion and destruction of all
others. In your own happy language which brings out fully the sweet
harmony in the heart of the Bhagavad-Gitâ, "The whole world of religions
is only a travelling, a coming up of different men and women through
various conditions and circumstances to the same goal."

Had you contented yourself with simply discharging this high and holy
duty entrusted to your care, even then, your Hindu co-religionists would
have been glad to recognise with joy and thankfulness the inestimable
value of your work. But in making your way into Western countries you
have also been the bearer of a message of light and peace to the whole
of mankind, based on the old teachings of India's "Religion Eternal". In
thanking you for all that you have done in the way of upholding the
profound rationality of the religion of the Vedanta, it gives us great
pleasure to allude to the great task you have in view, of establishing
an active mission with permanent centres for the propagation of our
religion and philosophy. The undertaking to which you propose to devote
yours energies is worthy of the holy traditions you represent and
worthy, too, of the spirit of the great Guru who has inspired your life
and its aims. We hope and trust that it may be given to us also to
associate ourselves with you in this noble work. We fervently pray to
Him who is the all-knowing and all-merciful Lord of the Universe to
bestow on you long life and full strength and to bless your labours with
that crown of glory and success which ever deserves to shine on the brow
of immortal Truth.

Next was read the following address from the Maharaja of Khetri:

YOUR HOLINESS,

I wish to take this early opportunity of your arrival and reception at
Madras to express my feelings of joy and pleasure on your safe return to
India and to offer my heartfelt congratulation on the great success
which has attended your unselfish efforts in Western lands, where it is
the boast of the highest intellects that, "Not an inch of ground once
conquered by science has ever been reconquered by religion" — although
indeed science has hardly ever claimed to oppose true religion. This
holy land of Âryâvarta has been singularly fortunate in having been able
to secure so worthy a representative of her sages at the Parliament of
Religions held at Chicago, and it is entirely due to your wisdom,
enterprise, and enthusiasm that the Western world has come to understand
what an inexhaustible store of spirituality India has even today. Your
labours have now proved beyond the possibility of doubt that the
contradictions of the world's numerous creeds are all reconciled in the
universal light of the Vedanta, and that all the peoples of the world
have need to understand and practically realise the great truth that
"Unity in variety" is nature's plan in the evolution of the universe,
and that only by harmony and brotherhood among religions and by mutual
toleration and help can the mission and destiny of humanity be
accomplished. Under your high and holy auspices and the inspiring
influence of your lofty teachings, we of the present generation have the
privilege of witnessing the inauguration of a new era in the world's
history, in which bigotry, hatred, and conflict may, I hope, cease, and
peace, sympathy, and love reign among men. And I in common with my
people pray that the blessings of God may rest on you and your labours.

When the addresses had been read, the Swami left the hall and mounted to
the box seat of a carriage in waiting. Owing to the intense enthusiasm
of the large crowd assembled to welcome him, the Swami was only able to
make the following short reply, postponing his reply proper to a future
occasion:

Man proposes and God disposes. It was proposed that the addresses and
the replies should be carried in the English fashion. But here God
disposes — I am speaking to a scattered audience from a chariot in the
Gitâ fashion. Thankful we are, therefore, that it should have happened
so. It gives a zest to the speech, and strength to what I am going to
tell you. I do not know whether my voice will reach all of you, but I
will try my best. I never before had an opportunity of addressing a
large open-air meeting.

The wonderful kindness, the fervent and enthusiastic joy with which I
have been received from Colombo to Madras, and seem likely to be
received all over India, have passed even my most sanguine expectations;
but that only makes me glad, for it proves the assertion which I have
made again and again in the past that as each nation has one ideal as
its vitality, as each nation has one particular groove which is to
become its own, so religion is the peculiarity of the growth of the
Indian mind. In other parts of the world, religion is one of the many
considerations, in fact it is a minor occupation. In England, for
instance, religion is part of the national policy. The English Church
belongs to the ruling class, and as such, whether they believe in it or
not, they all support it, thinking that it is their Church. Every
gentleman and every lady is expected to belong to that Church. It is a
sign of gentility. So with other countries, there is a great national
power; either it is represented by politics or it is represented by some
intellectual pursuits; either it is represented by militarism or by
commercialism. There the heart of the nation beats, and religion is one
of the many secondary ornamental things which that nation possesses.

Here in India, it is religion that forms the very core of the national
heart. It is the backbone, the bed-rock, the foundation upon which the
national edifice has been built. Politics, power, and even intellect
form a secondary consideration here. Religion, therefore, is the one
consideration in India. I have been told a hundred times of the want of
information there is among the masses of the Indian people; and that is
true. Landing in Colombo I found not one of them had heard of the
political upheavals going on in Europe — the changes, the downfall of
ministries, and so forth. Not one of them had heard of what is meant by
socialism, and anarchism, and of this and that change in the political
atmosphere of Europe. But that there was a Sannyasin from India sent
over to the Parliament of Religions, and that he had achieved some sort
of success had become known to every man, woman, and child in Ceylon. It
proves that there is no lack of information, nor lack of desire for
information where it is of the character that suits them, when it falls
in line with the necessities of their life. Politics and all these
things never formed a necessity of Indian life, but religion and
spirituality have been the one condition upon which it lived and thrived
and has got to live in the future.

Two great problems are being decided by the nations of the world. India
has taken up one side, and the rest of the world has taken the other
side. And the problem is this: who is to survive? What makes one nation
survive and the others die? Should love survive or hatred, should
enjoyment survive or renunciation, should matter survive or the spirit,
in the struggle of life? We think as our ancestors did, away back in
pre-historic ages. Where even tradition cannot pierce the gloom of that
past, there our glorious ancestors have taken up their side of the
problem and have thrown the challenge to the world. Our solution is
renunciation, giving up, fearlessness, and love; these are the fittest
to survive. Giving up the senses makes a nation survive. As a proof of
this, here is history today telling us of mushroom nations rising and
falling almost every century — starting up from nothingness, making
vicious play for a few days, and then melting. This big, gigantic race
which had to grapple with some of the greatest problems of misfortunes,
dangers, and vicissitudes such as never fell upon the head of any other
nation of the world, survives because it has taken the side of
renunciation; for without renunciation how can there be religion? Europe
is trying to, solve the other side of the problem as to how much a man
can have, how much more power a man can possess by hook or by crook, by
some means or other. Competition — cruel, cold, and heartless — is the
law of Europe. Our law is caste — the breaking of competition, checking
its forces, mitigating its cruelties, smoothing the passage of the human
soul through this mystery of life.

At this stage the crowd became so unmanageable that the Swami could not
make himself heard to advantage. He, therefore ended his address with
these words:

Friends, I am very much pleased with your enthusiasm. It is marvellous.
Do not think that I am displeased with you at all; I am, on the other
hand, intensely pleased at the show of enthusiasm. That is what is
required — tremendous enthusiasm. Only make it permanent; keep it up.
Let not the fire die out. We want to work out great things in India. For
that I require your help; such enthusiasm is necessary. It is impossible
to hold this meeting any longer. I thank you very much for your kindness
and enthusiastic welcome. In calm moments we shall have better thoughts
and ideas to exchange; now for the time, my friends, good-bye.

It is impossible to address you on all sides, therefore you must content
yourselves this evening with merely seeing me. I will reserve my speech
for some other occasion. I thank you very much for your enthusiastic
welcome.

</div>
