---
title: MY PLAN OF CAMPAIGN

---
<div>

[←](reply_to_the_address_of_welcome_at_madras.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](vedanta_in_its_applications_to_indian_life.htm)

  

## MY PLAN OF CAMPAIGN

(*Delivered at the Victoria Hall, Madras*)

As the other day we could not proceed, owing to the crowd, I shall take
this opportunity of thanking the people of Madras for the uniform
kindness that I have received at their hands. I do not know how better
to express my gratitude for the beautiful words that have been expressed
in the addresses than by praying to the Lord to make me worthy of the
kind and generous expressions and by working all my life for the cause
of our religion and to serve our motherland; and may the Lord make me
worthy of them.

With all my faults, I think I have a little bit of boldness. I had a
message from India to the West, and boldly I gave it to the American and
the English peoples. I want, before going into the subject of the day,
to speak a few bold words to you all. There have been certain
circumstances growing around me, tending to thwart me, oppose my
progress, and crush me out of existence if they could. Thank God they
have failed, as such attempts will always fail. But there has been, for
the last three years, a certain amount of misunderstanding, and so long
as I was in foreign lands, I held my peace and did not even speak one
word; but now, standing upon the soil of my motherland, I want to give a
few words of explanation. Not that I care what the result will be of
these words — not that I care what feeling I shall evoke from you by
these words. I care very little, for I am the same Sannyâsin that
entered your city about four years ago with this staff and Kamandalu;
the same broad world is before me. Without further preface let me begin.

First of all, I have to say a few words about the Theosophical Society.
It goes without saying that a certain amount of good work has been done
to India by the Society; as such every Hindu is grateful to it, and
especially to Mrs. Besant; for though I know very little of her, yet
what little I know has impressed me with the idea that she is a sincere
well-wisher of this motherland of ours, and that she is doing the best
in her power to raise our country. For that, the eternal gratitude of
every trueborn Indian is hers, and all blessings be on her and hers for
ever. But that is one thing — and joining the Society of the
Theosophists is another. Regard and estimation and love are one thing,
and swallowing everything any one has to say, without reasoning, without
criticising, without analysing, is quite another. There is a report
going round that the Theosophists helped the little achievements of mine
in America and England. I have to tell you plainly that every word of it
is wrong, every word of it is untrue. We hear so much tall talk in this
world, of liberal ideas and sympathy with differences of opinion. That
is very good, but as a fact, we find that one sympathises with another
only so long as the other believes in everything he has to say, but as
soon as he dares to differ, that sympathy is gone, that love vanishes.
There are others, again, who have their own axes to grind, and if
anything arises in a country which prevents the grinding of them, their
hearts burn, any amount of hatred comes out, and they do not know what
to do. What harm does it do to the Christian missionary that the Hindus
are trying to cleanse their own houses? What injury will it do to the
Brâhmo Samâj and other reform bodies that the Hindus are trying their
best to reform themselves? Why should they stand in opposition? Why
should they be the greatest enemies of these movements? Why? — I ask. It
seems to me that their hatred and jealousy are so bitter that no why or
how can be asked there.

Four years ago, when I, a poor, unknown, friendless Sannyasin was going
to America, going beyond the waters to America without any introductions
or friends there, I called on the leader of the Theosophical Society.
Naturally I thought he, being an American and a lover of India, perhaps
would give me a letter of introduction to somebody there. He asked me,
"Will you join my Society?" "No," I replied, "how can I? For I do not
believe in most of your doctrines." "Then, I am sorry, I cannot do
anything for you," he answered. That was not paving the way for me. I
reached America, as you know, through the help of a few friends of
Madras. Most of them are present here. Only one is absent, Mr. Justice
Subramania Iyer, to whom my deepest gratitude is due. He has the insight
of a genius and is one of the staunchest friends I have in this life, a
true friend indeed, a true child of India. I arrived in America several
months before the Parliament of Religions began. The money I had with me
was little, and it was soon spent. Winter approached, and I had only
thin summer clothes. I did not know what to do in that cold, dreary
climate, for if I went to beg in the streets, the result would have been
that I would have been sent to jail. There I was with the last few
dollars in my pocket. I sent a wire to my friends in Madras. This came
to be known to the Theosophists, and one of them wrote, "Now the devil
is going to die; God bless us all." Was that paving the way for me? I
would not have mentioned this now; but, as my countrymen wanted to know,
it must come out. For three years I have not opened my lips about these
things; silence has been my motto; but today the thing has come out.
That was not all. I saw some Theosophists in the Parliament of
Religions, and I wanted to talk and mix with them. I remember the looks
of scorn which were on their faces, as much as to say, "What business
has the worm to be here in the midst of the gods?" After I had got name
and fame at the Parliament of Religions, then came tremendous work for
me; but at every turn the Theosophists tried to cry me down.
Theosophists were advised not to come and hear my lectures, for thereby
they would lose all sympathy of the Society, because the laws of the
esoteric section declare that any man who joins that esoteric section
should receive instruction from Kuthumi and Moria, of course through
their visible representatives — Mr. Judge and Mrs. Besant — so that, to
join the esoteric section means to surrender one's independence.
Certainly I could not do any such thing, nor could I call any man a
Hindu who did any such thing. I had a great respect for Mr. Judge. He
was a worthy man, open, fair, simple, and he was the best representative
the Theosophists ever had. I have no right to criticise the dispute
between him and Mrs. Besant when each claims that his or her Mahâtmâ is
right. And the strange part of it is that the same Mahatma is claimed by
both. Lord knows the truth: He is the Judge, and no one has the right to
pass judgement when the balance is equal. Thus they prepared the way for
me all over America!

They joined the other opposition — the Christian missionaries. There is
not one black lie imaginable that these latter did not invent against
me. They blackened my character from city to city, poor and friendless
though I was in a foreign country. They tried to oust me from every
house and to make every man who became my friend my enemy. They tried to
starve me out; and I am sorry to say that one of my own countrymen took
part against me in this. He is the leader of a reform party in India.
This gentleman is declaring every day, "Christ has come to India." Is
this the way Christ is to come to India? Is this the way to reform
India? And this gentleman I knew from my childhood; he was one of my
best friends; when I saw him — I had not met for a long time one of my
countrymen — I was so glad, and this was the treatment I received from
him. The day the Parliament cheered me, the day I became popular in
Chicago, from that day his tone changed; and in an underhand way, he
tried to do everything he could to injure me. Is that the way that
Christ will come to India? Is that the lesson that he had learnt after
sitting twenty years at the feet of Christ? Our great reformers declare
that Christianity and Christian power are going to uplift the Indian
people. Is that the way to do it? Surely, if that gentleman is an
illustration, it does not look very hopeful.

One word more: I read in the organ of the social reformers that I am
called a Shudra and am challenged as to what right a Shudra has to
become a Sannyasin. To which I reply: I trace my descent to one at whose
feet every Brahmin lays flowers when he utters the words — यमाय
धर्मराजाय चित्रगुप्ताय वै नमः — and whose descendants are the purest of
Kshatriyas. If you believe in your mythology or your Paurânika
scriptures, let these so-called reformers know that my caste, apart from
other services in the past, ruled half of India for centuries. If my
caste is left out of consideration, what will there be left of the
present-day civilisation of India? In Bengal alone, my blood has
furnished them with their greatest philosopher, the greatest poet, the
greatest historian, the greatest archaeologist, the greatest religious
preacher; my blood has furnished India with the greatest of her modern
scientists. These detractors ought to have known a little of our own
history, and to have studied our three castes, and learnt that the
Brahmin, the Kshatriya, and the Vaishya have equal right to be
Sannyasins: the Traivarnikas have equal right to the Vedas. This is only
by the way. I just refer to this, but I am not at all hurt if they call
me a Shudra. It will be a little reparation for the tyranny of my
ancestors over the poor. If I am a Pariah, I will be all the more glad,
for I am the disciple of a man, who — the Brahmin of Brahmins — wanted
to cleanse the house of a Pariah. Of course the Pariah would not allow
him; how could he let this Brahmin Sannyasin come and cleanse his house!
And this man woke up in the dead of night, entered surreptitiously the
house of this Pariah, cleansed his latrine, and with his long hair wiped
the place, and that he did day after day in order that he might make
himself the servant of all. I bear the feet of that man on my head; he
is my hero; that hero's life I will try to imitate. By being the servant
of all, a Hindu seeks to uplift himself. That is how the Hindus should
uplift the masses, and not by looking for any foreign influence. Twenty
years of occidental civilisation brings to my mind the illustration of
the man who wants to starve his own friend in a foreign land, simply
because this friend is popular, simply because he thinks that this man
stands in the way of his making money. And the other is the illustration
of what genuine, orthodox Hinduism itself will do at home. Let any one
of our reformers bring out that life, ready to serve even a Pariah, and
then I will sit at his feet and learn, and not before that. One ounce of
practice is worth twenty thousand tons of big talk.

Now I come to the reform societies in Madras. They have been very kind
to me. They have given me very kind words, and they have pointed out,
and I heartily agree with them, that there is a difference between the
reformers of Bengal and those of Madras. Many of you will remember what
I have very often told you, that Madras is in a very beautiful state
just now. It has not got into the play of action and reaction as Bengal
has done. Here there is steady and slow progress all through; here is
growth, and not reaction. In many cases, end to a certain extent, there
is a revival in Bengal; but in Madras it is not a revival, it is a
growth, a natural growth. As such, I entirely agree with what the
reformers point out as the difference between the two peoples; but there
is one difference which they do not understand. Some of these societies,
I am afraid, try to intimidate me to join them. That is a strange thing
for them to attempt. A man who has met starvation face to face for
fourteen years of his life, who has not known where he will get a meal
the next day and where to sleep, cannot be intimidated so easily. A man,
almost without clothes, who dared to live where the thermometer
registered thirty degrees below zero, without knowing where the next
meal was to come from, cannot be so easily intimidated in India. This is
the first thing I will tell them — I have a little will of my own. I
have my little experience too; and I have a message for the world which
I will deliver without fear and without care for the future. To the
reformers I will point out that I am a greater reformer than any one of
them. They want to reform only little bits. I want root-and-branch
reform. Where we differ is in the method. Theirs is the method of
destruction, mine is that of construction. I do not believe in reform; I
believe in growth. I do not dare to put myself in the position of God
and dictate to our society, "This way thou shouldst move and not that."
I simply want to be like the squirrel in the building of Râma's bridge,
who was quite content to put on the bridge his little quota of
sand-dust. That is my position. This wonderful national machine has
worked through ages, this wonderful river of national life is flowing
before us. Who knows, and who dares to say whether it is good and how it
shall move? Thousands of circumstances are crowding round it, giving it
a special impulse, making it dull at one time and quicker at another.
Who dares command its motion? Ours is only to work, as the Gita says,
without looking for results. Feed the national life with the fuel it
wants, but the growth is its own; none can dictate its growth to it.
Evils are plentiful in our society, but so are there evils in every
other society. Here the earth is soaked sometimes with widows' tears;
there in the West, the air is rent with the sighs of the unmarried. Here
poverty is the great bane of life; there the life-weariness of luxury is
the great bane that is upon the race. Here men want to commit suicide
because they have nothing to eat; there they commit suicide because they
have so much to eat. Evil is everywhere; it is like chronic rheumatism.
Drive it from the foot, it goes to the head; drive it from there, it
goes somewhere else. It is a question of chasing it from place to place;
that is all. Ay, children, to try to remedy evil is not the true way.
Our philosophy teaches that evil and good are eternally conjoined, the
obverse and the reverse of the same coin. If you have one, you must have
the other; a wave in the ocean must be at the cost of a hollow
elsewhere. Nay, all life is evil. No breath can be breathed without
killing some one else; not a morsel of food can be eaten without
depriving some one of it. This is the law; this is philosophy. Therefore
the only thing we can do is to understand that all this work against
evil is more subjective than objective. The work against evil is more
educational than actual, however big we may talk. This, first of all, is
the idea of work against evil; and it ought to make us calmer, it ought
to take fanaticism out of our blood. The history of the world teaches us
that wherever there have been fanatical reforms, the only result has
been that they have defeated their own ends. No greater upheaval for the
establishment of right and liberty can be imagined than the war for the
abolition of slavery in America. You all know about it. And what has
been its results? The slaves are a hundred times worse off today than
they were before the abolition. Before the abolition, these poor negroes
were the property of somebody, and, as properties, they had to be looked
after, so that they might not deteriorate. Today they are the property
of nobody. Their lives are of no value; they are burnt alive on mere
presences. They are shot down without any law for their murderers; for
they are niggers, they are not human beings, they are not even animals;
and that is the effect of such violent taking away of evil by law or by
fanaticism. Such is the testimony of history against every fanatical
movement, even for doing good. I have seen that. My own experience has
taught me that. Therefore I cannot join any one of these condemning
societies. Why condemn? There are evils in every society; everybody
knows it. Every child of today knows it; he can stand upon a platform
and give us a harangue on the awful evils in Hindu Society. Every
uneducated foreigner who comes here globe-trotting takes a vanishing
railway view of India and lectures most learnedly on the awful evils in
India. We admit that there are evils. Everybody can show what evil is,
but he is the friend of mankind who finds a way out of the difficulty.
Like the drowning boy and the philosopher — when the philosopher was
lecturing him, the boy cried, "Take me out of the water first" — so our
people cry: "We have had lectures enough, societies enough, papers
enough; where is the man who will lend us a hand to drag us out? Where
is the man who really loves us? Where is the man who has sympathy for
us?" Ay, that man is wanted. That is where I differ entirely from these
reform movements. For a hundred years they have been here. What good has
been done except the creation of a most vituperative, a most
condemnatory literature? Would to God it was not here! They have
criticised, condemned, abused the orthodox, until the orthodox have
caught their tone and paid them back in their own coin; and the result
is the creation of a literature in every vernacular which is the shame
of the race, the shame of the country. Is this reform? Is this leading
the nation to glory? Whose fault is this?

There is, then, another great consideration. Here in India, we have
always been governed by kings; kings have made all our laws. Now the
kings are gone, and there is no one left to make a move. The government
dare not; it has to fashion its ways according to the growth of public
opinion. It takes time, quite a long time, to make a healthy, strong,
public opinion which will solve its own problems; and in the interim we
shall have to wait. The whole problem of social reform, therefore,
resolves itself into this: where are those who want reform? Make them
first. Where are the people? The tyranny of a minority is the worst
tyranny that the world ever sees. A few men who think that certain
things are evil will not make a nation move. Why does not the nation
move? First educate the nation, create your legislative body, and then
the law will be forthcoming. First create the power, the sanction from
which the law will spring. The kings are gone; where is the new
sanction, the new power of the people? Bring it up. Therefore, even for
social reform, the first duty is to educate the people, and you will
have to wait till that time comes. Most of the reforms that have been
agitated for during the past century have been ornamental. Every one of
these reforms only touches the first two castes, and no other. The
question of widow marriage would not touch seventy per cent of the
Indian women, and all such questions only reach the higher castes of
Indian people who are educated, mark you, at the expense of the masses.
Every effort has been spent in cleaning their own houses. But that is no
reformation. You must go down to the basis of the thing, to the very
root of the matter. That is what I call radical reform. Put the fire
there and let it burn upwards and make an Indian nation. And the
solution of the problem is not so easy, as it is a big and a vast one.
Be not in a hurry, this problem has been known several hundred years.

Today it is the fashion to talk of Buddhism and Buddhistic agnosticism,
especially in the South. Little do they dream that this degradation
which is with us today has been left by Buddhism. This is the legacy
which Buddhism has left to us. You read in books written by men who had
never studied the rise and fall of Buddhism that the spread of Buddhism
was owing to the wonderful ethics and the wonderful personality of
Gautama Buddha. I have every respect and veneration for Lord Buddha, but
mark my words, the spread of Buddhism was less owing to the doctrines
and the personality of the great preacher, than to the temples that were
built, the idols that were erected, and the gorgeous ceremonials that
were put before the nation. Thus Buddhism progressed. The little
fire-places in the houses in which the people poured their libations
were not strong enough to hold their own against these gorgeous temples
and ceremonies; but later on the whole thing degenerated. It became a
mass of corruption of which I cannot speak before this audience; but
those who want to know about it may see a little of it in those big
temples, full of sculptures, in Southern India; and this is all the
inheritance we have from the Buddhists.

Then arose the great reformer Shankarâchârya and his followers, and
during these hundreds of years, since his time to the present day, there
has been the slow bringing back of the Indian masses to the pristine
purity of the Vedantic religion. These reformers knew full well the
evils which existed, yet they did not condemn. They did not say, "All
that you have is wrong, and you must throw it away." It can never be so.
Today I read that my friend Dr. Barrows says that in three hundred years
Christianity overthrew the Roman and Greek religious influences. That is
not the word of a man who has seen Europe, and Greece, and Rome. The
influence of Roman and Greek religion is all there, even in Protestant
countries, only with changed names — old gods rechristened in a new
fashion. They change their names; the goddesses become Marys and the
gods become saints, and the ceremonials become new; even the old title
of Pontifex Maximus is there. So, sudden changes cannot be and
Shankaracharya knew it. So did Râmânuja. The only way left to them was
slowly to bring up to the highest ideal the existing religion. If they
had sought to apply the other method, they would have been hypocrites,
for the very fundamental doctrine of their religion is evolution, the
soul going towards the highest goal, through all these various stages
and phases, which are, therefore necessary and helpful. And who dares
condemn them?

It has become a trite saying that idolatry is wrong, and every man
swallows it at the present time without questioning. I once thought so,
and to pay the penalty of that I had to learn my lesson sitting at the
feet of a man who realised everything through idols; I allude to
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. If such Ramakrishna Paramahamsas are produced
by idol-worship, what will you have — the reformer's creed or any number
of idols? I want an answer. Take a thousand idols more if you can
produce Ramakrishna Paramahamsas through idol worship, and may God speed
you! Produce such noble natures by any means you can. Yet idolatry is
condemned! Why? Nobody knows. Because some hundreds of years ago some
man of Jewish blood happened to condemn it? That is, he happened to
condemn everybody else's idols except his own. If God is represented in
any beautiful form or any symbolic form, said the Jew, it is awfully
bad; it is sin. But if He is represented in the form of a chest, with
two angels sitting on each side, and a cloud hanging over it, it is the
holy of holies. If God comes in the form of a dove, it is holy. But if
He comes in the form of a cow, it is heathen superstition; condemn it!
That is how the world goes. That is why the poet says, "What fools we
mortals be!" How difficult it is to look through each other's eyes, and
that is the bane of humanity. That is the basis of hatred and jealousy,
of quarrel and of fight. Boys, moustached babies, who never went out of
Madras, standing up and wanting to dictate laws to three hundred
millions of people with thousands of traditions at their back! Are you
not ashamed? Stand back from such blasphemy and learn first your
lessons! Irreverent boys, simply because you can scrawl a few lines upon
paper and get some fool to publish them for you, you think you are the
educators of the world, you think you are the public opinion of India!
Is it so? This I have to tell to the social reformers of Madras that I
have the greatest respect and love for them. I love them for their great
hearts and their love for their country, for the poor, for the
oppressed. But what I would tell them with a brother's love is that
their method is not right; It has been tried a hundred years and failed.
Let us try some new method.

Did India ever stand in want of reformers? Do you read the history of
India? Who was Ramanuja? Who was Shankara? Who was Nânak? Who was
Chaitanya? Who was Kabir? Who was Dâdu? Who were all these great
preachers, one following the other, a galaxy of stars of the first
magnitude? Did not Ramanuja feel for the lower classes? Did he not try
all his life to admit even the Pariah to his community? Did he not try
to admit even Mohammedans to his own fold? Did not Nanak confer with
Hindus and Mohammedans, and try to bring about a new state of things?
They all tried, and their work is still going on. The difference is
this. They had not the fanfaronade of the reformers of today; they had
no curses on their lips as modern reformers have; their lips pronounced
only blessings. They never condemned. They said to the people that the
race must always grow. They looked back and they said, "O Hindus, what
you have done is good, but, my brothers, let us do better." They did not
say, "You have been wicked, now let us be good." They said, "You have
been good, but let us now be better." That makes a whole world of
difference. We must grow according to our nature. Vain is it to attempt
the lines of action that foreign societies have engrafted upon us; it is
impossible. Glory unto God, that it is impossible, that we cannot be
twisted and tortured into the shape oil other nations. I do not condemn
the institutions of other races; they are good for them, but not for us.
What is meat for them may be poison for us. This is the first lesson to
learn. With other sciences, other institutions, and other traditions
behind them, they have got their present system. We, with our
traditions, with thousands of years of Karma behind us, naturally can
only follow our own bent, run in our own grooves; and that we shall have
to do.

What is my plan then? My plan is to follow the ideas of the great
ancient Masters. I have studied their work, and it has been given unto
me to discover the line of action they took. They were the great
originators of society. They were the great givers of strength, and of
purity, and of life. They did most marvellous work. We have to do most
marvellous work also. Circumstances have become a little different, and
in consequence the lines of action have to be changed a little, and that
is all. I see that each nation, like each individual, has one theme in
this life, which is its centre, the principal note round which every
other note comes to form the harmony. In one nation political power is
its vitality, as in England, artistic life in another, and so on. In
India, religious life forms the centre, the keynote of the whole music
of national life; and if any nation attempts to throw off its national
vitality — the direction which has become its own through the
transmission of centuries — that nation dies if it succeeds in the
attempt. And, therefore, if you succeed in the attempt to throw off your
religion and take up either politics, or society, or any other things as
your centre, as the vitality of your national life, the result will be
that you will become extinct. To prevent this you must make all and
everything work through that vitality of your religion. Let all your
nerves vibrate through the backbone of your religion. I have seen that I
cannot preach even religion to Americans without showing them its
practical effect on social life. I could not preach religion in England
without showing the wonderful political changes the Vedanta would bring.
So, in India, social reform has to be preached by showing how much more
spiritual a life the new system will bring; and politics has to be
preached by showing how much it will improve the one thing that the
nation wants — its spirituality. Every man has to make his own choice;
so has every nation. We made our choice ages ago, and we must abide by
it. And, after all, it is not such a bad choice. Is it such a bad choice
in this world to think not of matter but of spirit, not of man but of
God? That intense faith in another world, that intense hatred for this
world, that intense power of renunciation, that intense faith in God,
that intense faith in the immortal soul, is in you. I challenge anyone
to give it up. You cannot. You may try to impose upon me by becoming
materialists, by talking materialism for a few months, but I know what
you are; if I take you by the hand, back you come as good theists as
ever were born. How can you change your nature?

So every improvement in India requires first of all an upheaval in
religion. Before flooding India with socialistic or political ideas,
first deluge the land with spiritual ideas. The first work that demands
our attention is that the most wonderful truths confined in our
Upanishads, in our scriptures, in our Purânas must be brought out from
the books, brought out from the monasteries, brought out from the
forests, brought out from the possession of selected bodies of people,
and scattered broadcast all over the land, so that these truths may run
like fire all over the country from north to south and east to west,
from the Himalayas to Comorin, from Sindh to the Brahmaputra. Everyone
must know of them, because it is said, "This has first to be heard, then
thought upon, and then meditated upon." Let the people hear first, and
whoever helps in making the people hear about the great truths in their
own scriptures cannot make for himself a better Karma today. Says our
Vyasa, "In the Kali Yuga there is one Karma left. Sacrifices and
tremendous Tapasyâs are of no avail now. Of Karma one remains, and that
is the Karma of giving." And of these gifts, the gift of spirituality
and spiritual knowledge is the highest; the next gift is the gift of
secular knowledge; the next is the gift of life; and the fourth is the
gift of food. Look at this wonderfully charitable race; look at the
amount of gifts that are made in this poor, poor country; look at the
hospitality where a man can travel from the north to the south, having
the best in the land, being treated always by everyone as if he were a
friend, and where no beggar starves so long as there is a piece of bread
anywhere!

In this land of charity, let us take up the energy of the first charity,
the diffusion of spiritual knowledge. And that diffusion should not be
confined within the bounds of India; it must go out all over the world.
This has been the custom. Those that tell you that Indian thought never
went outside of India, those that tell you that I am the first Sannyasin
who went to foreign lands to preach, do not know the history of their
own race. Again and again this phenomenon has happened. Whenever the
world has required it, this perennial flood of spirituality has
overflowed and deluged the world. Gifts of political knowledge can be
made with the blast of trumpets and the march of cohorts. Gifts of
secular knowledge and social knowledge can be made with fire and sword.
But spiritual knowledge can only be given in silence like the dew that
falls unseen and unheard, yet bringing into bloom masses of roses. This
has been the gift of India to the world again and again. Whenever there
has been a great conquering race, bringing the nations of the world
together, making roads and transit possible, immediately India arose and
gave her quota of spiritual power to the sum total of the progress of
the world. This happened ages before Buddha was born, and remnants of it
are still left in China, in Asia Minor, and in the heart of the Malayan
Archipelago. This was the case when the great Greek conqueror united the
four corners of the then known world; then rushed out Indian
spirituality, and the boasted civilisation of the West is but the
remnant of that deluge. Now the same opportunity has again come; the
power of England has linked the nations of the world together as was
never done before. English roads and channels of communication rush from
one end of the world to the other. Owing to English genius, the world
today has been linked in such a fashion as has never before been done.
Today trade centres have been formed such as have never been before in
the history of mankind. And immediately, consciously or unconsciously,
India rises up and pours forth her gifts of spirituality; and they will
rush through these roads till they have reached the very ends of the
world. That I went to America was not my doing or your doing; but the
God of India who is guiding her destiny sent me, and will send hundreds
of such to all the nations of the world. No power on earth can resist
it. This also has to be done. You must go out to preach your religion,
preach it to every nation under the sun, preach it to every people. This
is the first thing to do. And after preaching spiritual knowledge, along
with it will come that secular knowledge and every other knowledge that
you want; but if you attempt to get the secular knowledge without
religion, I tell you plainly, vain is your attempt in India, it will
never have a hold on the people. Even the great Buddhistic movement was
a failure, partially on account of that.

Therefore, my friends, my plan is to start institutions in India, to
train our young men as preachers of the truths of our scriptures in
India and outside India. Men, men, these are wanted: everything else
will be ready, but strong, vigorous, believing young men, sincere to the
backbone, are wanted. A hundred such and the world becomes
revolutionized. The will is stronger than anything else. Everything must
go down before the will, for that comes from God and God Himself; a pure
and a strong will is omnipotent. Do you not believe in it? Preach,
preach unto the world the great truths of your religion; the world waits
for them. For centuries people have been taught theories of degradation.
They have been told that they are nothing. The masses have been told all
over the world that they are not human beings. They have been so
frightened for centuries, till they have nearly become animals. Never
were they allowed to hear of the Atman. Let them hear of the Atman —
that even the lowest of the low have the Atman within, which never dies
and never is born — of Him whom the sword cannot pierce, nor the fire
burn, nor the air dry — immortal, without beginning or end, the
all-pure, omnipotent, and omnipresent Atman! Let them have faith in
themselves, for what makes the difference between the Englishman and
you? Let them talk their religion and duty and so forth. I have found
the difference. The difference is here, that the Englishman believes in
himself and you do not. He believes in his being an Englishman, and he
can do anything. That brings out the God within him, and he can do
anything he likes. You have been told and taught that you can do
nothing, and nonentities you are becoming every day. What we want is
strength, so believe in yourselves. We have become weak, and that is why
occultism and mysticism come to us — these creepy things; there may be
great truths in them, but they have nearly destroyed us. Make your
nerves strong. What we want is muscles of iron and nerves of steel. We
have wept long enough. No more weeping, but stand on your feet and be
men. It is a man-making religion that we want. It is man-making theories
that we want. It is man-making education all round that we want. And
here is the test of truth — anything that makes you weak physically,
intellectually, and spiritually, reject as poison; there is no life in
it, it cannot be true. Truth is strengthening. Truth is purity, truth is
all-knowledge; truth must be strengthening, must be enlightening, must
be invigorating. These mysticisms, in spite of some grains of truth in
them, are generally weakening. Believe me, I have a lifelong experience
of it, and the one conclusion that I draw is that it is weakening. I
have travelled all over India, searched almost every cave here, and
lived in the Himalayas. I know people who lived there all their lives. I
love my nation, I cannot see you degraded, weakened any more than you
are now. Therefore I am bound for your sake and for truth's sake to cry,
"Hold!" and to raise my voice against this degradation of my race. Give
up these weakening mysticisms and be strong. Go back to your Upanishads
— the shining, the strengthening, the bright philosophy — and part from
all these mysterious things, all these weakening things. Take up this
philosophy; the greatest truths are the simplest things in the world,
simple as your own existence. The truths of the Upanishads are before
you. Take them up, live up to them, and the salvation of India will be
at hand.

One word more and I have finished. They talk of patriotism. I believe in
patriotism, and I also have my own ideal of patriotism. Three things are
necessary for great achievements. First, feel from the heart. What is in
the intellect or reason? It goes a few steps and there it stops. But
through the heart comes inspiration. Love opens the most impossible
gates; love is the gate to all the secrets of the universe. Feel,
therefore, my would-be reformers, my would-be patriots! Do you feel? Do
you feel that millions and millions of the descendants of gods and of
sages have become next-door neighbours to brutes? Do you feel that
millions are starving today, and millions have been starving for ages?
Do you feel that ignorance has come over the land as a dark cloud? Does
it make you restless? Does it make you sleepless? Has it gone into your
blood, coursing through your veins, becoming consonant with your
heartbeats? Has it made you almost mad? Are you seized with that one
idea of the misery of ruin, and have you forgotten all about your name,
your fame, your wives, your children, your property, even your own
bodies? Have you done that? That is the first step to become a patriot,
the very first step. I did not go to America, as most of you know, for
the Parliament of Religions, but this demon of a feeling was in me and
within my soul. I travelled twelve years all over India, finding no way
to work for my countrymen, and that is why I went to America. Most of
you know that, who knew me then. Who cared about this Parliament of
Religions? Here was my own flesh and blood sinking every day, and who
cared for them? This was my first step.

You may feel, then; but instead of spending your energies in frothy
talk, have you found any way out, any practical solution, some help
instead of condemnation, some sweet words to soothe their miseries, to
bring them out of this living death?

Yet that is not all. Have you got the will to surmount mountain-high
obstructions? If the whole world stands against you sword in hand, would
you still dare to do what you think is right? If your wives and children
are against you, if all your money goes, your name dies, your wealth
vanishes, would you still stick to it? Would you still pursue it and go
on steadily towards your own goal? As the great King Bhartrihari says,
"Let the sages blame or let them praise; let the goddess of fortune come
or let her go wherever she likes; let death come today, or let it come
in hundreds of years; he indeed is the steady man who does not move one
inch from the way of truth." Have you got that steadfastness? If you
have these three things, each one of you will work miracles. You need
not write in the newspapers, you need not go about lecturing; your very
face will shine. If you live in a cave, your thoughts will permeate even
through the rock walls, will go vibrating all over the world for
hundreds of years, maybe, until they will fasten on to some brain and
work out there. Such is the power of thought, of sincerity, and of
purity of purpose.

I am afraid I am delaying you, but one word more. This national ship, my
countrymen, my friends, my children — this national ship has been
ferrying millions and millions of souls across the waters of life. For
scores of shining centuries it has been plying across this water, and
through its agency, millions of souls have been taken to the other
shore, to blessedness. But today, perhaps through your own fault, this
boat has become a little damaged, has sprung a leak; and would you
therefore curse it? Is it fit that you stand up and pronounce
malediction upon it, one that has done more work than any other thing in
the world? If there are holes in this national ship, this society of
ours, we are its children. Let us go and stop the holes. Let us gladly
do it with our hearts' blood; and if we cannot, then let us die. We will
make a plug of our brains and put them into the ship, but condemn it
never. Say not one harsh word against this society. I love it for its
past greatness. I love you all because you are the children of gods, and
because you are the children of the glorious forefathers. How then can I
curse you! Never. All blessings be upon you! I have come to you, my
children, to tell you all my plans. If you hear them I am ready to work
with you. But if you will not listen to them, and even kick me out of
India, I will come back and tell you that we are all sinking! I am come
now to sit in your midst, and if we are to sink, let us all sink
together, but never let curses rise to our lips.

</div>
