---
title: 'VEDANTA IN ITS APPLICATION TO INDIAN LIFE '

---
<div>

[←](my_plan_of_campaign.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_sages_of_india.htm)

  

## VEDANTA IN ITS APPLICATION TO INDIAN LIFE

There is a word which has become very common as an appellation of our
race and our religion. The word "Hindu" requires a little explanation in
connection with what I mean by Vedantism. This word "Hindu" was the name
that the ancient Persians used to apply to the river Sindhu. Whenever in
Sanskrit there is an "s", in ancient Persian it changes into "h", so
that "Sindhu" became "Hindu"; and you are all aware how the Greeks found
it hard to pronounce "h" and dropped it altogether, so that we became
known as Indians. Now this word "Hindu" as applied to the inhabitants of
the other side of the Indus, whatever might have been its meaning in
ancient times has lost all its force in modern times; for all the people
that live on this side of the Indus no longer belong to one religion.
There are the Hindus proper, the Mohammedans, the Parsees, the
Christians, the Buddhists, and Jains. The word "Hindu" in its literal
sense ought to include all these; but as signifying the religion, it
would not be proper to call all these Hindus. It is very hard,
therefore, to find any common name for our religion, seeing that this
religion is a collection, so to speak, of various religions, of various
ideas, of various ceremonials and forms, all gathered together almost
without a name, and without a church, and without an organisation. The
only point where, perhaps, all our sects agree is that we all believe in
the scriptures — the Vedas. This perhaps is certain that no man can have
a right to be called a Hindu who does not admit the supreme authority of
the Vedas. All these Vedas, as you are aware, are divided into two
portions — the Karma Kânda and the Jnâna Kânda. The Karma Kanda includes
various sacrifices and ceremonials, of which the larger part has fallen
into disuse in the present age. The Jnana Kanda, as embodying the
spiritual teachings of the Vedas known as the Upanishads and the
Vedanta, has always been cited as the highest authority by all our
teachers, philosophers, and writers, whether dualist, or qualified
monist, or monist. Whatever be his philosophy or sect, every one in
India has to find his authority in the Upanishads. If he cannot, his
sect would be heterodox. Therefore, perhaps the one name in modern times
which would designate every Hindu throughout the land would be
"Vedantist" or "Vaidika", as you may put it; and in that sense I always
use the words "Vedantism" and "Vedanta". I want to make it a little
clearer, for of late it has become the custom of most people to identify
the word Vedanta with the Advaitic system of the Vedanta philosophy. We
all know that Advaitism is only one branch of the various philosophic
systems that have been founded on the Upanishads. The followers of the
Vishishtâdvaitic system have as much reverence for the Upanishads as the
followers of the Advaita, and the Vishishtadvaitists claim as much
authority for the Vedanta as the Advaitist. So do the dualists; so does
every other sect in India. But the word Vedantist has become somewhat
identified in the popular mind with the word Advaitist, and perhaps with
some reason, because, although we have the Vedas for our scriptures, we
have Smritis and Purânas — subsequent writings — to illustrate the
doctrines of the Vedas; these of course have not the same weight as the
Vedas. And the law is that wherever these Puranas and Smritis differ
from any part of the Shruti, the Shruti must be followed and the Smriti
rejected. Now in the expositions of the great Advaitic philosopher
Shankara, and the school founded by him, we find most of the authorities
cited are from the Upanishads, very rarely is an authority cited from
the Smritis, except, perhaps, to elucidate a point which could hardly be
found in the Shrutis. On the other hand, other schools take refuge more
and more in the Smritis and less and less in the Shrutis; and as we go
to the more and more dualistic sects, we find a proportionate quantity
of the Smritis quoted, which is out of all proportion to what we should
expect from a Vedantist. It is, perhaps, because these gave such
predominance to the Paurânika authorities that the Advaitist came to be
considered as the Vedantist *par excellence*, if I may say so.

However it might have been, the word Vedanta must cover the whole ground
of Indian religious life, and being part of the Vedas, by all acceptance
it is the most ancient literature that we have; for whatever might be
the idea of modern scholars, the Hindus are not ready to admit that
parts of the Vedas were written at one time and parts were written at
another time. They of course still hold on to their belief that the
Vedas as a whole were produced at the same time, rather if I may say so,
that they were never produced, but that they always existed in the mind
of the Lord. This is what I mean by the word Vedanta, that it covers the
ground of dualism, of qualified monism, and Advaitism in India. Perhaps
we may even take in parts of Buddhism, and of Jainism too, if they would
come in — for our hearts are sufficiently large. But it is they that
will not come in, we are ready for upon severe analysis you will always
find that the essence of Buddhism was all borrowed from the same
Upanishads; even the ethics, the so-called great and wonderful ethics of
Buddhism, were there word for word, in some one or other of the
Upanishads; and so all the good doctrines of the Jains were there, minus
their vagaries. In the Upanishads, also, we find the germs of all the
subsequent development of Indian religious thought. Sometimes it has
been urged without any ground whatsoever that there is no ideal of
Bhakti in the Upanishads. Those that have been students of the
Upanishads know that that is not true at all. There is enough of Bhakti
in every Upanishad if you will only seek for it; but many of these ideas
which are found so fully developed in later times in the Puranas and
other Smritis are only in the germ in the Upanishads. The sketch, the
skeleton, was there as it were. It was filled in in some of the Puranas.
But there is not one full-grown Indian ideal that cannot be traced back
to the same source — the Upanishads. Certain ludicrous attempts have
been made by persons without much Upanishadic scholarship to trace
Bhakti to some foreign source; but as you know, these have all been
proved to be failures, and all that you want of Bhakti is there, even in
the Samhitas, not to speak of the Upanishads — it is there, worship and
love and all the rest of it; only the ideals of Bhakti are becoming
higher and higher. In the Samhita portions, now and then, you find
traces of a religion of fear and tribulation; in the Samhitas now and
then you find a worshipper quaking before a Varuna, or some other god.
Now and then you will find they are very much tortured by the idea of
sin, but the Upanishads have no place for the delineation of these
things. There is no religion of fear in the Upanishads; it is one of
Love and one of Knowledge.

These Upanishads are our scriptures. They have been differently
explained, and, as I have told you already, whenever there is a
difference between subsequent Pauranika literature and the Vedas, the
Puranas must give way. But it is at the same time true that, as a
practical result, we find ourselves ninety per cent Pauranika and ten
per cent Vaidika — even if so much as that. And we all find the most
contradictory usages prevailing in our midst and also religious opinions
prevailing in our society which scarcely have any authority in the
scriptures of the Hindus; and in many cases we read in books, and see
with astonishment, customs of the country that neither have their
authority in the Vedas nor in the Smritis or Puranas, but are simply
local. And yet each ignorant villager thinks that if that little local
custom dies out, he will no more remain a Hindu. In his mind Vedantism
and these little local customs have been indissolubly identified. In
reading the scriptures it is hard for him to understand that what he is
doing has not the sanction of the scriptures, and that the giving up of
them will not hurt him at all, but on the other hand will make him a
better man. Secondly, there is the other difficulty. These scriptures of
ours have been very vast. We read in the *Mahâbhâshya* of Patanjali,
that great philological work, that the Sâma-Veda had one thousand
branches. Where are they all? Nobody knows. So with each of the Vedas;
the major portion of these books have disappeared, and it is only the
minor portion that remains to us. They were all taken charge of by
particular families; and either these families died out, or were killed
under foreign persecution, or somehow became extinct; and with them,
that branch of the learning of the Vedas they took charge of became
extinct also. This fact we ought to remember, as it always forms the
sheet-anchor in the hands of those who want to preach anything new or to
defend anything even against the Vedas. Wherever in India there is a
discussion between local custom and the Shrutis, and whenever it is
pointed out that the local custom is against the scriptures, the
argument that is forwarded is that it is not, that the customs existed
in the branch of the Shrutis which has become extinct and so has been a
recognised one. In the midst of all these varying methods of reading and
commenting on our scriptures, it is very difficult indeed to find the
thread that runs through all of them; for we become convinced at once
that there must be some common ground underlying all these varying
divisions and subdivisions. There must be harmony, a common plan, upon
which all these little bits of buildings have been constructed, some
basis common to this apparently hope less mass of confusion which we
call our religion. Otherwise it could not have stood so long, it could
not have endured so long.

Coming to our commentators again, we find another difficulty. The
Advaitic commentator, whenever an Advaitic text comes, preserves it just
as it is; but the same commentator, as soon as a dualistic text presents
itself, tortures it if he can, and brings the most queer meaning out of
it. Sometimes the "Unborn" becomes a "goat", such are the wonderful
changes effected. To suit the commentator, "Ajâ" the Unborn is explained
as "Aja" a she-goat. In the same way, if not in a still worse fashion,
the texts are handled by the dualistic commentator. Every dualistic text
is preserved, and every text that speaks of non-dualistic philosophy is
tortured in any fashion he likes. This Sanskrit language is so
intricate, the Sanskrit of the Vedas is so ancient, and the Sanskrit
philology so perfect, that any amount of discussion can be carried on
for ages in regard to the meaning of one word. If a Pandit takes it into
his head, he can render anybody's prattle into correct Sanskrit by force
of argument and quotation of texts and rules. These are the difficulties
in our way of understanding the Upanishads. It was given to me to live
with a man who was as ardent a dualist, as ardent an Advaitist, as
ardent a Bhakta, as a Jnani. And living with this man first put it into
my head to understand the Upanishads and the texts of the scriptures
from an independent and better basis than by blindly following the
commentators; and in my opinion and in my researches, I came to the
conclusion that these texts are not at all contradictory. So we need
have no fear of text-torturing at all! The texts are beautiful, ay, they
are most wonderful; and they are not contradictory, but wonderfully
harmonious, one idea leading up to the other. But the one fact I found
is that in all the Upanishads, they begin with dualistic ideas, with
worship and all that, and end with a grand flourish of Advaitic ideas.

Therefore I now find in the light of this man's life that the dualist
and the Advaitist need not fight each other. Each has a place, and a
great place in the national life. The dualist must remain, for he is as
much part and parcel of the national religious life as the Advaitist.
One cannot exist without the other; one is the fulfilment of the other;
one is the building, the other is the top; the one the root, the other
the fruit, and so on. Therefore any attempt to torture the texts of the
Upanishads appears to me very ridiculous. I begin to find out that the
language is wonderful. Apart from all its merits as the greatest
philosophy, apart from its wonderful merit as theology, as showing the
path of salvation to mankind, the Upanishadic literature is the most
wonderful painting of sublimity that the world has. Here comes out in
full force that individuality of the human mind, that introspective,
intuitive Hindu mind. We have paintings of sublimity elsewhere in all
nations, but almost without exception you will find that their ideal is
to grasp the sublime in the muscles. Take for instance, Milton, Dante,
Homer, or any of the Western poets. There are wonderfully sublime
passages in them; but there it is always a grasping at infinity through
the senses, the muscles, getting the ideal of infinite expansion, the
infinite of space. We find the same attempts made in the Samhita
portion. You know some of those wonderful Riks where creation is
described; the very heights of expression of the sublime in expansion
and the infinite in space are attained. But they found out very soon
that the Infinite cannot be reached in that way, that even infinite
space, and expansion, and infinite external nature could not express the
ideas that were struggling to find expression in their minds, and so
they fell back upon other explanations. The language became new in the
Upanishads; it is almost negative, it is some times, chaotic, sometimes
taking you beyond the senses, pointing out to you something which you
cannot grasp, which you cannot sense, and at the same time you feel
certain that it is there. What passage in the world can compare with
this? — न तत्र सूर्यो भाति न चंन्द्रतारकं नेमा विद्युतो भान्ति
कुतोऽयमग्निः। — There the sun cannot illumine, nor the moon nor the
stars, the flash of lightning cannot illumine the place, what to speak
of this mortal fire." Again, where can you find a more perfect
expression of the whole philosophy of the world, the gist of what the
Hindus ever thought, the whole dream of human salvation, painted in
language more wonderful, in figure more marvellous than this?

द्वा सुपर्णा सयुजा सखाया समानं वृक्षं परिषस्वजाते ।  
तयोरन्यः पिप्पलं स्वाद्वत्त्यनश्नन्नन्यो अभिचाकशीति ॥  
समाने वृक्षे पुरुषो निमग्नोऽनीशया शोचति मुह्यमानः ।  
जुष्टं यदा पश्यत्यन्यमोशमस्य महिमानमिति वीतशोकः ॥

Upon the same tree there are two birds of beautiful plumage, most
friendly to each other, one eating the fruits, the other sitting there
calm and silent without eating — the one on the lower branch eating
sweet and bitter fruits in turn and becoming happy and unhappy, but the
other one on the top, calm and majestic; he eats neither sweet nor
bitter fruits, cares neither for happiness nor misery, immersed in his
own glory. This is the picture of the human soul. Man is eating the
sweet and bitter fruits of this life, pursuing gold, pursuing his
senses, pursuing the vanities of life — hopelessly, madly careering he
goes. In other places the Upanishads have compared the human soul to the
charioteer, and the senses to the mad horses unrestrained. Such is the
career of men pursuing the vanities of life, children dreaming golden
dreams only to find that they are but vain, and old men chewing the cud
of their past deeds, and yet not knowing how to get out of this network.
This is the world. Yet in the life of every one there come golden
moments; in the midst of the deepest sorrows, nay, of the deepest joys,
there come moments when a part of the cloud that hides the sunlight
moves away as it were, and we catch a glimpse, in spite of ourselves of
something beyond — away, away beyond the life of the senses; away, away
beyond its vanities, its joys, and its sorrows; away, away beyond
nature, or our imaginations of happiness here or hereafter; away beyond
all thirst for gold, or for fame, or for name, or for posterity. Man
stops for a moment at this glimpse and sees the other bird calm and
majestic, eating neither sweet nor bitter fruits, but immersed in his
own glory, Self-content, Self-satisfied. As the Gita says,
यस्त्वात्मरतिरेव स्यादात्मतृप्तश्च मानवः आत्मन्येव च संतुष्टस्तस्य
कार्यं न विद्यते॥ — "He whose devotion is to the Atman, he who does not
want anything beyond Atman, he who has become satisfied in the Atman,
what work is there for him to do?" Why should he drudge? Man catches a
glimpse, then again he forgets and goes on eating the sweet and bitter
fruits of life; perhaps after a time he catches another glimpse, and the
lower bird goes nearer and nearer to the higher bird as blows after
blows are received. If he be fortunate to receive hard knocks, then he
comes nearer and nearer to his companion, the other bird, his life, his
friend; and as he approaches him, he finds that the light from the
higher bird is playing round his own plumage; and as he comes nearer and
nearer, lo! the transformation is going on. The nearer and nearer he
comes, he finds himself melting away, as it were, until he has entirely
disappeared. He did not really exist; it was but the reflection of the
other bird who was there calm and majestic amidst the moving leaves. It
was all his glory, that upper bird's. He then becomes fearless,
perfectly satisfied, calmly serene. In this figure, the Upanishads take
you from the dualistic to the utmost Advaitic conception.

Endless examples can be cited, but we have no time in this lecture to do
that or to show the marvellous poetry of the Upanishads, the painting of
the sublime, the grand conceptions. But one other idea I must note, that
the language and the thought and everything come direct, they fall upon
you like a sword-blade, strong as the blows of a hammer they come. There
is no mistaking their meanings. Every tone of that music is firm and
produces its full effect; no gyrations, no mad words, no intricacies in
which the brain is lost. No signs of degradation are there — no attempts
at too much allegorising, too much piling of adjectives after
adjectives, making it more and more intricate, till the whole of the
sense is lost, and the brain becomes giddy, and man does not know his
way out from the maze of that literature. There was none of that yet. If
it be human literature, it must be the production of a race which had
not yet lost any of its national vigour.

Strength, strength is what the Upanishads speak to me from every page.
This is the one great thing to remember, it has been the one great
lesson I have been taught in my life; strength, it says, strength, O
man, be not weak. Are there no human weaknesses? — says man. There are,
say the Upanishads, but will more weakness heal them, would you try to
wash dirt with dirt? Will sin cure sin, weakness cure weakness?
Strength, O man, strength, say the Upanishads, stand up and be strong.
Ay, it is the only literature in the world where you find the word
"Abhih", "fearless", used again and again; in no other scripture in the
world is this adjective applied either to God or to man. Abhih,
fearless! And in my mind rises from the past the vision of the great
Emperor of the West, Alexander the Great, and I see, as it were in a
picture, the great monarch standing on the bank of the Indus, talking to
one of our Sannyâsins in the forest; the old man he was talking to,
perhaps naked, stark naked, sitting upon a block of stone, and the
Emperor, astonished at his wisdom, tempting him with gold and honour to
come over to Greece. And this man smiles at his gold, and smiles at his
temptations, and refuses; and then the Emperor standing on his authority
as an Emperor, says, "I will kill you if you do not come", and the man
bursts into a laugh and says, "You never told such a falsehood in your
life, as you tell just now. Who can kill me? Me you kill, Emperor of the
material world! Never! For I am Spirit unborn and undecaying: never was
I born and never do I die; I am the Infinite, the Omnipresent, the
Omniscient; and you kill me, child that you are!" That is strength, that
is strength! And the more I read the Upanishads, my friends, my
countrymen, the more I weep for you, for therein is the great practical
application. Strength, strength for us. What we need is strength, who
will give us strength? There are thousands to weaken us, and of stories
we have had enough. Every one of our Puranas, if you press it, gives out
stories enough to fill three-fourths of the libraries of the world.
Everything that can weaken us as a race we have had for the last
thousand years. It seems as if during that period the national life had
this one end in view, viz how to make us weaker and weaker till we have
become real earthworms, crawling at the feet of every one who dares to
put his foot on us. Therefore, my friends, as one of your blood, as one
that lives and dies with you, let me tell you that we want strength,
strength, and every time strength. And the Upanishads are the great mine
of strength. Therein lies strength enough to invigorate the whole world;
the whole world can be vivified, made strong, energised through them.
They will call with trumpet voice upon the weak, the miserable, and the
downtrodden of all races, all creeds, and all sects to stand on their
feet and be free. Freedom, physical freedom, mental freedom, and
spiritual freedom are the watchwords of the Upanishads.

Ay, this is the one scripture in the world, of all others, that does not
talk of salvation, but of freedom. Be free from the bonds of nature, be
free from weakness! And it shows to you that you have this freedom
already in you. That is another peculiarity of its teachings. You are a
Dvaitist; never mind, you have got to admit that by its very nature the
soul is perfect; only by certain actions of the soul has it become
contracted. Indeed, Râmânuja's theory of contraction and expansion is
exactly what the modern evolutionists call evolution and atavism. The
soul goes back, becomes contracted as it were, its powers become
potential; and by good deeds and good thoughts it expands again and
reveals its natural perfection. With the Advaitist the one difference is
that he admits evolution in nature and not in the soul. Suppose there is
a screen, and there is a small hole in the screen. I am a man standing
behind the screen and looking at this grand assembly. I can see only
very few faces here. Suppose the hole increases; as it increases, more
and more of this assembly is revealed to me, and in full when the hole
has become identified with the screen — there is nothing between you and
me in this case. Neither you changed nor I changed; all the change was
in the screen. You were the same from first to last; only the screen
changed. This is the Advaitist's position with regard to evolution —
evolution of nature and manifestation of the Self within. Not that the
Self can by any means be made to contract. It is unchangeable, the
Infinite One. It was covered, as it were, with a veil, the veil of Maya,
and as this Maya veil becomes thinner and thinner, the inborn, natural
glory of the soul comes out and becomes more manifest. This is the one
great doctrine which the world is waiting to learn from India. Whatever
they may talk, however they may try to boast, they will find out day
after day that no society can stand without admitting this. Do you not
find how everything is being revolutionized? Do you not see how it was
the custom to take for granted that everything was wicked until it
proved itself good? In education, in punishing criminals, in treating
lunatics, in the treatment of common diseases even, that was the old
law. What is the modern law? The modern law says, the body itself is
healthy; it cures diseases of its own nature. Medicine can at the best
but help the storing up of the best in the body. What says it of
criminals? It takes for granted that however low a criminal may be,
there is still the divinity within, which does not change, and we must
treat criminals accordingly. All these things are now changing, and
reformatories and penitentiaries are established. So with everything.
Consciously or unconsciously that Indian idea of the divinity within
every one is expressing itself even in other countries. And in your
books is the explanation which other nations have to accept. The
treatment of one man to another will be entirely revolutionized, and
these old, old ideas of pointing to the weakness of mankind will have to
go. They will have received their death-blow within this century. Now
people may stand up and criticise us. I have been criticised, from one
end of the world to the other, as one who preaches the diabolical idea
that there is no sin! Very good. The descendants of these very men will
bless me as the preacher of virtue, and not of sin. I am the teacher of
virtue, not of sin. I glory in being the preacher of light, and not of
darkness.

The second great idea which the world is waiting to receive from our
Upanishads is the solidarity of this universe. The old lines of
demarcation and differentiation are vanishing rapidly. Electricity and
steam-power are placing the different parts of the world in
intercommunication with each other, and, as a result, we Hindus no
longer say that every country beyond our own land is peopled with demons
and hobgoblins, nor do the people of Christian countries say that India
is only peopled by cannibals and savages. When we go out of our country,
we find the same brother-man, with the same strong hand to help, with
the same lips to say godspeed; and sometimes they are better than in the
country in which we are born. When they come here, they find the same
brotherhood, the same cheer, the same godspeed. Our Upanishads say that
the cause of all misery is ignorance; and that is perfectly true when
applied to every state of life, either social or spiritual. It is
ignorance that makes us hate each other, it is through ignorance that we
do not know and do not love each other. As soon as we come to know each
other, love comes, must come, for are we not ones. Thus we find
solidarity coming in spite of itself. Even in politics and sociology,
problems that were only national twenty years ago can no more be solved
on national grounds only. They are assuming huge proportions, gigantic
shapes. They can only be solved when looked at in the broader light of
international grounds. International organizations, international
combinations, international laws are the cry of the day. That shows the
solidarity. In science, every day they are coming to a similar broad
view of matter. You speak of matter, the whole universe as one mass, one
ocean of matter, in which you and I, the sun and the moon, and
everything else are but the names of different little whirlpools and
nothing more. Mentally speaking, it is one universal ocean of thought in
which you and I are similar little whirlpools; and as spirit it moveth
not, it changeth not. It is the One Unchangeable, Unbroken, Homogeneous
Atman. The cry for morality is coming also, and that is to be found in
our books. The explanation of morality, the fountain of ethics, that
also the world wants; and that it will get here.

What do we want in India? If foreigners want these things, we want them
twenty times more. Because, in spite of the greatness of the Upanishads,
in spite of our boasted ancestry of sages, compared to many other races,
I must tell you that we are weak, very weak. First of all is our
physical weakness. That physical weakness is the cause of at least
one-third of our miseries. We are lazy, we cannot work; we cannot
combine, we do not love each other; we are intensely selfish, not three
of us can come together without hating each other, without being jealous
of each other. That is the state in which we are — hopelessly
disorganised mobs, immensely selfish, fighting each other for centuries
as to whether a certain mark is to be put on our forehead this way or
that way, writing volumes and volumes upon such momentous questions as
to whether the look of a man spoils my food or not! This we have been
doing for the past few centuries. We cannot expect anything high from a
race whose whole brain energy has been occupied in such wonderfully
beautiful problems and researches! And are we not ashamed of ourselves?
Ay, sometimes we are; but though we think these things frivolous, we
cannot give them up. We speak of many things parrot-like, but never do
them; speaking and not doing has become a habit with us. What is the
cause of that? Physical weakness. This sort of weak brain is not able to
do anything; we must strengthen it. First of all, our young men must be
strong. Religion will come afterwards. Be strong, my young friends; that
is my advice to you. You will be nearer to Heaven through football than
through the study of the Gita. These are bold words; but I have to say
them, for I love you. I know where the shoe pinches. I have gained a
little experience. You will understand the Gita better with your biceps,
your muscles, a little stronger. You will understand the mighty genius
and the mighty strength of Krishna better with a little of strong blood
in you. You will understand the Upanishads better and the glory of the
Atman when your body stands firm upon your feet, and you feel yourselves
as men. Thus we have to apply these to our needs.

People get disgusted many times at my preaching Advaitism. I do not mean
to preach Advaitism, or Dvaitism, or any *ism* in the world. The only
*ism* that we require now is this wonderful idea of the soul — its
eternal might, its eternal strength, its eternal purity, and its eternal
perfection. If I had a child I would from its very birth begin to tell
it, "Thou art the Pure One". You have read in one of the Puranas that
beautiful story of queen Madâlasâ, how as soon as she has a child she
puts her baby with her own hands in the cradle, and how as the cradle
rocks to and fro, she begins to sing, "Thou art the Pure One the
Stainless, the Sinless, the Mighty One, the Great One." Ay, there is
much in that. Feel that you are great and you become great. What did I
get as my experience all over the world, is the question. They may talk
about sinners — and if all Englishmen really believed that they were
sinners, Englishmen would be no better than the negroes in Central
Africa. God bless them that they do not believe it! On the other hand,
the Englishman believes he is born the lord of the world. He believes he
is great and can do anything in the world; if he wants to go to the sun
or the moon, he believes he can; and that makes him great. If he had
believed his priests that he was a poor miserable sinner, going to be
barbecued through all eternity, he would not be the same Englishman that
he is today. So I find in every nation that, in spite of priests and
superstition, the divine within lives and asserts itself. We have lost
faith. Would you believe me, we have less faith than the Englishman and
woman — a thousand times less faith! These are plain words; but I say
these, I cannot help it. Don't you see how Englishmen and women, when
they catch our ideals, become mad as it were; and although they are the
ruling class, they come to India to preach our own religion
notwithstanding the jeers and ridicule of their own countrymen? How many
of you could do that? And why cannot you do that? Do you not know it?
You know more than they do; you are more wise than is good for you, that
is your difficulty! Simply because your blood is only like water, your
brain is sloughing, your body is weak! You must change the body.
Physical weakness is the cause and nothing else. You have talked of
reforms, of ideals, and all these things for the past hundred years; but
when it comes to practice, you are not to be found anywhere — till you
have disgusted the whole world, and the very name of reform is a thing
of ridicule! And what is the cause? Do you not know? You know too well.
The only cause is that you are weak, weak, weak; your body is weak, your
mind is weak, you have no faith in yourselves! Centuries and centuries,
a thousand years of crushing tyranny of castes and kings and foreigners
and your own people have taken out all your strength, my brethren. Your
backbone is broken, you are like downtrodden worms. Who will give you
strength? Let me tell you, strength, strength is what we want. And the
first step in getting strength is to uphold the Upanishads, and believe
— "I am the Soul", "Me the sword cannot cut; nor weapons pierce; me the
fire cannot burn; me the air cannot dry; I am the Omnipotent, I am the
Omniscient." So repeat these blessed, saving words. Do not say we are
weak; we can do anything and everything. What can we not do? Everything
can be done by us; we all have the same glorious soul, let us believe in
it. Have faith, as Nachiketâ. At the time of his father's sacrifice,
faith came unto Nachiketa; ay, I wish that faith would come to each of
you; and every one of you would stand up a giant, a world-mover with a
gigantic intellect — an infinite God in every respect. That is what I
want you to become. This is the strength that you get from the
Upanishads, this is the faith that you get from there.

Ay, but it was only for the Sannyâsin! Rahasya (esoteric)! The
Upanishads were in the hands of the Sannyasin; he went into the forest!
Shankara was a little kind and said even Grihasthas (householders) may
study the Upanishads, it will do them good; it will not hurt them. But
still the idea is that the Upanishads talked only of the forest life of
the recluse. As I told you the other day, the only commentary, the
authoritative commentary on the Vedas, has been made once and for all by
Him who inspired the Vedas — by Krishna in the Gita. It is there for
every one in every occupation of life. These conceptions of the Vedanta
must come out, must remain not only in the forest, not only in the cave,
but they must come out to work at the bar and the bench, in the pulpit,
and in the cottage of the poor man, with the fishermen that are catching
fish, and with the students that are studying. They call to every man,
woman, and child whatever be their occupation, wherever they may be. And
what is there to fear! How can the fishermen and all these carry out the
ideals of the Upanishads? The way has been shown. It is infinite;
religion is infinite, none can go beyond it; and whatever you do
sincerely is good for you. Even the least thing well done brings
marvellous results; therefore let every one do what little he can. If
the fisherman thinks that he is the Spirit, he will be a better
fisherman; if the student thinks he is the Spirit, he will be a better
student. If the lawyer thinks that he is the Spirit, he will be a better
lawyer, and so on, and the result will be that the castes will remain
for ever. It is in the nature of society to form itself into groups; and
what will go will be these privileges. Caste is a natural order; I can
perform one duty in social life, and you another; you can govern a
country, and I can mend a pair of old shoes, but that is no reason why
you are greater than I, for can you mend my shoes? Can I govern the
country? I am clever in mending shoes, you are clever in reading Vedas,
but that is no reason why you should trample on my head. Why if one
commits murder should he be praised, and if another steals an apple why
should he be hanged? This will have to go. Caste is good. That is the
only natural way of solving life. Men must form themselves into groups,
and you cannot get rid of that. Wherever you go, there will be caste.
But that does not mean that there should be these privileges. They
should be knocked on the head. If you teach Vedanta to the fisherman, he
will say, I am as good a man as you; I am a fisherman, you are a
philosopher, but I have the same God in me as you have in you. And that
is what we want, no privilege for any one, equal chances for all; let
every one be taught that the divine is within, and every one will work
out his own salvation.

Liberty is the first condition of growth. It is wrong, a thousand times
wrong, if any of you dares to say, "I will work out the salvation of
this woman or child." I am asked again and again, what I think of the
widow problem and what I think of the woman question. Let me answer once
for all — am I a widow that you ask me that nonsense? Am I a woman that
you ask me that question again and again? Who are you to solve women's
problems? Are you the Lord God that you should rule over every widow and
every woman? Hands off! They will solve their own problems. O tyrants,
attempting to think that you can do anything for any one! Hands off! The
Divine will look after all. Who are you to assume that you know
everything? How dare you think, O blasphemers, that you have the right
over God? For don't you know that every soul is the Soul of God? Mind
your own Karma; a load of Karma is there in you to work out. Your nation
may put you upon a pedestal, your society may cheer you up to the skies,
and fools may praise you: but He sleeps not, and retribution will be
sure to follow, here or hereafter.

Look upon every man, woman, and every one as God. You cannot help
anyone, you can only serve: serve the children of the Lord, serve the
Lord Himself, if you have the privilege. If the Lord grants that you can
help any one of His children, blessed you are; do not think too much of
yourselves. Blessed you are that that privilege was given to you when
others had it not. Do it only as a worship. I should see God in the
poor, and it is for my salvation that I go and worship them. The poor
and the miserable are for our salvation, so that we may serve the Lord,
coming in the shape of the diseased, coming in the shape of the lunatic,
the leper, and the sinner! Bold are my words; and let me repeat that it
is the greatest privilege in our life that we are allowed to serve the
Lord in all these shapes. Give up the idea that by ruling over others
you can do any good to them. But you can do just as much as you can in
the case of the plant; you can supply the growing seed with the
materials for the making up of its body, bringing to it the earth, the
water, the air, that it wants. It will take all that it wants by its own
nature. It will assimilate and grow by its own nature.

Bring all light into the world. Light, bring light! Let light come unto
every one; the task will not be finished till every one has reached the
Lord. Bring light to the poor and bring more light to the rich, for they
require it more than the poor. Bring light to the ignorant, and more
light to the educated, for the vanities of the education of our time are
tremendous! Thus bring light to all and leave the rest unto the Lord,
for in the words of the same Lord "To work you have the right and not to
the fruits thereof." "Let not your work produce results for *you*, and
at the same time may you never be without work."

May He who taught such grand ideas to our forefathers ages ago help us
to get strength to carry into practice His commands!

</div>
