---
title: THE SAGES OF INDIA

---
<div>

[←](vedanta_in_its_applications_to_indian_life.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_work_before_us.htm)

  

## THE SAGES OF INDIA

In speaking of the sages of India, my mind goes back to those periods of
which history has no record, and tradition tries in vain to bring the
secrets out of the gloom of the past. The sages of India have been
almost innumerable, for what has the Hindu nation been doing for
thousands of years except producing sages? I will take, therefore, the
lives of a few of the most brilliant ones, the epoch-makers, and present
them before you, that is to say, my study of them.

In the first place, we have to understand a little about our scriptures.
Two ideals of truth are in our scriptures; the one is, what we call the
eternal, and the other is not so authoritative, yet binding under
particular circumstances, times, and places. The eternal relations which
deal with the nature of the soul, and of God, and the relations between
souls and God are embodied in what we call the Shrutis, the Vedas. The
next set of truths is what we call the Smritis, as embodied in the words
of Manu. Yâjnavalkya, and other writers and also in the Purânas, down to
the Tantras. The second class of books and teachings is subordinate to
the Shrutis, inasmuch as whenever any one of these contradicts anything
in the Shrutis, the Shrutis must prevail. This is the law. The idea is
that the framework of the destiny and goal of man has been all
delineated in the Vedas, the details have been left to be worked out in
the Smritis and Puranas. As for general directions, the Shrutis are
enough; for spiritual life, nothing more can be said, nothing more can
be known. All that is necessary has been known, all the advice that is
necessary to lead the soul to perfection has been completed in the
Shrutis; the details alone were left out, and these the Smritis have
supplied from time to time.

Another peculiarity is that these Shrutis have many sages as the
recorders of the truths in them, mostly men, even some women. Very
little is known of their personalities, the dates of their birth, and so
forth, but their best thoughts, their best discoveries, I should say,
are preserved there, embodied in the sacred literature of our country,
the Vedas. In the Smritis, on the other hand, personalities are more in
evidence. Startling, gigantic, impressive, world-moving persons stand
before us, as it were, for the first time, sometimes of more magnitude
even than their teachings.

This is a peculiarity which we have to understand — that our religion
preaches an Impersonal Personal God. It preaches any amount of
impersonal laws *plus* any amount of personality, but the very
fountain-head of our religion is in the Shrutis, the Vedas, which are
perfectly impersonal; the persons all come in the Smritis and Puranas —
the great Avatâras, Incarnations of God, Prophets, and so forth. And
this ought also to be observed that except our religion every other
religion in the world depends upon the life or lives of some personal
founder or founders. Christianity is built upon the life of Jesus
Christ, Mohammedanism upon Mohammed, Buddhism upon Buddha, Jainism upon
the Jinas, and so on. It naturally follows that there must be in all
these religions a good deal of fight about what they call the historical
evidences of these great personalities. If at any time the historical
evidences about the existence of these personages in ancient times
become weak, the whole building of the religion tumbles down and is
broken to pieces. We escaped this fate because our religion is not based
upon persons but on principles. That you obey your religion is not
because it came through the authority of a sage, no, not even of an
Incarnation. Krishna is not the authority of the Vedas, but the Vedas
are the authority of Krishna himself. His glory is that he is the
greatest preacher of the Vedas that ever existed. So with the other
Incarnations; so with all our sages. Our first principle is that all
that is necessary for the perfection of man and for attaining unto
freedom is there in the Vedas. You cannot find anything new. You cannot
go beyond a perfect unity, which is the goal of all knowledge; this has
been already reached there, and it is impossible to go beyond the unity.
Religious knowledge became complete when Tat Twam Asi (Thou art That)
was discovered, and that was in the Vedas. What remained was the
guidance of people from time to time according to different times and
places, according to different circumstances and environments; people
had to be guided along the old, old path, and for this these great
teachers came, these great sages. Nothing can bear out more clearly this
position than the celebrated saying of Shri Krishna in the Gitâ:
"Whenever virtue subsides and irreligion prevails, I create Myself for
the protection of the good; for the destruction of all immorality I am
coming from time to time." This is the idea in India.

What follows? That on the one hand, there are these eternal principles
which stand upon their own foundations without depending on any
reasoning even, much less on the authority of sages however great, of
Incarnations however brilliant they may have been. We may remark that as
this is the unique position in India, our claim is that the Vedanta only
can be the universal religion, that it is already the existing universal
religion in the world, because it teaches principles and not persons. No
religion built upon a person can be taken up as a type by all the races
of mankind. In our own country we find that there have been so many
grand characters; in even a small city many persons are taken up as
types by the different minds in that one city. How is it possible that
one person as Mohammed or Buddha or Christ, can be taken up as the one
type for the whole world, nay, that the whole of morality, ethics,
spirituality, and religion can be true only from the sanction of that
one person, and one person alone? Now, the Vedantic religion does not
require any such personal authority. Its sanction is the eternal nature
of man, its ethics are based upon the eternal spiritual solidarity of
man, already existing, already attained and not to be attained. On the
other hand, from the very earliest times, our sages have been feeling
conscious of this fact that the vast majority of mankind require a
personality. They must have a Personal God in some form or other. The
very Buddha who declared against the existence of a Personal God had not
died fifty years before his disciples manufactured a Personal God out of
him. The Personal God is necessary, and at the same time we know that
instead of and better than vain imaginations of a Personal God, which in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred are unworthy of human worship we have
in this world, living and walking in our midst, living Gods, now and
then. These are more worthy of worship than any imaginary God, any
creation of our imagination, that is to say, any idea of God which we
can form. Shri Krishna is much greater than any idea of God you or I can
have. Buddha is a much higher idea, a more living and idolised idea,
than the ideal you or I can conceive of in our minds; and therefore it
is that they always command the worship of mankind even to the exclusion
of all imaginary deities.

This our sages knew, and, therefore, left it open to all Indian people
to worship such great Personages, such Incarnations. Nay, the greatest
of these Incarnations goes further: "Wherever an extraordinary spiritual
power is manifested by external man, know that I am there, it is from Me
that that manifestation comes." That leaves the door open for the Hindu
to worship the Incarnations of all the countries in the world. The Hindu
can worship any sage and any saint from any country whatsoever, and as a
fact we know that we go and worship many times in the churches of the
Christians, and many, many times in the Mohammedan mosques, and that is
good. Why not? Ours, as I have said, is the universal religion. It is
inclusive enough, it is broad enough to include all the ideals. All the
ideals of religion that already exist in the world can be immediately
included, and we can patiently wait for all the ideals that are to come
in the future to be taken in the same fashion, embraced in the infinite
arms of the religion of the Vedanta.

This, more or less, is our position with regard to the great sages, the
Incarnations of God. There are also secondary characters. We find the
word Rishi again and again mentioned in the Vedas, and it has become a
common word at the present time. The Rishi is the great authority. We
have to understand that idea. The definition is that the Rishi is the
Mantra-drashtâ, the seer of thought. What is the proof of religion? —
this was asked in very ancient times. There is no proof in the senses
was the declaration. यतो वाचो निवर्तन्ते अप्राप्य मनसा सह — "From whence
words reflect back with thought without reaching the goal." न तत्र
चक्षुर्गच्छति न वाग्गच्छति नो मनः — "There the eyes cannot reach,
neither can speech, nor the mind" — that has been the declaration for
ages and ages. Nature outside cannot give us any answer as to the
existence of the soul, the existence of God, the eternal life, the goal
of man, and all that. This mind is continually changing, always in a
state of flux; it is finite, it is broken into pieces. How can nature
tell of the Infinite, the Unchangeable, the Unbroken, the Indivisible,
the Eternal? It never can. And whenever mankind has striven to get an
answer from dull dead matter, history shows how disastrous the results
have been. How comes, then, the knowledge which the Vedas declare? It
comes through being a Rishi. This knowledge is not in the senses; but
are the senses the be-all and the end-all of the human being? Who dare
say that the senses are the all-in-all of man? Even in our lives, in the
life of every one of us here, there come moments of calmness, perhaps,
when we see before us the death of one we loved, when some shock comes
to us, or when extreme blessedness comes to us. Many other occasions
there are when the mind, as it were, becomes calm, feels for the moment
its real nature; and a glimpse of the Infinite beyond, where words
cannot reach nor the mind go, is revealed to us. This happens in
ordinary life, but it has to be heightened, practiced, perfected. Men
found out ages ago that the soul is not bound or limited by the senses,
no, not even by consciousness. We have to understand that this
consciousness is only the name of one link in the infinite chain. Being
is not identical with consciousness, but consciousness is only one part
of Being. Beyond consciousness is where the bold search lies.
Consciousness is bound by the senses. Beyond that, beyond the senses,
men must go in order to arrive at truths of the spiritual world, and
there are even now persons who succeed in going beyond the bounds of the
senses. These are called Rishis, because they come face to face with
spiritual truths.

The proof, therefore, of the Vedas is just the same as the proof of this
table before me, Pratyaksha, direct perception. This I see with the
senses, and the truths of spirituality we also see in a superconscious
state of the human soul. This Rishi-state is not limited by time or
place, by sex or race. Vâtsyâyana boldly declares that this Rishihood is
the common property of the descendants of the sage, of the Aryan, of the
non-Aryan, of even the Mlechchha. This is the sageship of the Vedas, and
constantly we ought to remember this ideal of religion in India, which I
wish other nations of the world would also remember and learn, so that
there may be less fight and less quarrel. Religion is not in books, nor
in theories, nor in dogmas, nor in talking, not even in reasoning. It is
being and becoming. Ay, my friends, until each one of you has become a
Rishi and come face to face with spiritual facts, religious life has not
begun for you. Until the superconscious opens for you, religion is mere
talk, it is nothing but preparation. You are talking second- hand,
third-hand, and here applies that beautiful saying of Buddha when he had
a discussion with some Brahmins. They came discussing about the nature
of Brahman, and the great sage asked, "Have you seen Brahman?" "No, said
the Brahmin; "Or your father?" "No, neither has he"; "Or your
grandfather?" "I don't think even he saw Him." "My friend, how can you
discuss about a person whom your father and grandfather never saw, and
try to put each other down?" That is what the whole world is doing. Let
us say in the language of the Vedanta, "This Atman is not to be reached
by too much talk, no, not even by the highest intellect, no, not even by
the study of the Vedas themselves."

Let us speak to all the nations of the world in the language of the
Vedas: Vain are your fights and your quarrels; have you seen God whom
you want to preach? If you have not seen, vain is your preaching; you do
not know what you say; and if you have seen God, you will not quarrel,
your very face will shine. An ancient sage of the Upanishads sent his
son out to learn about Brahman, and the child came back, and the father
asked, "what have you learnt?" The child replied he had learnt so many
sciences. But the father said, "That is nothing, go back." And the son
went back, and when he returned again the father asked the same
question, and the same answer came from the child. Once more he had to
go back. And the next time he came, his whole face was shining; and his
father stood up and declared, "Ay, today, my child, your face shines
like a knower of Brahman." When you have known God, your very face will
be changed, your voice will be changed, your whole appearance will he
changed. You will be a blessing to mankind; none will be able to resist
the Rishi. This is the Rishihood, the ideal in our religion. The rest,
all these talks and reasonings and philosophies and dualisms and
monisms, and even the Vedas themselves are but preparations, secondary
things. The other is primary. The Vedas, grammar, astronomy, etc., all
these are secondary; that is supreme knowledge which makes us realise
the Unchangeable One. Those who realised are the sages whom we find in
the Vedas; and we understand how this Rishi is the name of a type, of a
class, which every one of us, as true Hindus, is expected to become at
some period of our life, and becoming which, to the Hindu, means
salvation. Not belief in doctrines, not going to thousands of temples,
nor bathing in all the rivers in the world, but becoming the Rishi, the
Mantra-drashta — that is freedom, that is salvation.

Coming down to later times, there have been great world-moving sages,
great Incarnations of whom there have been many; and according to the
*Bhâgavata*, they also are infinite in number, and those that are
worshipped most in India are Râma and Krishna. Rama, the ancient idol of
the heroic ages, the embodiment of truth, of morality, the ideal son,
the ideal husband, the ideal father, and above all, the ideal king, this
Rama has been presented before us by the great sage Vâlmiki. No language
can be purer, none chaster, none more beautiful and at the same time
simpler than the language in which the great poet has depicted the life
of Rama. And what to speak of Sitâ? You may exhaust the literature of
the world that is past, and I may assure you that you will have to
exhaust the literature of the world of the future, before finding
another Sita. Sita is unique; that character was depicted once and for
all. There may have been several Ramas, perhaps, but never more than one
Sita! She is the very type of the true Indian woman, for all the Indian
ideals of a perfected woman have grown out of that one life of Sita; and
here she stands these thousands of years, commanding the worship of
every man, woman, and child throughout the length and breadth of the
land of Âryâvarta. There she will always be, this glorious Sita, purer
than purity itself, all patience, and all suffering. She who suffered
that life of suffering without a murmur, she the ever-chaste and
ever-pure wife, she the ideal of the people, the ideal of the gods, the
great Sita, our national God she must always remain. And every one of us
knows her too well to require much delineation. All our mythology may
vanish, even our Vedas may depart, and our Sanskrit language may vanish
for ever, but so long as there will be five Hindus living here, even if
only speaking the most vulgar patois, there will be the story of Sita
present. Mark my words: Sita has gone into the very vitals of our race.
She is there in the blood of every Hindu man and woman; we are all
children of Sita. Any attempt to modernise our women, if it tries to
take our women away from that ideal of Sita, is immediately a failure,
as we see every day. The women of India must grow and develop in the
footprints of Sita, and that is the only way.

The next is He who is worshipped in various forms, the favourite ideal
of men as well as of women, the ideal of children, as well as of
grown-up men. I mean He whom the writer of the *Bhagavata* was not
content to call an Incarnation but says, "The other Incarnations were
but parts of the Lord. He, Krishna, was the Lord Himself." And it is not
strange that such adjectives are applied to him when we marvel at the
many-sidedness of his character. He was the most wonderful Sannyasin,
and the most wonderful householder in one; he had the most wonderful
amount of Rajas, power, and was at the same time living in the midst of
the most wonderful renunciation. Krishna can never he understood until
you have studied the Gita, for he was the embodiment of his own
teaching. Every one of these Incarnations came as a living illustration
of what they came to preach. Krishna, the preacher of the Gita, was all
his life the embodiment of that Song Celestial; he was the great
illustration of non-attachment. He gives up his throne and never cares
for it. He, the leader of India, at whose word kings come down from
their thrones, never wants to be a king. He is the simple Krishna, ever
the same Krishna who played with the Gopis. Ah, that most marvellous
passage of his life, the most difficult to understand, and which none
ought to attempt to understand until he has become perfectly chaste and
pure, that most marvellous expansion of love, allegorised and expressed
in that beautiful play at Vrindâban, which none can understand but he
who has become mad with love, drunk deep of the cup of love! Who can
understand the throes of the lore of the Gopis — the very ideal of love,
love that wants nothing, love that even does not care for heaven, love
that does not care for anything in this world or the world to come? And
here, my friends, through this love of the Gopis has been found the only
solution of the conflict between the Personal and the Impersonal God. We
know how the Personal God is the highest point of human life; we know
that it is philosophical to believe in an Impersonal God immanent in the
universe, of whom everything is but a manifestation. At the same time
our souls hanker after something concrete, something which we want to
grasp, at whose feet we can pour out our soul, and so on. The Personal
God is therefore the highest conception of human nature. Yet reason
stands aghast at such an idea. It is the same old, old question which
you find discussed in the *Brahma-Sutras*, which you find Draupadi
discussing with Yudhishthira in the forest: If there is a Personal God,
all-merciful, all-powerful, why is the hell of an earth here, why did He
create this? — He must be a partial God. There was no solution, and the
only solution that can be found is what you read about the love of the
Gopis. They hated every adjective that was applied to Krishna; they did
not care to know that he was the Lord of creation, they did not care to
know that he was almighty, they did not care to know that he was
omnipotent, and so forth. The only thing they understood was that he was
infinite Love, that was all. The Gopis understood Krishna only as the
Krishna of Vrindaban. He, the leader of the hosts, the King of kings, to
them was the shepherd, and the shepherd for ever. "I do not want wealth,
nor many people, nor do I want learning; no, not even do I want to go to
heaven. Let one be born again and again, but Lord, grant me this, that I
may have love for Thee, and that for love's sake." A great landmark in
the history of religion is here, the ideal of love for love's sake, work
for work's sake, duty for duty's sake, and it for the first time fell
from the lips of the greatest of Incarnations, Krishna, and for the
first time in the history of humanity, upon the soil of India. The
religions of fear and of temptations were gone for ever, and in spite of
the fear of hell and temptation of enjoyment in heaven, came the
grandest of ideals, love for love's sake, duty for duty's sake, work for
work's sake.

And what a love! I have told you just now that it is very difficult to
understand the love of the Gopis. There are not wanting fools, even in
the midst of us, who cannot understand the marvellous significance of
that most marvellous of all episodes. There are, let me repeat, impure
fools, even born of our blood, who try to shrink from that as if from
something impure. To them I have only to say, first make yourselves
pure; and you must remember that he who tells the history of the love of
the Gopis is none else but Shuka Deva. The historian who records this
marvellous love of the Gopis is one who was born pure, the eternally
pure Shuka, the son of Vyâsa. So long as there its selfishness in the
heart, so long is love of God impossible; it is nothing but shopkeeping:
"I give you something; O Lord, you give me something in return"; and
says the Lord, "If you do not do this, I will take good care of you when
you die. I will roast you all the rest of your lives. perhaps", and so
on. So long as such ideas are in the brain, how can one understand the
mad throes of the Gopis' love? "O for one, one kiss of those lips! One
who has been kissed by Thee, his thirst for Thee increases for ever, all
sorrows vanish, and he forgets love for everything else but for Thee and
Thee alone." Ay, forget first the love for gold, and name and fame, and
for this little trumpery world of ours. Then, only then, you will
understand the love of the Gopis, too holy to be attempted without
giving up everything, too sacred to be understood until the soul has
become perfectly pure. People with ideas of sex, and of money, and of
fame, bubbling up every minute in the heart, daring to criticise and
understand the love of the Gopis! That is the very essence of the
Krishna Incarnation. Even the Gita, the great philosophy itself, does
not compare with that madness, for in the Gita the disciple is taught
slowly how to walk towards the goal, but here is the madness of
enjoyment, the drunkenness of love, where disciples and teachers and
teachings and books and all these things have become one; even the ideas
of fear, and God, and heaven — everything has been thrown away. What
remains is the madness of love. It is forgetfulness of everything, and
the lover sees nothing in the world except that Krishna and Krishna
alone, when the face of every being becomes a Krishna, when his own face
looks like Krishna, when his own soul has become tinged with the Krishna
colour. That was the great Krishna!

Do not waste your time upon little details. Take up the framework, the
essence of the life. There may be many historical discrepancies, there
may be interpolations in the life of Krishna. All these things may be
true; but, at the same time, there must have been a basis, a foundation
for this new and tremendous departure. Taking the life of any other sage
or prophet, we find that that prophet is only the evolution of what had
gone before him, we find that that prophet is only preaching the ideas
that had been scattered about his own country even in his own times.
Great doubts may exist even as to whether that prophet existed or not.
But here, I challenge any one to show whether these things, these ideals
— work for work's sake, love for love's sake, duty for duty's sake, were
not original ideas with Krishna, and as such, there must have been
someone with whom these ideas originated. They could not have been
borrowed from anybody else. They were not floating about in the
atmosphere when Krishna was born. But the Lord Krishna was the first
preacher of this; his disciple Vyasa took it up and preached it unto
mankind. This is the highest idea to picture. The highest thing we can
get out of him is Gopijanavallabha, the Beloved of the Gopis of
Vrindaban. When that madness comes in your brain, when you understand
the blessed Gopis, then you will understand what love is. When the whole
world will vanish, when all other considerations will have died out,
when you will become pure-hearted with no other aim, not even the search
after truth, then and then alone will come to you the madness of that
love, the strength and the power of that infinite love which the Gopis
had, that love for love's sake. That is the goal. When you have got
that, you have got everything.

To come down to the lower stratum — Krishna, the preacher of the Gita.
Ay, there is an attempt in India now which is like putting the cart
before the horse. Many of our people think that Krishna as the lover of
the Gopis is something rather uncanny, and the Europeans do not like it
much. Dr. So-and-so does not like it. Certainly then, the Gopis have to
go! Without the sanction of Europeans how can Krishna live? He cannot!
In the Mahabharata there is no mention of the Gopis except in one or two
places, and those not very remarkable places. In the prayer of Draupadi
there is mention of a Vrindaban life, and in the speech of Shishupâla
there is again mention of this Vrindaban. All these are interpolations!
What the Europeans do not want: must be thrown off. They are
interpolations, the mention of the Gopis and of Krishna too! Well, with
these men, steeped in commercialism, where even the ideal of religion
has become commercial, they are all trying to go to heaven by doing
something here; the bania wants compound interest, wants to lay by
something here and enjoy it there. Certainly the Gopis have no place in
such a system of thought. From that ideal lover we come down to the
lower stratum of Krishna, the preacher of the Gita. Than the Gita no
better commentary on the Vedas has been written or can be written. The
essence of the Shrutis, or of the Upanishads, is hard to be understood,
seeing that there are so many commentators, each one trying to interpret
in his own way. Then the Lord Himself comes, He who is the inspirer of
the Shrutis, to show us the meaning of them, as the preacher of the
Gita, and today India wants nothing better, the world wants nothing
better than that method of interpretation. It is a wonder that
subsequent interpreters of the scriptures, even commenting upon the
Gita, many times could not catch the meaning, many times could not catch
the drift. For what do you find in the Gita, and what in modern
commentators? One non-dualistic commentator takes up an Upanishad; there
are so many dualistic passages, and he twists and tortures them into
some meaning, and wants to bring them all into a meaning of his own. If
a dualistic commentator comes, there are so many nondualistic texts
which he begins to torture, to bring them all round to dualistic
meaning. But you find in the Gita there is no attempt at torturing any
one of them. They are all right, says the Lord; for slowly and gradually
the human soul rises up and up, step after step, from the gross to the
fine, from the fine to the finer, until it reaches the Absolute, the
goal. That is what is in the Gita. Even the Karma Kanda is taken up, and
it is shown that although it cannot give salvation direct; but only
indirectly, yet that is also valid; images are valid indirectly;
ceremonies, forms, everything is valid only with one condition, purity
of the heart. For worship is valid and leads to the goal if the heart is
pure and the heart is sincere; and all these various modes of worship
are necessary, else why should they be there? Religions and sects are
not the work of hypocrites and wicked people who invented all these to
get a little money, as some of our modern men want to think. However
reasonable that explanation may seem, it is not true, and they were not
invented that way at all. They are the outcome of the necessity of the
human soul. They are all here to satisfy the hankering and thirst of
different classes of human minds, and you need not preach against them.
The day when that necessity will cease, they will vanish along with the
cessation of that necessity; and so long as that necessity remains, they
must be there in spite of your preaching, in spite of your criticism.
You may bring the sword or the gun into play, you may deluge the world
with human blood, but so long as there is a necessity for idols, they
must remain. These forms, and all the various steps in religion will
remain, and we understand from the Lord Shri Krishna why they should.

A rather sadder chapter of India's history comes now. In the Gita we
already hear the distant sound of the conflicts of sects, and the Lord
comes in the middle to harmonise them all; He, the great preacher of
harmony, the greatest teacher of harmony, Lord Shri Krishna. He says,
"In Me they are all strung like pearls upon a thread." We already hear
the distant sounds, the murmurs of the conflict, and possibly there was
a period of harmony and calmness, when it broke out anew, not only on
religious grounds, but roost possibly on caste grounds — the fight
between the two powerful factors in our community, the kings and the
priests. And from the topmost crest of the wave that deluged India for
nearly a thousand years, we see another glorious figure, and that was
our Gautama Shâkyamuni. You all know about his teachings and preachings.
We worship him as God incarnate, the greatest, the boldest preacher of
morality that the world ever saw, the greatest Karma-Yogi; as disciple
of himself, as it were, the same Krishna came to show how to make his
theories practical. There came once again the same voice that in the
Gita preached, "Even the least bit done of this religion saves from
great fear". "Women, or Vaishyas, or even Shudras, all reach the highest
goal." Breaking the bondages of all, the chains of all, declaring
liberty to all to reach the highest goal, come the words of the Gita,
rolls like thunder the mighty voice of Krishna: "Even in this life they
have conquered relativity, whose minds are firmly fixed upon the
sameness, for God is pure and the same to all, therefore such are said
to be living in God." "Thus seeing the same Lord equally present
everywhere, the sage does not injure the Self by the self, and thus
reaches the highest goal." As it were to give a living example of this
preaching, as it were to make at least one part of it practical, the
preacher himself came in another form, and this was Shakyamuni, the
preacher to the poor and the miserable, he who rejected even the
language of the gods to speak in the language of the people, so that he
might reach the hearts of the people, he who gave up a throne to live
with beggars, and the poor, and the downcast, he who pressed the Pariah
to his breast like a second Rama.

You all know about his great work, his grand character. But the work had
one great defect, and for that we are suffering even today. No blame
attaches to the Lord. He is pure and glorious, but unfortunately such
high ideals could not be well assimilated by the different uncivilised
and uncultured races of mankind who flocked within the fold of the
Aryans. These races, with varieties of superstition and hideous worship,
rushed within the fold of the Aryans and for a time appeared as if they
had become civilised, but before a century had passed they brought out
their snakes, their ghosts, and all the other things their ancestors
used to worship, and thus the whole of India became one degraded mass of
superstition. The earlier Buddhists in their rage against the killing of
animals had denounced the sacrifices of the Vedas; and these sacrifices
used to be held in every house. There was a fire burning, and that was
all the paraphernalia of worship. These sacrifices were obliterated, and
in their place came gorgeous temples, gorgeous ceremonies, and gorgeous
priests, and all that you see in India in modern times. I smile when I
read books written by some modern people who ought to have known better,
that the Buddha was the destroyer of Brahminical idolatry. Little do
they know that Buddhism created Brahminism and idolatry in India.

There was a book written a year or two ago by a Russian gentleman, who
claimed to have found out a very curious life of Jesus Christ, and in
one part of the book he says that Christ went to the temple of Jagannath
to study with the Brahmins, but became disgusted with their
exclusiveness and their idols, and so he went to the Lamas of Tibet
instead, became perfect, and went home. To any man who knows anything
about Indian history, that very statement proves that the whole thing
was a fraud, because the temple of Jagannath is an old Buddhistic
temple. We took this and others over and re-Hinduised them. We shall
have to do many things like that yet. That is Jagannath, and there was
not one Brahmin there then, and yet we are told that Jesus Christ came
to study with the Brahmins there. So says our great Russian
archaeologist.

Thus, in spite of the preaching of mercy to animals, in spite of the
sublime ethical religion, in spite of the hairsplitting discussions
about the existence or non-existence of a permanent soul, the whole
building of Buddhism tumbled down piecemeal; and the ruin was simply
hideous. I have neither the time nor the inclination to describe to you
the hideousness that came in the wake of Buddhism. The most hideous
ceremonies, the most horrible, the most obscene books that human hands
ever wrote or the human brain ever conceived, the most bestial forms
that ever passed under the name of religion, have all been the creation
of degraded Buddhism.

But India has to live, and the spirit of the Lords descended again. He
who declared, "I will come whenever virtue subsides", came again, and
this time the manifestation was in the South, and up rose that young
Brahmin of whom it has been declared that at the age of sixteen he had
completed all his writings; the marvellous boy Shankaracharya arose. The
writings of this boy of sixteen are the wonders of the modern world, and
so was the boy. He wanted to bring back the Indian world to its pristine
purity, but think of the amount of the task before him. I have told you
a few points about the state of things that existed in India. All these
horrors that you are trying to reform are the outcome of that reign of
degradation. The Tartars and the Baluchis and all the hideous races of
mankind came to India and became Buddhists, and assimilated with us, and
brought their national customs, and the whole of our national life
became a huge page of the most horrible and the most bestial customs.
That was the inheritance which that boy got from the Buddhists, and from
that time to this, the whole work in India is a reconquest of this
Buddhistic degradation by the Vedanta. It is still going on, it is not
yet finished. Shankara came, a great philosopher, and showed that the
real essence of Buddhism and that of the Vedanta are not very different,
but that the disciples did not understand the Master and have degraded
themselves, denied the existence of the soul and of God, and have become
atheists. That was what Shankara showed, and all the Buddhists began to
come back to the old religion. But then they had become accustomed to
all these forms; what could be done?

Then came the brilliant Râmânuja. Shankara, with his great intellect, I
am afraid, had not as great a heart. Ramanuja's heart was greater. He
felt for the downtrodden, he sympathised with them. He took up the
ceremonies, the accretions that had gathered, made them pure so far as
they could be, and instituted new ceremonies, new methods of worship,
for the people who absolutely required them. At the same time he opened
the door to the highest; spiritual worship from the Brahmin to the
Pariah. That was Ramanuja's work. That work rolled on, invaded the
North, was taken up by some great leaders there; but that was much
later, during the Mohammedan rule; and the brightest of these prophets
of comparatively modern times in the North was Chaitanya.

You may mark one characteristic since the time of Ramanuja — the opening
of the door of spirituality to every one. That has been the watchword of
all prophets succeeding Ramanuja, as it had been the watchword of all
the prophets before Shankara. I do not know why Shankara should be
represented as rather exclusive; I do not find anything in his writings
which is exclusive. As in the case of the declarations of the Lord
Buddha, this exclusiveness that has been attributed to Shankara's
teachings is most possibly not due to his teachings, but to the
incapacity of his disciples. This one great Northern sage, Chaitanya,
represented the mad love of the Gopis. Himself a Brahmin, born of one of
the most rationalistic families of the day, himself a professor of logic
fighting and gaining a word-victory — for, this he had learnt from his
childhood as the highest ideal of life and yet through the mercy of some
sage the whole life of that man became changed; he gave up his fight,
his quarrels, his professorship of logic and became one of the greatest
teachers of Bhakti the world has ever known — mad Chaitanya. His Bhakti
rolled over the whole land of Bengal, bringing solace to every one. His
love knew no bounds. The saint or the sinner, the Hindu or the
Mohammedan, the pure or the impure, the prostitute, the streetwalker —
all had a share in his love, all had a share in his mercy: and even to
the present day, although greatly degenerated, as everything does become
in time, his sect is the refuge of the poor, of the downtrodden, of the
outcast, of the weak, of those who have been rejected by all society.
But at the same time I must remark for truth's sake that we find this:
In the philosophic sects we find wonderful liberalisms. There is not a
man who follows Shankara who will say that all the different sects of
India are really different. At the same time he was a tremendous
upholder of exclusiveness as regards caste. But with every Vaishnavite
preacher we find a wonderful liberalism as to the teaching of caste
questions, but exclusiveness as regards religious questions.

The one had a great head, the other a large heart, and the time was ripe
for one to be born, the embodiment of both this head and heart; the time
was ripe for one to be born who in one body would have the brilliant
intellect of Shankara and the wonderfully expansive, infinite heart of
Chaitanya; one who would see in every sect the same spirit working, the
same God; one who would see God in every being, one whose heart would
weep for the poor, for the weak, for the outcast, for the downtrodden,
for every one in this world, inside India or outside India; and at the
same time whose grand brilliant intellect would conceive of such noble
thoughts as would harmonise all conflicting sects, not only in India but
outside of India, and bring a marvellous harmony, the universal religion
of head and heart into existence. Such a man was born, and I had the
good fortune to sit at his feet for years. The time was ripe, it was
necessary that such a man should be born, and he came; and the most
wonderful part of it was that his life's work was just near a city which
was full of Western thought, a city which had run mad after these
occidental ideas, a city which had become more Europeanised than any
other city in India. There he lived, without any book-learning
whatsoever; this great intellect never learnt even to write his own
name,[1](#fn1) but the most graduates of our university found in him an
intellectual giant. He was a strange man, this Shri Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa. It is a long, long story, and I have no time to tell
anything about him tonight. Let me now only mention the great Shri
Ramakrishna, the fulfilment of the Indian sages, the sage for the time,
one whose teaching is just now, in the present time, most beneficial.
And mark the divine power working behind the man. The son of a poor
priest, born in an out-of-the-way village, unknown and unthought of,
today is worshipped literally by thousands in Europe and America, and
tomorrow will be worshipped by thousands more. Who knows the plans of
the Lord!

Now, my brothers, if you do not see the hand, the finger of Providence,
it is because you are blind, born blind indeed. If time comes, and
another opportunity, I will speak to you more fully about him. Only let
me say now that if I have told you one word of truth, it was his and his
alone, and if I have told you many things which were not true, which
were not correct, which were not beneficial to the human race, they were
all mine, and on me is the responsibility.

1.  [^](#txt1)Later research has shown that although Shri Ramakrishna
    was almost illiterate in the Western sense, he could read and write
    Bengali.

</div>
