---
title: THE WORK BEFORE US

---
<div>

[←](the_sages_of_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_future_of_india.htm)

  

## THE WORK BEFORE US

(*Delivered at the Triplicane Literary Society, Madras*)

The problem of life is becoming deeper and broader every day as the
world moves on. The watchword and the essence have been preached in the
days of yore when the Vedantic truth was first discovered, the
solidarity of all life. One atom in this universe cannot move without
dragging the whole world along with it. There cannot be any progress
without the whole world following in the wake, and it is becoming every
day dearer that the solution of any problem can never be attained on
racial, or national, or narrow grounds. Every idea has to become broad
till it covers the whole of this world, every aspiration must go on
increasing till it has engulfed the whole of humanity, nay, the whole of
life, within its scope. This will explain why our country for the last
few centuries has not been what she was in the past. We find that one of
the causes which led to this degeneration was the narrowing of our views
narrowing the scope of our actions.

Two curious nations there have been — sprung of the same race, but
placed in different circumstances and environments, working put the
problems of life each in its own particular way. I mean the ancient
Hindu and the ancient Greek. The Indian Aryan — bounded on the north by
the snow-caps of the Himalayas, with fresh-water rivers like rolling
oceans surrounding him in the plains, with eternal forests which, to
him, seemed to be the end of the world — turned his vision inward; and
given the natural instinct, the superfine brain of the Aryan, with this
sublime scenery surrounding him, the natural result was that he became
introspective. The analysis of his own mind was the great theme of the
Indo-Aryan. With the Greek, on the other hand, who arrived at a part of
the earth which was more beautiful than sublime, the beautiful islands
of the Grecian Archipelago, nature all around him generous yet simple —
his mind naturally went outside. It wanted to analyse the external
world. And as a result we find that from India have sprung all the
analytical sciences, and from Greece all the sciences of generalization.
The Hindu mind went on in its own direction and produced the most
marvellous results. Even at the present day, the logical capacity of the
Hindus, and the tremendous power which the Indian brain still possesses,
is beyond compare. We all know that our boys pitched against the boys of
any other country triumph always. At the same time when the national
vigour went, perhaps one or two centuries before the Mohammedan conquest
of India, this national faculty became so much exaggerated that it
degraded itself, and we find some of this degradation in everything in
India, in art, in music, in sciences, in everything. In art, no more was
there a broad conception, no more the symmetry of form and sublimity of
conception, but the tremendous attempt at the ornate and florid style
had arisen. The originality of the race seemed to have been lost. In
music no more were there the soul-stirring ideas of the ancient Sanskrit
music, no more did each note stand, as it were, on its own feet, and
produce the marvellous harmony, but each note had lost its
individuality. The whole of modern music is a jumble of notes, a
confused mass of curves. That is a sign of degradation in music. So, if
you analyse your idealistic conceptions, you will find the same attempt
at ornate figures, and loss of originality. And even in religion, your
special field, there came the most horrible degradations. What can you
expect of a race which for hundreds of years has been busy in discussing
such momentous problems as whether we should drink a glass of water with
the right hand or the left? What more degradation can there be than that
the greatest minds of a country have been discussing about the kitchen
for several hundreds of years, discussing whether I may touch you or you
touch me, and what is the penance for this touching! The themes of the
Vedanta, the sublimest and the most glorious conceptions of God and soul
ever preached on earth, were half-lost, buried in the forests, preserved
by a few Sannyâsins, while the rest of the nation discussed the
momentous questions of touching each other, and dress, and food. The
Mohammedan conquest gave us many good things, no doubt; even the lowest
man in the world can teach something to the highest; at the same time it
could not bring vigour into the race. Then for good or evil, the English
conquest of India took place. Of course every conquest is bad, for
conquest is an evil, foreign government is an evil, no doubt; but even
through evil comes good sometimes, and the great good of the English
conquest is this: England, nay the whole of Europe, has to thank Greece
for its civilization. It is Greece that speaks through everything in
Europe. Every building, every piece of furniture has the impress of
Greece upon it; European science and art are nothing but Grecian. Today
the ancient Greek is meeting the ancient Hindu on the soil of India.
Thus slowly and silently the leaven has come; the broadening, the
life-giving and the revivalist movement that we see all around us has
been worked out by these forces together. A broader and more generous
conception of life is before us; and although at first we have been
deluded a little and wanted to narrow things down, we are finding out
today that these generous impulses which are at work, these broader
conceptions of life, are the logical interpretation of what is in our
ancient books. They are the carrying out, to the rigorously logical
effect, of the primary conceptions of our own ancestors. To become
broad, to go out, to amalgamate, to universalist, is the end of our
aims. And all the time we have been making ourselves smaller and
smaller, and dissociating ourselves, contrary to the plans laid down our
scriptures.

Several dangers are in the way, and one is that of the extreme
conception that we are *the* people in the world. With all my love for
India, and with all my patriotism and veneration for the ancients, I
cannot but think that we have to learn many things from other nations.
We must be always ready to sit at the feet of all, for, mark you, every
one can teach us great lessons. Says our great law-giver, Manu: "Receive
some good knowledge even from the low-born, and even from the man of
lowest birth learn by service the road to heaven." We, therefore, as
true children of Manu, must obey his commands and be ready to learn the
lessons of this life or the life hereafter from any one who can teach
us. At the same time we must not forget that we have also to teach a
great lesson to the world. We cannot do without the world outside India;
it was our foolishness that we thought we could, and we have paid the
penalty by about a thousand years of slavery. That we did not go out to
compare things with other nations, did not mark the workings that have
been all around us, has been the one great cause of this degradation of
the Indian mind. We have paid the penalty; let us do it no more. All
such foolish ideas that Indians must not go out of India are childish.
They must be knocked on the head; the more you go out and travel among
the nations of the world, the better for you and for your country. If
you had done that for hundreds of years past, you would not be here
today at the feet of every nation that wants to rule India. The first
manifest effect of life is expansion. You must expand if you want to
live. The moment you have ceased to expand, death is upon you, danger is
ahead. I went to America and Europe, to which you so kindly allude; I
have to, because that is the first sign of the revival of national life,
expansion. This reviving national life, expanding inside, threw me off,
and thousands will be thrown off in that way. Mark my words, it has got
to come if this nation lives at all. This question, therefore, is the
greatest of the signs of the revival of national life, and through this
expansion our quota of offering to the general mass of human knowledge,
our contribution to the general upheaval of the world, is going out to
the external world.

Again, this is not a new thing. Those of you who think that the Hindus
have been always confined within the four walls of their country through
all ages, are entirely mistaken; you have not studied the old books, you
have not studied the history of the race aright if you think so. Each
nation must give in order to live. When you give life, you will have
life; when you receive, you must pay for it by giving to all others; and
that we have been living for so many thousands of years is a fact that
stares us in the face, and the solution that remains is that we have
been always giving to the outside world, whatever the ignorant may
think. But the gift of India is the gift of religion and philosophy, and
wisdom and spirituality. And religion does not want cohorts to march
before its path and clear its way. Wisdom and philosophy do not want to
be carried on floods of blood. Wisdom and philosophy do not march upon
bleeding human bodies, do not march with violence but come on the wings
of peace and love, and that has always been so. Therefore we had to
give. I was asked by a young lady in London, "What have you Hindus done?
You have never even conquered a single nation." That is true from the
point of view of the Englishman, the brave, the heroic, the Kshatriya —
conquest is the greatest glory that one man can have over another. That
is true from his point of view, but from ours it is quite the opposite.
If I ask myself what has been the cause of India's greatness, I answer,
because we have never conquered. That is our glory. You are hearing
every day, and sometimes, I am sorry to say, from men who ought to know
better, denunciations of our religion, because it is not at all a
conquering religion. To my mind that is the argument why our religion is
truer than any other religion, because it never conquered, because it
never shed blood, because its mouth always shed on all, words of
blessing, of peace, words of love and sympathy. It is here and here
alone that the ideals of toleration were first preached. And it is here
and here alone that toleration and sympathy have become practical it is
theoretical in every other country, it is here and here alone, that the
Hindu builds mosques for the Mohammedans and churches for the
Christians.

So, you see, our message has gone out to the world many a time, but
slowly, silently, unperceived. It is on a par with everything in India.
The one characteristic of Indian thought is its silence, its calmness.
At the same time the tremendous power that is behind it is never
expressed by violence. It is always the silent mesmerism of Indian
thought. If a foreigner takes up our literature to study, at first it is
disgusting to him; there is not the same stir, perhaps, the same amount
of go that rouses him instantly. Compare the tragedies of Europe with
our tragedies. The one is full of action, that rouses you for the
moment, but when it is over there comes the reaction, and everything is
gone, washed off as it were from your brains. Indian tragedies are like
the mesmerist's power, quiet, silent, but as you go on studying them
they fascinate you; you cannot move; you are bound; and whoever has
dared to touch our literature has felt the bondage, and is there bound
for ever. Like the gentle dew that falls unseen and unheard, and yet
brings into blossom the fairest of roses, has been the contribution of
India to the thought of the world. Silent, unperceived, yet omnipotent
in its effect, it has revolutionised the thought of the world, yet
nobody knows when it did so. It was once remarked to me, "How difficult
it is to ascertain the name of any writer in India", to which I replied,
"That is the Indian idea." Indian writers are not like modern writers
who steal ninety percent of their ideas from other authors, while only
ten per cent is their own, and they take care to write a preface in
which they say, "For these ideas I am responsible". Those great master
minds producing momentous results in the hearts of mankind were content
to write their books without even putting their names, and to die
quietly, leaving the books to posterity. Who knows the writers of our
philosophy, who knows the writers of our Purânas? They all pass under
the generic name of Vyâsa, and Kapila, and so on. They have been true
children of Shri Krishna. They have been true followers of the Gita;
they practically carried out the great mandate, "To work you have the
right, but not to the fruits thereof."

Thus India is working upon the world, but one condition is necessary.
Thoughts like merchandise can only run through channels made by
somebody. Roads have to be made before even thought can travel from one
place to another, and whenever in the history of the world a great
conquering nation has arisen, linking the different parts of the world
together, then has poured through these channels the thought of India
and thus entered into the veins of every race. Before even the Buddhists
were born, there are evidences accumulating every day that Indian
thought penetrated the world. Before Buddhism, Vedanta had penetrated
into China, into Persia, and the Islands of the Eastern Archipelago.
Again when the mighty mind of the Greek had linked the different parts
of the Eastern world together there came Indian thought; and
Christianity with all its boasted civilisation is but a collection of
little bits of Indian thought. Ours is the religion of which Buddhism
with all its greatness is a rebel child, and of which Christianity is a
very patchy imitation. One of these cycles has again arrived. There is
the tremendous power of England which has linked the different parts of
the world together. English roads no more are content like Roman roads
to run over lands, but they have also ploughed the deep in all
directions. From ocean to ocean run the roads of England. Every part of
the world has been linked to every other part, and electricity plays a
most marvellous part as the new messenger. Under all these circumstances
we find again India reviving and ready to give her own quota to the
progress and civilisation of the world. And that I have been forced, as
it were, by nature, to go over and preach to America and England is the
result. Every one of us ought to have seen that the time had arrived.
Everything looks propitious, and Indian thought, philosophical and
spiritual, roast once more go over and conquer the world. The problem
before us, therefore, is assuming larger proportions every day. It is
not only that we must revive our own country — that is a small matter; I
am an imaginative man — and my idea is the conquest of the whole world
by the Hindu race.

There have been great conquering races in the world. We also have been
great conquerors. The story of our conquest has been described by that
noble Emperor of India, Asoka, as the conquest of religion and of
spirituality. Once more the world must be conquered by India. This is
the dream of my life, and I wish that each one of you who hear me today
will have the same dream in your minds, and stop not till you have
realised the dream. They will tell you every day that we had better look
to our own homes first and then go to work outside. But I will tell you
in plain language that you work best when you work for others. The best
work that you ever did for yourselves was when you worked for others,
trying to disseminate your ideas in foreign languages beyond the seas,
and this very meeting is proof how the attempt to enlighten other
countries with your thoughts is helping your own country. One-fourth of
the effect that has been produced in this country by my going to England
and America would not have been brought about, had I confined my ideas
only to India. This is the great ideal before us, and every one must be
ready for it — the Conquest of the whole world by India — nothing less
than that, and we must all get ready for it, strain every nerve for it.
Let foreigners come and flood the land with their armies, never mind.
Up, India, and conquer the world with your spirituality! Ay, as has been
declared on this soil first, love must conquer hatred, hatred cannot
conquer itself. Materialism and all its miseries can never be conquered
by materialism. Armies when they attempt to conquer armies only multiply
and make brutes of humanity. Spirituality must conquer the West. Slowly
they are finding out that what they want is spirituality to preserve
them as nations. They are waiting for it, they are eager for it. Where
is the supply to come from? Where are the men ready to go out to every
country in the world with the messages of the great sages of India?
Where are the men who are ready to sacrifice everything, so that this
message shall reach every corner of the world? Such heroic spurs are
wanted to help the spread of truth. Such heroic workers are wanted to go
abroad and help to disseminate the great truths of the Vedanta. The
world wants it; without it the world will be destroyed. The whole of the
Western world is on a volcano which may burst tomorrow, go to pieces
tomorrow. They have searched every corner of the world and have found no
respite. They have drunk deep of the cup of pleasure and found it
vanity. Now is the time to work so that India's spiritual ideas may
penetrate deep into the West. Therefore young men of Madras, I specially
ask you to remember this. We must go out, we must conquer the world
through our spirituality and philosophy. There is no other alternative,
we must do it or die. The only condition of national life, of awakened
and vigorous national life, is the conquest of the world by Indian
thought.

At the same time we must not forget that what I mean by the conquest of
the world by spiritual thought is the sending out of the life-giving
principles, not the hundreds of superstitions that we have been hugging
to our breasts for centuries. These have to be weeded out even on this
soil, and thrown aside, so that they may die for ever. These are the
causes of the degradation of the race and will lead to softening of the
brain. That brain which cannot think high and noble thoughts, which has
lost all power of originality, which has lost all vigour, that brain
which is always poisoning itself with all sorts of little superstitions
passing under the name of religion, we must beware of. In our sight,
here in India, there are several dangers. Of these, the two, Scylla and
Charybdis, rank materialism and its opposite arrant superstition, must
be avoided. There is the man today who after drinking the cup of Western
wisdom, thinks that he knows everything. He laughs at the ancient sages.
All Hindu thought to him is arrant trash — philosophy mere child's
prattle, and religion the superstition of fools. On the other hand,
there is the man educated, but a sort of monomaniac, who runs to the
other extreme and wants to explain the omen of this and that. He has
philosophical and metaphysical, and Lord knows what other puerile
explanations for every superstition that belongs to his peculiar race,
or his peculiar gods, or his peculiar village. Every little village
superstition is to him a mandate of the Vedas, and upon the carrying out
of it, according to him, depends the national life. You must beware of
this. I would rather see every one of you rank atheists than
superstitious fools, for the atheist is alive and you can make something
out of him. But if superstition enters, the brain is gone, the brain is
softening, degradation has seized upon the life. Avoid these two. Brave,
bold men, these are what we want. What we want is vigour in the blood,
strength in the nerves, iron muscles and nerves of steel, not softening
namby-pamby ideas. Avoid all these. Avoid all mystery. There is no
mystery in religion. Is there any mystery in the Vedanta, or in the
Vedas, or in the Samhitâs, or in the Puranas? What secret societies did
the sages of yore establish to preach their religion? What
sleight-of-hand tricks are there recorded as used by them to bring their
grand truths to humanity? Mystery mongering and superstition are always
signs of weakness. These are always signs of degradation and of death.
Therefore beware of them; be strong, and stand on your own feet. Great
things are there, most marvellous things. We may call them supernatural
things so far as our ideas of nature go, but not one of these things is
a mystery. It was never preached on this soil that the truths of
religion were mysteries or that they were the property of secret
societies sitting on the snow-caps of the Himalayas. I have been in the
Himalayas. You have not been there; it is several hundreds of miles from
your homes. I am a Sannyâsin, and I have been for the last fourteen
years on my feet. These mysterious societies do not exist anywhere. Do
not run after these superstitions. Better for you and for the race that
you become rank atheists, because you would have strength, but these are
degradation and death. Shame on humanity that strong men should spend
their time on these superstitions, spend all their time in inventing
allegories to explain the most rotten superstitions of the world. Be
bold; do not try to explain everything that way. The fact is that we
have many superstitions, many bad spots and sores on our body — these
have to be excised, cut off, and destroyed — but these do not destroy
our religion, our national life, our spirituality. Every principle of
religion is safe, and the sooner these black spots are purged away, the
better the principles will shine, the more gloriously. Stick to them.

You hear claims made by every religion as being the universal religion
of the world. Let me tell you in the first place that perhaps there
never will be such a thing, but if there is a religion which can lay
claim to be that, it is only our religion and no other, because every
other religion depends on some person or persons. All the other
religions have been built round the life of what they think a historical
man; and what they think the strength of religion is really the
weakness, for disprove the historicity of the man and the whole fabric
tumbles to ground. Half the lives of these great founders of religions
have been broken into pieces, and the other half doubted very seriously.
As such, every truth that had its sanction only in their words vanishes
into air. But the truths of our religion, although we have persons by
the score, do not depend upon them. The glory of Krishna is not that he
was Krishna, but that he was the great teacher of Vedanta. If he had not
been so, his name would have died out of India in the same way as the
name of Buddha has done. Thus our allegiance is to the principles
always, and not to the persons. Persons are but the embodiments, the
illustrations of the principles. If the principles are there, the
persons will come by the thousands and millions. If the principle is
safe, persons like Buddha will be born by the hundreds and thousands.
But if the principle is lost and forgotten and the whole of national
life tries to cling round a so-called historical person, woe unto that
religion, danger unto that religion! Ours is the only religion that does
not depend on a person or persons; it is based upon principles. At the
same time there is room for millions of persons. There is ample ground
for introducing persons, but each one of them must be an illustration of
the principles. We must not forget that. These principles of our
religion are all safe, and it should be the life-work of everyone of us
to keep them safe, and to keep them free from the accumulating dirt and
dust of ages. It is strange that in spite of the degradation that seized
upon the race again and again, these principles of the Vedanta were
never tarnished. No one, however wicked, ever dared to throw dirt upon
them. Our scriptures are the best preserved scriptures in the world.
Compared to other books there have been no interpolations, no
text-torturing, no destroying of the essence of the thought in them. It
is there just as it was first, directing the human mind towards the
ideal, the goal.

You find that these texts have been commented upon by different
commentators, preached by great teachers, and sects founded upon them;
and you find that in these books of the Vedas there are various
apparently contradictory ideas. There are certain texts which are
entirely dualistic, others are entirely monistic. The dualistic
commentator, knowing no better, wishes to knock the monistic texts on
the head. Preachers and priests want to explain them in the dualistic
meaning. The monistic commentator serves the dualistic texts in a
similar fashion. Now this is not the fault of the Vedas. It is foolish
to attempt to prove that the whole of the Vedas is dualistic. It is
equally foolish to attempt to prove that the whole of the Vedas is
nondualistic. They are dualistic and non-dualistic both. We understand
them better today in the light of newer ideas. These are but different
conceptions leading to the final conclusion that both dualistic and
monistic conceptions are necessary for the evolution of the mind, and
therefore the Vedas preach them. In mercy to the human race the Vedas
show the various steps to the higher goal. Not that they are
contradictory, vain words used by the Vedas to delude children; they are
necessary not only for children, but for many a grown-up man. So long as
we have a body and so long as we are deluded by the idea of our identity
with the body, so long as we have five senses and see the external
world, we must have a Personal God. For if we have all these ideas, we
must take as the great Râmânuja has proved, all the ideas about God and
nature and the individualized soul; when you take the one you have to
take the whole triangle — we cannot avoid it. Therefore as long as you
see the external world to avoid a Personal God and a personal soul is
arrant lunacy. But there may be times in the lives of sages when the
human mind transcends as it were its own limitations, man goes even
beyond nature, to the realm of which the Shruti declares, "whence words
fall back with the mind without reaching it"; "There the eyes cannot
reach nor speech nor mind"; "We cannot say that we know it, we cannot
say that we do not know it". There the human soul transcends all
limitations, and then and then alone flashes into the human soul the
conception of monism: I and the whole universe are one; I and Brahman
are one. And this conclusion you will find has not only been reached
through knowledge and philosophy, but parts of it through the power of
love. You read in the *Bhâgavata*, when Krishna disappeared and the
Gopis bewailed his disappearance, that at last the thought of Krishna
became so prominent in their minds that each one forgot her own body and
thought she was Krishna, and began to decorate herself and to play as he
did. We understand, therefore, that this identity comes even through
love. There was an ancient Persian Sufi poet, and one of his poems says,
"I came to the Beloved and beheld the door was closed; I knocked at the
door and from inside a voice came, 'Who is there?' I replied, 'I am'.
The door did not open. A second time I came and knocked at the door and
the same voice asked, 'Who is there?' 'I am so-and-so.' The door did not
open. A third time I came and the same voice asked, 'Who is there?' 'I
am Thyself, my Love', and the door opened."

There are, therefore, many stages, and we need not quarrel about them
even if there have been quarrels among the ancient commentators, whom
all of us ought to revere; for there is no limitation to knowledge,
there is no omniscience exclusively the property of any one in ancient
or modern times. If there have been sages and Rishis in the past, be
sure that there will be many now. If there have been Vyâsas and Vâlmikis
and Shankarâchâryas in ancient times, why may not each one of you become
a Shankaracharya? This is another point of our religion that you must
always remember, that in all other scriptures inspiration is quoted as
their authority, but this inspiration is limited to a very few persons,
and through them the truth came to the masses, and we have all to obey
them. Truth came to Jesus of Nazareth, and we must all obey him. But the
truth came to the Rishis of India — the Mantra-drashtâs, the seers of
thought — and will come to all Rishis in the future, not to talkers, not
to book-swallowers, not to scholars, not to philologists, but to seers
of thought. The Self is not to be reached by too much talking, not even
by the highest intellects, not even by the study of the scriptures. The
scriptures themselves say so. Do you find in any other scripture such a
bold assertion as that — not even by the study of the Vedas will you
reach the Atman? You must open your heart. Religion is not going to
church, or putting marks on the forehead, or dressing in a peculiar
fashion; you may paint yourselves in all the colours of the rainbow, but
if the heart has not been opened, if you have not realised God, it is
all vain. If one has the colour of the heart, he does not want any
external colour. That is the true religious realisation. We must not
forget that colours and all these things are good so far as they help;
so far they are all welcome. But they are apt to degenerate and instead
of helping they retard, and a man identifies religion with
externalities. Going to the temple becomes tantamount to spiritual life.
Giving something to a priest becomes tantamount to religious life. These
are dangerous and pernicious, and should be at once checked. Our
scriptures declare again and again that even the knowledge of the
external senses is not religion. That is religion which makes us realise
the Unchangeable One, and that is the religion for every one. He who
realises transcendental truth, he who realises the Atman in his own
nature, he who comes face to face with God, sees God alone in
everything, has become a Rishi. And there is no religious life for you
until you have become a Rishi. Then alone religion begins for you, now
is only the preparation. Then religion dawns upon you, now you are only
undergoing intellectual gymnastics and physical tortures.

We must, therefore, remember that our religion lays down distinctly and
clearly that every one who wants salvation must pass through the stage
of Rishihood — must become a Mantra-drashta, must see God. That is
salvation; that is the law laid down by our scriptures. Then it becomes
easy to look into the scripture with our own eyes, understand the
meaning for ourselves, to analyse just what we want, and to understand
the truth for ourselves. This is what has to be done. At the same time
we must pay all reverence to the ancient sages for their work. They were
great, these ancients, but we want to be greater. They did great work in
the past, but we must do greater work than they. They had hundreds of
Rishis in ancient India. We will have millions — we are going to have,
and the sooner every one of you believes in this, the better for India
and the better for the world. Whatever you believe, that you will be. If
you believe yourselves to be sages, sages you will be tomorrow. There is
nothing to obstruct you. For if there is one common doctrine that runs
through all our apparently fighting and contradictory sects, it is that
all glory, power, and purity are within the soul already; only according
to Ramanuja, the soul contracts and expands at times, and according to
Shankara, it comes under a delusion. Never mind these differences. All
admit the truth that the power is there — potential or manifest it is
there — and the sooner you believe that, the better for you. All power
is within you; you can do anything and everything. Believe in that, do
not believe that you are weak; do not believe that you are half-crazy
lunatics, as most of us do nowadays. You can do anything and everything
without even the guidance of any one. All power is there. Stand up and
express the divinity within you.

</div>
