---
title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT ALMORA AND REPLY

---
<div>

[←](the_vedanta_in_all_its_phases.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](vedic_teaching_in_theory_and_practice.htm)

  

## ADDRESS OF WELCOME AT ALMORA AND REPLY

On his arrival at Almora, Swamiji received an Address of Welcome in
Hindi from the citizens of Almora, of which the following is a
translation:

GREAT-SOULED ONE,

Since the time we heard that, after gaining spiritual conquest in the
West, you had started from England for your motherland, India, we were
naturally desirous of having the pleasure of seeing you. By the grace of
the Almighty, that auspicious moment has at last come. The saying of the
great poet and the prince of Bhaktas, Tulasidâsa, "A person who
intensely loves another is sure to find him", has been fully realised
today. We have assembled here to welcome you with sincere devotion. You
have highly obliged us by your kindly taking so much trouble in paying a
visit to this town again. We can hardly thank you enough for your
kindness. Blessed are you! Blessed, blessed is the revered Gurudeva who
initiated you into Yoga. Blessed is the land of Bhârata where, even in
this fearful Kali Yuga, there exist leaders of Aryan races like
yourself. Even at an early period of life, you have by your simplicity,
sincerity, character, philanthropy, severe discipline, conduct, and the
preaching of knowledge, acquired that immaculate fame throughout the
world of which we feel so proud.

In truth, you have accomplished that difficult task which no one ever
undertook in this country since the days of Shri Shankarâchârya. Which
of us ever dreamt that a descendant of the old Indian Aryans, by dint of
Tapas, would prove to the learned people of England and America the
superiority of the ancient Indian religion over other creeds? Before the
representatives of different religions, assembled in the world's
Parliament of Religions held in Chicago, you so ably advocated the
superiority of the ancient religion of India that their eyes were
opened. In that great assembly, learned speakers defended their
respective religions in their own way, but you surpassed them all. You
completely established that no religion can compete with the religion of
the Vedas. Not only this, but by preaching the ancient wisdom at various
places in the continents aforesaid, you have attracted many learned men
towards the ancient Aryan religion and philosophy. In England, too, you
have planted the banner of the ancient religion, which it is impossible
now to remove.

Up to this time, the modern civilised nations of Europe and America were
entirely ignorant of the genuine nature of our religion, but you have
with our spiritual teaching opened their eyes, by which they have come
to know that the ancient religion, which owing to their ignorance they
used to brand "as a religion of subtleties of conceited people or a mass
of discourses meant for fools", is a mine of gems. Certainly, "It is
better to have a virtuous and accomplished son than to have hundreds of
foolish ones"; "It is the moon that singly with its light dispels all
darkness and not all the stars put together." It is only the life of a
good and virtuous son like yourself that is really useful to the world.
Mother India is consoled in her decayed state by the presence of pious
sons like you. Many have crossed the seas and aimlessly run to and fro,
but it was only through the reward of your past good Karma that you have
proved the greatness of our religion beyond the seas. You have made it
the sole aim of your life by word, thought, and deed, to impart
spiritual instruction to humanity. You are always ready to give
religious instruction.

We have heard with great pleasure that you intend establishing a Math
(monastery) here, and we sincerely pray that your efforts in this
direction be crowned with success. The great Shankaracharya also, after
his spiritual conquest, established a Math at Badarikâshrama in the
Himalayas for the protection of the ancient religion. Similarly, if your
desire is also fulfilled, India will be greatly benefited. By the
establishment of the Math, we, Kumaonese, will derive special spiritual
advantages, and we shall not see the ancient religion gradually
disappearing from our midst.

From time immemorial, this part of the country has been the land of
asceticism. The greatest of the Indian sages passed their time in piety
and asceticism in this land; but that has become a thing of the past. We
earnestly hope that by the establishment of the Math you will kindly
make us realise it again. It was this sacred land which enjoyed the
celebrity all over India of having true religion, Karma, discipline, and
fair dealing, all of which seem to have been decaying by the efflux of
time. And we hope that by your noble exertions this land will revert to
its ancient religious state.

We cannot adequately express the joy we have felt at your arrival here.
May you live long, enjoying perfect health and leading a philanthropic
life! May your spiritual powers be ever on the increase, so that through
your endeavours the unhappy state of India may soon disappear!

Two other addresses were presented, to which the Swami made the
following brief reply:

This is the land of dreams of our forefathers, in which was born
Pârvati, the Mother of India. This is the holy land where every ardent
soul in India wants to come at the end of its life, and to close the
last chapter of its mortal career. On the tops of the mountains of this
blessed land, in the depths of its caves, on the banks of its rushing
torrents, have been thought out the most wonderful thoughts, a little
bit of which has drawn so much admiration even from foreigners, and
which have been pronounced by the most competent of judges to be
incomparable. This is the land which, since my very childhood, I have
been dreaming of passing my life in, and as all of you are aware, I have
attempted again and again to live here; and although the time was not
ripe, and I had work to do and was whirled outside of this holy place,
yet it is the hope of my life to end my days somewhere in this Father of
Mountains where Rishis lived, where philosophy was born. Perhaps, my
friends, I shall not be able to do it, in the way that I had planned
before — how I wish that silence, that unknownness would be given to me
— yet I sincerely pray and hope, and almost believe, that my last days
will be spent here, of all places on earth.

Inhabitants of this holy land, accept my gratitude for the kind praise
that has fallen from you for my little work in the West. But at the same
time, my mind does not want to speak of that, either in the East or in
the West. As peak after peak of this Father of Mountains began to appear
before my sight, all the propensities to work, that ferment that had
been going on in my brain for years, seemed to quiet down, and instead
of talking about what had been done and what was going to be done, the
mind reverted to that one eternal theme which the Himalayas always teach
us, that one theme which is reverberating in the very atmosphere of the
place, the one theme the murmur of which I hear even now in the rushing
whirl­pools of its rivers — renunciation! सर्वं वस्तु भयान्वितं भुवि
नृणां वैराग्यमेवाभयम् — "Everything in this life is fraught with fear.
It is renunciation alone that makes one fearless." Yes, this is the land
of renunciation.

The time will not permit me, and the circumstances are not fitting, to
speak to you fully. I shall have to conclude, therefore, by pointing out
to you that the Himalayas stand for that renunciation, and the grand
lesson we shall ever teach to humanity will be renunciation. As our
forefathers used to be attracted towards it in the latter days of their
lives, so strong souls from all quarters of this earth, in time to come,
will be attracted to this Father of Mountains, when all this fight
between sects and all those differences in dogmas will not be remembered
any more, and quarrels between your religion and my religion will have
vanished altogether, when mankind will understand that there is but one
eternal religion, and that is the perception of the divine within, and
the rest is mere froth: such ardent souls will come here knowing that
the world is but vanity of vanities, knowing that everything is useless
except the worship of the Lord and the Lord alone.

Friends, you have been very kind to allude to an idea of mine, which is
to start a centre in the Himalayas, and perhaps I have sufficiently
explained why it should be so, why, above all others, this is the spot
which I want to select as one of the great centres to teach this
universal religion. These mountains are associated with the best
memories of our race; if these Himalayas are taken away from the history
of religious India, there will be very little left behind. Here,
therefore, must be one of those centres, not merely of activity, but
more of calmness, of meditation, and of peace; and I hope some day to
realise it. I hope also to meet you at other times and have better
opportunities of talking to you. For the present, let me thank you again
for all the kindness that has been shown to me, and let me take it as
not only kindness shown to me in person, but as to one who represents
our religion. May it never leave our hearts! May we always remain as
pure as we are at the present moment, and as enthusiastic for
spirituality as we are just now!

</div>
