---
title: VEDIC TEACHING IN THEORY AND PRACTICE

---
<div>

[←](address_of_welcome_at_almora_and_reply.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](bhakti_1.htm)

  

## VEDIC TEACHING IN THEORY AND PRACTICE

When the Swami's visit was drawing to a close, his friends in Almora
invited him to give a lecture in Hindi. He consented to make the attempt
for the first time. He began slowly, and soon warmed to his theme, and
found himself building his phrases and almost his words as he went
along. Those best acquainted with the difficulties and limitations of
the Hindi language, still undeveloped as a medium for oratory, expressed
their opinion that a personal triumph had been achieved by Swamiji and
that he had proved by his masterly use of Hindi that the language had in
it undreamt-of possibilities of development in the direction of oratory.

Another lecture was delivered at the English Club in English, of which a
brief summary follows.

The subject was "Vedic Reaching in Theory and Practice". A short
historical sketch of the rise of the worship of the tribal God and its
spread through conquest of other tribes was followed by an account of
the Vedas. Their nature, character, and teaching were briefly touched
upon. Then the Swami spoke about the soul, comparing the Western method
which seeks for the solution of vital and religious mysteries in the
outside world, with the Eastern method which finding no answer in nature
outside turns its inquiry within. He justly claimed for his nation the
glory of being the discoverers of the introspective method peculiar to
themselves, and of having given to humanity the priceless treasures of
spirituality which are the result of that method alone. Passing from
this theme, naturally so dear to the heart of a Hindu, the Swami reached
the climax of his power as a spiritual teacher when he described the
relation of the soul to God, its aspiration after and real unity with
God. For some time it seemed as though the teacher, his words, his
audience, and the spirit pervading them all were one. No longer was
there any consciousness of "I" and "Thou", of "This" or "That". The
different units collected there were for the time being lost and merged
in the spiritual radiance which emanated so powerfully from the great
teacher and held them all more than spellbound.

Those that have frequently heard him will recall similar experiences
when he ceased to be Swami Vivekananda lecturing to critical and
attentive hearers, when all details and personalities were lost, names
and forms disappeared, only the Spirit remaining, uniting the speaker,
hearer, and the spoken word.

</div>
