---
title: VEDANTISM

---
<div>

[←](the_vedanta.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_influence.htm)

  

## VEDANTISM

At Khetri on 20th December 1897, Swami Vivekananda delivered a lecture
on Vedantism in the hall of the Maharaja's bungalow in which he lodged
with his disciples. The Swami was introduced by the Raja, who was the
president of the meeting; and he spoke for more than an hour and a half.
The Swami was at his best, and it was a matter of regret that no
shorthand writer was present to report this interesting lecture at
length. The following is a summary from notes taken down at the time:

Two nations of yore, namely the Greek and the Aryan placed in different
environments and circumstances — the former, surrounded by all that was
beautiful, sweet, and tempting in nature, with an invigorating climate,
and the latter, surrounded on every side by all that was sublime, and
born and nurtured in a climate which did not allow of much physical
exercise — developed two peculiar and different ideals of civilization.
The study of the Greeks was the outer infinite, while that of the Aryans
was the inner infinite; one studied the macrocosm, and the other the
microcosm. Each had its distinct part to play in the civilisation of the
world. Not that one was required to borrow from the other, but if they
compared notes both would be the gainers. The Aryans were by nature an
analytical race. In the sciences of mathematics and grammar wonderful
fruits were gained, and by the analysis of mind the full tree was
developed. In Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, and the Egyptian
neo-Platonists, we can find traces of Indian thought.

The Swami then traced in detail the influence of Indian thought on
Europe and showed how at different periods Spain, Germany, and other
European countries were greatly influenced by it. The Indian prince,
Dârâ- Shuko, translated the Upanishads into Persian, and a Latin
translation of the same was seen by Schopenhauer, whose philosophy was
moulded by these. Next to him, the philosophy of Kant also shows traces
of the teachings of the Upanishads. In Europe it is the interest in
comparative philology that attracts scholars to the study of Sanskrit,
though there are men like Deussen who take interest in philosophy for
its own sake. The Swami hoped that in future much more interest would be
taken in the study of Sanskrit. He then showed that the word "Hindu" in
former times was full of meaning, as referring to the people living
beyond the Sindhu or the Indus; it is now meaningless, representing
neither the nation nor their religion, for on this side of the Indus,
various races professing different religions live at the present day.

The Swami then dwelt at length on the Vedas and stated that they were
not spoken by any person, but the ideas were evolving slowly and slowly
until they were embodied in book form, and then that book became the
authority. He said that various religions were embodied in books: the
power of books seemed to be infinite. The Hindus have their Vedas, and
will have to hold on to them for thousands of years more, but their
ideas about them are to be changed and built anew on a solid foundation
of rock. The Vedas, he said, were a huge literature. Ninety-nine per
cent of them were missing; they were in the keeping of certain families,
with whose extinction the books were lost. But still, those that are
left now could not be contained even in a large hall like that. They
severe written in language archaic and simple; their grammar was very
crude, so much so that it was said that some part of the Vedas had no
meaning.

He then dilated on the two portions of the Vedas — the Karma Kânda and
the Jnâna Kânda. The Karma Kanda, he said, were the Samhitâs and the
Brâhmanas. The Brahmanas dealt with sacrifices. The Samhitas were songs
composed in Chhandas known as Anushtup, Trishtup, Jagati, etc. Generally
they praised deities such as Varuna or Indra; and the question arose who
were these deities; and if any theories were raised about them, they
were smashed up by other theories, and so on it went.

The Swami then proceeded to explain different ideas of worship. With the
ancient Babylonians, the soul was only a double, having no individuality
of its own and not able to break its connection with the body. This
double was believed to suffer hunger and thirst, feelings and emotions
like those of the old body. Another idea was that if the first body was
injured the double would be injured also; when the first was
annihilated, the double also perished; so the tendency grew to preserve
the body, and thus mummies, tombs, and graves came into existence. The
Egyptians, the Babylonians, and the Jews never got any farther than this
idea of the double; they did not reach to the idea of the Âtman beyond.

Prof Max Müller's opinion was that not the least trace of ancestral
worship could be found in the Rig-Veda. There we do not meet with the
horrid sight of mummies staring stark and blank at us. There the gods
were friendly to man; communion between the worshipper and the
worshipped was healthy. There was no moroseness, no want of simple joy,
no lack of smiles or light in the eyes. The Swami said that dwelling on
the Vedas he even seemed to hear the laughter of the gods. The Vedic
Rishis might not have had finish in their expression, but they were men
of culture and heart, and we are brutes in comparison to them. Swamiji
then recited several Mantras in confirmation of what he had just said:
"Carry him to the place where the Fathers live, where there is no grief
or sorrow" etc. Thus the idea arose that the sooner the dead body was
cremated the better. By degrees they came to know that there was a finer
body that went to a place where there was all joy and no sorrow. In the
Semitic type of religion there was tribulation and fear; it was thought
that if a man saw God, he would die. But according to the Rig-Veda, when
a man saw God face to face then began his real life.

Now the questions came to be asked: What were these gods? Sometimes
Indra came and helped man; sometimes Indra drank too much Soma. Now and
again, adjectives such as all-powerful, all-pervading, were attributed
to him; the same was the case with Varuna. In this way it went on, and
some of these Mantras depicting the characteristics of these gods were
marvellous, and the language was exceedingly grand. The speaker here
repeated the famous *Nâsadiya Sukta* which describes the Pralaya state
and in which occurs the idea of "Darkness covering darkness", and asked
if the persons that described these sublime ideas in such poetic thought
were uncivilised and uncultured, then what we should call ourselves. It
was not for him, Swamiji said, to criticise or pass any judgment on
those Rishis and their gods — Indra or Varuna. All this was like a
panorama, unfolding one scene after another, and behind them all as a
background stood out एकं सद्विप्रा बहुधा वदन्ति। — "That which exists is
One; sages call It variously." The whole thing was most mystical,
marvellous, and exquisitely beautiful. It seemed even yet quite
unapproachable — the veil was so thin that it would rend, as it were, at
the least touch and vanish like a mirage.

Continuing, he said that one thing seemed to him quite clear and
possible that the Aryans too, like the Greeks, went to outside nature
for their solution, that nature tempted them outside, led them step by
step to the outward world, beautiful and good. But here in India
anything which was not sublime counted for nothing. It never occurred to
the Greeks to pry into the secrets after death. But here from the
beginning was asked again and again "What am I? What will become of me
after death?" There the Greek thought — the man died and went to heaven.
What was meant by going to heaven? It meant going outside of everything;
there was nothing inside, everything was outside; his search was all
directed outside, nay, he himself was, as it were, outside himself. And
when he went to a place which was very much like this world minus all
its sorrows, he thought he had got everything that was desirable and was
satisfied; and there all ideas of religion stopped. But this did not
satisfy the Hindu mind. In its analysis, these heavens were all included
within the material universe. "Whatever comes by combination", the
Hindus said, "dies of annihilation". They asked external nature, "Do you
know what is soul?" and nature answered, "No". "Is there any God?"
Nature answered, "I do not know". Then they turned away from nature.
They understood that external nature, however great and grand, was
limited in space and time. Then there arose another voice; new sublime
thoughts dawned in their minds. That voice said — "Neti, Neti", "Not
this, not this". All the different gods were now reduced into one; the
suns, moons, and stars — nay, the whole universe — were one, and upon
this new ideal the spiritual basis of religion was built.

न तत्र सुर्यो भाति न चंन्द्रतारकं नेमा विद्युतो भान्ति कुतोऽयमग्निः ।  
तमेव भान्तमनुभाति सर्वं तस्य भासा सर्वमिदं विभाति ॥

— "There the sun doth not shine, neither the moon, nor stars, nor
lightning, what to speak of this fire. He shining, everything doth
shine. Through Him everything shineth." No more is there that limited,
crude, personal idea; no more is there that little idea of God sitting
in judgment; no more is that search outside, but henceforth it is
directed inside. Thus the Upanishads became the Bible of India. It was a
vast literature, these Upanishads, and all the schools holding different
opinions in India came to be established on the foundation of the
Upanishads.

The Swami passed on to the dualistic, qualified monistic, and Advaitic
theories, and reconciled them by saying that each one of these was like
a step by which one passed before the other was reached; the final
evolution to Advaitism was the natural outcome, and the last step was
"Tattvamasi". He pointed out where even the great commentators
Shankarâchârya, Râmânujâchârya, and Madhvâchârya had committed mistakes.
Each one believed in the Upanishads as the sole authority, but thought
that they preached one thing, one path only. Thus Shankaracharya
committed the mistake in supposing that the whole of the Upanishads
taught one thing, which was Advaitism, and nothing else; and wherever a
passage bearing distinctly the Dvaita idea occurred, he twisted and
tortured the meaning to make it support his own theory. So with Ramanuja
and Madhvacharya when pure Advaitic texts occurred. It was perfectly
true that the Upanishads had one thing to teach, but that was taught as
a going up from one step to another. Swamiji regretted that in modern
India the spirit of religion is gone; only the externals remain. The
people are neither Hindus nor Vedantists. They are merely
don't-touchists; the kitchen is their temple and Hândi Bartans (cooking
pots) are their Devatâ (object of worship). This state of things must
go. The sooner it is given up the better for our religion. Let the
Upanishads shine in their glory, and at the same time let not quarrels
exist amongst different sects.

As Swamiji was not keeping good health, he felt exhausted at this stage
of his speech; so he took a little rest for half an hour, during which
time the whole audience waited patiently to hear the rest of the
lecture. He came out and spoke again for half an hour, and explained
that knowledge was the finding of unity in diversity, and the highest
point in every science was reached when it found the one unity
underlying all variety. This was as true in physical science as in the
spiritual.

</div>
