---
title: THE INFLUENCE OF INDIAN SPIRITUAL THOUGHT IN ENGLAND

---
<div>

[←](vedantism_2.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](sannyasa_its_ideal_and_practice.htm)

  

## THE INFLUENCE OF INDIAN SPIRITUAL THOUGHT IN ENGLAND

The Swami Vivekananda presided over a meeting at which the Sister
Nivedita (Miss M. E. Noble) delivered a lecture on "The Influence of
Indian Spiritual Thought in England" on 11th March, 1898, at the Star
Theatre, Calcutta. Swami Vivekananda on rising to introduce Miss Noble
spoke as follows:

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,

When I was travelling through the Eastern parts of Asia, one thing
especially struck me — that is the prevalence of Indian spiritual
thought in Eastern Asiatic countries. You may imagine the surprise with
which I noticed written on the walls of Chinese and Japanese temples
some well-known Sanskrit Mantras, and possibly it will please you all
the more to know that they were all in old Bengali characters, standing
even in the present day as a monument of missionary energy and zeal
displayed by our forefathers of Bengal.

Apart from these Asiatic countries, the work of India's spiritual
thought is so widespread and unmistakable that even in Western
countries, going deep below the surface, I found traces of the same
influence still present. It has now become a historical fact that the
spiritual ideas of the Indian people travelled towards both the East and
the West in days gone by. Everybody knows now how much the world owes to
India's spirituality, and what a potent factor in the present and the
past of humanity have been the spiritual powers of India. These are
things of the past. I find another most remarkable phenomenon, and that
is that the most stupendous powers of civilisation, and progress towards
humanity and social progress, have been effected by that wonderful race
— I mean the Anglo-Saxon. I may go further and tell you that had it not
been for the power of the Anglo-Saxons we should not have met here today
to discuss, as we are doing, the influence of our Indian spiritual
thought. And coming back to our own country, coming from the West to the
East, I see the same Anglo-Saxon powers working here with all their
defects, but retaining their peculiarly characteristic good features,
and I believe that at last the grand result is achieved. The British
idea of expansion and progress is forcing us up, and let us remember
that the civilisation of the West has been drawn from the fountain of
the Greeks, and that the great idea of Greek civilization is that of
*expression*. In India we *think* — but unfortunately sometimes we think
so deeply that there is no power left for expression. Gradually,
therefore, it came to pass that our force of expression did not manifest
itself before the world, and what is the result of that? The result is
this — we worked to hide everything we had. It began first with
individuals as a faculty of hiding, and it ended by becoming a national
habit of hiding — there is such a lack of power of expression with us
that we are now considered a dead nation. Without expression, how can we
live? The backbone of Western civilization is — expansion and
expression. This side of the work of the Anglo-Saxon race in India, to
which I draw your attention, is calculated to rouse our nation once more
to express itself, and it is inciting it to bring out its hidden
treasures before the world by using the means of communication provided
by the same mighty race. The Anglo-Saxons have created a future for
India, and the space through which our ancestral ideas are now ranging
is simply phenomenal. Ay, what great facilities had our forefathers when
they delivered their message of truth and salvation? Ay, how did the
great Buddha preach the noble doctrine of universal brotherhood? There
were I even then great facilities here, in our beloved India, for the
attainment of real happiness, and we could easily send our ideas from
one end of the world to the other. Now we have reached even the
Anglo-Saxon race. This is the kind of interaction now going on, and we
find that our message is heard, and not only heard but is being
responded to. Already England has given us some of her great intellects
to help, us in our mission. Every one has heard and is perhaps familiar
with my friend Miss Müller, who is now here on this platform. This lady,
born of a very good family and well educated, has given her whole life
to us out of love for India, and has made India her home and her family.
Every one of you is familiar with the name of that noble and
distinguished Englishwoman who has also given her whole life to work for
the good of India and India's regeneration — I mean Mrs. Besant. Today,
we meet on this platform two ladies from America who have the same
mission in their hearts; and I can assure you that they also are willing
to devote their lives to do the least good to our poor country. I take
this opportunity of reminding you of the name of one of our countrymen —
one who has seen England and America, one in whom I have great
confidence, and whom I respect and love, and who would have been present
here but for an engagement elsewhere — a man working steadily and
silently for the good of our country, a man of great spirituality — I
mean Mr. Mohini Mohan Chatterji. And now England has sent us another
gift in Miss Margaret Noble, from whom we expect much. Without any more
words of mine I introduce to you Miss Noble, who will now address you.

After Sister Nivedita had finished her interesting lecture, the Swami
rose and said:

I have only a few words to say. We have an idea that we Indians can do
something, and amongst the Indians we Bengalis may laugh at this idea;
but I do not. My mission in life is to rouse a struggle in you. Whether
you are an Advaitin, whether you are a qualified monist or dualist, it
does not matter much. But let me draw your attention to one thing which
unfortunately we always forget: that is — "O man, have faith in
yourself." That isle the way by which we can have faith in God. Whether
you are an Advaitist or a dualist, whether you are a believer in the
system of Yoga or a believer in Shankarâchârya, whether you are a
follower of Vyâsa or Vishvâmitra, it does not matter much. But the thing
is that on this point Indian thought differs from that of all the rest
of the world. Let us remember for a moment that, whereas in every other
religion and in every other country, the power of the soul is entirely
ignored — the soul is thought of as almost powerless, weak, and inert —
we in India consider the soul to be eternal and hold that it will remain
perfect through all eternity. We should always bear in mind the
teachings of the Upanishads.

Remember your great mission in life. We Indians, and especially those of
Bengal, have been invaded by a vast amount of foreign ideas that are
eating into the very vitals of our national religion. Why are we so
backwards nowadays? Why are ninety-nine per cent of us made up of
entirely foreign ideas and elements? This has to be thrown out if we
want to rise in the scale of nations. If we want to rise, we must also
remember that we have many things to learn from the West. We should
learn from the West her arts and her sciences. From the West we have to
learn the sciences of physical nature, while on the other hand the West
has to come to us to learn and assimilate religion and spiritual
knowledge. We Hindu must believe that we are the teachers of the world.
We have been clamouring here for getting political rights and many other
such things. Very well. Rights and privileges and other things can only
come through friendship, and friendship can only be expected between two
equals When one of the parties is a beggar, what friendship can there
be? It is all very well to speak so, but I say that without mutual
co-operation we can never make ourselves strong men. So, I must call
upon you to go out to England and America, not as beggars but as
teachers of religion. The law of exchange must be applied to the best of
our power. If we have to learn from them the ways and methods of making
ourselves happy in this life, why, in return, should we not give them
the methods and ways that would make them happy for all eternity? Above
all, work for the good of humanity. Give up the so-called boast of your
narrow orthodox life. Death is waiting for every one, and mark you this
— the most marvellous historical fact — that all the nations of the
world have to sit down patiently at the feet of India to learn the
eternal truths embodied in her literature. India dies not. China dies
not. Japan dies not. Therefore, we must always remember that our
backbone is spirituality, and to do that we must have a guide who will
show the path to us, that path about which I am talking just now. If any
of you do not believe it, if there be a Hindu boy amongst us who is not
ready to believe that his religion is pure spirituality, I do not call
him a Hindu. I remember in one of the villages of Kashmir, while talking
to an old Mohammedan lady I asked her in a mild voice, "What religion is
yours?" She replied in her own language, "Praise the Lord! By the mercy
of God, I am a Mussulman." And then I asked a Hindu, "What is your
religion?" He plainly replied, "I am a Hindu." I remember that grand
word of the Katha Upanishad — Shraddhâ or marvellous faith. An instance
of Shraddha can be found in the life of Nachiketâ. To preach the
doctrine of Shraddha or genuine faith is the mission of my life. Let me
repeat to you that this faith is one of the potent factors of humanity
and of all religions. First, have faith in yourselves. Know that though
one may be a little bubble and another may be a mountain-high wave, yet
behind both the bubble and the wave there is the infinite ocean.
Therefore there is hope for every one. There is salvation for every one.
Every one must sooner or later get rid of the bonds of Mâyâ. This is the
first thing to do. Infinite hope begets infinite aspiration. If that
faith comes to us, it will bring back our national life as it was in the
days of Vyasa and Arjuna — the days when all our sublime doctrines of
humanity were preached. Today we are far behindhand in spiritual insight
and spiritual thoughts. India had plenty of spirituality, so much so
that her spiritual greatness made India the greatest nation of the then
existing races of the world; and if traditions and hopes are to be
believed, those days will come back once more to us, and that depends
upon you. You, young men of Bengal, do not look up to the rich and great
men who have money. The poor did all the great and gigantic work of the
world. You, poor men of Bengal, come up, you can do everything, and you
must do everything. Many will follow your example, poor though you are.
Be steady, and, above all, be pure and sincere to the back­bone. Have
faith in your destiny. You, young men of Bengal, are to work out the
salvation of India. Mark that, whether you believe it or not, do not
think that it will be done today or tomorrow. I believe in it as I
believe in my own body and my own soul. Therefore my heart goes to you —
young men of Bengal. It depends upon you who have no money; because you
are poor, therefore you will work. Because you have nothing, therefore
you will be sincere. Because you are sincere, you will be ready to
renounce all. That is what I am just now telling you. Once more I repeat
this to you. This is your mission in life, this is my mission in life. I
do not care what philosophy you take up; only I am ready to prove here
that throughout the whole of India, there runs a mutual and cordial
string of eternal faith in the perfection of humanity, and I believe in
it myself. And let that faith be spread over the whole land.

</div>
