---
title: 'SANNYASA: ITS IDEAL AND PRACTICE'

---
<div>

[←](the_influence.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](what_have_i_learnt.htm)

  

## SANNYASA: ITS IDEAL AND PRACTICE

A parting Address was given to Swamiji by the junior Sannyâsins of the
Math (Belur), on the eve of his leaving for the West for the second
time. The following is the substance of Swamiji's reply as entered in
the Math Diary on 19th June 1899:

This is not the time for a long lecture. But I shall speak to you in
brief about a few things which I should like you to carry into practice.
First, we have to understand the ideal, and then the methods by which we
can make it practical. Those of you who are Sannyasins must try to do
good to others, for Sannyasa means that. There is no time to deliver a
long discourse on "Renunciation", but I shall very briefly characterise
it as "*the love of death*". Worldly people love life. The Sannyasin is
to love death. Are we to commit suicide then? Far from it. For suicides
are not lovers of death, as it is often seen that when a man trying to
commit suicide fails, he never attempts it for a second time. What is
the love of death then? We must die, that is certain; let us die then
for a good cause. Let all our actions — eating, drinking, and everything
that we do — tend towards the sacrifice of our self. You nourish your
body by eating. What good is there in doing that if you do not hold it
as a sacrifice to the well-being of others? You nourish your minds by
reading books. There is no good in doing that unless you hold it also as
a sacrifice to the whole world. For the whole world is one; you are
rated a very insignificant part of it, and therefore it is right for you
that you should serve your millions of brothers rather than aggrandise
this little self.

सर्वतः पाणिपादं तत् सर्वतोऽक्षिशिरोमुखम्‌ ।  
सर्वतः श्रुतिमल्लोके सर्वमावृत्य तिष्ठति ॥

"With hands and feet everywhere, with eyes, heads, and mouths
everywhere, with ears everywhere in the universe, That exists pervading
all." (Gita, XIII. 13)

Thus you must die a gradual death. In such a death is heaven, all good
is stored therein — and in its opposite is all that is diabolical and
evil.

Then as to the methods of carrying the ideals into practical life.
First, we have to understand that we must not have any impossible ideal.
An ideal which is too high makes a nation weak and degraded. This
happened after the Buddhistic and the Jain reforms. On the other hand,
too much practicality is also wrong. If you have not even a little
imagination, if you have no ideal let guide you, you are simply a brute.
So we must not lower our ideal, neither are we to lose sight of
practicality. We must avoid the two extremes. In our country, the old
idea is to sit in a cave and meditate and die. To go ahead of others in
salvation is wrong. One must learn sooner or later that one cannot get
salvation if one does not try to seek the salvation of his brothers. You
must try to combine in your life immense idealism with immense
practicality. You must be prepared to go into deep meditation now, and
the next moment you must be ready to go and cultivate these fields
(Swamiji said, pointing to the meadows of the Math). You must be
prepared to explain the difficult intricacies of the Shâstras now, and
the next moment to go and sell the produce of the fields in the market.
You must be prepared for all menial services, not only here, but
elsewhere also.

The next thing to remember is that the aim of this institution is to
make men. You must not merely learn what the Rishis taught. Those Rishis
are gone, and their opinions are also gone with them. You must be Rishis
yourselves. You are also men as much as the greatest men that were ever
born — even our Incarnations. What can mere book-learning do? What can
meditation do even? What can the Mantras and Tantras do? You must stand
on your own feet. You must have this new method — the method of
man-making. The true *man* is he who is strong as strength itself and
yet possesses a woman's heart. You must feel for the millions of beings
around you, and yet you must be strong and inflexible and you must also
possess Obedience; though it may seem a little paradoxical — you must
possess these apparently conflicting virtues. If your superior order you
to throw yourself into a river and catch a crocodile, you must first
obey and then reason with him. Even if the order be wrong, first obey
and then contradict it. The bane of sects, especially in Bengal, is that
if any one happens to have a different opinion, he immediately starts a
new sect, he has no patience to wait. So you must have a deep regard for
your Sangha. There is no place for disobedience here. Crush it out
without mercy. No disobedient members here, you must turn them out.
There must not be any traitors in the camp. You must be as free as the
air, and as obedient as this plant and the dog.

</div>
