---
title: WHAT HAVE I LEARNT?

---
<div>

[←](sannyasa_its_ideal_and_practice.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Lectures from Colombo to
Almora](lectures_from_colombo_to_almora_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_religion_we_are_born_in.htm)

  

## WHAT HAVE I LEARNT?

(*Delivered at Dacca, 30th March, 1901*)

At Dacca Swamiji delivered two lectures in English. The first was on
"What have I learnt?" and the second one was "[The Religion we are born
in](the_religion_we_are_born_in.htm) ". The following is translated from
a report in Bengali by a disciple, and it contains the substance of the
first lecture:

First of all, I must express my pleasure at the opportunity afforded me
of coming to Eastern Bengal to acquire an intimate knowledge of this
part of the country, which I hitherto lacked in spite of my wanderings
through many civilised countries of the West, as well as my
gratification at the sight of majestic rivers, wide fertile plains, and
picturesque villages in this, my own country of Bengal, which I had not
the good fortune of seeing for myself before. I did not know that there
was everywhere in my country of Bengal — on land and water — so much
beauty and charm. But this much has been my gain that after seeing the
various countries of the world I can now much more appreciate the
beauties of my own land.

In the same way also, in search of religion, I had travelled among
various sects — sects which had taken up the ideals of foreign nations
as their own, and I had begged at the door of others, not knowing then
that in the religion of my country, in our national religion, there was
so much beauty and grandeur. It is now many years since I found Hinduism
to be the most perfectly satisfying religion in the world. Hence I feel
sad at heart when I see existing among my own countrymen, professing a
peerless faith, such a widespread indifference to our religion — though
I am very well aware of the unfavourable materialistic conditions in
which they pass their lives — owing to the diffusion of European modes
of thought in this, our great motherland.

There are among us at the present day certain reformers who want to
reform our religion or rather turn it topsyturvy with a view to the
regeneration of the Hindu nation. There are, no doubt, some thoughtful
people among them, but there are also many who follow others blindly and
act most foolishly, not knowing what they are about. This class of
reformers are very enthusiastic in introducing foreign ideas into our
religion. They have taken hold of the word "idolatry", and aver that
Hinduism is not true, because it is idolatrous. They never seek to find
out what this so-called "idolatry" is, whether it is good or bad; only
taking their cue from others, they are bold enough to shout down
Hinduism as untrue. There is another class of men among us who are
intent upon giving some slippery scientific explanations for any and
every Hindu custom, rite, etc., and who are always talking of
electricity, magnetism, air vibration, and all that sort of thing. Who
knows but they will perhaps some day define God Himself as nothing but a
mass of electric vibrations! However, Mother bless them all! She it is
who is having Her work done in various ways through multifarious natures
and tendencies.

In contradistinction to these, there is that ancient class who say, "I
do not know, I do not care to know or understand all these your
hair-splitting ratiocinations; I want God, I want the Atman, I want to
go to that Beyond, where there is no universe, where there is no
pleasure or pain, where dwells the Bliss Supreme"; who say, "I believe
in salvation by bathing in the holy Gangâ with faith"; who say,
"whomsoever you may worship with singleness of faith and devotion as the
one God of the universe, in whatsoever form as Shiva, Râma, Vishnu,
etc., you will get Moksha"; to that sturdy ancient class I am proud to
belong.

Then there is a sect who advise us to follow God and the world together.
They are not sincere, they do not express what they feel in their
hearts. What is the teaching of the Great Ones? — "Where there is Rama,
there is no Kama; where there is Kama, there Rama is not. Night and day
can never exist together." The voice of the ancient sages proclaim to
us, "If you desire to attain God, you will have to renounce
Kâma-Kânchana (lust and possession). The Samsâra is unreal, hollow, void
of substance. Unless you give it up, you can never reach God, try
however you may. If you cannot do that, own that you are weak, but by no
means lower the Ideal. Do not cover the corrupting corpse with leaves of
gold!" So according to them, if you want to gain spirituality, to attain
God, the first thing that you have to do is to give up this playing
"hide-and-seek with your ideas", this dishonesty, this "theft within the
chamber of thought".

What have I learnt? What have I learnt from this ancient sect? I have
learnt:

दुर्लभं त्रयमेवैतत् देवानुग्रहहेतुकम्।  
मनुष्यत्वं मुमुक्षुत्वं महापुरुषसंश्रयः॥

— "Verily, these three are rare to obtain and come only through the
grace of God — human birth, desire to obtain Moksha, and the company of
the great-souled ones." The first thing needed is Manushyatva, human
birth, because it only is favourable to the attainment of Mukti. The
next is Mumukshutva. Though our means of realisation vary according to
the difference in sects and individuals — though different individuals
can lay claim to their special rights and means to gain knowledge, which
vary according to their different stations in life — yet it can be said
in general without fear of contradiction that without this Mumukshutâ,
realisation of God is impossible. What is Mumukshutva? It is the strong
desire for Moksha — earnest yearning to get out of the sphere of pain
and pleasure — utter disgust for the world. When that intense burning
desire to see God comes, then you should know that you are entitled to
the realisation of the Supreme.

Then another thing is necessary, and that is the coming in direct
contact with the Mahâpurushas, and thus moulding our lives in accordance
with those of the great-souled ones who have reached the Goal. Even
disgust for the world and a burning desire for God are not sufficient.
Initiation by the Guru is necessary. Why? Because it is the bringing of
yourself into connection with that great source of power which has been
handed down through generations from one Guru to another, in
uninterrupted succession. The devotee must seek and accept the Guru or
spiritual preceptor as his counsellor, philosopher, friend, and guide.
In short, the Guru is the *sine qua non* of progress in the path of
spirituality. Whom then shall I accept as my Guru?
श्रोत्रियोऽवृजिनोऽकामहतो यो ब्रह्मावित्तमः — "He who is versed in the
Vedas, without taint, unhurt by desire, he who is the best of the
knowers of Brahman." Shrotriya — he who is not only learned in the
Shâstras, but who knows their subtle secrets, who has realised their
true import in his life. "Reading merely the various scriptures, they
have become only parrots, and not Pandits. He indeed has become a Pandit
who has gained Prema (Divine Love) by reading even one word of the
Shâstras." Mere book-learned Pandits are of no avail. Nowadays, everyone
wants to be a Guru; even a poor beggar wants to make a gift of a lakh of
rupees! Then the Guru must be without a touch of taint, and he must be
Akâmahata — unhurt by any desire — he should have no other motive except
that of purely doing good to others, he should be an ocean of
mercy-without-reason and not impart religious teaching with a view to
gaining name or fame, or anything pertaining to selfish interest. And he
must be the intense knower of Brahman, that is, one who has realised
Brahman even as tangibly as an Âmalaka-fruit in the palm of the hand.
Such is the Guru, says the Shruti. When spiritual union is established
with such a Guru, then comes realisation of God — then god-vision
becomes easy of attainment.

After initiation there should be in the aspirant after Truth, Abhyâsa or
earnest and repeated attempt at practical application of the Truth by
prescribed means of constant meditation upon the Chosen Ideal. Even if
you have a burning thirst for God, or have gained the Guru, unless you
have along with it the Abhyasa, unless you practice what you have been
taught, you cannot get realisation. When all these are firmly
established in you, then you will reach the Goal.

Therefore, I say unto you, as Hindus, as descendants of the glorious
Âryans, do not forget the great ideal of our religion, that great ideal
of the Hindus, which is, to go beyond this Samsara — not only to
renounce the world, but to give up heaven too; ay, not only to give up
evil, but to give up good too; and thus to go beyond all, beyond this
phenomenal existence, and ultimately realise the Sat-Chit-Ânanda Brahman
— the Absolute Existence-Knowledge-Bliss, which is Brahman.

</div>
