---
title: STRUGGLE FOR EXPANSION

---
<div>

[←](../lectures_and_discourses/is_vedanta_the_future.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](the_birth_of_religion.htm)

  

## STRUGGLE FOR EXPANSION

(Written by the Swami during his first visit to America in answer to
questions put by a Western disciple.)

The old dilemma, whether the tree precedes the seed or the seed the
tree, runs through all our forms of knowledge. Whether intelligence is
first in the order of being or matter; whether the ideal is first or the
external manifestation; whether freedom is our true nature or bondage of
law; whether thought creates matter or matter thought; whether the
incessant change in nature precedes the idea of rest or the idea of rest
precedes the idea of change — all these are questions of the same
insoluble nature. Like the rise and fall of a series of waves, they
follow one another in an invariable succession and men take this side or
that according to their tastes or education or peculiarity of
temperaments.

For instance, if it be said on the one hand that, seeing the adjustment
in nature of different parts, it is clear that it is the effect of
intelligent work; on the other hand it may be argued that intelligence
itself being created by matter and force in the course of evolution
could not have been before this world. If it be said that the production
of every form must be preceded by an ideal in the mind, it can be
argued, with equal force, that the ideal was itself created by various
external experiences. On the one hand, the appeal is to our ever-present
idea of freedom; on the other, to the fact that nothing in the universe
being causeless, everything, both mental and physical, is rigidly bound
by the law of causation. If it be affirmed that, seeing the changes of
the body induced by volition, it is evident that thought is the creator
of this body, it is equally clear that as change in the body induces a
change in the thought, the body must have produced the mind. If it be
argued that the universal change must be the outcome of a preceding
rest, equally logical argument can be adduced to show that the idea of
unchangeability is only an illusory relative notion, brought about by
the comparative differences in motion.

Thus in the ultimate analysis all knowledge resolves itself into this
vicious circle: the indeterminate interdependence of cause and effect.
Judging by the laws of reasoning, such knowledge is incorrect; and the
most curious fact is that this knowledge is proved to be incorrect, not
by comparison with knowledge which is true, but by the very laws which
depend for their basis upon the selfsame vicious circle. It is clear,
therefore, that the peculiarity of all our knowledge is that it proves
its own insufficiency. Again, we cannot say that it is unreal, for all
the reality we know and can think of is within this knowledge. Nor can
we deny that it is sufficient for all practical purposes. This state of
human knowledge which embraces within its scope both the external and
the internal worlds is called Mâyâ. It is unreal because it proves its
own incorrectness. It is real in the sense of being sufficient for all
the needs of the animal man.

Acting in the external world Maya manifests itself as the two powers of
attraction and repulsion. In the internal its manifestations are desire
and non-desire (Pravritti and Nivritti). The whole universe is trying to
rush outwards. Each atom is trying to fly off from its centre. In the
internal world, each thought is trying to go beyond control. Again each
particle in the external world is checked by another force, the
centripetal, and drawn towards the centre. Similarly in the
thought-world the controlling power is checking all these outgoing
desires.

Desires of materialisation, that is, being dragged down more and more to
the plane of mechanical action, belong to the animal man. It is only
when the desire to prevent all such bondage to the senses arises that
religion dawns in the heart of man. Thus we see that the whole scope of
religion is to prevent man from falling into the bondage of the senses
and to help him to assert his freedom. The first effort of this power of
Nivritti towards that end is called morality. The scope of all morality
is to prevent this degradation and break this bondage. All morality can
be divided into the positive and the negative elements; it says either,
"Do this" or "Do not do this". When it says, "Do not", it is evident
that it is a check to a certain desire which would make a man a slave.
When it says, "Do", its scope is to show the way to freedom and to the
breaking down of a certain degradation which has already seized the
human heart.

Now this morality is only possible if there be a liberty to be attained
by man. Apart from the question of the chances of attaining perfect
liberty, it is clear that the whole universe is a case of struggle to
expand, or in other words, to attain liberty. This infinite space is not
sufficient for even one atom. The struggle for expansion must go on
eternally until perfect liberty is attained. It cannot be said that this
struggle to gain freedom is to avoid pain or to attain pleasure. The
lowest grade of beings, who can have no such feeling, are also
struggling for expansion; and according to many, man himself is the
expansion of these very beings.

</div>
