---
title: THE BIRTH OF RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](struggle_for_expansion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](four_paths_of_yoga.htm)

  

## THE BIRTH OF RELIGION

(Written by the Swami during his first visit to America in answer to
questions put by a Western disciple.)

The beautiful flowers of the forest with their many-coloured petals,
nodding their heads, jumping, leaping, playing with every breeze; the
beautiful birds with their gorgeous plumage, their sweet songs echoing
through every forest glade — they were there yesterday, my solace, my
companions, and today they are gone — where? My playmates, the
companions of my joys and sorrows, my pleasures and pastime — they also
are gone — where? Those that nursed me when I was a child, who all
through their lives had but one thought for me — that of doing
everything for me — they also are gone. Everyone, everything is gone, is
going, and will go. Where do they go? This was the question that pressed
for an answer in the mind of the primitive man. "Why so?" you may ask,
"Did he not see everything decomposed, reduced to dust before him? Why
should he have troubled his head at all about where they went?"

To the primitive man everything is living in the first place, and to him
death in the sense of annihilation has no meaning at all. People come to
him, go away, and come again. Sometimes they go away and do not come.
Therefore in the most ancient language of the world death is always
expressed by some sort of going. This is the beginning of religion. Thus
the primitive man was searching everywhere for a solution of his
difficulty — where do they all go?

There is the morning sun radiant in his glory, bringing light and warmth
and joy to a sleeping world. Slowly he travels and, alas, he also
disappears, down, down below! But the next day he appears again —
glorious, beautiful! And there is the lotus — that wonderful flower in
the Nile, the Indus, and the Tigris, the birth-places of civilisation —
opening in the morning as the solar rays strike its closed petals and
with the waning sun shutting up again. Some were there then who came and
went and got up from their graves revivified. This was the first
solution. The sun and the lotus are, therefore, the chief symbols in the
most ancient religions. Why these symbols? because abstract thought,
whatever that be, when expressed, is bound to come clad in visible,
tangible, gross garments. This is the law. The idea of the passing out
as not out of existence but in it, had to be expressed only as a change,
a momentary transformation; and reflexively, that object which strikes
the senses and goes vibrating to the mind and calls up a new idea is
bound to be taken up as the support, the nucleus round which the new
idea spreads itself for an expression. And so the sun and the lotus were
the first symbols.

There are deep holes everywhere — so dark and so dismal; down is all
dark and frightful; under water we cannot see, open our eyes though we
may; up is light, all light, even at night the beautiful starry hosts
shedding their light. Where do they go then, those I love? Not certainly
down in the dark, dark place, but up, above in the realm of Everlasting
Light. That required a new symbol. Here is fire with its glowing
wonderful tongues of flame — eating up a forest in a short time, cooking
the food, giving warmth, and driving wild animals away — this
life-giving, life-saving fire; and then the flames — they all go
upwards, never downwards. Here then was another — this fire that carries
them upwards to the places of light — the connecting link between us and
those that have passed over to the regions of light. "Thou Ignis",
begins the oldest human record, "our messenger to the bright ones." So
they put food and drink and whatever they thought would be pleasing to
these "bright ones" into the fire. This was the beginning of sacrifice.

So far the first question was solved, at least as far as to satisfy the
needs of these primitive men. Then came the other question: Whence has
all this come? Why did it not come first? Because we remember a sudden
change more. Happiness, joy, addition, enjoyment make not such a deep
impression on our mind as unhappiness, sorrow, and subtraction. Our
nature is joy, enjoyment, pleasure, and happiness. Anything that
violently breaks it makes a deeper impression than the natural course.
So the problem of death was the first to be solved as the great
disturber. Then with more advancement came the other question: Whence
they came? Everything that lives moves: we move; our will moves our
limbs; our limbs manufacture forms under the control of our will.
Everything then that moved had a will in it as the motor, to the
man-child of ancient times as it is to the child-man of the present day.
The wind has a will; the cloud, the whole of nature, is full of separate
wills, minds, and souls. They are creating all this just as we
manufacture many things; they — the "Devas", the "Elohims" are the
creators of all this.

Now in the meanwhile society was growing up. In society there was the
king — why not among the bright ones, the Elohims? Therefore there was a
supreme "Deva", an Elohim-Jahveh, God of gods — the one God who by His
single will has created all this — even the "bright ones". But as He has
appointed different stars and planets, so He has appointed different
"Devas" or angels to preside over different functions of nature — some
over death, some over birth, etc. One supreme being, supreme by being
infinitely more powerful than the rest, is the common conception in the
two great sources of all religions, the Aryan and Semitic races. But
here the Aryans take a new start, a grand deviation. Their God was not
only a supreme being, but He was the Dyaus Pitar, the Father in heaven.
This is the beginning of Love. The Semitic God is only a thunderer, only
the terrible one, the mighty Lord of hosts. To all these the Aryan added
a new idea, that of a *Father*. And the divergence becomes more and more
obvious all through further progress, which in fact stopped at this
place in the Semitic branch of the human race. The God of the Semitic is
not to be seen — nay, it is death to see Him; the God of the Aryan
cannot only be seen, but He is the goal of being; the one aim of life is
to see Him. The Semitic obeys his King of kings for fear of punishment
and keeps His commandments. The Aryan loves his father; and further on
he adds mother, his friend. And "Love me, love my dog", they say. So
each one of His creatures should be loved, because they are His. To the
Semitic, this life is an outpost where we are posted to test our
fidelity; to the Aryan this life is on the way to our goal. To the
Semitic, if we do our duty well, we shall have an ever — joyful home in
heaven. To the Aryan, that home is God Himself. To the Semitic, serving
God is a means to an end, namely, the pay, which is joy and enjoyment.
To the Aryan, enjoyment, misery — everything — is a means, and the end
is God. The Semitic worships God to go to heaven. The Aryan rejects
heaven to go to God. In short, this is the main difference. The aim and
end of the Aryan life is to see God, to see the face of the Beloved,
because without Him he cannot live. "Without Thy presence, the sun, the
moon, and the stars lose their light."

</div>
