+++
title = "Three of the heroes had fallen"

+++
He had become a powerful yogin but had not acquired j\~nAna. He had
acquired j\~nAna but lacked the power of yoga. So they wandered the
earth never reaching their desired destination. But the third one, who
only observes, said none of this matters; it is only contingent on fate
whether one reaches the destination. The fourth asked what is fate? The
third one answered it is not what people normally know by that word.
Look in why the one with yoga had no j\~nAna and the one with j\~nAna
had no yoga.

From the high perch we beheld the path which the third hero had led us
to in the days of yore. Nowadays the third hero was shy to talk of any
such thing from the past. When we reminded him of it he felt great
discomfort. Only the 2nd and the 4th stood there on the perch as they
beheld the path along which we had ascended to the skies in the former
yuga. The inum narrated his dreadful tale – it was one like the last
wick of bhairavAnanda. The inum in his bitterness said that none of the
former heroes mattered. But we said that the whole picture should be
unemotionally viewed. First hero was the first to venture on that path.
He stumbled and fell with the wheel on his head. After him the second
hero fell. Then the 4th hero put up a bold fight, but we learned while
on the high perch that he too had fallen. Of the third hero we knew
nothing, but at end of the day he was the only winner in round one. But
is seemed that the line of the brahman was dead. We said aloud: “We feel
like Proclus at the end of the era”. There was no one to hear us but the
four walls.

On the top of the hill they invoked the powerful daMShTra-yakShiNI and
waited for her to manifest. She came but with her was the dreadful
kauberaka known as virUpAkSha. Rather than receiving the favors of
daMShTra-yakShiNI they were possessed by virUpAkSha. They continue to
wander in that state.
