+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "December 11, 2020"

+++
पञ्चसिद्धन्तास्तावत् क्वचित्काले प्रमाणमेव इत्यवगन्तव्यम् । अपि च यः
सिद्धान्तः दर्शनाविसंवादी भवति सोऽन्वेषणीयः । दर्शनसंवादश्च तदानीन्तनैः
परीक्षकैः ग्रहणादौ विज्ञातव्यः ।

“The 5 siddhānta-s till now were authoritative in some time indeed. Such
a thing must be understood. \[althought they might not be authoritative
now\] And the siddhānta that is uncontradictory to observation, that
must be sought for. And then the conformity of observation must be
verified by the succeeding \[contemporary\] examiners in the beginning
of eclipses.”  
  
गणितोन्नीतस्य चन्द्रादेः देशविशेषान्वयस्य प्रत्यक्षेण संवादः , ततो
निश्चितान्वयस्य परस्य गणितलिङ्गोपदेशः , ततस्तस्याप्तोपदेशावगतान्वयस्य
अनुमानं संवादः , परस्मै चोपदेशः इति सम्प्रदायाविच्छेदात् प्रामाण्यम् ।  
  
“The correlation of the calculated Moon and others, with actual
observation at a particular place, the revision of calculation on the
basis of such correlation, logical inference therefrom being transmitted
as tradition, it being again correlated \[with observation and again
revised\] and communicated down to others—this is how tradition is
continued without interruption, and hence its \[continued\]
authoritativeness.”

These two statements by the great Indian mathematician Nīlakaṇṭha
Somayājī in his Jyotirmīmāṃsā (1500 CE \~) wonderfully demonstrates the
adherence to the scientific method in Indian Science. The great
scientist explains the importance of rational observations that must be
the foundational base of any siddhanta. And a continuous updation of
calculations based on new observations, which are verified by each
generation of scientists and passed down in an uninterrupted tradition.
This logical inference being constantly correlated and updated being
given authoritativeness on this account. Not only that, but the
Tantrasaṅgraha starting with obseciances to Lord Viṣṇu further shows how
Indian scientists never deemed rational scientific inquiry in opposition
with religiosity.

Notes:

_(1.pañca – five, siddhāntāḥ – siddhānta-s, tāvat – till then, kvacitkāle – in anywho time, pramāṇam eva – authoritative indeed, iti – such, avagantavyam – must be understood.)
_(api ca – and even, yaḥ – that which, siddhāntaḥ – siddhanta, darśana – observation, a+vi+saṃ+vādin = unfailing/uncontradictory, bhavati – is, saḥ – that, anu+eṣaṇīyaḥ – must be investigated/sought for, darśana – observation, saṃvāda ca – and conformity, tadānīm – then, tanaiḥ – by offsprings, parīkṣakaiḥ – observers/examiners, grahaṇādau – in the starting of the eclipse, vijñātavyaḥ – must be found out.)

_(2. gaṇita – counted, ut+nītasya – of led up/of carried out, candrādeḥ – of moon and others, deza+viśeṣa+anvayasya – of the specific associations of the country, pratyakṣeṇa – by perceptible, saṃvādaḥ – communication of information. tataḥ – therefore, niścita – certain, anvayasya – of logical succession, parasya – of other, gaṇita – counted, liṅga – mark, upadeśa – teaching, tataḥ – therefore, tasya – of that, āpta – obtained, upadeśa – teaching, avagata – understood, anvayasya – of succession, anumānam – to inference, saṃvādaḥ – conformity. parasmai – to other, ca upadeśaḥ – and teaching, iti – such, sampradāya – established traditional doctrine, avicchedāt – from uninterrupted, prāmāṇāyam – authoritativeness/credibility)

