+++
title = "The Sword"

+++
nakula the 4th pANDava asked the kuru grandsire on his arrowy death bed
about the origin of the sword. nakula said that he believed that the
sword was a superior weapon and even if one lost his bow or horse or
chariot one could still defend himself against mace and spear wielders
if one were a good swordsman.

bhIshma replied that he was excited beyond words by that question and
began to utter a narrative.

“In the beginning there there was no sky, nor light nor motion.
Extending over it all was utter silence. In his own proper time
prajApati manifested as hiraNyagarbha. From prajApati emerged the sky,
the stars, the earth and divisions of time. From him emerged the deva
rudra and devas: the maruts, Adityas, ashvins, and vasus. brahmA then
manifested as various living forms which included the R^iShis. prajApati
then promulgated the sanAtana dharma. The R^iShi-s saw this dharma in
the form of the vedas and lived in obedience to it. However in the
darkness of night the dAnavas began transgressing the dharma. They were
hiraNyakashipu, hiraNyAkSha, virochana, shambhara, viprachitti,
prahlAda, namuchi, bali and many others, who delighted in evil deeds.
The persecuted and afflicted all beings by thrashing them with their
rods of chastisement.

Then prajApati collected objects to perform a grand sacrifice with the
foremost of the devas. I have heard from the R^ishis that something
awful happened in that sacrifice. A creature sprang from the midst of
the sacrificial fire scattering flames all around him. It was as though
a moon had arisen in the midst of the stars. He was colored like a
deep-blue lotus. His teeth were sharp, stomach lean and stature tall. He
was of exceeding energy and winds were howling all around, trees were
being torn apart and meteor blazed through the skies. Then the great
prajApati declared: This being whom I have conceived is known as asi,
and he shall effect the destruction of the enemies of the gods. Then
that being assumed the form of a blazing, sharp-edged sword glowing like
the flame at the end of the kalpa. brahmA then gave that sword to the
blue-necked rudra with the bull-banner and asked him to put down pApa
and adharma.

Then that rudra praised by the great R^ishi-s took up that sword and
assumed a terrible form. He put forth four arms and filled the space
between heaven and earth. Flames gushed out of his mouth and he assumed
diverse colors of blue, white and red. He wore an upper garment of black
deerskin studded with stars of gold and he bore an eye on his forehead
that resembled the sun in splendor. His other two eyes were black and
tawny. The awful mahAdeva also picked up huge shield with 3 studs
resembling a black mass of clouds with flashes of lightning. Then the
great deva uttered terrible roars and laughing awfully, began to whirl
the sword in the sky desiring a showdown with the demons.

The dAnava began attacking rudra with diverse razor sharp and fiery
weapons. But rudra though single handed moved so rapidly with his sword
that the demons thought that they were facing a thousand rudras.
Tearing, piercing, lopping off, mincing and smashing down the great deva
moved with great celerity amongst the daityas, like a forest
conflagration consuming dry wood. Arms severed, heads lopped off, chests
pierced the dAnavas expired, while other fled penetrating the depths of
the earth or the oceans. The earth became miry with flesh and blood of
the dAnavas by the acts of rudra. Drenched in gore the earth looked like
a fair-complexioned maid intoxicated with alcohol and attired in crimson
robes in abandon. Having thus extirpated the demons and re-established
dharma rudra cast of his awful form and assumed the benign shape, shiva.

rudra gave this sword dyed with the blood of the daityas to the deva
viShNu. viShNu gave it to the deva indra. indra then gave it to the
other devas. They presented that mighty sword to manu. Giving it to him
they said: O manu protect the world with this sword having dharma in its
womb. Duly deliver punishments to those who transgress dharma. Never
miss use it according to caprice. Some should be punished by wordy
rebukes, fines and confiscations. Mutilations and death punishments
should never be inflicted for small transgressions. This all these
punishments are various shapes of this sword, O manu with which the law
in maintained and creatures protected. manu then passed the sword of the
god to his son kShUpa. From kShupa it passed to manu’s other son
ikShvAku.

From him the sword of dharma passed to pururavas born of iLA. From him
it passed to AyU. From him it passed to nahuSha. From him it passed
yayAti. From him it passed to pUru. From him it was wrested by
amUrtarAyas of the clan of the amAvasus. From him it went to bhumishaya.
From him it went to bharata daushyanti. From him it went Ailavila, the
upholder of dharma. From him it went to kuvalAshva the aikShvAkava. From
him it went to kambhoja. From him it went to muchukunda. From him it
went to marutta. From him it went to raivata. From him to yuvanAshva.
From him it went to raghu, the great conqueror. From him it went to
hariNAshva. From him it went to shunaka. From him it went to ushinAra.
From him it went to the bhojas and yadavas. From the yadus to shivi.
From him it went to the partardana-s of kAshi. Then it was taken by
vishvAmitras of the aShTaka lineage. Then it was taken by the pa\~nchala
pR^ishadashva. From him it went to the brahmins of the bharadvAja
lineage. The last of that lineage was droNa. He gave to kR^ipa. He in
turn gave it to the pAnDus.

kR^ittika is the nakShatra of the sword. rohiNi the gotra, agni the
deity, and rudra the maharshi. It is verily dharmapAla the upholder of
dharma.

It is praised by the names:

**“asir vishasanaH khaDgas tIkShNa-vartmA durAsadaH |  
shrIgarbho vijayash chaiva dharmapAlas tathaiva cha ||”** 

After narrating the above AkhyAna, bhIShma tersely notes:

**“agryaH praharaNAnAM cha khaDgo mAdravatIsuta”**

The sword is the foremost of the striking weapons, O son of mAdravati.

The above itihAsa is narrated from mahAbhArata (vulgate text, chapter
167/ “critical edition” chapter 161 of shAnti parvan).
