+++
title = "The jaina view"

+++
The jainas possess some interesting divergent variants of the canonical
Indo-Aryan myths. The harivaMsha of jinasena and the
triShaShThisalakapuruSha charita of hemachandra is a rather rich source
for such mythic material. The jaina view postulated the existance of 63
salakapuruShas or notable figures who are like spokes in the wheel of
time. Not unexpectedly the 63 includes the 24 tirthankaras. Other than
these there are 12 chakravartins who start with the great bhArata. Then
there are the 9 vAsudevas or the 9 nArAyaNas, 9 balabhadras and 9
prativAsudevas. In each epoch of the time wheel is born a vAsudeva or a
nArAyaNa with an elder brother termed the balabhadra. A woman called a
kR^itya is also born in each epoch to aid the vAsudeva in his acts. The
evil in the world is spread by the prativAsudeva, who is finally killed
in the show-down with the vAsudeva. Below are these entities:

**vAsudeva balabhadra prativAsudeva  
  
**tripR^ishTa vijaya ashvagrIva or hayagrIva  
  
dvipR^ishTa achala tAraka  
  
svAyambhuva dharmaprabha naraka  
  
puruShottama suprabha nishumbha  
  
puruShasiMha sudarsana madhu and kaiTabha  
  
puNDarIka Ananda prahlAda  
  
dattAtreya nandimitra bali  
  
lakShmaNa rAmachandra rAvana  
  
kR^iShNa samkarShaNa jarAsandha

In Jain temple 49 of Vimalavasahi (Mt. Abu) there is a remarkable idol
of the 16 armed vAsudeva puruShasiMha killing a prativAsudeva. The jaina
version of the rAmAyaNa obviously has lakShmaNa kill rAvaNa the
prativAsudeva and kR^iShNa kill jarAsandha rather than bhIma.

From the list of vAsudevas or nArAyaNas and prativAsudevas it is clear
that the jaina epicists had diverged from the Hindu mainstream early on
and were drawing in an ad hoc fashion from a body of historical and
mythological elements they had inherited from the mainstream. These were
used to rebuild works that paralleled the mainstream sUta literature.
The core elements of the original inheritance include the concept of
periodic nArAyaNas from the incarnations of viShNu and their number,
names of some of these incarnations and the names of demons. The concept
of the vAsudeva and the balabhadra appear to have been acquired from the
early form of the bhAgavata religion of the sAtvatas, which later
developed into the full-fledged pA\~ncharAtra system where they are the
primary manifestation of the puruSha nArAyaNa. This appears to have been
further systematized to include all the incarnations of viShNu. That the
elements of the original inheritance were reordered in an ad hoc fashion
is suggested by the several anachronisms such as the insertion of madhu
and kaiTabha in to the prati-vAsudeva list when they were actually
killed by the un-incarnated viShNu. Other demons like tAraka who was
killed by kumAra and naraka much later by kR^iShNa were made earlier
prativAsudevas.

Such conflations are also apparent in the bauddha ghatajAtaka. It talks
of the tale of vAsudeva and baladeva the sons of upasAgara and
devagabbhA the sister of kaMsa. In this tale vAsudeva and baladeva are
brought up by a certain andhakaveNhu and his wife nandagopA who was an
attendant of devagabbhA. Here the name andhakaveNhu is a corruption of
the compound of andhaka-vR^iShNi, the main clans of yadus from which
kR^iShNa hailed. One can see that the conflation of names coming from
the ancestral mainstream source following their isolation of the
bauddhas was similar to the case of the jainas. The chakravartins
amongst the 64 jaina salakapurShas also seems to be a concept derived
from the mainstream sUta histories which enumerate chakarvatins and the
ShoDaSharAjika. But the jaina list a of chakravartins is a strange
motley including mainstream rulers like bhArata, sagara and brahmadatta
woven into jaina-centric legends and polemics.

The jaina concept of prati-vAsudeva may not be very original either. The
bhAgavataM/ harivaMsha describe the showdown between kR^ishNa and the
false-vAsudeva (or the prativAsudeva), the paunDraka in which the
latter’s head is cut off. Thus, there may have existed the concept
even in the mainstream that in the age when vAsudeva emerge there is
competition for that status and the winner is the vAsudeva, while the
loser the prati-vAsudeva. The jaina theory present the balabhadra as a
more peaceful individual compared to the vAsudeva who slays the hostile
elements of his epoch. The baladeva is often portrayed as the
promulgator of peaceful jaina concepts. While the historical baladeva of
the mainstream literature was hardly in a jaina tirthankara mould he did
devote time to peace efforts even in the account of the harivaMsha.
During the marriage of sAmbha he prevented a major showdown between the
yadus and the kurus by his peace effort and a minimal threat of
diverting a river to flood Hastinapura. He also refused to participate
in the great bhArata war. After baladeva murdered the sUta lomaharShaNa
and rukmiNI’s brother rukma, he decided to retire from all military
activities and he and his wives devoted themselves to shrauta practices.
These may have provided the jainas with the inspiration for their idea
of the baladeva.
