+++
title = "Inter-Caste strife"

+++
The British, at the pinnacle of their rule over the sub-continent
succeeded in raising a wide section of Indic public opinion against
brahmins. This resulted in several anti-brahmin movements that blamed
the brahmins for the ills of various socio-ethnic sections of Indic
society. They cited as proof for their grievance the dharma shAstras,
chief amongst which was the mAnava dharma shAstra. These
anti-brahminists claimed that these texts sanctioned the brahmins to
ill-treat and oppress their people. These movements were orchestrated
and their perceptions abetted by the British, and later by the
collective Anglosphere, because they saw it as a potent tool to blunt
the traditional Brahminical leadership of Hindu society against foreign
invaders. This framework for the interpretation of the ancient Hindu
texts was further built up by Anglospheric India-agents (“Indological
scholars”) and their Marxist fellow travellers who had been planted in
India just before freedom. So great has been the influence of these
constructs that many Brahmins and other upper caste Indians in a
defensive knee-jerk response try to deny the primacy of manu’s great
work on dharma or concoct peculiar claims about castes and their nature.
However, in the midst of all the sound and light created by the
internalization of Anglospheric frameworks by Indians for the analysis
of Hindu texts, the actual historical analysis of the texts and the
nature of conflicts alluded therein , both perceived and real, have been
largely ignored. I shall briefly discuss some of these points. But I
must state upfront that these are a discussion of hypothesis and I am
not necessarily accepting them as the final picture, which would require
more investigation.

The first point, which many Hindus like to deny these days, but must be
discussed without any mincing of words, is the ethnic structure of Indic
society.

1\) The brAhmaNas (brahmins) and the kShatriyas are in essense the
descendents of the aristocracy or elite families of the invading Aryans.
Overtime the kShatriya fold adopted other Indo-Aryan tribes outside of
the pa\~nchajana-ikShvAku orthodoxy, and various “honorary” kShatriyas
of diverse ethnic backgrounds. These newcomers displaced or supplemented
the original kShatriyas to a significant degree. However, in the case of
the brahmin the displacement was less significant, though there was a
noticeable ethnic diversification through the process of anuloma
marriage and the 7 generation rule of ascent to brahmin-hood.
Nevertheless the brahmins and kshatriyas do seem to maintain a
significant component of their ancestral Indo-Aryan ethnicity as
supported by recent genetic studies.

2\) The vaishyas- these were in chief the descendents of the Indo-Aryan
laity. However, they eventually included a diverse group of individuals.

3\) shUdras- these seem to represent a mixture of individuals, namely:
1) those of Indo-Aryan ethnic and linguistic origins, but outside of the
pale of the pa\~nchajana-ikShvAku orthodoxy 2) Non-Indo-Aryan peoples of
various origins. We shall discuss their case in greater detail below.

An examination of the Hindu texts reveal direct or indirect evidence for
some major inter-varNa conflicts either in the period of their
composition or within their historical memories.

1\) In the core of the R^igveda the principal conflict is between the
Aryas and the dasyus/dasas. We shall not discuss this conflict directly
here. The terms dasyu/dAsa appears to represent the technical term for
the foes of the principle protagonists of the R^igveda- the Aryas.

2\) The post R^igvedic texts allude to the Arya vs shUdra conflict and
the brahma+kShatra vs shUdra conflicts.

3\) The mAnava dharmashAstra (manu smR^iti) and allied material alludes
to the same 2 above-mentioned conflicts.

4\) The bhArgava mythological and genealogical literature often embedded
in the itihAsas and to some extant the purANas refer to brAhmaNa vs
kShatriya conflicts. Some versions of this mention the brAhmaNas forming
an alliance with vaishyas and shUdras against the kShatriyas in this
conflict. It is typically centered around the bhR^igu epic of their
struggle with the haihayas.

We shall first look into 2 and 3 and briefly at 4.

The common understanding amongst modern Indians, and definitely amongst
almost all Western India-watchers, is that the term shUdra in these
ancient texts refered to the “low castes”. While there is not much doubt
that this term was applied at some point, typically, to the unskilled
laborers, servants and slaves, there is more to it that is often missed
in emotional analysis of the texts.

Firstly, the main “scholarly paradigm (with or without an explicit
display of Marxism; eg. DD Kosambhi – explicit Marxist; M Witzel- not an
explicit Marxist but using the same artifices )” is that the shUdras are
the lowest caste of society being continually opressed by the brAhmaNa-s
or the brahma-kShatra alliance.

Yet it is fairly plain from the manu smR^iti that the shUdra is feared
as a danger to brAhmaNa-s. The same is true of the vaguer vedic
allusions, where they are a threat to the Aryas or the brahma-kShatra
aristocracy. It should stated here that this clearly contrasts the
situation with the vaishyas. They are after all the “vish (people)” or
the laity who function as traders and cultivators and should have the
resources to for the brahma-kShatra or brahmin overlord to exploit.
Further, given their resources they could actually mobilize a threat to
the dominion of the aristocrats. Yet, there is no sense of hostile
interactions vis-a-vis the vaishyas in the texts under discussion. They
are discussed, variously, as Arya insiders or miscellaneous dvijas using
a neutral or common-place terminology. This presents a major
contradiction, for why should the brahma-kShatra, who were believed to
be in power in Hindu society, fear the lowest group rather than the
potential more dangerous vaishyas whom they are believed exploit. This
is also in contrast with the generally neutral or positive treatment of
the “low caste” trades which may be at the border of vaishya and shudra
functions. The texts both vedic and the MDS, consider these trades and
their practitioners a necessary feature of society that needs
protection. So the sense of threat from the hostile shUdra suggests that
term ‘shUdra’ was not merely applied to the lowest caste but actually
extended to enemy of the brahmin or the brahma-kShatra alliance.

To provide some detail on this from extent text of the mAnava dharma
shAstra:

MDS 10.129 warns that shUdras on acquiring wealth could harass brahmins.
Importantly, this is never stated of vaishyas who have the potential to
do so.

MDS 10.43-45 explains that the kShatriyas who have sunk to the state of
shUdras due to negligence of rites are chInas, draviDas, yavanas,
shakas, pahlavas and the like. They are also described as being dasyus,
irrespective of whether speak Arya or foreign languages. So clearly
several foreign tribes, typically hostile, were being identified with
shUdras and they were also described with the older term of the foes of
the Aryas- the dasyus. MDS 8.22 warns that a kingdom teeming with
shUdra-run courts rapidly degenerates as though over-run by enemies of
dvijas. MDS4.60-61 again mentions that the brAhmaNa should avoid
residence in a shUdra kingdom, which is described as being over-run with
inimical people and having practitioners of fake religions.

Thus, the term shUdra appeared to be used in the context of an hostile
individual or individual who actually possessed power to harm the
brAhmaNa or the Arya-s. So who were these hostile shUdras?

Obviously one subset of them included the named foreign tribes, many of
whom were known for their invasion of India and specific
anti-brahminical activities: for e.g the yavana Alexander the
Macedonian’s execution of brAhmaNa during his invasion of the Punjab.
The regions occupied by these invaders could be viewed as being ruled by
the shUdra kings who were destructive to the ways of the Aryas. The
Persians before them, with their anti-Daiva fanaticism also seem to be
candidates for the other inimical class of rulers- the mlechChas.

P. Olivelle has suggested that the mauryas were the shUdra rulers who
threatened the brAhmaNa-s of manu. This suggestions seems unlikely due
to many grounds. 1) The Greek visitors during the mauryan period,
clearly mention that the brAhmaNa was highly respected in the Indian
social setting. 2) There is no evidence from the mauryan inscriptions
that they were particularly anti-Brahminical, for after all the support
for brAhmaNa is explicity mentioned in the ashokan inscriptions. 3)
Hindu tradition ascribes the rise of mauryans to brAhmaNa advisers and
what ever information we have suggests that the administration was
dominated by brAhmaNa officials.

The same thing cannot be said of the nanda-s. The evidence suggests that
they were indeed malignant to brAhmaNa (caricatured in the chANakya
tale). This probably lead to the brahmin sponsored mauryan coup against
the nandas. The brAhmaNa rulers of the bharadvAja family, the shu\~Ngas
arose by overthrowing the mauryans when the Greek invasions threatened
to penetrate deep into India. But the shu\~Ngas, stemmed this tide by
routing the Greek armies and driving them beyond the sindhu. This
incident too seems to have left a clear impression of potential shudra
and mleccha threats to the Aryavarta-based nationalism of brAhmaNa
(something they had inherited from their old predcessor of the
kuru-pa\~nchala state).

The redaction of the ancient law-books, which were in their core
kuru-pa\~nchala documents (as supported by their definition of
Aryavarta=the kuru-pa\~nchala realm; the territory of the bhAratas or
sometime their feudatories and allies, the yadus and matsyas), seems to
have occurred during the maurya, shu\~Nga and kANva periods. These
redactions were characterized by inclusion of negative references with
respect to shudra, a term which specifically subsumed the recent hostile
elements that the brahma-kShatra alliance had faced. However, the vedic
references suggest that the redactors were not being innovative in this
regard. It is clear that there was an ancient hostile sub-text to the
shUdra term, as enemies of the Aryas. This parallels the term dAsa, that
in ancient sanskrit literature was typically an individual or group
hostile to the Aryans, but later also came to mean slave. These
terminologies definitely have a link to the subjugation of hostile
enemies and their eventual assimilation at the lower social rungs.

So in conclusion, I would state that the entire enterprise of searching
for a doctrine of oppression in negative statements regarding the
shUdras in the MDS and allied texts is a rather misplaced venture. These
texts are a product of a certain historical conflicts, where the
brahma-kShatra alliance is merely seen to be defending its interests
against competitors and threats. Whether, their texts or their
interpretations based on misunderstood terminologies were basis of
social inequities, which are very natural in primate societies, is
highly questionable. A dispassionate understanding of these texts as
historical documents will definitely benefit the Indians, but it may be
too late now.

Finally, I shall briefly consider the brahmin-kShatriya conflict of the
bhR^igu mythological cycles. In their most drastic form the bhR^igu hero
rAma jAmadgnya is described as exterminating 21 generations of
kShatriyas. The reason being, the kShatriyas under haihaya, and his
successor like kArtavIrya were extremely oppressive to brahmins in
particular and the world in general. One version of the tale narrated in
the mahAbhArata suggests that the brAhmaNa-s and the shUdras and
vaishyas formed an alliance to defeat the kShatriyas after a long
struggle. The references in the atharva veda and the older cycles of the
bhArgava myth in the mahabhArata, suggest that the core of these events
concerned a historical struggle between the bhR^igus and the haihaya
rulers of mAhiShmati. However, the later pauraNic redactions of the
myth, and late reinsertion in the mahAbhArata seem to have given it the
color of a general struggle between the kShatriyas and brahmins+rest of
castes. I believe that this generalization was actually inspired again
by a similar constellation of much later historical events that inspired
the manu smR^iti’s reaction to the shudra threat. These events were most
probably the oppressive rule of the nanda-s, colored to certain degree
by the atrocities of the foreign rulers (described as shudras by the
manu smR^iti) around the same time.

The victory of the brAhmaNa ruler puShyamitra shu\~Nga, probably
inspired a mythological reworking, in which his clan’s glorious
victories were compared to the historical struggle of parashurAma, and
that tale romanticized to its extant mythological form. It is not a
matter of coincidence that the politically pre-eminant brahmin clan, the
bhArgavas were involved, both in the generalization of their family epic
(the parashurAma epic) and the redaction of the manu smR^iti into its
extant form.
