+++
title = "How far back do feathers go?"

+++
![sinosauropteryx](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2009/03/sinosauropteryx.png?w=640
"sinosauropteryx")Feathers of *Sinosauropteryx*  

Some time back the famous paleontologist Mark Norell had remarked all
dinosaurs had feathers. Given his involvement with the revolutionary
Chinese fossils I wondered if he had the insider story on this matter.
From the earliest time I started studying dinosaurs seriously, I knew
that at least some of the non-avian dinosaurs must have had feathers.
What I did not know was how these feathers must have looked. In my
childhood (\~1985) I was attracted to Thomas Huxley’s proposal of the
dinosaurian origin of the birds (an idea which seemed to have declined
shortly after his time) but had no means of understanding its
significance. I was on bus journey to a mountain stronghold of the
founder of the mahAraTTa nation, when, by a remarkable piece of chance,
I got hold of the work of John Ostrom on *Deinonychus* (In those days it
was extraordinarily difficult to acquire any such source of information
in bhArata\!). This extraordinary dinosaur was probably one of the
greatest discoveries in vertebrate paleontology. Reading Ostrom’s
comparison of *Deinonychus* and *Archaeopteryx* was like that flash
which one experiences when one sees mantra-siddhi. I looked out from the
window of the bus and saw a flock of vultures cleaning up a bovine
carcass – it dawned on me like lightning that the dinosaurs were indeed
still with us. In my mind’s eye those vultures morphed into
*Deinonychus* and *Velociraptor* and back. Scanning the other precious
papers in my clutch I could suddenly see the profound unity of the birds
with not just with the deinonychosaurs, but with other theropods,
sauropods and the ornithishcians. The veil over the dinosaurs was lifted
– they were right here alive and breathing and not mere fossils of which
we understand little. Armed with this new found revelation was I began
my first serious studies of the dinosaurs.

The first idea that came to my mind was that the feathers must have some
relationship to the “fur” which had been reported in pterosaurs. So I
took several directions to study this problem– 1) Investigation of the
beta keratin superfamily which constitute reptilian scales, feathers and
claws. 2) The second direction was the development of the feather
follicle. 3) The natural diversity of scales and feathers various
reptiles including modern birds. It turned out that these directions
were to prove very fertile for other people – I was simply too limited
by the time when I initiated these studies –I wonder if mAtAshrI has
preserved the unpublished papers I wrote from these studies around 1985.
In large part, I had reached the conclusion that feathers of dinosaurs
are likely to be homologs of the pterosaurian “fur”.

But I had to wait years to see the visual evidence for this unfold – in
those days the only dinosaur with feathers was *Archaeopteryx*, which
despite nearly a century of studies was still mystifying people.  
This visual evidence started streaming in only in the second half of the
1990s. I had exchanged some mail with Catherine Forster in the second
half of the 1996 in which she stated that they had found a remarkable
dinosaur from the Cretaceous of Madagascar that was the ultimate link
between the deinonychosaurs and birds. She finally published this in
1998 as *Rahonavis*. But just before this Novas et al reported a
fragmentary dinosaur from the late Cretaceous of Patagonia, *Unenlagia*
,in 1997. The quill-attachment knobs in *Rahonavis* showed beyond any
measure of doubt that the deinonychosaurs were feathered and bore
contour feathers comparable to modern birds. Further, a comparison of
*Rahonavis* and *Unenlagia* with *Archaeopteryx* showed that the bird
clade, when defined as including *Archaeopteryx* was likely to be an
inclusive of the deinonychosaurs and possibly other coelurosaurs. Even
as these events were unfolding, the news reached us in 1996 that certain
Chinese researchers had published a description of a feathered dinosaur
from the Yixian formation of Liaoning in an obscure journal. The news of
this dinosaur leaked outside China over the next two years and finally
in 1998 there was an English language publication on this dinosaur,
*Sinosauropteryx prima* in one the well-known scientific tabloids. It
finally showed the form taken by the plumage of a basal coelurosaurian
lineage – a hollow filamentous down. This was followed by the discovery
of the remarkable primitive oviraptorosaurs *Protoarcheopteryx* and
*Caudipteryx* that showed that, like the deinonychosaurs, even this
group of dinosaurs bore vaned feathers. Soon there after, came, from the
same locality, other coelurosaurian lineages like the extraordinary the
basal therizinosaur *Beipaosaurus*, which bore a striking downy plumage
comparable to *Sinosauropteryx* in some ways, but longer. Later, Xu et
al reported that *Beipaosaurus* additionally had a second longer version
of the feather which was an unbranched elongated broad structure rising
out of the downy background. In 2002 a *Psittacosaurus* specimen was
reported with unbranched filamentous feather-like structures on the
tail. This was the first visual evidence that the feather-like
structures might have been present in the common ancestor of all
dinosaurs. This was followed by the publication of *Dilong*, a basal
tyrannosauroid, which also showed a downy filaments similar to that of
the other basal coelurosaurian lineage, the compsognathids. Thus, it
became clear the plumage of the basal coelurosaurs, like the
tyrannosauroids and compsognathids, took the form of a furry down cover.

![different\_feathers](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2009/03/different_feathers.png?w=640
"different_feathers") Three types of feathers 3 Mesozoic birds; C being
the unusual feather of *Protopteryx.*

![sinornithosaurus\_feathers](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2009/03/sinornithosaurus_feathers.png?w=640
"sinornithosaurus_feathers") Downy Feathers of the deinonychosaur
*Sinornithosaurus*

Till this point in the history of the science, the dinosaurian skin
filaments were found to span some diversity:  
\*Extant birds—Here, we see the entire diversity of structures: Contour
feathers, down feathers and forms in between such as semi-plumes, the
long rachis-containing filoplumes as well as the more specialized
bristles such as those on the face of frogmouths, or in the “beard” of a
turkey or a the tail of a 12-wired bird of paradise. We also observe
secondary simplification in the flightless paleognathan birds – the kiwi
has simple feathers with a central rachis and barbs forming a hair-like
structure. In the long past days I felt some of these feathers forms
might indeed provide models for those found in dinosaurs.  
\*Mesozoic forms closer to extant birds than non-avian dinosaurs- Among
these Mesozoic birds, including the great enantiornithine radiation, we
observe the same types of feathers seen in extant birds. However,
several of these birds like the confuciusornithids, *Jibenia* and
*Protopteryx* had a novel type of elongated flat strip-like feather on
the tail that resembled the tail ornaments of certain modern birds. Just
late last year a similar feather was reported in the scansoriopterygid
dinosaur, *Epidexipteryx*. But it had 4 such plumes instead of the two
usually seen in the Mesozoic birds.They could be either unbranched or
terminal branched. These could be either highly derived vanned feathers
like those in modern birds of paradise or a modification of basal
unbranched type.  
\*Non-avian theropods- Among deinonychosaurs we observe the vaned
feathers similar to the contour feathers of modern birds. The
oviraptorosaurs, which appear to be secondarily flightless birds,
probably close to the *Sapeornis* clade, also have such feathers.
However the all other feather-types of the non-avian theropods described
up to that were multi filamentous structures – either a single central
rachis branched into barbs or a bunch of barbs branching from a common
base. Some workers have stated that the structures in *Sinosauropteryx*
are branched, while on other occasions the same workers \[Xu and You\]
have claimed that they (at least some?) are unbranched \[see below for
further discussion\]. However, Currie et al in their monograph on
*Sinosauropteryx* have clearly described them as multi-filamentous
structures – i.e. multiple barbs.  
\*The ornithischians- The only known member of this dinosaurian clade
with such structures was *Psittacosaurus* with simple unbranched long
filaments.

In parallel with these developments, Prum et al advanced a developmental
model of feather evolution – another line of investigation we had long
ago felt would help in reconstructing the dinosaurian integument. The
basic idea here was that the development of feathers might in some way
recapitulate the evolution of feathers. In course of development the
feather begins as a hollow elongated filament that undergoes a “fractal”
division successively into subfilaments resulting in barbs, barbules and
hooklets, even as the central barb ridges fuse to form the rachis. The
earlier developmental stages of extant feathers, especially the earliest
branched stages, largely recapitulated the observed dinosaurian feathers
forms suggesting that both were indeed a product of a similar
developmental process. A logical corollary was that the earliest
feathers took the form of tubular filaments. So it became clear that,
*Psittacosaurus* filaments and the even earlier pterosaurian “fur” were
representatives of this evolutionary stage. It was even possible that
some of the long strip-like feathers of the Mesozoic birds were
derivatives of such a basal feather type, but the branching at the
termini in *Protopteryx* does makes this uncertain, though the case is
stronger for *Epidexipteryx*.

![tianyulong\_feathers](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2009/03/tianyulong_feathers.jpg?w=640
"tianyulong_feathers")Feathers of *Tianyulong*

With *Psittacosaurus* as the sole ornithischian with feather-like
structures (that too with an odd pattern of distribution) and the raging
phylogenetic debate regarding pterosaurs (mainly due to a well-known
worker Unwin’s doubts regarding their close affinity to dinosaurs) it
was not entirely surprising that there was still uncertainty in the
minds of some workers about when feathers first arose. However, thumping
support for the early origin for feathers finally arrived this year due
to two Liaoning-derived finds. The first, involving a new specimen of
the basal therizinosaur *Beipaosaurus*, pointed to the presence of
simple unbranched broader filaments among the feathers of this dinosaur.
Their distribution suggested that they might have formed a shaggy mane
that was used for display. This unbranched feather type seen in
*Beipaosaurus* not only resembled the tail filaments of *Psittacosaurus*
but also provided a morphological equivalent of the earliest stage of
feather development within the theropods. This completed the total
congruence between the feather morphologies in theropods and their
extant developmental program suggesting that such structures in other
dinosaurs might also been homologs of feathers. These second find
announced on 19th of the month was probably one of the greatest
paleontological finds in a long time – *Tianyulong* a lower Cretaceous
feathered heterodontosaur. This find is dramatic for many reasons –
until now genuine heterodontosaurs were only found from the Early
Jurassic of South Africa. But *Tianyulong* shows that they had not only
spread to Asia but also survived retaining their conservative anatomy
for at least 50-60 Mys – simply extraordinary. This supported the
earlier astute observations of Naish et al that the heterodontosaurs
probably did survive to through the Jurassic to the Cretaceous in both
Europe and North America. But equally startling was the presence of
filamentous feathers on its integument, approximately comparable to
those observed in *Beipaosaurus* or *Sinosauropteryx*.

But it is the description of this filamentous integument that has a
strange issue. This is best summarized by listing the positions taken by
different papers chronologically:  
1\) *Sinosauropteryx* monograph, Currie et al, 2001: The feathers of
this dinosaur are like down feathers, multi-filamentous branched
structures with rachis and barbs.  
2\) Feather evolution paper, Xu+Prum et al, 2001: The dromeosaur
*Sinornithosaurus* has tufted and serially branched feathers but
Sinosauropteryx has only unbranched filaments.  
3\) Feather evolution/development review, Prum+Brush, 2002: They propose
that *Sinosauropteryx* has unbranched tubular filaments congruent with
the earliest stage of feather evolution. They vaguely admit that it
might turn out that *Sinosauropteryx* has branched structures after.
Propose that feathers evolved in coelurosaurs and are convergent with
pterosaur and *Psittacosaurus* filaments.  
4\) Feather evolution, Xu, 2006: Feathers of all theropod dinosaurs
uncovered to that date, including *Sinosauropteryx*, are branched
structures. The earliest stage of unbranched single filament feathers is
likely to be represented by pterosaur and *Psittacosaurus* feathers.  
5\) *Beipaosaurus* feathers, Xu+You+Zheng, Jan 2009: Feathers of all
theropod dinosaurs uncovered to that date, including *Sinosauropteryx*,
are branched structures, but Beipaosaurus has special feathers which
were unbranched long filaments. These feathers are likely to represent
the primitive feather type and are likely to be homologous to
Psittacosaurus filaments and pterosaur fur.  
6\) *Tianyulong* paper, Xu+You+Zheng et al, March 2009:
*Sinosauropteryx* has unbranched feathers that are similar to the
unbranched feathers of *Tianyulong*.  
7\) *Tianyulong* supplementary material, Xu+You+Zheng et al, March 2009:
Citing paper \#5 the authors claim that all other theropods have
branched feathers, and *Tianyulong’s* unbranched feathers are closest to
the unbranched feathers of *Beipaosaurus*.

So it is apparent that the same authors have been doing a flip-flop on
the issue of branching, at least as far as *Sinosauropteryx* goes. It is
possible that Xu himself might accept their branching structure, but his
coauthors could influence him differentially. What ever the case this
does highlight their uncertainty in interpreting these structures, and
questions their description of the structures in *Tianyulong*. I cannot
say much without ever having seen the real specimens. But looking at
good photos it is does seem that Sinosauropteryx, as first described by
Currie et al does have tuft-like branched feathers. As for *Tianyulong*,
I would again express my cautious doubts regarding whether the authors
are correct in saying that all its feathers were unbranched. We cannot
rule out those on the ventral side of the cervical vertebra and those on
the dorsal vertebra being tuft-like structures than those in the
theropods. Those on the thighs do seem to be reminiscent of the long
unbranched feathers on the thighs of *Beipaosaurus* and are likely to be
similar display structures. Likewise, the faintly preserved thigh
feathers in the basal coelurosaur *Sinocalliopteryx* might also be
unbranched long feathers. In any case we believe this is an important
point that needs to be looked at carefully given the above confusing
history in the published literature.

Just as the conflict reports we reviewed above with respect to feather
structure, there is also much flux in terms of phylogeny and data
matrices used for these phylogenies in different papers sharing some of
the same authors. For example, Xu et al in their land mark description
of the basal ceratopsian *Yinlong* note that the heterodontosaurs and
ceratopsians are likely to form [a monophyletic
clade](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/15/yinlong-and-the-evolution-of-marginocephalian-dinosaurs/)
(the heterodontosauriformes). But in their study of *Tianyulong*, Xu et
al do not use any of the data from that matrix instead plugging their
scoring of this dinosaur into the matrix published by Butler et al in
their recent comprehensive survey of ornithischian phylogeny. However,
even in that paper the Butler et al note the need to combine their
matrix with that used in [the study of
Yinlong](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/15/yinlong-and-the-evolution-of-marginocephalian-dinosaurs/),
something which Xu et al do not attempt. Another key taxon discovered by
Butler et al, *Eocursor*, appears to influence the phylogeny – it
appears to be a sister group of all the ornithischians except
*Pisanosaurus* (and in Butler’s analysis the heterodontosaurs). So it
remains uncertain as to whether a heterodontosauriformes clade or the
primitive position of heterodontosaurs is the correct picture. If the
latter is correct then one could argue that the feathers of *Tianyulong*
are probably reflective of the primitive situation in ornithischians.
However, if the former is correct, taken together with the
*Psittacosaurus* feathers, it might imply that these long less-pliable
feathers might be something distinct to the heterodontosauriformes and
may not really tell us much about the ancestral condition of the
ornithischian feathers. Butler et al have noted in multiple studies that
the [basal ornithischians were small fast-running bipedal
herbivores](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/09/02/the-origin-of-the-uncinate-process-of-diapsid-ribs/),
comparable in body size and locomotion, to the basal saurischians like
*Eoraptor*, *Panphagia* and the staurikosaurs, and the small bodied
coelurosaurs. This strongly suggests that they might have had insulation
comparable to the small basal coelurosaurs. How exactly this looked
remains uncertain at this point – perhaps already they have a
Jeholosaurus with preserved integument waiting to be published :-). In
any case the common ancestor of the dinosaurs and pterosaurs was likely
to be a down insulated beast and *Tianyulong* goes a long way in adding
support that contention.

In the last part of this rambling we shall cover the evolution of
beta-keratin. Alibardi et al have done most of the pioneering work on
this. But there is apparently much in that story that is neglected by
the paleontologists.

**The story of keratin**  
Alpha Keratin is found in all gnathostomes and has been derived from the
more ancient intermediate filament coiled-coil proteins. In sharks,
fishes, amphibians, reptiles and mammals it is a major component of the
epithelial structure. In mammals alpha keratin alone constitutes all the
integumentary structures such as hair, nails, horns of the rhinoceros
and the scales. In reptiles there arose one of these interesting new
genes, beta keratin, that became the major constitutent of epithelial
structures (though alpha still is present as a major constituent of
naked skin and to a lesser extant other structures). This beta keratin’s
origins are mysterious (thought we believe we have answer for that;
probably to be voiced elsewhere) and is a predominantly beta-sheet
protein with some low complexity regions. The evolution of beta keratins
in reptiles takes an interesting course: Firstly each reptile has
numerous closely related or even nearly identical genes of the beta
keratin family – e.g. the fowl *Gallus gallus* has at least about a 105
odd genes encoding proteins of beta keratin family. Often these that
tend to display a pattern of lineage-specific expansion even within
particular genera. Thus, even within individual lineages such as
*Gallus*, *Taeniopygia*, *Pseudemys*, *Gekko* or *Podarcis* there are
whole clusters of beta keratin family members that are closer to members
from the same taxon than their equivalents from other taxa. This
suggests that there are sweeps of gene conversion that have been
repeatedly “normalizing” the expansions in each reptilian lineage. My
phylogenetic analysis of these proteins suggests that all squamate beta
keratins form a clade clearly separate from another clade comprised of
all the beta keratin family members from the archosauromorphs including
birds, crocodilians and turtles. Within the archosauromorph beta keratin
sub-family we have a basal lineage of keratins with representatives in
birds, turtles and probably also crocodilians. These appear to be the
ones that comprise the reticulate scales of the plantar surface of the
avian foot and probably, likewise, the corresponding scales in the
crocodilian and turtle body. The next lineage to branch of within the
archosauromorph beta keratin sub-family is an exclusively turtle family,
which appears to be the keratins constituting the scutes and claws of
turtles. This turtle family is a sister clade to the classical phi
keratin clade that thus far is exclusively found only in birds and
crocodilians. The phi keratin clade in turn shows two major divisions –
1) containing both crocodilian and dinosaurian members – this appears to
be the claw, scute and beak keratins of dinosaurs and crocodilians. 2)
The feather keratins that are currently exclusively found in dinosaurs.

[![keratin\_evolution](https://i1.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3563/3391040211_1733f46d90.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3391040211/ "keratin_evolution by somasushma, on Flickr")  
beta keratin evolution

This tree suggests that the beta keratin family was already present in
the ancestor of all diapsids and most likely constituted the scales in
that animal. The innovation of beta keratin derived scales was probably
a major adaptation in the dry desiccating climate of the Paleozoic when
these diapsids began their great expansion. Within archosauromorphs,
prior to the divergence of turtles the beta keratin family had
diversified into two distinct clades, which appear to have marked the
specialization of two types of scales. The second type corresponding to
scutes, beaks and claws was probably an archosauromorph innovation that
had an adaptive value in terms of stronger body armor and claws and
beaks that allowed food processing. Finally, within archosauria proper
the latter group split up into two further lineages – one specializing
in claws, beaks and scutes and other for feathers. At face value the
tree would suggest that this division happened early in archosaur
evolution, probably even before the split of the ornithodiran
(pterosaurs+dinosauromorphs) and crurotarsan lineage (including
crocodilians). However, here one needs to be careful and perform more
analysis because the feather keratins could have very well emerged
within the older claw/scute/beak keratin shared by the archosaurs but
only rapidly diverged in sequence.

Prum suggested that the origin of feathers preceded the origin of the
feather-specific keratin because he thought that a morphological
innovation was first required in order for a molecular innovation to be
selected.There is no requirement for this complicated argument.
Parsimoniously, the duplication of the ancestral scute/claw/feather
keratin (represented by the turtle-specific keratin clade in the tree)
of the archosauromorphs, in all likelihood, provided the raw material
for natural selection to produce two types of structures – one retaining
the ancestral condition (scute/claw/beak) and the other being the
neomorphic feathers. In conclusion, the evolutionary picture of keratins
does support an early origin for feathers and even leaves open the
possibility (though with some uncertainty) of their origin in the
ancestral archosaur with secondary loss somewhere within crocodilians.
Improving paleontological records might help us to fix this point more
robustly.
