+++
title = "Akhanda Bharata – A Concept Inxa0Flux"
date = "November 12, 2016"

+++
![main-qimg-95ecb5ec17b386c05ff3ac265732ac0b](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2016/11/main-qimg-95ecb5ec17b386c05ff3ac265732ac0b.png?w=676)

I’ve previously written a bit about the occasional bouts of revanchist
and irridentist tendencies which can accompany political Hinduism – the
most common of which are rather justified claims that India ought to
maintain or extend territorial possession to include areas such as the
full extent of Jammu & Kashmir, and areas of China (or, more
specifically, TIbet) on both India’s northwestern and northeastern
flanks. These imperatives are often made on the basis of ‘temporal’
authority, and not infrequently hinge upon differing interpretations of
agreements drawn up by the withdrawing British.

![jtmon2](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2016/11/jtmon2.png?w=676)

To these, we can often add declarations that Mother India ought control
other areas slightly further afield and adjoining the above – extending
sovereignty to encompass Mt. Kailash (the Residence of Lord Shiva, and
thus a prominent holy site), for instance, and other areas of spiritual
importance – whether in the Himalayas or elsewhere.

And, on top of this, the various demands for the formation of “Akhanda
Bharata” \[‘Undivided India’\] via the addition of the whole of
Bangladesh and Pakistan to the pre-existing Indian state (which is, if
you remember, how a fairly substantial swathe of the original Indian
Freedom Fighters wished for things to proceed in the early 20th century,
anyway. Occasionally, there are also demands for Afghanistan to
additionally be included in the above due to its historical
incorporation in some of the previous great Indian Empires \[indeed, up
until 1895, the folk of ‘Kafirstan’ – an Afghan province – were so known
because they still practiced a version of the ancient Aryan religion
(thus rendering it a rather appropriate toponym) … while their
neighbours, the Kalash, still worship Gods of the Aryan Pantheon who are
broadly recognizable to us Vedic-inclined Hindus today\]. There is also
often mention made of the idea of bringing in the modern state of
Myanmar to this region as well, due to its supposed previous settlement
by Indo-Aryan peoples.

![akhand-bharat](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2016/11/akhand-bharat.jpg?w=676)

To these, we can also add the notion that areas further afield to the
East of India ought also be incorporated – due mainly to their
historical participation in the impressively broad pre-Islamization
Indian/Hindu cultural sphere.

This is why you will often see maps (usually a little more restrained
than the one below) which extend at least all the way out to Bali in
Indonesia (which is still Hindu today), covering Thailand, Malaya,
Cambodia (where Angkhor Wat, let’s remember, was originally built as a
Hindu temple complex), Singapore (whose very name derives from an
ancient Sanskrit epithet – “City of the Lion”) and other such modern
South East Asian polities.

And then, as a final category, we have trends like the one below … which
we might perhaps fairly describe as “Dravidian Kitchen Sink-Ism”,
wherein the demarcation of what might constitute “Akhanda Bharata” is
taken to pretty much its furthest possible extreme.

![akhanda_bharatabarsham-1](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2016/11/akhanda_bharatabarsham-1.jpg?w=676)

Here, as you can see, some enterprising soul has decided that everything
from the western coast of Australia through to Madagascar ought to be
claimed within it – presumably on the strength of i) recent hypotheses
that some northern Aboriginal folk bear genetic evidence of previous
contact with Dravidian traders; or ii) the rather less overtly
scientifically backed ancient Dravidian folk-myths that they are the
last of the ancient scions of a supposed sunken continent known as
“Kumari Kandam” – which, before it sank beneath the waves, supposedly
occupied a geographic position between and linking India, Australia, and
Madagascar. (It’s probably important to note that Tamil nationalists are
not the only people who’ve ever thought this – prior to the
understanding of plate tectonics, Western academics also proposed a
similar theory as an explanation for why Lemur fossils are found in both
India and Madagascar, but not on the present-day lands in between).

Now, while there ARE historic settlements (and perhaps even kingdoms)
which now lie beneath the sea thanks to prehistoric variations in
climate and water-levels (particularly in the Gulf of Khambat and Bay of
Bengal), an entire undiscovered continent down there stretching across
most of the Southern & Indian Oceans is probably stretching the bounds
of plausibility a little bit. Anyway, I digress.

The reason why there are so many – and such shifting – conceptions of
what is meant by “Akhanda Bharata” is not simply due to the demands of
expediency, or even the mere factual tenability of various territorial
claims.

Instead, it’s the result of the several competing conceptual fields
which have gone into producing both the notion and the groups of people
for which the concept stands.

“Greater India” (as it is also known), is not simply a political unit.
Nor does it only encompass a “Holy Land”, or an Ethnic Homeland (in the
same way as, say, “Aryavarta”). Instead, it represents something of a
confluence of Sacred Geography with Mundane Geopolitics; and with
additional complications and complexities introduced by the fact that
there are often mutually competing agendas and metanarratives which have
gone into the unfurling of its prospective boundaries for each
individual commentator (for example, the map below apparenly including
parts of Afghanistan on grounds of their still-extant Aryan and
Aryan-Religion populations … but also the Philippines due to historic
contact with the Indian cultural sphere, parts of Australia due to
alleged Dravidian genetic or geographic connection, and Madagascar
despite this last one not being inhabited by Dravidian peoples nor
speaking a Dravidian language)

Phrased bluntly, the term “Akhanda Bharata” appears to be just as
contested – and potentially far more open to interpretation – than even
the pretty big notion of “Indianness”. Certainly, it’s much more open to
use and co-option than a comparatively narrow (and decidedly
ethnically/geographically linked) term like “Aryavarta”, particularly
for those non-Aryans who wish to make use of the idea of ‘Greater Indian
Civilization’ – or those who wish to incorporate decidedly non-Aryan
and/or non-Indian peoples and lands into their revanchist
imagi-nation-ings.

Still, if there’s one thing which seems rather strange to me – it’s that
many of the multiplicity of Indian meta-national extensions only seem to
go south and east – and maybe a bit west and north. We know from quite
an array of evidence – whether genetic, linguistic, archaeological, or
historical (and perhaps even scriptural), that the Aryan peoples also
live (and lived) on quite a bewildering array of terrain in the opposite
directions to those which the orange on this map extends. Whether we are
talking about present-day Iran (whose ancient Haoma-rituals and
ecclesiastical language bear such a remarkable resemblance to our own),
or further West and North into the Caucasus (where some of the surviving
pre-Islamic faiths can often shelter curious echoes of the older Aryan
myths), and on into the steady range of locations proposed by
(predominantly European) thinkers for the Aryan Urheimat – the Pontic
Steppe, lands not too far from the Balkans and south-eastern Europe … or
even the northern lands of proxima Scandinavia (whose myths and
pre-Christian religion are such close brethren of those of the ancient
Vedic/Hindu faith).

I get that the populations of the latter lands are everything ranging
from literal Mlecchas to Goras, and Barbaras folk all the way up – and,
perhaps more importantly, that the \*last\* time India was in union with
some of the lands and peoples to the west, it was in the form of
colonization … but it still remains interesting that some would reject
any form of ancestrally based solidarity with these places in favour of
extending a decidedly hypothetical suzerainty east and south, instead.

Still, as we enter into an age where Mother India might once again be
astride Her corner of the globe like a colossus … it may soon come to
pass that the notion of a “Greater India” – or the importance of an
“Indian Cultural Sphere” – will be concepts of decidedly far more than
‘mere’ academic application & interpolation.

Either way – Jai Hind!
