+++
title = "Americans in Fallujah"

+++
The American war machine under their not so intelligent Emperor easily
achieved the conquest of Mesopotamia. The great Yankie Emperor now sat
on the throne of Baghadad (albeit in a brief secret visit) emulating his
predecessors like Hulegu the grandson of Chingiz and Timur-i-lang.
However, his predecessors really conquered Iraq with all its tribes and
factions, and did not restrict themselves to a one demonized leader. The
notorious decapitation strikes of the Americans, and the capture of
Saddam the Sot, and the killings of his successors was presented to the
American people as a great victory. Surely, Americans did not get the
kisses and hugs their emperor and his court promised them on the fall of
Saddam. The court blamed it on elements of the previous regime. Of
course the astute did not get as impressed as some of the sadly
ill-informed voters. Then came the Fallujah bang. We were told that
there was fierce fighting between the American and the Moslems with
major losses (by modern American standards) on both sides. Then we were
told that the Americans were scoring a major victory but trying to
negotiate for a “peaceful” settlement. They emphasized that it was
survivors of the previous regime that was causing this new round of
convulsions.

After all the dust settled, lo behold, a Saddam look-alike is back in
power maintaining “law and order” in Fallujah and the Moslem new outlets
are reporting celebrations over the repulsion of American troops. But
the American media scrambled to hide that and clarify that the troops
were in a position to recover Fallujah as soon as required. Very strange
military tactics one would think. Why is an element of the old regime
back? So after all it looks as though the American troops did retreat
from Fallujah…

The lesson from this is that the American empire is damn good at trying
to fix things that ain’t broken and in the process break them. Once they
have screwed a place up they just leave it that way and go home. No
doubt that in Latin America, Balkans, Vietnam, Africa, Middle East
North-West of the sub-continent the CIA’s spoor is still hot amidst the
various nations fixed by the US.
