+++
title = "rudra- his agents"

+++
**vIrabhadra**: He emerged from a fragment of the matted locks of rudra
for the killing of prajApati dakSha. He wrought havoc in the midsts of
the deva armies and destroyed the demons created by bhR^igu before going
on to behead dakSha. He then revived dakSha with a goat’s head.

**kAla bhairava:** Created by rudra for the beheading of the 5th head of
brahma which was mocking rudra. For this he acquired the pApa of
brahmahatyA and had to perform the kApAlika vrata. He moved on to slay
vishvaksena, the chief gaNa of viShNu and was finally purified of brahma
hatyA after drinking the blood of viShNu.

**nandikeshvara**: The bull-headed or ape-headed chief gaNa of rudra. A
great warrior and leader of the armies of rudra in many battles. In the
battle against the dakSha he was felled by a blow from the vajra of
indra. In the battle against andhakAsura he captured the bhArgava shukra
and handed him over to rudra.

**kShetrapAla**: A fierce agent of rudra who emits a fiery meteor from
his mouth to counter missiles hurled by the asuras when they do battle
against rudra.

**kIrtimukha**: A fierce gaNa created by rudra for the chastisement of
rAhu. In his insatiable hunger he ate his own body parts and was reduced
to a roving head that devoured asuras.

**vIraka**: A terrible gaNa created by shiva to guard pArvati when he
was performing the mahApAshupata vrata to regain his energies after the
dalliance with umA. He fought the army of andhaka and wrought havoc in
its midst.

**kumAra**: The elder son of rudra, the six-headed god. He was first
born for the slaying of demons like mahiSha and tAraka. He led the deva
armies in these battles and subsequently was one of the major commanders
of rudra’s armies. Has numerous gaNas of his own.

**gaNapati**: The younger son of rudra, the elephant headed god. He was
created by pArvati as her personal gaNa, but was beheaded in a battle
with rudra and the gods and restored with an elephant head. He became
one of the major commanders of the gaNas and slew asuras like analasura
and sindhUra.

**bhadrakAli**: The wife of vIrabhadra. She led the shakti senA in the
dakshA battle and destroyed the dakSha army.

**mahAmAri**: The principal female commander of rudra’s armies. She lead
the pramatha army of shiva along with kumAra in the battle against the
demon sha\~NkachUDa and the two of them slaughtered the commanders of
shankachuDa’s army.

**kAlI**: The wife of rudra. She lead the forces of the shaktis in the
battle against shumbha and nishumbha. In the battle against
sha\~NkachUDa, kumAra was struck down by the brahmashakti hurled by
sha\~NkachUDa. She rescued kumAra from the battle lines and brought him
back to shiva. Thereafter, when vIrabhadra fell unconscious struck by he
missile of sha\~NkachUDa she took over the command of the gaNa armies
and marched against the asuras. She decimated the asura army and in a
fierce battle with sha\~NkachUDa struck him down with the mAheshvara
missile.
