+++
title = "The shaiva cult in the tamil country"

+++
The rise of shaiva thought in the draviDa country was a milestone in the
incorporation of motifs of Sankrit thought from North India. The
Dravidian works of shaiva literature closely parallel their development
in North Indian Sanskrit literature pointing to a pan-Indian explosion
of Hindu thought that gradually displaced the competing heterodox ideas
of the Jaina and Bauddha stream from the collective folk conciousness.
Unfortunately, the Tamil shaiva and vaishNava literature is not studied
as an integral companion to their Sanskrit precursors and counterparts
because of the political perversion of Dravidian nationalism and Tamil
chauvinism in the past century. The importance of the Dravidian
literature is underscored by the fact that it represents one of the few
ancient traditions in a regional langugage that has scope and bulk
comparable to the Sanskrit tradition.  
  
The classical tamil shaiva canon was made by nambi ANDAr nambi in the
900s of the common era. The earliest work in the tamil shaiva canon is
that of kArraikkAl ammaiar from the 500s of the common era. Ammaiar, a
woman poet, had a vision of the great dance of mahAdeva in tiruvAlangAdu
composed poems in the honor of rudra. Here poems mark the earliest
specimens of the prabandha style in tamil. The next great shaiva poet
was the tamil war lord aiyaDigaL kADavarkOn, who handed his holdings to
his son and lived the life of a shaiva ascetic. He wrote the work
kshetrattiruveNbA, an antAdi, where the last syllable of a verse begins
the next one. He describes 21 great shaiva shrines such as
mahAkAleshvara of ujjain. Then came the era of appar with his 307
padigams or songs to rudra and the brahmin GYAna sambandhar who composed
384 hymns. sambandhar and appar were great critics of jaina and bauddha
and played an active role in the repulsion of these sects.

Then comes the heart of the tamil shaiva canon in the form of the
tirumantiram of 3000 verses-A tamil rendering of the mantra shAstra of
tantric shiva worship of the sanskrit canon. It draws its authority from
many sanskrit tantras later surviving only in the Kashmirian school. It
is said that its author tirumUlar was a tantric adept from the Himalayas
who migrated to Tamil Nadu to see agastya. At tiruvADuturai he saw a
dead shepherd and his sheep in disarray. So he entered the body of the
shepherd and having revived him restored his herd to his family. Then
the hyperbolic tamil legend informs us that he meditated under a tree
for 3000 years creating the text at one verse per year.

Then we have the last three great shaiva composers headed by
sundaramUrti, the brahmin. He composed the tiruttoNDattogai at
tiruvAlUr, in which he lists the 60 great tamil devotees of shiva, the
nAyanArs. Including the parents of sundaramUrti and himself the number
is traditionally claimed by the tamils to be 63. A friend of
sundaramUrti was the chera chief, perumAl. When he and sundaramUrti had
gone to a pilgrimage to Manasarovar, the cheramAn invented a novel
poetic style starting with the poem on tirukailAsa GYAna ulA inspired by
the sight of mount Kailasa. Last in this group was the famed brahmin
mANikkavAshagar, whose tirukkovai and tiruvAshagam and highly rated by
the draviDas and brahmins.
