+++
title = "kauTilya on knowledge"

+++
The wise viShNugupta, who propelled the mauryan to meteoric heights,
while uprooting the tree of the wicked nanda-s and cleansing the taint
of the Macedonian barbarians on the land of the bhArata-s, uttered words
that remain vivid even after 2300 years. The AchArya’s enumeration of
the Hindu system of knowledge goes thus:

AnvIkShikI trayI vArtA daNDa-nItish cha^iti vidyAH ||

The branches of knowledge are: logical analysis, the three-fold ritual
chants \[the veda\], business and political science.

trayI vArtA daNDa-nItish cha^iti mAnavAH || trayI visheSho hy
AnvIkShikI^iti ||

The school of manu holds that \[there are only three branches\]: The
three fold ritual chants, business and political science. Because
logical analysis is only a special branch of the veda.

vArtA daNDa-nItish cha^iti bArhaspatyAH || saMvaraNa mAtraM hi trayI
loka yAtrA vida iti ||

The school of bR^ihaspati holds that \[there are only two branches\]:
Business and political science. Because the veda is only a cloak for
those who are well-versed in worldly customs.

daNDa-nItir ekA vidyA^ity aushanasAH || tasyAM hi sarva-vidyA.ArambhAH
pratibaddhA iti ||

The school of ushanas holds that there is only one branch: political
science. Because the origins of all types of knowledge are
\[ultimately\] united in it.

chatasra eva vidyA iti kauTilyaH ||

However, kauTilya holds that the branches of knowledge are verily only
four \[i.e. logical analysis, the veda, business and political
science\].

tAbhir dharma.arthau yad vidyAt tad vidyAnAM vidyAtvam ||

The defining feature of all branches of knowledge is that by knowing
them one can learn of dharma and artha.

sAMkhyaM yogo lokAyataM cha^ity AnvIkShikI ||

Logical analysis is comprised of the systems of sAMkhya, yoga and
lokAyata.

dharmaadharmau trayAm arthaanarthau vArtAyAM nayaanayau daNDa-nItyAM
balaabale cha etAsAM hetubhir anvIkShamANA lokasya upakaroti vyasane
.abhyudaye cha buddhim avasthApayati praj\~nA-vAkya-kriyA-vaishAradyaM
cha karoti ||

Logical analysis by means of proper arguments of dharma and adharma,
which belong to the realm of the veda, profit and loss which belong to
the realm of business, good and bad policies which belong to the realm
of political science, \[as also\] the strengths and weaknesses of each
branch of knowledge, benefits the people, keeps the intellect steady
both in dire situations and good times, and generates expertise in the
spheres of mental, verbal and physical activity.

pradIpaH sarva-vidyAnAm upAyaH sarva-karmaNAm | AshrayaH sarva-dharmANAM
shashvad AnvIkShikI matA || AS 1.2.01-12

The systems of logical analysis \[i.e. sAMkhya, yoga and lokAyata\] are
always the lamp illuminating all knowledge and the means of all actions.
It is the foundation of all dharma-s.

Notes  
\~\*\~\*\~  
\* The loss and recovery of the arthashAstra: Based on the textual
evidence, in the form of the mantra practice, deities, and urban layout
we hold that the arthashAstra, as we have it, comes from a time close to
that of viShNugupta. It is either his own text or that of his near
successors. One of his near successors was viShNusharman, [who composed
the pa\~nchatantra inspired by
kauTilya](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/06/05/panchatantra-indias-great-product-origin-and-evolution/).
There were many later successors, like kAmandaki, [who eloquently
eulogizes chANakya in the beginning of his own tome on political
science](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/04/06/kamandaki-on-vishnugupta-and-chandragupta/).
Thus, the tale of chANakya and his knowledge was very widely known and
practiced in the early medieval period. However, the text was lost in
the later medieval period, and was only rediscovered in 1904 CE by
Mysore Shama Shastry. He published the text along with a translation
that marking one of the most momentous events in Indian philology.

The front-line thinker of the modern Hindu revival, shrI Sitaram Goel,
however, took a dim view of the political tradition of the arthashAstra.
He attributed the inability of the Hindu rulers to ultimately stanch the
Mohammedan catastrophe to them adhering too closely to viShNugupta’s
maNDala theory of allies and foes. Thus, Goel reasoned that, acting as
per the [maNDala
theory](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/02/02/the-mandala-theory/),
they were unable to see the beards knocking at the gates of India as an
existential threat; instead they simply saw them as residents of the
outer maNDala, who could be used against the neighboring maNDala by the
central mahA-maNDaleshvara and his mahA-sAmanta henchmen. We are not
sure that Goel’s thesis is justified. In fact, we simply hold that the
genuine wisdom of viShNugupta was lost at some point in the medieval
period and replaced by a lesser version of the maNDala theory
(incidentally this is the very version parodied so humorously by the
great daNDin in his avantisundarI kathA). We see the decline in the
“higher” knowledge of chANakya as being the cause of the demise of the
Hindu power under the Mohammedan ravages, rather than what was proposed
by shrI Goel (for example, the above discussion of knowledge would have
helped any one). This, along with the inability to accommodate the
reality of the Aryan invasion (unlike Veer Savarkar), happens to be one
his rare lapses. Ironically, even the Mohammedans appreciated the wisdom
of chANakya in the form conveyed by viShNusharman. We are informed that
his was part of the curriculum of the education of Osman sultans like
Kanuni Sultan Suleyman.

\* trayi: The term trayi stands for the three types of vedic mantra-s
not the the three veda-s – the R^ik-s or the metrical chants; the
yajuSh-s or the prose chants and the sAman-s or the musical chants with
6-7 tones.

\* The view of the bR^ihaspati school that the veda is merely a cloak of
the world-savy seems to be reminiscent of the view espoused by the
chArvAka school whose founder is also known to be bR^ihaspati. We
suspect that this is not entirely coincidental.

\* The ushanas school, which emphasizes the importance of daNDanIti,
appears to have been [the basis of much of the exposition on this topic
(also rAja-dharma) in the
mahAbhArata](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/11/13/some-considerations-on-indian-polity/).
The text clearly echoes the view of the primacy of daNDanIti. Indeed,
the opinion expounded there is that all human endeavor and knowledge
resulting therefrom is merely an offshoot of political activity. While
this statement might sound either odd or cynical, it is not entirely
without merit. While human knowledge for knowledge’s sake and various
other aspects of life might be praised, they can all be seen as being
only social constructs, which can exist only as a consequence of
political organization.

Later in the arthashAstra, chANakya explains his position on daNDanIti,
while not according it the status of being the sole knowledge system, he
accepts the basic tenet of the importance of daNDanIti as per the
aushanasa school in the maintenance of knowledge, dharma and business:

AnvIkShikI trayI vArtAnAM yoga-kShema-sAdhano daNDaH | tasya nItir daNDa
nItiH | alabdha-lAbhaarthA labdha-parirakShaNI rakShita vivardhanI
vR^iddhasya tIrthe pratipAdanI cha || 1.4.03

The daNDa \[is the power\] by which the application and the growth of
the systems of logical analysis, the veda and business are upheld. Its
management is known as political science. It is the means by which new
acquisitions are made, profits are gained \[in business\], the
acquisitions are kept secure, security and growth \[are achieved\] and
the fruits of growth are re-distributed among the deserving.

Nevertheless, with respect to the actual application of daNDa,
viShNugupta advocates what might be termed the path of moderation:  
“tasmAl loka yAtrA .arthI nityam udyata-daNDaH syAt || na hy evaM vidhaM
vasha^upanayanam asti bhUtAnAM yathA daNDaH|” ity AchAryAH ||

“Whoever is desirous of progress of the world shall always do so with
the upraised rod of chastisement. Never can there be a better instrument
to bring beings \[implying people and other animals\] under control than
the application of chastisement.” So the earlier teachers expounded
\[i.e. they advocated a police state\].

na^iti kauTilyaH || tIkShNa.daNDo hi bhUtAnAm udvejanIyo bhavati ||
mR^idu daNDaH paribhUyate || yathA .arha daNDaH pUjyate || 1.4.05-10

“Not so,” says kauTilya; for whoever imposes severe chastisement becomes
tyrannical to the beings \[a police state\]; while he who is mild in
chastisement is despised/disrespected \[a soft state\]. But he who
imposes punishment as deserved is respected \[the ideal Hindu state\].

\* AnvIkShikI: What is chANakya’s AnvIkShikI? Tradition holds that
generally by the term AnvIkShikI the systems of nyAya and vaisheShika
are implied. This is consistent with the fact that these are the systems
that provide the foundation of Hindu logical analysis. However,
viShNugupta clearly defines it for us as being sAMkhya, yoga and
lokAyata. Now, tradition has a clear understanding of what is meant by
these three darshana-s. But it is interesting to note that the
traditional systems that pertain to logical analysis have not been
mentioned here. The great scholar of Hindu logical analysis, Kuppuswamy
Shastri, has argued that actually chANakya meant the nyAya- or
vaisheShika-like systems by the term yoga. What is classically
considered yoga is merely a version of sAMkhya. This, is certainly a
possibility. The point of greatest interest is that chANakya does not
disparage lokAyata. He sees it as a solid tradition of logical analysis
that forms one of the foundations of knowledge. This, attitude is rather
distinct from that held by the theistic schools, though it might be
remarked that some pashupata shaiva-s and the kaula tAntrika kavI dharma
from the lATa country appear to have preserved the lokAyata system and
used it in demolishing arguments of their nirgrantha rivals.

Unlike delusive modern liberal expositors, chANakya is clear that
learning analytical devices is not for all and sundry, and outlines who
can do so:

shushrUShA shravaNa grahaNa dhAraNa vij\~nAna^Uhaapoha
tattvaabhiniviShTa buddhiM vidyA vinayati na^itaram || 1.5.05

The acquisition of knowledge can only culture those whose intellect is
endowed with the abilities of discipline, learning from verbal
instruction, grasping concepts, memory, discrimination, inference and
applying falsification, but not others \[those who lack these\].

In conclusion, we find viShNugupta’s analysis of the knowledge to be one
of the most appealing among those we encounter in early history. We have
held the opinion that the AnvIkShikI approach has been the most
successful of the Hindu approaches to knowledge, though it eventually
declined compared to some of the other schools. It is not something
widely inculcated in modern education of Hindu-s. Verily, this is
manifest in a generally poor grasp of evolutionary thinking and
philosophy in the realm of the general physical universe, biological
systems, societies and languages. This is also compounded by the general
disinterest in acquisition of vast amounts of readily retrievable,
well-classified, and usable information in the mental disks through some
discipline. This relates to topic we broached in the last epistle, where
we emphasized the primacy of information. Indeed, it is not uncommon to
hear in the modern education systems that information is merely clutter,
and that rather they strive to impart logical thinking. Of course today
one can extend mental hard disks with silicon, but even to use the
latter effectively, one needs to have the discipline of information
acquisition and storage. Only then is logic of any value. It is clear
that viShNugupta realized and emphasized the importance of being widely
informed. He stresses the point of how the kShatriya needs to constantly
acquire new knowledge and revise what he learns.

He states :  
shrutAd hi praj\~nA^upajAyate praj\~nAyA yogo yogAd AtmavattA^iti
vidyAnAM sAmarthyam || 1.5.16

Verily from hearing (i.e. gathering information) emerges knowledge; that
knowledge allows its application; from its application one becomes
prudent. This is the power of knowledge.

We shall end by remembering how viShNugupta emphasizes the role of the
educated king and protection of knowledge by the king:  
vidyA vinIto rAjA hi prajAnAM vinaye rataH | ananyAM pR^ithivIM
bhu\~Nkte sarva-bhUta-hite rataH || 1.5.16

The king who is educated in the fields of knowledge, verily interested
in administration of his people, and inclined to benefit all beings will
enjoy the earth unopposed.

gAndharvaM nR^ittam AlekhyaM vAdyaM cha gaNitaM kalAH |  
arthashAstraM dhanurvedaM yatnAd rakShen mahIpatiH || chANakya-rAjanIti
75

Music, dance, painting, discourse, mathematics, technologies, economics
and military science, a king should painstakingly protect.

These concluding points are largely lost in the contemporary rulers of
jambudvIpa.
