+++
title = "A brief investigation about the views and role of Raghunandana and Ānandabhaṭṭa on the existence of Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas in the Kalixa0Yuga"
date = "2021-05-20"

+++
Warning note:This post is not intended to argue against varṇāśrama,but
is meant as a preliminary inquiry into the how people viewed themselves
in an idealized hierarchical setup.  
  
Anandabhatta presented the Ballālacarita to the influential Kayastha
landlord of Nabadwip (navadvīpādhipati) Buddhimanta Khan in 1510 CE. In
the 23rd chapter of the second part of the Ballālacarita he is clearly
aware of various lines with well recognized kṣatriya and vaiṣya status
that are clearly lines of the recent Kaliyuga and not some
pre-Mahapadma-Nanda or pre-Paraśurāma era.(some notable kṣatriya lines
of unambiguously this era that he names seems to be:
Mauryas,Chauhans,Paramaras,Chalukyas,Silharas,etc). He lists the
kṣatriya lines as Sūryavaṃśin,Candravamśin,descendants of Kadru and
Vinātā and from Prithu. He also names a Candravamśi line of vaiśyas and
gives a partial contemporary list of famous vaiśya communities before
scathingly mentioning the suvarṇa-vāniks,who were reduced to śudra
status by Ballālasena in the course of their conflict with him.  
Raghunandana is born in 1510 CE with his literary activity centred in
Nabadwip(and presumably patronized by the same influential Kayastha
landlords’ line) and lived uptil 1580(using Kane’s dating at the time).
Given the changing political scenario at that time(Bengal coming under
Mughal rule) it is more likely he recieved local Kayastha landlord
patronage(which was influential and powerful enough to integrate even
Rajputs from outside Bengal into it:The case of Purandar Basu Khan
integrating the Rajput chieftains Surasimha and Rudrasimha into the
Kayastha samaj of Western Bengal(Dakshin Rarh)) rather than needing to
Muslim patronage. He(Raghunandana) likely did not have access to the
same resources as Anandabhatta and thus stated,extrapolating from what
he saw around him in his specific region of Bengal that there were no
varṇas except brāhmaṇas and śudras (and he extrapolates this situation
backward to being in vogue since the time of Mahāpadma Nanda the son of
Mahānandin). I do not have enough data to speculate on why he did not
have more data about jātis of other regions and their statuses or the
social setups of other prāntas. I am reproducing his quotation from
Kane’s work below(from the Śuddhitattva).

![](https://padmavajrablog.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/raghunandana_sudra_remark_0.jpeg?w=768)
