---
title: MERCINARIES IN RELIGION

---
<div>

[←](../notes_of_class_talks/shri_ramakrishna_the_nations.htm)
[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm) / [Notes of
Lectures](notes_of_lectures_contents.htm) / [→](the_destiny_of_man.htm)

  

## MERCINARIES IN RELIGION

(*Delivered in Minneapolis on November 26, 1893:  
Reported in the Minneapolis Journal*)

The Unitarian church was crowded yesterday morning by an audience
anxious to learn something of eastern religious thought as outlined by
Swami Vivekananda, a Brahmin priest, who was prominent in the Parliament
of Religions at Chicago last summer. The distinguished representative of
the Brahmin faith was brought to Minneapolis by the Peripatetic Club,
and he addressed that body last Friday evening. He was induced to remain
until this week, in order that he might deliver the address yesterday. .
. .

Dr. H.M. Simmons, the pastor, . . . read from Paul's lesson of faith,
hope and charity, and "the greatest of these is charity", supplementing
that reading by a selection from the Brahmin scripture which teaches the
same lesson, and also a selection from the Moslem faith, and poems from
the Hindu literature, all of which are in harmony with Paul's
utterances.

After a second hymn Swami Vivekandi \[*sic*\] was introduced. He stepped
to the edge of the platform and at once had his audience interested by
the recital of a Hindu story. He said in excellent English:

"I will tell you a story of five blind men. There was a procession in a
village in India, and all the people turned out to see the procession,
and specially the gaily caparisoned elephant. The people were delighted,
and as the five blind men could not see, they determined to touch the
elephant that they might acquaint themselves with its form. They were
given the privilege, and after the pro cession had passed, they returned
home together with the people, and they began to talk about the
elephant. 'It was just like a wall,' said one. 'No it wasn't,' said
another, 'it was like a piece of rope.' 'You are mistaken,' said a
third, 'I felt him and it was just a serpent.' The discussion grew
excited, and the fourth declared the elephant was like a pillow. The
argument soon broke into more angry expressions, and the five blind men
took to fighting. Along came a man with two eyes, and he said, 'My
friends, what is the matter?' The disputation was explained, whereupon
the new-comer said, 'Men, you are all right: the trouble is you touched
the elephant at different points. The wall was the side, the rope was
the tail, the serpent was the trunk, and the toes were the pillow. Stop
your quarrelling; you are all right, only you have been viewing the
elephant from different standpoints."

Religion, he said, had become involved in such a quarrel. The people of
the West thought they had the only religion of God, and the people of
the East held the same prejudice. Both were wrong; God was in every
religion.

There were many bright criticisms on Western thought. The Christians
were characterised as having a "shopkeeping religion". They were always
begging of God — "O God, give me this and give me that; O God, do this
and do that." The Hindu couldn't understand this. He thought it wrong to
be begging of God. Instead of begging, the religious man should give.
The Hindu believed in giving to God, to his fellows, instead of asking
God to give to them. He had observed that the people of the West, very
many of them, thought a great deal of God, so long as they got along all
right, but when the reverse came, then God was forgotten: not so with
the Hindu, who had come to look upon God as a being of love. The Hindu
faith recognised the motherhood of God as well as the fatherhood,
because the former was a better fulfilment of the idea of love. The
Western Christian would work all the week for the dollar, and when he
succeeded he would pray, "O God, we thank thee for giving us this
benefit", and then he would put all the money into his pocket; the Hindu
would make the money and then give it to God by helping the poor and the
less fortunate. And so comparisons were made between the ideas of the
West and the ideas of the East. In speaking of God, Vivekanandi said in
substance: "You people of the West think you have God. What is it to
have God? If you have Him, why is it that so much criminality exists,
that nine out of ten people are hypocrites? Hypocrisy cannot exist where
God is. You have your palaces for the worship of God, and you attend
them in part for a time once a week, but how few go to worship God. It
is the fashion in the West to attend church, and many of you attend for
no other reason. Have you then, you people of the West, any right to lay
exclusive claim to the possession of God?"

Here the speaker was interrupted by spontaneous applause. He proceeded:
"We of the Hindu faith believe in worshipping God for love's sake, not
for what He gives us, but because God is love, and no nation, no people,
no religion has God until it is willing to worship Him for love's sake.
You of the West are practical in business, practical in great
inventions, but we of the East are practical in religion. You make
commerce your business; we make religion our business. If you will come
to India and talk with the workman in the field, you will find he has no
opinion on politics. He knows nothing of politics. But you talk to him
of religion, and the humblest knows about monotheism, deism, and all the
isms of religion. You ask:

"'What government do you live under?' and he will reply: 'I don't know.
I pay my taxes, and that's all I know about it.' I have talked with your
labourers, your farmers, and I find that in politics they are all
posted. They are either Democrat or Republican, and they know whether
they prefer free silver or a gold standard. But you talk to them of
religion; they are like the Indian farmer, they don't know, they attend
such a church, but they don't know what it believes; they just pay their
pew rent, and that's all they know about it — or God."

The superstitions of India were admitted, "but what nation doesn't have
them?" he asked. In summing up, he held that the nations had been
looking at God as a monopoly. All nations had God, and any impulse for
good was God. The Western people, as well as the Eastern people, must
learn to "want God", and this "want" was compared to the man under
water, struggling for air; he wanted it, he couldn't live without it.
When the people of the West "wanted" God in that manner, then they would
be welcome in India, because the missionaries would then come to them
with God, not with the idea that India knows not God, but with love in
their hearts and not dogma.

</div>
