---
title: THE DESTINY OF MAN

---
<div>

[←](mercenaries_in_religion.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm) / [Notes of
Lectures](notes_of_lectures_contents.htm) / [→](reincarnation.htm)

  

## THE DESTINY OF MAN

(*Delivered in Memphis on January 17, 1894:  
Reported in Appeal-Avalanche*)

The audience was moderately large, and was made up of the best literary
and musical talent of the city, including some of the most distinguished
members of the legal fraternity and financial institutions.

The speaker differs in one respect in particular from some American
orators. He advances his ideas with as much deliberation as a professor
of mathematics demon strates an example in algebra to his students.
Kananda (In those days Swamiji was generally referred to by American
Press as Vive Kananda.) speaks with perfect faith in his own powers and
ability to hold successfully his position against all argument. He
advances no ideas, nor make assertions that he does not follow up to a
logical conclusion. Much of his lecture is something on the order of
Ingersoll's philosophy. He does not believe in future punishment nor in
God as Christians believe in Him. He does not believe the mind is
immortal, from the fact that it is dependent, and nothing can be
immortal except it is independent of all things. He says: "God is not a
king sitting away in one corner of the universe to deal out punishment
or rewards according to a man's deeds here on earth, and the time will
come when man will know the truth, and stand up and say, 'I am God,' am
life of His life. Why teach that God is far away when our real nature,
our immortal principle is God?

"Be not deluded by your religion teaching original sin, for the same
religion teaches original purity. When Adam fell, he fell from purity.
(Applause) Purity is our real nature, and to regain that is the object
of all religion. All men are pure; all men are good. Some objections can
be raised to them, and you ask why some men are brutes? That man you
call a brute is like the diamond in the dirt and dust — brush the dust
off and it is a diamond, just as pure as if the dust had never been on
it, and we must admit that every soul is a big diamond.

"Nothing is baser than calling our brother a sinner. A lioness once fell
upon a flock of sheep and killed a lamb. A sheep found a very young
lion, and it followed her, and he gave it suck, and it grew up with the
sheep and learned to eat grass like a sheep. One day an old lion saw the
sheep lion and tried to get it away from the sheep, but it ran away as
he approached. The big lion waited till he caught the sheep lion alone,
and he seized it and carried it to a clear pool of water and said, 'You
are not a sheep, but a lion; look at your picture in the water.' The
sheep lion, seeing its picture reflected from the water, said, 'I am a
lion and not a sheep.' Let us not think we are sheep, but be lions, and
don't bleat and eat grass like a sheep.

"For four months I have been in America. In Massachusetts I visited a
reformatory prison. The jailor at that prison never knows for what
crimes the prisoners are incarcerated. The mantle of charity is thrown
around them. In another city there were three newspapers, edited by very
learned men, trying to prove that severe punishment was a necessity,
while one other paper contended that mercy was better than punishment.
The editor of one paper proved by statistics that only fifty per cent of
criminals who received severe punishment returned to honest lives, while
ninety per cent of those who received light punishment returned to
useful pursuits in life.

"Religion is not the outcome of the weakness of human nature; religion
is not here because we fear a tyrant; religion is love, unfolding,
expanding, growing. Take the watch — within the little case is machinery
and a spring. The spring, when wound up, tries to regain its natural
state. You are like the spring in the watch, and it is not necessary
that all watches have the same kind of a spring, and it is not necessary
that we all have the same religion. And why should we quarrel? If we all
had the same ideas the world would be dead. External motion we call
action; internal motion is human thought. The stone falls to the earth.
You say it is caused by the law of gravitation. The horse draws the cart
and God draws the horse. That is the law of motion. Whirlpools show the
strength of the current; stop the current and stag nation ensues. Motion
is life. We must have unity and variety. The rose would smell as sweet
by any other name, and it does not matter what your religion is called.

"Six blind men lived in a village. They could not see the elephant, but
they went out and felt of him. One put his hand on the elephant's tail,
one of them on his side, one on his tongue \[trunk\], one on his ear.
They began to describe the elephant. One said he was like a rope; one
said he was like a great wall; one said he was like a boa constrictor,
and another said he was like a fan. They finally came to blows and went
to pummelling each other. A man who could see came along and inquired
the trouble, and the blind men said they had seen the elephant and
disagreed because one accused the other of lying. 'Well,' said the man,
'you have all lied; you are blind, and neither of you have seen it.'
That is what is the matter with our religion. We let the blind see the
elephant. (Applause).

"A monk of India said, 'I would believe you if you were to say that I
could press the sands of the desert and get oil, or that I could pluck
the tooth from the mouth of the crocodile without being bitten, but I
cannot believe you when you say a bigot can be changed.' You ask why is
there so much variance in religions? The answer is this: The little
streams that ripple down a thousand mountain sides are destined to come
at last to the mighty ocean. So with the different religions. They are
destined at last to bring us to the bosom of God. For 1,900 years you
have been trying to crush the Jews. Why could you not crush them? Echo
answers: Ignorance and bigotry can never crush truth."

The speaker continued in this strain of reasoning for nearly two hours,
and concluded by saying: "Let us help, and not destroy."

</div>
