---
title: COMPARATIVE THEOLOGY

---
<div>

[←](reincarnation.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm) / [Notes of
Lectures](notes_of_lectures_contents.htm) / [→](buddhism.htm)

  

## COMPARATIVE THEOLOGY

(*Delivered in Memphis on January 21, 1894:  
Reported in Appeal-Avalanche*)

"Comparative Theology" was the subject of a discourse last night by
Swami Vive Kananda at the Young Men's Hebrew Association Hall. It was
the blue-ribbon lecture of the series, and no doubt increased the
general admiration the people of this city entertain for the learned
gentleman.

Heretofore Vive Kananda has lectured for the benefit of one
charity-worthy object or another, and it can be safely said that he has
rendered them material aid. Last night, however, he lectured for his own
benefit. The lecture was planned and sustained by Mr. Hu L. Brinkley,
one of Vive Kananda's warmest friends and most ardent admirers. In the
neighbourhood of two hundred gathered at the hall last night to hear the
eminent Easterner for the last time in this city.

The first question the speaker asserted in connection with the subject
was: "Can there be such a distinction between religions as their creeds
would imply?"

He asserted that no differences existed now, and he retraced the line of
progress made by all religions and brought it back to the present day.
He showed that such variance of opinion must of necessity have existed
with primitive man in regard to the idea of God, but that as the world
advanced step by step in a moral and intellectual way, the distinctions
became more and more indistinct, until finally it had faded away
entirely, and now there was one all-prevalent doctrine — that of an
absolute existence.

"No savage", said the speaker, "can be found who does not believe in
some kind of a god."

"Modern science does not say whether it looks upon this as a revelation
or not. Love among savage nations is not very strong. They live in
terror. To their superstitious imaginations is pictured some malignant
spirit, before the thought of which they quake in fear and terror.
Whatever he likes he thinks will please the evil spirit. What will
pacify him he thinks will appease the wrath of the spirit. To this end
he labours even against his fellow-savage."

The speaker went on to show by historical facts that the savage man went
from ancestral worship to the worship of elephants, and later to gods,
such as the God of Thunder and Storms. Then the religion of the world
was polytheism. "The beauty of the sunrise, the grandeur of the sunset,
the mystifying appearance of the star-bedecked skies, and the weirdness
of thunder and lightning impressed primitive man with a force that he
could not explain, and suggested the idea of a higher and more powerful
being controlling the infinities that flocked before his gaze," said
Vive Kananda.

Then came another period — the period of monotheism. All the gods
disappeared and blended into one, the God of Gods, the ruler of the
universe. Then the speaker traced the Aryan race up to that period,
where they said: "We live and move in God. He is motion." Then there
came another period known to metaphysics as the "period of Pantheism".
This race rejected Polytheism and Monotheism, and the idea that God was
the universe, and said "the soul of my soul is the only true existence.
My nature is my existence and will expand to me."

Vive Kananda then took up Buddhism. He said that they neither asserted
nor denied the existence of a God. Buddha would simply say, when his
counsel was sought: "You see misery. Then try to lessen it." To a
Buddhist misery is ever present, and society measures the scope of his
existence. Mohammedans, he said, believed in the Old Testament of the
Hindu \[Hebrew\] and the New Testament of the Christian. They do not
like the Christians, for they say they are heretics and teach
man-worship. Mohammed ever forbade his followers having a picture of
himself.

"The next question that arises," said he, "are these religions true or
are some of them true and some of them false? They have all reached one
conclusion, that of an absolute and infinite existence. Unity is the
object of religion. The multiple of phenomena that is seen at every hand
is only the infinite variety of unity. An analysis of religion shows
that man does not travel from fallacy to truth, but from a lower truth
to a higher truth.

"A man brings in a coat to a lot of people. Some say the coat does not
fit them. Well, you get out; you can't have a coat. Ask one Christian
minister what is the matter with all the other sects that are opposed to
his doctrines and dogmas, and he will answer: 'Oh, they're not
Christians.' But we have better instruction than these. Our own natures,
love, and science — they teach us better. Like the eddies to a river,
take them away and stagnation follows. Kill the difference in opinions,
and it is the death of thought. Motion is necessity. Thought is the
motion of the mind, and when that ceases death begins.

"If you put a simple molecule of air in the bottom of a glass of water
it at once begins a struggle to join the infinite atmosphere above. So
it is with the soul. It is struggling to regain its pure nature and to
free itself from this material body. It wants to regain its own infinite
expansion. This is everywhere the same. Among Christians, Buddhists,
Mohammedans, agnostic, or priest, the soul is struggling. A river flows
a thousand miles down the circuitous mountain side to where it joins the
seas, and a man is standing there to tell it to go back and start anew
and assume a more direct course! That man is a fool. You are a river
that flows from the heights of Zion. I flow from the lofty peaks of the
Himalayas. I don't say to you, go back and come down as I did, you're
wrong. That is more wrong than foolish. Stick to your beliefs. The truth
is never lost. Books may perish, nations may go down in a crash, but the
truth is preserved and is taken up by some man and handed back to
society, which proves a grand and continuous revelation of God."

</div>
