---
title: THE SCIENCE OF YOGA

---
<div>

[←](buddhism.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm) / [Notes of
Lectures](notes_of_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](../../epistles_third_series/note.htm)

  

## THE SCIENCE OF YOGA

(Fragmentary notes of a lecture recorded by Ida Ansell and reprinted
from *Vedanta and the West*, July-August 1957.)

(*Delivered at Tucker Hall, Alameda, California, on April 13, 1900*)

The old Sanskrit word Yoga is defined as \[Chittavrittinirodha\]. It
means that Yoga is the science that teaches us to bring the Chitta under
control from the state of change. The Chitta is the stuff from which our
minds are made and which is being constantly churned into waves by
external and internal influences. Yoga teaches us how to control the
mind so that it is not thrown out of balance into wave forms. . . .

What does this mean? To the student of religion almost ninety-nine per
cent of the books and thoughts of religion are mere speculations. One
man thinks religion is this and another, that. If one man is more clever
than the others, he overthrows their speculations and starts a new one.
Men have been studying new religious systems for the last two thousand,
four thousand, years — how long exactly nobody knows. . . . When they
could not reason them out, they said, "Believe!" If they were powerful,
they forced their beliefs. This is going on even now.

But there are a set of people who are not entirely satisfied with this
sort of thing. "Is there no way out?" they ask. You do not speculate
that way in physics, chemistry, and mathematics. Why cannot the science
of religion be like any other science? They proposed this way: If such a
thing as the soul of man really exists, if it is immortal, if God really
exists as the ruler of this universe — He must be \[known\] here; and
all that must be \[realised\] in \[your own\] consciousness.

The mind cannot be analysed by any external machine. Supposing you could
look into my brain while I am thinking, you would only see certain
molecules interchanged. You could not see thought, consciousness, ideas,
images. You would simply see the mass of vibrations — chemical and
physical changes. From this example we see that this sort of analysis
would not do.

Is there any other method by which the mind can be analysed as mind? If
there is, then the real science of religion is possible. The science of
Raja-Yoga claims there is such a possibility. We can all attempt it and
succeed to a certain degree. There is this great difficulty: In external
sciences the object is \[comparatively easy to observe\]. The
instruments of analysis are rigid; and both are external. But in the
analysis of the mind the object and the instruments of analysis are the
same thing. . . . The subject and the object become one. . . .

External analysis will go to the brain and find physical and chemical
changes. It would never succeed \[in answering the questions\]: What is
the consciousness? What is your imagination? Where does this vast mass
of ideas you have come from, and where do they go? We cannot deny them.
They are facts. I never saw my own brain. I have to take for granted I
have one. But man can never deny his own conscious imagination. .

The great problem is ourselves. Am I the long chain I do not see — one
piece following the other in rapid succession but quite unconnected? Am
I such a state of consciousness \[for ever in a flux\]? Or am I
something more than that — a substance, an entity, what we call the
soul? In other words, has man a soul or not? Is he a bundle of states of
consciousness without any connection, or is he a unified substance? That
is the great controversy. If we are merely bundles of consciousness, . .
. such a question as immortality would be merely delusion. . . . On the
other hand, if there is something in me which is a unit, a substance,
then of course I am immortal. The unit cannot be destroyed or broken
into pieces. Only compounds can be broken up. . . .

All religions except Buddhism believe and struggle in some way or other
to reach such a substance. Buddhism denies the substance and is quite
satisfied with that. It says, this business about God, the soul,
immortality, and all that — do not vex yourselves with such questions.
But all the other religions of the world cling to this substance. They
all believe that the soul is the substance in man in spite of all the
changes, that God is the substance which is in the universe. They all
believe in the immortality of the soul. These are speculations. Who is
to decide the controversy between the Buddhists and the Christians?
Christianity says there is a substance that will live for ever. The
Christian says, "My Bible says so." The Buddhist says, "I do not believe
in your book." . . .

The question is: Are we the substance \[the soul\] or this subtle
matter, the changing, billowing mind? . . . Our minds are constantly
changing. Where is the substance within? We do not find it. I am now
this and now that. I will believe in the substance if for a moment you
can stop these changes. . . .

Of course all the beliefs in God and heaven are little beliefs of
organised religions. Any scientific religion never proposes such things.

Yoga is the science that teaches us to stop the Chitta \[the
mind-stuff\] from getting into these changes. Suppose you succeed in
leading the mind to a perfect state of Yoga. That moment you have solved
the problem. You have known what you are. You have mastered all the
changes. After that you may let the mind run about, but it is not the
same mind any more. It is perfectly under your control. No more like
wild horses that dash you down. . . . You have seen God. This is no
longer a matter of speculation. There is no more Mr. So-and-So, . . . no
more books or Vedas, or controversy of preachers, or anything. You have
been yourself: I am the substance beyond all these changes. I am not the
changes; if I were, I could not stop them. I can stop the changes, and
therefore I can never be the changes. This is the proposition of the
science of Yoga. . . .

We do not like these changes. We do not like changes at all. Every
change is being forced upon us. . . . In our country bullocks carry a
yoke on their shoulders \[which is connected by a pole with an oil
press\]. From the yoke projects a piece of wood \[to which is tied a
bundle of grass\] just far enough to tempt the bullock, but he cannot
reach it. He wants to eat the grass and goes a little farther \[thereby
turning the oil press\]. . . . We are like these bullocks, always trying
to eat the grass and stretching our necks to reach it. We go round and
round this way. Nobody likes these changes. Certainly not! . . . All
these changes are forced upon us. . . . We cannot help it. Once we have
put ourselves in the machine, we must go on and on. The moment we stop,
there is greater evil than if we continued forward. . . .

Of course misery comes to us. It is all misery because it is all
unwilling. It is all forced. Nature orders us and we obey, but there is
not much love lost between us and nature. All our work is an attempt to
escape nature. We say we are enjoying nature. If we analyse ourselves,
we find that we are trying to escape everything and invent ways to enjoy
this and that. . . . \[Nature is\] like the Frenchman who had invited an
English friend and told him of his old wines in the cellar. He called
for a bottle of old wine. It was so beautiful, and the light sparkled
inside like a piece of gold. His butler poured out a glass, and the
Englishman quietly drank it. The butler had brought in a bottle of
castor oil! We are drinking castor oil all the time; we cannot help it.
. . .

\[People in general\] . . . are so reduced to machinery they do not . .
. even think. Just like cats, dogs and other animals, they are also
driven with the whip by nature. They never disobey, never think of it.
But even they have some experience of life. . . .

\[Some, however,\] begin to question: What is this? What are all these
experiences for? What is the Self? Is there any escape? Any meaning to
life? . . .

The good will die. The wicked will die. Kings will die, and beggars will
die. The great misery is death. . . .All the time we are trying to avoid
it. And if we die in a comfortable religion, we think we will see Johns
and Jacks afterwards and have a good time.

In your country they bring Johns and Jacks down to show you \[in
Seances\]. I saw such people numbers of times and shook hands with them.
Many of you may have seen them. They bang the piano and sing "Beulah
Land": America is a vast land. My home is on the other side of the
world. I do not know where Beulah Land is. You will not find it in any
geography. See our good comfortable religion! The old, old moth-eaten
belief!

Those people cannot think. What can be done for them? They have been
eaten up by the world. There is nothing in them to think. Their bones
have become hollow, their brains are like cheese. . . . I sympathise
with them. Let them have their comfort! Some people are evidently very
much comforted by seeing their ancestors from Beulah Land.

One of these mediums offered to bring my ancestors down to me. I said,
"Stop there. Do anything you like, but if you bring my ancestors, I
don't know if I can restrain myself." The medium was very kind and
stopped.

In our country, when we begin to get worried by things, we pay something
to the priests and make a bargain with God. . . . For the time being we
feel comforted, otherwise we will not pay the priests. A little comfort
comes, but \[it turns\] into reaction shortly. . . . So again misery
comes. The same misery is here all the time. Your people in our country
says, "If you believe in our doctrine you are safe." Our people among
the lower classes believe in your doctrines. The only change is that
they become beggars. . . . But is that religion? It is politics — not
religion. You may call it religion, dragging the word religion down to
that sense. But it is not spiritual.

Among thousands of men and women a few are inclined to something higher
than this life. The others are like sheep. . . . Some among thousands
try to understand things, to find a way out. The question is: Is there a
way out? If there is a way out, it is in the soul and nowhere else. The
ways out from other sources have been tried enough, and all \[have been
found wanting\]. People do not find satisfaction. The very fact that
those myriads of theories and sects exist show that people do not find
satisfaction.

The science of Yoga proposes this, that the one way out is through
ourselves. We have to individualise ourselves. If there is any truth, we
can \[realise it as our very essence\]. . . . We will cease being driven
about by nature from place to place. . . .

The phenomenal world is always changing: \[to reach the Changeless\]
that is our goal. We want to be That, to realise that Absolute, the
\[changeless\] Reality. What is preventing us from realising that
Reality? It is the fact of creation. The creative mind is creating all
the time and gets mixed up with its own creation. \[But we must also
remember that\] it is creation that discovered God. It is creation that
discovered the Absolute in every individual soul. . . .

Going back to our definition: Yoga is stopping the Chitta, the
mind-stuff, from getting into these changes. When all this creation has
been stopped — if it is possible to stop it — then we shall see for
ourselves what we are in reality. . . . The Uncreated, the One that
creates, manifests itself.

The methods of Yoga are various. Some of them are very difficult; it
takes long training to succeed. Some are easy. Those who have the
perseverance and strength to follow it through attain to great results.
Those who do not may take a simpler method and get some benefit out of
it.

As to the proper analysis of the mind, we see at once how difficult it
is to grapple with the mind itself. We have become bodies. That we are
souls we have forgotten entirely. When we think of ourselves, it is the
body that comes into our imagination. We behave as bodies. We talk as
bodies. We are all body. From this body we have to separate the soul.
Therefore the training begins with the body itself, \[until ultimately\]
the spirit manifests itself. . . . The central idea in all this training
is to attain to that power of concentration, the power of meditation.

</div>
