---
title: DIVINITY OF MAN

---
<div>

[←](note.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](swami_vivekananda_on_india.htm)

  

## DIVINITY OF MAN

(*Ada Record*, February 28, 1894)

The lecture on the Divinity of Man by Swami Vive Kananda, (In the
earlier days Swami Vivekananda's name was thus mis-spelt by the American
Press. — *Publisher.*) the Hindu monk, drew a packed house at the Opera
last Friday evening \[February 22\].

He stated that the fundamental basis of all religions was belief in the
soul which is the real man, and something beyond both mind and matter,
and proceeded to demonstrate the proposition. The existence of things
material are dependent on something else. The mind is mortal because
changeable. Death is simply a change.

The soul uses the mind as an instrument and through it affects the body.
The soul should be made conscious of its powers. The nature of man is
pure and holy but it becomes clouded. In our religion every soul is
trying to regain its own nature. The mass of our people believe in the
individuality of the soul. We are forbidden to preach that ours is the
only true religion. Continuing the speaker said: "I am a spirit and not
matter. The religion of the West hopes to again live with their body.
Ours teaches there can not be such a state. We say freedom of the soul
instead of salvation." The lecture proper lasted but 30 minutes but the
president of the lecture committee had announced that at the close of
the lecture the speaker would answer any questions propounded him. He
gave that opportunity and liberal use was made of the privilege. They
came from preachers and professors, physicians and philosophers, from
citizens and students, from saints and sinners, some were written but
dozens arose in their seats and propounded their questions directly. The
speaker responded to all — mark the word, please — in an affable manner
and in several instances turned the laugh on the inquirer. They kept up
the fusilade for nearly an hour; when the speaker begged to be excused
from further labor there yet remained a large pile of unanswered
questions. He was an artful dodger on many of the questions. From his
answers we glean the following additional statements in regard to the
Hindu belief and teachings: They believe in the incarnation of man. One
of their teachings is to the effect that their God Krishna was born of a
virgin about 5000 years ago in the North of India. The story is very
similar to the Biblical history of Christ, only their God was accidently
killed. They believe in evolution and the transmigration of souls: i.e.
our souls once inhabited some other living thing, a bird, fish or
animal, and on our death will go into some other organism. In reply to
the inquiry where these souls were before they came into this world he
said they were in other worlds. The soul is the permanent basis of all
existence. There was no time when there was no God, therefore no time
when there was no creation. Buddhists \[sic\] do not believe in a
personal god; I am no Buddhist. Mohammed is not worshipped in the same
sense as Christ. Mohammed believes in Christ but denies he is God. The
earth was peopled by evolution and not special selection \[creation\].
God is the creator and nature the created. We do not have prayer save
for the children and then only to improve the mind. Punishment for sin
is comparatively immediate. Our actions are not of the soul and can
therefore be impure. It is our spirit that becomes perfect and holy.
There is no resting place for the soul. It has no material qualities.
Man assumes the perfect state when he realizes he is a spirit. Religion
is the manifestation of the soul nature. The deeper they see is what
makes one holier than another. Worship is feeling the holiness of God.
Our religion does not believe in missions and teaches that man should
love God for love's sake and his neighbor in spite of himself. The
people of the West struggle too hard; repose is a factor of
civilization. We do not lay our infirmities to God. There is a tendency
toward a union of religions.

</div>
