---
title: FROM FAR OFF INDIA

---
<div>

[←](religious_harmony.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](an_evening_with_our_hindu_cousins.htm)

  

## FROM FAR OFF INDIA

(*Saginaw Courier-Herald*, March 22, 1894)

Seated in the lobby of the Hotel Vincent yesterday evening was a strong
and regular featured man of fine presence, whose swarthy skin made more
pronounced the pearly whiteness of his even teeth. Under a broad and
high forehead his eyes betoken intelligence. This gentleman was Swami
Vive Kananda, the Hindoo preacher. Mr. Kananda's conversation is in pure
and grammatically constructed English sentences, to which his slightly
foreign accent lends piquancy. Readers of the Detroit papers are aware
that Mr. Kananda has lectured in that city a number of times and aroused
the animosity of some on account of his strictures upon Christians. *The
Courier-Herald * representative had a few moments' conversation with the
learned Buddhist \[?\] just before he left for the Academy, where he was
to lecture. Mr. Kananda said in conversation that he was surprised at
the lapses from the paths of rectitude which were so common among
Christians, but that there was good and bad to be found among members of
all religious bodies. One statement he made was decidedly un-American.
Upon being asked if he had been investigating our institutions, he
replied: "No, I am a preacher only." This displayed both a want of
curiosity and narrowness, which seemed foreign to one who appeared to be
so well versed upon religious topics as did the Buddhist \[?\] preacher.

From the hotel to the Academy was but a step and at 8 o'clock Rowland
Connor introduced to a small audience the lecturer, who was dressed in a
long orange colored robe, fastened by a red sash, and who wore a turban
of windings of what appeared to be a narrow shawl.

The lecturer stated at the opening that he had not come as a missionary,
and that it was not the part of a Buddhist to convert others from their
faiths and beliefs. He said that the subject of his address would be,
"The Harmony of Religions". Mr. Kananda said that many ancient religions
had been founded, and were dead and gone.

He said that the Buddhists \[Hindus\] comprise two-thirds of the race,
and that the other third comprised those of all other believers. He said
that the Buddhists have no place of future torment for men. In that they
differ from the Christians, who will forgive a man for five minutes in
this world and condemn him to everlasting punishment in the next. Buddha
was the first to teach the universal brotherhood of man. It is a
cardinal principle of the Buddhist faith today. The Christian preaches
it, but does not practice its own teachings.

He instanced the condition of the Negro in the South, who is not allowed
in hotels nor to ride in the same cars with white men, and is a being to
whom no decent man will speak. He said that he had been in the South,
and spoke from his knowledge and observation.

</div>
