---
title: AN EVENING WITH OUR HINDU COUSINS

---
<div>

[←](from_far_off_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_manners_and_customs_of_india.htm)

  

## AN EVENING WITH OUR HINDU COUSINS

(*Northampton Daily Herald*, April 16, 1894)

For Swami Vive Kananda proved conclusively that all our neighbors across
the water, even the remotest, are our close cousins differing only a
trifle in color, language, customs and religion, the silver-tongued
Hindu monk prefacing his address in city hall Saturday evening \[April
14\] by an historic sketch of the origin of his own and all other
leading nations of the earth which demonstrated the truth that
race-kinship is more of a simple fact than many know or always care to
admit.

The informal address that followed regarding some of the customs of the
Hindu people was more of the nature of a pleasant parlor talk, expressed
with the easy freedom of the conversational adept, and to those of his
hearers possessing a natural and cultivated interest in the subject both
the man and his thought were intensely interesting for more reasons than
can be given here. But to others the speaker was disappointing in not
covering a larger scope in his word-pictures, the address, although
extremely lengthy for the American lecture-platform, referring to very
few of the "customs and manners" of the peculiar people considered, and
of whose personal, civil, home, social and religious life much more
would have been gladly heard from this one of the finest representatives
of this oldest of races, which the average student of human nature
should find preeminently interesting but really knows the least about.

The allusions to the life of the Hindu began with a picture of the birth
of the Hindu boy, his introduction to educational training, his
marriage, slight reference to the home life but not what was expected,
the speaker diverging frequently to make comparative comments on the
customs and ideas of his own and English-speaking races, socially,
morally and religiously, the inference in all cases being clearly in
favor of his own, although most courteously, kindly and gracefully
expressed. Some of his auditors who are tolerably well posted as to
social and family conditions among the Hindoos of all classes would have
liked to have asked the speaker a challenging question or two on a good
many of the points he touched upon. For instance, when he so eloquently
and beautifully portrayed the Hindu idea of womanhood as the divine
motherhood ideal, to be forever reverenced, even worshipped with a
devotion of loyalty such as the most woman-respecting unselfish and
truest of American sons, husbands and fathers cannot even conceive of,
one would have liked to know what the reply would have been to the query
as to how far this beautiful theory is exemplified in practice in the
majority of Hindu homes. which hold wives, mothers, daughters and
sisters.

The rebuke to the greed for gain, the national vice of luxury-seeking,
self-seeking the "dollar-caste" sentiment which taints the dominant
white European and American races to their mortal danger, morally and
civilly, was only too just and superbly well-put, the slow, soft, quiets
unimpassioned musical voice embodying its thought with all the power and
fire of the most vehement physical utterance, and went straight to the
mark like the "Thou art the man" of the prophet. But when this learned
Hindu nobleman by birth, nature and culture attempts to prove — as he
repeatedly did in his frequent and apparently half-unconscious
digressions from the special point under consideration — that the
distinctively self-centred, self-cultivating, preeminently
self-soulsaving, negative and passive, not to say selfishly indolent
religion of his race has proven itself superior in its usefulness to the
world to the vitally aggressive, self-forgetful, do-good
unto-others-first-last-and-always, go-ye-into-all-the-world and *work*
religion which we call Christianity, in whose name nine tenths of all
the really practical moral, spiritual and philanthropic work of the
world has been and is being done, whatever sad and gross mistakes have
been made by its unwise zealots, he attempts a large contract.

But to see and hear Swami Vive Kananda is an opportunity which no
intelligent fair-minded American ought to miss if one cares to see a
shining light of the very finest product of the mental, moral and
spiritual culture of a race which reckons its age by thousands where we
count ours by hundreds and is richly worth the study of every mind.

Sunday afternoon \[April 15\] the distinguished Hindu spoke to the
students of Smith college at the vesper service, the Fatherhood of God
and the Brotherhood of man being, virtually, his theme, and that the
address made a deep impression is evinced by the report of every
auditor, the broadest liberality of true religious sentiment and precept
characterizing the whole trend of thought.

</div>
