---
title: THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF INDIA

---
<div>

[←](an_evening_with_our_hindu_cousins.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_religions_of_india.htm)

  

## THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF INDIA

(*Boston Herald*, May 15, 1894)

Association Hall was crowded with ladies yesterday, to hear Swami
Vivekananda, the Brahmin (Meaning Hindu. — *Publisher*.) Monk talk about
"The Religion of India" \[actually "The Manners and Customs of India"\],
for the benefit of the ward 16 day nursery \[actually, Tyler-street Day
Nursery\]. The Brahmin monk has become a fad in Boston, as he was in
Chicago last year, and his earnest, honest, cultured manner has won many
friends for him.

The Hindoo nation is not given to marriage, he said, not because we are
women haters, but because our religion teaches us to worship women. The
Hindoo is taught to see in every woman his mother, and no man wants to
marry his mother. God is mother to us. We don't care anything about God
in heaven; it is mother to us. We consider marriage a low vulgar state,
and if a man does marry, it is because he needs a helpmate for religion.

You say we ill-treat our women. What nation in the world has not
ill-treated its women? In Europe or America a man can marry a woman for
money, and, after capturing her dollars, can kick her out. In India, on
the contrary, when a woman marries for money, her children are
considered slaves, according to our teaching, and when a rich man
marries, his money passes into the hands of his wife, so that he would
be scarcely likely to turn the keeper of his money out of doors.

You say we are heathens, we are uneducated, uncultivated, but we laugh
in our sleeves at your want of refinement in telling us such things.
With us, quality and birth make caste, not money. No amount of money can
do anything for you in India. In caste the poorest is as good as the
richest, and that is one of the most beautiful things about it.

Money has made warfare in the world, and caused Christians to trample on
each other's necks. Jealousy, hatred and avariciousness are born of
money-getters. Here it is all work, hustle and bustle. Caste saves a man
from all this. It makes it possible for a man to live with less money,
and it brings work to all. The man of caste has time to think of his
soul; and that is what we want in the society of India.

The Brahmin is born to worship God, and the higher his caste, the
greater his social restrictions are. Caste has kept us alive as a
nation, and while it has many defects, it has many more advantages.

Mr. Vivekananda described the universities and colleges of India, both
ancient and modern, notably the one at Benares, that has 20,000 students
and professors.

When you judge my religion, he continued, you take it that yours is
perfect and mine wrong; and when you criticise the society of India you
suppose it to be uncultured just so far as it does not conform to your
standard. That is nonsense.

In reference to the matter of education, the speaker said that the
educated men of India become professors, while the less educated become
priests.

</div>
