---
title: IDEALS OF WOMANHOOD

---
<div>

[←](the_hindu_way_of_life.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](true_buddhism.htm)

  

## IDEALS OF WOMANHOOD

(*Brooklyn Standard Union*, January 21, 1895)

Swami Vivekananda, after being presented to the audience by Dr. Janes,
president of the Ethical Association, said in part:

"The product of the slums of any nation cannot be the criterion of our
judgment of that nation. One may collect the rotten, worm-eaten apples
under every apple tree in the world, and write a book about each of
them, and still know nothing of the beauty and possibilities of the
apple tree. Only in the highest and best can we judge a nation — the
fallen are a race by themselves. Thus it is not only proper, but just
and right, to judge a custom by its best, by its ideal.

"The ideal of womanhood centres in the Arian race of India, the most
ancient in the worlds history. In that race, men and women were priests,
'sabatimini \[saha-dharmini\],' or co-religionists, as the Vedas call
them. There every family had its hearth or altar, on which, at the time
of the wedding, the marriage fire was kindled, which was kept alive,
until either spouse died, when the funeral pile was lighted from its
spark. There man and wife together offered their sacrifices, and this
idea was carried so far that a man could not even pray alone, because it
was held that he was only half a being, for that reason no unmarried man
could become a priest. The same held true in ancient Rome and Greece.

"But with the advent of a distinct and separate priest-class, the
co-priesthood of the woman in all these nations steps back. First it was
the Assyrian race, coming of semitic blood, which proclaimed the
doctrine that girls have no voice, and no right, even when married. The
Persians drank deep of this Babylonian idea, and by them it was carried
to Rome and to Greece, and everywhere woman degenerated.

"Another cause was instrumental in bringing this about — the change in
the system of marriage. The earliest system was a matriarchal one; that
is, one in which the mother was the centre, and in which the girls
acceded to her station. This led to the curious system of the Polianders
\[polyandrous\], where five and six brothers often married one wife.
Even the Vedas contain a trace of it in the provision, that when a man
died without leaving any children, his widow was permitted to live with
another man, until she became a mother; but the children she bore did
not belong to their father, but to her dead husband. In later years the
widow was allowed to marry again, which the modern idea forbids her to
do.

"But side by side with these excrescences a very intense idea of
personal purity sprang up in the nation. On every page the Vedas preach
personal purity. The laws in this respect were extremely strict. Every
boy and girl was sent to the university, where they studied until their
twentieth or thirtieth year; there the least impurity was punished
almost cruelly. This idea of personal purity has imprinted itself deeply
into the very heart of the race, amounting almost to a mania. The most
conspicuous example of it is to be found in the capture of Chito
\[Chitor\] by the Mohammedans. The men defended the town against
tremendous odds; and when the women saw that defeat was inevitable they
lit a monstrous fire on the market place, and when the enemy broke down
the gates 74,500 women jumped on the huge funeral pile and perished in
the flames. This noble example has been handed down in India to the
present time, when every letter bears the words '74,500,' which means
that any one who unlawfully reads the letter, thereby becomes guilty of
a crime similar to the one which drove those noble women of Chito to
their death.

"The next period is that of the monks; it came with the advent of
Buddhism, which taught that only the monks could reach the 'nirvana',
something similar to the Christian heaven. The result was that all India
became one huge monastery; there was but one object, one battle — to
remain pure. All the blame was cast onto women, and even the proverbs
warned against them. 'What is the gate to hell?' was one of them, to
which the answer was: 'Woman'. Another read: 'What is the chain which
binds us all to dust? Woman'. Another one: 'Who is the blindest of the
blind? He who is deceived by woman.'

"The same idea is to be found in the cloisters of the West. The
development of all monasticism always meant the degeneration of women.

"But eventually another idea of womanhood arose. In the West it found
its ideal in the wife, in India in the mother. But do not think that the
priests were altogether responsible for this change. I know they always
lay claim to everything in the world and I say this, although I am
myself a priest. I'll bend my knees to every prophet in every religion
and clime, but candor compels me to say, that here in the West the
development of women was brought about by men like John Stuart Mill and
the revolutionary French philosophers. Religion has done something, no
doubt, but not all. Why, in Asia Minor, Christian bishops to this day
keep a harem!

"The Christian ideal is that which is found in the Anglo-Saxon race. The
Mohammedan woman differs vastly from her western sisters in so far as
her social and intellectual development is not so pronounced. But do
not, on that account, think that the Mohammedan woman is unhappy,
because it is not so. In India woman has enjoyed property rights since
thousands of years. Here a man may disinherit his wife, in India the
whole estate of the deceased husband must go to the wife, personal
property absolutely, real property for life.

"In India the mother is the centre of the family and our highest ideal,
She is to us the representative of God, as God is the mother of the
Universe. It was a female sage who first found the unity of God, and
laid down this doctrine in one of the first hymns of the Vedas. Our God
is both personal and absolute, the absolute is male, the personal,
female. And thus it comes that we now say: 'The first manifestation of
God is the hand that rocks the cradle.' He is of the 'arian' race, who
is born through prayer, and he is a nonarian, who is born through
sensuality.

"This doctrine of prenatal influence is now slowly being recognized, and
science as well as religion calls out: 'Keep yourself holy, and pure.'
So deeply has this been recognized in India, that there we even speak of
adultery in marriage, except when marriage is consummated in prayer. And
I and every good Hindoo believe, that my mother was pure and holy, and
hence I owe her everything that I am. That is the secret of the race —
chastity."

</div>
