---
title: TRUE BUDDHISM

---
<div>

[←](ideals_of_womanhood.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](indias_gift_to_the_world.htm)

  

## TRUE BUDDHISM

(*Brooklyn Standard Union*, February 4, 1895)

Swami Vivekananda, being presented by Dr. Janes, the president of the
Ethical Association, under whose auspices these lectures are given, said
in part: "The Hindoo occupies a unique position towards Buddhism. Like
Christ, who antagonized the Jews, Buddha antagonized the prevailing
religion of India; but while Christ was rejected by his countrymen,
Buddha was accepted as God Incarnate. He denounced the priestcraft at
the very doors of their temples, yet to-day he is worshipped by them.

"Not, however, the creed which bears his name. What Buddha taught, the
Hindoo believes, but what the Buddhists teach, we do not accept. For the
teachings of the Great Master, spread out broadcast over the land, came
back in tradition, colored by the channels through which they passed.

"In order to understand Buddhism fully we must go-back to the mother
religion from which it came. The books of Veda have two parts; the
first, Cura makanda \[Karma Kanda\], contains the sacrificial portion,
while the second part, the Vedanta, denounces sacrifices, teaching
charity and love, but not death. Each sect took up what portion it
liked. The charvaka, or materialist, basing his doctrine on the first
part, believed that all was matter and that there is neither a heaven
nor a hell, neither a soul nor a God. The second sect, the Gains
\[Jains\], were very moral atheists, who, while rejecting the idea of a
God, believed that there is a soul, striving for more perfect
development. These two sects were called the heretics. A third sect was
called orthodox, because it accepted the Vedas, although it denied the
existence of a personal God, believing that everything sprang from the
atom or nature.

"Thus the intellectual world was divided before Buddha came. But for a
correct understanding of his religion, it is also necessary to speak of
the caste then existing. The Vedas teach that he who knows God is a
Brahma \[Brâhmin\]; he who protects his fellows is a Chocta
\[Kshatriya\], while he who gains his livelihood in trade is a Visha
\[Vaishya\]. These different social diversions \[divisions\] developed
or degenerated into iron-bound casts \[castes\], and an organized and
crystallized priestcraft stood upon the neck of the nation. At this time
Buddha was born, and his religion is therefore the culmination of an
attempt at a religious and a social reformation.

"The air was full of the din of discussion; 20,000 blind priests were
trying to lead 20,000,000 \[?\] blind men, fighting amongst themselves.
What was more needed at that time than for a Buddha to preach? 'Stop
quarreling, throw your books aside, be perfect!' Buddha never fought
true castes, for they are nothing but the congregation of those of a
particular natural tendency, and they are always valuable. But Buddha
fought the degenerated castes with their hereditary privileges, and
spoke to the Brahmins: 'True Brahmins are not greedy, nor criminal nor
angry — are you such? If not, do not mimic the genuine, real men. Caste
is a state, not an iron-bound class, and every one who knows and loves
God is a true Brahmin.' And with regard to the sacrifices, he said:
'Where do the Vedas say that sacrifices make us pure? They may please,
perhaps, the angels, but they make us no better. Hence, let off these
mummeries — love God and strive to be perfect.'

"In later years these doctrines of Buddha were forgotten. Going to lands
yet unprepared for the reception of these noble truths, they came back
tainted with the foibles of these nations. Thus the Nihilists arose — a
sect whose doctrine it was that the whole universe, God and soul, had no
basis, but that everything is continually changing. They believed in
nothing but the enjoyment of the moment, which eventually resulted in
the most revolting orgies. That, however, is not the doctrine of Buddha,
but a horrible degeneration of it, and honor to the Hindoo nation, who
stood up and drove it out.

"Every one of Buddha's teachings is founded in the Vedantas. He was one
of those monks who wanted to bring out the truths, hidden in those books
and in the forest monasteries. I do not believe that the world is ready
for them even now; it still wants those lower religions, which teach of
a personal God. Because of this, the original Buddhism could not hold
the popular mind, until it took up the modifications, which were
reflected back from Thibet and the Tartars. Original Buddhism was not at
all nihilistic. It was but an attempt to combat cast and priestcraft; it
was the first in the world to stand as champion of the dumb animals, the
first to break down the caste, standing between man and man."

Swami Vivekananda concluded his lecture with the presentation of a few
pictures from the life of Buddha, the 'great one, who never thought a
thought and never performed a deed except for the good of others; who
had the greatest intellect and heart, taking in all mankind and all the
animals, all embracing, ready to give up his life for the highest angels
as well as for the lowest worm." He first showed how Buddha, for the
purpose of saving a herd of sheep, intended for a king's sacrifice, had
thrown himself upon the altar, and thus accomplished his purpose. He
next pictured how the great prophet had parted from his wife and baby at
the cry of suffering mankind, and how, lastly, after his teachings had
been universally accepted in India, he accepted the invitation of a
despised Pariah, who dined him on swine's flesh, from the effects of
which he died.

</div>
