---
title: INDIA'S GIFT TO THE WORLD

---
<div>

[←](true_buddhism.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](child_widows_of_india.htm)

  

## INDIA'S GIFT TO THE WORLD

(*Brooklyn Standard Union*, February 27, 1895)

Swami Vivekananda, the Hindoo monk, delivered a lecture Monday night
under the auspices of the Brooklyn Ethical Association before a fairly
large audience at the hall of the Long Island Historical Society, corner
Pierrepont and Clinton streets. His subject was "India's Gift to the
World".

He spoke of the wondrous beauties of his native land, "where stood the
earliest cradle of ethics, arts, sciences, and literature, and the
integrity of whose sons and the virtue of whose daughters have been sung
by all travelers." Then the lecturer showed in rapid details, what India
has given to the world.

"In religion," he said, "she has exerted a great influence on
Christianity, as the very teachings of Christ would \[could\] be traced
back to those of Buddha." He showed by quotations from the works of
European and American scientists the many points of similarity between
Buddha and Christ. The latter's birth, his seclusion from the world, the
number of his apostles, and the very ethics of his teachings are the
same as those of Buddha, living many hundred years before him.

"Is it mere chance," the lecturer asked, "or was Buddha's religion but
the foreshadowing of that of Christ? The majority of your thinkers seem
to be satisfied in the latter explanation, but there are some bold
enough to say that Christianity is the direct offspring of Buddhism just
as the earliest heresy in the Christian religion — the Monecian
\[Manichaean\] heresy — is now universally regarded as the teaching of a
sect of Buddhists. But there is more evidence that Christianity is
founded in Buddhism. We find it in recently discovered inscriptions from
the reign of Emperor Oshoka \[Asoka\] of India, about 300 B.C., who made
treaties with all the Grecian kings, and whose missionaries
discriminated \[disseminated ?\] in those very parts, where, centuries
after, Christianity flourished, the principles of the Buddhistic
religion. Thus it is explained, why you have our doctrine of trinity, of
incarnation of God, and of our ethics, and why the service in our
temples is so much alike to that in your present Catholic churches, from
the mass to the chant and benediction. Buddhism had all these long
before you. Now use your own judgment on these premise — we Hindoos
stand ready to be convinced that yours is the earlier religion, although
we had ours some three hundred years before yours was even thought of.

"The same holds good with respect to sciences. India has given to
antiquity the earliest scientifical physicians, and, according to Sir
William Hunter, she has even contributed to modern medical science by
the discovery of various chemicals and by teaching you how to reform
misshapen ears and noses. Even more it has done in mathematics, for
algebra, geometry, astronomy, and the triumph of modern science — mixed
mathematics — were all invented in India, just so much as the ten
numerals, the very cornerstone of all present civilization, were
discovered in India, and are in reality, Sanskrit words.

"In philosophy we are even now head and shoulders above any other
nation, as Schopenhauer, the great German philosopher, has confessed. In
music India gave to the world her system of notation, with the seven
cardinal notes and the diatonic scale, all of which we enjoyed as early
as 350 B.C., while it came to Europe only in the eleventh century. In
philology, our Sanskrit language is now universally acknowledged to be
the foundation of all European languages, which, in fact, are nothing
but jargonized Sanskrit.

"In literature, our epics and poems and dramas rank as high as those of
any language; our 'Shaguntala' \[*Shakuntala*\] was summarized by
Germany's greatest poet, as 'heaven and earth united'. India has given
to the world the fables of Aesop, which were copied by Aesop from an old
Sanskrit book; it has given the Arabian Nights, yes, even the story of
Cinderella and the Bean Stalks. In manufacture, India was the first to
make cotton and purple \[dye\], it was proficient in all works of
jewelry, and the very word 'sugar', as well as the article itself, is
the product of India. Lastly she has invented the game of chess and the
cards and the dice. So great, in fact, was the superiority of India in
every respect, that it drew to her borders the hungry cohorts of Europe,
and thereby indirectly brought about the discovery of America.

"And now, what has the world given to India in return for all that?
Nothing but nullification \[vilification\] and curse and contempt. The
world waded in her children's life-blood, it reduced India to poverty
and her sons and daughters to slavery, and now it adds insult to injury
by preaching to her a religion which can only thrive on the destruction
of every other religion. But India is not afraid. It does not beg for
mercy at the hands of any nation. Our only fault is that we cannot:
fight to conquer; but we trust in the eternity of truth. India's message
to the world is first of all, her blessing; she is returning good for
the evil which is done her, and thus she puts into execution this noble
idea, which had its origin in India. Lastly, India's message is, that
calm goodness, patience and gentleness will ultimately triumph. For
where are the Greeks, the onetime masters of the earth? They are gone.
Where are the Romans, at the tramp of whose cohorts the world trembled?
Passed away. Where are the Arabs, who in fifty years had carried their
banners from the Atlantic to the Pacific? and where are the Spaniards,
the cruel murderers of millions of men? Both races are nearly extinct;
but thanks to the morality of her children, the kinder race will never
perish, and she will yet see the hour of her triumph."

At the close of the lecture, which was warmly applauded, Swami
Vivekananda answered a number of questions in regard to the customs of
India. He denied positively the truth of the statement published in
yesterday's \[February 25\] *Standard Union*, to the effect that widows
are ill-treated in India. The law guarantees her not only her own
property, before marriage, but also all she received from her husband,
at whose death, if there be no direct heirs, the property goes to her.
Widows seldom marry in India, because of the scarcity of men. He also
stated that the self-sacrifices of wives at the death of their husbands
as well as the fanatical self-destruction under the wheels of the
Juggernaut, have wholly stopped, and referred his hearers for proof to
Sir William Hunter's "History of the Indian Empire".

</div>
