---
title: SOME CUSTOMS OF THE HINDUS

---
<div>

[←](child_widows_of_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](../volume_2_contents.htm) / [Reports in American
Newspapers](reports_in_american_newspapers_contents.htm)
/ [→](../../volume_3/lectures_and_discourses/unity_the_goal_of_religion.htm)

  

## SOME CUSTOMS OF THE HINDUS

(*Brooklyn Standard Union*, April 8, 1895)

A special meeting of the Brooklyn Ethical Association with an address by
Swami Vivekananda, the Hindu monk as the main feature, was held at the
Pouch Gallery, of Clinton avenue, last night. "Some customs of the
Hindus what they mean, and how they are misinterpreted," was the subject
treated. A large throng of people filled the spacious gallery.

Dressed in his Oriental costume, his eyes bright, and a flush mantling
his face, Swami Vivekananda started to tell of his people, of his
country, and its customs. He desired only that justice be shown to him
and to his. In the beginning of his discourse he said he would give a
general idea of India. He said it was not a country but a continent;
that erroneous ideas had been promulgated by travellers who had never
seen the country. He said that there were nine separate languages spoken
and over 100 different dialects. He spoke severely of those who wrote
about his country, and said their brains were addled by superstition,
and that they had an idea that everyone outside of the pale of their own
religion was a horrible blackguard. One of the customs that had often
been misinterpreted was the brushing of the teeth by the Hindus. They
never put hair or skin in their mouths, but use a plant. "Hence a man
wrote," said the speaker, "that the Hindus get up early in the morning
and swallow a plant." He said the \[custom of widows throwing themselves
under the\] car of juggernaut did not exist, never had, and that no one
knew how such a story started.

Swami Vivekananda's talk on caste was most comprehensive and
interesting. He said it was not a granted \[graded\] system of classes,
but that each caste thought itself to be superior to all the others. He
said it was a trade guild and not a religious institution. He said that
it had been in existence from time immemorial, and explained how at
first only certain rights were hereditary, but how afterward the ties
were bound closer, and intermarriage and eating and drinking were
restricted to each caste.

The speaker told of the effect that the mere presence of a Christian or
Mohammedan would have on a Hindu household. He said that it was
veritable pollution for a white man to step into a Hindu's presence, and
that after receiving one outside of his religion, the Hindu always took
a bath.

The Hindu monk abused \[?\] the order of the Pariahs roundly, saying
they did all the menial work, ate carrion and were the scavengers. He
also said that the people who wrote books on India came only into
contact with these people, and not with genuine Hindus. He described the
trial of one who broke the rules of caste, and said that the only
punishment inflicted was the refusal of the particular caste to
intermarry or drink or eat with him or his children. All other ideas
were erroneous.

In explaining the defects of caste, the speaker said that in preventing
competition it produced stagnation, and completely blocked the progress
of the people. He said that in taking away brutality it stopped social
improvements. In checking competition it increased population. In its
favor, he said, were the facts that it was the only ideal of equality
and fraternity. That money had nothing to do with social standing in the
caste. All were equal. He said that the fault of all the great reformers
was that they thought caste was due only to religious representation,
instead of ascribing it to the right source, namely, the curious social
conditions. He spoke very bitterly of the attempts of the English and
Mohammedans to civilize the country by the bayonet and fire and sword.
He said that to abolish caste one must change the social conditions
completely ant destroy the entire economic system of the country.
Better, he said, that the waves of the \[Bay of\] Bengal flow and drown
all rather than this. English civilization was composed of the three
"B's" — Bible, bayonet, and brandy. "That is civilization, and it has
been carried to such an extent that the average income of a Hindu is 50
cents a month. Russia is outside, saying. 'Let's civilize a little,' and
England goes on and on."

The monk grew excited as he walked up and down, talking rapidly about
the way the Hindus had been treated. He scored the foreign educated
Hindus, and described their return to their native land, "full of
champagne and new ideas". He said that child-marriage was bad, because
the West said so, and that the mother-in-law could torture her
daughter-in-law with impunity, as the son could not interfere. He said
that the foreigners took every opportunity to abuse the heathen, because
they had so many evils of their own that they wanted to cover them up.
He said that each nation must work out its own salvation, and that no
one else could solve its problems.

In speaking of India's benefactors he asked whether America had ever
heard of David Herr \[Hare\], who established the first college for
women, and who had devoted so much of his life to education.

The speaker gave a number of Indian proverbs that were not at all
complimentary to the English. In closing he made an earnest appeal for
his land. He said:

"It matters not as long as India is true to herself and to her religion.
But a blow has been struck at her heart by this awful godless West when
she sends hypocrisy and atheism into her midst. Instead of sending
bushels of abuses, carloads of vituperation and shiploads of
condemnations, let an endless stream of love go forth. Let us all be
men"

</div>
