+++
title = "The journey to Kashi"

+++
Since the Atman, which merely watches, is poised to cast away its
sharIra and the old corpses shall lie on the path of no return, as
though marked by the dance of sharva, we shall narrate those old events
that we shall probably never get to talk of, once we walk ahead on the
path. The tale of the yogi prince of Shri Lanka who was offered putrid
food by the Dakini in the house of pleasure in bhArata came to our mind.
Also the dyadic fate of yayAti presented itself. After the enjoyment of
pleasures on earth and svarga one may fall head long from the lokas, as
the purANas talk of the meteoric crash of an individual who has
exhausted his puNya.

The year before the Great Transition our ruffianly band decided to
journey via a torturous path to the city of kAlabhairava, where the
fierce emanation of rudra finally stopped after having slain vishvaksena
and drunk the blood of the great Triple-strider. On that journey were
the following individuals many of whom are receding from the recesses of
our ken : 1) The boisterous mithilan (M). He was one who knew the
intricacies of NIA languages that could save us in the hostile belt of
the degenerate Aryavarta. Though an year younger was the leader of the
grAma. 2) There was the mean kabandhamukha (K). An intelligent and
learned soul but given to malicious comments. 3) saMjaya, a cultured
soul, especially given his roots in the acrid bogs of the land. 4) There
was also vaishya jyotisha, whose company we enjoyed under clear skies.
5) There was ST who was then pleasing to the eyes, ears and mouth. 6)
There was R, the nityAshrI of the kalashajas. 7) There Igul, the cow
amongst the descendents of bhAlandana.

When we arrived in the city of the awful bhairava, K was struck by the
very darts of mahAkAla via the food. We thought he might attain mokSha
rather soon on the banks of the holy jAhnAvI. But he somehow survived
only to form an alliance against me with my dviShantaM bhrAtR^ivya. Due
to the enterprise of M we translocated to a remarkably desolate spot in
the Doab some distance away from Varanasipura. We were the only humans
there for few kilometeres it appeared- a surprising thing for the most
densely populated part of the world.

There under the sky dome we saw the stars and I picked the thousands of
stars of omega Centauri with my occular. We feasted on STâ€™s cullinary
endeavors. Many years later, lacking food, we transcended hunger to see
the same sights on the great lake of mlechChapura.
