+++
title = "RV 8.41.1"

+++
The remoteness of the era of the veda, those oldest words of our Aryan
ancestors, are hardly grasped without deep consideration. This indeed is
a testimony of the great age of the veda, so hoary that its usages
remained mysterious to most brahmins of the ages and upstart indologists
of the modern era. Even the learned sAyaNa of the mideaval Andhra
country remained clueless on some such matters. So when one grasps an
obscure mantra of the R^igveda the feeling is profound. One such is the
spell of varuNa and the maruts composed by the hoary kANva in the
peculiar mahApankti meter of the form (8,8,8/8,8,8); if one is favored
by it the bhrAtR^ivyas are slain.

asmA U Shu prabhUtaye : varuNAya marudbhyo : .arcA viduShTarebhyaH /  
yo dhiitA mAnuShANAM : pashvo gA iva rakShati : nabhantAm anyake same //

The verse though simple is simple misunderstood and mistranslated by
most (for example the ridiculous translations of the Germans Grassmann
and Geldner as also sAyaNa’s incorrect idea).  
Herr Grassmann : Ihm der der Menschen Regungen wie Rinderherden wohl
bewacht.  
Herr Geldner: Der die Gedanken der Menschen bewacht wie der Hirt die
Herdentiere.  
Mr. Griffith: This Varuna who guardeth well the thoughts of men like
herds of kine.

What they do not realize is that the verb rakShati has two meanings : 1)
protect 2) To keep watch. The second meaning is critical to correctly
understand this mantra. Its prayoga can be successful only with this
latter meaning taken into account.
