+++
title = "mayurashikhA"

+++
om senApataye namaH [![Posted by
Hello](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/pbh.gif)](http://www.hello.com/)

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/400/kumara.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/640/kumara.jpg)

aiM huM kShuM klIM kumArAya namaH //  
oM shrIM e i u na shrIM rIM kumArAya namaH //  
We worship the awful skanda praised by in the most glorious of secret
tantras, embraced by the beautiful ShaShThi and holding a cock-banner, a
shakti, a vajra and a trishula.

The most secret vidyAs of the great god kumAra are revealed in the
saMhitAs of the skanda yAmala also known as the senApati yAmala. Having
worshipped the goddess chatushpatha niketA, the dreadful lohitAyani, and
mahAmayUrI, and then having propitiated skandApasmara, shishu and the
goat-head bhadrashAkha I shall narrate the lineage of transmission of
this vidyA:

1\) tejodhAman saw the senApatiâ€™s saMhitAs, 2) from him pR^ithushiras 3)
from him to samadR^isha 4) from him to vishvabhuk 5) from him to
viShavalayagola 6) from him to the great bhairava 7) from him to his
wife bhairavI 8) from her to vishAkha 9) from him to ku\~njaramukha the
elephant-faced one 10) from him to sambhadra 11) from him to vIrabhadra
12) from him to ugrachaNDa 13) from him to mahendra 14) from him to
chandrArkavAyumuni 15) from him to manugaNa 16) and from him to the
world.

The great saMhitAs of the senApati are: 1) gauhAsphandA 2) the
analakAntha 3) viShachChadA 4) shaishava 5) the glorious mayUrashikhA 6)
ramanodbhava 7) varada 8) lIlotpatamAlikA.

The deity shall be mediated upon in the 6-fold yantra with the door-ways
guarded by the goddess chatushpatha niketA, lohitAkShi, lohitAyani and
vetAlojanani.  
oM chatushpatha-niketAyai namaH //
