+++
title = "Big science and grant-driven science and how discoveries are made"

+++
When we were young some we had made some scientific discoveries that we
described to the elders around us. They were unable to make any sense of
it but had an intuitive feel that there might be something to our
blabberings; so they carted us to some professional scientists who were
supposed to understand such things. Their knowledge on the matter was
insufficient to understand what we narrated them; however, they
interpreted our explorations as the possibility of the beginnings of a
proto-scientific fascination in us. So as well-meaning adults they
decided to give us a general lecture before sending us off. We heard
attentively. They said that we, in our childish fantasy, were looking at
extremely disparate or unconnected systems and that our observations
purporting to be fundamental, unifying findings were a mark of someone
who really did not get the scientific process. It was all about focusing
on a controlled model system and understanding it deeply by asking
structured questions, constructing models and testing those models they
said. Further they added that you do not just make fundamental
discoveries about well-understood things like biological evolution by
taking a bunch of data generated by various different people and looking
at it with your intuition: as though the people who actually generated
the data could not have seen what you have. At the conclusion of the
lecture our elders felt we were blabbering after all and let us to our
own devices. This was not the first time we were to hear such things in
life. When we reached the shores of the mlechCha-land we were again told
about focusing on one problem (the word focus being repeated many a
time). To this the mlechCha-s added buzzwords like “thinking big”; “the
one clever experiment”; “big science”; “million dollar grants”; “a
structured grant explaining what you will do in the next 3 or 5 years”.
It was even considered a fulfilling and important exercise for a
starting graduate student to write a mock grant that would describe a
series of experiments on a hypothetical model worth a PhD of lab work.
By this time we had well realized that we were after all not this kind
of scientist and brushed all this aside to pursue our own course in
science with like-minded colleagues. Nevertheless, all these
life-experiences had taught us something about the way scientific
discovery happens and how the process is widely misunderstood. We
meander through some of this below

The Jewish philosopher Popper suggested that the development of science
resembles evolution by selective processes (e.g. biological evolution):
When a problem situation (PS1) is encountered several tentative theories
(TT1..n) are proposed to explain. These TT1..n are subject to
falsification i.e. tested to see if they can produce explanations for
all the facts concerning PS1. Popper called this the error elimination
(EE1) step. Then new observations might produce a new problem situation
PS2 that challenge the theory (Ti) which survived EE1 and the process
iteratively continues –  
`  PS1-> [TT1..n]-|EE1|->Ti-[new observations]->PS2
^----------------------------------------------' `

As a classic illustration of this problem people often cite the
development of modern physics. The need to explain the heliocentric
nature of the solar system, gravitational acceleration of objects
falling to earth \[PS1\] and the like eventually led to classical
mechanics \[Ti\] with EE1 being performed by Galileo, Kepler and Newton.
This theory explained most observations of the age well and gave good
predictions for orbits of planets, existence of new planets (Neptune)
and several other problems in physics. However, the new observation on
the excess precession of the orbit of Mercury resulted in a problem
\[PS2\] that was beyond Ti. This lead to new theories and their testing
that culminated in relativistic physics overthrowing classical physics.

Another Jewish philosopher Kuhn captured the inherent cyclicity of this
process, in addition to better describing the actual development of
science in real terms: He proposed that the development of science
proceeds via three steps namely: 1) the pre-paradigm stage where there
are several equal competing paradigms with one of them eventually
emerging as better than the rest. One can map this to Ti coming out of
the EE1 process of Popper. 2) the ‘normal science’ stage where all
pertinent scientific discoveries explored in implications of the
established paradigm: in this stage new observations are explained
according to the existing paradigm, and Kuhn importantly proposes that
findings failing to conform to that paradigm are not taken as
falsifications of the paradigm (unlike Popper). Rather they are treated
as deviations resulting from improper experiments or errors by the
scientist or incorrect understanding of the predictions of the paradigm
rather than a falsification of the paradigm itself. 3) The revolutionary
stage: accumulation of problematic observations results in a crisis
because the existing paradigm cannot explain several independent, and/or
reproducible observations that can no longer be swept under the carpet
as researcher errors. This results in a loop back to the first stage
with new alternative paradigms competing to explain the process.

Thus, Kuhn captures the actual tension, better than Popper, well-known
to a practicing scientist in differentiating between results that
actually go against the established paradigm as opposed to being some
problem with the research itself . Around the time we studied these
Jewish philosophers, we also studied the great Kashmirian atharvavedin,
bhaTTa jayanta, who laid out the Hindu method of science. In discussing
how a siddhAnta (paradigm) is established the nyAya-vaisheShika
tradition explains that for every upapatti (observed phenomenon) one
develops a kalpanA (a tentative theory), which is tested (nIrNIta) for
its ability to explain the facts or observed phenomena and its
non-violation of other established observations and valid
generalizations. When rival hypothesis are being considered the proposal
of a vinigamaka (test) that decided their validity is critical. The
absence of testability (vinigamanAviraha) makes them worthless for
consideration. Of course the Hindus also incorporated the consideration
of kalpanA-lAghava versus kalpanA-gaurava (i.e. known in the west as
Occam’s razor) in choosing between two valid hypothesis. Such is the
thinking laid out by vAtsyAnana the vaisheShika thinker and expanded by
jayanta \[In modern times these principles underlying the Hindu
scientific process were first brought to light by brajendranAth seal in
his 1915 PhD thesis. He was a Hindu scholar who could be both remarkably
insightful and tragically confused at the same time but this does
detract from his original work on the science of the Hindus\].

The parallels between our old thinkers on the structure of the
scientific method and the discourse on its dynamics offered by Popper
and Kuhn suggested that there was something deeper with regard to the
apparent convergence of these formulations. These further piqued our
interest in about something we were seeking to understanding: what is
the most productive and critical facet among all the processes proposed
to comprise science and how do they actually play out? Importantly, we
quickly realized that the answer to this closely related to the fact
that what we call science is an activity of a particular species of
great apes; hence, we cannot take out the ape from science. This is
indeed what is missing in the older formulations described above. In
line with our life-experiences alluded to above we decided that science
itself is hence a topic of ethological study, much like observations on
the behavior of a macaque, a baboon or any other primate. When we first
announced this at a conference for communication in science, the fellow
mlechCha-s were aghast – the reaction was as though something really
terrible had been had been said – it had touched a raw nerve – they
truly felt as though Snowden had revealed NSA secrets.

Hence, it is important to study and understand the ways of the ape that
does science (i.e. the scientist). From an early age we realized that
the sense of how science actually works might be gleaned, to an extent,
from the biographies and autobiographies of scientists. Indeed our
father asked us in our childhood to explore the biographies of a 100
yavana and white scientists. We found that some others who engaged in
similar exercises got wrong messages from them: They thought that the
struggle between science and the pretonmAda that played out in the West
was something universal and started tilting against their own traditions
much like the legendary Don Quixote launching a crusade on a windmill.
We saw such a gentleman during our peregrinations in bhagAnagari, for
whom science was merely a badge for his anti-traditional activism.
Others tried to recreate and yearn for the cultural scaffold within
which the white scientists acted, in part because they had no knowledge
or access to the biographies of yavana or Hindu scientists. In the
context of autobiographies we would recommend the recent writings of E.
O. Wilson – he captures for a young reader many of the essential
elements of the process of doing science very well and in simple
language. The study of the biographies reveals certain features: 1)
there are common behavioral traits across a vast swath of scientists
despite their apparent differences in individual ability and
religio-cultural background. 2) despite these commonalities between the
humble lay and the aristocrats among the scientists, the big effect of
rare individuals, of the colossal scientists is of central importance in
a field, i.e. rare individuals are much more important to a field than
even the cumulative effort of a large number of lesser scientists \[this
is despite the fact that the whole edifice might require those lesser
individuals to carry stones to construct it in totality\]. 3) Most
importantly, not all scientists are the same: there are several distinct
varieties of them and there might be even a difference between ethnic
groups in terms of the propensity to produce certain kinds \[this is
over and beyond the well-known difference between ethnic groups in
producing any science in the first place\].

In terms of the first point those who are scientists can recognize
comparable traits among others and feel a certain resonance with them.
This suggests that there is something deeper in terms of the neural
basis of doing science that goes over and beyond intelligence as
measured by ‘g’. The second point is of greater interest in this
context. It is best explained by using the analogy of equivalent figures
in military/political history: A Chingiz Kha’Khan has enormously greater
impact than a whole string of capable yet lesser rated Khans from the
rise of the Huns under Motun-tegin to the Khitan. This effect can also
be observed rather palpably in mathematics where raw ‘g’ makes a huge
difference – this might be illustrated by shrInivAsa rAmAnujan who was
of such enormous impact that the work he produced in a short while has
kept extremely competent (i.e. high IQ mathematicians) engaged for of a
long time and will continue to do so in the immediate future. Indeed,
effects of such giant mathematicians clearly washes into science when
they chose to do it – the oversized imprint of Newton, Laplace and Gauss
does not stop at mathematics but also extends to science, of which they
were vigorous practitioners. Such colossi were not restricted to
physics; similar virtuoso efforts were also seen in chemistry in the
form of Pauling and in biology in the form of Haldane. One could come
around say they were merely expressing their mathematical abilities in
science. We do not think so – while both Pauling and Haldane were first
rate in their quantitative abilities (the latter would have been a
mathematician if not a biologist), their true virtuosity lay in their
formulation of theories and approaches that lay well beyond the
cumulative efforts of the lay. Moreover they were also “allrounders” who
could bat and bowl in many ways on any pitch (something we will take up
further below). But In our opinion such colossi could also arise among
non-mathematical types of scientists as illustrated by Charles Darwin.
This ability to be a non-mathematical scientist yet make important
contributions was illustrated in the west by Immanuel Kant who proposed
profound hypotheses on the origin of the solar system and tidal
reduction of earth’s rotational speed. At a more basic level we feel
this distinction of mathematical versus non-mathematical scientists is
artefact of Western scientific tradition which give a fundamental place
for quantitative descriptions (a result of their interpretation of
yavana tradition) as opposed to a more flexible symbolic description of
which the quantitative description is just one version; Hindu thought
tends to be more flexible in the symbolic descriptions it
utilizes.Beyond doubt a certain threshold ‘g’ is required for being that
colossus. Our estimates suggest that an IQ of about 138-140 is the
minimum for being a scientist who offers fundamentally new insights; so
a colossus is certainly likely to have an IQ greater than that
threshold. However, it is critical to note that just greater IQ beyond
that range does not translate into a colossus. He has something
different from ‘g’, abilities which might be similar to synesthesia or
the synesthetic potential that are seen in other types of creative
individuals like poets and artists. It is not for nothing that the old
Hindus tended to call their proto-scientist kavi-s. Conversely,
kShemendra mentions the qualifications of a kavi that parallel those of
a scientist. Wilson too notes this relationship quite well in his book
mentioned above.That is also related why certain substance-users (e.g.
Kary Mullis) experience scientific insights inaccessible to the rest
(note LSD was originally marketed as a compound scientists could use to
obtain insights).

Coming to the third point we can identify several archetypes among
scientists. It is important to stress the word archetype because a given
scientist it typically a superposition of multiple archetypes although,
apart from the great allrounders, most have one archetypes dominate in
them. Even among allrounders many often transit through dominance
different archetypes in different stages of their life time. Here we
must mention that E. O. Wilson in his book also alludes to something
related to this in a general sense, but what we describe here is our own
independent conception. In greater detail these archetypes include:

1)The explorer-collector: This archetype is often associated with the
beginnings of a scientific process process and is the foundation on
which new science is developed. These individuals collect foundational
observations, or explore new frontiers for interesting phenomena, or
simply create the catalog of objects, facts or abstractions that in the
future help formulation in the first place of what in the Popperian
sense would be tentative theories. These individuals typically have a
strong “eye” or “sense” for finding something new or an urge to explorer
unknown domains physically or abstractly. They may not always understand
what their observations or collections mean. To illustrate with examples
– Alexander von Humboldt is a classic case of the explorer-collector who
amassed a vast array of facts that were to help found several lines of
scientific inquiry. In astronomy this type is particularly important –
Tycho Brahe with his untiring observations of Saturn and Mars, Galileo,
and [Wilhelm, Caroline and John
Herschel](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/07/05/friedrich-wilhelm-herschels-clan/)
in their quest for new deep sky objects (incidentally discovering
Uranus) fit this archetype well. This archetype played an important role
in the origin of modern chemistry in the form of the discoverers of
elements like Karl Scheele. Wallace was a notable example of this
archetype who was critical for the development of biology. The scientist
of this archetype likes to “go out there and look” and they typically
have hunches that guide them in being successful in the hunt but they do
not know what they are going to find. Outside of science, this archetype
is also seen in mathematics where it is of considerable importance. The
circum-calculus explorers of polynomial curves in Western science are
examples of such. We would also consider rAmAnujan as an epitome of this
archetype in mathematics. In science the core Germanic people have been
great exponents of this archetype.

2)The ontologist-synthesizer: This archetype in essence tries to find
order in all the data accumulated by the prior scientific process,
typically by workers of the above archetype. They define the categories
into which the observations will be classified, the relationships
between the categories and the predictions that can be made based on the
classification. Some versions of this archetype bring together disparate
fields of knowledge and place them in unified explanatory frameworks.
This archetype has played an important complementary role to those of
the above category in astronomy and might be illustrated by [Johannes
Kepler](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/08/14/johannes-kepler/),
who took the work of Tycho Brahe and systematized it by formulating
Kepler’s laws. In astronomy this has also involved individuals who labor
somewhat like the above category in classifying the initial
observations. The best example being “Pickering’s harem” comprised of
the women Williamina Fleming, Annie Cannon, Henrietta Leavitt and
Antonia Maury who classified thousands of stars according to spectral
type and variability. This first level classification effort gave rise
to a deeper ontology central to stellar astronomy in the form of the
Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. In biology Karl von Linne played such a
role which down the line helped in the development of the evolutionary
theory. In the history of chemistry one such ontology was the turning
point of the science itself – the conception of the periodic table by
Dimitri Mendeleev. Hindus in the past tended to produce good
representatives of this archetype and indeed produced some of the first
formal classifications in science such as those of living organisms,
chemical substances and clouds. Their activities in this direction in
linguistics and phonetics were critical for their foundations and
extended to other domains of knowledge such music (e.g.
ve\~NkaTa-makhin’s melakarta system of south Indian rAga-s). The Hindu
phonetic ontology transmitted by Böhtlingk to Mendeleev inspired the
latter in development of the periodic table \[In our own life we were
greatly inspired by Mendeleev’s table and its Hindu inspiration\].

3\) The conceptualist: This archetype contains those who produce a new
theory or discover a new law that explains the order discerned by the
ontologist-synthesizer or the observations amassed by the
explorer-collector. They differ from the ontologist-synthesizer in that
they are able to explain the ontology developed by the former in terms
of more basic principles – i.e. they try to explain why the ontology
exists in the first place. Astronomy provides a great example of this
progression: The early spectroscopists down to Pickering systematically
collected stellar spectra (the explorer-collector) which was then
classified by Pickering’s harem (the Harvard classification). This in
turn led to an intuition regarding the relationship between the spectral
type and surface temperature (the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram). But the
fundamental explanation of the H-R diagram arose due to Meghnad Saha
applying the idea of the dissociation of ionic molecules to atomic
ionization in stellar atmospheres to account for the spectrum
characteristic of the star. Conceptualists have played a central role in
the development of physics. The explorer-collectors had discovered and
collected disparate phenomena such as the remarkable Dulong–Petit law of
the specific heat of a crystalline solid (an ontology), photoelectric
effect and the black-body radiation. With fundamentally new concepts
unavailable to classical physics Max Planck and Albert Einstein were
able explain these phenomena. After gathering and classifying data in
the explorer-collector phase of their lives, Darwin and Wallace were
finally able explain the Linnean ontology which encompassed biology by a
more fundamental principle, i.e. that of natural selection.

4\) The symbolist: We distinguish this archetype from the
ontologist-synthesizer in that it is characterized by those who create a
new symbolic language to describe the science or a formalism that can
reproduce the existing system or ontology. Thus, they do not produce the
ontology in the first place but the symbols developed by them might
represent it much better or more rigorously. Such individuals are
typically characterized by high IQ and tend to use symbolic systems like
mathematics or computation. This has again been important in physics
–Erwin Schrödinger use of wave functions in quantum mechanism resulted
in a revolution that was to change the language of quantum physics from
that point on. In some cases such symbolism’s primary function is to
introduce a rigorous formalism for a system: Dirac’s presentation of
quantum mechanism using the bra and ket vectors is brilliant example of
this. Similarly, in biology the use of diffusion equations in genetics
by Mootoo Kimura resulted in the emergence of the neutral theory, which
was a major shift in the understanding of evolution at the molecular
level. One of the earliest examples of a symbolist was the bhArgava
pANini who introduced a system for the linguistic description of
saMskR^ita, which has echoes in modern symbolism in computer science
such as description of programing languages.

5\) The technician: This archetype is characterized by the ability to
perform technically demanding tasks, often with the use of hands and
eyes, or more simply by the ability to put in long hours of labor, focus
and concentration. This is critical for generating data on which the
rest of the science is based, much like the explorer-collector; however,
it is distinguished from that one in that the representative of this
archetype does not find anything fundamentally new as much as perform
difficult to do technical tasks that might lead to testing hypothesis or
the eventual discovery of something new. This class is dominated by the
experimentalists who have been critical in all the sciences. In physics
examples such as Michelson and Morley whose experiments falsified the
presence of aether might be mentioned among many others. In biology
several anatomists fall in this class and so also most players in modern
molecular biology. In particular we would cite the the example of the
discoverers of the remarkable Restriction-Modification systems like
Werner Arber and Hamilton Smith as such virtuosi of the technician
archetype. The beginnings of genomics would have been literally setback
without the hands of Hamilton Smith. In modern times chIna-s and korea-s
have produced numerous exemplars of this archetype.

6\) The inventors: This archetype includes individuals who make new
devices or methods to ease scientific investigation or make new
discoveries. The whole history of science has been contingent on
inventions that augment the basic sensory capacities of the ape. Not all
inventors are good at making discoveries – their skill is primarily in
creating the method or device. Thus, they are to be distinguished from
the explorer-collector archetype. For example the German inventor Johann
Lippershey made the telescope but hardly discovered anything using it.
This had to wait till Galileo, who was also bit of an inventor in that
he considerably improved the telescope and used it to discover new
things. The making of better telescopes by Huygens and Herschel was
instrumental in their discoveries. Biology has likewise gone hand in
hand with the microscope – the invention of a primitive microscope by
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek played an epic role in founding modern biology.
More recently the invention of the electron microscope played a
comparable role in taking biology forward. Similarly development of
methods like PCR by Kary Mullis resulted in a huge haul of new
discoveries even though Mullis himself did not make any of those
discoveries.

Propensity for these archetypes also show sex-specific differences:
Women are infrequent in all categories except 5 where in certain types
of actions they might be more common than men. Women can also be capable
in certain aspects of 1 and 2 especially in sciences such as cognitive
science and astronomy. This stems from the biological difference in the
two sexes rather than what liberals believe to be due to differential
attention to the education of the sexes.

The recognition of these archetypes and the fact that there is a
predominance of one or few of them in a given scientist suggests that
there is more to the process than the purely mechanistic descriptions of
Popper and \[to a lesser extent\] Kuhn. However, this does not seem to
be understood by the dominant movements in modern science management,
which might be described as “Big science” and “grant-driven science”.
The former is the disproportionate focus on big scientific projects that
involved a large collaborative or multi-investigator efforts on certain
areas which are deemed “sexy” or “hot” by general perception more often
than logic. Of course some of these efforts like the Higgs boson quest
in physics are entirely warranted. However, many others, especially in
biology are rather ill-conceived. Importantly, in many cases it collects
most resources with a few big power-players. Since several of these big
players have gotten big due to socio-political skills rather than
scientific virtuosity, it is not uncommon for these to have wrong or
poor ideas. Thus, by investing the bulk of the money into these
big-science ventures the system increases the chance for big negative
returns. To compound matters, just as in the case of the financial firms
which were deemed by the mlechCha government as being too big to fail
the failure of such scientific ventures is not declared openly. Instead
there is an attempt to aggressively market substandard productions as
being profoundly insightful. Thus, distributing the risks over smaller
scientific units is likely to also cut down the downside of the fall.
The “big-science” approach should be specifically limited to certain key
projects that need a large collaboration of talent and have very clear
cut objectives – thus the big projects testing fundamental issues of
physics are in this category. However, cancer or HIV research should not
be in this category and this approach has indeed resulted in the
metastasis of quite a bit of bad science.

The grant-driven science is that wherein an investigator competes with
others for patronage by writing a statement for money to the patron.
These statements have to describe in detail what he proposes to do over
several years along with monetary estimates of the costs that are going
to be incurred in the process. Such emphasis in science management
enforces a selective pressure that is counter-productive to scientists
in whom some of the above archetypes predominate. First, in the highly
competitive cash-starved, modern environment requires you to state in
advance what you will achieve with your grant. This strongly selects
against the explorer-collector archetype – if you already knew what you
would see why would you want to explore something at all. In most cases
the best yielding exploration cannot even be described systematically
beyond saying something like: “I might find something interesting once I
get on my ship and go to the Malay archipelago”. We know that some of
our colleagues realize this – they often quip Darwin or Wallace would
have never been given a grant for their endeavors; however, most of them
are unable to break free from the grant-driven system in which they are
trapped. Thus, by creating graduate students who conform to grant-driven
science the system tends to cut out explorer-collectors. Second the
grant-driven system is friendly to the inventor archetype who proposes
to invent new tools but even here it is a two-edged sword: Very often
once the tool is invented the grant-doling patron loses interest in
funding the researcher resulting in his inability to maintain the tool.
Moreover, several tools’ utility is unknown until they are used by
explorer-collectors to make discoveries. Unfortunately, as noted above
since they selected against many inventions go untested for their true
value, thereby negating the very purpose of funding them. Grant-driven
science also tends to discriminate against ontologists because they are
typically seen as not discovering anything hot and merely constructing
classifications which do not fall simply into the hypothesis-testing
mechanism which might be explained as a grant.

Grant-winning is seen as a major badge of scientific capability during
university recruitment. This unfortunately is a bad measure because the
real scientific capability is often not correlated with grant-winning.
Additionally, delicately crafting such grants with all kinds of details
in a brutally competitive environment is often a takes away time from
actually doing science. Thus, we see most investigators becoming lawyer
lookalikes who are crafting grants and doing not science themselves,
something which is left to the graduate students and post-docs. This has
encouraged the emergence of a wholly new archetype, who is no scientist
at all but a scientific manager with negotiation skills that can win
grants. Moreover the patrons tend to concentrate their cash on what are
perceived as hot research topics. This in combination with the unhealthy
turn grant-driven science has taken results in exploration of what could
be highly productive scientific areas being limited to few established
players along with a general neglect of the very act of exploratory
research. Instead it bolsters the testing on hypotheses within already
fixed paradigms. Sadly, this can be “gamed” by scientific managers to
set up and test useless models that do not add greatly to science but
look good as grants. Even more deleterious is the emergence of fake
scientists in this system who manipulate or produce false data to game
the granting system – [this is particularly rampant in the unhealthy
realm of cancer
research](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/07/13/the-fake-scientist/).

Finally, grant-driven science creates this artificial need to focus –
typically modern granting agencies in ultra-competitive environments
might punish you if you say want money to study a whole lot of things.
If you really want to study a whole lot of things you need to write
several different grants to different agencies, which as mentioned above
takes time away from doing real science. Thus, you see the emergence of
numerous myopic scientists who do not know anything beyond their own
“model” system. This malaise is particularly bad in biology where it
is not out of place to encounter a scientist (and this is from real
experience with a highly respected scientist from England) who asked us:
What is *Giardia*, is that a fungus (\!). Now this scientist by means of
inter-personal skills publishes (or rather repeats what others have
already done) high-sounding claims in what are considered respectable
journals. Now, if you do not know what *Giardia* is how can we be sure
of the claims being made which presuppose a reasonable understanding of
the diversity of eukaryotic life. Indeed, many of the great conquests
like those of the virtuosi of the last century like Haldane and Pauling,
on “battlefields” across the world of science, would be straitjacketed
by the call for focus of the kind imposed by grant-driven science.

In conclusion we believe that science and scientists would benefit from
a change in the organization of the system: The grant-driven strategy
should be restricted to a particular type of research, namely
circumscribed experiments that are for testing specific key hypotheses
wherein the test experiments have already been planned. The rest of the
vast diversity of the scientific process needs to be funded by trying
not to fit into the paradigms of grant-driven science. However, it the
topic for a [different
discussion](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/04/15/the-euro-american-academic-system-few-more-thoughts/)
which we had begun but have not yet completed.
