+++
title = "A brief note on haramiyidans and the Mesozoic radiation of the mammals"

+++
Mammals have a longer history in the “age of the dinosaurs” (Mesozoic)
than in the “age of the mammals” (Cenozoic). However, much of the
Mesozoic history of the mammals remains obscure, not in small part due
to the fact that mammals were mostly small in size and in large part
excluded from larger size ecological role in land, water, the air by
archosaurs and other reptiles. Even in typically “mammalian” roles in
many parts of the world they were excluded or limited by the notosuchid
crocodiles. Nevertheless, mammalian history in the Mesozoic is central
to understanding a large part of their evolution. Moreover, exclusion
from larger-size niches does not translate into lack of diversity among
the early mammals. The question of what is a mammal, i.e., what
distinguishes them from other basal synapsids or stem-mammals has to be
first answered before any discussion on the Mesozoic history of the
mammals. In the early days of evolutionary studies there was the
tendency to see mammals emerging via a gradual transition from reptiles.
These “reptiles” from which mammals arose were called the mammal-like
reptiles. However, in reality these were proto-mammals, no more
“reptile” than in the sense of retaining ancestral amniote features
to different degrees. As our understanding improved, these proto-mammals
were seen as basal representatives of the synapsid clade whose crown is
the mammal clade. Students of evolution have typically seen synapsids as
serially acquiring more mammal-like features on the basic amniote body
plan starting from the Carboniferous, through the Permian and the into
the Triassic eventually culminating in mammals some point before the
late Triassic. The most mammal-like of the basal synapsids form the
eucynodont clade within which mammals are nested. The major groups of
eucynodonts are: 1) the cynognathids; 2) the diademodontids and
traversodontids which comprise the diademodontoid clade; 3) the
chiniquodontids and probainognathids; 4) the tritylodontids; 5) the
trithelodontids and therioherpetontids; 6) the brasilodontids; 7) the
mammals. Even within the

There has been much contention regarding which of the above are the
closest sister groups of the mammals. Most recent studies have converged
on brasilodontids (e.g. Brasilitherium), followed by tritheledonts (e.g.
Pachygenelus) being the closest sister group of mammals, in turn
followed by the tritylodonts (e.g. Oligokyphus, Kayentatherium and
Bocatherium) and the probainognathids there after. A major clue to this
difficulty in determining the closest sister group of the mammals came
from the publication of a juvenile specimen of Probainognathus from
South America in 1994, which showed several derived features similar to
the more derived synapsids or earliest mammals like Morganucodon.
However, these derived features shared with more derived synapsids were
absent in the adults. This suggested that mammals emerged via
paedomorphism in the derived eucynodonts. This paedomorphism appears to
have been driven by the selective pressures for smaller body size and
could have occurred parallelly in multiple Triassic eucynodont groups
resulting in emergence of mammal-like features in several of them. Over
the past 25 years several morphological studies have helped define a
clear clade mammaliforms forms clearly closer to the crown mammalia,
i.e., the common ancestor of monotremes, marsupial and placentals to the
exclusion of the other eucynodonts mentioned above. Colloquially this
clade will be called mammals here. Mammals thus defined are first seen
in the late Triassic emerging even as the explosive radiation of
archosaurs and the rise of the dinosaurs among them was well underway.
Morphologically the following delineate mammals from the other
eucynodonts:  
\-A notable dentary condyle articulating with a glenoid fossa on
squamosal  
\-Features of the occipital condyles  
\-Formation of much of the side wall of the braincase by the anterior
lamina of the temporal bone  
\-Features relating to the foramina for the maxillar and mandibular
branches of the trigeminal nerve  
\-Several features of the brain case in the region proximal to the ear

Based on the presence of these shared features several groups of the
Mesozoic mammals can be recognized:  
[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-oLb2D1X7P5E/UhG_J4YiPaI/AAAAAAAACuM/g3ssHEC5e04/s640/mammal_evolution.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/6t1F6AdX1BZgVsDewmqYUNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)  
A slightly outdated (i.e. lack Juramaia described later by the author)
yet useful phylogenetic view of early mammal evolution by Zhe-Xi Luo.

1\) Morganucodonts: One of the earliest mammal groups with fossils from
the late Triassic itself and surviving till Middle Jurassic.  
2\) Haramiyidans: One of the earliest mammal groups with fossils from
the late Triassic itself and surviving till Late Cretaceous, perhaps
finally becoming extinct alongside the non-avian dinosaurs.  
3\) Docodonts: One of the earliest mammal groups as suggested by
Tikitherium from late Triassic of India. Underwent a great global
Jurassic radiation including aquatic forms such as Haldanodon and the
flat-tailed platypus-like Castorocauda. They survived till at least the
end of the Early Cretaceous.  
4\) Sinoconodon: A primitive form the Early Jurassic of uncertain
affinities.  
5\) Australosphenidans: The basal-most clade of mammalia proper. They
underwent a great global Jurassic radiation with lineages such as
Shuotheriids and Asfaltomylids and in the Cretaceous gave rise to the
monotremes which today are only seen in Australia: the platypus and
echidna.  
6\) Fruitafossor: An enigmatic Late Jurassic digging mammal with
Aardvark-like dental adaptations; uncertain affinities.  
7\) Eutriconodonts: Widely radiated in Jurassic and Early Cretaceous
giving rise to numeorus insectivorous forms and also the largest
mammalian predators of the Mesozoic like Repenomamus  
8\) Volaticotherium: A gliding mammal from the Middle Jurassic with a
morphology similar to a flying squirrel.  
9\) Tinodonts: First seen in the Late Jurassic and last through the
Early Cretaceous.  
10\) Multituberculates: A great radiation of mammals first seen in the
late Jurassic and lasting past the K-Pg boundary into the Cenozoic
finally dying out around 35 Mya. They had a come back in the Paleocene
just after the great K-Pg extinction.  
11\) Spalacotheroids: A Cretaceous radiation of mammals of some
diversity that became extinct alongside the non-avian dinosaurs.  
13\) Henkelotherium and Dryolestids: Henkelotherium was late Jurassic
arboreal mammal that appears to be related to a much larger group the
dryolestids. While the dryolestids appear to have undergone a major
radiation in the Northern continents during the Jurassic, it was in the
southern continents like that they thrived till the end of the age of
the dinosaurs. Included carnivores like Foxraptor and the enigmatic
long-canined Cronopio.  
14\) Stem boreosphenidans: Forms closer to the common ancestor of
placentals and marsupials than other mammals.  
16\) Marsupials and their stem forms like Sinodelphys from the Early
Cretaceous.  
15\) Placentals and their stem forms like Juramaia from the Oxfordian
age of the Late Jurassic.

Of these the haramiyidans are of particular significance because they
are one of the earliest lineages of mammals in the fossil record. They
predate the Jurassic in their first appearance – the Jurassic being the
beginning of the great mammal radiation in which all the major mammal
lineages including the stem placentals emerged. Thus, in a sense the
Jurassic was about as important to mammals as it was for dinosaurs.
Hence, the phylogenetic position of the haramiyidans is critical to
understand the early evolution of mammals. There have been two competing
hypothesis in this regard: 1) Based on the Triassic fossils of
Haramiyavia it has been proposed that they are one of the basal-most
lineages of mammals. 2) Based on their dental morphology they have been
linked to the multituberculates within crown mammalia proper. If this
were true then the divergences within crown mammalia will be pulled back
to the Triassic. Until this point most haramiyidan fossils were
extremely fragmentary. However, they did show that the the haramiyidans
were widespread and long-lived: In the lateTriassic we have the
fragmentary skull of Haramiyavia from Eastern Greenland. In the Middle
Jurassic (Bathonian Stage) we have Sineleutherus from Siberia. In the
late Jurassic (Kimmeridigian-Tithonian) we have Allostaffia from the
famed Tendaguru beds of Tanzania. Anantharaman and Wilson described
Avashishta comprised of just an enigmatic tooth from the Late Cretaceous
(Maastrichtian) Infratrappean beds of India. These observations
suggested that the haramiyidans had attained global distribution by the
Jurassic with an extensive presence in both the Gondwanaland fragments
and the Northern continental fragments during that period. Their
Cretaceous history remains vague but they might have persisted in some
Gondwanan fragments like India till the K/Pg event.

Three new fossils, all from China add a new twist to this story, still
leaving things somewhat unclear, but adding a lot of new information on
the biology and ecology of the enigmatic haramiyidans.Two of these
fossils are haramiyidans that are among the most complete ever found: 1)
Megaconus from the Tiaojishan Formation of Inner Mongolia is dated to
around 165-164 Mya. 2) Aboroharamiya also from the Tiaojishan Formation
but from somewhat younger strata dated to around 160 Mya. The third
fossil relevant to this discussion is one of the earliest relatively
complete fossils of a multituberculate, Rugosodon also from the 160 Mya
Tiaojishan Formation strata replete with post-cranial bones and ever
fossil fur imprints.

First the new haramiyidan fossils point to a considerable morphological
diversity in the adaptations of the group. Megaconus is inferred to be
an entirely terrestrial with an ambulatory gait similar to that of the
rock hyrax. On the other hand, Arboroharamiya shows clear scansorial
adaptations suggestive of a life style in the trees similar to mammals
such as the mouse lemurs among the placentals and the tree opossums
among the marsupials. Interestingly, the earliest known placental
Juramaia, also from the same formation and age as Arboroharamiya also
shows a similar set of scansorial adaptations in its hands and feet. The
basal marsupials like Sinodelphys This suggests that the trees in the
late Jurassic were teeming with several distinct clades of mammals.
Interestingly, like the platypus and echidna Megaconus showed an
enlarged extratarsal spur with a bony base horny covering which is used
to deliver venom. Remarkably, such spurs are also found in another basal
mammal lineage the docodonts (e.g. Castorocauda) and the more
crown-wards spalacotheroids (e.g. Zhangheotherium which was eaten by the
dinosaur Sinosauropteryx). This observation suggests that the
extratarsal venom spur was probably an ancestral feature of mammals. In
monotremes this spur delivers some interesting toxins which includes a
defensin-like peptide which contains a D-amino acid. Interestingly, the
pain of the platypus venom is not alleviated by morphine. The peptidyl
amino acyl isomerase mediating this reaction is hence likely to have
been an ancestral feature of mammals and it remains to be seen if it has
some neuro-endocrine function in modern therian mammals. In monotremes
the spur is only deployed (or present) in males and venom production
increases in the mating season. This suggests that the spur primarily
evolved as an intraspecific, inter-male competition mechanism rather
than as a defensive weapon. Thus, the emergence of venom in the basal
mammals was probably either just before or concomitant with the rise of
toxicoferan lizards: Mulcahy et al’s recent estimates suggest that the
radiation of the toxicoferans also happened in the Jurassic probably in
the time window of 140-170 Mya. However, snakes and Gila monsters were
to emerge only much later within Toxicofera around 120 Mya. However, the
evidence suggests that there it originated primarily as a weapon for
inter-specific conflicts. Megaconus also emerges as one of the most
primitive mammals with fossilized fur. It shows that its coat had a
dense layer of dark guard hair and an underfur of lighter color. The
abdomen had only sparse hair with foldings on the naked skin. This
condition might have been ancestral for mammals.

In phylogenetic terms, analysis of Arboroharamiya and Rugosodon yielded
a grouping between the multituberculates and the haramiyidans. This also
resembles the tree obtained by Luo in his analysis of Fruitafossor.
Gurovich obtains a tree that places them in an extremely primitive
position with respect to all mammals along with the tritylodonts. Luo et
al propose that a more accurate position of the haramiyidans is that
obtained in their phylogenetic analysis of Megaconus, which places the
haramiyidans as one of the most primitive mammalian lineages, with only
the morganucodonts, Sinoconodon and Adelobasileus emerging as more
primitive. If this position were correct then the inferences regarding
the presence of fur, the spur and the venoms proposed above would be
close to being primitive for all mammals. However, if the haramiyidans
are dragged into the mammalian crown along with the multituberculates
then this would mean that the crown mammals were already present in the
Triassic. We feel that the more primitive position of the haramiyidans
obtained by Luo et al in their study of Megaconus is closer to reality.
The similarity between the multituberculates and the haramiyidans is
primarily dental. However, closer examination suggests that this might
be convergent. First, the molar count is different and second the
lingual offset of the last molar is different. The post-cranial skeleton
also reveals no close links to the multituberculates. A similar kind of
convergence is also possible for the enigmatic gondwanatheria which have
also been linked to multituberculates.

In conclusion, the new finds show that in someways the Jurassic world
might have not been all that unfamiliar to us, except for the non-avian
dinosaurs and aquatic reptiles. It was teeming with all kinds of mammals
including our own ancestors represented by forms like Juramaia. There
were forms scampering like lemurs up trees like Arboroharamiya. There
gliders gliding from tree to tree like Volaticotherium. There was the
platypus-like Castorocauda swimming in water bodies and hyrax-like
Megaconus jumping among the rocks. There was the rodent-like Rugosodon
feeding on seeds, even as forms like Fruitafossor might have dug the
ground like an anteater to feed on insects. Many of these were eaten by
different types of theropod dinosaurs. They could have had a rich
nocturnal life when most of the theropods were perhaps asleep.
