+++
title = "Lessons from the past: A look at the earliest Mohammedan invasions of Central Asia"

+++
First published at IndiaFacts:
<http://www.indiafacts.co.in/isis-caliphate-lessons-earliest-mohammedan-invasions-central-asia/>

By the 1000CE the Turks were already on their way to becoming the
primary spearhead of Islam against the Hindus of India, the heathen
civilizations of Central Asia, and the Christians in the West. The
Mongol conquests of Il-Khan Hülegü in West Asia put an end to the Arab
Islamic Caliphate in Baghdad. This was followed by the ascendency of the
Turkic Osman empire, at which point the power center within Islam
completely shifted from the Arab world to the Turkic world. After the
Osman Sultan Mehmet-II \[Footnote 1\] took Constantinople from the
Byzantine Christians he declared himself the Khalifeh ül-Rasul Rab
al-A’alamin, i.e. Caliph of Islam. This Osman Caliphate lasted until
the last century when it was ended by the secular movement of Mustafa
Kemal. Now, 90 years later, the Islamic Caliphate has re-emerged in its
former west Asian heartland, where it held sway prior to the Mongol
conquests under Dr. Abu Bakr, who claims descent from the same clan as
the founder of Islam. The goriness and swiftness of its advance is
comparable only to its earlier counterpart from around 1300 years ago.
One of the major thrusts of Army of Islam under the early Arab Caliphate
was in Central Asia. This came at the expense of the greater Indic
civilization and still leaves its mark on bhārata by cutting our nation
off from its natural sphere of influence, Central Asia, or what the
Hindus called uttarāpatha. Now the new Caliphate has already placed
bhārata in it cross-hairs, even as its commander, Ibrahim Awwad
al-Badri, made this clear recently. Against this backdrop it is useful
to examine the history of these earliest Islamic attacks on Central
Asia.

Within 20 years from the death of Mohammed, the founder of Islam, the
army of Islam had largely destroyed the powerful Zoroastrian empire of
the Sassanians centered in Iran. While the exact reasons for this
dramatic collapse of the Iranians before the Mohammedan charge remains
unclear, it is conceivable that the death toll from the Justinian plague
caused by a particularly virulent strain of the bacterium Yersinia
pestis greatly weakened the ability of the former to mount an effective
response. In contrast, ensconced in the desert oases the Arabs seem to
have been shielded to greater extant from the plague. The Army of Islam
made its attempts to invade inner Eurasia and central Asia starting
around 650 CE. In a quick-moving assault they pursued the Iranian Shah
Yazdegird into Khorasan (Northeastern Iran). He took refuge in the city
of Merv, where he was murdered by a Christian commoner for his
possessions. With this the curtains came down on the Zoroastrian state,
though its remnants kept fighting bravely for a while against Islam. The
city of Merv was taken by the Moslems who settled 50,000 Arab families
in therein by dispossessing the Zoroastrians of their prized properties
and farmland. Thus, they created a base for waging demographic warfare
to go hand in hand with their military objectives. Shortly after the
death of Yazdegird, his sons fled towards China, while the Arabs
launched a series of raids into the Eastern limits of the Sassanian
territory around 655CE, and crossed the Amu Darya river into central
Asia. Here, the cities such as Bukhara and Samarkand fell in their
sight, with their chief targets being the richly endowed bauddha, āstika
and Zoroastrian temples and religious sites.

This period was also one of great turmoil on other fronts: Kashmir was
going through a phase of relatively weak rulers and so was the rest of
northern India after the death of harṣavardhana. This prevented Indian
military power from being effectively projected in Central Asia. A new
power, Tibet, had emerged and was on its way to being a great power,
boosted by their first emperor Songtsen Gampo. The Chinese were
launching a massive thrust into central Asia and towards greater India
as part of the expansionist policies of the Tang emperor Gaozong
\[Footnote 2\]. Thus, the local powers in Central Asia facing various
new political vectors around them were particularly vulnerable to the
assaults of the surging Moslems. Despite this several of the small
principalities with bauddha, āstika and Zoroastrian affinities boldly
fought the Arabs preventing them from making substantial gains in the
period between 655-705 CE. Among these was śubhakara siṃha, who was the
young ruler of a kingdom in what is today Northern Afghanistan and
Southern Tajikistan. He put up a bold fight to repulse the Arab foray
into his lands \[Footnote 3\]. In 682 CE the local struggle against the
Islamic assaults was also strengthened by the resurgent heathen Gök
(Blue) Turks united by their Khan Qutlugh Eltrish, who helped repulse a
Moslem thrust towards Khwarizm and Samarkand.

Finally, in 705 CE after several failed attempts to effectively
penetrate Central Asia, the Caliphate appointed Qutayba bin Muslim as
the chieftain of Merv. This Arab warlord led a series of brutal jihads
to capture the key civilizational centers of Central Asia. The local
rulers met at Khwarizm to plan a defensive strategy but it appears they
were unable reach a proper plan for united action – it clearly seems
they lacked a proper estimate of the threat before them. By the time of
his death Qutayba had taken Bukhara, Balkh, Samarkand and other major
Khwarizmian cities in quick succession. In each of the places he
massacred part of the population and took over the best quarters of the
cities and settled Moslems brought from Arabia in those. The rest were
made to accept Mohammedanism in return for their heads remaining intact
on their shoulders. They were then drafted as “cannon fodder” for the
assault on the next city. In addition to the forced conversions, Qutayba
took every step to erase all signs of Indic and Iranic civilization in
those regions. The Moslem scientist Al-Biruni himself informs us that in
the major cities of Khwarizm Qutayba demolished huge libraries and burnt
their numerous Indic and Iranic texts. Al-Biruni also mentions that he
systematically killed all the Indic and Iranian scholars who manned
those libraries. It is of interest to note that certain Western scholars
such as the Wilhelm Barthold have claimed that these events did not
happen and tried to whitewash the violence of Qutayba. However, there
are several accounts from the Moslem sources themselves of the brutality
of Qutayba’s actions: In 706 CE as a prelude to the assault on Bukhara
he took Paikend, which was bravely defended by heathen Iranian and
Turkic fighters. He then killed all the males and took the women and
children as booty. Many were sent to the slave markets at Kufa, Basra
and Merv and it is said that the prices of Central Asian slaves fell
drastically by several dirhams. In another assault that followed at the
height of winter on the Bukhara oasis the Moslems took many captives who
refused to accept Islam; thereupon they were stripped and left to freeze
to death. In 709 CE Qutayba finally took Bukhara after much fighting.
Those who did not lose their homes were forced to house Moslems and feed
them. Then in 712 CE he demolished the main temple of Bukhara, which was
a holy site for both bauddha-s and āstika-s \[Footnote 4\]; he built a
Masjid using the material from it.

In 715CE Qutayba bin Muslim was killed in an inter-Moslem conflict for
opposing the accession of the next Caliph (As Samuel Huntington said
Islam is bloody within and without). But this did not mean that the
jihad ended in Central Asia. Rather, new Ghazis or holy warriors
volunteered from the Arab ranks to join the fight against the infidels
in Central Asia. Without military resources to face the powerful Arab
onslaught the local rulers turned to the “superpower” of the day China.
The Tang emperors saw in it an opportunity to extend their power, but
little real help to the heathens was forthcoming from those quarters.
However a few surviving Indic and Iranic scholars found shelter in the
cīna country. We know of this from the biographical account of the
famous bauddha tAntrika teacher amoghavajra who was born in 705CE in
Samarkand to a brāhmaṇa father from either prayāga or kāśī and an Iranic
mother. His father died in course of the siege of Qutayba in 715CE and
the young amoghavajra fled with his mother to the cīna-deśa. Despite no
real aid from any quarter the local rulers did not give up their
religion and fought manfully to defend their way of life. We get a
glimpse of their difficulties from the letter Ghourek, the Iranic ruler
of Samarkand, sent in 718 CE to the Tang emperor politely complaining of
his not sending aid:  
*“Your subject \[Ghourek\], like the grass and soil trampled by your
horses for a million li, submits to the godly emperor who, by the grace
of the heavens, rules the entire world. The members of my family, and
the various Hou kingdoms, have long been sincerely devoted to your great
empire…Now for 35 years since we have fought ceaselessly with the Arab
brigands; each year we have sent large armies of infantry and cavalry on
campaign, without ever enjoying the good fortune of receiving soldiers
sent to help us by your imperial kindness. For more than 6 years, the
general commanding the Arabs has come at the head of a numerous army; we
fought him and tried to defeat him, but many of our soldiers were killed
or wounded; as the infantry and cavalry of the Arabs were numerous…I
returned behind by walls to defend myself. The Arabs then besieged the
city, placing 300 ballistas against the walls and at 3 points they dug
deep ditches, trying to destroy our kingdom.”*  
In 719 CE, central Asian rulers nārāyaṇa (Southern Tajikistan), Ghourek
(Samarkand) and the Indianized Turk tuṣārapati (Bukhara) put a firm
resistance against the Arabs and blocked their advance. With this ended
the first chapter of the Moslem assault on central Asia. Noting this,
the Tang emperor sent them words of encouragement and acknowledged them
as independent kings but did little else to help their cause. They
finally received succor only when Khan Su-lu became the ruler of the
Türgesh Turks and organized a combined heathen front to blunt the Arab
advance.

In conclusion, the incidents from the early phase of the Islamic
Caliphate’s advance into Central Asia are mirrored in many ways by the
advance of the current Caliphate, replete with slaughter and enslavement
of the Yezidis, one of the last remnants of the old Iranic tradition in
the region. Moreover, Hindus need to note that these early invasions
were at the expense of regions which were within their sphere of
influence and peopled by their co-religionists. Today this memory is
largely lost in the collective Hindu awareness. It is also important to
note that the heathens of those regions, Indic, Iranic and Turkic, did
not “accept” Mohammedanism as though it was gift being conferred on them
– a view subtly propagated by certain western scholars in an attempt to
create the image of a great flowering of an Arab civilization in Central
Asia \[Footnote 5\]. First, they fought tooth-and-nail to try to halt
the Islamic whirlwind sweeping into their lands from the Arabian
deserts. Second, the loss of heathen civilization in these regions was
ultimately because their libraries were specifically targeted and
destroyed, and their scholars killed. Third, while their knowledge
systems were destroyed, what remained was appropriated by Islam and is
accepted by its proponents (both Mohammedans and their non-Mohammedan
supporters) as being part of the Islamic civilization (e.g. several
aspects of Al-Biruni’s science and the Shah Nameh). Finally, from a
geopolitical viewpoint the memory of the struggle in Central Asia should
inform Hindus that their ultimate objective should be a state that
reasserts itself in those regions as in the past.

:::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: His brother Yusuf Adil Khan fled Turkey to evade
assassination and founded the Adil Shahi Sultanate in South India. It
was a major adversary of the great Hindu empires, namely vijayanagara
and the marāṭhā empire founded by chatrapati śivājī.

Footnote 2: Gaozong was close to Turkic clan from the region to the
North of China and as a youth liked to lead a life like them in camp
grounds rather than in the palace. He had inherited the Turkic mounted
cavalry divisions his father had built and this greatly aided his
military ambitions.

Footnote 3: He is said to have been the descendant of the ruling clan
from a small kingdom in what is today the border between modern Madhya
Pradesh and Orissa. He went on to renounce his kingdom and become a
great mantrayāna teacher who transmitted these traditions to China and
from to Japan.

Footnote 4: One may see “Hindu Gods in Western Central Asia A Lesser
Known Chapter of Indian History” by S.P. Gupta from evidence for Hindu
images from here.

Footnote 5: As an example one may consider the recently published
volume: “Lost Enlightenment: Central Asia’s Golden Age from the Arab
Conquest to Tamerlane” by S. Frederick Star. It gives an effusive
account of the “Islamic golden age” in Central Asia with claim that the
knowledge systems created there contributed fundamentally to Indian
knowledge among others.
