+++
title = "The dangers of Turkey"

+++
This is just a brief distraction from our paleontological narratives to
which we hope return. It is important for Hindus to observe Turkey. Some
time ago in our discussion on Islamic potentates we had mentioned that
Turkey sits on a cusp. Many thought that the forward-thinking Kemal
Ataturk nearly liberated the Turks after more than a millennium from the
clutches of the religion of peace. Some Turks even went as far as
thinking that the Mohammedanism had been eradicated in Turkey. The
Moslems in India were however ready to fight for the Khilafat (1919-1924
CE). The Osman Sultan Abdul Hamid-II sent a jihadi named Jamaluddin
Afghani (a proto-version of the modern Islamic terror organizers) to
seek help from the Sunni Moslems of India, who were the remnants of the
Mogol empire. The idea of Jamaluddin was to unite Sunni Islam into a
pan-Islamic Kilafat that would wage war on the West, i.e. its sister
Abrahamism, the religion of love. This ideal of the Kilafat is still
deep in the minds of the sub-continental Moslems. A poll conducted in
the terrorist state of Pakistan revealed that over 70% of the people
wanted a pan-Islamic Kilafat with Shariah. However, many of Jamaluddin’s
Indian followers were having more proximal ideas. Their first and
foremost concern was Jihad on the Kaffirs. Indeed inspired by the
Turkish agents the Moplahs initiated a Jihad in Eranad and Walluvanad
where Mohammad Haji raised the shashidhvaja (their lunaphorous banner
indicates their lunacy) and declared these areas as part of the Kilafat
under the above ghazi. They started a brutal massacre and ethnic
cleansing of Hindus (over 100,000) in these regions of the Chera
country, chiefly directed at nAyar-s and nambUthiri-s. If one reads the
descriptions of these massacres they are mirror image of the Armenian
massacres of the Turkish kilafat. The British government was initially
clueless about handling the situation. Then they mobilized a Hindu force
of World War veterans – the Malabar force and let it loose on the
Ghazis. The brave Hindu troops massively retaliated killing up to 5000
Ghazis for the loss of 43 men. This crushed the Islamic Kilafat of the
chera country. Some of them were captured and put into goods containers
routed to Coimbatore and died of suffocation – a fitting punishment for
the murderous Ghazis. However, the survivors were released after prison
terms in Coimbatore and found their way back to Kerala where their
descendents pose the latest threat to the country.

Turkey’s current prime minister Erdogan received the Faisal prize from
the Sultan of the hellhole of Saudi Arabia. This is actually recognition
of his work towards the re-Islamization of Turkey. The Turks have in the
past few days raised their voice against Israel and have sent a ship to
invade Israeli waters in support of the Saudi-backed Hamas. This
triangulation should be noticed and filed away. Some would say that the
return of Turkey to the Islamic fold is not a big deal for Hindus – it
is more a problem for the Europeans (especially if it enters the EU) and
the Israelis. I would still say Turkey has potential of becoming an even
bigger problem for India than people expect. Let us pause for a moment
to think of all the Hindus exterminated in the Moplah rebellion and the
activities of Jamaluddin Afghani, which among other things directly
contributed to the origin of the terrorist state of Pakistan. The big
lesson it teaches is that even if a nation were to roll back the lunacy
of the shashidhvaja-s to the degree Kemal Ataturk did, it can make a
come back. In light of this India is destined to face a second partition
or a repeat of the Moplah lunacy – let us not forget that the fake
mahAtma, the muNDaka, and his favored Kangress party supported the
Kilafat movement. Today the Italian plant and her bald Sikh protégé do
the same. Then the British poet Wilfrid Blunt admired Jamaluddin
Afghani, today the mlechChAdipati bans a Dutch politician from entering
England for talking the truth about the shashidhvaja-s.
