+++
title = "Azendohsaurus, the early archosauromorph radiation and a new position for turtles"

+++
We were walking down the bower to our lair in the late afternoon hour.
We were the only representative of the mammalian clade in sight; all
other vertebrates perceived by way of their manifold cacophonies and
displays of color were dinosaurs that continue to lord over the aerial
sphere. In our mind’s eye we journeyed back to their roots in the end of
the Permian in the form of the enigmatic and fragmentary Archosaurus
from Russia. In the recent years tremendous discoveries have greatly
enhanced our understanding of the evolution of the two great
archosaurian lines the crocodile-line and the dinosaur-line. However,
the evolutionary relationships of the basal members of the archosaurian
clade (technically basal archosauriformes) remain still incompletely
understood. Even more intriguing and murky are the affinities of those
reptiles of the great diapsid radiation of the Permian and the Triassic
that are closer to the archosauriformes, than to the lepidosauromorph
clade comprised of the lizards and the sphenodontids, i.e. the
composition and internal relationships of the archosauromorphs. Not only
is this question intrinsically one of the most exciting in paleontology,
but it also relates to that great evolutionary puzzle – from whence the
turtles? We have discussed these on several occasions on these pages but
now we shall revisit them in light of some recent publications of great
significance.

Rieppel’s analysis was the first that moved the turtles out of their
long-held place amongst the parareptiles to the diapsids. But beyond
that morphology was rather uncertain in terms of actual position of the
turtles. Molecular phylogenies firmly placed the turtles with the
archosaurs and now the primary scientific question became where within
archosauromorpha did turtles emerge? However, the paleontologists were
slower at accepting this development and investigating it further. Even
though there have been several major descriptions of archosauromorphs
such as Doswellia, Vancleavea, different aetosaurs and Azendohsaurus
since our last note on this topic (in the context of Chinlechelys), few,
if any, of these studies have considered the origin of turtles. In the
mean time, Odontochelys, a turtle perhaps even more primitive than
Proganochelys was also described. Current molecular phylogenies strongly
support turtles being a sister group to the archosaurs rather than
belonging to the crocodile line. This puts considerable doubt on the
relationship between turtles and aetosaurs as originally proposed by
Hedges because the aetosaurs seem to be firmly positioned within the
crocodile-line. Further, recent descriptions of the skull and the armor
of aetosaurs provide morphological support that turtles might not be
close to these crocodile-line archosaurs. Again the fragmentary and
enigmatic armored archosaurs like Euscolosuchus and Tarjadia appear to
be within the crocodile-line. Thus, it is questionable if these might
have any direct links to turtle origins since they appear to be outside
of the crown archosaurs. On the other hand there was a major development
on the morphological side of things with the report of an ossified
laterosphenoid by Bhullar et al in turtles. At the time of Bhullar et
al’s report the ossified laterosphenoid was only seen in turtles and
the archosauriformes. It is an ossification in the braincase that is
associated with the encasing of exits for the cranial nerves II (optic),
III (oculomotor) and IV and also marks the anterior border of the exit
of the trigeminal nerve (V). In a constrained phylogeny making
Proganochelys the sister-group of archosauriformes, this ossified
laterosphenoid along with the mid-dorsal dermal armor and a prominent
retroarticular process formed by the articular were noted by Bhullar et
al as potential archosauriform synapomorphies of turtles.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/lh3.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S_ySUWLt1dI/AAAAAAAABdo/uk-GTGnXdq8/s400/dinosaurs.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/6swuZRjAC7npfhovPqfUlw?feat=embedwebsite)

Proganochelys possessed teeth on the bones of the palatal surface. This
feature is frequently present in the more basal archosauriformes and
also in non-archosauriform representatives of archosauromorpha but not
in crown archosaurs. Such teeth have been noted by Dilkes et al in
archosauriforms like Proterosuchus, Euparkeria and Doswellia and in more
basal archosauromorphs such as the rhynchosaur Mesosuchus and
Prolacerta. Limited palatal surface teeth are also seen on the pterygoid
in Turfanosuchus and Yonghesuchus which are outside of the archosaurian
crown group. This again suggests that the origin of turtles is likely to
be placed outside the crown and somewhere among the more basal
diversifications of archosauriformes or outside among the more basal
archosauromorphs.The new descriptions are of considerable importance in
fixing the position of the turtles within this bracket ranging from the
basal archosauriforms to the even more primitive basal archosauromorphs.
Per say the combination of dermal armor, the nature of the
retroarticular process and the ossified laterosphenoid argue against the
non-archosauriform archosauromorphs such as the rhynchosaurs, the
drepanosaurs, the tanystropheids, the prolacertids, and Trilophosaurus
being close to chelonian origins. These lack both dorsal dermal armor
and the ossified laterosphenoid. This constrains the origin of turtles
to the bracket between the basal archosauriformes and any
archosauromorphs that may be closer to the archosauriformes than the
above basal archosauromorphs. Of course one could counter the homology
of the mid-dorsal dermal armor and the turtle’s carapace with Rieppel et
al’s description of Odontochelys from the Carnian age of the Late
Triassic (\~220 Mya) which apparently has a plastron but lacks a
carapace. As per this proposal the carapace evolved later than the
plastron; hence, it cannot be equivalent to the dorsal armor of the
archosauriformes, which is not necessarily accompanied by a
plastron-like mid-ventral armor (although such armor has developed in
several forms like aetosaurs and Vancleavea). However, we hold that this
proposal is not valid. The ribs of Odontochelys are not like regular
ribs of any archosauromorph. They are associated with peculiar lateral
plate-like extensions. These we interpret these as being the remnants of
the carapace that has fused with and encased the ribs. Odontochelys
being aquatic has greatly reduced the carapace comparable to several
other later aquatic turtles. Perhaps this might be related to the
predatory patterns where there was greater need for protection against
attacks from below.

Now let us consider the characters that apparently support the origin of
turtles among basal archosauriformes closer to the crown group. Firstly,
most phylogenies of archosauriformes show the proterosuchid radiation
and the erythrosuchids to be the basal-most lineages of this great
clade. Clearly the crown archosaurs form a clade with the
proterochampsids, euparkeriids (e.g. Euparkeria and Osmolskina),
Doswellia and Vancleavea to the exclusion of the above two. In Dilkes et
al’s description of Doswellia they obtained a tree placing the
erythrosuchids more derived than the euparkeriids. I suspect this is a
spurious result due certain coding issues. For example Dilkes et al
claim that the erythrosuchids had dorsal dermal armor, but clearly this
does not appear to be the case – the careful study of these reptiles by
Gower and Parrish do not report presence of such osteoderms. So in
conclusion the dorsal osteoderms are not present in the two basal-most
clades of archosauriformes but appear to be a synapomorphy of clade
uniting the remaining forms with the crown group. Additionally, in the
proterosuchids the taenia medialis is horizontal directed and makes
extensive contact with the frontal bone. However, turtles and the above
clade of more derived archosauriformes it is directed at a 45 degrees or
greater angle towards the vertical (See above figure modified from
Bhullar et al). Further these forms and the turtles show a fenestra
epiotica separating the laterosphenoid from the parietal. Finally these
forms also show a broadened base of the pila metoptica — it is narrow
and strap-like in the basal archosauriforms like Proterosuchus.
Together, these characters and the presence of dorsal armor would
suggest that turtles emerged within that derived clade of
archosauriformes that excludes the proterosuchids and erythrosuchids.

Within this clade Doswellia has prominent dorsal armor that resembles
turtle carapaces is some ways – e.g. the nuchal osteoderm. It has also
filled in the infra-temporal fenestra. However, it lacks ventral armor.
Further, Doswellia apparently lacks an ossified laterosphenoid
suggesting that it might have secondarily lost it. However, Vancleavea,
a rather unusual aquatic form, which shows some features with shared
with Doswellia does appear to have both ventral osteoderms as well as a
well-developed ossified laterosphenoid. This ossification again shows a
relatively broad base for the pila metoptica and a “high-angled” taenia
medialis. Further, Vancleavea lacks supratemporal, antorbital and
mandibular fenestra suggesting that a process of “filling in” has taken
place just as it occurred in the turtles. These observations suggest
that, though Vancleavea and Doswellia might not be sister groups of
turtles, they underwent morphological modifications that paralleled the
situation in turtles – i.e. In particular the development of extensive
and in some cases unusual dermal armor (e.g. the osteoderms of the tail
crest in Vancleavea) and the closure of fenestra in the skull suggest
that these processes were much more common in archosauriformes than are
typically mentioned – thus, the situation in turtles is not unusual and
they could have well been derived within the basal archosauriformes in
the general grade of the proterochampsids, Doswellia and Vancleavea.

On the other hand, the turtles do have some really primitive and
non-archosauriform features. Hence, in an unconstrained tree they fell
to the base of archosauromorpha with the new characters coded by Bhullar
et al. This was nevertheless the first time a morphological tree had
placed turtles in archosauromorpha rather than with sauropterygians,
which fell in lepidosauromorpha in Rieppel’s trees. Here is where the
recent reconstruction and description of the skull of Azendohsaurus by
Flynn et al might have significance in proposing an alternative more
primitive placement for turtles in the evolutionary tree of
archosauromorpha.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/lh5.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S_ySUKTw5ZI/AAAAAAAABdg/pgt7pbHA1hE/s800/Azhendohsaurus.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/D76Pth6EMABNZHI8Okgvpw?feat=embedwebsite)  
Azendohsaurus from the Middle-Late Triassic of Madagascar 

Azendohsaurus was first described from the Triassic of Morocco as an
ornithischian, then as a basal sauropodomorph and finally as some kind
of non-dinosaurian reptile. The recovery of more complete remains from
Madagascar showed that it was widely distributed and throughout the
central region of Gondwanaland and reaffirmed the fact that it was a
non-archosauriform archosauromorph. Indeed it lacks antorbital and
mandibular fenestrae – unlike the primitive state for archosauriformes.
Further, it has a pineal foramen on the parietal with prominent
surrounding fossa suggesting an exposed third eye. This is seen in other
primitive archosauromorphs such as Trilophosaurus and perhaps Prolacerta
but is apparently absent in all archosauriforms that have been studied
thus far. Again like other more basal archosauromorphs but not the
archosauriformes Azendohsaurus has incomplete temporal bar on the lower
margin of the infratemporal fenestra. Similarly, it also possesses a
non-thecodont dentition. However, in terms of other characters it is
more derived and of the currently known basal non-archosauriform
archosauromorphs appears to be the one closest to the archosauriforms.
The characters supporting this position include (for some of these
points we have to go by Flynn et al’s word because they unfortunately do
not offer any illustration or photograph of the crucial braincase
specimen FMNH PR 2765):  
1\) Azendohsaurus possess an ossified laterosphenoid albeit smaller than
that seen in archosauriformes.  
2\) Like archosauriform teeth those of Azendohsaurus bear serrations or
denticles.  
3\) The maxilla contains an ascending dorsal process just as what it
seen in the archosauriformes with an antorbital fenestra. However,
instead of bounding the antorbital fenestra in Azendohsaurus it
accommodates a large triangular lacrimal (note this point).  
4\) The mesial surface of the maxilla contains a prominent foramen just
posterior to the point where the dorsal process starts ascending. Witmer
had shown that this foramen is the orifice for the maxillary nerve and
blood vessels supplying the anterior part of the face. Azendohsaurus
shares this foramen with several archosauriformes like Arizonasaurus and
Batrachotomus.  
5\) The articular has a clear retroarticular process with a
sub-rectangular cross-section. This is comparable to archosauriformes
(e.g. in Doswellia) rather than the primitive archosauromorphs.

In conclusion in Azendohsaurus we might have a form rather close to the
origin of the archosauriformes but not inside that clade. The authors
believe that the stratigraphy of the Isalo II assemblage from Madagascar
where Azendohsaurus was found is more likely to be Ladinian (late Middle
Triassic) rather than Carnian (Late Triassic). Even if were so it is
still a long way from the basal most archosauriform from the late
Permian and better preserved proterosuchids from the early Triassic.
Thus, it appears that this sister lineage of the archosauriformes has a
long ghost-lineage going all the way to the late Permian or early
Triassic. In this period it could have potentially undergone
considerable diversification of which the herbivorous Azendohsaurus was
just one derived representative.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/lh4.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S_ySUgUNqgI/AAAAAAAABds/A-TxP8c46hI/s800/dinosaurs-1.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/DDGRKYe20PXQTS4AMjvasQ?feat=embedwebsite)  
The skull of Proganochelys

So what are the implications for the origin of turtles? Firstly, the
presence of the ossified laterosphenoid in a non-archosauriform
archosauromorph suggests that this feature among others could have
emerged earlier. Thus the turtles can now be potentially be occupied in
a more primitive position within archosauromorpha, which could account
for some of their rather primitive characters that do not sit well
within archosauriformes. In particular let us consider the antorbital
region. Examination of the maxilla of the basal turtle Proganochelys
suggests that it had a dorsal ascending process comparable to that in
Azendohsaurus. Further the triangular lacrimal in Proganochelys
articulates with the maxilla just as in Azendohsaurus (See above
figures): two sloping sides of the triangle articulate with ascending
dorsal and the posterior processes of the maxilla respectively and the
third vertical side of the triangle forms part of the anterior wall of
the orbit. This distinctive feature of the maxilla of Proganochelys was
noted by Gaffney as being distinct from the flat and low maxilla of the
parareptiles like Captorhinus among which the turtles were placed
earlier on. These lacrimals and their contacts with the maxillae are
also very distinct from those encountered in other more basal
archosauromorphs. Here the maxilla might be low with only a straight
edge contact with the lacrimal (e.g. the proclacertiform Boreopricea
described by Benton et al and Prolacerta described by Modesto et al).
The lacrimal might also be more or less sliver-like and small as in
Trilophosaurus (Speilmann et al), rhynchosaurus like Mesosuchus
(Dilkes), Pamelaria a prolacteriform from the middle Triassic of the
Godavari basin (Sen), and Czatkowiella a protorosaur from the early
Triassic of Poland. Thus we might have a progression in this character
from a sliver-like lacrimal in the primitive archosauromorphs, which
eventually enlarged to the triangular shape that fitted into a dorsal
process of the maxilla as in Azendohsaurus and the basal turtles.
Finally, in archosauriforms the antorbital fenestra arose through an
embayment of the anterior margin of the lacrimal converting it into the
“inverted L” morphology. Thus, one could imagine the turtles as
emerging from a near-archosauriform grade of archosauromorphs that are
currently only represented by Azendohsaurus. In this case the turtle
ancestors never had an antorbital fenestra and merely closed their
temporal fenestrae.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/lh6.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S_yST-AWV5I/AAAAAAAABdc/uwi3yA5P24w/s400/Captorhinus.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/K0tG6NCfu6gvgZFR7rdL0g?feat=embedwebsite)  
The skull of Captorhinus a parareptile

[![](https://i1.wp.com/lh6.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/S_ySUFlRxkI/AAAAAAAABdk/-Exz5dJrcvw/s400/Staganolepis.jpg)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/3LVlww4vAZvT5zI-_8ZBig?feat=embedwebsite)  
The skull of the crocodile-line archosaur, the aetosaur Staganolepis

Distinguishing between these scenarios is currently not straightforward.
Importantly, a better description and illustration of the laterosphenoid
of Azendohsaurus would be useful in polarizing the issue. Further, Flynn
et al mention that the post-crania of Azendohsaurus also suggest
closeness to the archosauriforms. The description of these elements
might also be important in resolving this issue. While a more primitive
position for turtles closer to the Azendohsaurus grade might have some
attractive features, we suspect that it leaves many things unanswered
such as the origin of dermal armor (which appears on in more derived
archosauriformes). Nevertheless we feel that the origin of turtles can
now be constrained to a relatively circumscribed bracket in
archosauromorpha. This point along with the growing recognition of basal
archosauromorph diversity shows how little we might understand regarding
the earlier radiation of archosauromorpha.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/lh5.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TASvP5XJHzI/AAAAAAAABeA/Gy88rG4I82M/s800/turtle_position.png)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/Uj04Lwhh_ifrDITK4Qja3g?feat=embedwebsite)

Weighing the alternative positions for turtle origins

At the base of archosauromorpha lies a great diversity of reptiles. Of
course we cannot be sure if these are really archosauromorphs and what
the interrelationships between them are. Just as the initial
morphological studies completely failed to recognize the turtles as
archosauromorphs it is conceivable that there are many lineages whose
archosauromorph affinities have not yet been identified. However, most
studies seem to agree that these groups are archosauromorphs: 1)
protorosaurids and Mecistotrachelos, 2) drepanosaurids and Longisquama,
3) coelurosauravids, 4) tanystropheids, 5) Trilophosaurus, 6)
rhynchosaurs, 7) prolacertids, 8)Azendohsaurus. Most of these forms are
rather remarkable reptiles with some bizarre adaptations that are not at
all clearly understood because they have no direct parallels among
extant tetrapods. They flourished during the later part of the Permian
and the Triassic and entirely ceased to exist there after.

The protorosaurids like Protorosaurus (\~2 meters in length) and
Czatkowiella are extremely strange in that they have long legs
suggesting that they were adapted for speed, but this is combined with a
rather long neck whose exact adaptive role is poorly understood. Even
more strange is form Mecistotrachelos from the Carnian age of the
Triassic of North America, which might be related to the protorosaurids.
This form acquired flight capabilities based on its extended ribs like
the Draco lizard but most unexpectedly has a long neck which is not
typical of fliers outside of the ornithodiran line of archosaurs. The
drepanosaurids were probably among the weirdest of the early
archosaurmorphs for more than one reason: 1) Their head shows several
convergent features with birds in terms of general shape. 2) Their
shoulder vertebrae are often enlarged fused into a prominent hump which
would have served as a massive muscle attachment site for the neck. How
exactly the neck was plied in real life remains poorly understood. Some
like Megalancosaurus had evolved chameleon like grasping limbs, which
might even have shown sexual dimorphism. Some like Hypuronector had
evolved a broad leaf-like tail with elongated haemal spines. Others like
Drepanosaurus evolved a large claw on the forelimb along with a carpal
bone with muscle attachment sites to ply that claw. It also had a
“tail-claw” formed by the terminal caudal vertebra for arboreal life.
Another member of this clade Vallesaurus might have adopted bipedalism
vaguely comparable to that seen the para-reptile the bolosaur Eudibamus
rather early in archosauromorph history. While Eudibamus is seen as
being predominantly terrestrial, Vallesaurus was predominantly arboreal.
The most bizarre Longisquama known only from fragmentary remains is
likely to have been related to the drepanosaurids. It had highly
elongated superficially feather-like scales on its dorsal surface. As
proposed by Voigt et al rather than being used for flight they might
have been used in display. The other oddball, Sharovipteryx, might also
be related to the drepanosaurids. It might have been the first
Delta-wing flier with a membrane stretched between the long hind legs.
The coelurosauravids, whose archosauromorph affinities are doubted by
some, developed a novel flight mechanism dependent on dermal bones
(rather than ribs) to support a Draco-style patagium. The mysterious
tanystropheids developed extremely long necks relative to the rest of
their bodies. There is still no convincing hypothesis at to how they
might have used these necks. Based on one of these forms,
Dinocephalosaurus, Rieppel claimed that they were aquatic predators that
used their long necks to reach out distant prey that could not see the
rest of the body.

Trilophosaurus, Teraterpeton and the rhynchosaurs form a group of rather
certain archosauropmorphs which appear to be closer to the
archosauriformes than those discussed above. Each of these had a rather
distinctive set of adaptations that appear to be primarily geared
towards herbivory. In the case of Trilophosaurus (\~2 m in length) we
have most unusual teeth that possess three high cusps arranged in a
straight line from the lingual to labial end. The rest of the body in
general follows the general primitive saurian body plan. Probably
related to Trilophosaurus was Teraterpeton which had no teeth on its
elongated premaxilla and dentary symphysis but more posteriorly had
unique occluding dentition. This suggests it might have had a beak to
clip plants which were then processed by the posterior teeth. The most
distinctive of these archosaurmorphs were rather widespread rhynchosaurs
that began in the early Triassic as rather primitive looking
archosauromorphs such as Mesosuchus. But even in these forms the
multiple rows of maxillary teeth are already seen. In the more advanced
forms emerging in the middle Triassic and continuing to the late
Triassic such as Isalorhynchus (from the same beds as Azendohsaurus) and
Hyperodapedon the premaxilla and the anterior dentary lose their teeth
entirely. We see them form an unusual beak with the premaxillae forming
a pair of tusk-like structures at the base of which the dentary neatly
fits in. With powerful jaw and tongue muscles and an unique dentition
with blade like dentary teeth fitting cleanly in grooves formed by the
maxillary teeth layers they appear to have become the dominant
herbivores on land. Their gait is also inferred as being semi-erect,
perhaps marking the beginning of this trend in archosauromorpha which
culminated in completely erect gaits in crown archosauria. For reasons
that are not entirely clear they became extinct along with the
Dicroidium type seed ferns at the end of the Carnian age. Finally, we
have the prolacertids, which in large part appear to have retained the
general morphology of the primitive archosauromorph. However, in
phylogenetic terms they might be closer to the archosauriformes than all
other archosauromorphs other than Azendohsaurus. The prolacertids appear
to have spread throughout the world in course of the Triassic. Beyond
these it is conceivable that other reptiles of somewhat uncertain
phylogenetic affinities are also possibly part of archosauromorpha.
These include the aquatic forms like the choristoderes, thalattosaurs,
the sauropterygians and ichthyosaurs. In Bhullar et al’s constrained
tree at least some of these were included in archosauromorpha; however,
evidence in this regard appears to be limited at present.

Finally, we may discuss one morphological character in archosauromorpha
– i.e. the relationship between the maxilla and naris. Within
archosauromorpha an advanced clade comprised including *Trilophosaurus*,
rhynchosaurs, prolacertids, Azendohsaurus and archosauriformes can be
recognized in which the maxilla is excluded from contributing to the
narial margin. However, this is not the case in the more primitive forms
like the drepanosaurids, coelurosauravids, Longisquama and probably the
remaining archosauromorphs where the maxilla does directly contribute to
the narial margin. This is also observed in turtles, which goes against
their more derived position proposed above. We suspect in turtles this
is a reversal caused by considerable shortening of the rostral region
relative to the ancestral archosauromorph condition. Finally it should
be noted that in terms of molecular studies [we had identified a clade
of beta
keratins](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/03/20/how-far-back-do-feathers-go/)
that are found in all extant archosauromorphs. Developmental studies on
the expression of this clade of beta keratins would be useful. If they
are found to be expressed dominantly in association with particular
dermal armor structures then it is conceivable that we might have an
independent means of anchoring the origin of turtles.
