---
title: THE DIVINE INCARNATION OR AVATARA

---
<div>

[←](god_personal_and_impersonal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](pranayama.htm)

  

## THE DIVINE INCARNATION OR AVATARA

Jesus Christ was God — the Personal God become man. He has manifested
Himself many times in different forms and these alone are what you can
worship. God in His absolute nature is not to be worshipped. Worshipping
such God would be nonsense. We have to worship Jesus Christ, the human
manifestation, as God. You cannot worship anything higher than the
manifestation of God. The sooner you give up the worship of God separate
from Christ, the better for you. Think of the Jehovah you manufacture
and of the beautiful Christ. Any time you attempt to make a God beyond
Christ, you murder the whole thing. God alone can worship God. It is not
given to man, and any attempt to worship Him beyond His ordinary
manifestations will be dangerous to mankind. Keep close to Christ if you
want salvation; He is higher than any God you can imagine. If you think
that Christ was a man, do not worship Him; but as soon as you can
realise that He is God, worship Him. Those who say He was a man and then
worship Him commit blasphemy; there is no half-way house for you; you
must take the whole strength of it. "He that hath seen the Son hath seen
the Father", and without seeing the Son, you *cannot* see the Father. It
would be only tall talk and frothy philosophy and dreams and
speculations. But if you want to have a hold on spiritual life, cling
close to God as manifest in Christ.

Philosophically speaking, there was no such human being living as Christ
or Buddha; we saw God through them. In the Koran, Mohammed again and
again repeats that Christ was never crucified, it was a semblance; no
one could crucify Christ.

The lowest state of philosophical religion is dualism; the highest form
is the Triune state. Nature and the human soul are interpenetrated by
God, and this we see as the Trinity of God, nature, and soul. At the
same time you catch a glimpse that all these three are products of the
One. Just as this body is the covering of the soul, so this is, as it
were, the body of God. As I am the soul of nature, so is God the soul of
my soul. You are the centre through which you see all nature in which
you are. This nature, soul, and God make one individual being, the
universe. Therefore they are a unity; yet at the same time they are
separate. Then there is another sort of Trinity which is much like the
Christian Trinity. God is absolute. We cannot see God in His absolute
nature, we can only speak of that as "not this, not this". Yet we can
get certain qualities as the nearest approach to God. First is
existence, second is knowledge, third is bliss — very much corresponding
to your Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Father is the existence out of
which everything comes; Son is that knowledge. It is in Christ that God
will be manifest. God was everywhere, in all beings, before Christ; but
in Christ we became conscious of Him. This is God. The third is bliss,
the Holy Spirit. As soon as you get this knowledge, you get bliss. As
soon as you begin to have Christ within you, you have bliss; and that
unifies the three.

</div>
