---
title: PRANAYAMA

---
<div>

[←](the_divine_incarnation.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](women_of_the_east.htm)

  

## PRANAYAMA

First of all we will try to understand a little of the meaning of
Prânâyama. Prâna stands in metaphysics for the sum total of the energy
that is in the universe. This universe, according to the theory of the
philosophers, proceeds in the form of waves; it rises, and again it
subsides, melts away, as it were; then again it proceeds out in all this
variety; then again it slowly returns. So it goes on like a pulsation.
The whole of this universe is composed of matter and force; and
according to Sanskrit philosophers, everything that we call matter,
solid and liquid, is the outcome of one primal matter which they call
Âkâsha or ether; and the primordial force, of which all the forces that
we see in nature are manifestations, they call Prana. It is this Prana
acting upon Akasha, which creates this universe, and after the end of a
period, called a cycle, there is a period of rest. One period of
activity is followed by a period of rest; this is the nature of
everything. When this period of rest comes, all these forms that we see
in the earth, the sun, the moon, and the stars, all these manifestations
melt down until they become ether again. They become dissipated as
ether. All these forces, either in the body or in the mind, as
gravitation, attraction, motion, thought, become dissipated, and go off
into the primal Prana. We can understand from this the importance of
this Pranayama. Just as this ether encompasses us everywhere and we are
interpenetrated by it, so everything we see is composed of this ether,
and we are floating in the ether like pieces of ice floating in a lake.
They are formed of the water of the lake and float in it at the same
time. So everything that exists is composed of this Akasha and is
floating in this ocean. In the same way we are surrounded by this vast
ocean of Prana — force and energy. It is this Prana by which we breathe
and by which the circulation of the blood goes on; it is the energy in
the nerves and in the muscles, and the thought in the brain. All forces
are different manifestations of this same Prana, as all matter is a
different manifestation of the same Akasha. We always find the causes of
the gross in the subtle. The chemist takes a solid lump of ore and
analyses it; he wants to find the subtler things out of which that gross
is composed. So with our thought and our knowledge; the explanation of
the grosser is in the finer. The effect is the gross and the cause the
subtle. This gross universe of ours, which we see, feel, and touch, has
its cause and explanation behind in the thought. The cause and
explanation of that is also further behind. So in this human body of
ours, we first find the gross movements, the movements of the hands and
lips; but where are the causes of these? The finer nerves, the movements
of which we cannot perceive at all, so fine that we cannot see or touch
or trace them in any way with our senses, and yet we know they are the
cause of these grosser movements. These nerve movements, again, are
caused by still finer movements, which we call thought; and that is
caused by something finer still behind, which is the soul of man, the
Self, the Âtman. In order to understand ourselves we have first to make
our perception fine. No microscope or instrument that was ever invented
will make it possible for us to see the fine movements that are going on
inside; we can never see them by any such means. So the Yogi has a
science that manufactures an instrument for the study of his own mind,
and that instrument is in the mind. The mind attains to powers of finer
perception which no instrument will ever be able to attain.

To attain to this power of superfine perception we have to begin from
the gross. And as the power becomes finer and finer, we go deeper and
deeper inside our own nature; and all the gross movements will first be
tangible to us, and then the finer movements of the thought; we will be
able to trace the thought before its beginning, trace it where it goes
and where it ends. For instance, in the ordinary mind a thought arises.
The mind does not know how it began or whence it comes. The mind is like
the ocean in which a wave rises, but although the man sees the wave, he
does not know how the wave came there, whence its birth, or whither it
melts down again; he cannot trace it any further. But when the
perception becomes finer, we can trace this wave long, long before it
comes to the surface; and we will be able to trace it for a long
distance after it has disappeared, and then we can understand psychology
as it truly is. Nowadays men think this or that and write many volumes,
which are entirely misleading, because they have not the power to
analyse their own minds and are talking of things they have never
*known*, but only theorised about. All science must be based on facts,
and these facts must be observed and generalised. Until you have some
facts to generalise upon, what are you going to do? So all these
attempts at generalising are based upon knowing the things we
generalise. A man proposes a theory, and adds theory to theory, until
the whole book is patchwork of theories, not one of them with the least
meaning. The science of Râja-Yoga says, first you must gather facts
about your own mind, and that can be done by analysing your mind,
developing its finer powers of perception and seeing for yourselves what
is happening inside; and when you have got these facts, then generalise;
and then alone you will have the real science of psychology.

As I have said, to come to any finer perception we must take the help of
the grosser end of it. The current of action which is manifested on the
outside is the grosser. If we can get hold of this and go on further and
further, it becomes finer and finer, and at last the finest. So this
body and everything we have in this body are not different existences,
but, as it were, various links in the same chain proceeding from fine to
gross. You are a complete whole; this body is the outside manifestation,
the crust, of the inside; the external is grosser and the inside finer;
and so finer and finer until you come to the Self. And at last, when we
come to the Self, we come to know that it was only the Self that was
manifesting all this; that it was the Self which became the mind and
became the body; that nothing else exists but the Self, and all these
others are manifestations of that Self in various degrees, becoming
grosser and grosser. So we will find by analogy that in this whole
universe there is the gross manifestation, and behind that is the finer
movement, which we can call the will of God. Behind that even, we will
find that Universal Self. And then we will come to know that the
Universal Self becomes God and becomes this universe; and that it is not
that this universe is one and God another and the Supreme Self another,
but that they are different states of the manifestation of the same
Unity behind.

All this comes of our Pranayama. These finer movements that are going on
inside the body are connected with the breathing; and if we can get hold
of this breathing and manipulate it and control it, we will slowly get
to finer and finer motions, and thus enter, as it were, by getting hold
of that breathing, into the realms of the mind.

The first breathing that I taught you in our last lesson was simply an
exercise for the time being. Some of these breathing exercises, again,
are very difficult, and I will try to avoid all the difficult ones,
because the more difficult ones require a great deal of dieting and
other restrictions which it is impossible for most of you to keep to. So
we will take the slower paths and the simpler ones. This breathing
consists of three parts. The first is breathing in, which is called in
Sanskrit Puraka, filling; and the second part is called Kumbhaka,
retaining, filling the lungs and stopping the air from coming out; the
third is called Rechaka, breathing out. The first exercise which I will
give you today is simply breathing in and stopping the breath and
throwing it out slowly. Then there is one step more in the breathing
which I will not give you today, because you cannot remember them all;
it would be too intricate. These three parts of breathing make one
Pranayama. This breathing should be regulated, because if it is not,
there is danger in the way to yourselves. So it is regulated by numbers,
and I will give you first the lowest numbers. Breathe in four seconds,
then hold the breath for eight seconds, then again throw it out slowly
in four seconds. (This process is more difficult when the ratio is two,
eight, and four: for further remarks see later.) Then begin again, and
do this four times in the morning and four times in the evening. There
is one thing more. Instead of counting by one, two, three, and all such
meaningless things, it is better to repeat any word that is holy to you.
In our country we have symbolical words, "Om" for instance, which means
God. If that be pronounced instead of one, two, three, four, it will
serve your purpose very well. One thing more. This breathing should
begin through the left nostril and should turn out through the right
nostril, and the next time is should be drawn in through the right and
thrown out through the left. Then reverse again, and so on. In the first
place you should be able to drive your breathing through either nostril
at will, just by the power of the will. After a time you will find it
easy; but now I am afraid you have not that power. So we must stop the
one nostril while breathing through the other with the finger and during
the retention, of course, both nostrils.

The first two lessons should not be forgotten. The first thing is to
hold yourselves straight; second to think of the body as sound and
perfect, as healthy and strong. Then throw a current of love all around,
think of the whole universe being happy. Then if you believe in God,
pray. Then breathe.

In many of you certain physical changes will come, twitchings all over
the body, nervousness; some of you will feel like weeping, sometimes a
violent motion will come. Do not be afraid; these things have to come as
you go on practicing. The whole body will have to be rearranged as it
were. New channels for thought will be made in the brain, nerves which
have not acted in your whole life will begin to work, and a whole new
series of changes will come in the body itself.

</div>
