---
title: WOMEN OF THE EAST

---
<div>

[←](pranayama.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](congress_of_religious_unity.htm)

  

## WOMEN OF THE EAST

(As many women as could crowd into Hall 7 yesterday afternoon flocked
thither to hear something as to the lives of their sisters of the
Orient. Mrs. Potter Palmer and Mrs. Charles Henrotin sat upon the
platform, surrounded by turbanned representatives of the women of the
East.

It may interest the readers to know that the published addresses of
Swami Vivekananda at the Parliament of Religions in Chicago are not
exhaustive and many addresses, specially those delivered at the
Scientific Section of the Parliament were not all reported. The
Scientific Sessions were conducted simultaneously with the open session
at the Hall of Columbus. Swami Vivekananda spoke on the following
subjects at the Scientific Section:

        1. Orthodox Hinduism and the Vedanta Philosophy.  
              *— Friday, September 22, 1893, at 10-30 a.m.*

        2. The Modern Religions of India.  
              *— Friday, September 22, 1893 afternoon session.*

        3. On the subject of the foregoing addresses.  
              *— Saturday, September 23, 1893.*

        4. The Essence of the Hindu Religion.  
                *— Monday, September 25, 1893.*

*The Chicago Daily Inter-Ocean* of September 23, 1893 published the
following note on the first lecture.

"In the Scientific Section yesterday morning Swami Vivekananda spoke on
'Orthodox Hinduism'. Hall III was crowded to overflowing and hundreds of
questions were asked by auditors and answered by the great Sannyasin
with wonderful skill and lucidity. At the close of the session he was
thronged with eager questions who begged him to give a semi-public
lecture somewhere on the subject of his religion. He said that he
already had the project under consideration.")

(*Report of a lecture in the* Chicago Daily Inter-Ocean, *September 23,
1893*)

Swami Vivekananda, at a special meeting, discussed the present and
future of the women of the East. He said, "The best thermometer to the
progress of a nation is its treatment of its women. In ancient Greece
there was absolutely no difference in the state of man and woman. The
idea of perfect equality existed. No Hindu can be a priest until he is
married, the idea being that a single man is only half a man, and
imperfect. The idea of perfect womanhood is perfect independence. The
central idea of the life of a modern Hindu lady is her chastity. The
wife is the centre of a circle, the fixity of which depends upon her
chastity. It was the extreme of this idea which caused Hindu widows to
be burnt. The Hindu women are very spiritual and very religious, perhaps
more so than any other women in the world. If we can preserve these
beautiful characteristics and at the same time develop the intellects of
our women, the Hindu woman of the future will be the ideal woman of the
world."

</div>
