---
title: THE REALITY AND THE SHADOW

---
<div>

[←](the_laws_of_life_and_death.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](way_to_salvation.htm)

  

## THE REALITY AND THE SHADOW

(*Report of a lecture delivered in Oakland on March 8, 1900, with
editorial comments  
of the* Oakland Tribune)

Swami Vivekananda, the Hindu philosopher, delivered another lecture in
Wendte Hall last evening. His subject was: "The Reality and The Shadow".
He said:

"The soul of man is ever striving after certainty, to find something
that does not change. It is never satisfied. Wealth, the gratification
of ambition or of appetite are all changeable. Once these are attained,
man is not content. Religion is the science which teaches us whence to
satisfy this longing after the unchangeable. Behind all the local
colours and derivations they teach the same thing — that there is
reality only in the soul of man.

"The philosophy of Vedanta teaches that there are two worlds, the
external or sensory, and the internal or subjective — the thought world.

"It posits three fundamental concepts — time, space, and causation. From
these is constituted Mâyâ, the essential groundwork of human thought,
not the product of thought. This same conclusion was arrived at a later
date by the great German philosopher Kant.

"My reality, that of nature and of God, is the same, the difference is
in form of manifestation. The differentiation is caused by Maya. The
contour of the shore may shape the ocean into bay, strait, or inlet; but
when this shaping force or Maya is removed, the separate form
disappears, the differentiation ceases, all is ocean again."

The Swami then spoke of the roots of the theory of evolution to be found
in the Vedanta philosophy.

All modern religions start with the idea," continued the speaker, "that
man was once pure, he fell, and will become pure again. I do not see
where they get this idea. The seat of knowledge is the soul; external
circumstance simply stimulates the soul; knowledge is the power of the
soul. Century after century it has been manufacturing bodies. The
various forms of incarnation are merely successive chapters of the story
of the life of the soul. We are constantly building our bodies. The
whole universe is in a state of flux, of expansion and contraction, of
change. Vedanta holds that the soul never changes in essence, but it is
modified by Maya. Nature is God limited by mind. The evolution of nature
is the modification of the soul. The soul in essence is the same in all
forms of being. Its expression is modified by the body. This unity of
soul, this common substance of humanity, is the basis of ethics and
morality. In this sense all are one, and to hurt one's brother is to
hurt one's Self.

"Love is simply an expression of this infinite unity. Upon what
dualistic system can you explain love? One of the European philosophers
says that kissing is a survival of cannibalism, a kind of expression of
'how good you taste'. I do not believe it.

"What is it we all seek? Freedom. All the effort and struggle of life is
for freedom. It is the march universal of races, of worlds, and of
systems.

"If we are bound, who bound us? No power can bind the Infinite but
Itself."

After the discourse an opportunity was afforded for asking questions of
the speaker, who devoted half an hour to answering them.

</div>
