---
title: WAY TO SALVATION

---
<div>

[←](the_reality_and_the_shadow.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_people_of_india.htm)

  

## WAY TO SALVATION

(*Report of a lecture delivered in Oakland on Monday, March 12, 1900,
with  
editorial comments of the* Oakland Enquirer)

Wendte Hall of the First Unitarian Church was crowded last evening with
a large audience to hear the "Way to Salvation" from the standpoint of
the Hindu priest, Swami Vivekananda. This was the last lecture of a
series of three which the Swami has delivered. He said in part:

One man says God is in heaven, another that God is in nature and
everywhere present. But when the great crisis comes, we find the goal is
the same. We all work on different plans, but the end is not different.

The two great watchwords of every great religion are renunciation and
self-sacrifice. We all want the truth, and we know that it must come,
whether we want it or not. In a way we are all striving for that good.
And what prevents our reaching it? It is ourselves. Your ancestors used
to call it the devil; but it is our own false self.

We live in slavery, and we would die if we were out of it. We are like
the man who lived in total darkness for ninety years and when taken out
into the warm sunshine of nature, prayed to be taken back to his
dungeon. You would not leave this old life to go into a newer and
greater freedom which opens out.

The great difficulty is to go to the heart of things. These little
degraded delusions of Jack So-and-So's, who thinks he has an infinite
soul, however small he is with his different religions. In one country,
all as a matter of religion, a man has many wives; in another one woman
has many husbands. So some men have two gods, some one God, and some no
God at all.

But salvation is in work and love. You learn something thoroughly; in
time you may not be able to call that thing to memory. Yet it has sunk
into your inner consciousness and is a part of you. So as you work,
whether it be good or bad, you shape your future course of life. If you
do good work with the idea of work — work for work's sake — you will go
to heaven of your idea and dream of heaven.

The history of the world is not of its great men, of its demi-gods, but
it is the little islands of the sea, which build themselves to great
continents from fragments of the sea drift. Then the history of the
world is in the little acts of sacrifice performed in every household.
Man accepts religion because he does not wish to stand on his own
judgment. He takes it as the best way of getting out of a bad place.

The salvation of man lies in the great love with which he loves his God.
Your wife says, "O John, I could not live without you." Some men when
they lose their money have to be sent to the asylum. Do you feel that
way about your God? When you can give up money, friends, fathers and
mothers, brothers and sisters, all that is in the world and only pray to
God that He grant you something of His love, then you have found
salvation.

</div>
