---
title: I AM THAT I AM

---
<div>

[←](the_people_of_india.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](unity.htm)

  

## I AM THAT I AM

(*Notes of a lecture give in San Francisco on March 20, 1900*)

The subject tonight is man, man in contrast with nature. For a long time
the word "nature" was used almost exclusively to denote external
phenomena. These phenomena were found to behave methodically; and they
often repeated themselves: that which had happened in the past happened
again — nothing happened only once. Thus it was concluded that nature
was uniform. Uniformity is closely associated with the idea of nature;
without it natural phenomena cannot be understood. This uniformity is
the basis of what we call law.

Gradually the word "nature" and the idea of uniformity came to be
applied also to internal phenomena, the phenomena of life and mind. All
that is differentiated is nature. Nature is the quality of the plant,
the quality of the animal, and the quality of man. Man's life behaves
according to definite methods; so does his mind. Thoughts do not just
happen, there is a certain method in their rise, existence and fall. In
other words, just as external phenomena are bound by law, internal
phenomena, that is to say, the life and mind of man, are also bound by
law.

When we consider law in relation to man's mind and existence, it is at
once obvious that there can be no such thing as free will and free
existence. We know how animal nature is wholly regulated by law. The
animal does not appear to exercise any free will. The same is true of
man; human nature also is bound by law. The law governing functions of
the human mind is called the law of Karma.

Nobody has ever seen anything produced out of nothing; if anything
arises in the mind, that also must have been produced from something.
When we speak of free will, we mean the will is not caused by anything.
But that cannot be true, the will is caused; and since it is caused, it
cannot be free — it is bound by law. That I am willing to talk to you
and you come to listen to me, that is law. Everything that I do or think
or feel, every part of my conduct or behaviour, my every movement — all
is caused and therefore not free. This regulation of our life and mind —
that is the law of Karma.

If such a doctrine had been introduced in olden times into a Western
community, it would have produced a tremendous commotion. The Western
man does not want to think his mind is governed by law. In India it was
accepted as soon as it was propounded by the most ancient Indian system
of philosophy. There is no such thing as freedom of the mind; it cannot
be. Why did not this teaching create any disturbance in the Indian mind?
India received it calmly; that is the speciality of Indian thought,
wherein it differs from every other thought in the world.

The external and internal natures are not two different things; they are
really one. Nature is the sum total of all phenomena. "Nature" means all
that is, all that moves. We make a tremendous distinction between matter
and mind; we think that the mind is entirely different from matter.
Actually, they are but one nature, half of which is continually acting
on the other half. Matter is pressing upon the mind in the form of
various sensations. These sensations are nothing but force. The force
from the outside evokes the force within. From the will to respond to or
get away from the outer force, the inner force becomes what we call
thought.

Both matter and mind are really nothing but forces; and if you analyse
them far enough, you will find that at root they are one. The very fact
that the external force can somehow evoke the internal force shows that
somewhere they join each other — they must be continuous and, therefore,
basically the same force. When you get to the root of things, they
become simple and general. Since the same force appears in one form as
matter and in another form as mind, there is no reason to think matter
and mind are different. Mind is changed into matter, matter is changed
into mind. Thought force becomes nerve force, muscular force; muscular
and nerve force become thought force. Nature is all this force, whether
expressed as matter or mind.

The difference between the subtlest mind and the grossest matter is only
one of degree. Therefore the whole universe may be called either mind or
matter, it does not matter which. You may call the mind refined matter,
or the body concretised mind; it makes little difference by which name
you call which. All the troubles arising from the conflict between
materialism and spirituality are due to wrong thinking. Actually, there
is no difference between the two. I and the lowest pig differ only in
degree. It is less manifested, I am more. Sometimes I am worse, the pig
is better.

Nor is it any use discussing which comes first — mind or matter. Is the
mind first, out of which matter has come? Or is matter first, out of
which the mind has come? Many of the philosophical arguments proceed
from these futile questions. It is like asking whether the egg or the
hen is first. Both are first, and both last — mind and matter, matter
and mind. If I say matter exists first and matter, growing finer and
finer, becomes mind, then I must admit that before matter there must
have been mind. Otherwise, where did matter come from? Matter precedes
mind, mind precedes matter. It is the hen and the egg question all
through.

The whole of nature is bound by the law of causation and is in time and
space. We cannot see anything outside of space, yet we do not know
space. We cannot perceive anything outside of time, yet we do not know
time. We cannot understand anything except in terms of causality, yet we
do not know what causation is. These three things — time, space, and
causality — are in and through every phenomena, but they are not
phenomena. They are as it were the forms or moulds in which everything
must be cast before it can be apprehended. Matter is substance plus
time, space, and causation. Mind is substance plus time, space and
causation.

This fact can be expressed in another way. Everything is substance plus
name and form. Name and form come and go, but substance remains ever the
same. Substance, form, and name make this pitcher. When it is broken,
you do not call it pitcher any more, nor do you see its pitcher form.
Its name and form vanish, but its substance remains. All the
differentiation in substance is made by name and form. There are not
real, because they vanish. What we call nature is not the substance,
unchanging and indestructible. Nature is time, space and causation.
Nature is name and form. Nature is Mâyâ. Maya means name and form, into
which everything is cast. Maya is not real. We could not destroy it or
change it if it were real. The substance is the noumenon, Maya is
phenomena. There is the real "me" which nothing can destroy, and there
is the phenomenal "me" which is continually changing and disappearing.

The fact is, everything existing has two aspects. One is noumenal,
unchanging and indestructible; the other is phenomenal, changing and
destructible. Man in his true nature is substance, soul, spirit. This
soul, this spirit, never changes, is never destroyed; but it appears to
be clothed with a form and to have a name associated with it. This form
and name are not immutable or indestructible; they continually change
and are destroyed. Yet men foolishly seek immortality in this changeable
aspect, in the body and mind — they want to have an eternal body. I do
not want that kind of immortality.

What is the relation between me and nature? In so far as nature stands
for name and form or for time, space, and causality, I am not part of
nature, because I am free, I am immortal, I am unchanging and infinite.
The question does not arise whether I have free will or not; I am beyond
any will at all. Wherever there is will, it is never free. There is no
freedom of will whatever. There is freedom of that which becomes will
when name and form get hold of it, making it their slave. That substance
— the soul — as it were moulds itself, as it were throws itself into the
cast of name and form, and immediately becomes bound, whereas it was
free before. And yet its original nature is still there. That is why it
says, "I am free; in spite of all this bondage, I am free." And it never
forgets this.

But when the soul has become the will, it is no more really free. Nature
pulls the strings, and it has to dance as nature wants it to. Thus have
you and I danced throughout the years. All the things that we see, do,
feel, know, all our thoughts and actions, are nothing but dancing to the
dictates of nature. There has been, and there is, no freedom in any of
this. From the lowest to the highest, all thoughts and actions are bound
by law, and none of these pertain to our real Self.

My true Self is beyond all law. Be in tune with slavery, with nature,
and you live under law, you are happy under law. But the more you obey
nature and its dictates, the more bound you become; the more in harmony
with ignorance you are, the more you are at the beck and call of
everything in the universe. Is this harmony with nature, this obedience
to law, in accord with the true nature and destiny of man? What mineral
ever quarrelled with and disputed any law? What tree or plant ever
defied any law? This table is in harmony with nature, with law; but a
table it remains always, it does not become any better. Man begins to
struggle and fight against nature. He makes many mistakes, he suffers.
But eventually he conquers nature and realises his freedom. When he is
free, nature becomes his slave.

The awakening of the soul to its bondage and its effort to stand up and
assert itself — this is called life. Success in this struggle is called
evolution. The eventual triumph, when all the slavery is blown away, is
called salvation, Nirvâna, freedom. Everything in the universe is
struggling for liberty. When I am bound by nature, by name and form, by
time, space and causality, I do not know what I truly am. But even in
this bondage my real Self is not completely lost. I strain against the
bonds; one by one they break, and I become conscious of my innate
grandeur. Then comes complete liberation. I attain to the clearest and
fullest consciousness of myself — I know that I am the infinite spirit,
the master of nature, not its slave. Beyond all differentiation and
combination, beyond space, time and causation, I am that I am.

</div>
