+++
title = "A THIRD DRAUGHT OF SOMA-KVASIR – THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE MEANING OF THExa0MEAD"
date = "August 17, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/di2imruxcaaggru-1.jpg?w=819)

  
As I have previously illustrated, it now seems that Snorri Sturluson’s
accounting of the Mead of Poetry is drawing from, and perhaps inexpertly
seeking to summarize materials that are far older. That are
Indo-European. That have likely been passed down since the points
roughly at which the Vedic and the Eddic religious canons were broadly
one.

I have shown this via a close comparison of the ‘functional’ elements in
Sturluson’s treatment of the Meath – with a particular focus upon the
linguistic elementstherein, and how they have retained their meanings
even though their place within the myth, their understanding in other
words, may have become reverse-euhemerized. A good example of which
being the term ‘Hnitbjorg’ – which means ‘clashing rocks’, and which has
been recalled in Germanic mythology as some sort of mountain that opens
and closes … but which should be better understood as a direct correlate
of what we know from the RigVeda as the ‘Press-Stones’ (often even
themselves referred to as Parvats – mountains); hard devices made use of
to ‘press’ the Mead or the Soma empowering ingredient out of its
otherwise hidden home. There are, of course, other examples – and I
would thoroughly advise interested readers to consult the previous two
articles in this series. One of which is even, itself, in summarized
form!

So if we can identify particular close-correlates between the Myth of
the Meath on the one hand, and the Rites of the Soma on the other … it
therefore follows that there is serious probative value to be found in
analyzing \*other\* potential quandrieswhen it comes to our
comprehension of the Mead of Poetry upon exactly the same basis. To look
for the possible Vedic correlates for the terms and the concepts within
the Eddic referencing of this structure that have hitherto proven
somewhat intractable to clear interpretation. And therefore to more
properly comprehend the otherwise enigmatic qualities of these
obscurated terms.

The area I have turned this lense to, is the naming of the Three Vessels
of the Mead – Óðrerir, Boðn, and Són. For while ‘Odrerir’ is reasonably
clear in its interpolation, ‘Bodn’ has produced quite an array of
interpretations that are, to my mind, often unfeasibly mundane or simply
outright confused … and ‘Son’, is similarly poorly understood.

**A THIRD DRAUGHT OF SOMA-KVASIR – THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE MEANING OF
THE MEAD – THE SPIRIT RISING: ON ODRERIR  
**  
‘Odrerir’ is, in many ways, the key. For it tells us that the Names of
the Vessels are not to be understood as simply terms for … well …
vessels within which such a brew might be housed. But rather, that they
are intended to be ‘Functional’ designations – words that tell us
something about what the liquid housed therein is supposed to \*do\*.

As for ‘Odrerir’ itself – it clearly derives from ‘Odr’ … a term for
fury, frenzy, but also (Divine) Inspiration; and as I have previously
argued in this year’s MahaShivRatri tribute piece ( ‘MahaShivRatri And
The Mytholinguistics Of War \[Part 3\] – The Mind, The Mania, The Manyu
‘ ), not only are ‘Furor Teutonicus’ and ‘Furor Poeticus’ fundamentally
the same thing (just somewhat differently expressed – the sword in the
tongue, or perhaps the pen, relative to the sword in the hand), but
these have an abundantly clear pan-Indo-European expression.

They are known to us here in the Vedisphere, as the ‘Manyu’ – a term
which derives from the Proto-Indo-European for an ‘Active Mind’, as
well as for the imparted mental state or element (such as Sanskrit:
‘Mantra’) ; and which is also, entirely uncoincidentally, a Vedic
Theonym for an Aspect of Rudra. The Manyu, the Berserk Fury, the
Unstoppable Mightiest of the Vedic War Gods.

As Rudra-Shiva is Odin, it therefore makes multiple layers of conceptual
sense to regard the Manyu and the Odr to be fundamentally one and the
same.

This is especially the case when we note that Odin, and Shiva as Soma,
Soumya, are closely identified with the provision of the Empowering
Elixir in question. The Qualities under Their – or, more properly,
\*His\* – Command, are bestowed out to the chosen Devotee in just such a
manner. And, in the way broadly commensurate with how we ‘become more
like That Which We Meditate Upon’, so too do we seek to emulate via
imbibification , the admirable qualities of the Great God therethrough.

So, what isÓðrerir, then? It is the ‘stirrer’, the ‘stirrer up’ of this
mystical quality of ‘Odr’. It is the Kettle, the largest and most
important of the three vessels – precisely because it is the essential
quality that makes the other two possible. It is from there that the
other two, more properly, should be conceived of as being filled.

It is called Odrerir, because of the manner in which the brewing takes
place therein – and thence which we emulate when we feel the furor, the
manyu that is Odrerir well up also inside us. The ‘furor’ qualities
ofBoðn and Són are what are also imparted in just such a manner –
almost as ‘steam’ rising up from the heated brew. And that goes also
with the well-founded Indo-European conceptry on the ‘smoking-breath’
\[also of anger\] being the signifer not only of fury but also of \*life
itself\* and of spirit, of inspiration. But more upon that, perhaps,
some other time.

In terms of the actual and direct ‘Odr’ quality imparted to us – it is
as I have already stated. That essence of ‘Inspiration’ which grants
the spontaneous knowledge and insight, the initiative of the active-flow
of the Poet’s tongue-stream. That guides and shapes upon a veer-y
instinctual level our men-tal efforts and our proper, pious output via
the wrath of the Pen.

The Vedic co-expression of this is, largely, as I have already set out:
the Odr concept itself is expressed as ‘Manyu’, as well as the various
Vedic attestations around the Rsi \[‘Sage’/’Seer’\] being guided in
their verses and their perspective illuminated via the empowerment of
the Soma Brew and other such Divine uplifting to their perspective and
elocution. It may also have correlate in the RigVedic mention for the
quality which makes a man a Rsi under Vak’s aegis of empowerment being
Ugra – ‘Fury’, ‘Anger’, and of course, another Shaivite ‘functional’
theonym into the bargain.

**A THIRD DRAUGHT OF SOMA-KVASIR – THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE MEANING OF
THE MEAD – THE BREW OF BODNAND BUDDHI  
**  
So this brings us on to Boðn – a term that has been straightforwardly
interpreted as, effectively, just another term for a storage container:
akin to modern GermanBütte. However, this does not seem quite right.
After all, why bestow upon the first vessel the undeniably mighty and
mentally / metaphysically empowering title of ‘Odrerir’ if the next in
the sequence was simply to be termed what amounts to ‘barrel’.

No, I rather suspect that there is another relatively straightforward
and much more \*insightful\* term meant here. Not ‘Barrel’ (or the
etymologically not-that-related ‘Bottle’), but rather a Germanic
equivalent for Sanskrit बुध्, बुद्धि‘Budh’, ‘Buddhi’.

‘Bodn’, ‘Budh’ – it is not hard to see how just such a parallel
etymological derivation may have occurred. In this case, both from
Proto-Indo-European ‘Bhewhd’ \[the same chain of derivation arrived at
by Axel Kock when analyzing Boðn, albeit for other reasons\], meaning
‘Awake / Aware’ \[functionally somewhat equivalent to the Odinic theonym
– Vak, Vakr; the ‘Awake’ or perhaps ‘Wakener’, presumably not ‘the
Woke’\]. These clearly inform the Sanskrit ‘Budh’ and ‘Buddhi’ – wherein
the sense being conveyed is one of ‘perception’, ‘wit’, and ‘wisdom’.
The ability to see things and thence to process and comprehend what is
seen, thus producing an insight as to their nature and a declaration as
to what it is that must be done therefore about them. ‘Intelligence’ not
so much as the ‘being’ of a spirit – but the facility which enables that
spirit to mediate and process the external realm. ‘Sapience’, we might
perhaps call it. Or even ‘cunning’, especially in relation to ‘ken’,
‘kenning’.

Exactly what we should expect from the fabled Meath of Poetry, and also
what is supported in the Vedic hymnals around the positive impact for
the imbibing Rsi upon their perspicacity, their knowledge, their mental
faculties and powers all up.

And \*also\*, entirely uncoincidentally to my mind, how we might
interpret the effects of both the drinking of \*another\* empowering
brew – the blood of the dragon consumed by Sigurd that grants him the
comprehension of the Language of the Birds … as well as the ability to
understand said Language, itself. Which grants Sigurd the perception of
the intended future by he who would wish him ill.

However, there is a slight complication. Many of the directly descended
Germanic terms we have from Proto-Indo-European Bhewhd have gone down a
more narrow range of derivations of meaning than we should perhaps
otherwise expect. Proto-Germanic ‘Budona’ and ‘Beudana’, for instance –
which come to mean a ‘proclamation’ and a ‘bid’ (another descendent –
although this has also been reconstructed as deriving from PIE ‘Gwhedh),
respectively; ‘Buda’ – a message (which informs ‘ Boð ‘), whence
‘Budilaz’ – a messenger (‘Budo’ means much the same thing); or even
‘Beudaz’ – meaning a space upon which something is offered such as a
dish or an altar.

But is this fatal for our prospective identification of the Mead of Boðn
as bestowing ‘awareness’ , enhancing and augmenting the powers of
perception and critical insight? I do not think so. For after all – what
is a ‘messenger’ ? One who makes you \*aware\* of something. In just
such a manner as we have seen from those Birds and their Language
speaking unto Sigurd. They ‘showed’ – or, more aptly, ‘told’ him, of
something that was going to happen … if he did not take moves to prevent
it. “He who sees his own doom can better avoid its path. He who sees the
doom of others can deliver it “, indeed.

A similar phenomenon, after a sort, is visible in the Rigsthula, wherein
Kon (the ‘Young King’) is provided with critical guidance via the mouth
of a Crow; and, of course, Odin’s Ravens providing reconnaissance
\[‘Thought’ and ‘Memory’ bringing ‘Intelligence’, you might say, in
multiple senses of the term\] are a further well-known element of the
relevant mythology.

It may be possible to interpret this figuratively, in the manner of
divination \[and consider also the similarly descended Old Norse ‘Bysn’
– a wonder or a portent\]; and certainly, perceiving patterns in the
flights of birds is a well-known form of such an augury: Romulus & Remus
settled their contest in just such a manner.

But I do not think that that is quite what is being communicated here.
On one sense, it is quite plausible that the kind of super-comprehensive
insight needed to interpret signs and wonders out there in the natural
world and then key them to the unfurling of one’s own or one’s tribe’s
impending narrative … would be something that should benefit from a
consciousness-altering elixir or other such mental power and prowess. On
another, it could even be interpreted more euhemerically – in the way
that my favoured Sanskrit ‘Vacam Garjit Lakshanam’ \[‘Thunder bearing
the characteristics of Speech’\] has occasionally been explained as the
fact that if you can hear thunder, it is ‘telling’ you that rain is
taking place somewhere. So, too, if one can see or hear birds being
disturbed somewhere – it indicates that somebody is likely approaching
through such a vector. Or birds and other such creatures fleeing a place
where an earthquake or other natural disaster is shortly to be
impending; Crows and Ravens gathering above the site of impending
bloodshed (and even acting as ‘scouts’ for wolves that then take down
prey for them to join the feast upon). But I do not think that it is
these, either – not entirely, at any rate.

Rather, it is the role of these Birds as \*speaking\*, and with the
Voice of the Divine, or at least a Divinely Intended Message, that is
the more useful sense and concept here. Something which we can certainly
see in the Crow’s communique unto Kon aforementioned – wherein its sage
counsel is for the Young King to ride out in conquest against other
humans rather than merely catching birds for his prey. Perhaps there may
have been a certain note of self-interest in the Crow’s words … and
perhaps Kon was quite glad to no longer be afforded the prospect of
‘eating Crow’.

But in terms of the Corvidae in particular, we so often encounter these
as the ‘messengers’ and the ‘accompaniers’ of particular deities of the
Indo-Europeans. Odin, Athena, Apollo, Yama, Shaani, Shiva (in particular
as Bhairava), and of course, the MahaVidya \[‘Great Revelation’\]
Dhumanvatihave such associations. I would also include Varuna, not
least upon suspicion that the ‘Spies’ He has all about may be just such
black-feathered emissaries. Among we Hindus, the Corvid is directly
hailed as ‘Yamadhuta’ – the Emissary of Lord Yama; and is also
frequently regarded as a returned Pitr \[‘Forefather’/’Ancestor’
spirit\].

The commonality of all of those deific-expressions aforementioned ought
be obvious. In most of these cases, there is a strong association with
Death and/or the provision of Insight. These faculties have long been
most closely aligned – consider the ‘vision-quest’ style katabasic
jaunts of Aeneas and Odysseus into the Underworld in pursuit of the
necessary Wisdom of the Dead. They \*became\*, if you like, the
Messengers, the Heralds. And they made active use of a different kind of
‘awareness’ in order to perceive and to comprehend what was going on
‘midst the Sepulchral Realm.

So, again, we are left with the sense that the ‘Awareness’ in question
means the facility, the faculty, the capacity to ‘see’ and to ‘hear’ the
wisdom that comes to us from perhaps ‘hidden’ sources \[recalling the
Proto-Indo-European ‘Kel’ particle, meaning a ‘Veil’ that informs
Sanskrit terms for ‘Death’ like Kaal – connoting the notion of ‘Death’
and the After-Life being something that is ‘hidden’, ‘beyond the veil’\]
; as well as the conception that this wisdom is delivered unto us , if
we are so disposed to hear it and able to bid it to come to us , via
Messengers. ‘Budh’, ‘Bhehwd’, you might say – all the way down.

However, there are two other meaning-stems from a different
Proto-Indo-European term (the aforementioned ‘Gwhedh’) that we ought
consider before bringing things back full-circle to the ‘Bodn’ that I
believe to be ‘Budh’. And these are the sense of ‘Bid’ (and its various
closely related Germanic-Continental cousins; including, in the opposite
sense, ‘forbid’, ‘verboten’ etc.) and ‘Bede’ (which is, itself, also
potentially derived from PIE ‘Bhewdh’) – both modern English terms,
albeit with the former nowadays only really retaining its ‘commercial’
sense of an offer (rather than a declaration, an invitation, a
proclamation, a welcoming), and the latter largely un-known(it means
‘to pray’). Such is the spirit of the age.

Why do I suggest these might be relevant? Well, consider just what it is
that is happening when the Soma is prepared, and therefore almost
certainly what the Mead of Poetry’s preparatory rites and purpose must
have correspondingly entailed. Certainly, we are producing an elixir
that, when consumed, empowers the imbiber – we are ‘bidding’ that the
power in question come inside us. And we are hoping that the brew in
question shall give us serious potency when it comes to the power of
poesy – of speech, proclamation, prayer. We are \*also\*, press-uming
the Soma comparative is correct, carrying out a proper sacrificial rite.
And hence, we are engaged in a form of prayer … an \*offering\* ,
wherein it would only seem appropriate for the God or Gods relevant to
have first taste, drink of the brew that has been prepared, alongside of
and ahead of us. This may partially resonate with that Proto-Germanic
‘Beudaz’, speaking of a table or a dish made use of in a sacral,
offering context.

‘Prayer’, in other words, may here be understood not simply as saying
something up to the Heavens … but as more of a two-way communicative
street. Inviting, by politely asking \[‘bidding’ – as in, bid you
answer, please\], the Guidance, the Inspiration, the Insight, the Odr to
come down from Above as ‘Answer’ … and which would also conveniently
situate this within the ‘Guest’ model of Indo-European sacral conduct
\[wherein we do quite literally this: we bid the Deity in question to
come down among us and partake of the sacral rite in Their Honour as
Honoured Guest .

Something that would, now that we think upon it, make quite some sense
for a certain ‘Wandering God’ …

Speaking of Whom, it is interesting indeed to note that the
Interpretatio Romano of Odin – Mercury – is also directly relevant here,
and twice over. For the planet Mercury is also referred to within
Hinduism as the Graha of Budh / Budha (बुध). This Budh is also a
lesser-known deity, presiding over the linguistically associated (as in,
what is meant by the other ‘Budh’ term) qualities of the alacrity and
swiftness of mind , the empowerment and the impartmant thereof; as well
as the linguistic, communicative \*expressions\* of those powers through
eloquence and articulation. He is also occasionally referenced \*as\*
such a ‘messenger’/’communicator’ figure, acting as such for The Gods in
part due to the swift and speedy motion across the skies.

And Budh-Var, that is to say, Wednesday \[Odin’s Day\], is also referred
to as being Soumya’s Day. Soumya, of course, being Soma – the Deity
presiding over the Empowering Elixir of the Vedic Aryans. Now, Soma is
often identified with Chandra, with Shiva … and it should therefore come
as no surprise to find that this Budh is also similarly related.
Related, that is, in a rather direct sense – as Chandra’s Son, either by
Rohini or by Taraka; with Taraka being linked to Brihaspati as His
Consort. Brihaspati, of course, \*also\* being Shiva in one of His many
masques , and having a pretty direct figurative linkage to the Odinic
theonym of Galdrfodr. Father of the Songs of Prayer, a most \*eloquent\*
figure, indeed!

This would therefore presumably place Budh as being a Son of the Sky
Father, in much the same manner as Heimdall, or Hermod (or, to a degree,
Hermes/Mercury). But one that is veer-y much following in His Father’s
foot-steps in terms of the associations and portfolios of same. The main
reason for His citation here, other than the comparative interest, is to
further elucidate the direct proximal connexions of Soma and Budh and
the relevant locative materials for Odin. And to show that the concept
for Proto-Indo-European ‘Bhewdh’ in later Germanic languages … that of
something that makes us ‘aware’ of something, also has comparative
expression in the East. As well as demonstrating the specific linkage of
the communicative, the expressive faculties that are positively
empowered via the Soma-Kvasir brew – with the presiding actions and
essences of Budh(-Graha).

All of which is a lot more compelling and useful than simply ascribing
the name ofBoðn to the designation for a mere vessel for the brew.

Something that is particularly the case when we consider that the
identification ofBoðn as a ‘vessel’ would effectively make it the
\*only\* one out of the three names (Óðrerir, Boðn, and Són), that would
be so mundanely mean.Són is a fantastically difficult term to pin down,
itself, but almost certainly must have had a similarly ‘functional’ and
pointedly ‘sacred’ meaning to it as well. It is to this that we shall
now turn.

**A THIRD DRAUGHT OF SOMA-KVASIR – THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE MEANING OF
THE MEAD – SON, SONAR, SVAHA  
**  
Now, the major linkage that has been previously proposed is to Old Norse
‘Sonar’ – as is prominently featured in the Sonargoltr boar-sacrifice.
Although it should be noted that this particular identification comes
with some controversy, as the actual meaning of ‘Sonar’ in this context
has been proposed to go in a number of potentially relevant ways. The
older interpretation is that the ‘Sonar’ in ‘Sonargoltr’ should mean
‘Atonement’ or perhaps ‘Sacrifice’; although this has seemingly been
cast into doubt via the resurrection of a newer rendering supported by
Lombard explication upon the matter – that instead holds the ‘Sonar’ of
‘Sonargoltr’ to mean something more akin to ‘the biggest’, or the best …
something that would make immense logical sense when considering the
customary selection of animals for divine offering in other
Indo-European myths and cultures. There is also a rather less likely
suggestion that the ‘Son(n)ar’ of ‘Sonargoltr’ ought mean ‘Sun’ ,
however while there is perhaps some conceptual resonancy for this in
light of the Freyr associations of the boar, I do not consider it to be
entirely sound.

Yet curiously, if we consider the matter etymologically – and most
particularly , in light of the potential Vedic comparative , it actually
appears that our quandry is not between different words of entirely
different meaning … but rather between broadly the same terms, with
figurative \*shadings\* of meaning that may have lead to artificial
obscuration of the actual sense being conveyed. Especially when it comes
to the potentially somewhat forced extrapolation of the ritualine
saliency of the ‘Sonar’ of ‘Sonargoltr’ to the ‘Son’ that is the third
vessel, or perhaps quality of the Empowering Brew.

You see, “Atonement” is almost exactly on the mark for what is meant by
‘Son’ – it is just that we have forgotten what is right in front of us
when it comes to that term. It literally means “At-One-Ment” – the
making whole of something. And while the Proto-Germanic that this likely
descends from – Swono – also can be interpreted as the forming of accord
or agreement between men (another form of bringing together to make
‘one’ out of formerly divided or less-complete parts), which may help to
inform why Freyr is linked to the Sonargoltr boar (other than, of
course, it being a boar) … this would be somewhat curious to have as the
name of one of the qualities of the Mead of Poetry in this sense. Not
impossible, it must be said, and you could perhaps read the last draught
as bearing the quality of comradeship, the unification of men into
common purpose, in light of the traditional role of alcohol in binding
together fellows, for example via the Sumbl rite … but I suspect that
other meanings of the ‘rendering complete’ are more plausible.

Particularly that \*other\* well-known toast when quaffing a beverage –
“to good health!”

For this is rather closer to the mark of the Proto-Indo-European ‘Swan’
from whence Proto-Germanic ‘Swono’ derives. A sense also preserved in
the directly cognate Latin ‘Sanus’ (likely the origin of modern English
‘Sane’), as well as the various Germanic ‘Gesund’ style terms that are
somewhat coterminous etymologically, to name but a few. Making somebody
whole – at-one-ment – as the provision of health and vigour, the healing
of injury, the removal of imperfecting disease. There is also some
tantalizing hints around the use of the ‘Sonar Dreyri’ in two Nordic
texts for the provision of somewhat differing forms of
‘health’/’wellbeing’/’completeness’ – but more upon that at some future
date. We’re still doing the research!

However, there is a further sense to ‘Sonar’ that ought be considered,
again potentially not exclusively to the above aforementioned, before we
examine a potential Vedic cognate.

This is the notion of ‘Sonar’ as ‘Sacrifice’ – which, beyond its obvious
application in the Sonargoltr rite, may concord with the Proto-Germanic
‘Swono’ having the sense of ‘atonement’, or perhaps the more general
notion of ‘proper’ and ‘whole-some’ conduct. implied in the
Proto-Indo-European ‘Swa-n’ and its subsequent derivatives. Certainly,
in some small way, the pious act of sacrificing contributes to the
making whole, hale, and healthy of the World entire – the strengthening
of the tapestry of Rta’s immanence here in our universe, and the further
energizing of our ‘concordat’ with The Gods. Indeed, in the sense of
‘Sonar’ implying a coming together of various parties in good spirit and
shared purpose, particularly to hallow oaths, the fact that
Indo-European sacral rite conduct tends to hinge around the concept of
The Gods arriving as honoured guests (or, vice versa – us as Guests in
Their Residence, if we should be visiting a Temple) , Swono, Sonar, and
their relatives are \*exactly\* the right terms to use.

The reason that this is relevant, is threefold. First and foremost,
because if my theory does in fact hold water (or any other vitally
empowering liquid substance, for that matter), then the Mead of Poetry
would have been a sacrament, an offering, prepared in a sacral context
much like its Vedic co-expression of Soma. We must \*always\* keep this
in mind!

What that may mean, is that viewed in terms of the ‘functional’
labelling of the Vessels, the designation of the third draught as ‘Son’,
may suggest that it is the Power of Piety and the strength of as well as
sense of one’s connection to The Gods (an acknowledgement of Heritage,
as well as learning to see the world differently, flowing out therefrom
that) which comprises the third Investiture, the third Quality granted
by the imbibification of the Mead of Poetry. So just as Odrerir would
grant ‘Odr’ – the Furor Poeticus and/or Teutonicus that represents
eloquence on the battlefield or in verse as well as a powerful, raging
spirit which may also correlate with Will; and just as Bodnwould grant
the ‘Budh’ style boons of superior ‘insight’ (critical thinking, mental
acuity) and external ‘sight’ (sensory perception, perspicacity) ; so,
therefore, should ‘Son’ bestow something connected to the term’s
intrinsic meaning. However, we shall consider that, along with another
possibility, shortly.

The second potentiality is that the ‘Son’ in question does, in fact,
mean ‘sacrifice’ – and that this may refer to the third vessel’s
intended destination. Not as something to be (initially) consumed by the
sacrificer – but rather, to be offered up to The Gods, Whose Mead after
all, it actually is. This would also therefore underpin the earlier
conceptualized ‘Son’ as a shared occasion – as it is precisely the
offering to The Gods which renders this veer-y much more than but a
‘one-way street’ (which, you could argue, the ‘fourth drop’, the one
that engenders bad verses, which was inadvertently jettisoned by Odin in
eagle form as He flew back to Asgard with the Mead … pretty much was –
insofar as it turns up with no offering made and no reciprocity, and
dire and improper are the resulting outputs in consequence). A parallel
to this is easily findable in the Vedic Soma rites – wherein offering of
the Elixer thusly produced to The Gods (Who are in attendance) is
absolutely integral to proceedings.

This may also inform the third dimension to ‘Son’ amidst Odrerir and
Bodn– wherein it is the carrying out of such a sacrificial portion of
the Mead’s derivation which renders things ‘complete’, ‘whole’, ‘right’,
and ‘proper’.

Another probability is that the ‘Son’ of the Third Vessel is meant in a
perhaps more ‘sociable’ functionalist sense. That is to say , that it
may provide preternatural powers of charisma and the ability to bring
men together in shared, common purpose through inspiration and insight
(Odr and Bodn, respectively). This would plausibly fit with what we know
of the miraculous potency of the Mead, and would be an absolutely vital
skill for many of the would-be heroic and mighty figures who would seek
to benefit from its imbibification. On one end of the spectrum, it is
the veer-y stuff of which kingships and empires are made ; and in
another part, it is the natural, indeed quite literally log-ical result
of an excellent story-teller working his magic upon an audience in a
darkened fire-lit feast-hall.

But let us move on to the potential Vedic cognates, of which there are
also three. ‘Svadha’, ‘Svaha’, and ‘Svasthya’.

The first is a rather intriguing term for our purposes, insofar as it
encodes the sense of an ’empowering imbibification’; for example, in its
use in RV I 144 2, wherein it is Agni Who is the one to take the power
via drinking of this offering. A transmission that is curiously rendered
in the Brereton/Jamison translation of the relevant hymnal as being an
implicit act of self-sacrifice, a sort of self-contained cycle wherein
Agni comes to gain and benefit from powers already somewhat innate to
Him via the making and then drinking of the offering to Him(self); and
which has direct linkage also to The Waters – something which would also
fit, perhaps, with the hypothesized role of the Well of Mimir in my
reconstructive interpretation of that myth. In particular, the mediative
role of Saraswati as both ‘gatekeeper’ and ‘expression’ of that which
lies beyond The Waters, and therefore the empowerment, the knowledge and
wisdom, that can flow therefrom.

However, I consider this somewhat less likely in a direct sense to be
the meaning of ‘Son’ – as apart from noting that all \*three\* of the
Vessels of the Meath are ’empowering beverages’ to be drunken, the
etymology is also somewhat more remote. ‘Svadha’ either derives from
‘dha’, and would therefore mean something akin to ‘drawing to one’s self
via sucking’; or it derives from Proto-Indo-European ‘Swe-Deh’, in which
case we have the more interesting ‘Self Placing’ as the original
meaning. And I say this is ‘more interesting’ because it grants cognate
terms in Ancient Greek of both ‘Ethos’ and ‘Ethnos’ – that is to say,
Custom/Habit and Culture/People. The Germanic cognate, meanwhile, would
be ‘Siduz’ (giving us the Old Norse ‘Siðr’ – in which the term has
usefully also come to mean ‘Religion’), although it is also possible
that ‘Siduz’ is slightly differently derived, from PIE ‘Sehy’ meaning
‘To Bind’. In any case, the meaning of ‘Svadha’ as ‘Power’ and also
‘Custom’, is interesting and resonant; as are the broader Indo-European
cognate terms for ‘Svadha’ wherein this ‘Power’ is the power of
Principle and culture – that which is right, proper, and correct,
because it is ‘the done thing’ for one’s folk. Which would, as applies
the ‘folk’ connection, also link back to one of the manners in which
Germanic ‘Sonar’ has been interpreted. But there are better potential
options for our Sanskrit functional cognate, I think.

The most obvious of which being ‘Svaha’ – a remarkably common and also
resonant Sanskrit liturgical phrasing , the effective meaning of which
in directly literal terms is ‘Well-Said’; although with the better
understanding perhaps being akin to ‘Hail!’ – as it is the injunctive
phrase which sanctifies and ‘completes’ a ritual expression and the
correspondent offering. It is the final ‘ingredient’, if you like, to
rendering something holy and properly empowered. Interestingly, Svaha
also occurs as the name of a Wife of Agni, a Mother of Kartikeya, as
well as the name of a Wife of Shiva (and it should be noted the
effective unifying thread of these three occurrences is Him; in the
first case, the Svaha in question is a Daughter of Daksha, as is Lady
Sati; in the second case, the principle Mother of Kartikeya is Parvati;
and in the third case, Shiva’s bride of the fiery (self) sacrifice is
regrettably rather coterminous with the domain of Svaha over the
offerings consumed via flame).

If ‘Svaha’ were the correct Vedic ritual cognate for ‘Son’, then it
would imply that this third Vessel of the Mead is the one which renders
the bestowal of the blessings of the Meath to be ‘complete’, to be
‘good’. It may also, in a figurative sense, imply the bestowal of the
Skaldic potency for which the Mead of Poetry is, after all, named –
‘Well-Said’, remember? A somewhat logical final step following the
preceding ‘raising of spirit’, the linkage of the ‘spirit’ implied by
Odr, Odrerir with the outside world via the perceptiveness of Bon – the
ability to then express what has been formented, ‘stirred up’ via the
preceding two impartments or investments via the power of Speech.

Although the parallel formulation we ought consider, in light of the
customary way with which a toast is to be drink even today, is a further
possibility – “Good Health!”

Or, as we might say in Sanskrit – Svasthya. Which, in addition to its
sense of ‘Health’ can also connote ‘Well-Being’ in other ways, including
happiness and contentment, as well as the state of ‘being at peace’.
That last one, in particular, may not sound entirely in keeping with the
Nordic/Germanic ‘spirit’ of things – but consider the Proto-Germanic
term ‘Swono’ which I had raised earlier. It means, in addition to an
offering or a sacrifice, the bringing about of a concord or the
reconciliation of men. Exactly the sorts of things one expects to see as
correlate with the bringing of peace – the atonement (at-one-ment) of
parties, consecrated with a ritual offering, and in the case of the
Sonar-Boar, hallowed with oaths. A restoration of the ‘health’ of the
community via the amelioration and removal of strife and discord.

I therefore have little hesitation in suggestion that the ‘Són’ of the
Third Vessel, is broadly equivalent to the ‘Sunn’ of modern Norwegian –
‘Health’, in a sense comparable to how we would say ‘of Sound Mind’, ‘of
Sound Body’ in modern formalized legal English, ‘Sound’ in this sense
being etymologically cognate.

However, while we have identified direct Odinic theonyms related to the
qualities being imparted for each of the first two Vessels –Óðrerir and
Odr,Boðn and Vakr; which should be expected, given the prominent
mythological associations and ‘possession’ for Odin with the qualities
in question; we reach a minor obstacle as appliesSón. Odin is more
usually regarded as the inciter of strife and inceptor of conflict, than
the negotiator of the peace which restores an equitable balance
post-bellum. Although the main instance in which Odin must have been
involved in a peace-treaty is, of course, also the one which produces
Kvasir in the first place – the resolution of the Aesir-Vanir conflict.
In terms of theonyms, ‘Thror’ and ‘Throttr’ may have some relevancy. The
latter refers to ‘Strength’ (providing modern Icelandic ‘throttur’ –
also meaning energy and vigour), the former to the quality of ‘Thriving’
(which, interestingly, Tolkien had potentially linked to a boar in his
Legendarium’s use of the name). And is also the name Odin gives for
Himself in the context of Council Assembly – exactly where we should
expect the active participants to come together in positive spirit and
concord. My colleague, Tristan Powers, has also alerted me to the mythic
account of Odin healing Baldr’s horse, mention of Odin’s healing power
occurrent in the Havamal, and the Odinic theonym of ‘Kjalarr’ –
‘Nourisher’ – although he also adds that it is possible this is meant …
rather specifically, to refer to ‘nourishing the Crows’ via the dead
bodies of the battlefield.

**A THIRD DRAUGHT OF SOMA-KVASIR – THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE MEANING OF
THE MEAD – THE EMBERS OF EMPOWERMENT OF HUMAN  
**  
The best justification for the Third Vessel providing ‘Health’ or
‘Bodily Vitality’, though, is to be found in a perhaps less-expected
source – theVöluspá.

To quote from the Old Norse:

“Ǫnd þau né átto, óð þau né hǫfðo,  
lá né læti né lito góða.  
Ǫnd gaf Óðinn, óð gaf Hœnir,  
lá gaf Lóðurr ok lito góða.”

A full-scale exploration of the three sets of qualities being imparted
here (as well as the perhaps curious specific names bestowed upon the
Givers thereof) is beyond the scope of this piece; but suffice to say
the three terms are generally rendered as follows. ‘Önd’ – as ‘Breath’,
or Soul, Spirit \[linking, as we have previously seen, to the strong
alignment of ‘Spirit’ and ‘Air’\]; ‘Óð’ is customarily translated as
‘Sense’ \[the ‘Active Engagement’ of ‘Spirit’ with the world around it,
perhaps\]; ‘Lá’ and ‘Lito’ variously translated as ‘Heat’, ‘Film of
Flesh’, ‘Blood’, and ‘Colour’, ‘Hue’, ‘Appearance’ \[think of the
essential qualities of the living being as opposed to the corpse – life
seen in living temperature and the lack of the corpse-like pallor of
death\], respectively. These are the qualities imparted to the first
humans – Ask and Embla – in order to render them truly alive, human.

As we can see, these align closely with the three ‘qualities’ which
should be imparted by the Meath of Poetry.Óðrerir pertaining to the
‘Spirit’, Boðn linking to the ‘Sense’, andSón referring to the
‘Health’. Which does not seek to imply that the Mead of Poetry was
required for the formulation and life-giving of Man. Only that the
qualities already present in man and provided to us by The Gods , are
significantly enhanced in their scale and scope via the imbibification
of the Brew. In a similar manner, perhaps, to the way in which ‘Amrit’
in Sanskrit \[another rendering for ‘Soma’, contingent upon the
context\] means ‘Opposite-to-Death’ – i.e. ‘Life’ – and therefore refers
to the sine qua non essential quality (singular) of Human (Living)
Existence. And, in a similar manner to the way in which Amrit is
referred to as the Elixir of Immortality or Lengthening of Life – so,
too, should the Empowering Brew of the Meath be viewed as taking that
which already exists, is already in us, and massively enhancing it.
Enhancing us, in fact – rendering us Superhuman via the further
augmentation of those subtle ember-sparks of the Divine with which we
have previously been brought to ‘life’.

There is a further potential line of inquiry which I mean to address in
a future piece, which also links to my aforementioned reconstructive
cosmological speculation around the Well of Mimir and the Vedic concept
of The Waters (more specifically, What – and, for that matter, Who –
lies Above the Sky Therein), pertaining to what Ask and Embla are said
in theVöluspá to be pointedly \*without\* prior to these three
Investments – Orlog, Supernal Law – But we shall leave that for another
time. Probably not as a \*fourth\* installment of this series, for
reasons which ought be mythologically obvious …

Now in terms of the implications of all of this – and the ritualine
applications – it should be noted that the broad array of functional
roles for Soma in the Vedic Indo-European religion likely should inform
how we think about the Meath of the Eddic Indo-European religion being
employed. That is to say, the fact that we have the mythic accounts for
the use of the Elixir by Gods, does not mean that we lack good grounds
for presuming ritualine usage of the Elixir – or its simulacra – by
Humans. Indeed, the two go side by side, hand in hand – with due
offering of a pressing or pressings to the God or Gods in question being
followed up via the drinking of the Soma by the human agents involved in
the relevant rite. Becoming more like Gods , closer to Them in some
small ways, via the Mythic Recurrence, the Eternal Return, the Mythic
Resonancy of the ritual.

In a similar manner, just as Soma and to a lesser extent Amrit turn up
with some frequency in various mythic situations amidst the Vedic canon,
so too may what is represented by the Mead of Poetry find similar
diversity of wellsprings (potentially quite mythic-literally) amidst the
Norse mythology and accompanying cosmology.

The essential point, for our (somewhat Neb-ulous) purposes is to
highlight the Qualities of the Mead, via our reconstructive and
Vedic-Sanskrit comparative approach , as a way of thinking about the
Potion and its Portion; shedding new light upon matters which had
previously proven remarkably stubborn if not downright enigmatic to
prior scholarship.

And, in so doing, helping to demonstrate that not only is encoded within
the Old Norse sources available to us a much more coherent mythoreligion
than previously realized by many – with less outright ‘invention’ by
Sturluson than is perhaps presumed; as well as, once again, the
fundamental and underlying unity of the Indo-European mythoreligion.

We all, it would appear, have drawn from the same well. 
