+++
title = "Foe-Slayer Claims Our Eulogy – Understanding RigVeda VIII 100: Indra,xa0Vak"
date = "August 7, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/goddess-durga.jpg?w=361)

Every so often, we come across a Hymnal that really *really* deserves a
broader audience. In this case, RV VIII 100 – which details a rather
lesser-known element to the Slaying of Vritra by Indra. Namely, the
salient role of Vak Devi (Saraswati) in this conflict. It therefore
seemed most appropriate to prepare a brief commentary upon it for our
Friday Devi-otional offering post. And, in so doing, also begin to meet
the enthusiastic request of some of our readership for more Indra (but
also, perhaps (un)surprisingly, Herakles) material as well.

So, before I get too carried away with the exegesis … here’s RV VIII
100, in the Griffith translation \[bizarrely cited as RV VIII 89 in some
editions\]. It’s officially designated a Hymnal to *both* Indra and Vak
Devi, and should properly be considered a dialogue hymn – which means
that instead of it all being sung as a single poem, various lines are
almost ‘acted out’ by particular designated priests who are playing the
parts of the relevant Gods involved to give a sense of … a dialogue.
Meanwhile, another priest assumes the role almost of a ‘narrator’ with
his lines, providing expository commentary in his verses which help to
tie the whole thing together, to the rite, and keep it cohesively
moving. Unfortunately, just which lines are supposed to be sung by whom
or Whom, is a matter of some speculation and disagreement. But we’ll get
on to that in due course. For now, the Hymn:

“1. I MOVE before thee here present in person, and all the Deities
follow behind me.  
When, Indra, thou securest me my portion, with me thou shalt perform
heroic actions.  
2 The food of meath in foremost place I give thee, thy Soma shall be
pressed, thy share appointed.  
Thou on my right shalt be my friend and comrade: then shall we two smite
dead full many a foeman.  
3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, a truthful hymn if
he in truth existeth.  
One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath beheld him? Whom then
shall we honour?  
4 Here am I, look upon me here, O singer. All that existethI surpass in
greatness.  
The Holy Law’s commandments make me mighty. Rending with strength I rend
the worlds asunder.  
5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached me as I sate lone upon
the dear sky’s summit.  
Then spake my spirit to the heart within me, My friends have cried unto
me with their children.  
6 All these thy deeds must be declared at Soma-feasts, wrought, Indra,
Bounteous Lord, for him who sheds the juice,  
When thou didst open wealth heaped up by many, brought from far away to
Sarablia, the Ṛṣi’s kin.  
7 Now run ye forth your several ways: he is not here who kept you
back.  
For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Vṛtra’s vital part?  
8 On-rushing with the speed of thought within the iron fort he
pressed:  
The Falcon went to heaven and brought the Soma to the Thunderer.  
9 Deep in the ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round about,  
And in continuous onward flow the floods their tribute bring to it.  
10 When, uttering words which no one comprehended, Vāk, Queen of Gods,
the Gladdener, was seated,  
The heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and vigour: now whither hath
her noblest portion vanished?  
11 The Deities generated Vāk the Goddess, and animals of every figure
speak her.  
May she, the Gladdener, yielding food and vigour, the Milch-cow Vāk,
approach us meetly lauded.  
12 Step forth with wider stride, my comrade Viṣṇu; make room, Dyaus, for
the leaping of the lightning.  
Let us slay Vṛtra, let us free the rivers let them flow loosed at the
command of Indra.”

Pretty stirring stuff! And it only becomes more profound when it is
considered in light of both its Vedic as well as its broader
Indo-European context.

Now, the broad outlines of the Slaying of Vritra are pretty well known,
and form perhaps the best known Hindu expression of the
Striker/Thunderer vs Demon-Dragon(of the waters) Indo-European mytheme.
Which is itself almost certainly the most prominent and readily
identified of these underlying ancient-archaic mythic templates of our
ancestors – finding somewhat close coterminates in pretty much every
Indo-Eurpean descendant culture. Thor against Jormungandr ; Tarhunt
against Illuyanka ; and, of course, Herakles against the Hydra (which
this Hymnal has an intriguing direct point of resonancy with) are some
of the better known instances. Although there are, of course, numerous
others. Including some which aren’t actually of this typology – but
instead, are of the somewhat parallel one wherein it is the Sky Father
Who carries out the appropriate action of demon-slaying (consider, for
example, Brihaspati’sorbital bombardment of Vala (just to be sure); or
Zeus against Typhon … who also winds up buried under a mountain). But
more upon that, perhaps, at some other time.

The Vedic presentations of Indra against Vritra represent the oldest
recountings of this myth that we have available to us; and preserve many
features within them that appear to have dropped out, or at the very
least become significantly distorted and/or de-emphasized in other
Indo-European cultures’ renditions of the same tale. Which does not mean
that the Hindu renditions are completely consistent upon these matters
simply by virtue of age. As is often the case with scripture – each
Hymnal which covers or draws from the episode in question presents
things from a slightly different perspective and to somewhat different
purpose. Some details are to be found partially or entirely omitted
simply because they are not so relevant for the Hymn’s intended purpose.
Later Hindu scripture goes even further, and makes occasionally quite
pointed conflationary leaps (for example, the Mahabharat’s recounting of
the incident, which appears to have melded Indra’s fight against Vritra
with the Shatapatha Brahmana’sexplication of the Slaying of Namuki by
Him; or the Srimad Bhagavatam’spresumably deliberate ‘Shaivite’ style
description of Vritra in what I can only surmise must have been the
Vaishnavas pushing a sectarian propaganda-barrow of their day).

As applies the Vedic evocations of the combat – these serve three
closely interrelated purposes. First, to Glorify and pay homa-ge to The
Gods via extolling Their achievements. Second, to explain *how*
something was achieved – and preserve/inculcate a broader lesson around
it both for immediate audience as well as for the civilization at large.
And third, to further immanentize via the Eliadian ‘Eternal Return’ the
positive outcome of the original Mythic Deed out into the world around
us (i.e. the sacral recollection and semi re-performance of the event in
question further amplifies its ‘echoes’ and embeds the patterns of its
occurrence into our reality – which, when it comes to Vritra-slaying,
may include facilitating the ongoing rain-cycle against the threat of
drought, for example … as an expression of underlying fundamental
Cosmic Law which has been defended against the demonic-disruptive
onslaught).

It is clear to see how all three objectives are intricately interwoven
in this Hymn. For it hails the mighty deeds of Indra and Vak in slaying
Vritra … in no small part by describing the manner in which this is
actually attained – through pious offering *to* Vak and appropriate
sacral conduct, adherence to the mandate of Rta (Cosmic Order) … and
therein contains the ‘lesson’ for the culture which has produced and
performed the hymnal. All of which is performed as part of a sacral
offering itself – thus engaging in the aforementioned Eternal Return of
the events, and therefore facilitating the re-immanentization of the
principle outcomes under discussion that are hailed therein.

There are several important points yet to be made upon that last element
– including the significantly important Indo-European warding against
the depredations of demons by *reminding them of a time when even some
of the greatest of their number were hurt really, really badly by our
Gods* so as to dissuade them from bothering us any further … but we
shall leave those for another time.

Instead, let’s take a closer look at several of the verses of this Hymn
– and then how these relate to the aforementioned Classical
co-expression of the same myth in the combat of Herakles (and Iolaus)
against the Hydra.

Now, as I have said, this is a ‘dialogue hymn’ – and there is some
controversy over just which lines are meant to be voiced by which Gods
or other roles to the Rite. The recent Jamison/Brereton Oxford
translation and commentary proposes that much of the exchange is
actually between Vayu (the Wind God – a figure significantly coterminous
with Nordic Odin) and Indra, at first interspersed by and then
supplanted with the lines of ‘narration’ ascribed to a Vedic priest
acting as officiator of proceedings. This interpretation is, by their
own admission, “uncertain” and not exactly “secure”; in no small part
because it hinges around an incredibly complex level of ritual-structure
symbolism that they have imputed onto the hymn. How complex? In order to
make things work with their preferred ‘structural’ interpretation keyed
to the three daily Soma pressings … they have the composer (or
performer) of the hymn “imitating an unnamed singer in dialogue with
Indra, and the singer is in turn imitating Indra or some other
eyewitness of the mythical scene.” Meanwhile, their main argument for
ascribing to Vayu the opening lines of the Hymn, is that there is a
certain degree of resonance with a Brahamana-commentary episode wherein
Indra and Vayu have a dispute over the division of the spoils-of-war
from the dragon-slaying in question. Which, again by Jamison and
Brereton’s own admission, is a problematic interpretation as it places
the aftermath of the death of Vritra at the exact opposite end of the
Hymnal to the combat actually being initiated, among other elements that
are exactly the wrong way around for this to truly be the case. Other
efforts have been put forward from time to time … many of which appear
to overlook some remarkably obvious features in pursuit of increasingly
abstract and emptily ‘theoretical’ flights of academic inquiry.

So enough of those. Here’s how *I* interpret it.

The Hymn all up, is one in which Indra is granted aid and availment in
making ready to take down Vritra. It is implicitly made clear that
several elements have contributed to His quite literally *striking*
success in the ensuing combat. One of which is the assistance of the
enigmatic figure of the first line – which cannot be Vayu, per Jamison &
Brereton’s speculation, because the granting of the appropriate sacral
‘portion’ to this figure is what precedes and makes possible Indra’s
ensuing ‘heroic actions’ and ‘mighty deeds’. It is not a division of
loot after the conflict. Instead, it is something familiar to many an
Indo-European Hero – whether God or Human. The act of sacrifice and
pious offering to a powerful (also, in this context) Divine patron Who
shall then aid Her chosen champion in the fight to come. Who might this
Patron of the Gods be?

It is Vak. As we can see in Her Own most magnificent hymnal, the famed
DeviSukta \[RV X 125\] – wherein precisely this pattern and typology is
directly extolled for our benefit. Specifically including, interestingly
enough, a mention for Her supporting of Indra; as well as directing and
empowering the Divine War Effort more generally \[something also found
in RV VI 61 12 – “She must be /Invoked in every deed of might.”\];
going in motion with All the Gods – but being the *first* to merit
worship amongst Them.

This deftly explains the first line of the combined Indra-Vak hymnal:

“1. I MOVE before thee here present in person, and all the Deities
follow behind me.  
When, Indra, thou securest me my portion, with me thou shalt perform
heroic actions.”

And so therefore, just as the first line is Vak speaking to Indra (as
well as, while looking directly at the camera, as it were, speaking also
to the assembled audience for the re-enactment of the rite’s proceedings
amongst humankind – for we, too, are able to accomplish the Heroic
Actions through the assistance, the guidance, and the augmentation of
Vak) … so, too, is the *second* line Indra replying to Vak:

“2 The food of meath in foremost place I give thee, thy Soma shall be
pressed, thy share appointed.  
Thou on my right shalt be my friend and comrade: then shall we two smite
dead full many a foeman.”

And while some have attempted to suggest that, given the role of Vishnu
in the last line of the Hymnal, the ally Indra is hailing in line two
must therefore likewise be He … I again have a different interpretation
in place for this. As, after all, we already know from elsewhere in the
RigVeda that Lady Vak – Saraswati – has the honour accorded of Killing
Vritra. She, along with Indra, is hailed as ‘Vritrahan’ (Vritraghni, to
be more precise) \[RV VI 61 7\]. Griffith himself translates that line
as: “Yea, this divine Sarasvatī, terrible with Her golden path, /
Foe-slayer, claims our eulogy.” And while various commentators have
suggested that it is meant to be interpreted figuratively – stating
Saraswati’s immense power being *equal* to that of the ‘other’
Vritra-slayer Who is better-known for the mighty deed … and/or simply
rendering it as the ‘smiter of resistance’ in the context of the
Riverine Saraswati having an unstoppable flow … it should come as no
surprise to find that I do not believe Saraswati as Vritra-Slayer can be
excluded in such a manner. It simply fits too well in light of what we
know from the other RigVedic Hymnals as well as subsequent scriptural
sources upon the matter. By which I do not only mean RV VIII 100, but
also those in which the holy act of dragon-slaying is carried out quite
explicitly via an act of *prayer* – of Pious Speech – which brings forth
the Vajra to slay the fiend. Vak / Saraswati is quite directly ‘Pious
Speech’, ‘Divine Speech’; and we also have other Vedic material showing
Her in action (potentially assisted by the Asvins in some cases – for
example, Satapatha Brahmana,XII, 7, 3 ) imbuing Indra’s Vajra so as to
ensure it is capable of bypassing whatever magical warding that the
foeman has at the time. This connexion is *also* supported by the other
major figure Who engages in mythic acts of dragon-slaying in the course
of the RigVeda – Brihaspati (Shiva-Rudra-Odin – the Sky Father), the
Consort of Vak, Who pointedly makes use of Her Power in these combats,
as do the War-Priests Who march (and chant) with Him to similar
purpose.

So, Indra, having given Vak Her proper (and prime) share of the
sacrificial offering \[as is mandated as proper in RV X 125 3\],
energetically affirms to Her: “Thou on my right shalt be my friend and
comrade: then shall we two smite dead full many a foeman.”

“3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, a truthful hymn if
he in truth existeth.  
One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath beheld him? Whom then
shall we honour?”

The third line is on the face of it slightly more surprising, as it
seems to depict the Vedic priest carrying out a rite of worship and
empowerment for Indra … despite being unsure that Indra even (still)
exists – and setting up a conceptual space for another savior deity to
step forth unto the breachif necessary in His place should He not. It
is a note of despair rather than atheism, and to my mind would appear to
recall the interregnum following Indra’s fight with Vritra’s elder
brother Trisiras … during which Indra goes into hiding and recuperation
in a place unknown even to many of The Gods, Who attempt to
(temporarily) replace Him during His absence with an elevated human,
Nahusha.

This therefore sets up the triumphant re-emergence of Indra in Line
Four, wherein He is at no pains to express humbleness:

“4 Here am I, look upon me here, O singer. All that existethI surpass
in greatness.  
The Holy Law’s commandments make me mighty. Rending with strength I rend
the worlds asunder.”

Cometh The Hour, Cometh The God – and in response to the dire
circumstances that the Brahmins and Gods have raised the alarm about, we
find Lord Indra quite literally answering Their prayers, in person. And
seemingly rearing to go!However, while we might perhaps have thought
that Indra’s trying ordeal that had preceded this would inculcate some
more immediately obvious humility … I do believe that even alongside the
(somewhat understandable) boasting, there is clear evidence of just such
a moral dimension to the Indra Who emerges here. It is contained in the
juncture of the second and third quarters of Line Four – “All that
existethI surpass in greatness.The Holy Law’s commandments make me
mighty.”. As a certain work of fiction once put it – “We are Mighty
because we are Right. We are not Right because we are Mighty. Vile the
hour when that reversal becomes our credo.” Indra’s emphatic declaration
that He “surpass\[es\] in greatness” all that exists is, strictly
speaking, rather wide of the mark – but He has been Divinely Empowered.
Not only by Soma, but also by Vak (Who, as Shakti, *more-than-Exists*);
Vak Who Is, per Sayana and my own’sVedic theology, Rta Herself
expressed in-universe. It is Rta – Cosmic Order – that has granted Indra
His Greatness, here, and to a pointed purpose – that of the Defence of
Order’s immanency in this universe against the dire demon-dragon
disruptor threat thereto (as symbolized and reified through Vritra’s
interruption of the water-cycle and its consequent, ensuing direly
deleteriousimpacts upon the worlds of Gods and Men). ‘Dharmo Rakshati
Rakshitaha’, indeed. Indra’s significant strength here is His
unassailable moral position. Something not so clearly found in His
previous martial conquest against the Brahmin Trisiras – which was
implicitly a significant opposite, on grounds that Brahmanicide
\[‘Brahmahatya’\] is a severe crime precisely because it is a harm
against the immanency of the Supernal in our world by killing one of the
perceivers thereof. \[See my works in the ‘Of Bhairava And Balance’
series for more details upon that principle and various relevant
examples of the phenomenon in action\].

Line 5, meanwhile, swings the focus back to Lady Vak, with Her declaring
that She had Heard the pleas of the pious folk and Gods for relief from
this rapacious reptilian scourge currently bedevilling them with its
nuisance:

“5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached me as I sate lone upon
the dear sky’s summit.  
Then spake my spirit to the heart within me, My friends have cried unto
me with their children.”

We can tell this is plausibly Vak, due to the symbolic resonancy with,
once again, the DeviSukta – in which Vak is depicted as being found
alone “On the World’s Summit” – in or around that ‘liminal zone’ at the
edge of the Universe also referred to as ‘The Waters’ (beyond which lies
Brahman / AdiParaShakti unveiled \[the Waters, in a way, are a ‘veil’ –
although so too, we might fairly suggest, is Maya, the ‘illusory’
‘tapestry’ of reality … but more upon that, perhaps, some other time\]).
The last part of the line also resonates most strongly with and presages
the later scriptural accountings for the Deviappearance ofShakambhari
… wherein Devi, responding to the beseeching prayers for relief from
*another* demon-caused drought, appears to fight the demon Durgamasur –
both ending the drought and consequent famine while re-establishing
proper piety (through the resumption of Vedic rites) in the process. An
act, as applies the former, perhaps facilitated by the rivers of blood
from slain demonic armies that also ensue.

Lines 6 and 7 are relatively straightforward, and have the Priest who
has taken the role of the ‘Narrator’ hailing Indra for His successful
completion of the slaying of the adversary (Vritra, the “he \[…\] who
kept you back”) and liberation of the riches ill-gotten by the latter
so that they may (re-)enrich the Rsi and the natural world around him.

“6 All these thy deeds must be declared at Soma-feasts, wrought, Indra,
Bounteous Lord, for him who sheds the juice,  
When thou didst open wealth heaped up by many, brought from far away to
Sarabha, the Ṛṣi’s kin.  
7 Now run ye forth your several ways: he is not here who kept you
back.  
For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Vṛtra’s vital part?”

However, Line 7 may also entail an instruction to the Narrator’s
Priestly colleagues to begin the pouring forth of the Soma libation :
its dual symbolic saliency here as both ‘The Waters’ which have been
freed by Indra in the mythic flow of time that is the successful
culmination of that myth – as well as the Soma which is brought to Indra
by Shyena the Falcon, as mentioned in Line 8, which *should* canonically
happen *earlier* than the Liberation of the Waters, as it is one of the
essential actions required in Indra’s preparation to fight and kill
Vritra.

Lines 6 and 7, therefore, represent a curious and convoluted contributor
to the ‘eternal return’ theme of the hymnal and its accompanying rite –
as these are simultaneously the words of the then-contemporary Priest,
hailing the past mighty deed of Indra (which has already been
completed), as well as ‘reaching backwards’ across the mythic-time flow
of the ‘re-enactment’ in order to facilitate the essential steps
necessary for the next phase of the re-enactment which is yet to be
completed.

“8 On-rushing with the speed of thought within the iron fort he
pressed:  
The Falcon went to heaven and brought the Soma to the Thunderer.”

Line 8, as aforementioned, is a smooth reintegration to the expected
progression of the mythic events in question, depicting Agni-as-Shyena,
the Falcon Who brings the Soma to Indra in some versions of the myth,
doing just exactly that. The Soma’s source-point in Heaven is an
interesting emphasis, in light of the rest of the hymnal’s conceptry –
and serves to further underscore Indra’s role as an empowered champion
of the Cosmic Order acting with the Ultimate Sanction. A theme continued
in Line 9, wherein we find the Vajra being stored and empowered in order
to be made ready for Lord Indra’s use.

“9 Deep in the ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round about,  
And in continuous onward flow the floods their tribute bring to it.”

There are multiple manners in which this again deceptively simple
sentence may be read; contingent upon just which of several
(not-necessarily-exclusive) additional conceptual/scriptural elements
one chooses to bring to bear upon it. Bearing in mind the well-known
archaic Indo-European belief in the Sky also being a kind of Sea, it
seems relatively clear that the ‘ocean’ in question is up above. Which
means that, euhemerically, the waters which are rendering energetic
tribute to the Vajra housed within may be read as akin to the manner in
which the convection cycle raises up water in vapour form to produce
storm-clouds which then rain down lightning from above. This has an
obvious and alluring sense to it, but I believe that other and more
directly scripturally attested interpretations are also relevant. These
include the later material around Sage Dadhichi offering up His Spine
for the Vajra following a process involving various Sacred Waters coming
together. But also, perhaps more resoundingly, the Vedic accounts of
another confrontation of Indra with a worrisome foe – namely, His fight
against Namuci.

I shall not go into any great depth of detail here upon that matter,
except to note that Namuci, as with Vritra in various tellings, had a
whole suite of specific immunities to harm – which necessitated Indra et
co to get ‘creative’ in their congealing of a weapon with which to
strike him down. To quote the Shatapatha Brahmana commentary upon the
matter – Indra had sworn that he could slay Namuci “neither by day nor
by night, neither with staff nor with bow, neither with the palm of my
hand nor with the fist, neither with the dry nor with the moist”. Which,
of course, meant that Indra attacked Namuci in the pre-dawn twilight
when it is not really Day *or* Night, and by using a weapon which was
‘neither wet nor dry’ – for it had been made of foam by Saraswati (Vak)
working with the Asvins.

Why this matters, to put it more succinctly again, is due to the manner
in which the *deep* Waters, which form a liminal space of sorts about
the universe, are hailed as being the Home of Devi Vak. This fits in
with the notion of Rta-as-Brahman existing above and beyond the
Universe, yet emanating *into* said Universe, in particular as Vak,
Sacred Speech. An idea which shall become rather relevant for us in the
Hymnal’s next line. What it means here, is that the Weapon, the Vajra
made use of by Indra is, in effect, a congealed force of Cosmic Law
Itself; and has been quite literally Heavens-sent to Him, from this
‘outside space’ sphere via the Waters, and via the direct intervention
of Vak Devi. Just as was also the case in Indra’s encounter against
Namuci, wherein Saraswati (Vak) (operating with the Asvins, notablemost
usually for Their mastery of secret potions such as the Soma – a
liquified ‘eternal’ essence) likewise prepared a supernal armament for
Him.

Indeed, there is a deliberate ‘double resonance’ to this verse, as it is
also possible to read the extrapolation as, effectively, having Vak as
the Divine Weapon in question. This is quite deliberate, and echoes the
parallel expression for the concept found in various other portions of
the RigVeda – including the strongly coterminous incidences such as
Brihaspati’s combat ‘gainst Vala \[Vritra’s brother\]; and, of course,
the DeviSukta line around giving active, animate force (through sound)
to the Bow of Rudra “so His Arrow may strike and slay the hater of
devotion”.

The notion of the”continuous onward flow \[in which\] the floods their
tribute bring to it ” would therefore (also) denote not merely the
‘congealing’ of the relevant Weapon – but its seriously escalating
Empowerment, its ‘Charging’ if you like , as the supernal currents
‘midst the Akasha bring together such energies as are required to make
the Bolt, the Dread Weapon, truly unstoppable. The “limitless unbroken
flood” being how Saraswati Vritra-Slayer \[Vritrahan / Vritraghni\] is
hailed in RV VI 61 immediately following the Vritra-smiting epithet,
along with acting via a thunderous ‘tempestuous roar’ accompanied
‘golden path’ perhaps akin to Lightning.

This also helps to explain the next line, line 10:

“10 When, uttering words which no one comprehended, Vāk, Queen of Gods,
the Gladdener, was seated,  
The heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and vigour: now whither hath
her noblest portion vanished?”

However in order to make best sense of it we shall have to dip into the
Jamison/Brereton translation:

“10. When Speech, saying indistinguishable things, sat down as
gladdening ruler of the Gods,  
She milked out in four (streams) nourishment and milk drinks. Where
indeed did the highest of Hers go?”

The metaphor being carried forward here in the ‘four streams’ is better
explained when we get to the next line in which Vak is compared to a Cow
– hence the ‘four streams’ are of that most vital and nourishing
importance … milk. Metaphorically speaking, anyway. What the
Milk-metaphor actually stands for is, indeed, metaphorically speaking –
as in, it is four clades of ‘speech’. Three of which correlate to the
Three Worlds of this broad phase of Vedic cosmology, with the Fourth
representingthe ‘unknown’ speech which is beyond the comprehension of
any other than Her (and, perhaps, Her Consort, Brihaspati-Shiva). This
‘Secret Speech’ is what may make the actual ritual empowerment of the
Vajra work – it is the mediation and the emanation, the transducing of
the Power from beyond The Waters’ Veil , into the Bolt of Thunder with
which He shall slay. And ‘Thunder’ is exactly the right word for this
weapon – as ‘Thunder’, after all, is the low, loud, roaring sound.
Vacam Garjit Lakshanam – Thunder with the Characteristics of Divine
Speech – but with a figurative meaning of ‘Indistinct Speech’, speech
that we *can* tell is , well , ‘speech’ … but which we cannot make out
exactly what it is saying, is one of my absolute favourite theological
principles. And, as you can see, most directly relevant here in
explicating what is going on with that ‘vanished’ Fourth Part to the
Holy Speech.

In terms of the potential Indo-European correlates for such a concept –
one of the more obvious ones comes to us from the Nordic conceptry;
wherein in addition to the well-known Runes of Man, there are also held
to be another four groups of Runes revealed each specific group of
sapient beings – the Gods, Elves, Dwarves, and Jotunn \[which may match
up with the fourfold speech division caused by Vayu in Shatapatha
Brahmana IV, 1, 3 – wherein only one of four divisions of speech
allotted to four clades of beings is intelligible; although it is worth
noting that this is, therefore, exactly the opposite way around from
what is referenced in RV VIII 100, where it is only one of the four
streams of Vak that are beyond our perceptive grasp\]. Further research
shall be necessary to see if this Division of the World – Division of
the Empowered Communication \[‘Speech’ and Runes – the engraved patterns
in surfaces rather than soundwaves\] coterminity is present elsewhere.
My colleague, Tristan Powers, has also pointed out to me the existence
of a most unusual spell-song in the Havamal, verse 163 in the Bray
translation –

“An eighteenth I know: which I ne’er shall tell  
to maiden or wife of man  
save alone to my sister, or haply to her  
who folds me fast in her arms;  
most safe are secrets known to but one-  
the songs are sung to an end.”

Given that Odin is Brihaspati, Vak’s Partner, it would seem logical to
ponder whether there may be some degree of conceptual resonancy herein.

But more upon that, perhaps, some other time.

“11 The Deities generated Vāk the Goddess, and animals of every figure
speak her.  
May she, the Gladdener, yielding food and vigour, the Milch-cow Vāk,
approach us meetly lauded.”

The Cow symbolism we have already briefly parsed; although it may be
prudent to observe that this also recalls the relatively standard
figurative language employed to talk about the Wife of the Sky Father –
which, of course, Vak Is. The first line resonates with the
conceptryfound prominently in later Shakta mythology around the
Appearance of Durga – wherein the Gods, threatened by the otherwise
insurmountable buffalo-demon Mahishasura, engage in a summoning forth of
the Great War Goddess Durga. Durga, of course, is also Vak; and the
parallels with various of the other instances wherein Devi is called
upon in this manner to solve a demon problem that the rest of the
Pantheon is unable to handle, ought be immediately obvious (for example
the Shakambhari episode aforementioned – which also has resonancy with
the ‘food and vigour’ which She brings; the ‘vigour’ referring to the
energy necessary to fight and defeat the foe as well as that gained from
the material sustenance provided once nature is back in balance and
drought or famine is over; and the ability to actually eat, digest, and
unlock the energy within food via Devi as we find attested in RV X 125
4; In addition, of course, to the more metaphysically and mentally
nourishing – i.e. to the spirit – nourishment of the Divine Speech, the
Proper Piety, without which Men are not really Men at all). .

In terms of *how* the Gods bring forth the mighty Devi Vak, the answer
is not immediately described – although we can obviously infer rather
strongly that it entails the standard ritualine formulas for asking a
Deity to come and be present for a sacral rite in Their honour, as that
is exactly what is referenced in the immediately preceding line of the
hymnal. The notion of the God or Goddess as an honoured guest of the
ritual’s officiators is a well-known pan-Indo-European concept; and it
should come as no surprise to find out, particularly in this instance,
that just as we humans carry out such conduct for The Gods – The Gods,
too, carry out such conduct for this most august figure amidst and yet
beyond even Them. It is also, again as is directly stated in the line in
question, an instance of Visiting Royalty. The line around creatures of
all types speaking Her helps to evince Her importance to all of
creation, all of the Worlds and their inhabitants; and may also carry
the connotion that as the threat posed by Vritra is literally
existential, so too are seemingly all creatures capable of Speech
engaged in the petition of Her to arrive and avail .

This notion of ‘speaking Vak’ also concords with the Gods Summoning Her
in another way as well. In the later Devi Mahatmyam account of Durga’s
manifestation in order that She may slay Mahishasura, the Three Great
Gods (later joined by others of the Pantheon) effectively do just that –
From the Mouths (‘Vadana’ – which can also refer to Speaking or Singing)
of Shiva, Vishnu, Brahma come great projections of Tejas, Radiance. This
matters, because there is a prominent co-identification of terms for
Light and Speech within the Sanskrit conceptry – ‘Arka’, for instance,
refers to both the Flash of Lightning, and to a Prayer, a Hymn. Sacred
Speech, in other words, in proper formulation and enunciation and
purpose, found directly coterminous with the Lightning-Weapon which Lord
Indra is about to employ (or, for that matter, the Lightning-Arrows of
Lord Rudra, let fly with the Humkara of the Devi-empowered Great Bow,
Pinaka). I would also argue that ‘Bhasa’ (‘Spoken Language’ – also a
Saraswati Theonym), from Proto-Indo-European ‘Bheh’ (‘Speak’) resonates
this pattern mytholinguistically – given the parallel derivation in
evidence for ‘Bhasas’ \[meaning ‘Light’, inter alia; a word of slightly
different pronunciation –भाषा vsभासस्, respectively) from another
Proto-Indo-European ‘Bheh’ which means ‘To Shine’ or’ Glow’, ‘Light’.

So therefore, as we can see – there is a fundamentally consistent
typology between these various instances wherein Devi has been Called
Upon by The Gods , built around not only the occurrence of pious rites
and offerings To and For Her (as we saw initially in Line One); but also
upon the notion of Speech, Prayer (Vak, indeed) as the essentialized
ingredient in Her Manifestation. Which also helps to explain the nature
of the weapon and the boon possessed by Indra for His Fight against
Vritra which we shall shortly be getting to … and also, at the same
time, aids in demonstrating the fundamental consistence and coherency of
later Hindu mythology and theology with the archaic Vedic foundations of
same.

This ‘Light’ or ‘Fire’ conceptry apparently so necessary in order to
accomplish the dragon-slaying of Vritra finds its echo in the Greek myth
of the Hydra’s slaying. I shall not consider this in great detail nor
depth here \[having already done so at some length in a recent, earlier
article – “Hail Hydra-Slayer: On The Mythic Combat Of Herakles And
Athena – Indra And Vak Saraswati, Against The Demon-Dragon Of The
Water”\], but suffice to say the presence of Athena alongside Herakles
in the oldest versions of the Greek myth that we have available to us is
no accident. Nor is the provision by Athena of the ‘insight’ of making
use of Fire in various renditions of it as the means via which Herakles
is able to circumvent the Hydra’s supernatural protections against being
slain. It seems evident that the Greeks preserved in various coherency,
certain Indo-European myths and conceptry which find their best
expression and consistency in the Vedic canon – yet which must near
certainly have been more ancient in their origin, broader in their
pervasiveness through the Indo-European peoples and mythology, and
deeper in their intended interpretation and meaning than what one would
perhaps presume if the most popular baseline elements of an immensely
strong figure armed with a club and perhaps setting things on fire as a
problem-solving tool were taken at face value and in exclusion.

This brings us to the concluding line, phrased by Jamison/Brereton as:

“12. Comrade Viṣṇu, stride out widely. Heaven, grant a place for the
mace to prop apart.  
We two will smite Vr̥tra; we two will give leave to the rivers. Let them,
unleashed, go at the impetus of Indra.”

And, perhaps more resonantly by Griffith as:

“12 Step forth with wider stride, my comrade Viṣṇu; make room, Dyaus,
for the leaping of the lightning.  
Let us slay Vṛtra, let us free the rivers let them flow loosed at the
command of Indra.”

The ‘Wide Stride’ which the speaker of this last line imperates Vishnu
to make is likely correlate with the famed ‘Three Steps’ of Vishnu that
finds salient mention elsewhere in the Vedic canon. These are usually
interpreted to correlate with the Three Worlds, one Stride of Vishnu
being sufficient to demarcate the distance across one world to the
boundary with the next; although in this instance it is perhaps somewhat
uncertain as to whether the ‘stride’ mentioned is intended to refer to
all three steps and therefore all three worlds, or whether the singular
is made use of deliberately to connote that it is but a single world
which Vishnu must traverse in advance of the Vajra’s thunderous
discharge against the Demon-Dragon that has stolen the Water (the Rivers
referred to which shall once more flow freely once Vritra, their captor,
has been dealt with). Given the next portion of the line, wherein it is
the Heavenly Sky and Sky Father, Dyaus, Who is asked to stand clear –
the conventional imputation would be that it is the single stride
encompassing the Heavens which Vishnu is urged to make … presumably,
likewise given Vishnu’s RigVedic position proximate to the highest point
(‘Paramam Padam’) thereof, for the same reason as Dyaus being requested
to get out of the way and give Indra space to fight from On High.

The final line has invited further debate on a number of points – most
prominent of which, Who is intended to be Speaking, Who is the other
(i.e. non-Indra) member of the ‘Two’, the ‘Us’. The former question is
usually thought to be straightforward – Indra requesting two relevant
Sky deifics to give Him space in which to fight, followed by the
declaration of intent for what He is about to do, as applies both
Smiting Vritra, and releasing the Rivers from Their captivity. However,
there is an issue with this, in that it would effectively have Indra
speaking in the third person – a not insurmountable obstacle to the
interpretation, to be sure, but a puzzling one given the “I” of line 4
is usually held to be Indra speaking in the first person. To me, it
sounds more like the voice is giving orders to the first two Gods
mentioned \[Vishnu & Dyaus\] to get out of the way because the Bolt is
about to come down from The Waters at the apex of the world \[i.e. where
Dyaus is , per RV X 125 7; and proximate to Vishnu’s station as
aforementioned\] in a manner perhaps like the Meteorite utilized as the
Vajra by Brihaspati in various Vedic hymnals \[this would be the
“Leaping Lightning”\]; followed by this same voice *telling* Indra that
which is about to happen, and that which He is about to ensue.

As for the latter question, upon the identity of the ‘Two’, there are
several possible answers. Many favour it being Vishnu, and there is
certainly a RigVedic hymnal wherein Vishnu is referred to as “the Friend
of Indra, close-allied” \[RV I 22 19\] , but despite Vishnu’s citation
earlier in proceedings as ‘making way’ via the Wide Stride, I do not
find that instantly persuasive. It has occasionally been suggested that
the honour may belong to Vayu (given Vayu’s attested role following
Vritra’s slaying in confirming that the latter is actually dead) – yet
that does not seem quite right, as Vayu does not (usually) play a role
in the actual killing itself. There are various RigVedic Hymnals in
which Indra is accompanied by Brihaspati in order to go Dragon-Slaying,
including of Vritra particularly and specifically, so that would
certainly be a possibility ; although the lack of otherwise attestion
for Brihaspati within the bounds of this Hymnal \[the mention for Dyaus
notwithstanding\]would appear to cast some doubt as to whether that
could be what is meant here.

No, I think another solution is much more plausible. One wherein
immediately following the Gods’ Summoning of Goddess Vak via Their pious
conduct and ritualine sanctified Speech, Vak does indeed appear. And in
just such a manner that the first thing (The) Rudra does when HE appears
is also an expression of what He Is – i.e. the Roar; so too, when Vak
Devi arrives and becomes fully, actively apparent (having already been
‘in spirit’ welcomed with the invocation and the inviting to be seated
in the honour seat of the sacrificial rite that has been thus far
unfolding) does She Do what She Is: She Speaks.

Or, as She Herself puts it in RV X 125 5: “5 I, verily, Myself announce
and utter the word that Gods and men alike shall welcome.” in the
Griffith Translation – a declaration which is, perhaps, rather more
clear in its imputation in theJanasvami translation: “I speak this
Myself, which is liked by both gods and men alike”; with the next
portion of RV X 125 5 asserting Her ability to bestow immense power to
Her chosen champion.

And, in the next line of the DeviSukta, Vak declares: “I rouse and order
battle for the people” \[Griffith translation\], although others phrase
the line a little differently and instead place the emphasis upon Vak’s
direct engagement in combat. The actual Sanskrit wording to the verse
would more directly render as ‘Make War’ or ‘Do Battle’ ; and there is a
perhaps useful broadness of meaning to the English idiom to ‘Wage War’ –
wherein both soldiers directly engaged in fighting and the generals who
command them are covered by the ambit of the term. Both senses are
applicable to Vak’s role – although in the instance under discussion in
the concluding line of RV VIII 100, what is being set up is a channeling
of Vak’s power by Lord Indra which places the latter in the more overtly
‘front line’ combative position. Still, it would be difficult in the
extreme to come up with a better and more immediately striking RigVedic
manifestation of the concept of Vak’s “Rous\[ing\] and Order\[ing\]
Battle” for the Divine Purpose than Her issuing forth the Order:

“Step forth with wider stride, my comrade Viṣṇu; make room, Dyaus, for
the leaping of the lightning.  
Let us slay Vṛtra, let us free the rivers let them flow loosed at the
command of Indra.”

To phrase it quite directly: I have come to believe that this line is
actually Vak’s. That it is the direct answer and reply to Indra’s
earlier declaration in Line Two that: “Thou on my right shalt be my
friend and comrade: then shall we two smite dead full many a foeman.”
The confirmation issued after the proper and appropriate acts of piety
and ritual have been undertaken to honour Her; and the Weapon which She
Alone can make manifest (indeed, *is* Her Manifest) has become charged
and is ready to ‘leap’ like ‘lightning’ down from the Waters which swirl
beyond even On High.

That the ‘We Two’ or ‘Us’ of Line 12 is Vak and Indra acting in concert
to slay Vritra. That whether we are viewing Vak as having a more
‘supportive’ role – providing the essential Armament, marshaling and
directing particular Divinities in order to ensure Her strategy’s
success – or whether we are taking things further and additionally
accepting the inference that Vak is also the Weapon … this is a case
wherein the accreditation for the Deed should be shared. Hence, no
doubt, why this Hymnal is titled and dedicated to Indra and Vak together
in the first place – a choice which has occasionally puzzled analysts
who’ve instead insisted upon endeavouring to minimize Vak’s role in this
hymnal and then wondered why She gets such prominent billing in the
subject-explicatory title, etc.

I am aware that this has been a seriously lengthy and heavy-going read;
yet given the singular, salient significance to our mythology and our
theology of both the myth of the Striker/Thunderer against the
Demon-Dragon of the water and the Immense Power that is the Sacred
Speech, I felt that it deserved nothing less.

“Foe-Slayer”, after all, “Claims Our Eulogy!”

Jai Mata DI!
