+++
title = "On Disregarding The Puranic Mythology For Allegedly Denigrating Vedicxa0Gods"
date = "August 26, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/118272964_10164055162240574_5453116934672411776_n.jpg?w=770)

Quite frequently, we hear it said that people may like Vedic religion,
Vedic mythology – but they balk at the later developments upon same.
Often becausethey claim that these subsequent scriptures “denigrate”
variousVedic – and therefore Indo-European – Gods.

I have already addressedelsewhere the arguments that the Puranas
contain all manner of allegedly “non-Aryan” elements – and demonstrated
repeatedly that in almost every major instance, this is a charge without
water. That in most circumstances, all that has happened is something
that is lesser-known yet still of Vedic precedency– or at least, is of
demonstrable Indo-European pedigree – has been ‘carried forward’ and
expanded upon. And usually in ways that are both fundamentally
commensurate with and immediately recognizable as their European
relative or more archaic Indian relative ancestor. This should be
unsurprising – many of the Puranas are simply preserving the ‘popular
mythology’ of the Vedic age, and material that did not make it in to the
Vedas due to the role of the latter as ‘ritual manuals’ rather than
anthologies of our legendarium.

I shall not repeat those arguments here. Not least because it is,
broadly speaking, a set of threads found interwoven throughout my
almost-entire canon of work.

Instead, I wish to focus upon this other charge: the notion that the
Puranic mythology and its successors ‘blaspheme’ in a way, by unfairly
or artificially “denigrating” the Great Gods of the Vedas.

And, along with this, a psychological examination of what is going on
here.

Now, the simple truth of the matter, is that while in various instances
certain Vedic Gods ARE depicted in a manner that is less than entirely
flattering – and occasionally being bested in combat or in other such
contests by some deity or avatara that is not to be found, or at least
not so prominently to be found amidst the Vedic canon …

… this does not, in and of itself, constitute a ‘blasphemy’ – it does
not, either, axiomatically constitute some sort of ‘distorted’
‘innovation’. And for one good reason:

In many of these instances, what is being reported is, again, something
that is either \*also\* found in the Vedas and associated ancient Vedic
texts of similar antiquity – or it is broadly commensurate with
something that is found therein.

And therefore – how can it be ‘blasphemy’ or
‘denigration-via-derivation’ to reproduce such matters in later texts?

Our Gods are Great. Nobody seriously disputes this – unless they have an
agenda, of course, which is not and cannot be our own. But nobody ever
said that various of these Gods are ‘infallible’ – either morally or
metaphysically. Gods fighting Gods is something that is well-renowned as
occurring. Gods behaving in a less than morally unimpeachable manner is,
again, something well-renowned as occurring. Not only, in either set of
circumstances, amidst the Vedic and post-Vedic Hindu mythology – but in
just about every genuine Indo-European mythology you can possibly name.

In fact, I would go so far as to state that this lack of ‘perfection’
(or, in some instances, perfection-\*through\*-imperfection – and see my
Of Bhairava And Balance series for more upon that in a metaphysical and
ethical sense!) … this lack of ‘perfection’ makes our Gods more
relatable. Somehow, upon occasion, more ‘real’ – at least to us,
anyway.

Now this notion of Gods as ‘real’ is quite integral to what I am getting
at. Because the idea of Gods as absolutely spotless moral exemplars at
all times and in all circumstances in violation of the actual mythology
– is to reduce the Gods from \*real beings\* to Gods as ‘archetypes’.
Allegories. Teaching tools and fable-stories. It is an artistic
representation in the same way that a painting is – that is to say, it
is ‘two dimensional’. Lacking in depth and nuance, no matter how cool it
might otherwise seem to be. Which does not, of course, mean that there’s
no place for such ‘paintings’ – only that they should not be confused
for the more complex, more vital and vitally living Reality.

No, real people – real Gods – may occasionally make mistakes (or, at
least, \*seem\* to – from a certain point of view, of course). Real Gods
may be bested in competition or combat – They even Die. And Real Gods
also may potentially engage in ‘growth’, ‘development’, ‘come back
better’ following Their previous defeats. Just as people do.

So, in terms of this ‘disrespect’ to Vedic Gods that we find people
charging the Puranic materials with … it is true that Indra is not
usually presented as ‘supreme’ in the Puranas. And has His various moral
imperfections brought up from time to time. But Indra is not ‘supreme’
in The Vedas, either – except upon a situational basis.

Indra in the Vedas is portrayed as noble, valiant, and incredibly
powerful. And this also comes through in various Puranic materials also.
When, in the course of the Mahabharat, Krishna tells Arjuna to call upon
Devi Durga for blessing in the upcoming War … this is the carrying
forward, in its way, of Indra’s \*own\* conduct in the RigVeda prior to
the fight against Vritra \[c.f RV VIII 100 \]. Devi’s frame of reference
for how powerful She is going to make Arjuna – includes ‘The Thunderer’
as being pretty much the benchmark for unstoppable force.

It is true that Indra is depicted in Puranic materials as engaging in
some … extrajudicial killings, we might perhaps somewhat euphemistically
say – but these are not ‘innovations’ only to be found in the Puranas.
They are \*right there\* in the Vedas Themselves! And, as it happens, in
the Vedas, these too often attract the appropriate sanction, the
declaration that Indra has committed a Sin – and therefore may even wind
up having to flee away from the site of the crime. Even where the
killing is a legitimate, sanctioned one – we still find Vedic materials
in which Indra may or may not be entirely martially valorous (and
understandably so, as in some of these cases, it is a threat against
which almost none other could have stood anyway): for example, Indra’s
fear leading to His haggling with Lord Vayu to induce the latter to go
and reconnoitre whether Vritra really \*has\* been successfully slain,
or whether the demon-dragon adversary might yet still breathe.

People object to the portrayal of Indra as less than totally, ideally
courageous in some Puranic accounts. And yet even beyond the
aforementioned Vedic precedency for this – we must ask the question: do
they similarly oppose and call for the throwing out of Homer due to
Homer’s representation of Ares? \[To be sure, this is somewhat of a
‘biased account’ – yet you will still see people quite rightly drawing
upon the Iliad and Odyssey when making statements about proper and
archaic Greek mythoreligious belief\]

The insistence that various Puranic materials – indeed, virtually
\*all\* the Puranic materials – ought be disregarded , due to alleged
‘disrespect’ to various Gods by presenting some of Their moral or other
shortcomings … is both hyper-critical and hypocritical when we can often
exceptionally easily find frequent parallels for many of these in other
Indo-European religions. For instance, some might seek to infer that
Indra is being defamed via the Puranic and other Smriti portrayals of
His womanizing conduct. And yet the womanizing conduct is also displayed
by Zeus. Does this mean that Greek mythology has defamed Zeus? I think
not!

Or maybe it is the ‘punishment’ – maybe the particular sanction meted
out against Indra for said womanizing, is why it is said to be
denigratory. This, I also do not accept.

A core tenet of the Indo-European Cosmos is that Gods, as well as Men,
are also under The Law. Rta, Orlog, Dikaiosune. Cosmic Order. When Odin
carries out an act of sexual impropriety in order to conceive a mighty
avenger-son, He is not treated as above the Law. He is sent into Exile.
Which, to be sure, is a bit of a … potential non-punishment for a
Wandering God – but the principle is nevertheless there.

Now it should, perhaps, be noted here that I am NOT making the case for
absolutely EVERY post-Vedic text being treated as equally canonical –
let alone equally canonical to The Vedas Themselves. That is not, and
never has been, how our theology works. We have two categories relevant
here – Shruti and Smriti. ‘That Which Is Heard’, and ‘That Which Is
Written’. Shruti is the more canonical, as it is \*direct\* revelation.
Smriti has an author, and represents a perspective – often one that has
gone through any number of iterations of revision and editing down the
ages when it finally gets to us. The Vedas and some associated texts are
Shruti. The Puranas and Itihasas \[the Mahabharatand Ramayana\] are
Smriti. And absolutely \*all\* of it is best taken \*non-literally\* –
per the rather direct and repeated statements of various well-respected
ancient Hindu theologians upon the subject.

Which does not, as it happens, mean that the materials in question are
‘untrue’ – just that often, ‘Mythic Truth’ means something rather
different to ‘Literal Truth’ ; and that we are dealing with, as Obiwan
Kenobi once put it, things that are true “from a certain point of
view”.

There are also serious and serial debates within HInduism itself over
just how canonical some smriti texts actually are – with the Vaishnavas
in particular often asserting that various otherwise-canonical materials
which portray Shiva winning against Vishnu , or other such things, are
‘tamasik’ \[‘dark’/’occluded’/’corrupted’\] and can be safely
disregarded. Much to everybody else’s general a/be-musement.

I cannot help but feel that this sort of impulse also underlies some of
the psychological ‘rejection’ of the Puranic canons by various people
who come to the matter from outside of the Hindu sphere. They quite
understandably have an attachment to particular Gods Whom they know from
their own ‘local’ Indo-European mythoreligious tradition and perspective
… and react quite negatively to the perception that their own
‘favourites’ are being harshly treated in this or that work. So they
presume that the entire layer of the canon in question is somehow at
fault – and that because it is later than The Vedas (occasionally by
multiple millennia in extremis) that it is therefore not only
‘unreliable’ but actively malicious: almost a covert ‘plot’ to ‘cast
down’ the previously prominent Gods in favour of more recent
apparitions, pseudo-Zoroastrian style. And that it is somehow less
‘Aryan’ due to the incorporation into ‘Arya’ Hindu civilization of an
array of non-Indo-Aryan peoples. Oddly, they never seem to mentally
include the Greeks, Scythians (Sakas), and other Indo-Europeans turning
up on the fringes of the Aryavarta sphere during the Puranic age in this
calculus.

Obviously, not everybody who has an issue with the Puranic presentation
of this or that Deity is thinking this way – and it is indeed most
definitely possible to have a legitimate opposition to the way in which
particular Puranic mythology is propounded \*at the expense of\* the
broader Vedic context from which it descends, or in ways that overtly
contradict vast swathes of the rest of the Hindu, let alone
Indo-European canon upon whichever matter. A large portion of my ongoing
contratemps with the Hare Krishnas and some other Vaishnavas is that
they tend to do \*Exactly That\* – and yes, in direct and deliberate
service of an “Our God Is Greater” type propagandizing proselytization.

Yet when counteracting such presumptuous prevarications, the proper
approach is to have them \*outgunned\*. By making use of \*both\* the
Vedic materials \*and\* the Puranic materials. And, of course, others
besides. But I digress.

The post-Vedic ‘Puranic’ era canon of Hinduism is truly \*massive\* –
there are dozens upon dozens of Puranas, or documents claiming to be
such. Not all of them are equally valuable in a theological sense. But
it does not seem prudent to attempt to draw some sort of entirely
artificial mental-theological ‘dividing line’ in time or conceptry
beyond which one basically attempts to pretend that these things do not
exist, and have absolutely no validity whatsoever.

As I have already said – often, what is found in the Puranas is the
direct carrying forward and explication of what is found in The Vedas.
It is not ‘newer’ in its expression, except in terms of the actual
composition of the text itself. And even then, some are built around
truly archaic ultimate cores of quotational value. And much of the time,
where somebody has insisted that such-and-such is ‘non-Aryan’
incorporation – they mean, of course, ‘corruption’ – this has turned out
not to be the case for \*precisely\* this reason. Because we can
\*demonstrate\* that it is actually a Vedic concept, an Indo-European
concept that is being viewed more expansively or more directly than had
otherwise been hte case.

It is not appropriate, either, to try and declare illegitimate an entire
centuries-spanning canonical corpus of texts, because they do not accord
with how one ‘feels’ that a particular favoured Deity ought be exalted.
Which does not mean, of course, that it is inappropriate to criticize
various post-Vedic materials for being curiously \*specific\* in some of
their unflattering presentations thereof, either – only that a
(well-founded) theological-exegetical, rather than a
psychological-emotional reasoning must be advanced to do so. But as we
have said, often the ‘unfavourable’ elements that are being objected to
– are not ‘new’ nor ‘novel’, but find Vedic expression, as well as
comparative expression elsewhere in the Indo-European canons of other
cultures thousands of miles or hundreds, thousands of years more
distant.

All things considered, I feel that often when people are doing this
thing – sneering at post-Vedic Hindu mythology and claiming they have no
use for it … they are doing so out of a serious ignorance of what is
actually contained therein. Either in the Vedic mythology or the
Puranic. And they are doing so out of personal preference for the former
over the latter – perhaps because they like to imagine themselves
‘closer’ to the archaic Indo-Aryans than the Indo-Aryans and their
descendents who wrote the Puranas … or who still continue to practice
the Hindu religion, replete with its Vedic bones and seeds, today.

I suppose it is their loss.

For ultimately, it seems, in many of these cases wherein people wish to
attack or to criticize the Puranic mythology as being
“non-Indo-European” – the elements in question which they have singled
out for de-legitimation are integral to the Indo-European Mythos
Itself.
