+++
title = "ON THE HORSE TWINS – The Savior Sons of the Sky Father [Part 1 – Introductions, Inceptions, Andxa0Asvins]"
date = "August 4, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/arya-akasha-asvins-horse-twins.png?w=950)

One of the more pervasive, yet perplexing of the elements of the
Indo-European mythology must surely be the Heroic Horse-Twins. Whether
the Asvins / Nasatyas / Divo Napata of the Vedas, the Dioscuri of the
Greeks (Castor & Pollux / Polydeuces), the Asvieniai / Dievo Suneliai of
the Lithuianians, or Hengist and Horsa of the Nordic/Germanic texts ..
there They are.They are evident in almost all of our cultures – even
if, as in the case of the Celtic instances, we only really know of some
these there because of Classical sources insistently stating their more
northerly neighbours held the Dioskouroi \[‘Boys/Sons of Dyaus/Zeus’\]
in such high regard.

Yet Who are They? Well, the clues are – as ever – to be found within the
names.

Divo Napata / Divah Kumarau, Dioscuri / Dioskouroi, and Dievo Suneliai
are all virtually self-explanatory. The Sons/Boys of the Sky Father.
Various other descriptive elements pertaining to parentage \[e.g. the
lesser-known RigVedic attestations for the Asvins as Sons of Rudra; and
prominent mention for Vivasvant\], including the admittedly somewhat
more drawn-out descent for Hengist and Horsa from Odin/Woden (as great
\[…\] great grandsons thereof in the euhemerized accounts that we are
left with), are much the same. And further go to reiterate that
Odin-Rudra *is* the Sky Father, in case there were any lingering doubt
upon that score.

‘Ashwin’ / ‘Asvin’ derives from Sanskrit ‘Asva’, meaning ‘Horse’. This
therefore gives the meaning of ‘Possessors of Horse’, ‘Horsemen’,
‘Cavalier’. ‘Nasatya’ is more complex, and has defied easy etymological
trace with precision. It has come to mean ‘Helpful’, ‘Friendly’; likely
shares some coterminity with ‘Nasate’ \[‘Join’/’Approach’\] – hence why
I have chosen to figuratively render it as ‘Ally’. This is, after all, a
pretty defining feature of the pan-Indo-European mythology of these
figures, as we shall soon see.

However, the likely Proto-Indo-European root for ‘Nasatya’ goes down a
related trajectory of meaning – ‘Nes’, meaning ‘To Return’ (particularly
to one’s Home, a safe place of refuge – hence ‘Save’) or perhaps ‘Heal’
(also a returning to a state of … the latter of which certainly also
accords with what the Asvins do, via Their mastery of medicines and
empowering elixir preparation. It would also, somewhat, accord with the
mention given for Pollux saving Castor from death via a divine
empowerment in Greek mythology – which does, after all, restore His
Brother to Divinity among the Heavens. A ‘Homecoming’ of a sort.

The Proto-Germanic ‘Nozijana’ provides an eloquent explication of the
concept-field around the Nasatyas – it refers to the provision of
refreshment, relief, revitalization; the ignition or tending to a fire
\[which has obvious sacral implications given the central role of a
‘living flame’ in Indo-European piety, and especially the preparation of
the various empowerments, or even simply the bringing together of Our
People(s) around a Hearth, particularly in Alliance and mutual
support\], and very interestingly for reasons that shall become clearer
when we shall come to Castor & Pollux (one of whom is prominently
identified as a horse-trainer), a third definition of the keeping or
breeding, the husbandry of animals. ‘Nozijana’, it will absolutely not
surprise you to learn, is derived from the same Proto-Indo-European
‘Nes’ particle as ‘Nasatya’.

In any case, the mode in which these Two provide this Help to the
Indo-Aryans is extolled most aptly in RV I 181 4 – wherein some suggest
a juxtaposition of sorts is made between a ‘conquering’/’victorious’
Twin Who may have a more overtly ‘martial’ characterization, and His
Brother Who bestows a more metaphysical, sacral benefit. Although the
preceding half of RV 181 4 is at pains to stress the ‘unity of essence’
between the Two, and while one ‘facing’ of the Twins may emphasize the
vitality of the warrior whilst the other empowers the sagaciousness of
the seer, in truth both are capable across the spectrum of capacities.
Indeed, if we consider the situation of the preparation of Indra’s Vajra
for use against the fiend Namuci, wherein Saraswati and the Asvins must
metaphysically generate the weapon for Indra so that it might bypass
Namuci’s especial protections – the application of wisdom and cunning to
facilitate martial conduct means that there has never been a hard and
fast distinction between the two spheres for the Indo-European.

The recent Jamison/Brereton Oxford translation of the RigVeda renders RV
I 181 4 thus:

“Born (one) here, (one) there, the two have always bellowed together
with  
(one) flawless body but with their own (multiple) names. \[ / \]  
One of you is lauded as the victorious patron of the good battler, the  
other as the son of heaven dispensing a good portion.”

There is a potential issue with this translation in that it appears to
be making use of a somewhat controversial rendering for ‘Sumakhasya’ as
‘warrior’ – when more usually, it would be interpreted as something
along the lines of ‘great sacrificer’, or ‘very
enthusiastic/exuberant/joyous’, with the English ‘to be festive’ (in the
sense of both a ‘festive occasion’, such as a positive rite and banquet
or feast, but also the appropriate demeanour for a cheerful key
participant in same) providing a comparison for the bridging between
these two latter renderings. I suspect that this has been done by
Jamison & Brereton in order to underscore the ‘differential’ between the
‘Victorious/Conquering’ \[‘Jisnu’\] Twin, and His Brother … although
such a distinction is largely illusory. In the opening lines of the
Hymnal in question, Both Twins are directly hailed as carrying out the
role of a Priest, and it is also possible to translate the term
(‘Surih’) being used as the title for this ‘Conquering’ Twin as a Sage
or a Sacrificer as well as a ‘Lord’ (the English ‘Magister’ or in a more
archaic era, ‘Master’, would be a good comparative – as it encompasses
not only the sense of having ‘authority’, but also can mean that one has
intellectual command of a subject (e.g. having a masters degree) and/or
is a teacher and guide to others (hence the old Grammar school custom of
teachers being referred to as ‘Masters’ – hence ‘Headmaster’ for
principal); meanwhile ‘Magister’ has taken on connotations additional as
a cultic or otherwise metaphysically powerful leadership figure). The
term utilized to characterize the other Twin, the ‘Son of Heaven’, on
the other hand (SuBhaga), while it does indeed refer to the “dispensing
\[of\] a good portion” (although can also refer to being ‘beautifully
countenanced’, ‘fortunate’, inter alia), which is what we should perhaps
expect from a more ‘priestly’ sort (in which case, what is bestowed is
the positive outcomes/proceedings of the sacrifice) … also has martial
connotation. ‘Bhaga’, as in ‘Lord’, as in ‘Distributor of the
\[War-\]Booty’.

This is no accident. In both cases, the delicate interplay of the
Sanskrit is intentionally double-meaninged so as to reinforce that
*each* Twin has both warlike and sacral competencies – indeed, to
underscore that fundamentally, these are not different let alone
dissonant areas of Aryan endeavour.

Certainly, these are both spheres wherein wisdom, cunning, and intellect
are made major use of; and in which men often petition for Divine
guidance, counsel, empowerment, and aid.

For reasons of brevity (intended, if not necessarily realized), I have
chosen to end the first part there, leaving several elements to the
Vedic Horse-Twins (for now) unexamined.

Nevertheless, the Asvins form an admirable explication of just Who and
What the Indo-European Heroic Horse-Twins are about; and have
excellently set us up for the examination of our next two instances of
the typology (and thus, the next pieces in this series): Hengist &
Horsa, the Germanic Twins; and Castor & Pollux, the Greek Dioscuri.
