+++
title = "The Cyclopes And The Ribhus Elves – Solar Smiths of the Skyxa0Father"
date = "August 27, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/hephaestus_and_cyclopes_forging_the_shield_of_achilles_marble.jpg?w=600)

One of the most iconic creatures from Greek mythology must surely be the
Cyclopes. Best known from Odysseus’ encounter with Polyphemus during the
course of the Odyssey, the Cyclopes is one of those classic mythic
tropes – the big, brutish monster who must be defeated via cunning and
guile lest he devour the hero and (more) of his men.

Yet what if I told you that the Cyclopes is a much more complex figure.
And that it’s the actions and affectations of a certain clade of the
Cyclopes which have brought the general reputation of the species into
undeserved disrepute. What if I told you that there exists a substantive
Greek – and, in fact, broader Indo-European – literature which presents
quite a different (dare I say, less one-eyed) view of them?

Well, you’d probably think I was attempting to rewrite the mythology.
Engaging in some sort of (post-)modernist ‘editing’ of the canon for a
presumably-political end. There is certainly a lot of that going on
nowadays. Yet that is not what you shall find here. Instead, by
highlighting what is actually contained within the actual archaic
sources available to us – and then combining this with our Indo-European
comparative approach – I seek to amend the otherwise lacking-in-depth
perception of the Cyclopes. To restore the actual mythic truth of the
matter. Which, never fear, still leaves Polyphemus’ characterization in
the Odyssey largely in-tact.

You see, we focus so much upon the ‘younger’ or ‘Hypereian’ Cyclopes–
those living upon the isle of Hypereia in savagery – that we utterly
neglect their much more impressive ‘Elder’ superiors: the Ouranian
Cyclopes. Who are quite a different sort of creature altogether –
sharing only their iconic feature of the single eye, a certain degree of
divine descent (much more prominent in the Ouranians than the
Hypereians), and their gigantic stature.

Yet despite our customary acquaintance with the sort of Cyclopes
exemplified by Polyphemus being far more prominent in our mind’s eye …
he and his kin are actually much less important than these lesser-known
Ouranian Cyclopes.

But who are this loftier brood, and what is it which distinguishes them
from the brutes? Well, it is my belief that they represent the Greek
understanding, the Greek expression of the ‘Solar Craftsmen’ of
Indo-European mythology. Also known amongst the Vedic Hindus as the
Ribhus / Rhbus , and with the same underlying typology and linguistics
helping to inform the Nordic/Germanic conception of Elves (although in
this case, something has gone awry – as there, the ‘Solar’ aspect is not
just missing, but actively inverted for the Dwarves (Svartalfar); they
are encountered away from the Light, which is fatal to them, and are
described as ‘Black’; in contrast to the more obviously Solar aspected
(Light) Elves, who are not overtly associated with the ‘Craftsman’
element to the typology – with the potential exception of Volundr, the
exact species of whom (‘Black’ or ‘Light’ Elf), Arya Akasha has a
long-running argument over). But more upon all of those in due course.
For now, let us turn to the primary texts upon the matter.

The major one, of course, being Hesiod’s Theogony. Of a comparable rough
antiquity to Homer (although there is some debate about the precise
datings of each and therefore which is actually older), it records some
rather different perspectives in various matters to that we find in the
Iliad and Odyssey. My personal supposition is that this is due to the
difference in their purpose – Homer is producing what is, effectively,
religiously derived ‘entertainment’ \[which does not mean it is not of
great value and beauty – only that ‘poetic license’ means that some
details are differently emphasized or interpolated as necessary for that
prime purpose\]; whereas Hesiod is endeavouring to provide a synopsis of
the relevant mythology. Both are, of course, figures who are writing
from and immersed within their own localized native traditions –
perspectives which could disagree quite markedly even from other Greek
beliefs prominent at the time a mere few dozen miles down the road (c.f.
for instance, the observation that the Athenian mythology around Ares
may have quite some bias to it and therefore portray Him in an eminently
different manner to the Ares as understood by the Spartans).

I have generally observed that Hesiod’s work often accords in
interesting ways with the archaic Vedic canon – and therefore believe
that through whatever means, it contains perhaps surprisingly
well-preserved kernels from the Urheimat-era of Indo-European mythology
\[as I explored in, for instance, “MahaShivRatri And The
Mytholinguistics Of War \[Part 3\] – The Mind, The Mania, The Manyu” and
“Hail Hydra-Slayer: On The Mythic Combat Of Herakles And Athena – Indra
And Vak Saraswati, Against The Demon-Dragon Of The Water”\], so it
should therefore perhaps prove unsurprising that his Theogony forms such
an important source for looking at the Greek recollection *from* said
Urheimat of the Solar Craftsmen semi-divine role.

But enough prefacing – to the text!

“And again, she bare the Cyclopes, overbearing in spirit, Brontes, and
Steropes and stubborn-hearted Arges, who gave Zeus the thunder and made
the thunderbolt: in all else they were like the gods, but one eye only
was set in the midst of their foreheads. And they were surnamed Cyclopes
(Orb-eyed) because one orbed eye was set in their foreheads. Strength
and might and craft were in their works.”

The ‘She’ in question is, of course, the Earth Mother – Gaia. The Father
of these Three being Ouranos. In terms of the names, ‘Brontes’ is
‘Thunder’, ‘Steropes’ is ‘Lightning’, and ‘Arges’ is ‘Bright’ or
‘Flash’. We shall come back to the importance of these names in a
moment.

Relations between the young Cyclopes and Their Father are, predictably,
strained – this being Ouranos in the course of Greek myth, after all. He
imprisons Them along with Their Brothers, the Hekatoncherires \[the
‘Hundred-Handed’ ‘Storm-Giants’\], which leads to Their playing an
important role in Their Brother Kronos’ uprising against Ouranos … only
for Them to be imprisoned again by Kronos – and then to carry out a
similarly important role in Zeus’ own overthrow of Kronos.

Quoth Hesiod upon the matter:

“And he set free from their deadly bonds the brothers of his father,
sons of Heaven whom his father in his foolishness had bound. And they
remembered to be grateful to him for his kindness, and gave him thunder
and the glowing thunderbolt and lightning: for before that, huge Earth
had hidden these. In them he trusts and rules over mortals and
immortals.”

So, as we can see, the Names of the Ouranian Cyclopes are not
coincidental – they are ‘functional designations’ if you like, for the
work for which these mighty artificers are best-known for having
produced: the Thunderbolts of Zeus. Mightiest Weapon in His Arsenal.

Later sources, such as Pseudo-Apollodorus, expand this list of output to
also make especial reference to the provision of other such ‘iconic’
equipment for this combat ‘gainst Kronos – the Invisibility Helmet of
Hades, and the Trident of Poseidon being the most prominent examples.
Although to this I would add also the provision of another truly
remarkable weapon … albeit one which is not, perhaps, so often thought
of as such. Namely, the first Altar – a constellation, an altar in the
sky of such name – upon which The Gods swear sacred oath of Unity of
purpose against the common foe, and may even have carried out the
world’s first (proper) rite of sacrifice in consecration of Their
covenant and its divine mission. Piety and Comradeship – these two
forces truly are amidst the mightiest weapons known to the Indo-European
arsenal. It is therefore only fitting that the Ouranian Cyclopes be the
ones to forge the manner via which these come into activated, weaponized
beingamong even The Gods.

To quote Pseudo-Hyginus upon this Altar’s construction – “On this altar
the gods are thought to have first made offerings and formed an alliance
when they were about to oppose the Titanes. The Cyclopes made it. From
this observance men established the custom that when they plan to do
something, they make sacrifices before beginning the undertaking.” This
is something which likely finds comparative expression in the Vedic
canon – wherein the properly constructed fire-altar is the highest of
hallows for an oath sworn before it, and is reflected in the Ribhus’
role as Hotars (Vedic Fire-Priests who construct and operate such
altars) likewise.

However, before we head off into the wilds of Indo-European
reconstructive theology – in order to more properly elucidate just who
and what these mighty beings actually are, via our utilization of the
rest of the Indo-European mythic spheres to highlight the underlying
patterning only fragmentarily portrayed in the Greek and Roman
traditions … there are two other points that must be considered.

The first of which being the Ouranian Cyclopes’ association, especially
prominent in Roman myth, with Hephaestus / Vulcan. Interestingly, this
re-aligns the two different ‘species’ of Cyclopes in some ways – as it
situates the Ouranian Cyclopes on or about Sicily, often identified with
the Hypereia of the Odyssey where Polyphemus et co are to be found. The
reasoning for the Ouranians to be found there is prima facie obvious –
the Fires of Mt Etna / Aetna thereupon represent one of the most
prominent and potent of the continuously-active volcanoes of the
Mediterranean; and the ongoing rumblings and other forms of disruption
generated therefrom can easily be rendered as the rumblings of a
furiously active forge. To quote Virgil: “Between the Sicilian coast and
Aeolian Lipare there’s an island, whose cliffs, sheer-rising, jet out
smoke from their crannies : deep within it are vaults, a rumbling
volcanic cavern scooped out by the action of the Cyclopes’ fires; you
can hear the clang of hard blows on the anvils, the roaring when masses
of ore are smelted within, and a throbbing blast of flame form the
furnaces.”

Virgil then goes on to depict the Cyclopes hard at work upon a number of
other wondrous devices for certain other Gods – including a War-Chariot
for Mars, and the Aegis cloak worn by Athena; and, of course, yet
another wondrous Thunderbolt for Zeus. This is not an innovation of
Virgil’s, but rather a building upon something relatively consistent
within the Classical mythology – as we find within the works of the
Greek Callimachus, writing some two centuries before Virgil, mention of
these Cyclopes, similarly situated proximate to Sicily upon the Liparean
Isles to its immediate north, doing likewise for Goddess Artemis and
forging Her a most mighty bow and arrows.

The point, as we shall see in our Ribhus-comparative, is that these
Three Artificers are associated with the Artificer-God – and, in such a
manner that suggests that some degree of competition or rivalry has been
involved. Yet with all acknowledging Their superlative skill in
producing such bespoke accouterments and apparatoi.

The second concerns Their interaction with Apollo – which is an
assumedly lethal one. Although just Whom it is lethal *to* is a matter
of some debate within the Classical source material – some endeavouring
to reconcile the seeming contradiction between the near-Godlike and thus
immortal status of the Ouranian Cyclopes and the accounts of Ouranian
Cyclopes being slain by Apollo by suggesting that it was the four
less-Divine sons of the original Three Ouranian Cyclopes that were
killed.

As for *why* Lord Apollo wished to do Them harm … it was an act of
revenge, retaliation. For Zeus had just struck down Apollo’s Son,
Asclepius, in fear that this young demi-god of Medicine and Healing
would transmit his hidden knowledge as to the mechanism for resurrecting
the dead on to others. This, I believe, has rather close parallel with
Lord Indra’s (attempted) Smiting of the Sage Dadhichi for teaching the
secrets of the Soma-producing ceremony to the Asvin Twins via which the
latter attained the immortality of the divine – although it is worth
noting that there are a number of differences between the two myths as
well. Including the rather cunning subterfuge employed by the Ashvins to
replace Dadhichi’shead with that of a horse so as to render the
latter’s real skull not shattered by Indra when He came to exact
sanction upon Dadhyanc for his passing on the knowledge (which, in a
perhaps fitting reflection of the earlier occurrence, is then followed
up by the Asvins restoring Dadhichi to life via the reattaching of his
original, human head with Indra none the wiser) \[for more details upon
this Vedic mythic occurrence, as well as its ritualine implications, see
my earlier “A Cut Off Horse-Head Delivers The Message”\].

In any case, following Asclepius’ killing by Zeus, Apollo is (perhaps
understandably) enraged – and realizing that even He cannot take
vengeance against Zeus directly, He instead resolves to destroy the next
best thing : the creatures who produced the Thunderbolt weapon with
which the initial fatal deed was done.

So what does all of this mean? Well, let us take a ‘step back’ – three
steps back, in a way – from the source-texts, and examine things
somewhat in abstract, in aggregate. And then see how this aligns with
the other Indo-European mythic examples in order to properly establish
our typology.

What we have here are three Divine Craftsmen, Who are justly famed for
producing a myriad of wonders for The Gods – and Who have both a close
relationship with a Solar aspected (and/or Artificer-Supreme) Lordly
Figure, with Whom the three Craftsmen may wind up having quite some
contratemps.

But why do I say that these are *Solar* Craftsmen?

Well, this is where we shall begin turning in earnest to our comparative
Indo-European analysis of the trio. Beginning with the iconographic
feature that is so prominent it is literally right there in the name.
The Cyclopes – the One-Eyed (although the more literal rendering for
‘Cyclopes’ would in fact be the somewhat confusing ‘Circle-Eyed’).

Why is this likely ‘Solar’ in meaning? Because there is a well-known and
quite prevalent Indo-European concept of the ‘One Eye’ of the Sky Father
being The Sun. Varuna in the Vedas is hailed in such a manner, and there
is also mention for this for Zeus, as well. I personally suspect that
Odin’s One (‘Flashing’) Eye is at least partially a residual holdover
from this which has been retained despite Odin’s loss of the other overt
‘Solar’ conceptry that otherwise tends to be prominent for a Sky Father
deific expression.

The ‘One Eye’ of the Cyclopes, in other words, is a way of referring to
Their ‘Solar’ association. Something figurative which has become
interpreted more literally as the Greeks progressed further down their
own mythoreligiousdevelopment and divergence from the rest of the
Indo-European-isphere.

How do we know this is plausible, this symbolic interpretation, beyond
the fact of its occurrence in reference to the Sky Father? Because the
RigVeda directly states it.

RV 1 111 4 – “The sons of Sudhanvan, the R̥bhus, who have the sun as
their eye, in a year became infused with insights.” \[Jamison & Brereton
translation – another version phrases it as the “Rbhus becoming
sun-eyed”\]

The parallels with the Ribhus are further in number than just the ‘one’
of the eye, as well. In fact, they are three – both the ‘Hesiodic’
Artificing Cyclopes, and the Vedic Solar-Smithing Ribhus. And there are
also the mythic parallels to consider. In particular – the parentage of
the Cyclopes lies with Ouranos, whilst their ‘functional’ association
lies with Hephaestus, and they also endure some dire ‘rivalry’ or threat
from Apollo (another ‘Solar’ aspected Deity), as well as Kronos (Who
imprisons the trio). The Ribhus, meanwhile, are hailed as the Sons of
Sudhanvan – the Great Archer ; their ‘functional’ association lies with
Tvastr, the Forge-Father – as does their ‘rivalry’ or ‘threat’ in the
form of a certain well-renowned contest of artificer-skill therewith and
its near-fatal outcome.

I do not believe these parallels are at all coincidental. In fact, I am
in the course of preparing an article to approach Tvastr as potentially
a further and overtly ‘Solar’ expression of the Indo-European Sky Father
deific (in particular light of the logical Tvastr-Tuisto connexion, as
aspected by, say, Luwian ‘Tiwaz’; as well as the prominent
identification of Svarog of the Slavs, an otherwise straightforward Sky
Father figure, with Hephaestus in the Hypatian Codex); and it has long
been acknowledged that Apollo bears significant coterminity with
Shiva-Rudra … the Great Archer. Which does NOT mean, of course, that
within the realms of the Greco-Roman mythology, one should be regarding
all these three deities – Ouranos, Hephaestus, Apollo – as necessarily
being the same … only that it appears more-than-plausible that the
underlying mythology of each figure is bearing forward elements that
were originally associated with one particular deity in the more archaic
Indo-European setup (which should not, either, be read as proffering a
‘monist’ or ‘monotheistic’ baseline for Indo-European theology – quite
the contrary. It is one *particular* deity amidst a pantheon we are
speaking of, here). But that is, as I say, another matter for another
time. Indeed, several such pieces-in-waiting.

The final piece to the puzzle concerns those much-earlier aforementioned
Nordic Alfar. Which I considered in more expansive detail in our
Christmas Day piece from last year – “On The Elves Of The North Pole”,
from which I shall now quote:

“Let us consider the etymologies. In each case – Elf, and Rhbus – there
are two non-exclusive and quite likely decidedly coterminous
explanations for the derivation of the terms.

As applies Elf, the main understanding is that of “White” – the “Alf” of
the Germanic languages shares obvious coterminity with terms like “Alb”
(as in “Albino”) and “Alp” (as in “White” Mountains through Snow)
\[Interestingly, the Hittite 𒀠𒉺𒀸 \[Alpas\] appears to have taken this in
the direction of ‘Cloud’; which not only combines the characteristic
whiteness, but also the ‘elevated’ connotations we should expect of
caelestial meaning\], deriving ultimately from Proto-Indo-European
‘Albhos’/'(h)elbhos’. \[This is also, with deference to a certain other
modern writer whose series incorporates worker ‘elves’, the root origin
of Latin “Albus”\]

It is certainly possible to take the “White” connotation rather
literally – as that is exactly and precisely what natural sunlight is.
Really, really bright white light \[and there is an intriguing ‘Elbid’
in Celtic languages, meaning “Upper World”, which not only conveys the
“upper” part, as in ‘above-ground’, but also links to how “Loka” derives
from “Lewk” to refer not only to the ‘world’ , as in the ‘visible
world’, but also to the faculty of ‘sight’. “Lewk”, of course, meaning
“Light” (inter alia) in PIE\]. But it also carries inherent within it
the connotations of Beauty \[see also the Sanskrit semantic field around
“Gaura”/”Gauri”\], and, due to the source of the ‘Whiteness’ in
question, the Caelestial expression.

The ‘Craftsman’ connotation, meanwhile, is supplied by the other chain
of etymological derivation – wherein it is instead linked to a close
phonetically relative term whose ambit of meaning is almost directly
that of the Sanskrit Rhbus. Incorporating not only the physical sense of
artifice and invention – but also the mental faculties which are
possessed alongside these active expressions of same; those of
inventiveness, ingenuity, the adept mastery of a field, skill and
wisdom, the courage of one’s burgeoning output.”

This closely affiliated alternate etymology would, in Germanic, run back
through terms like ‘arbaz’ and ‘arbaidiz’ (i.e. ‘worker’) – and is
reconstructed as ‘albiz’ by the major linguist involved. It is not hard
to see how ‘arbaz’ and ‘rhbus’ are likely linked; although it should be
noted that in the case of ‘albiz’, the ‘b’ sound is somewhere between
how we would say it and something like a ‘v’, whilst the
long-acknowledged ‘r’ – ‘l’ sound-shift is also evidently in play. The
mytholinguisticpattern for the regular co-development of terms for
skillful labour and whiteness/shining light, therefore, I would suggest
to be one of the ‘clearness’ – ‘clarity of mind’ – required in order to
perform such incredible feats of artifice. The skill whose quality
shines forth as the active expression of the ‘radiant mind’ of the
creativity within. A pattern which plausibly explains the instances of
both the Germanic and Indo-Aryan linguistic canons on the one hand, and
the mythic instances from these as well as the Greco-Roman on the
other.

So, as we can see, the ‘Bright’ or ‘Solar’ ‘Craftsmen’ are figures that
plausibly have a quite ancient Indo-European pedigree. As it would be
difficult to explain away the co-occurrence of such a trio in each of
the Vedic and the Classical mythologies with these repeated motifs and
coterminities of role and function via mere coincidental happenstance.

This does not, of course, answer – nor really even seek to address –
just what it is which happened in the Nordic mythology to produce such a
dramatic divergence with the Dwarves from what we have seen in these
other Indo-European instances that underpin our typology. Certainly,
there are tantalizing hints to suggest that the Norse knew these figures
too – Volundr the Smith has two brothers, for instance (although his leg
impairment may perhaps recollect another Smith, and of the three – only
Volundr is well-known for Forging) and is eventually able to take flight
in a manner perhaps comparable to the Ribhus at the conclusion of each
of their respective cup-involving ordeals. Yet at the same time, too
many things are ‘backward’ to truly assert with confidence that these
same Angelic Artificers also flew North to the Norse.

The Sons of Ivaldi may produce artefacts of wonder and weapons of
prodigious might for The Gods – just as the Ribhus and Hesiodic
Cyclopeshave done. But it is another group of Dwarves, Brokkr and
Sindri, that engage in the contest (which, to be sure, does also produce
weaponry – including the analogous instrument to the Vajra of Indra, in
the form of Thor’s Mjolnir … the Vajra having been produced by Tvastr
Himself rather than the Ribhus) – and it is, in effect, a contest not
against a mighty Forge-Lord deity’s output, but rather against the
earlier-produced works of the Sons of Ivaldi as part of a bet which also
involves Loki and his head (but not neck).

Meanwhile, the essential natures of the Ribhus and the
Craftsmen-Cyclopes also do not align with that of the Dwarves. Hesiod is
quite direct and specific in hailing the Divine Nature of the Three –
“in all else they were like the gods, but one eye only was set in the
midst of their fore-heads.” And the Ribhus, too, are directly addressed
as having the status of Divinity. There is no such positive regard for
the Dwarves. Nor, as we have mentioned towards the outset, can there be
‘Solar’ association for them – as they are customarily regarded as
unable to even venture into sunlight, much less actively embody it in
the manner of the Ribhus, or bear its energetic symbolism in the manner
of the Cyclopes. To go even further, the close companionship of the
Ribhus with Indra is the diametric opposite of the customary attitude of
Thor to Dwarves – although both do, to be sure, involve the close
proximity of fire …

There is some speculative room for a closer association to have yet
remained when considering the ‘elves’ of far later German folk-belief –
wherein we again find reference to a craftsman (in this case undeniably
human) who has his work completed and improved upon by what is often a
trio of such creatures; although significantly diminished in both
physical and metaphysical stature here – instead of being giants as
among the Greeks, or standing amidst the Gods as with the Hindus, these
are ‘small’ figures … engaged in cobbling shoes rather than forging
weapons of divine destructive capability or miraculous means of
conveyance and overcoming of death. Still, one additionally salient
parallel does remain – just as with the Vedic Ribhus in RV IV 51 6,
these cobbler elves have their works completed ready afore the Dawn.

It would be tempting to proffer some speculation as to just what might
have happened to result in the Norse lacking the strong and direct
parallel expressions of the Smith-Scions which we so easily attest
amidst the Classical and Hindu canons – but that should wait for another
time and a more comprehensive examination of the subject in question
upon both sociological and mythological grounds.

Instead, let us proceed back to those two expressions which we DO have,
and the potential underlying Indo-European understanding which has given
rise to each of these.

We know, prima facie, for the Vedas and associated commentary tells us
so – that the Ribhus are, in their way, the Sons of the Sun. The
Radiating energy and force thereof – hence why They are also called upon
to facilitate the workings of Immortality, as They gave Their Parents a
renewed span of Days. The Cyclopes are associated in both name and deed
with Lightning-bolts – which, per the longstanding conventions upon the
subject found in several Indo-European sources, are also the same energy
as the Sun in the Highest Heaven and the Fire down here on earth: the
difference of appearance attributable to the form and ‘wavelength’ of
which it takes as it crashes down through the Mid-Atmosphere betwixt the
two \[this may also help to explain the Ribhus’ co-invocation and even
occasional co-identification with Their Comrades, the Maruts\].

In each case, therefore, we have a fundamental Fire association: both in
terms of the ultimate origins of either (i.e. The Sun), as well as the
expression here on Earth with which they are associated (i.e. the
Forge-Fire, but also in both cases an Altar – which, for the
Indo-European will customarily involve the Sacred, Living Flame of
Offering : the fire upon which Oaths are evidently forged in cast-iron
cladding, something which on both elements may also help to explain the
Sanskrit customary etymology of ‘Ribhus’ as ‘Rta + Bha’ – the ‘Radiance
of Cosmic Law’ ).

The Sun, in the Indo-European view, is a force for creation and life –
whether the ‘creation’ in question is the wondrous workmanship of the
human race (see our ‘Sons of the Sun’ series, as well as the ‘Radiant
Queen of the Heavens’ series for a corresponding implication) or even of
The Worlds themselves (c.f the ‘Solar Craftsman’ deific in some Vedic
cosmogony, or the ‘Hiranyagarbha’ – ‘Golden Womb’ – in others). It
therefore makes a certain form of sense for the Forge-Fire and the
Solar-Pyre to be so closely coterminous.

Even though it may seem self-evident that Hephaestus is not a ‘Sky
Father’ deific in the proper sense of the term – an Orphic hymnal to the
God hails Him as:

“Strong, mighty Hephaistos, bearing splendid light, unwearied fire, with
flaming torrents bright: strong-handed, deathless, and of art divine,
pure element, a portion of the world is thine: all-taming artist,
all-diffusive power, ’tis thine, supreme, all substance to devour:
aither, sun, moon, and stars, light pure and clear, for these thy lucid
parts \[of fire\] to men appear. \[A variant translation has these
various forms of light being rendered as the ‘limbs’ of Hephaestus that
we are able to perceive\] To thee all dwellings, cities, tribes belong,
diffused through mortal bodies, rich and strong. Hear, blessed power, to
holy rites incline, and all propitious on the incense shine: suppress
the rage of fire’s unwearied frame, and still preserve our nature’s
vital flame.”

The Orphic canon is, of course, rather more recent in collation than the
works of Hesiod or Homer – yet which nevertheless also carry forward
important symbolic and mythological comprehensions from the underlying
archaic Classical stratum of belief.

The role of the Cyclopes operating in such close working proximity with
Hephaestus, then, simply further underscores the trenchant Solar
symbolism of all four of these radiantly mighty beings. Symbolism which
was, in any case, never in doubt in the presentational understanding of
the Ribhus ; and which is latent in the *term* if not necessarily its
fulgurite-fulsome application in all instances of the Nordic Alfar, as
well.

All things considered, then, it seems that the Solar Smiths of the Sky
Father are quite an ancient and innately, enduringly Indo-European
trio.

Even though They evidently often appear to have been somewhat
ineluctably overshadowed by other figures with whom They bear some
conspicuous coterminity (for example, the one-eye of the Homeric
Cyclopes– such as Polyphemus and his fellows; or, potentially, whatever
it is which has happened to Them in the Nordic-Germanic canon) , They
yet remain.

It is over to us, I feel, to hail and honour Them – and to grant Them
the recognition which every master-craftsman deep(a) down secretly
relishes.

To play our small part in the acts of illumination, and of repair , that
shall restore Them to their proper and prominent place amidst our ken of
mythic vision.

Hail, therefore, to the Solar Smiths of the Sky Father !
