+++
title = "On Reclaiming ‘Barbarian’"
date = "August 5, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/653eae3f2b119d986b5d2f296bef3401.jpg?w=563)

The time has come, I think, to ‘reclaim’ the term “Barbarian”.

Now, in some circles this has already happened – it is utterly
uncontroversial, because there is the implicit recognition that what
“Barbarian” refers to , is one’s own ancestors … the negative, fearful
connotations thereof, being those affixed by the other people who *had*
something to fear from them.

But elsewhere, the appellation still bears a significant barb to it.
Instead of responding with the Chad ‘Yes’, the instinct of those called
out in such a manner is to angrily protest that no, no they (we) are not
the ‘barbarians’ – but rather, the more properly civilized people.

In truth, there does not have to be a distinction. ‘Barbarian’, in one
sense, simply conveys that the target for the term is from a different
culture – and more specifically, a different language, a different way
of doing things \[hence its main derivation – from the ‘Bah-Bah’ sounds
of indistinct speech to refined ears of the more southerly cultures of
the ‘civilized’ Mediterranean’\]. With the accompanying associations
that the figure in question is a brute, savage, almost feral perhaps.

It is erroneously presumed that this also axiomatically means “stupid” –
an arrogant imputation which has generally worked out very *very* poorly
for the ‘civilized’ would-be world-conquering empire builders making the
claim. Think of Darius’ Scythian campaign, or why the Romans pointedly
*stopped* attempting to invade and occupy Germania.

Yet looming at the fringes of the ‘civilized’ psyche in many parts has
also been a fundamentally congruent awareness that this is false – and
that those ‘Barbarians’ are in possession of a wisdom, an insight which
has been worn away or otherwise rendered less accessible amidst more
self-congratulatorily ‘sophisticated’ (which, after all, contains the
word ‘sophist’) climes.

Hence we find the Athenians speaking in glowing tones of the Scythian
Anarchises – a man who was honoured as one of the great philosophers and
wits of his time not simply ‘despite’ but actively *because of* his
Barbarian origins and resultant clarity of perspective amidst (or even
against) ‘civilized’ man.

We also find the customary due respect being accorded to the Shaivite
Sadhus of the Mountains in Hindu culture – and the somewhat fearful yet
also reverent reception of the Vratya among the Vedic people in an
earlier age. In both cases, this is a reflection of the attitudes
prevalent towards the Patron Deity of these groups. The terrifying
figure of most fearsome and formidable wisdom Who is also, despite being
‘on the periphery’ and up in the mountains – actually also at the heart
of everything, the ultimate ‘center’ of the cosmos.

Implicit in the way that ‘Barbarian’ is made use of as a slur by many,
is the assertion that to be ‘Barbarian’ means you can be disregarded –
that your views, your values, your heritage can be safely ignored. And
that with ‘civilization’, these shall become steadily eroded to the
point that they no longer even really exist, let alone actually matter.

As I have said, this is a singularly a-historical view. And not least
because often, when a civilization is decrepit and decaying – it is the
‘Barbarians’ at the gates who provide it with its fresh vibrancy and
life.

Or, as we see with the Scythian preservation of Andronovo religious
elements (a coterminity with Vedic religion, as it happens), as
expressed also in the ‘Turanian’ war effort against the Zoroastrian
heresy some three thousand years ago – the ‘Barbarian’ can represent the
bulwark, the preservation of what is ancient, honourable, and true
against the degradation of those who have deliberately gone off the
path, lost their way.

The observation which sparked all of this, was the occurrence a few days
ago of anti-Brahmin sorts in India attacking Brahmins rhetorically as
being Steppe ‘Barbarians’. And certainly, it is true that a significant
component of many Brahmins’ genetic heritage and all of Hinduism’s
cultural ancestry is to be found from that Urheimat-via-Central-Asian
source.

Yet even though it is indisputably meant as an insult when these sorts
of anti-Brahmin, anti-Hindu agitators deploy the term … just as we saw
via the ‘Gothicismus’ movement in Sweden two to four hundred years ago ,
I believe that the most appropriate response to such claims is veer-y
much the aforementioned Chad YES.

Because if we look at the more usual stereotypical associations of the
‘Barbarian’ label .. what is the insult here. “Your ancestors were
STRONG; Your ancestors were HONOURABLE; Your ancestors were TERRIFYING;”
– what is so ‘insulting’ about that?

“Your ancestors had CUSTOMS WE DO NOT UNDERSTAND” – is the crux of it,
and it is doubly relevant because the sorts of people who are attacking
‘Barbarians’ without acknowledging the true status and contribution of
‘Barbarians’ to their own civilizations and ancestry .. clearly don’t.
Alleged Hindus attacking Brahmins even more so !

To be ‘Barbarian’, I feel, is to be part of the Axe Which Reshapes
(Their) Reality.

It should be a point of pride, as well as a spear(tongue). Especially
when it is acknowledged – as any who has seen Scythian goldwork can most
assuredly attest – that quite away from not being ‘stupid’, many of
those so-called ‘Barbarian’ peoples are capable of heights of technical
and cultural sophistication that would startle and amaze the subsistence
‘civilization-dweller’ in their ill-health and cramped living conditions
of ‘sophisticated’ squalor.

And, in any case, as Robert E. Howard once pithily observed:

“Civilized men are more discourteous than savages because they know they
can be impolite without having their skulls split, as a general thing.”

And, for good measure from the same author:

“The more I see of what you call civilization, the more highly I think
of what you call savagery!”
