+++
title = "On The Wind-Walk Of Aristeas Of Proconnesus As Mythic-Metaphoric-Metempsychotic Journey"
date = "August 21, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/d2cdf8d78ea37baf6393a3c6d6700c9a.png?w=730)

\[Author’s Note: This piece, examining the legendary journey of Aristeas
of Proconnesus across Scythia, is an extract from my earlier “The
Gryphon – Indo-European Guardian of the Golden Realm”. I felt that it
was of sufficient import and general interest to publish separately as
well – and may further expand the concepts it touches upon at a later
time to also speak of Abaris the Hyperborean, and other angles upon the
mythic representation, the de-euhemerization of the sacred geography and
cosmology of the Indo-European world and Eurasia. It is my belief that
there are an array of other accounts in our mythology wherein while you
*can* interpret the journey in question as being a literal physical one
– it is, in essence, a recording of something else. A Guide-Book of
sorts to the traversing of the Mythic World – the secret, sacred
roadways to the Heavens (and, for that matter … elsewhere), masquerading
as mere marching across the mundus mundane\]

Nor is the fact that the most archaic source we have (incredibly
fragmentarily and indirectly) available to us which directly speaks to
the traverse between Ancient Greece and the Realm of the Arimaspi – the
account of Aristeas of Proconnesus – is effectively a ‘Wind-Walk’
metempsychotic journey of the soul of a theoretically dead man. Which
had him, empowered by the Bright God (although I personally suspect that
Phobos may be near as relevant as Phoebus for this journey – perhaps
similar to the role of Bhairava in some more Dharmically oriented
equivalents), (meta)physically run the entire distance to the borders of
the Arimaspi; before returning, some seven years later, to extol the
knowledge and experience of which he had gained in a now almost entirely
lost poetic verse. He then left again, only to reappear in another part
of the world entirely, claiming that he had ventured there previously in
the form of a Raven, following the leadership and footsteps of Apollo
and urging the locals to construct an altar thereto in consequence.
Following which, he is supposed to have lived for a further two hundred
and forty years.

While the notion of Aristeas making the physical journey across the
wilds of Scythia to its further extremes is not, itself, entirely
implausible in mundanely literal (or, if you prefer, euhemeric) terms –
the concept of him doing this despite being dead is somewhat less
viable. As is the idea of his then accomplishing further divinely-guided
journeying in the form of a Crow or Raven, and most especially his then
subsequent living for a span of almost a quarter of a millennium. It is
therefore my belief that his account and circumstance is best understood
somewhere between ‘metaphorically’ and ‘metempsychotically’ –
‘mythically’. A position perhaps strengthened by Herodotus’ own
expression of dubiousness at Aristeas’ presentation of inter-national
relations and history in that far-flung part of the world, on grounds of
it not according with the Scythians’ own understanding of their history.

To phrase it more directly – I believe that Aristeas’ Steppe sojourn was
at least in part a Soul’s journey up almost to the edge of the Divine
Realm (or, at least, the beginnings of the liminal zone intermediate
between this world and Theirs), and then heading back down to this plane
of Earth armed with both wisdom and a Mission; and potentially also
equipped with that most particular sort of ‘Gold’ found amongst the
Upplands … the ‘Gold’ that is ‘Immortality’ – at least, in some certain
small supply of it fit to sustain him for the further length of time he
needed here to carry out his purpose. This interpretation is perhaps
strengthened via his mention of flitting about the world in the form of
a Raven – not merely due to the Bird’s association with Apollo or Odin,
but due to the manner in which we Hindus regard these as ‘Yamadutas’
(‘Emissaries of Lord Yama’, the Ruler of the Realm of the
Glorious/Ancestral Dead), and as ‘Pitrs’ (Spirits of the Ancestors come
back amidst us). Now by necessity, such a journey would, of course, have
taken him up to the North and then the East – proceeding somewhat
‘astrally’ backward along the ancient migratory routes that had borne
the Greek people out Southward from the Proto-Indo-European Urheimat so
many centuries before; until eventually reaching such ‘deepa’ point at
which to cross over any further would run the veer-y real risk of there
being no chance of turning back – to vigorously Ascend the
World-Mountain, endeavour to attempt to make it past the watchful
Sentinels of the Sky-Road \[as mentioned in, for instance, RV X 14
10-12\], and attain the proper un-dying-ness of the Ancestors, of which
Aristeas was only given a temporary simulacra.

This was, of course, semi-euhemerized by later and more
rationalistically minded Classical authors, for whom “Scythian” was both
some strange and otherwordly semi-mythical figure … but also a somewhat
prominent and in-the-street (in certain cities, anyway – Athens being a
standout example) encounterable human people. And therefore so, too, did
all the other more overtly mythical or even downright mystical elements
in Aristeas’ account or the others no doubt like it, get brought
together in ‘History’ books as descriptions, regarded as unusually
fanciful even for their day, of what might lie out there in the mundane
world under that most map-legendary of designators: “Here Be Monsters”.
