+++
title = "Yama Iamso Coin of the Kushans, And What This Means For Central Asian Indo-European Religion – Arte-Factsxa0#7"
date = "August 9, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/arya-akasha-huviska-yama-coin.png?w=400)

I’ve had this coin in my head for some days now – a golden coin of the
Kushan king Huviska (who appears on the obverse), featuring what appears
to be Yama on the deity side.

Why? Because of the iconography with which Yama – here hailed as ‘Iamso’
– is displayed. He’s holding a Spear in one hand, and a Bird is visible
upon the other.

A Lord of the Realm of the Dead, armed with a Spear and with a prominent
Bird is certainly a well-known Indo-European deific!

Yet what kind of bird is it? And why does this matter?

Well, for the latter, because it tells us quite a bit about how the
Kushan thought about their own Indo-European religion – which drew from
seemingly all the strands that had made their way to that crossroads of
the world. You have Hindu deities on some Kushan coins, Greek ones on
others, and Greek ones in relation to Buddhist concepts on yet still
more. It really is an area of heavy diversity – yet also, out of that
roiling sea of inputs, certain patterns emerge; and certain underlying
truths nevertheless have a habit of reasserting themselves.

I’ve earlier written about this as a sort of parallel phenomenon to the
more well-known ‘Interpretatio Romana’ in the West; a rubric of quite
some practical necessity in ‘bringing peoples together’, yet which is
also an archaic expression of theological insight – comparative
mythological inquiry conducted in the realm wherein religion is no mere
armchair academic pursuit for people considerably removed from its
consequences. But an almost scientific exploration of the
actually-existing world around them, and which could have gravely
serious consequences if and when it might so happen to go awry. In short
– it was treating Myths as being \*real\*, and then endeavouring to
explicate how these real myths might really align. Rather like what we
do here at Arya Akasha in the 21st century, as it happens.

So, to bring it back to the Kushan specifically – there’s quite a bit of
scholarly debate about what they actually believed, especially amidst
the elite. Some were without a doubt Hindus. Others seem more
Zoroastrian styled. Many appear to fall somewhere in the middle, often
with additional elements drawn from elsewhere again.

We tend to favour the position that while the Kushan often had phases
where Zoroastrian elements \*look\* like they’re prominent – the actual
understandings and belief practiced seems decidedly more Hindu. And that
it is, in fact, a case of Indo-European Gods expressed via occasional
pseudo-Zoroastrian garbing – with the resultant re-synchronization of
beliefs from a number of Indo-European inputs \[Hindu, Greek, Scythian,
other Indo-European Central Asian groups, and Persian – even seemingly
Roman, occasionally\] quite understandably arriving at understandings
reasonably resonant with the Hindu perception. A good example of which
being the figure of ‘Oesho’ – represented with Shaivite iconography and
what may be a derivation of ‘Ishvara’ \[‘God-Emperor’\] as the theonym,
but also argued to incorporate the Zoroastrian version of Vayu as well.
Which is no problem, because in the Hindu understanding, Shiva and Vayu
are the same deity (You may also know Him as Odin).

So how does this coin and the Bird depicted thereon apply to this?

Well, because the big question as to just why Huviska had chosen to
depict Yama upon one of his coins is bound up with this. Despite the
well-attested pattern of the Lord of the Dead also being famously
‘wealthy’ \[Classical Pluto, for instance\], there’s usually supposed to
be another reason for the selection.

One outside possibility is that Huviska was not, in fact, the son of the
man who ruled before him – but rather, his brother. This is a somewhat
contentious position, but if true and Huviska is the brother rather than
the son of Kaviska, a rulership transition predicated upon the untimely
death of the latter is quite likely. As Yama and Manu, much like Romulus
& Remus, form a pair of Brothers with the elder one dying and the
younger one then claiming the throne to rule, but \*both\* honoured for
their respective and necessary roles … it would make a certain
figurative sense for the younger brother to pay homage to his elder
sibling by consciously and deliberately invoking the figure of Yama in
silent tribute to him as he assumed the Manu role. But as I say, this is
something of an outsider possibility, based upon a less commonly
accepted theory of the Kushan royal succession.

Meanwhile, people who want to push the notion of the Kushan as
Zoroastrian make the case that this is therefore ‘Yima’ rather than
‘Yama’ – that is to say, the Zoroastrian version of the same figure
\[see my Sons of the Sun series on the Progenitor Twins\]; and that the
bird upon Yima’s arm is the Varegna – a Hawk or Falcon that is a symbol
or even form of Verethragna as well as the Kingly ‘Farr’ \[‘Glory’, or,
perhaps, metaphysical mantle of honour for a blessed man\]. On the face
of it, this would seem eminently logical for a putatively Zoroastrian
king – and would fit also with Yima’s role in the Zoroastrian rendition
of Indo-European mythology as an archaic king in some ways analogous to
the more conventional Man(n)u(s)/Romulus \[although again, see ‘The
Indo-European Man – Sons of the Sun \[Part III\]: Zoroastrian Yima – The
Death of Manu’ for how this actually works out in practice\]. Huviska
would therefore be invoking this prior ancestral ruler of mankind,
particularly mankind during a crisis point, as a source of inspiration
and as the sort of ruler which he, himself therefore aspired to be.

Except that, as the academics Daryaee & Malekzadeh have pointed out ….
symbolically, this makes little sense. It presupposes that the populace
of Kushan and its related client-countries would be familiar with
Zoroastrian mythology and iconography – but also that they would somehow
not make the more obvious connection wherein the main occurrence of a
Falcon in relation to Yima is when the latter is \*losing\* his right of
rulership and mantle of ‘glory’ due to heading into the darkness of
falsehood beyond the Zoroastrian orthodoxy. It would make for a
questionable point of reference, indeed, for a king to implicitly frame
himself thus.

The same authors also make mention of ‘Iamso’ \[the inscription upon the
coin\] as potentially referencing an archaic and definitely
pre-Zoroastrian Bactrian form of the deity, perhaps in common with the
Nuristani ‘Imra’ version of the figure. This, I suspect, is more –
pardon the pun – on the money.

Where things get interesting, for our purposes, is another point of
potential connexion within the Zoroastrian canon – and which, to my
mind, recalls the broader typology much more easily in evidence
elsewhere in the Indo-European-Varta for the relevant deific. You see,
Daryaee & Malekzadeh point out – Yima is also somewhat prominently
identified as receiving an important revelatory message from a certain
bird, ‘Karsiptar’. There is some debate as to just which species of bird
local to the Indo-Iranisphere this should most properly represent, with
recent theorizing focusing upon either a species of Iranian Lark, or an
Indian bird known as the Cakravaka. This latter is due to the alternate
Avestan term for the Karsiptar – the Caxrwak.

However, I should like to propose a different alternative, which
\*should\* fit both potential terms; as well as what we know fairly
conclusively about the relevant Indo-European deific under discussion.

You see, ‘Karsiptar’ is in fact ‘Karsi-Ptar’ – that is to say, the
‘Black-Winged’. And what is a bird we so frequently find as a messenger
or emissary of the Lord of the Dead, who is also black winged. In
Sanskrit, we would also call them Yamadutas, or occasionally as Pitrs
\[‘Forefathers’\] – Corvids: Crows or Ravens. As applies the Caxrwak
linkage, the speculation would be that the latter particle would be
commensurate with ‘Vak’ \[‘Voice’\], whilst the former should represent
something akin to the more usual ‘Garh’ , ‘Gerh’ – which means a ‘harsh
noise’. It is where we get terms such as ‘Crack’ from, as well as
various other words for the Roar of Thunder; and most directly for our
purposes – it is also where we get ‘Crow’. (I should note here that
there is another possible etymology for some Corvid-related terms such
as ‘Corvus’ – going back to Proto-Indo-European ‘Ker’, in this sense
being, again, a ‘Harsh Noise’)

‘Caxrwak’, therefore, would be the ‘Harsh-Voiced’, or perhaps, as we
shall see, the ‘Indistinct Voice’/’Hidden Voice’. (Although it should be
briefly noted that other identifications are possible – the Medieval
Persian term similar to this, which means a sort of Lark; and the
Sanskrit ‘Cakravaka’, which refers to an admittedly rather
orange/saffron feathered duck, which nevertheless does have some
connection to the Pitrs … most usually as a sacrifice to Them; there is
also some suggestion for ‘Caxrwak’ as meaning ‘Duck’ in Avestan\]

The PIE ‘Gerh’ derivation has important implications also – as I
frequently cite in the form ‘Vacam Garjit Lakshanam’: Thunder Having The
Characteristics Of Divine Speech. This is a familiar concept to
Indo-European religions, and also implies in its Hindu usage the notion
of communication which only a specially perceptive ear is actually able
to comprehend. In a not dissimilar manner to the ‘Language of the Birds’
we find referenced in the Germanic mythology as well as elsewhere – and
I am not simply meaning those who spoke to Sigurd to warn him of
impending threat. Kon, the Young King of the Rigsthula, too, hears the
voice of a Crow (perhaps sent by Kon’s Father, the God Odin – although
some identify Rig with Heimdall, in which case Odin would be Kon’s
Grandfather) advising and guiding him to become a powerful ruler. A
voice which only the sort of man who was not merely a man – but rather,
of the appropriately divine bloodline and/or education and empowerment
should be able to comprehend. Just the sort of thing one would wish to
present to one’s people if you were a newly minted king. The great
diviner, the one who can see things as they actually are, and discern
the proper pathway and godly guidance where others only hear the harsh
caw-ing of carrion birds.

So, how to interpret this coin and the religious culture from whence it
came, then? Well, for a start it would seem rather curious for this to
be – as is often argued – a direct representation of Zoroastrian Yima.
The patterns of coins issued by Huviska have tended to have deities on
the reverse facing and the king upon the obverse. This presents an
immediate problem for this being \*Zoroastrian\* Yima – as the
Zoroastrians did not really regard Yima as a deity. Great mortal man,
sure – but not a God, in the manner of the Hindus or the Nuristanis with
Yama and Imra respectively. Now, that is not to say that some might have
suggested at the time a conceptual linkage with the Yima of the Persians
– but that is, as we have noted above, a case of Indo-European Gods
merely occasionally depicted in Zoroastrian garbing.

The coin could most certainly be Yama – albeit in a slightly different
sense, perhaps, than the most familiar Vedic figure; and with elements
we also find co-expressed in the Imra deific of the Nuristanis and the
Kalash. And I say ‘co-expressed’, because these, too, are to be found in
the Hindu figure of Yama. It is just that while we would ourselves
recall Yama as DharmaRaja, this term is often taken to mean ‘Lord of
Justice’ rather than its more expansive sense of, effectively, the Just
Ruler, the Righteous Ruler. That is to say, the essential ingredient in
a prosperous and prudent Kingship – Dharma, Righteousness; and its
active expression as the administering of the Rule of Law and Justice.
We are merely more used to the more ‘limited’ conceptual sphere for Yama
as focused exclusively upon ‘Justice’ in an eschato-legal sense rather
than the expansive regal-legal-sovereignty sense more common for a
mortal King rather than a magistrate. And in terms of ‘domain’, we are
likewise more accustomed to thinking of Yama focused pointedly in the
realm of Death and what comes after. Rather than, perhaps, rulership of
what the Pitrloka may also be thought of as – the Idealized Realm of the
Glorious/Ancestral Dead. A ‘Heavenly Kingdom’, if you will. It is not
hard to see how a ruler here on this Earth might wish to make oblique
comparison to the regimen prevailing in such a blessed realm; and there
is also a perhaps surprisingly under-spoken about connexion in
mytholinguistic terms between the words we associate with ‘dark’ and
‘ending’ in the manner of ‘death’ and those for ‘rulership’, as I
previously explored in “Ragnarok And The Night Lord”.

Such a more ‘expansive’ perception for Yama would also fit with the role
in which Imra takes in the related Indo-Iranian religions of the Kalasha
and the Nuristanis – wherein the ‘Heavenly Ruler’ denotation appears to
become something almost more akin to the Sky Father deific we have
broadly known elsewhere. There is a certain logic to this – the Sky
Father has a well-known Death linkage \[c.f Dyaus Pitar as Shiva – Kala,
Odin, and of course, Hades identified as Zeus of the Underworld\],
although it presents some obstacles in light of the fact that,
technically speaking, Yama should be a \*Son\* of Dyaus Pitar. Which
either means that the suggested linkage of Imra to Yama is somewhat
overstated, or that it is accurate – and the Nuristani and Kalasha have
suffered a ‘shift’ in their respective perspectives over the intervening
four thousand years, perhaps as the result of flawed oral transmission
of the myths in question \[a phenomenon observed by some in light of the
differences between Kalasha accounts given to one anthropologist versus
those transcribed by another visiting them some decades later after some
upheaval in the region\]. More upon much of that, perhaps, some other
time.

I mentioned toward the beginning of this piece that I found the
operation of this Central Asian ‘convection zone’ rather remarkable. Not
simply because it managed to bring together the Indo-European
mythoreligious perspectives of half a dozen or more cultures in
occasionally quite bewilderingly panoply of diversity. But rather,
because it could often (if not \*quite\* always) seem to do so in a
manner which \*resonated\* – which brought together out of and from this
diversity, the essential elements of the underlying Indo-European mythic
truth.

This coin stands as testament to that – an ethos so potent it has
seemingly been capable even of acting as a ‘corrective’ to the
Zoroastrian deliberate vandalism of their own prior Indo-Iranian
mythology.

Huviska’s successor, Vasudeva is often regarded as being the formalized
‘convert’ to Hinduism amidst the latter lines of the Kushan – but I
think, in truth, that even well prior to him, the ‘innovations’ of
certain Buddhists and more proper Zoroastrians were already fading
against the light represented by the revanchism of the more traditional
Indo-Iranic mythic milieu.
