+++
title = "Empedocles and vasiShTha : Agrigentum and Mithila"

+++
τέσσαρα γὰρ πάντων ῥιζώματα πρῶτον ἄκουε·  
Ζεὺς ἀργὴς Ἥρη τε φερέσβιος ἠδ’ Ἀιδωνεύς  
Νῆστίς θ’, ἣ δακρύοις τέγγει κρούνωμα βρότειον.

And first the fourfold root of all things hear\!—  
White gleaming Zeus, life-bringing Hera, Aidoneus,  
And Nestis whose tears bedew mortality.

Hayasthanika of great beauty and vigor (I would like to say this of
another woman too but am forbidden from saying so in public ;) ) and I
were once discussing the edifices of pagan thought. I was unfolding to
her the basic idea that the entire edifice of what might be termed the
current intellectual meme unfolded between Sicily and Mithila long long
ago. I term this the collective “gyANa-kANDa” of the pagans. Though no
one clearly understands the dynamics of this great and striking
resonance between the Aryas and yavanas, it is very clear to those who
properly understand both systems. So much so that just as understanding
the depths of the vedic language benefits from understanding Greek, so
too deciphering the intricacies of Aryan thought is eased by comparisons
to yavana thought. Pythagoras and bAdarAyaNa, Euclid and pANini,
Democritus and kaNAda; thus they go along in resonance. Sadly, much of
this missed in the modern world because somehow yavana thought has come
to be termed “Western philosophy”, and is gazed upon by minds infected
by the Abrahamistic memes. While on the other hand the Hindu makes no
attempt to make an independent study of it. The typical modern Hindu
thinker does not even realize that as a pagan he is the only genuine
adhikArI to interpret the yavana-s, as the pagan yavana-s are long gone.
I have always believed that the Hindus can be considered as having truly
come of age only when they set up institutes that can analyze various
pagan thoughts within a pagan framework (the natural Hindu one, rather
than the Abrahamistic one).

She who is like a female oryx was wondering as to who were the greatest
sages amongst the yavana-s. Of course names like Pythagoras,
Anaximander, Parmenides, Euclid, Plato and Aristotle were thrown about.
But the one name which came to my mind was Empedocles of Agrigentum, son
of Meton , that highest sage amongst the yavana-s. One thing about
Empedocles that struck a common chord in Hayasthanika and me, and
vividly impacted our world view, was his remarkable description of the
origin of of the world and life forms. He held that 4 elements- fire,
air, earth and water which in a hymn composed by him he identified with
the deities Zeus, Hera, Aidoneus and Nestis (See above). From these
elements he believed that first various parts of the body came into
being: heads, arms, eyes, legs that floated around and combined with
other body parts to give rise to full beings.  
“These members fell together where they met,  
And many a birth besides was then begot  
In a long line of ever varied life.“ Hymn fragment 59 of Empedocles.

He further elaborated that there arose many forms with wrong
combinations of limbs and body parts or ancient forms with supernumerary
combinations that were not capable of surviving. Hence, they perished
leaving behind only the correctly combined parts that resulted in fully
functioning organism. This was one of the earliest statements one of the
basic biological truths: the principle of evolution by natural selection
(Thus, he had preceded Darwin in proposing an evolutionary model based
on natural selection by over 2300 years).

In addition to this, Empedocles had many profound proto-scientific
ideas: He proposed a version of the conservation principle for matter
that resembled the saMkhya version of the Hindus; he described the
importance of the heart in the circulatory system, and was possibly even
an engineer. Empedocles belonged to the aristocracy of Agrigentum and is
believed to have led the life of a sage: He abstained from meat and
impure foods. He performed magical rituals and cured diseases by using
medicines and uttering ritual incantations. He believed that if one
murdered, broke oaths and committed such other sins one was reborn
repeatedly through many bodies. He claimed he remembered his many births
: “For by now I have been born as a boy, a girl, a plant, a bird, and a
dumb fish in the sea.” Many later yavana authors praised him as one of
the greatest poets of their past.

Coming back to his remarkable evolutionary model of organisms being put
together from pre-emerging parts, she who is like a female eagle asked:
Is this not a remarkable and unprecedented insight? I agreed remarkable
indeed but not unprecedented. Hayasthanika asked: So where do we
encounter this idea prior to Empedocles?

The answer to this lies in a lecture given by a vasiShTha to a janaka
named karAla, the ruler of mithilA preserved in the shanti parvan of the
great bhArata (12.303 in the Vulgate edition; 12.291 in Critical Pune
edition). Here, the kauNDinya, on being questioned by the king on the
highest philosophy, propounds a saMkhya theory, which is a proto-version
of pA\~ncharAtric sAMkhya. In it he explains that from the tanmAtras the
bhUtas- akAsha, teja, vAyu, Apah and pR^ithivi emerged (these correspond
to the four elements of Empedocles, only that the Hindus had 5 bhUta-s
instead with AkAsha being the extra one). These bhUtas then combined to
gave rise to several organs like: ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose, mouth,
hands, legs, guts, genitalia and the mind. These then combined to give
rise to the organisms of waters, earth and sky. Only those forms that
could exist/ or survived in these environments are observed as existing.
This presentation of the vasiShTha clearly explains that the peculiar
core sAMkhyan theory of the organs and mind emerging from the bhUta-s
and then assembling organisms was actually meant in the same way
Empedocles propounded his theory in the Greek world.

A further allusion to an evolutionary theory that resembles the
principle of natural selection as suggested by Empedocles is provided in
another lecture on sAMkhya similar to that provided by the vasiShTha.
This is in a lecture that was delivered by the R^iShi yA\~jnyavalkya to
the janaka named daivarAti, the king of mithilA (Mbh shantiparvan:
12.312 in Vulgate edition; 12.299 in critical Pune edition). This
lengthy lecture on sAMkhya is said to be an upaniShad. Here in
yA\~jnyavalkya explains that the source organisms (yonis) come into
being through the conglomeration of the pa\~ncha-bhUta-s (same as
described by the vasiShTha). The they are said to compete with each
other (anyonya-spardhinaH) and consequently they kill the rival
organisms or out-compete them depending on their qualities which result
in destruction or survival. Some are said to form associations with each
other and exist symbiotically. Thus evolving the organisms come to be.

Thus, in early sAMkhya thought we find evolutionary theories that
propose an assembly of organisms from various parts that were formed
from the bhUta-s (elements of Empedocles). We also find an evolutionary
theory which proposed that organisms compete with each other with only
some surviving depending on their properties. It also postulates
formation of symbiotic associations. The fine differences between
Empedocles and the sAMkhya seers represent different parallel synthetic
attempts utilizing a similar set of core ideas. Both the sAMkhya seers
and Empedocles also share other issues like having some concept of
rebirth and the need for purifications to transcend the births with
suffering. This similarity in not only their naturalistic thought but
also other points of their world view shows that they belong to a
related intellectual tradition with comparable ideas (It should be noted
that such ideas are not particularly frequent in other coeval cultures
of the Americas, Africa, Indo-Pacific, Australia and most other Eurasian
peoples).

In the Hindu world, the various works belonging to this genre include in
addition to the AkhyAnas of the vasiShTha and yA\~jnyavalkya in the
Mithilan court, the bhR^igu-smR^iti, the opening section of the
manu-smR^iti, the lecture of the butcher to the kaushika and the lecture
of the female sage sulabhA prAdhAni to another janaka explaining among
other things the atomic theory and embryology of humans. These works
were a part of the corpus that was inserted into the original core
bhArata to form the mahAbhArata. This appears to have been the work of
the bhArgava-s during their inflationary redaction of the bhArata text.
In this act the bhArgavas preserved the intellectual production that
immediately followed the end of the vedic period (upaniShads) and
beginning of the darshana period. The key highlight of this period was
the rise of sAMkhya and other darshanas and the use of naturalistic
theories to explain properties of substances, atomic structure of
matter, physiological functions of plants and animals (as seen in the
bhR^igu smR^iti), classification of living organisms (opening section of
manu smR^iti), embryology, and also evolutionary models to explain their
origins. The frequent involvement of the janaka-s suggests that the
court of mithilA was one of the key centers of this great intellectual
movement that began with the late vedic (upaniShadic) period. A little
later similar thoughts exploded across the far away yavana world, with
systematic new theoretical syntheses converging on theories similar to
evolution by natural selection.

In fact, even though the evolutionary models of Empedocles and the
sAMkhya seers involving fusions of “free-floating parts” looks childish,
we now know they are not all that far-fetched. We see how much
horizontal gene transfer has contributed to the emergence of complex
forms including animals — literally a putting together of genomes from
various parts floating about. Emergence of key components of the animal
neuro-sensory system provide some good examples : The key receptors of
neurotransmitters like acetylcholine and GABA emerged from an ancestral
receptor of the ART-LGIC family that was coded by a laterally mobile
gene in the bacteria. Likewise the precursors of the animal and plant
(chlorophyte alga) nitric oxide receptor and the calcium channel subunit
that bind gabapentin were also present in bacteria. So also precursors
of taste (and neural metabotropic) receptors emerged from bacterial
small molecule sensors. So in a sense, as described by Empedocles and
the sAMkhya sages, the parts of the complex animal neuro-sensory system
was already floating around in the bacteria. They came together through
lateral transfers over eukaryotic evolution in the precursor of the
animals (literally the parts, like the manas, j\~nAnendriya–s and
karmendriya-s floating about and aggregating to form the tiryagyoni-s in
the sAmkhya theories :)).

Thus, in a sense they were close to the truth in a funny unexpected way.
