+++
title = "The devAlaya at mAlinIthan"

+++
One of the remarkable forgotten devAlaya-s of the eastern fringes of
pragjyotiSha is that of mAlinIthan in the modern state of Arunachal
Pradesh. ekanetra and me were rummaging through some old grainy photos
collected by his sachiva during his expedition to Arunachal Pradesh,
when we were reminded of this remarkable shrine. There is no support for
the medieval dates floated around by the archaeologists, and not much is
known of its builders and patrons. Evidently, at some point it went out
of the larger Hindu memory because it lies in utter ruins today.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkgB149MdVI/AAAAAAAAAJM/5D_L2Ut9YMQ/s320/mahagaNapati.jpg)](http://bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkgB149MdVI/AAAAAAAAAJM/5D_L2Ut9YMQ/s1600-h/mahagaNapati.jpg)  
uchChiShTa-gaNapati with madanAvatI

The main images of the shrine appear to be carved in granite while the
smaller ones are in sandstone. A well-fashioned nandin suggests that the
main shrine was perhaps a shivAlaya, but then it does not survive. The
other granite images are of durgA, uchChiShTa-gaNapati with his shakti
madanAvatI on his lap, kumAra with his peacock, deva savitA and indra
mounted on airAvata. The vinAyaka is shown with several weapons (more
like mahAgaNapati) but tickling the yoni of his shakti with his trunk
like in case of uchChiShTa-gaNapati.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkgB1Y9MdSI/AAAAAAAAAI0/G8YmpGvj57w/s320/indra_malinithan1.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkgB1Y9MdSI/AAAAAAAAAI0/G8YmpGvj57w/s1600-h/indra_malinithan1.jpg)[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkgB1o9MdTI/AAAAAAAAAI8/kigeqqlYYws/s320/indra_malinithan2.jpg)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkgB1o9MdTI/AAAAAAAAAI8/kigeqqlYYws/s1600-h/indra_malinithan2.jpg)

indra 

The indra is of considerable interest in iconographic terms. His third
eye on the fore seems horizontal as recommended in the shilpashAstra-s,
he has a large yaj\~nopavIta, and beside him are two ayudha puruSha-s of
his vajra and a\~NkuSha. There is additionally a second similar image of
indra in the mAlinIthan site made of sandstone and in a greater state of
ruin. An iconographically similar series of indra images have been found
in the ruins of temples in Chatrakara (one of the finest indra images
ever seen in India), Dibrugarh, Pandughat and Narakasura hill in Assam
(the last site producing even a bronze utsava mUrtI of indra). The
presence of several indra icons in the East is rather interesting, given
his general rarity as a prominent deity in the temples of other parts of
India. This suggests that there was a vigorous worship of indra even in
the medieval period in this region of India, even after he had declined
elsewhere. One point of great interest to investigate in this regard is
whether there was an associated vedic tradition in these regions that is
now lost and whether the defining feature of the Hindu nation, the
indra-dhvaja festival was observed in these regions.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkgB1o9MdUI/AAAAAAAAAJE/LdHr1YEafYg/s320/viparIta_ratI.jpg)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkgB1o9MdUI/AAAAAAAAAJE/LdHr1YEafYg/s1600-h/viparIta_ratI.jpg)

kAlikA in viparIta-rati with li\~Nga 

A sandstone icon of considerable interest in the mAlinIthan ruins is
that of dakShiNa-kAlikA in viparIta-rati with a li\~Nga. The only
parallels of this form of dakShiNa-kAlikA are apparently seen in the
pi\~Ngaleshvara temple in Assam, Gauhati and the nearby temple on a hill
a Sualkuchi. Thus, in conclusion mAlinIthan is an unusual temple
combining a series of poorly studied features of seen in the eastern
reaches of the country. The shAkta-tantra-s role, in particular kula
tantra-s, influence is seen in the form some of the iconographic details
including the kAlikA and the vinAyaka. While at the same time the
persistent survival of indra and kumAra worship is a unique feature of
this region that needs more detailed study.
