+++
title = "The yaudheya-kuShAna conflict"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkX2CI9MdMI/AAAAAAAAAIE/x09T7hkNyxU/s320/kumAra_coin.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkX2CI9MdMI/AAAAAAAAAIE/x09T7hkNyxU/s1600-h/kumAra_coin.jpg)[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkX2Co9MdNI/AAAAAAAAAIM/Jp-ytnai-78/s320/kumAra_saramA.jpg)](http://bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkX2Co9MdNI/AAAAAAAAAIM/Jp-ytnai-78/s1600-h/kumAra_saramA.jpg)

A yaudheya coin with kumAra and a yaudheya style image showing a
li\~nga, kumAra and [revatI
devI.](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/10/akhyana-of-skanda-patni.html)

One of the murky aspects of Indian history is the overthrow of the
Hinduized Iranian rulers, the Kushanas and the mahA-kShatrapa-s. We know
that the mahA-kShatrapa-s appear to be descendants of the shAka
haumavarga, and held sway mainly in the Western part of India. After a
glorious rise under rudra-dAman these Iranians appear to have declined
gradually and moved into oblivion, with their military power curbed by
the andhras (shatavAhanas). The end of the kushAnas appears to have been
more dramatic, especially in the mainland of Aryavarta. Given that these
Iranians were thoroughly Hinduized it is not clear if a major
nationalist response to them was initiated — i.e. similar to something
against the Macedonians of Alexander or much later the movement of the
later gupta-s against the hUNa rAjas. However, it is clear that the
original kShatriya-s who were overrun by the Iranians were not going to
take their subordinate status lying down and eventually organized the
struggle that destroyed the kushAna rule.

There are claims in the tamil epic the shilap-padhikAraM that the chera
king senguttavan defeated a certain kaniShka in Aryavarta. He is said to
have made this kanaka and another ruler vijaya carry the image of
pattini (kaNNaki-ammAl) to the drAviDa country. There is little clarity
on what this meant. Altekar argued using numismatic evidence that it was
the yaudheya republic that overthrew the kushAnas. Altekar correctly
inferred that prior to the kuShAna period, the yaudheya republic’s
territory encompassed a northern Rajasthan and Punjab/Haryana of modern
times. One of their chief capitals was the great kaumAra center of
rohitaka (Rohtak), [their patron deity being
kumAra](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/10/royal-kumara-worshippers.html).
The mahAbharata states that the republic was founded by the son of
yudhiShThira through devikA, a princess of the ANava kingdom of the
shaibyas.

The yaudheya republic was overrun by the kushAnas under kanishka who
annexed their territory to his empire. In 145 AD they made their first
attempt at breaking the stranglehold by declaring independence in
Northern Rajasthan. The kushAna-s took the aid of their co-ethnic
rudra-dAman to crush the yaudheyas. He declares with much pride in the
Junagad inscription that the yaudheya-s who were much respected for
their valor by all the kShatriya-s were destroyed by his sena which
moved northwards to smother their attempt at revolt. For about 30 years
after this crushing defeat the yaudheya-s seemed finished. But they rose
again defeating the kShatrapa-s in the south and then in a series of
battles driving out the kushAna-s from the original yaudheya territory.
After this point the kushAna-s lost the entire territory east of the
shutudri (Sutlej) river to the yaudheyas, and subsequently crumbled and
disintegrated eventually becoming vassals of the Sassanid rulers of Iran
in the extreme west. After this victory of the yaudheyas, we notice
their cities reviving again in places corresponding to modern Rohtak,
Dehra Dun, Saharanpur, Delhi, Ludhiana and Kangra. The latter city was
originally founded by the audumbarAyanas, who were destroyed completely
by the kushAna-s. This glorious victory against and overthrow of one of
the most powerful empires of the world of that era, one which had
defeated the chIna-s and taken as hostage a prince and princess of the
Han chIna-s, greatly increased the the prestige of the yaudheya
republic. Their victorious advance of the yaudheya-s was attributed to
the jaya-mantra of the brahmaNya deva — a point often mentioned in the
legends of their coins below the image of a spear-wielding skanda
(“yaudheyANam jaya mantra dharANAM”). A point of interest that Altekar
noted regarding the yaudheya coins was that the script used was brAhmi
and not Greek or even kharoShThi, as was typical of the kushAna-s who
also had coins with kumAra images. This might indicate that yaudheya-s
were explicitly flaunting their national spirit by repudiating the
foreign and northwestern scripts.

The study of the coin inscriptions has also been noted that the yaudheya
republic grew by amalgamation of other republic they incited into the
overthrow of the kushAna-s. These were: 1) the enigmatic arjunAyana-s,
who claimed descent from the pANDu hero and liberated the territory in
the Agra-Jaipur zone. 2) kuNinda-s who liberated the area in the
north-west between the shutudri and vipAshA (Beas). Some historians feel
that the numbers ‘2’ or ‘3’ coming after the legend yaudheya-gaNasya
jayaH indicated these associated republics that coalesced with the core
yaudheya-s. Their rule was one of the golden periods of the kaumAra
sect, with the development of much of the classical kaumAra
mantra-shAstra.
