+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "February 20, 2021"

+++
One often hears a bitter tirade against the occidental scholar from the
mouths of many of our co-religionists. This sentiment is most often
misplaced and misdirected leading to nothing but an exasperated silence
after the choicest abuses have been dished out. What no one seems to
have thought prudent to do is introspect on why this sentiment
repeatedly manifests in the minds of all shades of our co-religionists,
from english educated diaspora who set sail for merrier (coincidentally
occidental!) shores to rustic bucolic country bred folk. While the
sentiment is the same, it is merely coated with a layer of polish when
spoken by the english-medium diaspora or urbane minded modern
co-religionist of ours. One can immediately identify common patterns in
both, the tendency to fantasize wild claims about an ancient past filled
with anachronistic modern technology and oft progressive values that was
snatched by the onslaught of foreign invaders, a striking halcyon age to
soothen the haughty pride of the medievalistic bucolic and erase the
cognitive dissonance of the diaspora increasingy conscious of his
minority identity and the asymmetric power-relationship he finds himself
in, in the occident. This bitter lashing out is rarely ever accompanied
by a critical exegesis of the theological attack the videshi scholar has
made. Leave alone an attack, most people criticizing the videshi scholar
even lack the mere conception of the ontological framework necessary to
debate them. If they do sometimes possess it, they lack the in-depth
understanding of saṃskṛta-vāṅmaya the videshi scholar possesses, granted
the videshi is not sympathetic to our religious order but know about it,
he does. If our co-religionist does rarely possess a strong grasp of
saṃskṛta and it’s vāṅmaya, they lack the ontological framework of modern
sprachwissenschaft and allied theories which the indologist is armed
with. Few manage to ground themselves in both and this is a simple fact
the videshi has taken merry advantage of to brand our country and
religion as infected by quackdom and superstition none can cure. This is
extremley unfortunate consider bhāratavarṣa is the home of the
foundations of naiyayika-logic, rationality, saṃvāḍaḥ as well as
grounded in mīmāṃsika-epistemology that was honed into a fine razor
after countless hours of debate with the bauddha-s and other
nāstika-s.  
  
That razor has acquired a lot of rust today. From the foundations of
poetics and theory of drama, the aesthetic rasa of nāṭya to the echelons
of math in astronomy to the finest soteriology on earth; you name it and
India was at the forefront of it for many a millenia. It seems sad that
many people consider this an imaginative fantasy, when it is history
etched in scripture none desire to bother about today. Even the western
indologist approaches the wisdom of the Ancient Indian with an aura of
suspicion; is this really the product of India? they chaff. In their
mind, the poor land of brown skinned snake charmers incapable of
producing anything except superstition and inequality. Not all are like
this, of course. However, this line of thought lies silent like the
colossal proverbial elephant in the room hidden in the minds of the
westerner who discovers these texts and the Indian who rediscovers
them.  
  
The Hindu, a beaten and bruised soul with a spine that endured the
flogging of a violent intellectual, physical and emotional cleansing at
the hands of invading turkic conquerors. He merely had time to recover,
catch a slight breath in a world that was passing by faster than the
speed of sound when his back was broken again by the company. True, he
did not suffer physically, not as much as he was used to. But the die
was cast and intellectual awakening of a knowledge production system
that had been ravaged a thousand years ago never took place. Come
independence and he was flogged again, by his own kin who had been
intoxicated mad on the mead of progressivism. Respite never came for him
and so he finds himself today with a confused identity, a product of an
anglo horizon, bred on the bread and butter of nationalist secularism
but weakly pulled home by the now debilitated and infirm gravitational
field of his ancient civilization.  
  
So he lashes out. The only way he knows how to, intellectually deficient
due to never having learned the devabhāṣā in school and never stepping
foot into the beautiful world of kālidasa, daṇḍin and bharatamuni to
experience the divine aesthetic of poetry and kavya. Never having heard
of a native scientist except for Aryabhaṭṭa (the modern Indians
knowledge of his achievements stops at his mere name!). So viel und so
weiter.  
  
Much akin to the attitude I have noticed in many interactions with
modern greeks on the internet, in person and in the continent of Europe;
the modern Indian tries his best to defend the civilization of his
forefathers but is simply unequipped to even begin because he has never
grown up in a knowledge system that was his own. It is like cutting off
an athlete’s leg and asking him to run. He knows how to run, he knows he
has to run but he cannot run. The modern Indian fails worse than the
modern Greek (despite having civilizational and religious continuity a
dozen times more!). The Greek, bruised by the whip of Ottoman rule and
his ego hurt by the condescending attitude of 19th century European
classical romanticism that sought to even demote him as nothing but a
mongrel (a popular ideology in the teutonic stock of the time who had to
reconcile the history of Greece with its abjective failure of the last
half a millenia) lashed out at his oppressor and the anglo. He still
does today by making preposterous claims such as Modern Greek is
essentially Ancient Greek or Greece has perfect continuity with its
past. The modern Indian, even more whipped down and with no powerful
tuetonic state impelled by a sympathetic attitude of romanticism to save
him, is completely at the mercy of the secularist and videshi scholar
who beats him down when he screams about electricity in the veda or
disowns the entire science of linguistics itself (how ironic! the
ancient Indian made this proto-science and the science of grammar & his
descendant thinks it is horseraddish!)  
  
This cycle shall continue and we can go on forever about it but a wise
minded young hindu should revel in his heritage, acquire good
understanding of the devabhāṣā and study saṃskṛta-vāṅmaya as a hobby in
whatever limitation he can to connect with the spirit of the ancients, a
spirit of a jāta of men who were proud of their birth and their nation.
This pride did not make them blockheads immune to the changes of the
world around them. [As the great Nīlakaṇṭha Somayajī
said,](https://vriitrahan.wordpress.com/2020/12/11/nilaka%e1%b9%87%e1%b9%adha-somayaji-s-wisdom/)
“The 5 siddhānta-s till now were authoritative in some time indeed. Such
a thing must be understood. \[althought they might not be authoritative
now\] And the siddhānta that is uncontradictory to perceptive
observation, that must be worthy of investigation.”

For we must understand, the fossilized mind can never fight back. It is
merely fit for DNA analysis in expensive laboratories in Switzerland and
Massachusetts.

सन्ति अधुना जगति बहूपप्लवाः । पूर्वपण्डितविद्यैव मूढं विज्ञापितीकरोति ।
उपप्लवान् अतिक्रम्य सत्यदर्शनं बोधितुम् शक्नुवन्ति । सत्यदर्शनं किमस्ति
। यन् नवीनदर्शनमध्ये स्थित्वापि पूर्वदर्शनस्य रसं बहिर् नयितुम्
प्रकाशितुम् च शक्ष्यति । आङ्ग्लिकसिद्धन्तज्ञानस्य उपकारं कृत्वा
आधुनिककाले जीवितुम् शक्नोति वा न? अर्थकनकौ लब्ध्वा सुमध्यमां वृणुयात्।
तथास्तु केचित् लोका अन्तर्जाले आगत्वा स्वेषां शुद्धिकरणं कृत्वा
शास्त्रीया भवितुमर्हन्ति। ते सत्यशास्त्रीयपुरुषान् निनित्सन्ति।
किमर्थम्? डन्निङ्ग-क्रोग्र इत्यस्य हेत्वाभासस्य बलित्वे गते आत्मनो
धर्मरक्षिकाणां मुद्रा ददति । यो नव-दशन्-वर्षात्
धर्मवेदज्ञानसाहित्यपुराणकाव्यभाषादर्शनानि पठन्नस्ति, सः पुरुषः इदानीं
म्लेच्छराक्षस इति तैर् उच्यन्ते। अहो किमद्भुतमस्ति। वीक्षस्व, वयं
कपिवन्न भवितुमर्हन्ति। एषः संवादः संस्कृते लिखितुमवश्यं आसीत्।
व्याकरणदोषाय क्षम्यताम् ॥ इति अल्पविचारेण प्राख्यातम् ॥

