+++
title = "Neuregulins, serotonin transporter and creativity"

+++
That the line between genius and madness can be thin one — this reality
struck me hard when, as youth, I saw a mad Hindu mathematician on
television. Some time later I got a chance to learn about the powerful
mantravAdin Fourier and his wife — both had a remarkable streak of
intelligence, but both were prone to quirky behavior, which on
occasions, especially in the latter, bordered on madness. Fourier was
way above the quotidian intelligence of most people around him — be it
in the knowledge of saMskR^ita texts, the technical analysis of music
and language or mathematical abilities. The other lecturers in the
college where he taught were such dwarfs before him that they could
hardly make sense of much of what he said. He wrote several books on
topics ranging from mathematical analysis to travelogues and verses
resembling the great poet bhAnudatta. A descendent of the great tAntrika
from kali\~Nga uttered several new mantra-s and vidhi-s once during a
meeting in which even I was present. Fourier came back home and wrote
all of them down neatly and later in the evening reproduced them in a
discussion with his friend a chera magician and gave a lucid commentary
on them. Of the many descendents of Fourier some were of reasonably high
intelligence, but one of them was especially smart. Some thought he
might be a second Fourier, and he used to assist Fourier in laying
abhichAra. In his late youth after Fourier’s death he suddenly became
mad and burnt most of Fourier’s books. Despite his great rivalry with
the kula, Fourier strangely had a soft corner for M and sent her two of
his books — she was unable to fully grasp them but saw their worth and
showed them to me. I was stunned and felt the presence of a genius. With
Fourier junior rapidly disintegrating into dysfunctionality, many said
that it was the rebound of one of Fourier abhichAra-s. But Ashri said
that genius and madness are faces of the same coin may be there was some
interesting genetics in the whole thing.

Studies have indicated that mood disorders are 8-10 times more prevalent
in artists and writers than the average population. Accumulating human
genetic association studies have gone a long way in clarifying the
picture in this regard and raise some interesting points. The neuregulin
1 gene is an extraordinary gene in vertebrates from which a wide range
of growth factors are produced by alternative splicing that signal via
the ERBB3/4 receptor tyrosine kinase. Mutations in Nrg1 had been
repeatedly implicated in schizophrenia. Of particular interest is the
T/T genotype in the Nrg1 promoter which results in increased amounts of
the type IV transcript. It has been associated with risk for
schizophrenia and also shows associations with distinct phenotypes such
as decreased working memory capacity, increased sensitivity to harsh
criticism and also interestingly decreased pre-morbid IQ. But recently a
study showed that paradoxically when present in healthy higher IQ
background (mean IQ 125) it confers a significant increase in creativity
independent of IQ. A comparable study looked at the serotonin
transporter gene (SLC6A4) polymorphism found about 1kb upstream of the
transcription start site. This polymorphism is in the form of
variability in the number of a 22bp repeat resulting in the S allele
with 14 repeats and L allele with 16 repeats. The S allele has been
associated previously with neuroticism and risk for depression and
suicide. But interestingly in the healthy population the S allele
confers increased creativity of verbal and figural creativity to its
possessors. Interestingly, in an independent study the presence of the
short allele S of SLC6A4 with other polymorphisms associated with the
arginine vasopressin receptor gene have been associated with aptitude
for dancing. In yet another study, the tryptophan hydroxylase gene,
implicated in serotonin metabolism TPH1, was associated with figural and
numeric creativity (A allele of TPH-A779C). This polymorphism has also
been linked to smoking and aggressive personality and suicide.
Interestingly, polymorphisms at this locus can be mimicked by an
environmental effect on cognitive capability — namely availability or
depletion of the amino acid tryptophan. R and I were once amused to
learn that we had convergently taken to eating tryptone when we worked
in the lab; though I am not sure it made a difference to me. The
dopamine D2 receptor gene A1+ allele was associated with higher verbal
creativity relative to the A1− allele. This A1+ allele arises from a SNP
in the 3’ UTR of the DRD2 gene and causes a 30–40% reduction in D2
dopamine receptor density probably by destabilizing the mRNA. There have
also been other conflicting studies which claim that the A1+ allele has
been associated with increase in IQ or decrease in visuospatial
performance.

In on study polymorphisms in the arginine vasopressin receptor (AVPR1)
gene has been have been implicated in dancing aptitude, social behavior
and autism which is characterized by a major deficit in social
interaction. In several vertebrates AVP has been linked with social
behavior, especially in connection to bonding between individuals.
Hence, it has been proposed that the aptitude for dance might be linked
to prosocial tendencies of the AVP pathway coupled with the altered
neural states conferred by the serotonin pathway. The use of Ecstasy
(3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine) in dancing parties is presented in
support of this as it affects the serotonergic system and possibly even
activates, downstream of serotonin, the release of oxytocin, a peptide
related to vasopressin. In another independent study it was observed
that polymorphisms at the AVPR1 gene showed association with musical
aptitude. This is of considerable interest because across cultures music
and dance are closely associated and this association is likely to have
been present even in the common ancestor of all modern humans.

In summary, a sampling of these recent gene association studies suggests
the following: 1) The same polymorphism might be linked to a “positive”
phenotype like creativity, while also predisposing individuals for
potentially debilitating psychiatric morbidity (e.g. NRG1, TPH and
SLC6A4). This supports the contention with which we started this
exploration, namely, the thin line between madness and genius. 2)
Different genes could be specialized for different forms of creativity
and they may or may not be coupled to general intelligence — thus not
every one with high IQ will be creative. This is seen particular
strongly in the case of science where not everyone with high IQ can be a
good scientist due to differences in the creativity dimension. 3)
Finally, the role of the AVP pathway in dance and musical aptitude
suggest that certain specialized forms of creativity might emerge as a
consequence of genetic interaction between general creativity associated
with the serotonergic pathway superimposed on pathways linked to social
interaction, such as expression of bonding. 4) Most of these
polymorphisms are in the non-coding regions of the genes and appear to
mainly function by altering amount of mRNA produced or its stability.
This observation, taken together with the evidence for dietary
tryptophan in cognitive abilities, suggests that rather than fundamental
functional changes it is the amount of available protein that makes the
difference in most cases. These point to the possibility of potential
importance of environmental interactions like nutrients and substances
that might mimic the genetic effects.

Finally, these finding raise interesting questions and implications
regarding human behavior and capability. One could look at the
conflicting role of some of these polymorphisms from an evolutionary
angle, just like the sickle cell allele. In environments where malaria
is prevalent this allele is favored by selection. Likewise, it is
conceivable that in certain societies where creativity was emphasized
saw a rise in such alleles due to enhanced fitness in such social
structures. But their numbers were possibly balanced by the negative
consequences to fitness that they caused via mental disease. It is also
possible that the creativity associated alleles are frequently
associated with a cost in their possessors. But this cost could be
balanced if the society in which they exist supports them. Hence, it is
conceivable that their numbers are likely to rise in societies that can
support such individuals. The creativity alleles may spark off memetic
and temetic revolutions in the societies that support them to alter them
in their favor — simply put creativity creates memes and temes that
addict the society, thus favoring the genetic variants that create them.
Hence, the fitness cost of creativity could be offset by the memetic and
temetic advantages they leverage and thereby allow their persistence.
While stereotypes are greatly frowned upon today, the findings suggest
that there is an element of truth to some of these. The link between
dancing and music and the pathway linked to individual bonding is of
considerable interest. In the Hindu world there has been a consistent
trend to place dance and music (as entertainment as against the ritual
music) in the domain of the gaNikA. That naTI, the shailUSha and the
puMshchalI have formed a linked locus whose arts are laid out in the
kAmashAstra-s is not surprising in light of the reported findings —
gaNikA is predisposed to strongly exhibit emotions of bonding as it is
just the other side of her aptitude in dance and music.

We also know the famous stereotypes in the differences in musical
proclivities and types of creativity amongst different races. For
example, one might say that the Africans tend to emphasize rhythm in
their music, the Hindus emphasize melody (this is evident even from the
earliest surviving Indo-European musical tradition the sAmaveda) and the
mlechCha-s emphasize harmony. Hindus have historically emphasized
phonetic analysis, euphonic creativity in language and developed a
phonetic script. In contrast, the chIna-s and some other prAchya-s
emphasized written communication with a complex script rather lacking in
phonetic compactness and development of calligraphic creativity. Now the
question arises whether the genetic differences in some of the above or
other uncharacterized loci have a role in the human diversity in type of
creativity and musical tendency. Recent studies indicated that certain
positively selected alleles of ASPM and Microcephalin are correlated
with linguistic tone or use of pitch differences to convey lexical and
grammatical distinctions. Thus, the development and fixation of tonal
languages might have a genetic vector. This study provides a potential
model for similar considerations on genetic contributions to differences
in creative expressions.While actual execution of such a study would
need considerable psychometric standardization, one can easily see the
available data that there is [considerable available variation in the
human genome to support such inter-population
differences](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3439/4002159211_fdc1b255e5_o.png).
For example if one looks at the SLC6A4 locus and compares the
frequencies of SNPs across different populations one notices some
striking differences (Here the populations are Western/Northern
European, Indian, Chinese, Japanese and Sub-Saharan African):  
[![SLC6A4](https://i1.wp.com/farm3.static.flickr.com/2546/4000164696_8122824fda_o.jpg)](http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2546/4000164696_8122824fda_o.jpg)
The general differences in SNP frequencies follow the basic
differentiation pattern of the human population similar to that
suggested by physical anthropology. The Chinese and Japanese closely
resemble each other, the Indians and Europeans generally resemble each
other and the Africans form a distinct group. Now much of the
inter-population difference in SNP frequencies is likely to be
consequence of the population history. In the first block we have SNPs
which differentiate Africans from all non-Africans — this set is likely
to have differentiated as a part of the out of Africa migration. Then
the second block differentiates all the 3 major groups Africans, Western
Eurasians (Indians+Europeans) and Eastern Eurasians (Chinese+Japanese)
and represents the frequency differences accompanying the fundamental
differentiation in Eurasia. These SNPs are in non-coding regions and
most are likely to be largely. However, SNP rs6354 in the first exon and
rs1042173 in the last (15th) exon are respectively in regulatory regions
in the 5’UTR and 3’ UTR respectively and could hence affect the function
of the gene via mRNA stability. These could be candidates for potential
population differences in certain mental traits arising from differences
in serotonin levels.
