+++
title = "Some further notes on the Mongol religion"

+++
The young Mongol scholar Dorje Banzar, published a book in 1846 in
Russian at the university of Kazan that brought to light for the first
time the old religion of the Mongols to the scholarly world. In the
1960s, M. Jaadamba, a descendent of Chingiz Kha’Khan, along with a group
of Mongolian workers brought to light several texts and incantations of
the ancient Mongol ritual that had never been seen before. We have
alluded to some of these incantations on these pages before. This old
religion of the Mongols has been considerably diluted by the missionary
activity of the tAthAgata-s but remains in certain pockets of steppe
eking out a precarious existence. Along with the hoary Shinto tradition
of the eastern islanders it remains one of the important documents of
old Eurasian ritual expression. We had early pointed out parallels
between to [Mongol fire
ritual](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/10/23/the-fire-hymns-of-the-mongols/)
and the ancient Hindu one in the veda. We had also pointed to the
interactions of the Mongol tradition with the Indo-Aryan and Iranian
traditions, with elements such as the the [nakShatra
mantra-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/05/10/the-mahamayuri-vidya-rajni/),
the equation of [Köke Möngke Tengri with Ahura
Mazda](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/12/06/the-confluence-of-four-paths/)
and the invocation of Darqan Guejir Tengri.

The old Mongol religion called its invocations as daghudalgha and
considers itself an oral tradition, much like the early Indo-Iranian
traditions. This appears to be stated explicitly in the starting
invocations of the shaman-s:  
*My teacher, you have given \[me\]*  
*the ritual practice without writing\!*  
*My teacher, you who have taught \[me\]*  
*the ritual practice without books…*

Or:  
*You my three teachers, he hi hi \!*  
*With my unwritten ritual teaching, he hi hi\!*  
\[Translated by Heissig from Monghol kele bichikh of Mongol scholar
Manijab\]  
The nAstika practioners wanted to remove many elements of these old
deities and subordinate them to the tathAgata-s. The practitioners of
the old Mongol religion saw the nAstika mata as diluting influence on
their spirit. This was expressed early on by another great Altaic tribe,
the Uighurs, where the steppe orthodoxy stalled the progress of
Manichaeism in their midst. Finally, a compromise was reached with the
tAthagata-s letting alone the worship of these deities by the shamans
with some cosmetic changes. Still we see the tension in some of the
ritual incantations composed by the Mongol ritualists of the medieval
period, e.g. a recitation to one of their noted deities Dayan
Degereki:  
*Khan, Black Tengri*  
*With medicine in you thumb,*  
*With divine healing power in your index finger,*  
*With a breast of bronze ore,*  
*With hips of iron ore,*  
*With the trees of the Khangai as posts to tie up your horses,*  
*With black blood as libation,*  
*You have drunk the blood of a hundred Lamas,*  
*You who have made a hanging decoration from the skulls of a thousand
Bandi \[break\]*  
*With black crows as your retinue,*  
*With the pups of spotted bats,*  
*You who still do not see a shorn headed \[bhikShu\],*  
*You who see no shramaNa or vajrAcharya.*  
*You who do not see the yellow and red color,*  
*You who do not smell the smoke of incense-offering of
juniper…\[break\]*  
\[Based on translations by B.Rinchen who first recorded the incantation
and Walther Heissig\]

In general the tAthAgata-s have seen it prudent to accommodate the great
Kha’Khan, the father of the Mongol nation. Hence, they have declared him
as an incarnation of vajrapAnI, and confer on him the traits inhered by
vajrapAnI from the ancient indra, which meld with with the shamanic
conception of their ancestor as being sent by Köke Möngke Tengri. They
also retain much of the shamanic liturgy associated with the worship of
the father of the nation, with some bauddha insertions to bring it in
line with nAstika doctrines. Indeed, to this date the Mongols worship
their ancestor in a small idol kept in their gers (below)

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-czvdFTCVdaY/UVvNhE75rtI/AAAAAAAACos/drbHDHOIQEw/s400/Chingiz2.bmp.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/c9F4y4tb0HYT6CzkgDLO8dMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Alternatively, he is publicly worshiped at large stone steles, which
bear his image, erected on the steppes in the manner of the balbal
stones of the ancient Hun Khans.

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-DVUV82vmwFk/UVvNlKq63SI/AAAAAAAACo0/M1qeZXttuVk/s400/Chingiz2.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/6z9YGxZnn2DgRJeJRYND4tMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

In this context, we may note an interesting discovery made the Hungarian
Gábor Bálint, who was interestingly a scholar of Tamil and Mongolian,
during his expedition to Kalmykia where he recovered a text preserved by
the bauddha Mongols on the worship their rAShTrapitar, which recorded
the maxims of Chingiz Kha’Khan (or elements of his Yasa) along with some
liturgy for his worship. This suggests that the worship of the ancestor
was closely associated with the transmission of the nuggets of his
wisdom.The worship of ancestors was certainly around at least from the
time of the Chingizid Mongols. In the Secret History we here that such a
ritual was performed in spring with offerings to the departed ancestors
just before the Mongols moved to their summer camps \[Footnote 1\]. This
equinoctial ancestor festival is comparable to an Iranian ancestor rite
to the fravashi-s \[Farwardigan\], which comes around the same time of
the Mongol ritual noted in the Secret History. The Mongol tradition
holds that Chingiz Kha’Khan had formalized and recast the ritual in his
time. For example, the Mongol chronicle Bolor Erike notes:

“*On the cool meadows of the Onon river Chingiz had his general Jelme
\[Footnote 2\] set up a ritual arena bounded by ropes and decorated by
flowers, and the wise Choua-mergen of the Juerchid tribe round-up the
foals. After 7 days and nights Chingiz himself arrived and announced a
new ritual practice in which mare’s milk was poured out as offerings to
Tengri-s and then his ancestor Borduanchar (the fifth son of their
legendary ancestress Alan Goa) followed by the rest.*”

Rituals at the founding of the Mongol nation might be compared to the
rituals performed by bharata dauHShanti to indra and other deities at
the foundation of the Hindu nation; [an old
gatha](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/09/the-gatha-on-the-founder-of-our-nation/)
is remembered regarding his great ashvamedha-s and his name is taken at
the beginning of all shrauta rites where the ritual fire is declared as
belonging to the bhArata-s. The promulgation of new rituals at the
founding of nation are important for a nation’s identity. A parallel
might also be noted with respect to the promulgation of new rituals with
the emergence of the unified Hindu nation in northern India after its
complete conquest by janamejaya pArikShita. On the occasion of his
indrAbhiSheka, tura kavasheya who was previously rejected by other
brAhmaNa-s, was declared as the chief ritualist. At the directive of
janamejaya the shrauta system was unified along with the composition of
a new AprI for the ashvamedha by tura kavasheya that is preserved in the
yajurveda.

Chingiz is also said to have formalized other rituals such as those of
marriage. Walther Heissig noted that in eastern Mongolia they still
recite this history during the pre-marriage ritual:  
“*The fortunate Chingiz Kha’Khan, the incarnation of Qormusta Tengri, at
the time when he took to wife Boerte \[Footnote 3\], the daughter of the
Bayan of the Khunggirad tribe, the subject of Ughichud, sent his wise
officials, led by the ministers Boghorju and Muqali \[Footnote 4\] and
following the custom of the old, the custom was fulfilled to ask after
the name and the year of birth of the bride. He is said to have
introduced the ritual of anointing the yurt followed by the worship of
the deities of the sun and moon and making offerings to the yurt hearth
fire.*”

The last can be compared to the ritual offering to the gArhapatya fire
in the Hindu tradition.

We have alluded several times to the transmission of Indo-Iranian
traditions to the Altaic people. In this context we may note that the
earliest phase of transmission of the fire ritual might go back in time
before any of the known Altaic people appear in history. For this we
have to turn to the records of the chIna-s brought to light by the
modern chIna scholar Zhang He. The Chu Ci or the poetry of the Chu
kingdom which has works going back 300 BCE is of great interest in this
regard. The ruling clan of the Chu kingdom is supposed to have been one
of outsiders coming from the northwest, who took over the custody of
this chIna kingdom. They are described as being characterized by a
distinctive shamanistic practice involving a fire ritual. The medieval
chIna scholar Shen Kuo (1031–1095 CE) made a remarkable observation. In
his study of an ancient Chu incantation, known as the Zhao Hun, he noted
that a word that comes frequently as the end of the formula pronounced
in the Chu language as ‘sai’ corresponded to svAhA in Sanskrit (“sa po
he” in Chinese). A Chu poem Tian Wen has also been proposed to bear
parallels to verses in the veda and the avesta. The maternal ancestress
of the Chu are described by chIna chronicles as being of the Guifang
clan. The chIna historians state that they were a clan of the Central
Asian pastoralist raiders known as the Xiongnu or Hunyu, who were the
Huns of history. The paternal ancestor of the Chu ruling clan is said to
be emperor Zhuan Xu. His grandsons Zhongli and Wuhui are supposed to
have become Chu ritualist-ministers called the “Officer of Fire” with
the title Zhurong (In later chIna parlance apparently Zhu Rong is the
name of the fire deity). The chIna text termed Zhou Li (Rituals of Zhou)
from around 500 BCE records the duties of such an “Officer of Fire”,
named Si Quan, which have no parallels elsewhere in the Han chIna world.
He is supposed to issue orders for fire rituals, kindle the new fire at
the beginning of each of the four seasons, conduct fire worship with
oblations, and maintain the “fire seed” or original fire for the state.
These are remarkably parallel to the Indo-Iranian ritual tradition. This
when taken together with an observation made by Zhang He appears to be a
clincher in this regard. The chIna-s currently term the holy soma plant
(Ephedra species) huang ma or ma huang which is taken to mean yellow
(huang) ma (hemp). Now the yellowness is indeed a feature of the plant
that the Indo-Aryans and Iranians emphasize (hari and zairi). One
possibility is that the chIna-s purposely used the name huang ma to also
capture the phonetics of the Iranian name of the plant hauma. But more
telling is the fact that among the Chu poems, the Jiu Ge, comprising of
the ritual recitations of the Chu fire shamans, one encounters a plant
called suma:

*“Pluck the suma and the yaohua;  
Present them to the one who departs:  
We are getting older, toward the end of our lives,  
But we are no nearer each other.”*

The word shu-ma or su-ma has been interpreted by the chIna-s as “distant
hemp”, with the ma being the same as in huang ma, but the plant itself
was believed to be mythical by many. As Zhang He points out this is
clearly soma itself. Thus, one may infer that the rulers of the chu
state probably emerged from a hybrid of an Indo-Iranian tribe with a
Mongolic tribe (the Hun) and observed Indo-Iranian-type fire and soma
rituals before being assimilated completely within the chIna world.
Thus, we have reasonable evidence for Indo-Iranian influx very early in
the history of the Altaic tribes, before bauddha-mata ever reached them
or the chIna-s. While the soma ritual appears to have died down the fire
ritual was certainly retained and renewed in various forms through their
history.

There have been clearly been several periods of contact between the
Indo-Iranian and Tocharian peoples on the Indo-European side and the
chIna-s and Altaic steppe peoples. This first of this appears to have
been the one recorded in the Chu state. It has been proposed that the
horse and chariot tradition frequently mentioned by some poets
associated with Chu state might be a further marker of this contact. It
indeed appears that the chariot and the equestrian culture were
transmitted on one or even more occasions from the Indo-Iranians. It
appears that a robust equestrian warfare arose somewhat later than the
chariot culture (often linked to the need for the stirrup for effective
warfare). Proto-Indo-Iranian tradition, while aware of horseback riding
and equestrian warfare, placed much greater emphasis on the chariot in
war and does not seem to record a stirrup. The invention of the stirrup
itself remains murky – it is first seen in India and then in the
steppes, yet the first major users of equestrian warfare were the steppe
Indo-Iranians like the Shakas and Kushanas. It was from them that it was
transmitted to the first Altaic people who became known to the world as
the Huns under Motun Tegin, and the Kushanas themselves became the first
victims of the Huns. We suspect that the echoes of these contacts were
seen not just in the acquisition of technologies but also mythic motifs
and ritual actions. The transmission of the horse and the chariot
cultures were accompanied by horse-based rituals. It was one such
ancient equestrian ritual was reworked by Chingiz into the special
ritual of the Suelde Tengri with the famous 9 horse tail banners. The
Suelde banners were extremely auspicious for the Mongols and was the
center of much struggle in the 1900s. One of those belonging to the
great Khans was apparently stolen or destroyed by the Russians in
Mongolia. The other was supposed to be shown in a place called Sarachi
which was much sought after by the Japanese warriors when they invaded
China and was apparently taken by them to Japan. But some of the ritual
incantations and actions pertaining to the horse-standard still survive
in a relatively unchanged form from the Chingizid period which show the
tell-tale Iranian “hoof prints” of an earlier period from which they
were derived. In this regard a remarkable tale is recorded by a
descendant of Chingiz Kha’Khan with respect the to horse-standard
deity:  
“*There was a great battle between the demons and the Tengri in which
the latter were defeated. They turned to Qormusta Khan Tengri (ahura
mazdA), the high god, for aid. He declared that their defeat was due to
them having no horse-standard and recommended that they invoke the
Suelde Tengri the god of the horse-banner. Then appeared 9 divine
brothers armed with swords, tiger-skin quivers and bows, the eldest of
whom was Suelde Tengri, riding fiery horses (corresponding to the nine
horse tails of the banner). Aided by these deities, the Tengri fought
the demons and defeated them.*”  
This is followed by a verse incantation to the Suelde deities. The Dalai
Lamas declared that the Suelde deity was the same as mahAkAla and
homologized it with the dGra lha tradition of the Tibetans. The
formalization of the ritual appears to have emerged at the time when
Temujin acquired the title Chingiz Kha’Khan in 1206 CE. We know from
some material preserved from the earlier Uighur Khanate that there were
followers an Iranian religion, Manichaeism, in their midst. Genetic and
physical anthropological studies reveal that Uighurs have a major
Indo-European admixture. We know that the Chingizid Mongols were close
to the Uighurs, e.g. Alaltuen, daughter of Chingiz and Boerte, was
married to the lord of the Uighurs and was the viceroy of the Kha’Khan
in the Uighur state. There is ample philological evidence for [Uighur to
Mongol transmission of religious
terms](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/07/10/some-philological-considerations-on-indic-transmissions-to-uighurs-and-mongols/)
So one could argue that the Iranian influence came via the Uighurs. We
do not see this as likely – whereas the earlier Uighur Khanate was
certainly influenced by Iranian religions, examination of the Uighur
texts of those affiliated with Chingiz shows that they lost Manichaeism
and followed the mAhAyAna and vajrAyANa streams of the bauddha-mata.
Moreover, we do not see any evidence for the dualism of the Manichaeism
in the Mongol or later Uighur tradition. Hence, suspect that that
Iranian influence actually belongs to the earlier period.

Some clues for the earlier Iranian transmissions come from an unexpected
source, namely the Japanese Shinto tradition. In the period before 250
CE (Yayoi period) there is no major presence of horses in Japan.
Sometime after 250-300 CE (the Kofun period) for the first time one sees
horses coming into prominence, with their depiction and of chariots
being a major feature of the art of this period. A key Shinto ritual is
leading of the holy white horse before the goddess Amaterasu three times
a month at the Ise shrine, the holiest Shinto shrine whose ritualists
come from the emperor’s clan. On mythological and philological grounds
we can say that the Shinto tradition per say is an ancient Eurasiatic
tradition whose primary deities emerged in some form before the
introduction of the horse to the islands. However, the coming of the
horse clearly had a major impact with it being incorporated whole scale
into the ritual. In some form, a ritual parallel to the the leading of
the holy horse before the Ise shrine was already in place at beginning
the Kofun period (the Japanese chronicles refer to emperor Suujin
dedicating a horse to the Shinto deities). Importantly, along with
horses in the Kofun there are also images of horse-borne warriors who
look just like the Shaka-tigrakauda – a depiction not seen before or
after in Japan. Both their non-Japanese facial appearance and the
tigrakauda (the pointed hat just as in the Iranian carvings of Darius)
strongly suggest that these are not natives but the Shakas who got the
horse from central Asia to Japan. The other key feature is the ancient
mirror used in sun-worship by the Shakas (e.g. the case made recently by
Vassilkov for the use of Hindu mirrors in pre-maurya times by the Shakas
on the steppes). which appears to have become part of the Shinto
tradition around this time.

We may note that the Japanoic languages have a distant relationship to
the Mongolic, Turkic and Tungusic languages suggesting a common origin.
However, the old Turkic and Mongolic people have rather similar
religious traditions and legends that share many features that are not
seen in Japan. This indicates that there was a considerable development
of the continental Altaic tradition after its separation from the island
version. We suggest that the above discussed Indo-Iranian these
transmissions are part of this divergence and that it happened over a
prolonged early phase of interaction that culminated in the conflicts of
the Shaka and Kushana with the Altaic tribes. This eventually resulted
in the defeat of the steppe Iranians and their expulsion from their
ancient seats. But in the process the continental Altaics had absorbed
many of their traditions. This is also reflected in the genetics of the
Huns: Among the people whose DNA was recovered from the Hun cemetery in
Duurlig Nars, Northeast Mongolia (\~20-0 BCE), there was one with the
typical Indo-Iranian R1a1 Y-chromosome alongside others with North-East
Asian markers. Some of the steppe Iranians fled towards India with which
they had deep and long-standing cultural connection. Another a group
appears to have reached Japan and transmitted the use of the horse along
with several elements to the Shinto religion. But these transmissions
were not identical to the transmissions seen in the continent and might
have in fact led to a divergence in the Shinto practice from its old
Altaic state. For instance, the transformation of the role of the Miko
ladies from the old Altaic shamaness to a ritual assistant appears to be
part of this process.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: This festival is the backdrop of the hostilities between the
Taidjuts and Hoelun the mother of Chingis Kha’khan, where the latter
gets driven out along with her young kids.

Footnote 2: Jelme was one of the great Mongol generals who saved
Chingiz’s life when he was struck down by an arrow of his future
general Jebe in the battle with the Taidjuts. Jelme treated his wound
and stole curds from the Taidjut camp itself to feed Chingiz and keep
him alive. He was the brother of Subedai another great Mongol general
who subjugated the Rus.

Footnote 3: Boerte was the principal wife of Chingiz and is worshiped by
Mongols as an ancestress along with him. She was the mother of all his
primary successors Jochi, Chagadai, Ogodai and Tolui.

Footnote 4: Boghorju was one of the great generals of Chingiz. He helped
the latter when the two were just boys and Chingiz’s horses were stolen.
The two went on a recovery expedition where Chingiz killed the thief
even as he was trying to lasso Boghorju and recovered the horses.
Boghorju was the chief commander of the Mongol armies in the northern
campaigns. Muqali was the other great general who was the chief
commander in the Chinese campaigns.
