+++
title = "Chinese incursion of 2013: Just the beginning?"

+++
Hindus face three major civilizational threats – two from the
Abrahamisms, the religions of peace and love, and one from the
legalistic Han imperialism. The assault from the religion of love is
primarily spear-headed by the leukosphere and is abetted by their
internal allies in the form of the shava-sAdhaka-s within India. The
onslaught from the religion of peace belongs to the whole umma, but the
primary ghazis deployed against the Hindus come from remnants of the
Mogol empire in the form of terrorist state of Pakistan, the terrorist
state of Bangladesh, Malaysia and Indonesia. Many Hindus wrongly believe
that the Han are not a civilizational enemy, but the conflict with them
is a recent and unfortunate consequence of Marxism. As we stated before
the Marxism and Westernism of the chIna-s is only a facade for the inner
legalism, which has conferred identity to chIna policy since the days of
the wall-building Chin Shi Huang. Per say Marxists are merely
subversionist rabble who might by used by all the three civilizational
enemies of ours. Some interlocutors have questioned, somewhat
indignantly, as to how we could call our Asian neighbor and a hoary
nation a civilizational enemy. The problem is these people, like many
other Hindus, have not studied history too closely. Nor have they
understood the essentiality of an uncompromising, maximalist Hindu
realist position. To briefly reiterate, this position entails the total
defanging of the religions of peace and love, along with the restoration
of global paganism nourished by the benign light of bhArata. Of course
this naturally includes restoration of the Tibetan, and other central
Asian pagan traditions, which is in direct conflict with the Han
rapacity.

There have no more brazen land-grabbers in history than the Han. The
mlechCha-s grabbed vast lands but in most cases they have not been able
to attach them to their own country. In the case of Spain and Portugal
their south and central American conquests they ruined and looted the
pagan civilizations but it has not made a big difference to the modern
economies of those countries. Further, the south and central American
are not Spanish or Portuguese people anymore, nor do they identify with
their conquerors in a major way. While one could say that the English
conquest of North America was complete in terms of the genocide of the
natives, still the continent has long ceased to be a part of the English
empire. Similarly, with the French conquests. The Han in contrast seem
to only be increasing the stranglehold over their conquered territories
to the point that those territories are accepted by the rest of the
world as Han property belonging to the Han state of China, governed by
the legalism emanating from the belligerent Beijing. Yet we all know
that the Han had but the weakest hold or none at all over most of their
recently acquired territories. Thus, the primary dimension of the Han
civilizational threat is a territorial one – wherein is steadily
occupies territory which was under Hindu control or nourished by the
Hindu civilizational ethos. It follows this by the definitive erasure of
the Hindu civilizational ethos and the genocide of the peoples to make
Lebensraum for the Han.

The Han civilization was largely demolished by the cunning mlechCha-s,
followed by a stern cut from the samurai’s blade. However, the
mlechCha-s in their conquest of Japan ended up giving the chIna-s a new
leash of life. The chIna-s not being the type that easily passes up an
opportunity took the chance to resurrect their power and display their
belligerence ever since. Ironically, they have been aided in this
process by none other than the mlechCha-s, whose constructs they have
exploited against the mlechCha-s themselves and also other
civilizations. The key in all this was the destruction and conquest of
Japan which was vastly superior to the chIna-s in military prowess. This
completely freed their eastern flank, with Japan unlikely to ever
challenge the chIna power again. The fall in birth rates in Japan
indicates that they will not be able to have the key ingredient by which
wars are fought – young men. While the chIna-s also have this problem,
they are ultimately better off than the Japanese in absolute numbers.
They also hope to combine with the potential use of directed eugenics in
the future to keep them ahead of the Japanese in terms of human capital
\[Footnote 1\]. While the chIna-s were sharpening on advice of Sun Tzu
and the practices of Shi Huang, the chAchA was conjuring up his
grandiose ideas on an armyless state, the superfluity of missiles, and
the Pan-Asian non-aligned alliance, while neglecting the advice of
viShNugupta (and closer to our times Vallabhbhai Patel and the great
Acharya Raghuvira) and the action of chandragupta. Not surprisingly, the
chIna-s gobbled Tibet even as a snake devouring a frog, while chAchA
kept talking nonsense such as pa\~nchshIla or hindI-chInI bhai-bhai. The
consequences were keenly felt with the surprise invasion of India in
1962 by the chIna-s followed by a crushing defeat. Things could have
gone worse in the subsequent years had the Rus-chIna conflict not broken
out. The drubbing which the Rus gave the chIna-s put some fear into
their hearts (though today the chIna-s like to claim that they won the
war), and made them wary of further adventures. However, the mlechCha-s
locked in conflict with Rus again ended up strengthening the chIna-s as
a potential force multiplier against them. Let us not forget that the
mlechCha-s again stood by the chIna tyrant Deng Xiaoping when he
declared that he would teach the Hindus a lesson during the Sumdorong
Chu invasion in 1986-1987 and were trying to incite a war.

Given this background the current chIna invasion is not unexpected.
[Having looked into situation, we wrote a few years back that a chIna
invasion was
imminent](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/08/16/asia-and-geopolitics/).
We thought that it would take place that year itself. However, it has
come a little later. This point is of interest to us as it throws
greater light on the chIna approach to war. Essentially, there are
several parallels to the Sumdorong Chu invasion in particular, and more
generally the approach in their invasions of the Rus and Vietnam. The
Hindus have not taken decisive steps to cultivate allies, such as
Vietnam and Japan, to create a ring around the chIna-s – the classical
maNDala principle of chANakya. Instead, they have allowed the chIna-s to
penetrate Nepal and and also get into Lanka (let us not forget how the
chIna-s tried to conquer Lanka in the past by an audacious naval
incursion followed by kidnapping of the Lankan prince). The chIna-s
sensed that the Hindus are weak, with numerous internal problems. They
also know that the Hindus are isolated with their former ally, the Rus,
on the decline. The chIna-s have also shown a recent history of
belligerence occupying territory of the Philippines, threatening Japan
and using North Korea to create a dependency of the mlechCha-s on them.
We see their intention to game India as an extension of the same
belligerence. The essential idea it appears is to probe the Indians
closely to get a feel for how weak they really are, and follow it up
with a land-grab. Extent of the land-grab they are intending would
depend on how deep their probe sinks into the Hindu defenses. This we
will see playing out in the coming month. A big territorial gain would
seen as boost to the swelling arrogance of the Han hegemon and an
equivalent blow to the Hindu dignity. By this they wish to signal their
status as a superpower and show India to be a mere pretender who has
been put in his place. Since, this matches the mlechCha perception of
India, it will be seen as a successful testing of the hypothesis. A
successful test would be lapped by the mlechCha-s and also TSP to the
west to treat India with even greater disdain. Are the Hindus ready for
the real world of men?

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: Hsu, an American professor of Han origin (who is batting for
the Hans right in the mlechCha land) has a large project to determine
the genetic determinants for Han and mlechCha intelligence, and has
presented a proposal for directed eugenics that could be used by the
Hans down the line.
