+++
title = "samarA~NgaNa marsha"

+++
khaT phaT jahi \!  
In the tales of Sherlock Holmes many a time the great narrative of Dr.
Watson could see the light of day only after a long silent interlude.
Even so perhaps the whole history of the great struggle will be narrated
only in the future. For that the only person who can be the narrator
should remain alive at the conclusion of the story. Hence, there are
some stories which never have an ending. With such thoughts we wondered
how it might be possible to send the signal even if we were to be sent
to vaivasvata’s domain. Three past statements came to mind: 1) The
learned Acharya before going on the southward path had said: “All my
vidyA-s will become divided among you all. Each with some, but none with
all.” 2) When we stood there before the greatest of the great indra, he
said: “Chose the choice of mArkaNDeya. There is glory in it but only one
who lives the life of mArkaNDeya can complete it” 3) pretty mAnasikA
said: “You will hear me call you on the night of the turning of the 9th
year of the decade of that mAnusha yuga. A grAhI of the terrible kind
would have seized you then. You would turn back to look who called but
you will see no one.”

I continued walking on that weary path after mAnasikA made that
statement. After having gazed at pita dyauH with our Aptavarga we shook
off that above-said grAhI by a great yAga where we saw the thunderer as
the eagle. We kept walking on that path. When PM was routed for his
final journey by the abhichAra of Fourier of maNgala-grAma we were
seized by the second grAhI.

The abhichAra-s of Fourier had probably gone with him. It was prayoga
against the “secular ari”. Much had happened between the great strike of
the durNama, a terrible piShAcha and a vile mohini at mid-night. Those
events will form part of the great narrative if comes to pass. It was a
quite night and we had just rebuilt our fort which had smashed to
smithereens by the ari. Suddenly we sighted the troops of the duShTA
trailing us. With the usual taskara-like slyness, they slipped through
our defenses to take a stab at us. We had placed a decoy that they
promptly pummeled with all their hate. This gave enough time for our
dUra-dR^iShTi prayoga to detect their line of action. They had broken
through our second wall in the mean time. We knew where the kR^ityA was
by then. We immediately reacted from our secret fort and carried out an
immediate uchChATana on her. While retreating she however placed two
valaga-s against us and was lying in wait in the nest. We invoked
vinAyaka to protect us against her and escaped to the northern nest.
Seeing this she retreated to the southern lair. We feared the strange
Apya-valaga that she had placed right in the path – we are still a bit
puzzled why it was still unbroken after so many hours.

khaT phaT jahi \!
