+++
title = "The illiterate Hindu and other digressions"

+++
[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-TagmqSEOOu8/Th6VTwLBc0I/AAAAAAAACJk/U-6zweHx0f4/s400/Sample%252520Pictures2.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/xTg2GRGE3-9L29kBzYaaBA?feat=embedwebsite)
Early Tamil in brAhmI script and Indus writing: Note the peculiar
graffiti appearing to the left end of two Tamil inscriptions beginning
in ama. The inscription from Lanka (top right) has 7 characters of which
4 and 5 are graffiti embedded within brAhmI characters.

We were talking about how in school and college R and I had little
inclination to write down anything the lecturers said. We typically
relied on our memories, even if imperfect, much to the dissatisfaction
of the lecturers. ekanetra was somewhat more diligent with his notes, at
least in certain subjects. ST on the contrary was most conscientious,
writing things down in a neat hand. Some of our lecturers were rather
irascible so we appeared to write things down, while we actually filled
out our notebooks with graffiti that would have done the megalithic
people proud. Thus we kept company of some worthies from the netherworld
of our class whose own productions might have made a dadaist proud.
While conversing recently we reminisced of those old days and remarked
that after all we were supposed to be descendents of those illiterate
Arya-s who kept writing out of the Indian peoples mind during the great
“Vedic night” that white Indologists inform us about. Instead, our
ancestors chose to rather accurately store in their neural “hard disks”
texts typically amounting up to 3-5 Mb. Some of these very white
Indologists also want us to believe that the graffiti of the IVC was no
writing at all. What ever the case, there appears to be a strange
dichotomy vis-a-vis writing among the Hindus. The earliest Hindus
clearly did not write much or they did have much use for it – usually
they simply preferred keeping things in their head. Then, within a
hundred years of the appearance of brAhmI we find the literate Hindu to
be the norm, writing everything from royal edicts to delicate love
letters with his or her tAMbUla-laced spittle for the red ink. Even the
much discussed Indus script, which is the center of the fishy (mIn),
hare (muyal/cheviyan)-brained theories of Parpola, Wells and others, may
not reveal too much if deciphered. Though several ancient civilizations
wrote extensive texts, the Indus people chose to remain laconic, for
after all in Hindu parlance silence is often a sign of great wisdom.
Hence, let us imagine that after all the effort the Indus script was
deciphered, all we would mostly learn is some wholely boring stuff about
goods peddled by the merchants and their market value (a possible
exception, though still low on information content, would be the copper
plates with a hare on them). And, lets for a moment imagine that the
Indus civilization was indeed the DMK’s dream come true, a Dravidian one
– what would learn about the glories of this lost tamilakam? Precious
little would it add to the sanghaM collection, which is already much
later than Sanskrit and studded with Indo-Aryan linguistic and cultural
loans. No odes or epics to the imaginary tamil kaDavuL, at best we may
finally learn the name of the tigmashR^i\~Ngin seated in baddhakoNAsana.
Indeed we may continue to ask: where are those great, old pre-Aryan
literary marvels of the proto-Dravidian tongue? Be it Parpola or
Iravatham Mahadevan, they all have to turn to the R^igveda to interpret
the Indus seals, other than of course reading the muruku-munching
tamil-kaDavul in the circle sign (They fail to tell us which drAviDa-s,
other than the Aryanized ones, worship kumAra and which of them call
kumAra by that name). Even though Indus people did write, it appears
they did not choose to make writing a major medium of expression – much
like the eloquently illiterate Arya-s. This is also true of the early
tamil-s (not the unreal ones from Lemuria conjured by the Munnetra-s and
their miscellaneous followers) – the earliest tamil texts were part of
an oral bardic tradition rather than a purely literary one. Thus, the
Indus attitude towards writing was not far away from that of the early
Indians both of the Arya or the drAviDa variety they simply wrote little
even when capable to doing so. But when they did start writing they came
up with a rather remarkably elegant script, which, like a viral meme,
swept across Asia fighting off competition from the apparently older
script of the chIna-s. Now we heard the nirgrantha-s singing its praise
with the mantra namo bambhIye liviye \[footnote 1\] while that shaiva-s
declared her to be the very body of the great goddess mAlinI and the
bhairava shabdarAshI. Why this happened is certainly a question
deserving a genuine historical investigation by Hindus for Hindus.

\~o\~O\~o\~

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-4ccm0-ppzaM/Th6LTKyqcXI/AAAAAAAACJQ/7se46Jg2OL0/s400/Sample%252520Pictures1.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/g9A0zp5p3o72IgvnG0Sdlg?feat=embedwebsite) Dice
from the Indus sites, and gaming pieces from Indus (right) and PGW sites
(below): games proscribed by the buddha

Thus we were conversing, when suddenly it took a turn to the earliest
mentions of a written alphabet in Arya tradition. This lead us to a
digression regarding the tathAgata, who in his condemnations of
brAhmaNa-s preserves interesting historical information. So we decided
to yarn about what the tathAgata had to say about primitive games in
bhArata. Very self-righteously and puritanically the tathAgata in the
brahma-jAla-sutta takes a swipe at many Astika institutions and customs
and puts down brAhmaNa-s and ascetics who while living off alms of the
pious play the following eighteen games while the ascetic gotama avoids
all of them (in the Pali):  
yathA vA paneke bhonto samaNa-brAhmaNA saddhA-deyyAni bhojanAni
bhu\~njitvA te evarUpaM jUtappamAdaTThAnAnuyogaM anuyuttA viharanti –
seyyathIdaM: 1) aTThapadaM dasapadaM; 2) AkAsaM; 3) parihArapathaM; 4)
santikaM; 5) khalikaM; 6) ghaTikaM; 7) salAkahatthaM; 8) akkhaM; 9)
pa\~NgachIraM; 10) va\~NkakaM; 11) mokkhachikaM; 12) chi\~NgulakaM; 13)
pattALLihakaM; 14) rathakaM; 15) dhanukaM; 16) akkharikaM 17) manesikaM
18) yathAvajjam | iti vA iti eva rUpA jUtappa-mAdaTThAnAnuyogA
paTivirato samaNo gotamo.iti |

Let us look at these games to the extent we can understand them: First,
we can recognize a famous Arya triad of games in this list: rathakaM=
chariot-racing; dhanukaM= Archery; akkhaM= dice. Indeed the coins for
the famous Hindu dice game have been found in both the Harappan and
Painted-Greyware layers of certain Indian sites along with dice
themselves. khalikaM is believed to be another dice game played on a
board, most likely resembling the modern snakes and ladders. Indeed such
cubical dice have been found in various Indus sites. Now, of the
remaining ones, the bauddha commentators explain chi\~NgulakaM as:
tAla-paNNAdIhi kata\~N vAtap-pahArena parib-bhamana– chakka\~N |, That
is a windmill made from palm leaves that spins when impacted by wind (We
remarked to ourselves about having spent many a day playing with
chi\~Ngulaka-s in school – indeed, we were the descendents of
brAhmaNa-s, whom the tathAgata would have dismissed :-). aTTapadaM and
dasapadaM seem to be references of some form of chess with 8 and 10
sided grids. The discovery of chess pieces in the Indus sites supports
its presence by the time of the tathAgata. AkAsaM is explained as
playing board games imagining a board in space. parihArapathaM is a
hopscotch-like game. ghaTikam is explained by the nAstika scholars as
being gilli-daNDa – which we thought was the national game of India
before cricket displaced it :-). salAkahatthaM is a game exploiting
pareidolia in which the player dipped his hand in lac or paint and then
pressed it on the floor and asked what figure would be formed.
pa\~NgachIraM is a game of making whistles. va\~NkakaM is a game of
pulling a plow through hard soil. mokkhachikaM is apparently a game of
doing cartwheels or somersaults. pattALLihakaM is a game of measuring
out lengths with pieces of palm-leaves. manesikaM is a guessing game.
yathAvajjaM is not clearly understood but is was something in which one
of the players probably hobbled on one foot while he tried to catch
others running about him. Finally, we come to akkharikaM, which all the
learned sthaviravAdin-s explain as being a game in which a fellow traces
letters in the air or on ones palm when ones eyes are shut and one has
to guess what they are. To all this R remarked that, except for the
famously manly Arya triad, the old Hindus seemed rather unmanly with
their games :-). Indeed, it is stuff like akSharika that has probably
predisposed Hindus towards stuff like spelling games she remarked. To
which I had to bring to her attention that the tathAgata had already
dismissed earlier in this sutta the more violent pastimes of brAhmaNa-s
and ascetics such as:  
daNDa-yuddhaM muTThi-yuddhaM nibbuddhaM uyyodhikaM balaggaM senA-byuhaM
…  
These include bouts with quarterstaves, fists, bare-hand martial arts,
weapon games, simulations of war marches and fighting in formation.
Well, so much for the more manly Hindu pastimes of yore. But the point
of this whole digression was that in the game of akSharika the tradition
of the nAstika-s provides an early testimony of a script among Hindus.

Now the tAthagata-s and the nirgrantha-s record another interesting
tradition regarding scripts. The former mention an ancient Indian script
by the name pukkharasAriya, while the latter call this script the
puShkarasArI. Now that tathAgatha himself states in his tevIjja sutta
that pokkharasAti was a learned brAhmaNa, whom he converts to the
nAstika mata. Now it is possible that this puShkarasAdi or an even
earlier one mentioned as a great Astika teacher in the shA\~NkhAyana
AraNyaka was the inventor of a early Indian script known after his name.
Tradition also refers to a puShakarasAdi who was grammarian (mentioned
by pata\~njali) and a maker of a yajurvaidika pATha. This same
puShkarasAdi is likely the one cited as an authority in dharmasUtra-s
associated with yajurveda tradition. While we are not certain of the
identity of this puShkarasAdi with the teacher recorded in the
shA\~NkhAyana AraNyaka, we suspect he is the fits the profile for being
the early innovator of an Indo-Aryan script. Importantly, the phonetic
analysis which forms the foundation of saMskR^ita’s grammar would have
predisposed an early Hindu thinker to eventually formulate a script.
Now, we have a further speculation – the name puShkarasAdi means the one
seated on the lotus (from puShkarasad – the lotus seat; also compare
with the saMskR^ita word for the jacana: puShkarasAda). This word is
also a name of brahma (the one seated on the lotus from which he is
described as being born). Hence, we suspect that the term brAhmI itself
might have been linked in its very origin with the puShkarasAdi script
and then attributed to the deva brahma. The deva is said to have
provided the script for recording legal contracts. Thus, the early
Hindus, before the “literacy revolution” like their Indus counterparts
parts probably used the written mode of expression only for specific
purposes like a legal records. Indeed, in this regard we see a gradual
increase in the number of allusions to written documents in the dharma
texts:  
Apastamba/baudhAyana/gautama/vasiShTha dharma sUtra-s
(absent-rare)-\>manu (occasional)-\> nArada/bR^ihaspati/yAj\~navalkya
(common).  
Indeed, nArada, while describing the components of dharma, states:  
rAjA sapuruShaH sabhyAH shAstraM gaNaka-lekhakau |  
hiraNyam agnir udakam aShTA\~NgaH sa udAhR^itaH || 1.15

Thus, the eight limbs of dharma are enumerated as: the king with his
agents, the court, the shAstra-s, the accountants, \*the scribes\*,
gold, fire and water.

Similarly, bR^ihaspati states:  
gaNako gaNayed arthaM likhen nyAyaM cha lekhakaH | 1.1.90ab  
The accountant makes financial calculations while the scribe records the
legal judgments.

The importance of scribes is very clear here – a clear departure from
the dharmasUtra-s and manu. However, in manu and the dharmasUtra-s,
whatever allusions are made to writing they are always in the concept of
legal documentation, e.g., records of property. We see this feature of
Indo-Aryan tradition as being comparable to that of the Indus people –
they were both relatively curt and utilitarian with their writing.
Again, in relation to the Indus seals, one aspect of manu that might
point to some form of marking or record keeping in the context of trade
is the mention of the king listing the fixed prices of commodities every
5-14 days and stamping measures, balances and weights with an official
examination stamp every 6 months (MDS 8.402-403).

\~o\~O\~o\~

So was it writing after all?  
In our opinion despite the forceful statements by certain mlechCha
indologists, who are plainly involved in subverting the Hindu nation,
there is not much doubt that the Indus graffiti was writing after all.
Despite dravidianist intentions, Mahadevan et al. and Wells have adduced
fairly strongly evidence that it is likely to be a script, though the
underlying language(s) might not be known. What is interesting is that
it was not used as major form of expression, i.e. comparable to
conventional literacy, seen in later Indian tradition (e.g. ashoka’s
inscriptions). To reiterate, in this respect it is interesting to note
that Indus tradition is not very far from early Indo-Aryan tradition in
not using the written mode as the primary form of expression. Indeed,
this marks one of the fundamental distinctions of the two old Asiatic
civilizations, the Indic and the Sinitic – a feature which continues to
dominate the general mindset of the two people to this date – we are are
verbal people emphasizing the spoken word while they are a visual people
emphasizing what is hard written. But a more mysterious point is what
happened to the Indus graffiti beyond the core Indus period – be it the
dravidianists, like Mahadevan and Parpola, or the indological rogues
headed by the kInAsha and his viTa they have turned to the RV to look
for meaning in the scripts or excavate words of the Indus people. In
that case how could it have been entirely forgotten during the Vedic
night that they propose? In this regard, the vR^iddha of Indian
archeology, Brajbhashi Lal, more than 50 years ago made some key
observations. He noted that pottery from Indic archeological sites are
characterized by certain graffiti. This graffiti is rare in the early
neolithic sites of India. But it becomes more frequent in the
pre-Harappan sites of the Indus and blends with the Indus script in the
core Indus period. In the peri- and post- Harappan chalcolithic sites of
India it persists with a distribution extending to Bihar, southern
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. Finally, during the megalithic sweep of
the southern peninsula the graffiti appears on abundantly on potsherds
from various sites in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, and in the later stages
co-occurs with brAhmI script characters in these sites. Indeed, from
such a base it spreads even wider appearing outside the peninsula in
Shrilanka and Thailand. Thus, the graffiti appears to have spread from
north to south temporally. Lal’s analysis of this graffiti suggested as
high of 89% of the megalithic graffiti symbols being traceable to the
chalcolithic and Harappan layers and that 85% of the symbols from the
latter are observable in the megalithic graffiti. If we accept these
values then it is clear that aspects of the Indus script survived long
enough to interact with brAhmI.

Indeed when one analyzes the early brAhmI inscriptions from megalithic
sites in India and Lanka they routinely co-occur with graffiti. The
dravidianist Mahadevan claims that the use of these symbols especially
in sites in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Lanka means that the Indus people
were Dravidians – they continued to use the script after being pushed
south by the Arya-s. What he seems to conveniently forget is that
brAhmI, which is found in these inscriptions to encode Tamil, is also
used to encode Indo-Aryan languages and was primarily developed for the
latter. So, the presence of Indus symbols in megalithic south India does
not mean that they were used to solely represent Tamil or a related
Dravidian all the way through. Whatever the case, the main point to note
is that the graffiti bearing the Indus signs or other graffiti symbols
occurs in-line with the clearly readable brAhmI characters. For example,
in the figure above in the two tamil inscriptions they occur immediately
after the brAhmI characters or they are even embedded in the middle of
the brAhmI characters. Now this means that they are two be read together
collinearly. To me this is one of the strongest bits of evidence that
the graffiti is actually a form of a script – given the overlap of the
symbols in these graffiti with the Indus script it might also be taken
as indirect evidence for survival of the verbal values of the Indus
script, in some form, down to this period. We believe it is not a
coincidence that these symbols remain the completely undeciphered aspect
of these brAhmI inscriptions. When we take this factor into account we
are faced with notable problems with respect to certain decipherments.

[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-IS7JrDUBM1k/TiHgPS4iAtI/AAAAAAAACJ4/lP6d9hdRtYE/s400/brahmi_graffiti.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/RwDY004W7Rg8VnRs_NJoyQ?feat=embedwebsite)

For example, in the above 7 character inscription from Tissamaharama,
Shrilanka (approximately coeval with ashoka’s brAhmI edicts) the first
three characters are clear-cut brAhmI and can be read as li-ra-ti. The
next two characters are not given any sound values as they are graffiti
signs. Then the last two are read as mu-ri, with the peculiar 7th
character being apparently the retroflex ‘r’ seen in Shrilankan
inscriptions. Now, the dravidianists have read the text as tiraLi ||
muRi with an inversion of the direction of writing around the two
graffiti signs. We suspect this is a rather artificial interpretation
which has been forced on the texts to obtain words that make sense in
Tamil – though there is difference of opinion of what tiraLi muRi
actually meant in old Tamil. We suspect that the real meaning is lost
due to the inability to read the two graffiti signs. Interestingly, even
the graffiti appears to be equipped with brAhmI-like vowel diacritics in
this case. This intermingling of brAhmI with graffiti signs might have a
bearing on the Indus script, where some signs there are common while
others are rather rare. This suggests that even in the Indus script
there was a subset of the symbols with a more standardized sound value
like the brAhmI characters, and others that might have functioned just
like the graffiti co-occuring with brAhmI in the later period. Indeed,
there are intriguing features of certain signs in the Indus script that
appear to resemble later Indian scripts such as conjunct characters and
vowel diacritics, which might favor such an interpretation.

\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~  
Footnote 1: The jaina-s give us the important information in their
savAyA\~Nga sUtra 46 that:  
bambhi.enam liviye ChAyAlisaM mAuy-akkharA; the brAhmi script had 46
characters.
