---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUE '

---
<div>

[←](priya_nath_sinha/pns_xxxi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](taa_xxxiii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUE

XXXII

VENGEANCE OF HISTORY

(*Mrs. Wright*)

\[At the end of August 1893, Swami Vivekananda stayed at Annisquam at
the house of Prof. J. H. Wright. So astonishing a sight did Swamiji
present in this quiet little New England village that speculations set
in at once as to who this majestic and colourful figure might be. From
where had he come? At first they decided that he was a Brahmin from
India, but his manners did not fully conform to their ideas.\] It was
something that needed explanation and they unanimously repaired to the
cottage after supper, to hear this strange new discourse. . . .

"It was the other day," he said, in his musical voice, "only just the
other day — not more than four hundred years ago." And then followed
tales of cruelty and oppression, of a patient race and a suffering
people, and of a judgment to come! "Ah, the English!" he said. "Only
just a little while ago they were savages, the vermin crawled on the
ladies' bodies, . . . and they scented themselves to disguise the
abominable odour of their persons. . . . Most hor-r-ible! Even now they
are barely emerging from barbarism."

"Nonsense," said one of his scandalised hearers, "that was at least five
hundred years ago."

"And did I not say 'a little while ago'? What are a few hundred years
when you look at the antiquity of the human soul?" Then with a turn of
tone, quite reasonable and gentle, "They are quite savage", he said.
"The frightful cold, the want and privation of their northern climate",
going on more quickly and warmly, "has made them *wild*. They only think
to kill. . . . Where is their religion? They take the name of that Holy
One, they claim to love their fellowmen, they civilise — by
Christianity! — No! It is their hunger that has civilised them, not
their God. The love of man is on their lips, in their hearts there is
nothing but evil and every violence. 'I love you my brother, I love
you!' . . . *and all the while they cut his throat*! Their hands are
*red* with blood." . . . Then, going on more slowly, his beautiful voice
deepening till it sounded like a bell, "But the judgment of God will
fall upon them. 'Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord', and
destruction is coming. What are your Christians? Not one third of the
world. Look at those Chinese, millions of them. They are the vengeance
of God that will light upon you. There will be another invasion of the
Huns", adding, with a little chuckle, "they will sweep over Europe, they
will not leave one stone standing upon another. Men, women, children,
all will go and the dark ages will come again." His voice was
indescribably sad and pitiful; then suddenly and flippantly, dropping
the seer, "Me — I don't care! The world will rise up better from it, but
it is coming. The vengeance of God, it is coming soon."

"Soon?" they all asked.

"It will not be a thousand years before it is done."

They drew a breath of relief. It did not seem imminent.

"And God will have vengeance", he went on. "You may not see it in
religion, you may not see it in politics, but you must see it in
history, and as it has been; it will come to pass. If you grind down the
people, you will suffer. We in India are suffering the vengeance of God.
Look upon these things. They ground down those poor people for their own
wealth, they heard not the voice of distress, they ate from gold and
silver when the people cried for bread, and the Mohammedans came upon
them slaughtering and killing: slaughtering and killing they overran
them. India has been conquered again and again for years, and last and
worst of all came the Englishman. You look about India, what has the
Hindu left? Wonderful temples, everywhere. What has the Mohammedan left?
Beautiful palaces. What has the Englishman left? Nothing but mounds of
broken brandy bottles! And God has had no mercy upon my people because
they had no mercy. By their cruelty they degraded the populace; and when
they needed them, the common people had no strength to give for their
aid. If man cannot believe in the Vengeance of God, he certainly cannot
deny the Vengeance of History. And it will come upon the English; they
have their heels on our necks, they have sucked the last drop of our
blood for their own pleasures, they have carried away with them millions
of our money, while our people have starved by villages and provinces.
And now the Chinaman is the vengeance that will fall upon them; if the
Chinese rose today and swept the English into the sea, *as they well
deserve*, it would be no more than justice."

And then, having said his say, the Swami was silent. A babble of
thin-voiced chatter rose about him, to which he listened, apparently
unheeding. Occasionally he cast his eye up to the roof and repeated
softly, "Shiva! Shiva!" and the little company, shaken and disturbed by
the current of powerful feelings and vindictive passion which seemed to
be flowing like molten lava beneath the silent surface of this strange
being, broke up, perturbed.

He stayed days \[actually it was only a long weekend\]. . . . All
through, his discourses abounded in picturesque illustrations and
beautiful legends. . . .

One beautiful story he told was of a man whose wife reproached him with
his troubles, reviled him because of the success of others, and
recounted to him all his failures. "Is this what your God has done for
you", she said to him, "after you have served Him so many years?" Then
the man answered, "Am I a trader in religion? Look at the mountain. What
does it do for me, or what have I done for it? And yet I love it because
I am so made that I love the beautiful. Thus I love God." . . . There
was another story he told of a king who offered a gift to a Rishi. The
Rishi refused, but the king insisted and begged that he would come with
him. When they came to the palace, he heard the king praying, and the
king begged for wealth, for power, for length of days from God. The
Rishi listened, wondering, until at last he picked up his mat and
started away. Then the king opened his eyes from his prayers and saw
him. "Why are you going?" he said. "You have not asked for your gift."
"I", said the Rishi, "ask from a beggar?"

When someone suggested to him that Christianity was a saving power, he
opened his great dark eyes upon him and said, "If Christianity is a
saving power in itself, why has it not saved the Ethiopians, the
Abyssinians?"

Often on Swamiji's lips was the phrase, "They would not dare to do this
to a monk." . . . At times he even expressed a great longing that the
English government would take him and shoot him. "It would be the first
nail in their coffin", he would say, with a little gleam of his white
teeth. "and my death would run through the land like wild fire."

His great heroine was the dreadful \[?\] Ranee of the Indian mutiny, who
led her troops in person. Most of the old mutineers, he said, had become
monks in order to hide themselves, and this accounted very well for the
dangerous quality of the monks' opinions. There was one man of them who
had lost four sons and could speak of them with composure, but whenever
he mentioned the Ranee, he would weep, with tears streaming down his
face. "That woman was a goddess", he said, "a *devi*. When overcome, she
fell on her sword and died like a man." It was strange to hear the other
side of the Indian mutiny, when you would never believe that there was
another side to it, and to be assured that a Hindu could not possibly
kill a woman. . . .

</div>
