---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUE '

---
<div>

[←](tdfp_xxxiv.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](../translation_of_writings/note.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUE

XXXV

FALLEN WOMEN

(*The Detroit Tribune*, March 17, 1894)

"Lalun is a member of the most ancient profession in the world. Lilith
was her very great-grandmamma, and that was before the days of Eve, as
everyone knows. In the West people say rude things about Lalun's
profession and write lectures about it, and distribute the lectures to
young persons in order that morality may be preserved. In the East,
where the profession is hereditary, descending from mother to daughter,
nobody writes lectures or takes any notice." — RUDYARD KIPLING.

The story of which the sentences that precede this one are a paragraph,
was written in India. They were written by Rudyard Kipling, from whom
most of us have learned all that we definitely know about India, with
the exception of the fact that India raises wheat enough to be a great
competitor of our own farmers, that men work there for two cents a day
and that women throw their babies into the Ganga, which is the sacred
river of the country.

But Vive Kananda, since he came to this country, has exploded the story
about the women of India feeding their babies to the alligators, and now
he says that he never heard of Rudyard Kipling until he came to America,
and that it is not proper in India to talk of such a profession as that
of Lalun, out of which Mr. Kipling has made one of his most delightful
and instructive tales.

"In India," said Kananda yesterday, "we do not discuss such things. No
one ever speaks of those unfortunate women. When a woman is discovered
to be unchaste in India, she is hurled out from her caste. No one
thereafter can touch or speak to her. If she went into the house, they
would take up and clean the carpets and wash the walls she breathed
against. No one can have anything to do with such a person. There are no
women who are not virtuous in Indian society. It is not at all as it is
in this country. Here there are bad women living side by side with
virtuous women in your society. One cannot know who is bad and who is
good in America. But in India once a woman slips, she is an outcast for
ever — she and her children, sons and daughters. It is terrible, I
admit, but it keeps society pure."

"How about the men?" was asked. "Does the same rule hold in regard to
them? Are they outcast when they are proven to be unchaste?"

"Oh, no. It is quite different with them. It would be so, perhaps, if
they could be found out. But the men move about. They can go from place
to place. It is not possible to discover them. The women are shut up in
the house. They are certainly discovered if they do anything wrong. And
when they are discovered, they are thrown out. Nothing can save them.
Sometimes it is very hard when a father has to give up his daughter or a
husband his wife. But if they do not give them up, they will be banished
with them too. It is very different in this country. Women cannot go
about there and make associations as they do here. It is very terrible,
but it makes society pure.

"I think that unchastity is the one great sin of your country. It must
be so, there is so much luxury here. A poor girl would sell herself for
a new bonnet. It must be so where there is so much luxury."

Mr. Kipling says this about Lalun and her profession:

"Lalun's real husband, for even ladies of Lalun's profession have
husbands in the East, was a great, big jujube tree. Her mama, who had
married a fig, spent ten thousand rupees on Lalun's wedding, which was
blessed by forty-seven clergymen of mama's church, and distributed 5,000
rupees in charity to the poor. And that was a custom of the land."

"In India when a woman is unfaithful to her husband she loses her caste,
but none of her civil or religious rights. She can still own property
and the temples are still open to her.

"Yes," said Kananda, "a bad woman is not allowed to marry. She cannot
marry any one without their being an outcast like herself, so she
marries a tree, or sometimes a sword. It is the custom. Sometimes these
women grow very rich and become very charitable, but they can never
regain their caste. In the interior towns, where they still adhere to
the old customs, she cannot ride in a carriage, no matter how wealthy
she may be; the best that she is allowed is a pair of bullocks. And then
in India she has to wear a dress of her own, so that she can be
distinguished. You can see these people going by, but no one ever speaks
to them. The greatest number of these women is in the cities. A good
many of them are Jews too, but they all have different quarters of the
cities, you know. They all live apart. It is a singular thing that, bad
as they are, wretched as some of these women are, they will not admit a
Christian lover. They will not eat with them or touch them — the
'omnivorous barbarians', as they call them. They call them that because
they eat everything. Do you know what that disease, the unspeakable
disease, is called in India? It is called 'Bad Faringan', which means
'the Christian disease'. It was the Christian that brought it into
India.

"Has there been any attempt in India to solve this question? Is it a
public question the way it is in America?"

"No, there has been very little done in India. There is a great field
for women missionaries if they would convert prostitutes in India. They
do nothing in India — very little. There is one sect, the Veshnava
\[Vaishnava\] (Words in square brackets are ours. — Ed.), who try to
reclaim these women. This is a religious sect. I think about 90 per cent
\[?\] of all prostitutes belong to this sect. This sect does not believe
in caste and they go everywhere without reference to caste. There are
certain temples, as the temple of Jagatnot \[Jagannath\], where there is
no caste. Everybody who goes into that town takes off his caste while he
is there, because that is holy ground and everything is supposed to be
pure there. When he goes outside, he resumes it again, for caste is a
mere worldly thing. You know some of the castes are so particular that
they will not eat any food unless it is prepared by themselves. They
will not touch any one outside their caste. But in the city they all
live together. This is the only sect in India that makes proselytes. It
makes everybody a member of its church. It goes into the Himalayas and
converts the wild men. You perhaps did not know that there were wild men
in India. Yes, there are. They dwell at the foot of the Himalayas."

"Is there any ceremony by which a woman is declared unchaste, a civil
process?" Kananda was asked.

"No, it is not a civil process. It is just custom. Sometimes there is a
formal ceremony and sometimes there is not. They simply make pariahs out
of them. When any woman is suspected sometimes they get together and
give her a sort of trial, and if it is decided that she is guilty, then
a note is sent around to all the other members of the caste, and she is
banished.

"Mind you," he exclaimed, "I do not mean to say that this is a solution
of the question. The custom is terribly rigid. But you have no solution
of the question, either. It is a terrible thing. It is a great wrong of
the Western world."

</div>
