---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](../../inspired_talks/44_tuesday_august_6.htm)
[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_ii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

I  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_13e7_01.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur, the rented Math premises*. Year: *1898*.\]

Swamiji was staying at the time at the rented garden-house of Nilâmbar
Bâbu where the Math had been removed from Alambazar. Arrangements had
been made for Shri Ramakrishna's Tithipujâ (Nativity) on a grand scale.
On the morning of the auspicious day, Swamiji personally inspected the
preliminaries of the worship. The inspection over, Swamiji asked the
disciple, "Well, you have brought the holy threads, I hope?"

Disciple: Yes, sir, I have. Everything is ready, as you desired. But,
sir, I can't make out why so many holy threads are in requisition.

Swamiji: Every Dwijâti (Brâhmins, Kshatriyas, and Vaishyas are the
Dwijatis) (twice-born) has a right to investiture with the holy thread.
The Vedas themselves are authority in this matter. Whoever will come
here on this sacred birthday of Shri Ramakrishna I shall invest him with
the holy thread. These people have fallen from their true status, and
the scriptures say that after proper expiation, those fallen in the way
earn the right to investiture with the holy thread. This is the great
day of Shri Ramakrishna's nativity, and men will be purified by taking
his name. So the assembled devotees are to be invested with the holy
thread today; do you now understand?

Disciple: I have collected, Sir, quite a good number of holy threads
according to your instructions, and after the worship I shall with your
permission invest the Bhaktas with them.

Swamiji: To the Bhaktas who are not Brahmins, give this Mantra of
Gâyatri (here Swamiji communicated to the disciple the special Gayatris
for them.) By degrees all the people of the land have to be lifted to
the position of Brahmins, not to speak of the Bhaktas of Shri
Ramakrishna. Each Hindu, I say, is a brother of every other, and it is
we who have degraded them by our outcry, "Don't touch, don't touch!" And
so the whole country has been plunged to the utmost depths of meanness,
cowardice, and ignorance. These men have to be uplifted; words of hope
and faith have to be proclaimed to them. We have to tell them, "You are
men like us, and you have all the rights that we have." Do you
understand?

Disciple: Yes, sir, it should be so.

Swamiji: Now, ask those who will take the holy thread to finish their
bath in the Gangâ. Than after prostration before Shri Ramakrishna, they
will have their investiture.

About forty to fifty Bhaktas then duly received the Gayatri from the
disciple and were invested with the holy thread. When receiving them,
Swamiji's face beamed with profound delight. A little after this, Shri
Girish Chandra Ghosh arrived at the Math from Calcutta.

Now arrangements for music were made at the desire of Swamiji, and
Sannyasins of the Math decorated Swamiji as a Yogin.

Swamiji now chanted with the sweetest intonation to the accompaniment of
the Tânpurâ, the Sanskrit hymn beginning with — कुजन्तं
रामरामेति ("repeating in a low tone the name of Rama" etc.), and when
the chanting came to a close, he went on repeating with exquisite charm
the holy words "Râma, Râma, Shri Râma, Râma". His eyes were half-closed,
and the natural sublimity of his countenance seemed to have deepened a
hundred-fold. Everybody remained spelled for over half an hour.

After the chanting of Shri Rama's name, Swamiji continued to sing a song
of Tulsidas on Shri Ramachandra in the same intoxicated strain of mind.
Then other music followed.

After this, Swamiji suddenly took to putting of all the decorations he
had on his person and began to dress Girish Babu with them. Then he
declared, "Paramhansa-deva used to say our brother is the incarnation of
Bhairava (Divine companion of Shiva.). There's no distinction between
him and us." Girish Babu sat speechless all the time. A piece of *geruâ*
cloth was also brought, and was draped in it and uttered no word of
remonstrance. For he had merged his self fully today in the wishes of
his brother disciples. Swamiji now said, "Well, G. C., you are to speak
to us today about Thâkur (Lord). And all of you (turning all round
himself) sit quiet and attentive." Even then, Girish Babu sat
motionless, voiceless like marble, absolutely lost in joy. And when at
last he opened his lips, he did so to say, "Ah, what can this humble
self speak of our Lord of unbounded mercy! Verily in this alone I
realise his mercy, that to me, this lowly creature, He has extended the
privilege of sitting and mixing on the same footing with you Sannyasins,
pure from your childhood, who have renounced all lust and lucre." While
speaking thus, the words choked in his throat, and he could not speak
anything more.

After this, some pieces of Hindu music were rendered by Swamiji. The
devotees were now called to partake of refreshments. After refreshments,
Swamiji came and took his seat in the parlour on the ground-floor, and
all the many visitors sat round him. Accosting a house- holder friend
who had his investiture with the holy thread that day, Swamiji said,
"Really you all belong to the twice-born castes, only it is long since
you lost your status. From this day again you become the twice-born.
Repeat the Gayatri at least a hundred times daily, won't you?" The
householder expressed his assent.

Meanwhile Srijut Mahendranath Gupta (Master Mahâshaya \[Venerable\], or
"M") appeared on the scene. Swamiji cordially received him and made him
take his seat. "Master Mahashaya," said Swamiji, "this is the
anniversary of Shri Ramakrishna's birthday. So you shall have to relate
to us something about him." Master Mahashaya bent his head down
smilingly in reply.

Just then it was announced that Swami Akhandananda had come from
Murshidabad with two Pântuâs[1](#fn1) which weighed one maund and a
half! All of us hurried out to see these prodigious Pantuas. When they
were shown to Swamiji, he said, "Take them up to the chapel for
offering."

Making Swami Akhandananda the subject of his remarks, Swamiji said to
the disciple, "Mark you, what a great hero he is in work! Of fear, death
and the like he has no cognisance — doggedly going on doing his own work
— 'work for the welfare of the many, for the happiness of the many'."

Disciple: Sir, that power must have come to him as the result of a good
deal of austerities.

Swamiji: True, power comes of austerities; but again, working for the
sake of others itself constitutes Tapasyâ (practice of austerity). The
karma-yogins regard work itself as part of Tapasya. As on the one hand
the practice of Tapasya intensifies altruistic feelings in the devotee
and actuates him to unselfish work, so also the pursuit of work for the
sake of others carries the worker to the last fruition of Tapasya,
namely the purification of the heart, and leads him thus to the
realisation of the supreme Âtman (Self).

Disciple: But, sir, how few of us can work whole-heartedly for the sake
of others from the very outset! How difficult it is for such
broad-mindedness to come at all as will make men sacrifice the desire
for their own happiness and devote their lives for others!

Swamiji: And how many have their minds going after Tapasya? With the
attraction for lust and lucre working the other way, how many long for
the realisation of God? In fact, disinterested work is quite as
difficult as Tapasya. So you have no right to say anything against those
who go in for work in the cause of others. If you find Tapasya to be to
your liking, well, go on with it. Another may find work as congenial to
himself, and you have no right to make a prohibition in his case. You
seem to have the settled idea in your mind that work is no Tapasya at
all!

Disciple: Yes, sir, before this I used to mean quite a different thing
by Tapasya.

Swamiji: As by continuing our religious practices we gradually develop a
certain determined tendency for it, so by performing disinterested work
over and over again, even unwillingly, we gradually find the will
merging itself in it. The inclination to work for others develops in
this way, do you see? Just do some such work even though unwillingly,
and then see if the actual fruit of Tapasya is realised within or not.
As the outcome of work for the sake of others, the angularities of the
mind get smoothed down, and men are gradually prepared for sincere
self-sacrifice for the good of others.

Disciple: But, sir, what is the necessity at all for doing good to
others?

Swamiji: Well, it is necessary for one's own good. We become forgetful
of the ego when we think of the body as dedicated to the service of
others — the body with which most complacently we identify the ego. And
in the long run comes the consciousness of disembodiness. The more
intently you think of the well-being of others, the more oblivious of
self you become. In this way, as gradually your heart gets purified by
work, you will come to feel the truth that your own Self is pervading
all beings and all things. Thus it is that doing good to others
constitutes a way, a means of revealing one's own Self or Âtman. Know
this also to be one of the spiritual practices, a discipline for
God-realisation. Its aim also is Self-realisation. Exactly as that aim
is attained by Jnâna (knowledge), Bhakti (devotion) and so on, also by
work for the sake of others.

Disciple: But, sir, if I am to keep thinking of others day and night,
when shall I contemplate on the Atman? If I rest wholly occupied with
something particular and relative, how can I realise the Atman which is
Absolute?

Swamiji: The highest aim of all disciplines, all spiritual paths, is the
attainment of the knowledge of Atman. If you, by being devoted to the
service of others and by getting your heart purified by such work,
attain to the vision of all beings as the Self, what else remains to be
attained in the way of Self-realisation? Would you say that
Self-realisation is the state of existing as inert matter, as this wall
or as this piece of wood, for instance?

Disciple: Though that is not the meaning, yet what the scriptures speak
of as the withdrawal of the Self into Its real nature consists in the
arresting of all mind-functions and all work.

Swamiji: Yes, this Samâdhi of which the scriptures speak is a state not
at all easy to attain. When very rarely it appears in somebody, it does
not last for long; so what will he keep himself occupied with? Thus it
is that after realising that state described in the scriptures, the
saint sees the Self in all beings and in that consciousness devotes
himself to service, so that any Karma that was yet left to be worked out
through the body may exhaust itself. It is this state which has been
described by the authors of the Shâstras (scriptures) as Jivanmukti,
"Freedom while living".

Disciple: So after all it comes about, sir, that unless this state of
Jivanmukti is attained, work for the sake of others can never be pursued
in the truest sense of the term.

Swamiji: Yes, that is what the Shastras say, but they also say that work
or service for the good of others leads to this state of Jivanmukti.
Otherwise there would be no need on the part of the Shastras to teach a
separate path of religious practice, called the Karma-Yoga.

The disciple now understood the point and became silent, and Swamiji
giving up the point commenced rendering in a voice of superhuman
sweetness the song composed by Babu Girish Chandra Ghosh to commemorate
Shri Ramakrishna's Nativity, and beginning:

"Who art Thou lying on the lap of the poor Brahmin matron."

1.  [^](#txt1)A sweetmeat usually about two inches in length, made
    mostly of fresh cheese fried in ghee and put in syrup.

</div>
