---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_v.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_vii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

VI  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_17e7_06.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The rented Math premises at Belur*. Year: *1898*.\]

The disciple is staying with Swamiji at the garden-house of Nilambar
Babu at Belur for the last two days.

Today, Swamiji has given permission to the disciple to stay in his room
at night. When the disciple was serving Swamiji and massaging his feet,
he spoke to him: "What folly! Leaving such a place as this, you want to
go back to Calcutta! See what an atmosphere of holiness is here — the
pure air of the Ganga — what an assemblage of Sadhus — will you find
anywhere a place like this!"

Disciple: Sir, as the fruition of great austerities in past lives, I
have been blessed with your company. Now bless me that I may not be
overcome by ignorance and delusion any more. Now my mind sometimes is
seized with a great longing for some direct spiritual realisation.

Swamiji: I also felt like that many times. One day in the Cossipore
garden, I had expressed my prayer to Shri Ramakrishna with great
earnestness. Then in the evening, at the hour of meditation, I lost the
consciousness of the body, and felt that it was absolutely non-existent.
I felt that the sun, moon, space, time, ether, and all had been reduced
to a homogeneous mass and then melted far away into the unknown; the
body-consciousness had almost vanished, and I had nearly merged in the
Supreme. But I had just a trace of the feeling of Ego, so I could again
return to the world of relativity from the Samâdhi. In this state of
Samadhi all the difference between "I" and the "Brahman" goes away,
everything is reduced into unity, like the waters of the Infinite Ocean
— water everywhere, nothing else exists — language and thought, all fail
there. Then only is the state "beyond mind and speech" realised in its
actuality. Otherwise, so long as the religious aspirant thinks or says,
"I am the Brahman" — "I" and "the Brahman", these two entities persist —
there is the involved semblance of duality. After that experience, even
after trying repeatedly, I failed to bring back the state of Samadhi. On
informing Shri Ramakrishna about it, he said, "If you remain day and
night in that state, the work of the Divine Mother will not be
accomplished; therefore you won't be able to induce that state again;
when your work is finished, it will come again."

Disciple: On the attainment of the absolute and transcendent Nirvikalpa
Samadhi can none return to the world of duality through the
consciousness of Egoism?

Swamiji: Shri Ramakrishna used to say that the Avataras alone can
descend to the ordinary plane from that state of Samadhi, for the good
of the world. Ordinary Jivas do not; immersed in that state, they remain
alive for a period of twenty-one days; after that, their body drops like
a sere leaf from the tree of Samsâra (world).

Disciple: When in Samadhi the mind is merged, and there remain no waves
on the surface of consciousness, where then is the possibility of mental
activity and returning to the world through the consciousness of Ego?
When there is no mind, then who will descend from Samadhi to the
relative plane, and by what means?

Swamiji: The conclusion of the Vedanta is that when there is absolute
samadhi and cessation of all modifications, there is no return from that
state; as the Vedanta Aphorism says: "अनावृत्तिः शब्दात् —  There is
non-return, from scriptural texts." But the Avataras cherish a few
desires for the good of the world. By taking hold of that thread, they
come down from the superconscious to the conscious state.

Disciple: But, sir, if one or two desires remain, how can that state be
called the absolute, transcendent Samadhi? For the scriptures say that
in that state all the modifications of the mind and all desires are
stamped out.

Swamiji: How then can there be projection of the universe after
Mahâpralaya (final dissolution)? At Maha pralaya everything is merged in
the Brahman. But even after that, one hears and reads of creation in the
scriptures, that projection and contraction (of the universe) go on in
wave forms. Like the fresh creation and dissolution of the universe
after Mahapralaya, the superconscious and conscious states of Avataras
also stand to reason.

Disciple: If I argue that at the time of dissolution the seeds of
further creation remain almost merged in Brahman, and that it is not
absolute dissolution or Nirvikalpa Samadhi?

Swamiji: Then I shall ask you to answer how the projection of the
universe is possible from Brahman in which there is no shadow of any
qualification — which is unaffected and unqualified.

Disciple: Why, this is but a seeming projection. The reply to the
question is given in the scriptures in this way, that the manifestation
of creation from Brahman is only an appearance like the mirage in the
desert, but really there has been no creation or anything of the kind.
This illusion is produced by Maya, which is the negation of the
eternally existing Brahman, and hence unreal.

Swamiji: If the creation is false, then you can also regard the
Nirvikalpa Samadhi of Jiva and his return therefrom as seeming
appearances. Jiva is Brahman by his nature. How can he have any
experience of bondage? Your desire to realise the truth that you are
Brahman is also a hallucination in that case — for the scripture says,
"You are already that." Therefore, "अयमेव हि ते बन्ध समाधिमनुतिष्ठसि —
This is verily your bondage that you are practising the attainment of
Samadhi."

Disciple: This is a great dilemma. If I am Brahman, why don't I always
realise it?

Swamiji: In order to attain to that realisation in the conscious plane,
some instrumentality is required. The mind is that instrument in us. But
it is a non-intelligent substance. It only appears to be intelligent
through the light of the Atman behind. Therefore the author of the
Panchadashi (III. 40) says: "चिच्छायावेशतः शक्तिश्चेतनेव विभाति सा — 
The Shakti appears to be intelligent by the reflection of the
intelligence of the Atman." Hence the mind also appears to us like an
intelligent substance. Therefore it is certain that you won't be able to
know the Atman, the Essence of Intelligence, through the mind. You have
to go beyond the mind — for only the Atman exists there — there the
object of knowledge becomes the same as the instrument of knowledge. The
knower, knowledge, and the instrument of knowledge become one and the
same. It is therefore that the Shruti says, "विज्ञातारमरे केन विजानीयात्
— Through what are you to know the Eternal Subject?" The real fact is
that there is a state beyond the conscious plane, where there is no
duality of the knower, knowledge, and the instrument of knowledge etc.
When the mind is merged, that state is perceived. I say it is
"perceived," because there is no other word to express that state.
Language cannot express that state. Shankaracharya has styled it
"Transcendent Perception" (Aparokshânubhuti). Even after that
transcendent perception Avataras descend to the relative plane and give
glimpses of that — therefore it is said that the Vedas and other
scriptures have originated from the perception of Seers. The case of
ordinary Jivas is like that of the salt-doll which attempting to sound
the depths of the ocean melted into it. Do you see? The sum and
substance of it is — you have only got to know that you are Eternal
Brahman.

You are already that, only the intervention of a non-intelligent mind
(which is called Maya in the scriptures) is hiding that knowledge. When
the mind composed of subtle matter is quelled, the Atman is effulgent by
Its own radiance. One proof of the fact that Maya or mind is an illusion
is that the mind by itself is non-intelligent and of the nature of
darkness; and it is the light of the Atman behind, that makes it appear
as intelligent. When you will understand this, the mind will merge in
the unbroken Ocean of Intelligence; then you will realise: अयमात्मा
ब्रह्म — This Atman is Brahman."

Then Swamiji, addressing the disciple, said, "You feel sleepy, then go
to sleep."

\*            \*            \*

In the night the disciple had a wonderful dream, as a result of which he
earnestly begged Swamiji's permission to worship him. Swamiji had to
acquiesce, and after the ceremony was over he said to the disciple,
"Well, your worship is finished, but Premananda will be in a rage at
your sacrilegious act of worshipping my feet in the flower-tray meant
for Shri Ramakrishna's worship." Before his words were finished, Swami
Premananda came there, and Swamiji said to him, "See what a sacrilege he
has committed! With the requisites of Shri Ramakrishna's worship, he has
worshipped me!" Swami Premananda, smiling, said, "Well done! Are you and
Shri Ramakrishna different?" — hearing which the disciple felt at ease.

The disciple is an orthodox Hindu. Not to speak of prohibited food, he
does not even take food touched by another. Therefore Swamiji sometimes
used to refer to him as "priest". Swamiji, while he was eating biscuits
with his breakfast, said to Swami Sadananda, "Bring the priest in here."
When the disciple came to Swamiji, he gave some portion of his food to
him to eat. Finding the disciple accepting it without any demur, Swamiji
said, "Do you know what you have eaten now? These are made from eggs."
In reply, the disciple said, "Whatever may be in it, I have no need to
know; taking this sacramental food from you, I have become immortal."

Thereupon Swamiji said, "I bless you that from this day all your egoism
of caste, colour, high birth, religious merit and demerit, and all, may
vanish for ever!". . .

</div>
