---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_vi.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_viii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

VII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_18e7_07.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The rented Math premises at Belur*. Year: *1898*.\]

The disciple has come to the Math this morning. As soon as he stood
after touching the feet of Swamiji, Swamiji said, "What's the use of
your continuing in service any more? Why not go in for some business?"
The disciple was then employed as a private tutor in some family. Asked
about the profession of teaching, Swamiji said, "If one does the work of
teaching boys for a long time, one gets blunt in intellect; one's
intelligence is not manifested. If one stays among a crowd of boys day
and night, gradually one gets obtuse. So give up the working of teaching
boys."

Disciple: What shall I do, then?

Swamiji: Why, if you want to live the life of a worldly man and have a
desire for earning money, then go over to America. I shall give you
directions for business. You will find that in five years you will get
together a lot of money.

Disciple: What business shall I go in for? And where am I to get the
money from?

Swamiji: What nonsense are you talking? Within you lies indomitable
power. Only thinking, "I am nothing, I am nothing", you have become
powerless. Why, you alone! The whole race has become so. Go round the
world once, and you will find how vigorously the life-current of other
nations is flowing. And what are you doing? Even after learning so much,
you go about the doors of others, crying, "Give me employment". Trampled
under others' feet doing slavery for others, are you men any more? You
are not worth a pin's head! In this fertile country with abundant
water-supply, where nature produces wealth and harvest a thousand times
more than in others, you have no food for your stomach, no clothes to
cover your body! In this country of abundance, the produce of which has
been the cause of the spread of civilisation in other countries, you are
reduced to such straits! Your condition is even worse than that of a
dog. And you glory in your Vedas and Vedanta! A nation that cannot
provide for its simple food and clothing, which always depends on others
for its subsistence — what is there for it to vaunt about? Throw your
religious observances overboard for the present and be first prepared
for the struggle for existence. People of foreign countries are turning
out such golden results from the raw materials produced in your country,
and you, like asses of burden, are only carrying their load. The people
of foreign countries import Indian raw goods, manufacture various
commodities by bringing their intelligence to bear upon them, and become
great; whereas you have locked up your intelligence, thrown away your
inherited wealth to others, and roam about crying piteously for food.

Disciple: In what way, sir, can the means of subsistence be procured?

Swamiji: Why, the means are in your hands. You blindfold your eyes, and
say, "I am blind and can see nothing." Tear off the folds from your eyes
and you will see the whole world lighted by the rays of the midday sun.
If you cannot procure money, go to foreign countries, working your
passage as a Lascar. Take Indian cloth, towels, bamboo-work, and other
indigenous products, and peddle in the streets of Europe and America;
you will find how greatly Indian products are appreciated in foreign
markets even now. In America I found, some Mohammedans of the Hooghly
district had grown rich by peddling Indian commodities in this way. Have
you even less intelligence than they? Take, for example, such excellent
fabric as the Varanasi-made Sâris of India, the like of which are not
produced anywhere else in the world. Go to America with this cloth. Have
gowns made out of this fabric and sell them, and you will see how much
you earn.

Disciple: Sir, why will they wear gowns made of the Saris of Varanasi? I
have heard that clothes designed diversely are not to the taste of the
ladies in those countries.

Swamiji: Whether they will receive or not, I shall look to that. It is
for you to exert yourself and go over there. I have many friends in that
country, to whom I shall introduce you. At first I shall request them to
take this cloth up among themselves. Then you will find many will follow
suit, and at last you won't be able to keep the supply up to the
enormous demand.

Disciple: Where shall I get the capital for the business?

Swamiji: I shall somehow give you a start; for the rest you must depend
on your own exertions. "If you die, you get to heaven; and if you win,
you enjoy the earth" (Gita). Even if you die in this attempt, well and
good, many will take up the work, following your example. And if you
succeed, you will live a life of great opulence.

Disciple: Yes, sir, so it is. But I cannot muster sufficient courage.

Swamiji: That is what I say, my son, you have no Shraddhâ — no faith in
yourselves. What will you achieve? You will have neither material nor
spiritual advancement. Either put forth your energy in the way I have
suggested and be successful in life, or give up all and take to the path
we have chosen. Serve the people of all countries through spiritual
instruction — then only will you get your dole of food like us. If there
is no mutual exchange, do you think anybody cares for anybody else? You
observe in our case, that because we give the householders some
spiritual instructions, they in return give us some morsels of food. If
you do nothing, why will they give you food? You observe so much misery
in mere service and slavery of others, still you are not waking up; and
so your misery also is never at an end. This is certainly the delusive
power of Maya! In the West I have found that those who are in the
employment of others have their seats fixed in the back rows in the
Parliament, while the front seats are reserved for those who have made
themselves famous by self-exertion, or education, or intelligence. In
Western countries there is no botheration of caste. Those on whom
Fortune smiles for their industry and exertion are alone regarded as
leaders of the country and the controllers of its destiny. Whereas in
your country, you are simply vaunting your superiority in caste, till at
last you cannot even get a morsel of food! You have not the capacity to
manufacture a needle, and you dare to criticise the English! Fools! Sit
at their feet and learn from them the arts, industries, and the
practicality necessary for the struggle for existence. You will be
esteemed once more when you will become fit. Then they too will pay heed
to your words. Without the necessary preparation, what will mere
shouting in the Congress avail?

Disciple: But, sir, all the educated men of the country have joined it.

Swamiji: Well, you consider a man as educated if only he can pass some
examinations and deliver good lectures. The education which does not
help the common mass of people to equip themselves for the struggle for
life, which does not bring out strength of character, a spirit of
philanthropy, and the courage of a lion — is it worth the name? Real
education is that which enables one to stand on one's own legs. The
education that you are receiving now in schools and colleges is only
making you a race of dyspeptics. You are working like machines merely,
and living a jelly-fish existence.

The peasant, the shoemaker, the sweeper, and such other lower classes of
India have much greater capacity for work and self-reliance than you.
They have been silently working through long ages and producing the
entire wealth of the land, without a word of complaint. Very soon they
will get above you in position. Gradually capital is drifting into their
hands, and they are not so much troubled with wants as you are. Modern
education has changed your fashion, but new avenues of wealth lie yet
undiscovered for want of the inventive genius. You have so long
oppressed these forbearing masses; now is the time for their
retribution. And you will become extinct in your vain search for
employment, making it the be-all and end-all of your life.

Disciple: Sir, although our power of originality is less than that of
other countries, still the lower classes of India are being guided by
our intelligence. So where will they get the power and culture to
overcome the higher classes in the struggle for existence?

Swamiji: Never mind if they have not read a few books like you — if they
have not acquired your tailor-made civilisation. What do these matter?
But they are the backbone of the nation in all countries. If these lower
classes stop work, from where will you get your food and clothing? If
the sweepers of Calcutta stop work for a day, it creates a panic; and if
they strike for three days, the whole town will be depopulated by the
outbreak of epidemics. If the labourers stop work, your supply of food
and clothes also stops. And you regard them as low-class people and
vaunt your own culture!

Engrossed in the struggle for existence, they had not the opportunity
for the awakening of knowledge. They have worked so long uniformly like
machines guided by human intelligence, and the clever educated section
have taken the substantial part of the fruits of their labour. In every
country this has been the case. But times have changed. The lower
classes are gradually awakening to this fact and making a united front
against this, determined to exact their legitimate dues. The masses of
Europe and America have been the first to awaken and have already begun
the fight. Signs of this awakening have shown themselves in India, too,
as is evident from the number of strikes among the lower classes
nowadays. The upper classes will no longer be able to repress the lower,
try they ever so much. The well-being of the higher classes now lies in
helping the lower to get their legitimate rights.

Therefore I say, set yourselves to the task of spreading education among
the masses. Tell them and make them understand, "You are our brothers —
a part and parcel of our bodies, and we love you and never hate you." If
they receive this sympathy from you, their enthusiasm for work will be
increased a hundredfold. Kindle their knowledge with the help of modern
science. Teach them history, geography, science, literature, and along
with these the profound truths of religion. In exchange for that
teaching, the poverty of the teachers will also disappear. By mutual
exchange both parties will become friendly to each other.

Disciple: But, sir, with the spread of learning among them, they too
will in course of time have fertile brains but become idle and inactive
like us and live on the fruits of the labour of the next lower classes.

Swamiji: Why shall it be so? Even with the awakening of knowledge, the
potter will remain a potter, the fisherman a fisherman, the peasant a
peasant. Why should they leave their hereditary calling? "सहजं कर्म
कौन्तेय सदोषमपि न त्यजेत् — Don't give up the work to which you were
born, even if it be attended with defects." If they are taught in this
way, why should they give up their respective callings? Rather they will
apply their knowledge to the better performance of the work to which
they have been born. A number of geniuses are sure to arise from among
them in the course of time. You (the higher classes) will take these
into your own fold. The Brahmins acknowledged the valiant king
Vishvâmitra as a Brahmin, and think how grateful the whole Kshatriya
race became to the Brahmins for this act! By such sympathy and
co-operation even birds and beasts become one's own — not to speak of
men!

Disciple: Sir, what you say is true, but there yet seems to be a wide
gulf between the higher and lower classes. To bring the higher classes
to sympathise with the lower seems to be a difficult affair in India.

Swamiji: But without that there is no well-being for your upper classes.
You will be destroyed by internecine quarrels and fights — which you
have been having so long. When the masses will wake up, they will come
to understand your oppression of them, and by a puff of their mouth you
will be entirely blown away! It is they who have introduced civilisation
amongst you; and it is they who will then pull it down. Think how at the
hands of the Gauls the mighty ancient Roman civilisation crumbled into
dust! Therefore I say, try to rouse these lower classes from slumber by
imparting learning and culture to them. When they will awaken — and
awaken one day they must — they also will not forget your good services
to them and will remain grateful to you.

After such conversation Swamiji, addressing the disciple, said: Let
these subjects drop now — come, tell me what you have decided. Do
something, whatever it be. Either go in for some business, or like us
come to the path of real Sannyasa, "आत्मनो मोक्षार्थ जगद्धिताय च — For
one's own liberation and for the good of the world." The latter path is
of course the best way there is. What good will it do to be a worthless
householder? You have understood that everything in life is transitory:
"नलिनीदलगतजलमतितरलम् तद्वज्जीवनमतिशयचपलम् — Life is as unstable as the
water on the lotus leaf." Therefore if you have the enthusiasm for
acquiring this knowledge of the Atman, do not wait any more but come
forward immediately. "यदहरेव विरजेत् तदहरेव प्रव्रजेत् — The very day
that you feel dispassion for the world, that very day renounce and take
to Sannyasa" (Jâbâlopanishad, 4). Sacrifice your life for the good of
others and go round to the doors of people carrying this message of
fearlessness "उत्तिष्ठत जाग्रत प्राप्य वरान् निबोधत — Arise, awake, and
stop not till the goal is reached."

</div>
