---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_vii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_ix.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

VIII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_20e7_08.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Calcutta*. Year: *1898*.\]

Swamiji accompanied by Sister Nivedita, Swami Yogananda, and others has
come to visit the Zoological Gardens at Alipur in the afternoon. Rai
Rambrahma Sanyal Bahadur, Superintendent of the Gardens, cordially
received them and took them round the Gardens. Swamiji, as he went on
seeing the various species of animals, casually referred to the
Darwinian theory of the gradual evolution of animals. The disciple
remembers how, entering the room for snakes, he pointed to a huge python
with circular rings on its body, with the remark: "From this the
tortoise has evolved in course of time. That very snake, by remaining
stationary at one spot for a long time, has gradually turned
hard-backed." He further said in fun to the disciple, "You eat
tortoises, don't you? Darwin holds that it is this snake that has
evolved into the tortoise in the process of time — then you eat snakes
too!" The disciple protested, "Sir, when a thing is metamorphosed into
another thing through evolution, it has no more its former shape and
habits; then how can you say that eating tortoise means eating snakes
also?"

This answer created laughter among the party. After seeing some other
things, Swamiji went to Rambrahma Babu's quarters in the Gardens, where
he took tea, and others also did the same. Finding that the disciples
hesitated to sit at the same table and partake of the sweets and tea
which Sister Nivedita had touched, Swamiji repeatedly urged him to take
them, which he was induced to do, and drinking water himself, he gave
the rest of it to the disciple to drink. After this there was a short
conversation on Darwin's evolution theory.

Rambrahma Babu: What is your opinion of the evolution theory of Darwin
and the causes he has put forward for it?

Swamiji: Taking for granted that Darwin is right, I cannot yet admit
that it is the final conclusion about the causes of evolution.

Rambrahma Babu: Did the ancient scholars of our country discuss this
subject?

Swamiji: The subject has been nicely discussed in the Samkhya
Philosophy. I am of opinion that the conclusion of the ancient Indian
philosophers is the last word on the causes of evolution.

Rambrahma Babu: I shall be glad to hear of it, if it can be explained in
a few words.

Swamiji: You are certainly aware of the laws of struggle for existence,
survival of the fittest, natural selection, and so forth, which have
been held by the Western scholars to be the causes of elevating a lower
species to a higher. But none of these has been advocated as the cause
of that in the system of Patanjali. Patanjali holds that the
transformation of one species into another is effected by the
"in-filling of nature" (प्रकृत्यापूरात्) It is not that this is done by
the constant struggle against obstacles. In my opinion, struggle and
competition sometimes stand in the way of a being's attaining its
perfection. If the evolution of an animal is effected by the destruction
of a thousand others, then one must confess that this evolution is doing
very little good to the world. Taking it for granted that it conduces to
physical well-being, we cannot help admitting that it is a serious
obstacle to spiritual development. According to the philosophers of our
country, every being is a perfect Soul, and the diversity of evolution
and manifestation of nature is simply due to the difference in the
degree of manifestation of this Soul. The moment the obstacles to the
evolution and manifestation of nature are completely removed, the Soul
manifests Itself perfectly. Whatever may happen in the lower strata of
nature's evolutions, in the higher strata at any rate, it is not true
that it is only by constantly struggling against obstacles that one has
to go beyond them. Rather it is observed that there the obstacles give
way and a greater manifestation of the Soul takes place through
education and culture, through concentration and meditation, and above
all through sacrifice. Therefore, to designate the obstacles not as the
effects but as the causes of the Soul-manifestation, and describe them
as aiding this wonderful diversity of nature, is not consonant with
reason. The attempt to remove evil from the world by killing a thousand
evil-doers, only adds to the evil in the world. But if the people can be
made to desist from evil-doing by means of spiritual instruction, there
is no more evil in the world. Now, see how horrible the Western struggle
theory becomes!

Rambrahma Babu was astonished to hear Swamiji's words and said at
length, "India badly needs at the present moment men well versed in the
Eastern and Western philosophies like you. Such men alone are able to
point out the mistakes of the educated people who see only one side of
the shield. I am extremely delighted to hear your original explanation
of the evolution theory."

Shortly after, Swamiji with the party left for Baghbazar and reached
Balaram Bose's house at about 8 p.m. After a short rest, he came to the
drawing-room, where there was a small gathering, all eager to hear of
the conversation at the Zoological Gardens in detail. When Swamiji came
to the room, the disciple, as the spokesman of the meeting, raised that
very topic.

Disciple: Sir, I have not been able to follow all your remarks about the
evolution theory at the Zoo. Will you kindly recapitulate them in simple
words?

Swamiji: Why, which points did you fail to grasp?

Disciple: You have often told us that it is the power to struggle with
the external forces which constitutes the sign of life and the first
step towards improvement. Today you seem to have spoken just the
opposite thing.

Swamiji: Why should I speak differently? It was you who could not follow
me. In the animal kingdom we really see such laws as struggle for
existence, survival of the fittest, etc., evidently at work. Therefore
Darwin's theory seems true to a certain extent. But in the human
kingdom, where there is the manifestation of rationality, we find just
the reverse of those laws. For instance, in those whom we consider
really great men or ideal characters, we scarcely observe any external
struggle. In the animal kingdom instinct prevails; but the more a man
advances, the more he manifests rationality. For this reason, progress
in the rational human kingdom cannot be achieved, like that in the
animal kingdom, by the destruction of others! The highest evolution of
man is effected through sacrifice alone. A man is great among his
fellows in proportion as he can sacrifice for the sake of others, while
in the lower strata of the animal kingdom, that animal is the strongest
which can kill the greatest number of animals. Hence the struggle theory
is not equally applicable to both kingdoms. Man's struggle is in the
mental sphere. A man is greater in proportion as he can control his
mind. When the mind's activities are perfectly at rest, the Atman
manifests Itself. The struggle which we observe in the animal kingdom
for the preservation of the gross body obtains in the human plane of
existence for gaining mastery over the mind or for attaining the state
of balance. Like a living tree and its reflection in the water of a
tank, we find opposite kinds of struggle in the animal and human
kingdoms.

Disciple: Why then do you advocate so much the improvement of our
physique?

Swamiji: Well, do you consider yourselves as men? You have got only a
bit of rationality — that's all. How will you struggle with the mind
unless the physique be strong? Do you deserve to be called men any
longer — the highest evolution in the world? What have you got besides
eating, sleeping, and satisfying the creature-comforts? Thank your stars
that you have not developed into quadrupeds yet! Shri Ramakrishna used
to say, "He is the man who is conscious of his dignity". You are but
standing witnesses to the lowest class of insect-like existence of which
the scripture speaks, that they simply undergo the round of births and
deaths without being allowed to go to any of the higher spheres! You are
simply living a life of jealousy among yourselves and are objects of
hatred in the eyes of the foreigner. You are animals, therefore I
recommend you to struggle. Leave aside theories and all that. Just
reflect calmly on your own everyday acts and dealings with others and
find out whether you are not a species of beings intermediate between
the animal and human planes of existence! First build up your own
physique. Then only you can get control over the mind. नायमात्मा बलहीनेन
लभ्यः — This Self is not to be attained by the weak" (Katha Upanishad,
I.ii.23).

Disciple: But, sir, the commentator (Shankara) has interpreted the word
"weak" to mean "devoid of Brahmacharya or continence".

Swamiji: Let him. I say, "The physically weak are unfit for the
realisation of the Self."

Disciple: But many dull-headed persons also have strong bodies.

Swamiji: If you can take the pains to give them good ideas once, they
will be able to work them out sooner than physically unfit people. Don't
you find that in a weak physique it is difficult to control the
sex-appetite or anger? Lean people are quickly incensed and are quickly
overcome by the sex-instinct.

Disciple: But we find exceptions to the rule also.

Swamiji: Who denies it? Once a person gets control over the mind, it
matters little whether the body remains strong or becomes emaciated. The
gist of the thing is that unless one has a good physique one can never
aspire to Self-realisation. Shri Ramakrishna used to say, "One fails to
attain realisation if there be but a slight defect in the body".

Finding that Swamiji had grown excited, the disciple did not dare to
push the topic further, but remained quiet accepting Swamiji's view.
Shortly after, Swamiji, addressing those present, said, "By the bye,
have you heard that this 'priest' has today taken food which was touched
by Nivedita? That he took the sweets touched by her did not matter so
much, but — here he addressed the disciple — "how did you drink the
water she had touched?"

Disciple: But it was you, sir, who ordered me to do so. Under the Guru's
orders I can do anything. I was unwilling to drink the water though. But
you drank it and I had to take it as Prasâda.

Swamiji: Well, your caste is gone for ever. Now nobody will respect you
as a Brahmin of the priest class.

Disciple: I don't care if they do not. I can take the rice from the
house of a Pariah if you order me to.

These words set Swamiji and all those present in a roar of laughter.

The conversation lasted till it was past midnight, when the disciple
came back to his lodging, only to find it bolted. So he had to pass the
night out of doors.

The wheel of Time has rolled on in its unrelenting course, and Swamiji,
Swami Yogananda, and Sister Nivedita are now no more on earth. Only the
sacred memory of their lives remains — and the disciple considers
himself blessed to be able to record, in ever so meagre a way, these
reminiscences.

</div>
