---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_xi.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xiii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_28e7_12.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The Belur Math* (*under construction*). Year: beginning of
*1899*.\]

Today Swamiji is walking round the new Math grounds in the afternoon in
company with the disciple. Standing at a little distance off the Bael
tree Swamiji took to singing slowly a Bengali song: (This is one of the
songs sung in the homes of Bengal on the eve of Durgâ Pujâ.) "O
Himalaya, Ganesh is auspicious to me" etc., ending with the line — "And
many Dandis (Sannyasins) and Yogis with matted hair will also come."
While singing the song Swamiji repeated this line to the disciple and
said, "Do you understand? In course of time many Sadhus and Sannyasins
will come here." Saying this he sat under the tree and remarked, "The
ground under the Bilva tree is very holy. Meditating here quickly brings
about an awakening of the religious instinct. Shri Ramakrishna used to
say so."

Disciple: Sir, those who are devoted to the discrimination between the
Self and not-Self — have they any need to consider the auspiciousness of
place, time, and so forth?

Swamiji: Those who are established in the knowledge of the Atman have no
need for such discrimination, but that state is not attained off-hand.
It comes as the result of long practice. Therefore in the beginning one
has to take the help of external aids and learn to stand on one's own
legs. Later on, when one is established in the knowledge of the Atman,
there is no more need for any external aid.

The various methods of spiritual practice that have been laid down in
the scriptures are all for the attainment of the knowledge of the Atman.
Of course these practices vary according to the qualifications of
different aspirants. But they also are a kind of work, and so long as
there is work, the Atman is not discovered. The obstacles to the
manifestation of the Atman are overcome by practices as laid down in the
scriptures; but work has no power of directly manifesting the Atman, it
is only effective in removing some veils that cover knowledge. Then the
Atman manifests by Its own effulgence. Do you see? Therefore does your
commentator (Shankara) say, "In our knowledge of Brahman, there cannot
be the least touch of work."

Disciple: But, sir, since the obstacles to Self-manifestation are not
overcome without the performance of work in some form or other,
therefore indirectly work stands as a means to knowledge.

Swamiji: From the standpoint of the causal chain, it so appears *prima
facie*. Taking up this view it is stated in the Purva-Mimâmsâ that work
for a definite end infallibly produces a definite result. But the vision
of the Atman which is Absolute is not to be compassed by means of work.
For the rule with regard to a seeker of the Atman is that he should
undergo spiritual practice, but have no eye to its results. It follows
thence that these practices are simply the cause of the purification of
the aspirant's mind. For if the Atman could be directly realised as a
result of these practices, then scriptures would not have enjoined on
the aspirant to give up the results of work. So it is with a view to
combating the Purva-Mimamsa doctrine of work with motive producing
results, that the philosophy of work without motive has been set forth
in the Gita. Do you see?

Disciple: But, sir, if one has to renounce the fruits of work, why
should one be induced to undertake work which is always troublesome?

Swamiji: In this human life, one cannot help doing some kind of work
always. When man has perforce to do some work, Karma-Yoga enjoins on him
to do it in such a way as will bring freedom through the realisation of
the Atman. As to your objection that none will be induced to work — the
answer is, that whatever work you do has some motive behind it; but when
by the long performance of work, one notices that one work merely leads
to another, through a round of births and rebirths, then the awakened
discrimination of man naturally begins to question itself, "Where is the
end to this interminable chain of work?" It is then that he appreciates
the full import of the words of the Lord in the Gita: "Inscrutable is
the course of work. "Therefore when the aspirant finds that work with
motive brings no happiness, then he renounces action. But man is so
constituted that to him the performance of work is a necessity, so what
work should he take up? He takes up some unselfish work, but gives up
all desire for its fruits. For he has known then that in those fruits of
work lie countless seeds of future births and deaths. Therefore the
knower of Brahman renounces all actions. Although to outward appearances
he engages himself in some work, he has no attachment to it. Such men
have been described in the scriptures as Karma-Yogins.

Disciple: Is then the work without motive of the unselfish knower of
Brahman like the activities of a lunatic?

Swamiji: Why so? Giving up the fruits of work means not to perform work
for the good of one's own body or mind. The knower of Brahman never
seeks his own happiness. But what is there to prevent him from doing
work for the welfare of others? Whatever work he does without attachment
for its fruits brings only good to the world — it is all "for the good
of the many, for the happiness of the many". Shri Ramakrishna used to
say, "They never take a false step". Haven't you read in the
*Uttara-Râma-Charita*, "ऋषिणाम् पुनराद्यानां वाचमर्थोऽनुधावति — The
words of the ancient Rishis have always some meaning, they are never
false?" When the mind is merged in the Atman by the suppression of all
modifications, it produces "a dispassion for the enjoyment of fruits of
work here or hereafter"; there remains no desire in the mind for any
enjoyment here, or, after death, in any heavenly sphere. There is no
action and interaction of desires in the mind. But when the mind
descends from the superconscious state into the world of "I and mine",
then by the momentum of previous work or habit, or Samskaras
(impressions), the functions of the body go on as before. The mind then
is generally in the superconscious state; eating and other functions of
the body are done from mere necessity, and the body-consciousness is
very much attenuated. Whatever work is done after reaching this
transcendental state is done rightly; it conduces to the real well-being
of men and the world; for then the mind of the doer is not contaminated
by selfishness or calculation of personal gain or loss. The Lord has
created this wonderful universe, remaining always in the realm of
superconsciousness; therefore there is nothing imperfect in this world.
So I was saying that the actions which the knower of the Atman does
without attachment for fruits are never imperfect, but they conduce to
the real well-being of men and the world.

Disciple: Sir, you said just now that knowledge and work are
contradictory, that in the supreme knowledge there is no room at all for
work, or in other words, that by means of work the realisation of
Brahman cannot be attained. Why then do you now and then speak words
calculated to awaken great Rajas (activity)? You were telling me the
other day, "Work, work, work — there is no other way."

Swamiji: Going round the whole world, I find that people of this country
are immersed in great Tamas (inactivity), compared with people of other
countries. On the outside, there is a simulation of the Sâttvika (calm
and balanced) state, but inside, downright inertness like that of stocks
and stones — what work will be done in the world by such people? How
long can such an inactive, lazy, and sensual people live in the world?
First travel in Western countries, then contradict my words. How much of
enterprise and devotion to work, how much enthusiasm and manifestation
of Rajas are there in the lives of the Western people! While, in your
own country, it is as if the blood has become congealed in the heart, so
that it cannot circulate in the veins — as if paralysis has overtaken
the body and it has become languid. So my idea is first to make the
people active by developing their Rajas, and thus make them fit for the
struggle for existence. With no strength in the body, no enthusiasm at
heart, and no originality in the brain, what will they do — these lumps
of dead matter! By stimulating them I want to bring life into them — to
this I have dedicated my life. I will rouse them through the infallible
power of Vedic Mantras. I am born to proclaim to them that fearless
message — "Arise! Awake!" Be you my helpers in this work! Go from
village to village, from one portion of the country to another, and
preach this message of fearlessness to all, from the Brahmin to the
Chandâla. Tell each and all that infinite power resides within them,
that they are sharers of immortal Bliss. Thus rouse up the Rajas within
them — make them fit for the struggle for existence, and then speak to
them about salvation. First make the people of the country stand on
their legs by rousing their inner power, first let them learn to have
good food and clothes and plenty of enjoyment — then tell them how to be
free from this bondage of enjoyment.

Laziness, meanness, and hypocrisy have covered the whole length and
breadth of the country. Can an intelligent man look on all this and
remain quiet? Does it not bring tears to the eyes? Madras, Bombay,
Punjab, Bengal — whichever way I look, I see no signs of life. You are
thinking yourselves highly educated. What nonsense have you learnt?
Getting by heart the thoughts of others in a foreign language, and
stuffing your brain with them and taking some university degrees, you
consider yourselves educated! Fie upon you! Is this education? What is
the goal of your education? Either a clerkship, or being a roguish
lawyer, or at the most a Deputy Magistracy, which is another form of
clerkship — isn't that all? Open your eyes and see what a piteous cry
for food is rising in the land of Bharata, proverbial for its wealth!
Will your education fulfil this want? Never. With the help of Western
science set yourselves to dig the earth and produce food-stuffs — not by
means of mean servitude of others — but by discovering new avenues to
production, by your own exertions aided by Western science. Therefore I
teach the people of this country to be full of activities, so as to be
able to produce food and clothing for themselves. For want of food and
clothing and plunged in anxiety for it, the country has come to ruin —
what are you doing to remedy this? Throw aside your scriptures in the
Ganga and teach the people first the means of procuring their food and
clothing, and then you will find time to read to them the scriptures. If
their material wants are not removed by the rousing of intense activity,
none will listen to words of spirituality. Therefore I say, first rouse
the inherent power of the Atman within you, then, rousing the faith of
the general people in that power as much as you can, teach them first of
all to make provision for food, and then teach them religion. There is
no time to sit idle — who knows when death will overtake one?

While saying these words, a mingled expression of remorse, sorrow,
compassion, and power shone on his face. Looking at his majestic
appearance, the disciple was awed into silence. A little while
afterwards Swamiji said again, "That activity and self-reliance must
come in the people of the country in time — I see it clearly. There is
no escape. The intelligent man can distinctly see the vision of the next
three Yugas (ages) ahead. Ever since the advent of Shri Ramakrishna the
eastern horizon has been aglow with the dawning rays of the sun which in
course of time will illumine the country with the splendour of the
midday sun."

</div>
