---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_xii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xiv.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XIII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_29e7_13.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The Belur Math. Beginning of 1899*.\]

The present Math buildings are almost complete now. Swamiji is not in
good health; therefore doctors have advised him to go out on a boat in
the mornings and evenings on the Ganga.

Today is Sunday. The disciple is sitting in Swamiji's room and
conversing with him. About this time Swamiji framed certain rules for
the guidance of the Sannyasins and Brahmacharins of the Math, the object
of which was to keep them from indiscriminate mixing with worldly
people. The conversation turned on this topic.

Swamiji: Nowadays I feel a peculiar smell of lax self-control in the
dress and clothes of worldly people; therefore I have made it a rule in
the Math that householders should not sit or lie on the beds of Sadhus.
Formerly I used to read in the Shastras that such a smell is felt, and
therefore Sannyasins cannot bear the smell of householders. Now I see it
is true. By strictly observing the rules that have been framed, the
Brahmacharins will in time grow into genuine Sannyasins. When they are
established in the ideal of Sannyasa, they will be able to mix on an
equal footing with worldly men without any harm. But now if they are not
kept within the barriers of strict rules, they will all go wrong. In
order to attain to ideal Brahmacharya one has in the beginning to
observe strict rules regarding chastity. Not only should one keep
oneself strictly aloof from the least association with the opposite sex,
but also give up the company of married people even.

The disciple who was a householder was awed at these words of Swamiji,
felt dejected that he would not be able to associate freely as before
with the Sadhus of the Math and said, "Sir, I feel more intimacy with
the Math and its inmates than with my own family. As if they are known
to me from a long long time. The unbounded freedom that I enjoy in the
Math, I feel nowhere else in the world."

Swamiji: All those who are pure in spirit will feel like that here.
Those who do not feel so must be taken as not belonging to this Math and
its ideals. That is the reason why many people come here out of mere
sensation-mongering and then run away. Those who are devoid of
continence and are running after money day and night will never be able
to appreciate the ideals of the Math, nor regard the Math people as
their own. The Sannyasins of this Math are not like those of old,
ash-besmeared, with matted hair and iron tongs in their hands, and
curing disease by medicinal titbits; therefore seeing the contrast,
people cannot appreciate them. The ways, movements and ideas of our
Master were all cast in a new mould, so we are also of a new type.
Sometimes dressed like gentlemen, we are engaged in lecturing; at other
times, throwing all aside, with " Hara, Hara, Vyom Vyom " on the lips,
ash-clad, we are immersed in meditation and austerities in mountains and
forests.

Now it won't do to merely quote the authority of our ancient books. The
tidal wave of Western civilisation is now rushing over the length and
breadth of the country. It won't do now simply to sit in meditation on
mountain tops without realising in the least its usefulness. Now is
wanted — as said in the Gita by the Lord — intense Karma-Yoga, with
unbounded courage and indomitable strength in the heart. Then only will
the people of the country be roused, otherwise they will continue to be
as much in the dark as you are.

The day is nearly ended. Swamiji came downstairs, dressed for the
boating excursion on the Ganga. Swamiji, accompanied by the disciple and
two others, boarded the boat, which passed the Dakshineswar temple and
reached Panihati where it was anchored below the garden-house of Babu
Govinda Kumar Chaudhury. It has once been proposed to rent this house
for the use of the Math. Swamiji descended from the boat, went round the
house and the garden and looking over the place minutely said, "The
garden is nice but is at a great distance from Calcutta. The devotees of
Shri Ramakrishna would have been put to trouble to walk such a long
distance from Calcutta. It is fortunate that the Math has not been
established here." The boat then returned to the Math amid the
enveloping darkness.

</div>
