---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_xiv.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xvi.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XV  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_32e7_15.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur Math*. Year: *1899*.\]

Swamiji is now in very good health. The disciple has come to the Math on
a Sunday morning. After visiting Swamiji he has come downstairs and is
discussing the Vedantic scriptures with Swami Nirmalananda. At this
moment Swamiji himself came downstairs and addressing the disciple,
said, "What were you discussing with Nirmalananda?"

Disciple: Sir, he was saying, "The Brahman of the Vedanta is only known
to you and your Swamiji. We on the contrary know that "कृष्णस्तु भगवान्
स्वयं — Shri Krishna is the Lord Himself. "

Swamiji: What did you say?

Disciple: I said that the Atman is the one Truth, and that Krishna was
merely a person who had realised this Atman. Swami Nirmalananda is at
heart a believer in the Advaita Vedanta, but outwardly he takes up the
dualistic side. His first idea seems to be to moot the personal aspect
of the Ishvara and then by a gradual process of reasoning to strengthen
the foundations of Vedanta. But as soon as he calls me a "Vaishnava" I
forget his real intention and begin a heated discussion with him.

Swamiji: He loves you and so enjoys the fun of teasing you. But why
should you be upset by his words? You will also answer, "You, sir, are
an atheist, a believer in Nihility."

Disciple: Sir, is there any such statement in the Upanishads that
Ishvara is an all-powerful Person? But people generally believe in such
an Ishvara.

Swamiji: The highest principle, the Lord of all, cannot be a Person. The
Jiva is an individual and the sum total of all Jivas is the Ishvara. In
the Jiva, Avidyâ, or nescience, is predominant, but Ishvara controls
Maya composed of Avidya and Vidyâ and independently projects this world
of moving and immovable things out of Himself. But Brahman transcends
both the individual and collective aspects, the Jiva and Ishvara. In
Brahman there is no part. It is for the sake of easy comprehension that
parts have been imagined in It. That part of Brahman in which there is
the superimposition of creation, maintenance and dissolution of the
universe has been spoken of as Ishvara in the scriptures, while the
other unchangeable portion, with reference to which there is no thought
of duality, is indicated as Brahman. But do not on that account think
that Brahman is a distinct and separate substance from the Jivas and the
universe. The Qualified Monists hold that it is Brahman that has
transformed Itself into Jivas and the universe. The Advaitins on the
contrary maintain that Jivas and the universe have been merely
superimposed on Brahman. But in reality there has been no modification
in Brahman. The Advaitin says that the universe consists only of name
and form. It endures only so long as there are name and form. When
through meditation and other practices name and form are dissolved, then
only the transcendent Brahman remains. Then the separate reality of
Jivas and the universe is felt no longer. Then it is realised that one
is the Eternal Pure Essence of Intelligence, or Brahman. The real nature
of the Jiva is Brahman. When the veil of name and form vanishes through
meditation etc., then that idea is simply realised. This is the
substance of pure Advaita. The Vedas, the Vedanta and all other
scriptures only explain this idea in different ways.

Disciple: How then is it true that Ishvara is an almighty Person?

Swamiji: Man is man in so far as he is qualified by the limiting adjunct
of mind. Through the mind he has to understand and grasp everything, and
therefore whatever he thinks must be limited by the mind. Hence it is
the natural tendency of man to argue, from the analogy of his own
personality, the personality of Ishvara (God). Man can only think of his
ideal as a human being. When buffeted by sorrow in this world of disease
and death he is driven to desperation and helplessness, then he seeks
refuge with someone, relying on whom he may feel safe. But where is that
refuge to be found? The omnipresent Atman which depends on nothing else
to support It is the only Refuge. At first man does not find that. When
discrimination and dispassion arise in the course of meditation and
spiritual practices, he comes to know it. But in whatever way he may
progress on the path of spirituality, everyone is unconsciously
awakening Brahman within him. But the means may be different in
different cases. Those who have faith in the Personal God have to
undergo spiritual practices holding on to that idea. If there is
sincerity, through that will come the awakening of the lion of Brahman
within. The knowledge of Brahman is the one goal of all beings but the
various ideas are the various paths to it. Although the real nature of
the Jiva is Brahman, still as he has identification with the qualifying
adjunct of the mind, he suffers from all sorts of doubts and
difficulties, pleasure and pain. But everyone from Brahmâ down to a
blade of grass is advancing towards the realisation of his real nature.
And none can escape the round of births and deaths until he realises his
identity with Brahman. Getting the human birth, when the desire for
freedom becomes very strong, and along with it comes the grace of a
person of realisation, then man's desire for Self-knowledge becomes
intensified. Otherwise the mind of men given to lust and greed never
inclines that way. How should the desire to know Brahman arise in one
who has the hankering in his mind for the pleasures of family life, for
wealth and for fame? He who is prepared to renounce all, who amid the
strong current of the duality of good and evil, happiness and misery, is
calm, steady, balanced, and awake to his Ideal, alone endeavours to
attain to Self-knowledge. He alone by the might of his own power tears
asunder the net of the world. "निर्गच्छति जगज्जालात् पिञ्जरादिव केशरी —
Breaking the barriers of Maya, he emerges like a mighty lion."

Disciple: Well then, is it true that without Sannyasa, there can be no
knowledge of Brahman?

Swamiji: That is true, a thousand times. One must have both internal and
external Sannyasa — renunciation in spirit as also formal renunciation.
Shankaracharya, in commenting on the Upanishadic text, "Neither by Tapas
(spiritual practice) devoid of the necessary insignia"(Mundaka
Upanishad, III. ii. 4.), he said that by practising Sadhana without the
external badge of Sannyasa (the Gerua-robe, the staff, Kamandalu, etc.),
Brahman, which is difficult to attain, is not realised. Without
dispassion for the world, without renunciation, without giving up the
desire for enjoyment, absolutely nothing can be accomplished in the
spiritual life. "It is not like a sweetmeat in the hands of a child
which you can snatch by a trick." (Song of Râmaprâsad.)

Disciple: But, sir, in the course of spiritual practices, that
renunciation may come.

Swamiji: Let those to whom it will come gradually have it that way. But
why should you sit and wait for that? At once begin to dig the channel
which will bring the waters of spirituality to your life. Shri
Ramakrishna used to deprecate lukewarmness in spiritual attainments as,
for instance, saying that religion would come gradually, and that there
was no hurry for it. When one is thirsty, can one sit idle? Does he not
run about for water? Because your thirst for spirituality has not come,
therefore you are sitting idly. The desire for knowledge has not grown
strong, therefore you are satisfied with the little pleasures of family
life.

Disciple: Really I do not understand why I don't get that idea of
renouncing everything. Do make some way for that, please.

Swamiji: The end and the means are all in your hands. I can only
stimulate them. You have read so many scriptures and are serving and
associating with such Sadhus who have known Brahman; if even this does
not bring the idea of renunciation, then your life is in vain. But it
will not be altogether vain; the effects of this will manifest in some
way or other in time.

The disciple was much dejected and again said to Swamiji: "Sir, I have
come under your refuge, do open the path of Mukti for me — that I may
realise the Truth in this body."

Swamiji: What fear is there? Always discriminate — your body, your
house, these Jivas and the world are all absolutely unreal like a dream.
Always think that this body is only an inert instrument. And the
self-contained Purusha within is your real nature. The adjunct of mind
is His first and subtle covering, then, there is this body which is His
gross, outer covering. The indivisible changeless, self-effulgent
Purusha is lying hidden under these delusive veils, therefore your real
nature is unknown to you. The direction of the mind which always runs
after the senses has to be turned within. The mind has to be killed. The
body is but gross — it dies and dissolves into the five elements. But
the bundle of mental impressions, which is the mind, does not die soon.
It remains for some time in seed-form and then sprouts and grows in the
form of a tree — it takes on another physical body and goes the round of
birth and death, until Self-knowledge arises. Therefore I say, by
meditation and concentration and by the power of philosophical
discrimination plunge this mind in the Ocean of
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. When the mind dies, all limiting
adjuncts vanish and you are established in Brahman.

Disciple: Sir, it is so difficult to direct this uncontrolled mind
towards Brahman.

Swamiji: Is there anything difficult for the hero? Only men of faint
hearts speak so. "वीराणामेव करतलगता मुक्तिः न पुनः कापुरुषाणाम् — Mukti
is easy of attainment only to the hero — but not to cowards." Says the
Gita (VI. 35), "अभ्यासेन तु कौन्तेय वैराग्येण च गृह्यते — By
renunciation and by practice is the mind brought under control, O
Arjuna." The Chitta or mind-stuff is like a transparent lake, and the
waves which rise in it by the impact of sense-impressions constitute
Manas or the mind. Therefore the mind consists of a succession of
thought-waves. From these mental waves arises desire. Then that desire
transforms itself into will and works through its gross instrument, the
body. Again, as work is endless, so its fruits also are endless. Hence
the mind is always being tossed by countless myriads of waves — the
fruits of work. This mind has to be divested of all modifications
(Vrittis) and reconverted into the transparent lake, so that there
remains not a single wave of modification in it. Then will Brahman
manifest Itself. The scriptures give a glimpse of this state in such
passages as: "Then all the knots of the heart are cut asunder", etc. Do
you understand?

Disciple: Yes, sir, but meditation must base itself on some object?

Swamiji: You yourself will be the object of your meditation. Think and
meditate that you are the omnipresent Atman. "I am neither the body, nor
the mind, nor the Buddhi (determinative faculty), neither the gross nor
the subtle body" — by this process of elimination, immerse your mind in
the transcendent knowledge which is your real nature. Kill the mind by
thus plunging it repeatedly in this. Then only you will realise the
Essence of Intelligence, or be established in your real nature. Knower
and known, meditator and the object meditated upon will then become one,
and the cessation of all phenomenal superimpositions will follow. This
is styled in the Shâstras as the transcendence of the triad or relative
knowledge (Triputibheda). There is no relative or conditioned knowledge
in this state. When the Atman is the only knower, by what means can you
possibly know It? The Atman is Knowledge, the Atman is Intelligence, the
Atman is Sachchidananda. It is through the inscrutable power of Maya,
which cannot be indicated as either existent or non-existent, that the
relative consciousness has come upon the Jiva who is none other than
Brahman. This is generally known as the conscious state. And the state
in which this duality of relative existence becomes one in the pure
Brahman is called in the scriptures the superconscious state and
described in such words as, "स्तिमितसलिलराशिप्रख्यमाख्याविहीनम् — It is
like an ocean perfectly at rest and without a name" (*Vivekachudâmani*,
410).

Swamiji spoke these words as if from the profound depths of his
realisation of Brahman.

Swamiji: All philosophy and scriptures have come from the plane of
relative knowledge of subject and object. But no thought or language of
the human mind can fully express the Reality which lies beyond the plane
of relative Knowledge! Science, philosophy, etc. are only partial
truths. So they can never be the adequate channels of expression for the
transcendent Reality. Hence viewed from the transcendent standpoint,
everything appears to be unreal — religious creeds, and works, I and
thou, and the universe — everything is unreal! Then only it is
perceived: "I am the only reality; I am the all-pervading Atman, and I
am the proof of my own existence." Where is the room for a separate
proof to establish the reality of my existence? I am, as the scriptures
say, "नित्यमस्मत्प्रसिद्धम् — Always known to myself as the eternal
subject" (*Vivekachudâmani*, 409). I have seen that state, realised it.
You also see and realise it and preach this truth of Brahman to all.
Then only will you attain to peace.

While speaking these words, Swamiji's face wore a serious expression and
he was lost in thought. After some time he continued: "Realise in your
own life this knowledge of Brahman which comprehends all theories and is
the rationale of all truths, and preach it to the world. This will
conduce to your own good and the good of others as well. I have told you
today the essence of all truths; there is nothing higher than this."

Disciple: Sir, now you are speaking of Jnana; but sometimes you proclaim
the superiority of Bhakti, sometimes of Karma, and sometimes of Yoga.
This confuses our understanding.

Swamiji: Well, the truth is this. The knowledge of Brahman is the
ultimate goal — the highest destiny of man. But man cannot remain
absorbed in Brahman all the time. When he comes out of it, he must have
something to engage himself. At that time he should do such work as will
contribute to the real well-being of people. Therefore do I urge you in
the service of Jivas in a spirit of oneness. But, my son, such are the
intricacies of work, that even great saints are caught in them and
become attached. Therefore work has to be done without any desire for
results. This is the teaching of the Gita. But know that in the
knowledge of Brahman there is no touch of any relation to work. Good
works, at the most, purify the mind. Therefore has the commentator
Shankara so sharply criticised the doctrine of the combination of Jnana
and Karma. Some attain to the knowledge of Brahman by the means of
unselfish work. This is also a means, but the end is the realisation of
Brahman. Know this thoroughly that the goal of the path of
discrimination and of all other modes of practice is the realisation of
Brahman.

Disciple: Now, sir, please tell me about the utility of Raja-Yoga and
Bhakti-Yoga.

Swamiji: Striving in these paths also some attain to the realisation of
Brahman. The path of Bhakti or devotion of God is a slow process, but is
easy of practice. In the path of Yoga there are many obstacles; perhaps
the mind runs after psychic powers and thus draws you away from
attaining your real nature. Only the path of Jnana is of quick fruition
and the rationale of all other creeds; hence it is equally esteemed in
all countries and all ages. But even in the path of discrimination there
is the chance of the mind getting stuck in the interminable net of vain
argumentation. Therefore along with it, meditation should be practised.
By means of discrimination and meditation, the goal or Brahman has to be
reached. One is sure to reach the goal by practising in this way. This,
in my opinion, is the easy path ensuring quick success.

Disciple: Now please tell me something about the doctrine of Incarnation
of God.

Swamiji: You want to master everything in a day, it seems!

Disciple: Sir, if the doubts and difficulties of the mind be solved in
one day, then I shall not have to trouble you time and again.

Swamiji: Those by whose grace the knowledge of Atman, which is extolled
so much in the scriptures, is attained in a minute are the moving
Tirthas (seats of holiness) — the Incarnations. From their very birth
they are knowers of Brahman, and between Brahman and the knower of
Brahman there is not the least difference. "ब्रह्म वेद ब्रह्मैव भवति —
He who knows the Brahman becomes the Brahman" (Mundaka, III. ii. 9). The
Atman cannot be known by the mind for It is Itself the Knower — this I
have already said. Therefore man's relative knowledge reached up to the
Avataras — those who are always established in the Atman. The highest
ideal of Ishvara which the human mind can grasp is the Avatara. Beyond
this there is no relative knowledge. Such knowers of Brahman are rarely
born in the world. And very few people can understand them. They alone
are the proof of the truths of the scriptures — the towers of light in
the ocean of the world. By the company of such Avataras and by their
grace, the darkness of the mind disappears in a trice and realisation
flashes immediately in the heart. Why or by what process it comes cannot
be ascertained. But it does come. I have seen it happen like that. Shri
Krishna spoke the Gita, establishing Himself in the Atman. Those
passages of the Gita where He speaks with the word "I", invariably
indicate the Atman: "Take refuge in Me alone" means, "Be established in
the Atman". This knowledge of the Atman is the highest aim of the Gita.
The references to Yoga etc. are but incidental to this realisation of
the Atman. Those who have not this knowledge of the Atman are
"suicides". "They kill themselves by the clinging to the unreal"; they
lose their life in the noose of sense-pleasures. You are also men, and
can't you ignore this trash of sensual enjoyment that won't last for two
days? Should you also swell the ranks of those who are born and die in
utter ignorance? Accept the "beneficial" and discard the "pleasant".
Speak of this Atman to all, even to the lowest. By continued speaking
your own intelligence also will clear up. And always repeat the great
Mantras — "तत्वमसि — Thou art That, "सोऽहमस्मि — I am That", "सर्वं
खल्विदं ब्रह्म — All this is verily Brahman" — and have the courage of a
lion in the heart. What is there to fear? Fear is death — fear is the
greatest sin. The human soul, represented by Arjuna, was touched with
fear. Therefore Bhagavân Shri Krishna, established in the Atman, spoke
to him the teachings of the Gita. Still his fear would not leave him.
Later, when Arjuna saw the Universal Form of the Lord, and became
established in the Atman, then with all bondages of Karma burnt by the
fire of knowledge, he fought the battle.

Disciple: Sir, can a man do work even after realisation?

Swamiji: After realisation, what is ordinarily called work does not
persist. It changes its character. The work which the Jnani does only
conduces to the well-being of the world. Whatever a man of realisation
says or does contributes to the welfare of all. We have observed Shri
Ramakrishna; he was, as it were, "देहस्थोऽपि न देहस्थः — In the body,
but not of it!" About the motive of the actions of such personages only
this can be said: "लोकवत्तु लीलाकैवल्यम् — Everything they do like men,
simply by way of sport" (*Brahma-Sutras*, II. i. 33).

</div>
