---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_xv.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xvii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XVI  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_33e7_16.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur Math*. Year: *1901*.\]

The disciple has come to the Math today accompanied by Shri Ranadaprasad
Das Gupta, the founder and professor of the Jubilee Art Academy,
Calcutta. Ranada Babu is an expert artist, a learned man and an admirer
of Swamiji. After the exchange of courtesies Swamiji began to talk with
Ranada Babu on various topics relating to art.

Swamiji: I had the opportunity of seeing the beauties of art of nearly
every civilised country in the world, but I saw nothing like the
development of art which took place in our country during the Buddhistic
period. During the régime of the Mogul Emperors also, there was a marked
development of art — and the Taj and the Jumma Masjid etc. are standing
monuments of that culture.

Art has its origin in the expression of some idea in whatever man
produces. Where there is no expression of idea, however much there may
be a display of colours and so on, it cannot be styled as true art. Even
the articles of everyday use, such as water vessels, or cups and
saucers, should be used to express an idea. In the Paris Exhibition I
saw a wonderful figure carved in marble. In explanation of the figure,
the following words were inscribed underneath: Art unveiling Nature.
That is how art sees the inner beauty of nature by drawing away with its
own hands the covering veils. The work has been so designed as to
indicate that the beauty of nature has not yet become fully unveiled;
but the artist is fascinated, as it were, with the beauty of the little
that has become manifest. One cannot refrain from praising the sculptor
who has tried to express this exquisite idea. You should also try to
produce something original like this.

Ranada Babu: Yes, I also have the desire to do some original modelling
at leisure. But I meet with no encouragement in this country; it is a
poor country and there is want of appreciation.

Swamiji: If you can with your whole heart produce one real thing, if you
can rightly express a single idea in art, it must win appreciation in
course of time. A real thing never suffers from want of appreciation in
this world. It is also heard that some artists have gained appreciation
for their works a thousand years after their death!

Ranada Babu: That is true. But we have become so worthless that we
haven't got the courage to spend a lot of energy to no purpose. Through
these five years' struggle I have succeeded to some extent. Bless me
that my efforts be not in vain.

Swamiji: If you set to work in right earnest, then you are sure to be
successful. Whoever works at a thing heart and soul not only achieves
success in it, but through his absorption in that he also realises the
supreme Truth — Brahman. Whoever works at a thing with his whole heart
receives help from God.

Ranada Babu: What difference did you find between the art of the West
and that of India?

Swamiji: It is nearly the same everywhere. Originality is rarely found.
In those countries pictures are painted with the help of models obtained
by photographing various objects. But no sooner does one take the help
of machinery than all originality vanishes — one cannot give expression
to one's ideas. The ancient artists used to evolve original ideas from
their brains and try to express them in their paintings. Now the picture
being a likeness of photographs, the power of originality and the
attempt to develop are getting scarce. But each nation has a
characteristic of its own. In its manners and customs, in its mode of
living, in painting and sculpture is found the expression of that
characteristic idea. For instance, music and dancing in the West are all
pointed in their expression. In dance, they look as if jerking the
limbs; in instrumental music, the sounds prick the ear like a sword
thrust, as it were; so also in vocal music. In this country, on the
other hand, the dance has a rolling wave-like movement, and there is the
same rounded movement in the varieties of pitch in vocal song. So also
in instrumental music. Hence with regard to art also, a different
expression is found among different people. People who are very
materialistic take nature as their ideal, and try to express in art
ideas allied thereto, while the people whose ideal is the transcendent
Reality beyond nature try to express that in art through the powers of
nature. With regard to the former class of people, nature is the primary
basis of art, while with the second class, ideality is the principal
motive of artistic development. Thus, though starting with two different
ideals in art, they have advanced in it each in its own way. Seeing some
paintings in the West you will mistake them for real natural objects.
With respect to this country also, when in ancient times sculpture
attained a high degree of perfection, if you look at a statue of the
period it will make you forget the material world and transport you to a
new ideal world. As in Western countries paintings like those of former
times are not produced now, so in our country also, attempts to give
expression to original ideas in art are no longer seen. For example, the
paintings from your art school have got no expression, as it were. It
would be well if you try to paint the objects of everyday meditation of
the Hindus by giving in them the expression of ancient ideals.

Ranada Babu: I feel much encouraged by your words. I shall try to act up
to your suggestions.

Swamiji: Take, for instance, the figure of Mother Kali. In it there is
the union of the blissful and the terrible aspects. But in none of the
pictures can be seen the true expression of these two aspects. Far from
this, there is no attempt to express adequately even one of these two
aspects! I have tried to put down some ideas of the terrible aspects of
Mother Kali in my English poem, *Kali the Mother*. Can you express those
ideas in a picture?

Ranada Babu: Please let me know them.

Swamiji had the poem brought from the library, and began to read it out
most impressively to Ranada Babu. Ranada Babu silently listened to the
poem, and after a while, as if visualising the figure with his mind's
eye, he turned to Swamiji with a frightened look.

Swamiji: Well, will you be able to express this idea in the picture?

Ranada Babu: Yes, I shall try (Ranada Babu began to paint this picture
the very next day, but it was never finished, nor shown to Swamiji.);
but it turns one's head even to imagine the idea.

Swamiji: After drawing the picture, please show it to me. Then I will
tell you about the points necessary to perfect it.

Then Swamiji had the design which he had sketched for the seal (Printed
on the title page of this volume.) of the Ramakrishna Mission brought,
showed it to Ranada Babu and asked his opinion on it. It depicted a lake
in which a lotus blossomed, and there was a swan, and the whole was
encircled by a serpent. Ranada Babu at first could not catch the
significance of it and asked Swamiji to explain. Swamiji said, "The wavy
waters in the picture are symbolic of Karma; the lotus, of Bhakti; and
the rising-sun, of Jnana. The encircling serpent is indicative of Yoga
and the awakened Kundalini Shakti, while the sun in the picture stands
for the Paramâtman (Supreme Self). Therefore the idea of the picture is
that by the union of Karma, Jnana, Bhakti, and Yoga, the vision of the
Paramatman is obtained."

Ranada Babu kept silent, gratified to hear the *motif* of the picture.
After a while he said, "I wish I could learn about art from you!"

Then Swamiji showed to Ranada Babu a drawing, depicting his plan of the
future Ramakrishna Temple and Math. Then he began to say, "In the
building of this prospective Temple and Math I have the desire to bring
together all that is best in Eastern and Western art. I shall try to
apply in its construction all the ideas about architecture which I have
gathered in my travels all over the world. A big prayer-hall will be
built with roof supported on numerous clustered pillars. In its walls,
hundreds of lotuses will be in full bloom. It must be big enough to
accommodate a thousand persons sitting in meditation. The Ramakrishna
temple and prayer-hall should be built together in such a way that from
a distance it would taken for a representation of the symbol, "Om".
Within the temple there would be a figure of Shri Ramakrishna seated on
a swan. On the two sides of the door will be represented the figure of a
lion and a lamb licking each other's body in love — expressing the idea
that great power and gentleness have become united in love. I have these
ideas in my mind; and if I live long enough I shall carry them out.
Otherwise future generations will try if they can do it by degrees. It
is my opinion that Shri Ramakrishna was born to vivify all branches of
art and culture in this country. Therefore this Math has to be built up
in such a way that religion, work, learning, Jnana, and Bhakti may
spread over the world from this centre. Be you my helpers in this work."

Ranada Babu and the assembled Sannyasins and Brahmacharins listened to
Swamiji in mute wonder. After a while Swamiji resumed, "I am discussing
the subject at length with you as you are yourself an adept in the line.
Now please tell me what you have learnt about the highest ideals of art
as the result of your long study of it."

Ranada Babu: What new thing can I tell you? On the contrary, it is you
who have opened my eyes on this subject. I have never heard such
instructive words on the subject of art in my life. Bless me, sir, that
I can work out the ideas that I have got from you.

Then Swamiji got up from his seat and paced the lawn, remarking to the
disciple, "He is a very spirited young man."

Disciple: Sir, he is astonished to hear your words.

Swamiji, without answering the disciple, began to hum the lines of a
song which Shri Ramakrishna used to sing, "The controlled mind is a
great treasure, the philosopher's stone, which yields whatever you
want."

After walking a while, Swamiji, washing his face, entered his room with
the disciple in company and read the article on Art in the
*Enclyclopaedia Britannica* for some time. After finishing it, he began
to make fun with the disciple, caricaturing the words and accents of
East Bengal.

</div>
