---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_xvi.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xviii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XVII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_34e7_17.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur Math*. Year: *1901*.\]

Swamiji has just returned from East Bengal and Assam a few days back. He
is ill, and his feet have swollen. Coming to the Math, the disciple went
upstairs and prostrated himself at Swamiji's feet. In spite of his ill
health, Swamiji wore his usual smiling face and affectionate look.

Disciple: How are you, Swamiji?

Swamiji: What shall I speak of my health, my son? The body is getting
unfit for work day by day. It has been born on the soil of Bengal, and
some disease or other is always overtaking it. The physique of this
country is not at all good. If you want to do some strenuous work, it
cannot bear the strain. But the few days that the body lasts, I will
work for you. I shall die in harness.

Disciple: If you give up work for some time and take rest, then you will
be all right. Your life means good to the world.

Swamiji: Am I able to sit quiet, my son! Two or three days before Shri
Ramakrishna's passing away, She whom he used to call "Kali" entered this
body. It is She who takes me here and there and makes me work, without
letting me remain quiet or allowing me to look to my personal comforts.

Disciple: Are you speaking metaphorically?

Swamiji: Oh, no; two or three days before his leaving the body, he
called me to his side one day, and asking me to sit before him, looked
steadfastly at me and fell into Samadhi. Then I really felt that a
subtle force like an electric shock was entering my body! In a little
while, I also lost outward consciousness and sat motionless. How long I
stayed in that condition I do not remember; when consciousness returned
I found Shri Ramakrishna shedding tears. On questioning him, he answered
me affectionately, "Today, giving you my all, I have become a beggar.
With this power you are to do many works for the world's good before you
will return." I feel that power is constantly directing me to this or
that work. This body has not been made for remaining idle.

Hearing these words with speechless wonder the disciple thought — who
knows how common people will take these words? Thereupon he changed the
topic and said, "Sir, how did you like our East Bengal?"

Swamiji: I liked it on the whole. The fields, I saw, were rich in crops,
the climate also is good, and the scenery on the hill-side is charming.
The Brahmaputra Valley is incomparable in its beauty. The people of East
Bengal are a little stronger and more active than those of this part. It
may be due to their taking plenty of fish and meat. Whatever they do,
they do with great persistence. They use a great deal of oil and fat in
their food, which is not good, because taking too much of oily and fatty
food produces fat in the body.

Disciple: How did you find their religious consciousness?

Swamiji: About religious ideas, I noticed the people are very
conservative, and many have turned into fanatics in trying to be liberal
in religion. One day a young man brought to me, in the house of Mohini
Babu at Dacca, a photograph and said, "Sir, please tell me who he is. Is
he an Avatara?" I told him gently many times that I know nothing of it.
When even on my telling him three or four times the boy did not cease
from his persistent questioning, I was constrained to say at last, "My
boy, henceforth take a little nutritious food and then your brain will
develop. Without nourishing food, I see your brain has become dried up."
At these words the young man may have been much displeased. But what
could I do? Unless I spoke like this to the boys, they would turn into
madcaps by degrees.

Disciple: In our East Bengal a great many Avataras have cropped up
recently.

Swamiji: People may call their Guru an Avatara; they may have any idea
of him they like. But Incarnations of God are not born anywhere and
everywhere and at all seasons. At Dacca itself I heard there were three
or four Avataras!

Disciple: How did you find the women of that side?

Swamiji: The women are very nearly the same everywhere. I found
Vaishnavism strong at Dacca. The wife of H\_\_ seemed to be very
intelligent. With great care she used to prepare food and send it to me.

Disciple: I heard you have been to Nag Mahashaya's place.

Swamiji: Yes, going so far, should I not visit the birthplace of such a
great soul? His wife fed me with many delicacies prepared by her own
hand. The house is charming, like a peace retreat. There I took a
swimming bath in a village pond. After that I had such a sound sleep
that I woke at half past two in the afternoon. Of the few days I had
sound sleep in my life, that in Nag Mahashaya's house was one. Rising
from sleep I had a plentiful repast. Nag Mahashaya's wife presented me a
cloth which I tied round my head as a turban and started for Dacca. I
found that the photograph of Nag Mahashaya was being worshipped there.
The place where his remains lie interred ought to be well kept. Even now
it is not as it should be.

Disciple: The people of that part have not been able to appreciate Nag
Mahashaya.

Swamiji: How can ordinary people appreciate a great man like him? Those
who had his company are blessed indeed.

Disciple: What did you see at Kâmâkhyâ?

Swamiji: The Shillong hills are very beautiful. There I met Sir Henry
Cotton, the Chief Commissioner of Assam. He asked me, "Swamiji, after
travelling through Europe and America, what have you come to see here in
these distant hills?" Such a good and kind-hearted man as Sir Henry
Cotton is rarely found. Hearing of my illness, he sent the Civil Surgeon
and inquired after my health mornings and evenings. I could not do much
lecturing there, because my health was very bad. On the way Nitai served
and looked after me nicely.

Disciple: What did you find the religious ideas of that part to be?

Swamiji: It is the land of the Tantras. I heard of one "Hankar Deva" who
is worshipped there as an Avatara. I heard his sect is very wide-spread.
I could not ascertain if "Hankar Deva" was but another form of the name
Shankaracharya. They are monks — perhaps Tântrika Sannyasins, or perhaps
one of the Shankara sects.

Disciple: The people of East Bengal have not been able to appreciate you
as is the case with Nag Mahashaya.

Swamiji: Whether they appreciate me or not, the people there are more
active and energetic than those of these parts. In time it will develop
more. What are nowadays known as refined or civilised ways have not yet
thoroughly entered those parts. Gradually they will. In all times,
etiquette and fashion spread to the countryside from the capital. And
this is happening in East Bengal also. The land that has produced a
great soul like Nag Mahashaya is blessed and has a hopeful future. By
the light of his personality Eastern Bengal is radiant.

Disciple: But, sir, ordinary people did not know him as a great soul. He
hid himself in great obscurity.

Swamiji: There they used to make much fuss about my food and say, "Why
should you eat that food or eat from the hands of such and such?" — and
so on. To which I had to reply, "I am a Sannyasin and a mendicant friar
and what need have I to observe so much outward formality with regard to
food etc.? Do not your scriptures say, "चरेन्माधुकरीं वृत्तिमपि
म्लेच्छकुलादपि — One should beg one's food from door to door, ay even
from the house of an outcast"? But of course external forms are
necessary in the beginning, for the inner realisation of religion, in
order to make the truth of the scriptures practical in one's life.
Haven't you heard of Shri Ramakrishna's story of "wringing out the
almanac for water"?[1](#fn1) Outward forms and observances are only for
the manifestation of the great inner powers of man. The object of all
scriptures is to awaken those inner powers and make him understand and
realise his real nature. The means are of the nature of ordinances and
prohibitions. If you lose sight of the ideal fight over the means only,
what will it avail? In every country I have visited, I find this
fighting over the means going on, and people have no eye on the ideal.
Shri Ramakrishna came to show the truth of this.

Realisation of the truth is the essential thing. Whether you bathe in
the Ganga for a thousand years or live on vegetable food for a like
period, unless it helps towards the manifestation of the Self, know that
it is all of no use. If on the other hand, any one can realise the
Atman, without the observance of outward forms, then that very
non-observance of forms is the best means. But even after the
realisation of Atman, one should observe outward forms to a certain
extent for setting an example to the people. The thing is you must make
the mind steadfast on something. If it is steadfast on one object, it
attains to concentration, that is, its other modifications die out and
there is a uniform flow in one direction. Many become wholly preoccupied
with the outward forms and observances merely and fail to direct their
mind to thoughts of the Atman! If you remain day and night within the
narrow groove of ordinances and prohibitions, how will there be any
expression of the soul? The more one has advanced in the realisation of
the Atman, the less is he dependent on the observances of forms.
Shankaracharya also has said, "निस्त्रैगुण्ये पथि विचरतां को विधिः को
निषेधः — Where is there any ordinance or prohibition for him whose mind
is always above the play of the Gunas?" Therefore the essential truth is
realisation. Know that to be the goal. Each distinct creed is but a way
to the Truth. The test of progress is the amount of renunciation that
one has attained. Where you find the attraction for lust and wealth
considerably diminished, to whatever creed he may belong, know that his
inner spirit is awakening. The door of Self-realisation has surely
opened for him. On the contrary if you observe a thousand outward rules
and quote a thousand scriptural texts, still, if it has not brought the
spirit of renunciation in you, know that your life is in vain. Be
earnest over this realisation and set your heart on it. Well, you have
read enough of scriptures. But tell me, of what avail has it been? Some
perhaps thinking of money have become millionaires, whereas you have
become a Pundit by thinking of scriptures. But both are bondages. Attain
the supreme knowledge and go beyond Vidyâ and Avidyâ, relative knowledge
and ignorance.

Disciple: Sir, through your grace I understand it all, but my past Karma
does not allow me to assimilate these teachings.

Swamiji: Throw aside your Karma and all such stuff. If it is a truth
that by your own past action you have got this body; then, nullifying
the effects of evil works by good works, why should you not be a
Jivanmukta in this very body? Know that freedom or Self-Knowledge is in
your own hands. In real knowledge there is no touch of work. But those
who work after being Jivanmuktas do so for the good of others. They do
not look to the results of works. No seed of desire finds any room in
their mind. And strictly speaking it is almost impossible to work like
that for the good of the world from the householder's position. In the
whole of Hindu scriptures there is the single instance of King Janaka in
this respect. But you nowadays want to pose as Janakas (lit. fathers) in
every home by begetting children year after year, while he was without
the body-consciousness!

Disciple: Please bless me that I may attain Self-realisation in this
very life.

Swamiji: What fear? If there is sincerity of spirit, I tell you, for a
certainty, you will attain it in this very life. But manly endeavour is
wanted. Do you know what it is? "I shall certainly attain
Self-knowledge. Whatever obstacles may come, I shall certainly overcome
them" — a firm determination like this is Purushakâra. "Whether my
mother, father, friends, brothers, wife, and children live or die,
whether this body remains or goes, I shall never turn back till I attain
to the vision of the Atman" — this resolute endeavour to advance towards
one's goal, setting at naught all other considerations, is termed manly
endeavour. Otherwise, endeavour for creature comforts even beasts and
birds show. Man has got this body simply to realise Self-knowledge. If
you follow the common run of people in the world and float with the
general current, where then is your manliness? Well, the common people
are going to the jaws of death! But you have come to conquer it! Advance
like a hero. Don't be thwarted by anything. How many days will this body
last, with its happiness and misery? When you have got the human body,
then rouse the Atman within and say — I have reached the state of
fearlessness! Say — I am the Atman in which my lower ego has become
merged for ever. Be perfect in this idea; and then as long as the body
endures, speak unto others this message of fearlessness: "Thou art
That", "Arise, awake, and stop not till the goal is reached!" If you can
achieve this, then shall I know that you are really a tenacious East
Bengal man.

1.  [^](#t1)The Bengali alamanac makes a forecast of the annual rainfall
    but not a drop comes out of squeezing its pages! Similarly
    scriptures are useless unless their truths are realised in life.

</div>
