---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_xvii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xix.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XVIII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_35e7_18.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur Math*. Year: *1901*.\]

Swamiji is in indifferent health since his return to the Math from the
Shillong Hills. His feet have swollen. All this has made his
brother-disciples very anxious. At the request of Swami Niranjanananda,
Swamiji has agreed to take Âyurvedic medicine. He is to begin this
treatment from next Tuesday and entirely give up taking water and salt.
Today is Sunday. The disciple asked him, "Sir, it is terribly hot now
and you drink water very frequently; it will be unbearable for you now
to stop taking water altogether for this treatment."

Swamiji: What do you say? I shall make a firm resolve, on the morning of
the day I shall begin this treatment, not to take any water. After that
no water shall pass down the throat any more. For three weeks not a drop
of water shall be able to go down the throat. The body is but an outer
covering of the mind and whatever the mind will dictate to it, it will
have to carry out. So there is nothing to be afraid of. At the request
of Niranjan I have to undergo this treatment. Well, I cannot be
indifferent to the request of my brother-disciples.

It is now about ten o'clock. Swamiji cheerfully raised the topic of his
future Math for women, saying, "With the Holy Mother as the centre of
inspiration, a Math is to be established on the eastern bank of the
Ganga. As Brahmacharins and Sâdhus will be trained in this Math here, so
in the other Math also, Brahmacharinis and Sâdhvis will be trained."

Disciple: Sir, history does not tell us of any Maths for women in India
in ancient times. Only during the Buddhistic period one hears of Maths
for women; but from it in course of time many corruptions arose. The
whole country was overrun by great evil practices.

Swamiji: It is very difficult to understand why in this country so much
difference is made between men and women, whereas the Vedanta declares
that one and the same conscious Self is present in all beings. You
always criticise the women, but say what have you done for their uplift?
Writing down Smritis etc., and binding them by hard rules, the men have
turned the women into mere manufacturing machines! If you do not raise
the women, who are the living embodiment of the Divine Mother, don't
think that you have any other way to rise.

Disciple: Women are a bondage and a snare to men. By their Maya they
cover the knowledge and dispassion of men. It is for this, I suppose,
that scriptural writers hint that knowledge and devotion are difficult
of attainment to them.

Swamiji: In what scriptures do you find statements that women are not
competent for knowledge and devotion? In the period of degradation, when
the priests made other castes incompetent for the study of the Vedas,
they deprived the women also of all their rights. Otherwise you will
find that in the Vedic or Upanishadic age Maitreyi, Gârgi, and other
ladies of revered memory have taken the places of Rishis through their
skill in discussing about Brahman. In an assembly of a thousand
Brahmanas who were all erudite in the Vedas, Gargi boldly challenged
Yâjnavalkya in a discussion about Brahman. Since such ideal women were
entitled to spiritual knowledge, why shall not the women have the same
privilege now? What has happened once can certainly happen again.
History repeats itself. All nations have attained greatness by paying
proper respect to women. That country and that nation which do not
respect women have never become great, nor will ever be in future. The
principal reason why your race has so much degenerated is that you have
no respect for these living images of Shakti. Manu says, "Where women
are respected, there the gods delight; and where they are not, there all
works and efforts come to naught." (Manu, III. 56.) There is no hope of
rise for that family or country where there is no estimation of women,
where they live in sadness. For this reason, they have to be raised
first; and an ideal Math has to be started for them.

Disciple: Sir, when you first returned from the West, in your lecture at
the Star Theatre you sharply criticised the Tantras. Now by your
supporting the worship of women, as taught in the Tantras, you are
contradicting yourself.

Swamiji: I denounced only the present corrupted form of Vâmâchâra of the
Tantras. I did not denounce the Mother-worship of the Tantras, or even
the real Vamachara. The purport of the Tantras is to worship women in a
spirit of Divinity. During the downfall of Buddhism, the Vamachara
became very much corrupted, and that corrupted form obtains to the
present day. Even now the Tantra literature of India is influenced by
those ideas. I denounced only these corrupt and horrible practices —
which I do even now. I never objected to the worship of women who are
the living embodiment of Divine Mother, whose external manifestations,
appealing to the senses have maddened men, but whose internal
manifestations, such as knowledge, devotion, discrimination and
dispassion make man omniscient, of unfailing purpose, and a knower of
Brahman. "सैषा प्रसन्ना वरदा नृणां भवति मुक्तये — She, when pleased,
becomes propitious and the cause of the freedom of man" (*Chandi*, I.
57). Without propitiating the Mother by worship and obeisance, not even
Brahmâ and Vishnu have the power to elude Her grasp and attain to
freedom. Therefore for the worship of these family goddesses, in order
to manifest the Brahman within them, I shall establish the women's Math.

Disciple: It may be a good idea but where will you get the women
inmates? With the present hard restrictions of society, who will permit
the ladies of their household to join your Math?

Swamiji: Why so? Even now there are women disciples of Shri Ramakrishna.
With their help I shall start this Math. The Holy Mother will be their
central figure and the wives and daughters of the devotees of Shri
Ramakrishna will be its first inmates. For they will easily appreciate
the usefulness of such a Math. After that, following their example, many
householders will help in their noble work.

Disciple: The devotees of Shri Ramakrishna will certainly join this
work. But I don't think the general public will help in this work.

Swamiji: No great work has been done in the world without sacrifice. Who
on seeing the tiny sprout of the banyan can imagine that in course of
time it will develop into a gigantic banyan tree? At present I shall
start the Math in this way. Later on you will see that after a
generation or two people of this country will appreciate the worth of
this Math. My women disciples will lay down their lives for it. Casting
off fear and cowardice, you also be helpers in this noble mission and
hold this high ideal before all. You will see, it will shed its lustre
over the whole country in time.

Disciple: Sir, please tell me all about your plan of this Math for
women.

Swamiji: On the other side of the Ganga a big plot of land will be
acquired, where unmarried girls or Brahmacharini widows will live;
devout married women will also be allowed to stay now and then. Men will
have no concern with this Math. The elderly Sadhus of the Math will
manage the affairs of this Math from a distance. There shall be a girls'
school attached to this women's Math, in which religious scriptures,
literature, Sanskrit, grammar, and even some amount of English should be
taught. Other matters such as sewing, culinary art, rules of domestic
work, and upbringing of children, will also be taught while Japa,
worship, meditation, etc. shall form an indispensable part of the
teaching. Those who will be able to live here permanently, renouncing
home and family ties, will be provided with food and clothing from the
Math. Those who will not be able to do that will be allowed to study in
this Math as day-scholars. With the permission of the head of the Math,
the latter will be allowed even to stay in the Math occasionally, and
during such stay will be maintained by the Math. The elder
Brahmacharinis will take charge of the training of the girl students in
Brahmacharya. After five or six years' training in this Math, the
guardians of the girls may marry them. If deemed fit for Yoga and
religious life, with the permission of the guardians they will be
allowed to stay in this Math, taking the vow of celibacy. These celibate
nuns will in time be the teachers and preachers of the Math. In villages
and towns they will open centres and strive for the spread of female
education. Through such devout preachers of character there will be the
real spread of female education in the country. So long as the students
will remain in association with this Math, they must observe
Brahmacharya as the basic ideal of this Math.

Spirituality, sacrifice, and self-control will be the motto of the
pupils of this Math, and service or Sevâ-dharma the vow of their life.
In view of such ideal lives, who will not respect and have faith in
them? If the life of the women of this country be moulded in such
fashion, then only will there be the reappearance of such ideal
characters as Sitâ, Sâvitri and Gârgi. To what straits the strictures of
local usages have reduced the women of this country, rendering them
lifeless and inert, you could understand if only you visited the Western
countries. You alone are responsible for this miserable condition of the
women, and it rests with you also to raise them again. Therefore I say,
set to work. What will it do to memorise a few religious books like the
Vedas and so on?

Disciple: Sir, if the girl students after being trained in this Math
marry, how will one find ideal characters in them? Will it not be better
if the rule is made that those who will be educated in this Math shall
not marry?

Swamiji: Can that be brought about all at once? They must be given
education and left to themselves. After that they will act as they think
best. Even after marriage and entering the world, the girls educated as
above will inspire their husbands with noble ideals and be the mothers
of heroic sons. But there must be this rule that the guardians of the
students in the women's Math must not even think of marrying them before
they attain the age of fifteen.

Disciple: Sir, then those girls will not command reputation in society.
Nobody would like to marry them.

Swamiji: Why will not they be wanted in marriage? You have not yet
understood the trend of society. These learned and accomplished girls
will never be in want of bridegrooms. Society nowadays does not follow
the texts recommending child-marriage nor will do so in future. Even now
don't you see?

Disciple: But there is sure to be a violent opposition against this in
the beginning.

Swamiji: Let it be. What is there to be afraid of in that? Opposition to
a righteous work initiated with moral courage will only awaken the moral
power of the initiators the more. That which meets with no obstruction,
no opposition, only takes men to the path of moral death. Struggle is
the sign of life.

Disciple: Yes, sir.

Swamiji: In the highest reality of the Parabrahman, there is no
distinction of sex. We notice this only in the relative plane. And the
more the mind becomes introspective, the more that idea of difference
vanishes. Ultimately, when the mind is wholly merged in the homogeneous
and undifferentiated Brahman, such ideas as this is a man or that a
woman do not remain at all. We have actually seen this in the life of
Shri Ramakrishna. Therefore do I say that though outwardly there may be
difference between men and women, in their real nature there is none.
Hence, if a man can be a knower of Brahman, why cannot a woman attain to
the same knowledge? Therefore I was saying that if even one amongst the
women became a knower of Brahman, then by the radiance of her
personality thousands of women would be inspired and awakened to truth,
and great well-being of the country and society would ensue. Do you
understand?

Disciple: Sir, your teachings have opened my eyes today.

Swamiji: Not fully yet. When you realise that all-illumining reality of
the Atman, then you will see that this idea of sex-distinction has
vanished altogether, then only will you look upon women as the veritable
manifestation of Brahman. We have seen in Shri Ramakrishna how he had
this idea of divine motherhood in every woman, of whatever caste she
might be, or whatever might be her worth. It is because I have seen this
that I ask you all so earnestly to do likewise and open girls' schools
in every village and try to uplift them. If the women are raised, then
their children will by their noble actions glorify the name of the
country — then will culture, knowledge, power, and devotion awaken in
the land.

Disciple: But, sir, contrary results appear to have come out of the
present female education. With just a smattering of education, they take
merely to the Western modes of living, but it is not clear how far they
are advancing in the spirit of renunciation, self-control, austerity,
Brahmacharya and other qualities conducive to Brahmajnana.

Swamiji: In the beginning a few mistakes like that are unavoidable. When
a new idea is preached in the country, some, failing to grasp it
properly, go wrong in that way. But what matters it to the well-being of
society at large? Well, those who are pioneers of the little bit of
female education that now obtains in the country were undoubtedly very
great-hearted. But the truth is that some defect or other must creep
into that learning or culture which is not founded on a religious basis.
But now female education is to be spread with religion as its centre.
All other training should be secondary to religion. Religious training,
the formation of character and observance of the vow of celibacy — these
should be attended to. In the female education which has obtained up
till now in India, it is religion that has been made a secondary
concern, hence those defects you were speaking of have crept in. But no
blame attaches therefore to the women. Reformers having proceeded to
start female education without being Brahmacharins themselves have
stumbled like that. Founders of all good undertakings, before they
launch on their desired work, must attain to the knowledge of the Atman
through rigorous self-discipline. Otherwise defects are bound to occur
in their work.

Disciple: Yes, sir, it is observed that many educated women spend their
time in reading novels and so on; but in East Bengal even with education
women have not given up their religious observances. Is it so here in
this part?

Swamiji: In every country, nations have their good and bad sides. Ours
is to do good works in our lives and hold an example before others. No
work succeeds by condemnation. It only repels people. Let anybody say
what he likes, don't contradict him. In this world of Maya, whatever
work you will take up will be attended with some defect. "सर्वारम्भा हि
दोषेण धूमेनाग्निरिवावृताः — All works are covered with defects as fire
is with smoke" (Gita, XVIII. 48). Every fire has a chance of being
attended with smoke. But will you, on that account, sit inactive? As far
as you can, you must go on doing good work.

Disciple: What is this good work?

Swamiji: Whatever helps in the manifestation of Brahman is good work.
Any work can be done so as to help, if not directly, at least
indirectly, the manifestation of the Atman. But following the path laid
down by the Rishis, that knowledge of the Atman manifests quickly; on
the contrary, the doing of works which have been indicated by the
scriptural writers as wrong, brings only bondage of the soul and
sometimes this bondage of delusion does not vanish even in many lives.
But in all ages and climes, freedom is sure to be attained by Jivas
ultimately. For the Atman is the real nature of the Jiva. Can anybody
give up his own nature? If you fight with your shadow for a thousand
years, can you drive it away from you? — it will always remain with you.

Disciple: But, sir, according to Shankara, Karma is antagonistic to
Jnana. He has variously refuted the intermingling of Jnana and Karma. So
how can Karma be helpful to the manifestation of Jnana?

Swamiji: Shankara after saying so has again described Karma as indirect
help to the manifestation of Jnana and the means for the purification of
the mind. But I do not contradict his conclusion that in transcendent
knowledge there is no touch of any work whatsoever. So long as man is
within the realm of the consciousness of action, agent, and the result
of action, he is powerless to sit idle without doing some work. So, as
work is thus ingrained in the very nature of man, why don't you go on
doing such works as are helpful to the manifestation of the knowledge of
the Atman? That all work is the effect of ignorance may be true from the
absolute standpoint, but within the sphere of relative consciousness it
has a great utility. When you will realise the Atman, the doing or
non-doing of work will be within your control, and whatever you will do
in that state will be good work, conducive to the well-being of Jivas
and the world. With the manifestation of Brahman, even the breath you
draw will be to the good of Jiva. Then you will no longer have to work
by means of conscious planning. Do you understand?

Disciple: Yes, it is a beautiful conclusion reconciling Karma and Jnana
from the Vedantic standpoint.

At this time, the bell for supper rang, and the disciple, before going
to partake of it, prayed with folded hands, "Bless me, sir, that I may
attain to the knowledge of Brahman in this very life." Swamiji placing
his hand on the disciple's head said, "Have no fear, my son. You are not
like ordinary worldly men — neither householders, nor exactly Sannyasins
— but quite a new type."

</div>
