---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_xix.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xxi.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XX  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_37e7_20.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur Math*. Year: *1901*.\]

Swamiji is much better under the Ayurvedic treatment. The disciple is at
the Math. While attending on Swamiji, he asked, "The Atman is
all-pervading, the very life of the life of all beings, and so very
near. Still why is It not perceived?"

Swamiji: Do you see yourself that you have eyes? When others speak of
the eyes, then you are reminded that you have got eyes. Again when dust
or sand enters into them and sets up an irritation, then you feel quite
well that you have got eyes. Similarly the realisation of this universal
Atman which is inner than the innermost is not easily attained. Reading
from scriptures or hearing from the lips of the preceptor, one has some
idea of It, but when the hard lashes of the bitter sorrow and pain of
the world make the heart sore, when on the death of one's near and dear
relatives, man thinks himself helpless, when the impenetrable and
insurmountable darkness about the future life agitates his mind, then
does the Jiva pant for a realisation of the Atman. Therefore is sorrow
helpful to the knowledge of the Atman. But one should remember the
bitter lesson of experience. Those who die, merely suffering the woes of
life like cats and dogs, are they men? He is a man who even when
agitated by the sharp interaction of pleasure and pain is
discriminating, and knowing them to be of an evanescent nature, becomes
passionately devoted to the Atman. This is all the difference between
men and animals. That which is nearest is least observed. The Atman is
the nearest of the near, therefore the careless and unsteady mind of man
gets no clue to It. But the man who is alert, calm, self-restrained, and
discriminating, ignores the external world and diving more and more into
the inner world, realises the glory of the Atman and becomes great. Then
only he attains to the knowledge of the Atman and realises the truth of
such scriptural texts as, "I am the Atman", "Thou art That, O
Shvetaketu," and so on. Do you understand?

Disciple: Yes, sir. But why this method of attaining Self-knowledge
through the path of pain and suffering? Instead of all this, it would
have been well if there had been no creation at all. We were all at one
time identified with Brahman. Why then this desire for creation on the
path of Brahman? Why again this going forth of the Jiva (who is no other
than Brahman) along the path of birth and death, amidst the interaction
of the dualities of life?

Swamiji: When a man is intoxicated, he sees many hallucinations; but
when the intoxication goes off, he understands them as the imaginations
of a heated brain. Whatever you see of this creation which is without a
beginning, but has an end, is only an effect of your state of
intoxication; when that passes off, such questions will not arise at
all.

Disciple: Then is there no reality in the creation, and preservation,
etc. of the Universe?

Swamiji: Why should not there be? So long as you identify yourself with
the body and have the ego-consciousness, all these will remain. But when
you are bereft of the body-consciousness and devoted to the Atman and
live in the Atman, then with respect to you none of these will remain,
and such questions as whether there is any creation or birth or death
will have no room. Then you will have to say —

क्व गतं केन वा नीतं कुत्र लीनमिदं जगत्।  
अधुनैव मया दृष्टं नास्ति किं महदद्भुतम्॥

— "Where is it gone, by whom is it taken, wherein is the world merged?
It was just observed by me and is it non-existent now? What a wonder!"
(*Vivekachudâmani* 483).

Disciple: If there is no knowledge of the existence of the universe, how
can it be said, "Wherein is the world merged?"

Swamiji: Because one has to express the idea in language, therefore that
mode of expression has been used. The author has tried to express in
thought and language about the state where thought or language cannot
reach, and therefore he has stated the fact that the world is wholly
unreal, in a relative mode like the above. The world has no absolute
reality which only belongs to Brahman, which is beyond the reach of mind
and speech. Say what more you have to ask. Today I will put an end to
all your arguments.

The bell of the evening service in the worship-room rang at the time,
and everybody made for it. But the disciple stayed in Swamiji's room,
noticing which Swamiji said, "Won't you go to the worship-room?"

Disciple: I should like to stay here.

Swamiji: All right.

After some time the disciple looking outside of the room said, "It is
the new-moon night and all the quarters are overspread with darkness. It
is the night for the worship of Mother Kali."

Swamiji without saying anything gazed at the eastern sky for some time
and said, "Do you see what a mysterious and solemn beauty there is in
this darkness!" Saying this and continuing to look at the dense mass of
darkness, he stood enwrapt. After some minutes had passed, Swamiji
slowly began to sing a Bengali song, "O Mother, in deep darkness flashes
Thy formless beauty", etc. After the song Swamiji entered his room and
sat down with an occasional word like "Mother, Mother", or "Kali, Kali",
on his lips.

Uneasy at Swamiji's profoundly abstracted mood, the disciple said, "Now,
sir, please speak with me."

Swamiji smilingly said, "Can you fathom the beauty and profundity of the
Atman whose external manifestation is so sweet and beautiful?" The
disciple wished for a change of topic, noticing which, Swamiji began
another song of Kali: "O Mother, Thou flowing stream of nectar, in how
many forms and aspects dost Thou play in manifestation!" After the song
he said, "This Kali is Brahman in manifestation. Haven't you heard Shri
Ramakrishna's illustration of the 'snake moving and the snake at rest'
(representing the dynamic and static aspects of the same thing)?"

Disciple: Yes, sir.

Swamiji: This time, when I get well, I shall worship the Mother with my
heart's blood, then only will She be pleased. Your Raghunandan also says
like that. The Mother's child shall be a hero, a Mahâvira. In
unhappiness, sorrow, death, and desolation, the Mother's child shall
always remain fearless.

</div>
