---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_xx.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xxii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XXI  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_38e7_21.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur Math*. *Year*: *1901*.\]

Swamiji is staying at the Math nowadays. His health is not very good,
but he goes out for a walk in the mornings and evenings. The disciple,
after bowing at the feet of Swamiji, inquired about his health.

Swamiji: Well, this body is in such a pitiable condition, but none of
you are stepping forward to help in my work! What shall I do
single-handed? This time the body has come out of the soil of Bengal, so
can it bear the strain of much work? You who come here are pure souls;
and if you do not become my helpers in this work, what shall I do alone?

Disciple: Sir, these self-sacrificing Brahmacharins and Sannyasins are
standing behind you, and I think that each one of them can devote his
life to your work — still why do you speak in this way?

Swamiji: Well, I want a band of young Bengal — who alone are the hope of
this country. My hope of the future lies in the youths of character —
intelligent, renouncing all for the service of others, and obedient —
who can sacrifice their lives in working out my ideas and thereby do
good to themselves and the country at large. Otherwise, boys of the
common run are coming in groups and will come. Dullness is written on
their faces — their hearts are devoid of energy, their bodies feeble and
unfit for work, and minds devoid of courage. What work will be done by
these? If I get ten or twelve boys with the faith of Nachiketâ, I can
turn the thoughts and pursuits of this country in a new channel.

Disciple: Sir, so many young men are coming to you, and do you find none
among them of such a nature?

Swamiji: Among those who appear to me to be of good calibre, some have
bound themselves by matrimony; some have sold themselves for the
acquisition of worldly name, fame, or wealth; while some are of feeble
bodies. The rest, who form the majority, are unable to receive any high
idea. You are no doubt fit to receive my high ideas, but you are not
able to work them out in the practical field. For these reasons
sometimes an anguish comes into the mind, and I think that taking this
human body, I could not do much work through untowardness of fortune. Of
course, I have not yet wholly given up hope, for, by the will of God,
from among these very boys may arise in time great heroes of action and
spirituality who will in future work out my ideas.

Disciple: It is my firm belief that your broad and liberal ideas must
find universal acceptance some day or other. For I see they are
all-sided and infusing vigour into every department of thought and
activity. And the people of the country are accepting, either overtly or
covertly, your ideas, and teaching them to the people.

Swamiji: What matters it if they acknowledge my name or not? It is
enough if they accept my ideas. Ninety-nine per cent of the Sadhus, even
after renouncing lust and wealth, get bound at the last by the desire of
name and fame. "Fame . . . that last infirmity of noble mind" — haven't
you read? We shall have to work, giving up altogether all desire for
results. People will call us both good and bad. But we shall have to
work like lions, keeping the ideal before us, without caring whether
"the wise ones praise or blame us".

Disciple: What ideal should we follow now?

Swamiji: You have now to make the character of Mahâvira your ideal. See
how at the command of Râmachandra he crossed the ocean. He had no care
for life or death! He was a perfect master of his senses and wonderfully
sagacious. You have now to build your life on this great ideal of
personal service. Through that, all other ideals will gradually manifest
in life. Obedience to the Guru without questioning, and strict
observance of Brahmacharya — this is the secret of success. As on the
one hand Hanumân represent the ideal of service, so on the other hand he
represents leonine courage, striking the whole world with awe. He has
not the least hesitation in sacrificing his life for the good of Rama. A
supreme indifference to everything except the service of Rama, even to
the attainment of the status of Brahmâ and Shiva, the great World-Gods!
Only the carrying out of Shri Rama's behest is the one vow of this life!
Such whole-hearted devotion is wanted. Playing on the Khol and Kartâl
and dancing in the frenzy of Kirtana has degenerated the whole people.
They are, in the first place, a race of dyspeptics — and if in addition
to this they dance and jump in that way, how can they bear the strain?
In trying to imitate the highest Sâdhana, the preliminary qualification
for which is absolute purity, they have been swallowed in dire Tamas. In
every district and village you may visit, you will find only the sound
of the Khol and Kartâl! Are not drums made in the country? Are not
trumpets and kettle-drums available in India? Make the boys hear the
deep-toned sound of these instruments. Hearing from boyhood the sound of
these effeminate forms of music and listening to the kirtana, the
country is well-nigh converted into a country of women. What more
degradation can you expect? Even the poet's imagination fails to draw
this picture! The Damaru (An hour-glass-shaped drum, held in Shiva's
hand.) and horn have to be sounded, drums are to be beaten so as to
raise the deep and martial notes, and with "Mahavira, Mahavira" on your
lips and shouting "Hara, Hara, Vyom, Vyom" , the quarters are to be
reverberated. The music which awakens only the softer feelings of man is
to be stopped now for some time. Stopping the light tunes such as Kheâl
and Tappâ for some time, the people are to be accustomed to hear the
Dhrupad music. Through the thunder-roll of the dignified Vedic hymns,
life is to be brought back into the country. In everything the austere
spirit of heroic manhood is to be revived. In following such an ideal
lies the good of the people and the country. If you can build your
character after such an ideal, then a thousand others will follow. But
take care that you do not swerve an inch from the ideal. Never lose
heart. In eating, dressing, or lying, in singing or playing, in
enjoyment or disease, always manifest the highest moral courage. Then
only will you attain the grace of Mahâshakti, the Divine Mother.

Disciple: Sir, at times I am overcome by low spirits, I don't know how.

Swamiji: Then think like this: "Whose child am I? I associate with him
and shall I have such weak-mindedness and lowness of spirits?" Stamping
down such weakness of mind and heart, stand up, saying, "I am possessed
of heroism — I am possessed of a steady intellect — I am a knower of
Brahman, a man of illumination." Be fully conscious of your dignity by
remembering, "I am the disciple of such and such who is the
companion-in-life of Shri Ramakrishna, the conqueror of lust and
wealth." This will produce a good effect. He who has not this pride has
no awakening of Brahman within him. Haven't you heard Râmprasâd's song?
He used to say, "Whom do I fear in the world, whose sovereign is the
Divine Mother!" Keep such a pride always awake in the mind. Then
weakness of mind and heart will no longer be able to approach you. Never
allow weakness to overtake your mind. Remember Mahavira, remember the
Divine Mother! And you will see that all weakness, all cowardice will
vanish at once.

Saying these words, Swamiji came downstairs and took his accustomed seat
on a cot in the courtyard. Then, addressing the assembled Sannyasins and
Brahmacharins, he said, "Here is the unveiled presence of Brahman. Fie
upon those who disregarding It set their mind on other things! Ah! here
is Brahman as palpable as a fruit in one's palm. Don't you see? Here!"

These words were spoken in such an appealing way, that every one stood
motionless like a figure painted on canvas and felt as if he were
suddenly drawn into the depth of meditation. . . . After some time that
tension of feeling passed and they regained their normal consciousness.

Next, in the course of a walk, Swamiji spoke to the disciple. "Did you
see how everybody had become concentrated today? These are all children
of Shri Ramakrishna, and on the very uttering of the words, they felt
the truth."

Disciple: Sir, not to speak of them, even my heart was overflowing with
an unearthly bliss! But now it appears like a vanished dream.

Swamiji: Everything will come in time. Now, go on working. Set yourself
to some work for the good of men sunk in ignorance and delusion. You
will see that such experiences will come of themselves.

Disciple: I feel nervous to enter into its labyrinths — neither have I
the strength. The scriptures also say, "Impenetrable is the path of
Karma".

Swamiji: What do you wish to do then?

Disciple: To live and hold discussion with one like you, who has
realised the truth of all scriptures and through hearing, thinking, and
meditating on the Truth to realise Brahman in this very life. I have no
enthusiasm, nor perhaps the strength, for anything else.

Swamiji: If you love that, well, you can go on doing it. And speak about
your thoughts and conclusions about the Shastras to others, it will
benefit them. So long as there is the body, one cannot live without
doing some work or other; therefore one should do such work as is
conducive to the good of others. Your own realisations and conclusions
about scriptural truths may benefit many a seeker after Truth. Put them
into writing which may help many others.

Disciple: First let me realise the Truth, then I shall write. Shri
Ramakrishna used to say; "Without the badge of authority, none will
listen to you."

Swamiji: There may be many in the world who have got stuck in that stage
of spiritual discipline and reasoning through which you are passing,
without being able to pass beyond that stage. Your experience and way of
thinking, if recorded, may be of benefit to them at least. If you put
down in easy language the substance of the discussions which you hold
with the Sadhus of this Math, it may help many.

Disciple: Since you wish it, I shall try to do it.

Swamiji: What is the good of that spiritual practice or realisation
which does not benefit others, does not conduce to the well-being of
people sunk in ignorance and delusion, does not help in rescuing them
from the clutches of lust and wealth? Do you think, so long as one Jiva
endures in bondage, you will have any liberation? So long as he is not
liberated — it may take several lifetimes — you will have to be born to
help him, to make him realise Brahman. Every Jiva is part of yourself —
which is the rationale of all work for others. As you desire the
whole-hearted good of your wife and children, knowing them to be your
own, so when a like amount of love and attraction for every Jiva will
awaken in you, then I shall know that Brahman is awakening in you, not a
moment before. When this feeling of the all-round good of all without
respect for caste or colour will awaken in your heart, then I shall know
you are advancing towards the ideal.

Disciple: Sir, it is a most tremendous statement that without the
salvation of all, there shall be no salvation for an individual! I have
never heard of such a wonderful proposition.

Swamiji: There is a class of Vedantists who hold such a view. They say
that individual liberation is not the real and perfect form of
liberation, but universal and collective liberation is true Mukti. Of
course, both merits and defects can be pointed out in that view.

Disciple: According to Vedanta, the state of individualised existence is
the root of bondage, and the Infinite Intelligence, through desires and
effects of works, appears bound in that limiting condition. When by
means of discrimination that limiting condition vanishes and the Jiva is
bereft of all adjuncts, then how can there be bondage for the Atman
which is of the essence of transcendent Intelligence? He for whom the
idea of the Jiva and the world is a persisting reality may think that
without the liberation of all he has no liberation. But when the mind
becomes bereft of all limiting adjuncts and is merged in Brahman, where
is there any differentiation for him? So nothing can operate as a bar to
his Mukti.

Swamiji: Yes, what you say is right, and most Vedantins hold that view,
which is also flawless. In that view, individual liberation is not
barred. But just consider the greatness of his heart who thinks that he
will take the whole universe with him to liberation!

Disciple: Sir, it may indicate boldness of heart, but it is not
supported by the scriptures.

Swamiji was in an abstracted mood and did not listen to the words. After
some time he said: "Day and night think and meditate on Brahman,
meditate with great one-pointedness of mind. And during the time of
awakeness to outward life, either do some work for the sake of others or
repeat in your mind, 'Let good happen to Jivas and the world!' 'Let the
mind of all flow in the direction of Brahman!' Even by such continuous
current of thought the world will be benefited. Nothing good in the
world becomes fruitless, be it work or thought. Your thought-currents
will perhaps rouse the religious feeling of someone in America."

Disciple: Sir, please bless me that my mind may be concentrated on the
Truth.

Swamiji: So it will be. If you have earnestness of desire, it will
certainly be.

</div>
