---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_xxiii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xxv.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XXIV  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_41e7_24.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The Math, Belur*. Year: *1902*.\]

After returning from Eastern Bengal Swamiji stayed in the Math and lived
a simple childlike life. Every year some Santal labourers used to work
in the Math. Swamiji would joke and make fun with them and loved to hear
their tales of weal and woe. One day several noted gentlemen of Calcutta
came to visit Swamiji in the Math. That day Swamiji had started such a
warm talk with the Santals that, when he was informed of the arrival of
those gentlemen, he said, "I shan't be able to go now. I am happy with
these men." Really that day Swamiji did not leave the poor Santals to
see those visitors.

One among the Santals was named Keshta. Swamiji loved Keshta very much.
Whenever Swamiji came to talk with them, Keshta used to say to Swamiji,
"O my Swamiji, do not come to us when we are working, for while talking
with you our work stops and the supervising Swami rebukes us
afterwards." Swamiji would be touched by these words and say, "No, no,
he will not say anything; tell me a little about your part of the
country" — saying which he used to introduce the topic of their worldly
affairs.

One day Swamiji said to Keshta, "Well, will you take food here one day?"
Keshta said, "We do not take food touched by you; if you put salt in our
food and we eat it, we shall lose our caste." Swamiji said, "Why should
you take salt? We will prepare curry for you without salt, will you then
take it?" Keshta agreed to it. Then at orders of Swamiji, bread, curry,
sweets, curd, etc. were arranged for the Santals, and he made them sit
before him to eat. While eating, Keshta said, "Whence have you got such
a thing? We never tasted anything like this." Feeding them sumptuously,
Swamiji said, "You are Nârâyanas, God manifest; today I have offered
food to Narayana." The service of "Daridra Narayana" — God in the poor —
about which Swamiji spoke, he himself performed one day like this.

After their meal, the Santals went for rest, and Swamiji, addressing the
disciple, said, "I found them the veritable embodiment of God — such
simplicity, such sincere guileless love I have seen nowhere else." Then,
addressing the Sannyasins of the Math, he said, "See how simple they
are. Can you mitigate their misery a little? Otherwise, of what good is
the wearing of the Gerua robe? Sacrifice of everything for the good of
others is real Sannyasa. They have never enjoyed any good thing in life.
Sometimes I feel a desire to sell the Math and everything, and
distribute the money to the poor and destitute. We have made the tree
our shelter. Alas! the people of the country cannot get anything to eat,
and how can we have the heart to raise food to our mouths? When I was in
the Western countries, I prayed to the Divine Mother, "People here are
sleeping on a bed of flowers, they eat all kinds of delicacies, and what
do they not enjoy, while people in our country are dying of starvation.
Mother, will there be no way for them! One of the objects of my going to
the West to preach religion was to see if I could find any means for
feeding the people of this country.

"Seeing the poor people of our country starving for food, a desire comes
to me to overthrow all ceremonial worship and learning, and go round
from village to village collecting money from the rich by convincing
them through force of character and Sadhana, and to spend the whole life
in serving the poor.

"Alas! nobody thinks of the poor of this land. They are the backbone of
the country, who by their labour are producing food-these poor people,
the sweepers and labourers, who if they stop work for one day will
create a panic in the town. But there is none to sympathise with them,
none to console them in their misery. Just see, for want of sympathy
from the Hindus, thousands of Pariahs in Madras are turning Christians.
Don't think this is simply due to the pinch of hunger; it is because
they do not get any sympathy from us. We are day and night calling out
to them, 'Don't touch us! Don't touch us!' Is there any compassion or
kindliness of heart in the country? Only a class of 'Don't-touchists';
kick such customs out! I sometimes feel the urge to break the barriers
of 'Don't-touchism', to go at once and call out, 'Come, all who are
poor, miserable, wretched, and down-trodden', and to bring them all
together in the name of Shri Ramakrishna. Unless they rise, the Mother
won't awaken. We could not make any provision for food and clothes for
these — what have we done then? Alas! they know nothing of worldliness,
and therefore even after working day and night cannot provide themselves
with food and clothes. Let us open their eyes. I see clear as daylight
that there is the one Brahman in all, in them and in me — one Shakti
dwells in all. The only difference is of manifestation. Unless the blood
circulates over the whole body, has any country risen at any time? If
one limb is paralysed, then even with the other limbs whole, not much
can be done with that body — know this for certain."

Disciple: Sir, there is such a diversity of religions and ideas among
the people of this country that it is a difficult affair to bring
harmony among them.

Swamiji (in anger): If you think any work difficult, then do not come
here. Through the grace of God all paths become easy. Your work is to
serve the poor and miserable, without any distinction of caste or
colour, and you have no need to think about the results. Your duty is to
go on working, and then everything will follow of itself. My method of
work is to construct and not to pull down. Read the history of the
world, and you will find that a great soul stood as the central figure
in a certain period of a country. Animated by his ideas, hundreds of
people did good to the world. You are all intelligent boys, and have
been coming here for a long time. Say, what have you done? Couldn't you
give one life for the service of others? In the next life you may read
Vedanta and other philosophies. Give this life for the service of
others, then I shall know that your coming here has not been in vain.

Saying these words, Swamiji sat silent, wrapt in deep thought. After
some time, he added, "After so much austerity, I have understood this as
the real truth — God is present in every Jiva; there is no other God
besides that. 'Who serves Jiva, serves God indeed'." After some pause
Swamiji, addressing the disciple, said, "What I have told you today,
inscribe in your heart. See that you do not forget it."

</div>
