---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_xxiv.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xxvi.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XXV  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_42e7_25.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The Math*, *Belur*. Year: *beginning of 1902*.\]

It was Saturday, and the disciple came to the Math just before evening.
An austere routine was being followed now at the Math regarding
spiritual practices. Swamiji had issued an order that all Brahmacharins
and Sannyasins should get up very early in the morning and practise Japa
and meditation in the worship-room. Swamiji was having little sleep
during these days, and would rise from bed at three in the morning.

On the disciple saluting Swamiji just after his appearance at the Math,
he said, "Well, see how they are practising religious exercises here
nowadays. Everyone passes a considerable time in Japa and meditation on
mornings and evenings. Look there — a bell has been procured, which is
used for rousing all from sleep. Everyone has to get up before dawn.
Shri Ramakrishna used to say, 'In the morning and evening the mind
remains highly imbued with Sattva ideas; those are the times when one
should meditate with earnestness.'

"After the passing away of Shri Ramakrishna we underwent a lot of
religious practice at the Baranagore Math. We used to get up at 3 a.m.
and after washing our face etc.— some after bath, and others without it
— we would sit in the worship-room and become absorbed in Japa and
meditation. What a strong spirit of dispassion we had in those days! We
had no thought even as to whether the world existed or not.
Ramakrishnananda busied himself day and night with the duties pertaining
to Shri Ramakrishna's worship and service, and occupied the same
position in the Math as the mistress of the house does in a family. It
was he who would procure, mostly by begging, the requisite articles for
Shri Ramakrishna's worship and our subsistence. There have been days
when the Japa and meditation continued from morning till four or five in
the afternoon. Ramakrishnananda waited and waited with our meals ready,
till at last he would come and snatch us from our meditation by sheer
force. Oh, what a wonderful constancy of devotion we have noticed in
him!"

Disciple: Sir, how did you use to meet the Math expenses then?

Swamiji: What a question! Well, we were Sadhus, and what would come by
begging and other means, would be utilised for defraying the Math
expenses. Today both Suresh Babu (Surendra Nath Mitra) and Balaram Babu
are no more; had they been alive they would have been exceedingly glad
to see this Math. You have doubtless heard Suresh Babu's name. It was he
who used to bear all the expenses of the Baranagore Math. It was this
Suresh Mitra who used to think most for us in those days. His devotion
and faith have no parallel!

Disciple; Sir, I have heard that you did not see him very often while he
was dying.

Swamiji: We could only do so if we were allowed (by his relatives).
Well, it is a long tale. But know this for certain that among worldly
people it is of little count to your relatives and kinsmen whether you
live or die. If you succeed in leaving some property, you will find even
in your lifetime that there has been set up a brawl over it in your
household. You will have no one to console you in your death-bed — not
even your wife and sons! Such is the way of the world!

Referring to the past condition of the Math, Swamiji went on, "Owing to
want of funds I would sometimes fight for abolishing the Math
altogether. But I could never induce Ramakrishnananda to accede to the
proposal. Know Ramakrishnananda to be the central figure of the Math.
There have been days when the Math was without a grain of food. If some
rice was collected by begging, there was no salt to take it with! On
some days there would be only rice and salt, but nobody cared for it in
the least. We were then being carried away by a tidal wave of spiritual
practice. Boiled Bimba leaves, rice, and salt — this was the menu for a
month at a stretch. Oh, those wonderful days! The austerities of that
period were enough to dismay supernatural beings, not to speak of men.
But it is a tremendous truth that if there be real worth in you, the
more are circumstances against you, the more will that inner power
manifest itself. But the reason why I have provided for beds and a
tolerable living in this Math is that the Sannyasins that are enrolling
themselves nowadays will not be able to bear so much strain as we did.
There was the life of Shri Ramakrishna before us, and that was why we
did not care much for privations and hardships. Boys of this generation
will not be able to undergo so much hardship. Hence it is that I have
provided for some sort of habitation and a bare subsistence for them. If
they get just enough food and clothing, the boys will devote themselves
to religious practice and will learn to sacrifice their lives for the
good of humanity."

Disciple: Sir, outside people say a good deal against this sort of
bedding and furniture.

Swamiji: Let them say. Even in jest they will at least once think of
this Math. And they say, it is easier to attain liberation through
cherishing a hostile spirit. Shri Ramakrishna used to say, "Men should
be ignored like worms." Do you mean we have to conduct ourselves
according to the chance opinion of others? Pshaw!

Disciple: Sir, you sometimes say, "All are Nârâyanas, the poor and the
needy are my Narayanas", and again you say, "Men should be ignored like
worms." What do you really mean?

Swamiji: Well, there is not the least doubt that all are Narayanas. But
all Narayanas do not criticise the furniture of the Math. I shall go on
working for the good of men, without caring in the least for the
criticisms of others — it is in this sense that the expression, "Men are
to be ignored like worms", has been used. He who has a dogged
determination like that shall have everything. Only some may have it
sooner, and others a little later, that is all. But one is bound to
reach the goal. It is because we had such a determination that we have
attained the little that we have. Otherwise, what dire days of privation
we have had to pass through! One day, for want of food I fainted in the
outer platform of a house on the roadside and quite a shower of rain had
passed over my head before I recovered my senses! Another day, I had to
do odd jobs in Calcutta for the whole day without food, and had my meal
on my return to the Math at ten or eleven in the night. And these were
not solitary instances.

Saying these words, Swamiji sat for a while pursuing some trend of
thought. Then he resumed:

Real monasticism is not easy to attain. There is no order of life so
rigorous as this. If you stumble ever so little, you are hurled down a
precipice — and are smashed to pieces. One day I was travelling on foot
from Agra to Vrindaban. There was not a farthing with me. I was about a
couple of miles from Vrindaban when I found a man smoking on the
roadside, and I was seized with a desire to smoke. I said to the man,
"Hallo, will you let me have a puff at your Chillum?" He seemed to be
hesitating greatly and said, "Sire, I am a sweeper." Well, there was the
influence of old Samskaras, and I immediately stepped back and resumed
my journey without smoking. I had gone a short distance when the thought
occurred to me that I was a Sannyasin, who had renounced caste, family,
prestige, and everything — and still I drew back as soon as the man gave
himself out as a sweeper, and could not smoke at the Chillum touched by
him! The thought made me restless at heart; then I had walked on half a
mile. Again I retraced my steps and came to the sweeper whom I found
still sitting there. I hastened to tell him, "Do prepare a Chillum of
tobacco for me, my dear friend." I paid no heed to his objections and
insisted on having it. So the man was compelled to prepare a Chillum for
me. Then I gladly had a puff at it and proceeded to Vrindaban. When one
has embraced the monastic life, one has to test whether one has gone
beyond the prestige of caste and birth, etc. It is so difficult to
observe the monastic vow in right earnest! There must not be the
slightest divergence between one's words and actions.

Disciple: Sir, you sometimes hold before us the householder's ideal and
sometimes the ideal of the Sannyasin. Which one are we to adopt?

Swamiji: Well, go on listening to all. Then stick to that one which
appeals to you — grip it hard like a bulldog.

Swamiji came downstairs accompanied by the disciple, while speaking
these words, and began to pace to and fro, uttering now and then the
name of Shiva or humming a song on the Divine Mother, such as, "Who
knows how diversely Thou playest, O Mother, Thou flowing stream of
nectar", and so on.

</div>
