---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_xxvii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xxix.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XXVIII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_45e7_28.pdf)* )

\[Place: *From Calcutta to the Math on a boat*. Year: *1902*.\]

While walking on the banks of the Ganga at Calcutta one afternoon, the
disciple saw a Sannyasin in the distance approaching towards Ahiritola
Ghat. While he came near, the disciple found the Sannyasin to be no
other than his Guru, Swami Vivekananda. In his left hand he had a leaf
receptacle containing fried gram, which he was eating like a boy, and
was walking in great joy. When he stood before him, the disciple fell at
his feet and asked the reason for his coming to Calcutta unexpectedly.

Swamiji: I came on business. Come, will you go to the Math? Eat a little
of the fried gram. It has a nice saline and pungent taste.

The disciple took the food with gladness and agreed to go to the Math
with him.

Swamiji: Then look for a boat.

The disciple hurried to hire a boat. He was settling the amount of the
boat-hire with the boatman, who demanded eight annas, when Swamiji also
appeared on the scene and stopped the disciple saying, "Why are you
higgling with them?" and said to the boatman, "Very well, I will give
you eight annas", and got into the boat. That boat proceeded slowly
against the current and took nearly an hour and half to reach the Math.
Being alone with Swamiji in the boat, the disciple had an opportunity of
asking him freely about all subjects. Raising the topic of the
glorificatory poem which the disciple had recently composed singing the
greatness of the devotees of Shri Ramakrishna, Swamiji asked him, "How
do you know that those whom you have named in your hymn are the near and
intimate disciples of Shri Ramakrishna?"

Disciple: Sir, I have associated with the Sannyasin and householder
disciples of Shri Ramakrishna for so many years; I have heard from them
that they are all devotees of Shri Ramakrishna.

Swamiji: Yes, they are devotees of Shri Ramakrishna. But all devotees do
not belong to the group of his most intimate and nearest disciples.
Staying in the Cossipore Garden, Shri Ramakrishna said to us, "The
Divine Mother showed me that all of these are not my inner devotees."
Shri Ramakrishna said so that day with respect to both his men and women
devotees.

Then speaking of the way Shri Ramakrishna would indicate different
grades among devotees, high and low, Swamiji began to explain to the
disciple at length the great difference there is between the
householder's and the Sannyasin's life.

Swamiji: Is it possible that one would serve the path of lust and wealth
and understand Shri Ramakrishna aright at the same time? Or will it ever
be possible? Never put your faith in such words. Many among the devotees
of Shri Ramakrishna are now proclaiming themselves as Ishvara-koti (of
Divine class), Antaranga (of inner circle), etc. They could not imbibe
his great renunciation or dispassion, yet they say they are his intimate
devotees! Sweep away all such words. He was a prince of Tyagis
(self-renouncers), and obtaining his grace can anybody spend his life in
the enjoyment of lust and wealth?

Disciple: Is it then, sir, that those who came to him at Dakshineswar
were not his devotees?

Swamiji: Who says that? Everybody who has gone to Shri Ramakrishna has
advanced in spirituality, is advancing, and will advance. Shri
Ramakrishna used to say that the perfected Rishis of a previous Kalpa
(cycle) take human bodies and come on earth with the Avataras. They are
the associates of the Lord. God works through them and propagates His
religion. Know this for a truth that they alone are the associates of
the Avatara who have renounced all self for the sake of others, who,
giving up all sense-enjoyments with repugnance, spend their lives for
the good of the world, for the welfare of the Jivas. The disciples of
Jesus were all Sannyasins. The direct recipients of the grace of
Shankara, Ramanuja, Shri Chaitanya and Buddha were the all-renouncing
Sannyasins. It is men of this stamp who have been through succession of
disciples spreading the Brahma-vidyâ (knowledge of Brahman) in the
world. Where and when have you heard that a man being the slave of lust
and wealth has been able to liberate another or to show the path of God
to him? Without himself free, how can he make others free? In Veda,
Vedanta, Itihâsa (history), Purâna (ancient tradition), you will find
everywhere that the Sannyasins have been the teachers of religion in all
ages and climes. History repeats itself. It will also be likewise now.
The capable Sannyasin children of Shri Ramakrishna, the teacher of the
great synthesis of religions, will be honoured everywhere as the
teachers of men. The words of others will dissipate in the air like an
empty sound. The real self-sacrificing Sannyasins of the Math will be
the centre of the preservation and spread of religious ideas. Do you
understand?

Disciple: Then is it not true — what the householder devotees of Shri
Ramakrishna are preaching about him in diverse ways?

Swamiji: It can't be said that they are altogether false; but what they
are saying about Shri Ramakrishna is only partial truth. According to
one's own capacity, one has understood Shri Ramakrishna and so is
discussing about him. It is not bad either to do so. But if any of his
devotees has concluded that what he has understood of him is the only
truth, then he is an object of pity. Some are saying that Shri
Ramakrishna was a Tantrika and Kaula, some that he was Shri Chaitanya
born on earth to preach "Nâradiya Bhakti" (Bhakti as taught by Nâradâ);
some again that to undertake spiritual practices is opposed to faith in
him as an Avatara while some are opining that it is not agreeable to his
teachings to take to Sannyasa. You will hear such words from the
householder devotees, but do not listen to such one-sided estimates. He
was the concentrated embodiment of how many previous Avataras! Even
spending the whole life in religious austerity, we could not understand
it. Therefore one has to speak about him with caution and restraint. As
are one's capacities, so he fills one with spiritual ideas. One spray
from the full ocean of his spirituality, if realised, will make gods of
men. Such a synthesis of universal ideas you will not find in the
history of the world again. Understand from this who was born in the
person of Shri Ramakrishna. When he used to instruct his Sannyasin
disciples, he would rise from his seat and look about to see if any
householder was coming that way or not. If he found none, then in
glowing words he would depict the glory of renunciation and austerity.
As a result of the rousing power of that fiery dispassion, we have
renounced the world and become averse to worldliness.

Disciple: He used to make such distinctions between householders and
Sannyasins!

Swamiji: Ask and learn from the householder devotees themselves about
it. And you yourself can think and know which are greater — those of his
children who for the realisation of God have renounced all enjoyments of
the worldly life and are spending themselves in the practice of
austerities on hills and forests, Tirthas and Ashramas (holy places and
hermitages), or those who are praising and glorifying his name and
practising his remembrance, but are not able to rise above the delusion
and bondage of the world? Which are greater — those who are coming
forward in the service of humanity, regarding them as the Atman, those
who are continent since early age, who are the moving embodiments of
renunciation and dispassion, or those who like flies are at one time
sitting on a flower, and at the next moment on a dung heap? You can
yourself think and come to a conclusion.

Disciple: But, sir, what does the world really mean to those who have
obtained his grace? Whether they remain in the householder's life or
take to Sannyasa, it is immaterial — so it appears to me.

Swamiji: The mind of those who have truly received his grace cannot be
attached to worldliness. The test of his grace is-unattachment to lust
or wealth. If that has not come in anyone's life, then he has not truly
received his grace.

When the above discussion ended thus, the disciple raising another
topic, asked Swamiji, "Sir, what is the outcome of all your labours here
and in foreign countries?"

Swamiji: You will see only a little manifestation of what has been done.
In time the whole world must accept the universal and catholic ideas of
Shri Ramakrishna and of this, only the beginning has been made. Before
this flood everybody will be swept off.

Disciple: Please tell me more about Shri Ramakrishna. I like very much
to hear of him from your lips.

Swamiji: You are hearing so much about him all the time, what more? He
himself is his own parallel. Has he any exemplar?

Disciple: What is the way for us who have not seen him?

Swamiji: You have been blessed with the company of these Sadhus who are
the direct recipients of his grace. How then can you say you have not
seen him? He is present among his Sannyasin disciples. By service to
them, he will in time be revealed in your heart. In time you will
realise everything.

Disciple: But, sir, you speak about others who have received his grace,
but never about what he used to say about yourself.

Swamiji: What shall I say about myself? You see, I must be one of his
demons. In his presence even, I would sometimes speak ill of him,
hearing which he would laugh.

Saying thus Swamiji's face assumed a grave aspect, and he looked towards
the river with an absent mind and sat still for some time. Within a
short time the evening fell and the boat also reached the Math. Swamiji
was then humming a tune to himself, "Now in the evening of life, take
the child back to his home."

When the song was finished, Swamiji said, "In your part of the country
(East Bengal) sweet-voiced singers are not born. Without drinking the
water of mother Ganga, a sweet, musical voice is not acquired."

After paying the hire, Swamiji descended from the boat and taking off
his coat sat in the western verandah of the Math. His fair complexion
and ochre robe presented a beautiful sight.

</div>
