+++
title = "Bhairavānanda’s wicks: axa0retelling"
date = "2021-07-17"

+++
It was early in the school year and the last class for the week, the
English class. The students were restless as the sea at the time of the
tide from the pull of the impending weekend. For the first time in his
life, school seemed to hold something of interest to Somakhya as he had
just made acquaintance with the clever girl of the Aṅgiras-es. However,
at that point he was lost in working out the geometry of a new chaotic
map he had discovered. Vidrum, who sat beside him, peeked into his work,
trying to follow it, but soon lost track of the scribbles of his
algebra. Just then the English teacher entered the class and surveyed
the mood in the room, twirling his chastising rod. The more rowdy
students were in a raucous mood. Mahish and Gardabh were singing a
cyclical song using their desks, lunch boxes and water bottles as
percussion surfaces. The song ran thus in a local apabhraṃsha:  
There was a man.  
The man had a wife.  
The wife birthed a boy.  
The boy became a man  
The man had a wife.  
\<repeat>

Episodically, Mudgar decorated the song with single-word interjections
comprised of salacious apabhraṃsha words. The English teacher swung his
cane and charged towards them: “If I hear anymore of this I’ll have you
all stand outside the class.” Sensing the students’ mood, as he did once
or twice a month, he decided to provide some exit for the steam building
in his restless class: “Today we shall not have any lesson. Instead, I
will let two of you all tell the rest of the class a story. You must
hear the story quietly without interrupting and I will give you’ll five
minutes at the end of each story to ask questions and discuss it. I’ll
be choosing one boy and one girl to tell the story; however, be warned,
I will not tolerate any lewd story and shall punish you if you narrate
one. Today, I’m selecting Sharvamanyu as the boy who shall tell us the
first story. Come to the front of the class.”

Sharvamanyu did so and narrated a tale of a Marāṭhā or a Piṇḍārī evading
a wild chase from the English army and finally ending up eaten by a
mugger crocodile. After a lively discussion for five minutes the teacher
said: “As most of you’ll would have noticed, we have a new girl in the
class this year, Lootika. She did extraordinarily well in the surprise
entrance test we administered to verify her candidacy for admission to
our school. As you know, our institution strives for high standards and
hopes to send students to the best colleges by ranking in the highest
decile in the school-leaving certificate. She shows promise to be one of
our good students in final reckoning three years from now. Hence, I
select her as the girl who will tell the next story.”

As Lootika came to the front of the class, Mudgar whistled loudly, even
as Mahish made an obscene gesture and shouted, “Four eyes!”, alluding to
to Lootika’s spectacles. Lootika retorted: “Hey buffalo dung-skull!”.
The English teacher struck Mudgar with his cudgel, even as
[Mudgar](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/12/06/of-lives-of-men-of-times-of-men-iii/)
himself might have played a square cut on the field of cricket, and
swinging it menacingly he and went up to Mahish: “Lootika, stop
counter-swearing and tell your story. I’m the one supposed to maintain
discipline here. Mahish, I’d already warned you. Now, you shall stand
outside class, next to the door. The next time you do something like
this, my stick will mightily kiss you.”

With Mahish evicted from the class, Lootika told them the following
story:  
Friends, I will tell you a story that is believed by some to have been
composed by a certain Viṣṇuśarman. However, it is possible that it was a
folktale that was later inserted into the older work of Viṣṇuśarman. I
am going to follow the plot of the original closely but tell it in my
own words. In a certain town in central India lived four brāhmaṇa
youths, who were great friends. They were very poor and, as is usual,
the richer folk shunned them. They felt that nobody appreciated them for
their good qualities and no woman showed any interest in them due their
poverty. Tired of their destitution, they decided to seek a fortune
elsewhere. They declared that it was better to live in the jungle
wearing bark-fiber vestures than to be among their kin while being
indigent. Wandering a long way, they eventually reached the river Śiprā
in the environs of Avanti and took a dip in the tīrtha. Having ritually
purified themselves, they set out to the great temple of Mahākāla and
worshiped the god sincerely. As they were making their way out, they ran
into the great Śaiva yogin Bhairavānanda. He was a profound master of
the Śaiva lore. Having toiled through the voluminous tantra-s of the
tradition of Īśāna, Tumburu and the four sisters, Garuḍa and the
Bhūta-s, he attained the pinnacle of his mastery through the study of
the Bhairava-tantra-s. Thus, he became a renowned teacher with a school
at Avanti.

Having fallen at his feet, the four youths accompanied Bhairavānanda to
the hall of his school: “Young men what do you seek?”. The four: “Sir,
we are very poor. We have decided that we shall either become lords of
wealth or die in the attempt. We have heard of your great renown in the
magical arts, the nidhividyā by which a man finds subterranean wealth or
the kauberīvidyā by which one can locate the great stores of wealth that
the lord of the yakṣa-s has provisioned at secluded spots on this earth.
We are exceedingly brave and committed, and are willing to perform bold
or arduous acts to succeed in this regard. Please inform us of the right
way — whether we should seek deep cavernous mines, or perform
Bhairava-sādhana in the cremation grounds, or worship the goddess
Śākini, or sell human meat to attain our goal.” Bhairavānanda took pity
on the youths and brought out four cotton wicks from his sacristy:
“Young men, proceed north to the Himālayas towards the source of the
Sindhu river along the the route I shall lay out. These wicks will act
like dowsing rods. As you climb the slopes of the great mountain, if the
wick accidentally drops from your hand dig at that spot. You will
definitely come upon some great source of wealth. Collect it and return
home.” Having consented, the four youths hurried along on their
Himālayan expedition, pregnant with excitement. They made a pact that
they would share whatever wealth they might obtain upon the dropping of
the wick. After a few days of wandering in the regions where the Sindhu
river descends from the great mountain glacier, the wick of one of the
men dropped. They quickly excavated the spot and soon hit a lode of
copper. The man whose wick dropped said: “Let us take this wealth and
return. We can make quite a gain from selling this copper and establish
ourselves.” The three other friends shot back: “You are welcome to
return with all the copper you want. We have three more wicks and hope
to discover even greater stuff than this red metal.”

Thus, the three proceeded; in a while one of their wicks dropped. This
time their excavation yielded a lode of silver. The youth said to his
friends let us take this silver and return — we have done much better
than a mere mass of copper that our poor friend settled for. The two
others retorted: “We hit copper first and now silver. Do we need to tell
you what lies ahead?” The man who found the silver said: “I’m content
with this silver and will take it and return.” The two others pressed on
and neared a dizzying cataract on the Sindhu. There the third wick
dropped. They dug up that spot and caught the gleam of huge nuggets of
gold. The lad whose wick had fallen said that they their quest had truly
ended as there was nothing more to find and urged that they split the
gold between themselves and go back home. His companion thundered. You
are a fool. We still have a wick left. Why should we waste this
blessing, which has come to us from the great Mahādeva himself via the
mantravādin Bhairavānanda. Each time around we have greater success. You
may return with your gold if you choose, I am going to press on alone —
I believe I’ll find diamonds and sapphires, which will yield us more
wealth than gold. The youth who found gold said that he would wait for
his friend to return at that spot and they could go back home together.

The fourth lad pressed on but soon realized that he had lost his way as
saw none of the landmarks which Bhairavānanda had indicated to them. He
found himself going in circles and ran out of water. To break the cycle
and find some water he just marched ahead on a straight line. Soon he
came upon a ghastly sight. A man stood in the midst of a cold plateau
with his body bespattered with gore. On his head spun a wheel on a peg
that seemed to trepan his skull and blood freely spurted out of that
perforation. The fourth youth asked this unfortunate man: “What the hell
are you doing to yourself? Is there someplace I can find water?” As soon
as he spoke that wheel flew away from the man’s head and dropped on the
head of the fourth lad and began drilling into it. He yelled: “Ouch,
what is this!”. The man who had just been relieved of the wheel said to
him: “I thank you from the bottom of my heart for relieving me. I don’t
know how long I have been waiting for your arrival.” The fourth lad: “I
don’t understand, please get this wheel of my head”. The original
wheel-bearer: “Young man, like you, I too had sought wealth from the
dropping of the final wick. Thus, did I reach this spot and had the
wheel jump on to my head from another unfortunate soul from Tibet who
stood here bearing wheel before me. When another man with a wick comes
this way, you too will be eventually relieved.” The fourth lad:“How long
have you been here?” The former wheel-bearer: “It seems like eons. Who
is the emperor of India now?” The fourth lad: “When we left on our
expedition, queen Mṛgāvati had just handed over the throne to her son
Udayana Vatsarāja, who mightily lords over the land from Kauśāmbī.” The
original wheel-bearer: “Oh, I’ve never heard of him. When I left home,
Rāmacandra Aikṣvākava held sway over the land from the city of Ayodhyā,
like an Indra on earth.” The fourth youth shrieked in pain: “What! that
is terrible — it must be more than a 1000 years. How is that even
possible!”. The old wheel-bearer: “Well, this is the punishment that has
been set up by the great yakṣa Naravāhana. Indeed, it has been said that
the man who seeks to plunder that which belongs to the great deity of
the North is penalized thus. As you would have noticed, your thirst
should have left you — deathless, hungerless, thirstless but full of
unrelenting pain, like me, you too shall suffer this wheel of Kubera
till someone else comes by with a wick. Thank you and I shall now take
leave.”

Having waited long for his friend the third youth followed his footsteps
and eventually found him suffering the torture of the wheel. Having
heard his tale the third youth said: “Friend, I told you that we had met
our ultimate aim in gold. But lacking sense and fueled by false
extrapolations you went ahead. Now I’ll have to leave you and return.”
The fourth lad: “You are such a heartless fellow to betray your friend
in suffering and return to a life a wealth. You can only be called a
traitor who will go to naraka.” The third lad: “That would be so if I
were in situation where I could have helped you. No human can ever free
you from this punishment which has been inflicted by none other than the
great Vaiśravaṇa. Seeing the pain on your face from the boring of your
skull, my instincts tell me that I should leave this place right away —
I sense the deepest dangers lurking in this spot from the dreadful
agents of Kāmeśvara. Goodbye.”

As Lootika finished her tale, some of her classmates, Tumul, Vakraas,
Skambhakay and Muhira started loudly vocalizing: “boo…boo… what a boring
story! Lootika is a bore!” The English teacher intervened: “Stop it or
I’ll whack you. Lootika, I want you to ignore them and quietly go back
to your desk. It was an excellent story, capped with a didactic
flourish, which introduced the class to trivia of history, geography and
quaint superstitions reminding one of the notorious
[Rasgol-bābājī](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2019/04/29/leaves-from-the-scrapbook-4/).
Lootika also introduced few words and phrases that some of you’ll might
not be familiar with. Note those, check their meanings in the
dictionary, and write down sentences with each of them. Now, Tumul,
stand up and tell the class what you thought was the message of the
story?” Tumul: “Sir, it is was just a long-winded way of saying a simple
sentence: it is bad to be greedy. Other than that, the story does not
make much sense, and as you said, master, it talks about all kinds of
superstitions that cannot be true — Lootika doesn’t seem to know even
basic physics — a wheel cannot spin by itself forever. it seems she just
wants to show off that she knows some words from the dead language
Sanskrit in an English class. Moreover, how much copper ore can a single
man take back home from high in the mountains. Surely, it will not be
enough to even pay for his food and boarding on the way back. As a
Brahmin girl, Lootika is simply following the example how her kind has
operated since time immemorial — obfuscate simple, common sense things
with elaborate stories packed with mumbo-jumbo.” The English teacher:
“Tumul, you are unable to get the device of a metaphor. Now it is you
who are are being long-winded to be mean to your classmate. We need to
be more welcoming to our new students. Hence, I want you to write out
the whole story in your own words properly explaining its significance
and bring it over to me next fortnight. Now, Somakhya stand up and tell
the class what you think about the story.”

Somakhya: “I think there are two ways, not mutually exclusive ways, to
look at it. First, due to conservation laws and the principle of entropy
growth can never be infinite. Hence, if you keep on the growth curve you
will go up and eventually down. Second, you could look at it as the
problem of the gambler’s ruin at a casino. Even if the gambler makes
some gains, eventually he will be ruined if the probability of loss is
lesser than or equal to 0.5. In both these, which have bearing on real
life, the big question is when exactly to bail out. If you bail out too
soon you may catch much less of the growth or gain than those who stuck
on longer but stay too long and you will go bust. That’s the metaphor of
the wheel of Kubera. But making that decision can be extraordinarily
difficult.”

The English teacher: “That is a practical take. Vidrum, what do you have
to say?” Vidrum: “Based on what Somakhya has said, I think the whole
story is a metaphor for participating in pyramid schemes like
cryptocurrency. If you know when to quit you can retire with good money
but if you don’t you can sink into misery like that fourth chap. Hence,
I think persistence might be an overrated quality and quitting often
might after all help.” E.T: “That last sentence is a rather negative
take and I believe a fallacious inference from the story. Hemling, I see
you gesticulating and getting excited. Did you understand the story and
have anything to say?” Hemling: “ The problem looks hard because the
gain function in Lootika’s example is discrete. If it were a continuous
function that were differentiable throughout then I think we could for
most part use the derivative of the function to reach some conclusions
regarding when it would right to bail out. For typical gain functions in
real life you have decrease in the magnitude of the derivative as you
are nearing the peak. That should give you a reasonably precise
indication of when to quit.” The English teacher seemed confused:
“Hemling, you better keep that stuff for your math class.”

ET: “Sumalla, what do you have to say about the story?” Sumalla smiled
and puckered her lips and face, uttering a lot of filler words to make
up for the lack of anything substantial to say. Finally, she managed to
string a few grammatical sentences: “I love diamonds and also sapphires
but I would be happy to settle for gold. Lootika always has something
more to say any topic. Sir, please ask her if there is some secret
message in this story.” ET: “Alright, Lootika, I’ll permit you to have
the last word on your story.”

L: “First, I think Tumul is a fool. He for one should brush up his
physics by reading about photovoltaic cells — something like that could
have kept the wheel spinning.” E.T.: “I don’t want you to go there
Lootika. Stick to your story.” L: “I think the boys have more or less
covered the basic message of the difficulty that we constantly face in
life with respect to the quitting problem. However, I’m not sure if
Vidrum’s strategy of quitting often is the winning one in an unqualified
setting. Maybe it can be explored by means of computer simulations. I’d
also add that these problems are made more complex by hidden variables
that we cannot see or whose causal chain is too complex for us to trace
— like what decided whose wick would fall when. Hence, as a general
lesson, it is good to think in terms of the nature of probability
distributions and perform cost-benefit analysis accordingly while making
life decisions. That said, life in the margins with some copper is much
better than getting trepanned.”

Just then the bell rang announcing the end of the class and the school
closed for the weekend. Lootika realized that there were classmates who
hated her and might want to have a go at her for the punishment they had
suffered. Hence, she quickly scurried over to Somakhya and his gang.
Thus, shielded by her friend she exited the school premises.

