+++
title = "Indo-European Origins, Part II: The Nordic, Kurgan, and Anatolianxa0Theories"
date = "October 29, 2016"

+++


As Alain de Benoist has noted, there are two main schools of thought on
the Indo-European *urheimat* (homeland): one which derives the
Indo-Europeans from the North, and another which brings them from South
Russia (and ultimately the Near East).

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/t31.0-8/13227487_164703127261108_3762027708223922058_o.jpg)

Suprà: *Zones of Indo-European origin proposed by scholars over the
19–20th centuries, showing a trend toward the northwest over time.*



![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13151831_164703337261087_5949609775027415208_n.jpg?oh=c1716c88da68bdf760d419f7f819443c&oe=58A70BB0)

At the beginning of the 20th century the origin of the Indo-Europeans
was located in the Saxony-Denmark-Scania region by Gustaf Retzius
(anatomist), Karl Penka (ethnologist), and Ludwig Wilser (philologist).
This **Nordic Theory**, defended by the archæologist **Gustav
Kossinna**, was the prevailing school of thought on Indo-European
origins until it after WWII. It was supplanted, at least in the
English-speaking world, by the **Kurgan** (South Russian) Theory and the
**Anatolian** Theory, both of which bring the Indo-European languages
into Europe via invasions from the east.

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13227139_164702107261210_6626194388437617241_n.jpg?oh=20a3c9b99eb3aa4d7daabad4ed21c118&oe=58A73977)

Kossinna concluded that the homeland of the Indo-Europeans was the
cradle of their last migratory wave, the **Germanic**, who had absorbed
the least non-Indo-European elements of all the Aryan peoples. According
to Kossinna, the Nordic race developed from a hybridization of two Upper
Palæolithic races, the **Cro-Magnon** and **Aurignac-Chancelade**, after
the end of the Ice Age—leading to the Hallstatt and Fælid subraces,
encompassing both long- and short-skulled types. Ten thousandyears ago,
the ancestors of the Indo-Europeans and Finns arose from this common
Mesolithic (Middle Stone Age) culture in southern Scandinavia, whence
rising sea levels forced them to emigrate from 6000 B.C. Kossinna dated
the *Centum-Satem*linguistic split to c.4000 B.C., when the *Satem*
people moved southward to form the Neolithic **Donaukultur** (Danubian
cultures) and ultimately the Greeks and Indo-Iranians.

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13221497_164696330595121_7366509896768960140_n.jpg?oh=bd2819f1b0906134bd9d03f0dc6e7f42&oe=589D06B8)

The **Kurgan Theory** is based on ideas developed by the
Anglo-Australian Marxist **Vere Gordon Childe** (1892–1957) and feminist
**Marija Gimbutas** (1921–94) who, despite their undeniable expertise as
archæologists, actually created more confusion than solved problems in
their field of ancient history. Gordon Childe had opposed the Nordic
Theory since 1926 for ideological reasons, deeming it too close to
German nationalism. Childe argued that the Indo-Europeans came from the
South Russian steppes between the Black Sea, Caucasus, Volga, and
Caspian: home of the *Kurgan* (Turkic for ‘burial mound’) or
**‘Ochre-Grave’** culture, based on their custom of smearing the dead
with red ochre. The ochre facilitated decomposition and left residues on
the skeleton. Indo-Europeanists like Hermann Hirt objected to this
theory based on the improbability of a steppe invasion impressing its
culture and language upon settled populations.

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13230081_164701670594587_6979097864793071601_n.jpg?oh=f2442d7dd895a25b117576b7a869a792&oe=58A47C77)

After the War academic favour swung from Kossinna to Childe, who had
also, since 1936, developed his theory of the so-called ‘**Neolithic
Revolution**,’ arguing that the transition from the Old Stone Age
‘hunters’ to the New Stone Age farmers constituted a ‘revolution’
dictated by ‘economic necessity.’ Even his most ardent supporters have
admitted this not only unconfirmed but sharply contradicted by
historical data. In fact there was no revolution, but a slow and gradual
transformation of **Mesolithic** society due to factors of religion,
culture, politics, and manpower.

The advent of **radiocarbon dating** – the real revolution – also threw
his theory into turmoil, revealing older dates for this culture in the
north than on the steppe. Childe, feeling outdatedand retreating
intoabsolute scepticism regarding Neolithic Nordic civilisation,
committed suicide in 1957. His disciple, **Marija Gimbutas**, stepped up
to reinvigorate the Kurgan theory. From 1956 to 1993 the
Lithuanian-American scholar wrote a series of articles reconstructing
**four waves** of Kurgan invasion from the Pontic/Volga steppe over the
period 4400–2500 B.C. She injected more serious arguments into the
theory than Childe, even if they were later proved inconsistent.

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13164360_164698330594921_8152280608107716323_n.jpg?oh=1a0cab9a79728aee10a39583da051b8f&oe=588D5384)

Gimbutas then worked out the famous theory of the Neolithic **Mother
Goddess**, positing a matriarchal, pacifist ‘**Old European**’
civilisation destroyed by violent battle-axe-wielding Indo-Europeans
from the steppes. She further argued that certain Neolithic pottery
marks anticipated the invention of ideographic writing. Gimbutas’
theories on Neolithic feminism and ideographic script were demolished by
further in-depth studies, and finally the origin of the Indo-Europeans
on the Kurgan steppe was itself disproven by carbon dating in favour of
northern Europe.

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13173810_164699293928158_6042365016938739103_n.jpg?oh=cc27a9ad63806ee8e7605dda982b8f82&oe=58915E1C)

In fact, the archæology can just as well be taken to support an
Indo-European invasion **south and** **eastward**into Eastern Europe,
with groups such as the proto-Greeks deriving from the Neolithic
cultures of Saxony and Thuringia: ‘The expansion of Nordic culture into
central and southern Russia left in its wake the megalithic **Volyn**
culture as well as the **middle Dnieper** and **Fatyanovo** cultures:
these are all characterized by **Globular** or **Corded** ceramics and
**battle-axes**. They invaded the territory of the Finno-Ugric
**Pit-Comb Ware** hunters, and encroached upon the painted-pottery
farmers of Tripolje. These invasions were vehemently denied by Nikolai
Marr and his comrades in the Soviet school of archæology, for whom the
existence of an Indo-European *Urheimat* was “a bourgeois prejudice,
just like faith in the existence of God,” and to whom the Indo-European
invasions represented a facet of capitalist mythology.’ \[**Romualdi**,
*The Indo-Europeans* (1978), p. 29\]

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13177910_164704557260965_5376483923853338313_n.jpg?oh=1b9772f2b7a2fdc6c434a4b4e7de189e&oe=588E70B8)

Circumstantial evidence also suggests a Nordic habitat for the early
Indo-Europeans, as highlighted by Evolian scholar Adriano Romualdi and
archæologist **Lothar Kilian**: ‘most of the names for trees and animals
common to the Indo-European languages, as well as the terms relating to
the climate and division of the year, pertain to the Nordic regions. The
Indo-Europeans knew of spring, summer and winter, but not autumn.’ The
sturdy, brush-maned Greek horses immortalised by Pheidias on the
Parthenon frieze are clearly depicted performing the ***Tölt***, a fifth
gait of which only Scandinavian ponies are genetically capable: imported
by the chariot-driving ancestors of the Hellenes? Perhaps.

![tolt](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/tlt.jpg?w=676)  
![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13165859_164699617261459_4535626752394414994_n.jpg?oh=6016e98f783e76da341c229cb2e42f60&oe=589383CF)In
the 1980s Prof. **Colin Renfrew** appeared on the scene and realised the
Kurgan thesis was getting seriously leaky. As a good ex-serviceman of
His Majesty, Lord Renfrew was predisposed to disregard evidence for the
Nordic theory (like his compatriot Gordon Childe) as smelling of Nazis.
For an alternative to Gimbutas he literally invented the Anatolian
theory, acc. to which the Indo-Europeans originated from Anatolia in the
7th millennium (??!), whence they allegedly brought the Eastern
Neolithic agricultural revolution to Europe, by cultural transmission(?)
and not physical migration.

Renfrew’s ideas enjoyed some popularity amongst unwary amateurs and
academic eccentrics seeking alternatives to the Nordic theory, until
Hittite scholars proved conclusively that the Indo-European languages of
Anatolia are younger than the non-Indo-European. The Hittites, Luwians,
and other I.-E. in Anatolia were an invading minority who introduced the
characteristically Aryan aristocratic horse-warrior ethos to areas with
no prior trace of this culture, or only traces in limited areas toward
the Euphrates. Previously Anatolia was occupied by pre-Indo-European
Pelasgians, Hattians, Hurrians, and Caucasians. If the Indo-Europeans
originated here in the Stone Age they would have made up the vast
majority of the region, but were in fact a small minority. Indeed, it’s
that all the Neolithic groups who spread into Europe from Anatolia in
the 7th millennium were associated with pre-Indo-European peoples.

Soviet linguists Thomas **Gamkrelidze** and Vyacheslav **Ivanov** made a
clumsy attempt to salvage *Ex Oriente Lux* in 1985: their interpretation
(based on the flawed Glottalic and Nostratic theories) located the
Indo-European homeland in the northern Middle East and Southern
Caucasus. Proto-Indo-European is linked with the South Caucasian
(Kartvelian) languages/cultures and ‘Proto-Indo-European culture
typologically belongs to the family of ancient Near Eastern \[Semitic\]
civilisations.’ Gamkrelidze and Ivanov’s theory is politically underlain
by the belief in progressive evolutionary development from lower to
higher (communistic) forms of society, from the perspective of the
working class. \[See Philip L. Kohl and G. R. Tsetskhladze,
‘Nationalism, Politics and the Practice of Archæology in the Caucasus,’
in P. L. Kohl and Clare Fawcett (ed.), *Nationalism, Politics and the
Practice of Archæology* (Cambridge, 1996)\]

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13174105_164700557261365_1000219328848147413_n.jpg?oh=76b6c0a5d45fcc01db825f57f1779b72&oe=58A79EEF)

The Anatolian Theory was quickly consigned to the dustbin by linguists.
The concept of the substratum (indigenous languages leaving traces in
invader languages) is a universally accepted linguistic proof. In
**Scandinavia**, there is no linguistic trace of pre-Indo-Europeans even
any Indo-European peoples before the Germanic, meaning that the language
must have very ancient roots here. The Nordic theory has quietly
returned to the academic fold, strengthened by Prof. **Jean Haudry**’s
circumarctic cosmological thesis and Prof. **Wolfgang Schmid**’s model
of Indo-European expansion from a Baltic nucleus, which is suggested by
the status of Lithuanian as the most conservative living Indo-European
language. Specialists in the Indo-European field who retained support
for a North European origin into the late 20th century include linguist
Giacomo Devoto, Indologist Paul Thieme, and archæologists Pere
Bosch-Gimpera and Alexander Häusler.

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13221660_164697273928360_4218133887266549738_n.jpg?oh=583933ce596cfc964017234bb12130d9&oe=58926237)

Current archæology does not support a large-scale invasion of
Indo-Europeans from the east, practically returning to an early-20th
century consensus on the homeland of the Indo-Europeans. Instead, the
earliest speakers of these languages were indigenous Northern Europeans
in the area of the Mesolithic **Maglemose culture**, between the Rhine,
the Baltic and the Vistula, including Jutland and Southern Sweden. This
developed into the Ertebølle, Nordic Megalithic (6500 B.C.), and the
pastoralist Neolithic **Funnelbeaker** culture (*Trichterbecherkultur*,
TRB), the likeliest source of the **lactose tolerance gene** and native
cattle breeds in Europe. TRB then evolved into the **Corded Ware** and
**Globular Amphoræ** cultures, also known as the **Battle-Axe**
cultures. It is from these cultures that the Indo-Europeans spread
throughout Europe.

![](https://scontent-syd2-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/13227020_164702507261170_6542976580528876570_n.jpg?oh=f844432af5e44fefd607a4114db44be5&oe=588E0B17)

The Kurgan Theory, of which the ‘new’ Anatolian Theory was merely a
distillation, has been widely discredited and survives largely on the
strength of academic inertia. The most rigorous scholars in the field
have swept the floor with Renfrew’s model, which no longer has any
scientific backing. A recent study comparing the DNA of modern and
prehistoric Europeans found no evidence amongst European populations for
the notable influx of Middle-Eastern genes which must have occurred if
European civilisation truly originated from the southeast.

There’s no doubt that hypotheses of a southeastern origin will remain in
circulation, however, since they fit in perfectly with the democratic
prejudices which seek to replace the warrior chieftain’s battle-axe with
the peasant’s hoe. Such a theory is ideologically too valuable to end up
on the back burner for the contradiction of a few inconvenient facts. If
‘scientific’ research were conducted with even a minimum of objectivity,
the Nordic origin of the Indo-Europeans would long have been
acknowledged, as had always been argued by ‘politically suspect’
scholars (and underlying their findings, the ‘forbidden knowledge’ of
Evola) even before the advent of ideological aberrations like ‘Out of
Africa’…

