+++
title = "The Origin of the Indo-Europeans, Part I: Earlyxa0Theories"
date = "October 29, 2016"

+++


The scientific study of the Indo-European language family is generally
dated to 1786, when Sir William Jones read his famous paper before the
Asiatic Society of Calcutta, which includes these immortal lines:

‘The Sanscrit language, whatever be its antiquity, is of a wonderful
structure; more perfect than the *Greek*, more copious than the *Latin*,
and more exquisitely refined than either, yet bearing to both of them a
stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and the forms of grammar,
than could possibly have been produced by accident… there is a similar
reason… for supposing that both the *Gothic* and the *Celtic*… had the
same origin with the Sanscrit; and the old *Persian* might be added to
the same family.’

![Sir William
Jones.jpg](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2016/10/sir-william-jones.jpg?w=676)

                                   
                                   
                        Early scholarship on the
Indo-Europeans was facilitated and influenced by two coinciding factors:
(1) Anglo-French colonialism (bringing knowledge of Asiatic cultures to
Europe); (2) Romantic-era disenchantment with dogmatic Christianity and
corresponding interest in the wisdom of the exotic East. The latter
cultural paradigm of *Ex Oriente Lux* (‘Light from the East’) was
anticipated by Enlightenment thinkers such as Voltaire and Kant, who
placed the origins of civilisation around the Himalayas. A craze for
Europe’s new-found Aryan cousins inspired the early Romantic generation
of scholars such as Friedrich Schlegel to locate the homeland of the
Indo-Europeans in India: such ‘Indomania’ was echoed by the
preoccupation of thinkers like Schopenhauer and Herder with Buddhist and
Hindu philosophies.

                                   
                                   
                      By the middle of the 19th
century, scholarly opinion on the origin of the Indo-Europeans had
shifted north and west, based initially on the Sanskritic vocabulary
evidence of Julius von Klaproth and F. A. Pott. A Central Asian or
Bactrian *Urheimat* (‘homeland’) was suggested by Max Müller, Adolphe
Pictet, Franz Bopp, and Jacob Grimm.

                                   
                                   
                     This was strongly criticized
by the ethnologist Robert Latham and the philologists Theodor Benfey and
Canon Isaac Taylor, who proposed an Indo-European homeland in the North
of Europe. ‘To deduce the Indo-Europeans of Europe from the
Indo-Europeans of Asia,’ Latham declared, ‘is like deriving the reptiles
of Great Britain from those of Ireland in herpetology’ (1851,
introduction to Tacitus’ *Germania*). This derivation of the
Indo-Europeans from the Nordic area was supported by the mythographer
Viktor Rydberg and the Celticist Sir John Rhys.

                                   
                                   
                        At the end of the 19th
century the *Ex Oriente Lux* paradigm, which affirmed the seniority of
Near Eastern civilisation over ‘barbaric’ Northern Europe, came under
heavy attack from the French Jewish archæologist Salomon Reinach, who
dubbed it ‘la mirage orientale.’ He was joined in chorus by the German
prehistorians Matthäus Much and Gustaf Kossinna, who championed Northern
Europe as the homeland of the Indo-Europeans and ethnocultural
fountainhead of the ancient world. We shall focus on this theory in the
second part of this essay.

