+++
title = "The post-Talikota struggle"

+++
After the fall of Vijayanagar some historians believe that Tirumala, the
brother of Ramaraya made an attempt to revive the city but failed. It is
believed that there was a conflict between him and his nephew Pedda
Tirumala over the control of the city and hence he decided to abandon
it. With the Vijayanagar army in shambles, Ramaraya’s nepotism at the
expense of traditional Hindu civil officers left the whole kingdom in a
state of chaos. Moslem horsemen roved over the countryside extorting
money and goods from the people. There was also a profusion of robberies
and plundering operations by gangs of warlords in the Telugu country. In
the Tamil country Nayakas of Madurai, Tanjavur and Gingee established
independent kingdoms, which to a great extant restored local stability
in these regions. It took Tirumala a whole six years to restore civil
administration and rebuild an army. He attacked Portuguese horse traders
and seized horses from them to raise a cavalry. He made Penukonda his
capital and started heavily fortifying it to prepare for a major
defensive war.

Imad Shah of Berar suffered massively and his kingdom soon ended within
a few years of Talikota. Barid Shah of Bidar, founded by the Turk Qasim
Barid from Azerbaijan, and Nizam Shah of Ahmednagar were also
considerably weakened. Adil Shah, who had recovered from the Talikota
war, marched southwards again in 1567 to continue the conquest of the
Vijayanagaran kingdom. Pedda Tirumala entered into negotiations with the
Sultan and directed the invader against his uncle Tirumala, whom he
feared. But the Sultan brushed him aside and took Vijayanagar and then
marched on Penukonda. Tirumala dispatched his commander Savaram
Chennappa Nayaka to repulse the Sultan. The Nayaka inflicted a defeat on
the Moslem forces through a surprise sally when the Sultan was expecting
a defensive reaction from the fort of Penukonda. Tirumala made Chennappa
commander of the Vijayanagar army and resorted to diplomacy to buy some
time for himself. Tirumala thought that his negotiations would result in
Nizam Shah and Qutb Shah forming a common cause against Adil Shah. But
instead the Moslems secretly made a pact with each other and launched a
Jihad on the Hindus in 1568. A twin Moslem army attacked the
Vijayanagarans at Adoni and Penugonda. Hard pressed in Adoni the Hindu
armies capitulated but Tirumala and Chennappa put up a strong resistance
at Penukonda and repulsed the Moslem forces from the Telugu country.
Tirumala then initiated negotiations with the Nayakas of Gingee,
Tanjavur and Madurai and unified them to his cause of the defense of the
South against the Turushkas. He appointed his 3 sons, Shriranga, Rama
and Venkatapati as viceroys at Penukonda, Shrirangapattanam and
Chandragiri to respectively administer the Telugu, Kannada and Tamil
divisions of the kingdom. He then strengthened his army to deter any
further Moslem attacks and finally ascended the throne with the title:
“Reviver of the decadent Karnata empire”. In 1572, he felt he was too
old to rule and retired to a religious life of Vishnubhakti.

For a while the Sultans watched, vary of the revived Southern army of
the Hindus. But by 1576 Adil Shah had vastly strengthened his army and
fortified Adoni as a base to launch a “non-stop war” on the
Vijayanagarans. A huge Mohammedan army suddenly set forth from Adoni to
attack Penukonda from different directions. The capital and treasury lay
in great peril, so Shriranga retreated with the treasury to Chandragiri
and from there established a supply line for Chennappa Nayaka to defend
Penukonda. One of the generals in the Moslem army was a Rigvedi
Maharashtrian Brahmin, Yamaji Rao. Chennappa sent a message to him
appeal to his duty to the Dharma against the Mlecchas and Turushkas.
Yamaji Rao accepted the message and joined the Vijayanagar side with the
Hindu troops in the Shah’s army and critical intelligence. Chennappa
immediately struck with great vigor. On December 21st 1576, the holy
solisticial day for the Hindus, Chennappa advanced heavy guns against
the Moslem flanks and opened an intense simultaneous bombardment from
the Penukonda ledges and the flanks. Adil Shah’s army broke up very
rapidly and retreated in disarray. Shriranga sent reinforcements to tear
apart the disarrayed Moslem ranks and they retreated. In the mean time
Shriranga negotiated peace with Qutb Shah who did not send any
reinforcements to Adil Shah allowing the Vijayanagarans to completely
evict him. However, Qutb Shah soon appointed Murari Rao, the Brahmin
brigand, as his commander-in-chief, and he began strengthening the
Golconda army. In 1579 Murari Rao launched a sudden plundering operation
and the head of a large Moslem army. His hordes began systematically
ravaging the territory south of the Krishna with great ferocity. In late
1579, he appeared near the great Nrisimha temple at Ahobilam, which had
been enormously endowed by several generations since the Reddis and the
Vijayanagarans. Along with his Moslem troops he ransacked the temple and
laid waste to it. He uprooted an ancient ruby-studded pure gold idol of
Vishnu and sent it to the Sultan as gift.

Shriranga, hurried to parry the attack and defeated Murari Rao and his
Golconda raiders. Finally, by 1580, he turned the tide and started
chasing the Golconda army northwards recovering the territory they had
seized. In the process Murari Rao was captured but his life spared
because of this brahminical origins. Ibrahim Qutb Shah was furious and
decided to settle the matters himself and invaded Kondavidu with the
rest of his army and took the fort. Then he launched a massive raid on
Udayagiri and slaughtered Hindus in the Jihad. But Shriranga kept the
fight on and repulsed the Moslem army from Udayagiri after an initial
retreat. Unfazed Qutb Shah struck at Vinukonda and seized the fort.
Shriranga along Chennappa rushed to counter the attack. After much
fierce fighting the Moslem army was forced to retreat. The Hindus
stormed the fort of Vinukonda after intense fighting. Then Chennappa
stormed Kondavidu and died fighting even as he forced the Islamic army
to retreat. But Shriranga got into an internecine conflict with his
brothers, who refused to cooperate in the national struggle. Qutb Shah
took advantage of this and in late 1580 captured Kondavidu firmly and
died in Golconda shortly after that. His son, Muhammad Quli became Qutb
Shah thereafter. In 1585 Shriranga died without issues and his brother
Venkatapati became the Raja. Venkata was faced with an aggressive Jihad
launched by the new Qutb Shah. The Qutb invaded Kurnool in Andra and
seized the territory shortly after Venkata came to power. Then he
ravaged Cuddapah and having completely laid waste to it, marched on
Anantapur burning and plundering the district. Next a large Moslem army
of the under the Qutb’s personal command besieged Penukonda. Another
Moslem division under the fierce Turk Rustam Khan ravaged Gandikota and
Gutti and annexed them. Venkata realized the deep crisis that had dawned
on the Hindus and decided to resort to stratagem. He sent a delegation
to the Shah stating that he was suing peace and accepting him as the
overlord of the conquered territory. The Shah thought the Hindu was
brought to his knees and pleased with his conquests decided to
consolidate them rather than stand a long siege before Penukonda.
Venkata, moved very rapidly to strengthen Penukonda to withstand a long
siege and declared war on the Moslems. The Sultan hurried back to renew
the siege. The Venkata waited till just before monsoon and launched a
strong artillery barrage on the Moslem army. The Moslems began to
retreat and the monsoons began swelling the Krishna river and cut off
their escape route. The Hindus fell upon the Moslem army and soundly
trashed it. Qutb somehow escaped the attack and retreated to Kondavidu.
Then Venkata attacked the Moslem garrison at Gutti and destroyed it to
re-conquer the fort. Then from Kondavidu a large Moslem force advanced
to provide relief to the garrison at Gandikota. But the Venkata
intercepted the army, destroyed it and stormed Gandikota to liberate the
territory that was earlier taken by Qutb Shah. Qutb Shah decided to put
an end to the Hindu resistance for good and sent his ace general Rustam
Khan with Moslem army of around 100000 men to smash Venkata. Venkatapati
quickly prepared for their charge and prepared an ambush for them
between Gandikota and the Penner River. Rustam Khan believed that the
Hindus were not reacting and fell into the Vijayanagaran ambush in mid
1588. The Hindus opened artillery fire and after having softened the
Moslem ranks fell upon them with their infantry and cavalry divisions. A
carnage followed, Rustam Khan’s head was cut off, and over 50,000 Moslem
troops were exterminated in the battle of Penner. It was great win for
the Hindus and the Sultan’s men were on the retreat everywhere. Venkata
followed this up with a strike on Udayagiri and liberated it from the
stranglehold of the Moslem troops. After this the Vijayanagar recovered
the territory lost to the Qutb Shahs and repulsed them beyond the
Krishna. Thus, till the end of Venkata’s rule the Moslem advance was
pushed beyond the Krishna. For another 28 years Venkatapati ruled wisely
and did much to restore the rest of South India that was under his
control to great prosperity.

However, the Hindu chiefs remained much disunited and after his death
there was a long period of internal instability. But the measure of
Venkata had kept out Moslems till Adil Shah recovered and sent Abdul
Wahabi to savagely attack Kurnool. But the Vijayanagar general
Gopalaraja defeated and repulsed this attack in 1620. Then another Adil
Shahi general Randhula Khan finally overcame the Hindu resistance, and
with help from some Hindu traitors took Bangalore in 1641. In 1645 the
Mogol Emperor of Delhi instructed the Sultans of the Deccan to wage a
Jihad of extermination on the Kaffrs of Hind in the south and make the
whole territory Moslem. Mustafa Khan led this Jihad. The last Hindu
ruler of Vijayanagara Shriranga III was too weak to do much and was
driven into exile. The Brahmins met at Tirupati to use to wealth from
temple donations for organizing a national defense against the Moslems.
The women too donated their jewels for this national movement. They
called upon the Nayaks to fight for the Dharma and inflicted a defeat on
Mustafa Khan. But Moslem powers combined their forces and pressed on
again with the Jihad with Sardar Mir Jumla strengthening Mustafa Khan’s
assault. The Hindus put up their last fight in very fiercely fought
battle at Virincipuram. While they suffered heavy losses in the
engagement, Moslems too suffered heavy losses and could not pursue their
conquests immediately. However, even as Shriranga III was vanishing into
oblivion in 1649, a new Hindu power that was to conquer the south had
emerged in the form of the king of the Maharattas.
