+++
title = "The first skirmishes"

+++
It was a cold and blustery day. We sent out a expeditionary force to
check out the fortress we had secured for the purpose of the showdown.
The conditions were similar to those predicted on the lower end on the
day of the impending campaign. We are still vary of fighting the
encounter in the famous battle ground “Gaugamela”. Our track record was
mixed. The first encounter was a dismal disaster despite the good
weather conditions. We knew what caused us the defeat but there was just
nothing we could do against that deficiency. The second encounter was
actually easy, we nearly screwed that one up too, but we won in the end.
Though the victory was of hardly any value. Anyhow, coming back to the
matter at hand we successfully inspected the fort and returned, though
the whole journey was quite scary. In the least we had trained ourselves
to the conditions.

Then we sent a raiding squadron to inspect the hostile territory. Our
men rapidly penetrated the poorly guarded fences. But then suddenly,
somewhat unexpectedly our second major weakness was exposed. Our men
came under heavy fire from the hostile camp. Some were killed. The rest
rapidly dodged the enemy charge and escaped unhurt. However, it struck
me that our second weakness was really grimly exposed. Looking back at
our reverses we noticed 3 major weaknesses :  
  
1\) sharIrasya oshadi-vanaspati: This had done us in badly in the
encounters at the “Gaugamela” and that of the bard’s hill. In the bard’s
hill battle we thought we had almost won an unexpected victory after
much tough fighting, but we could not do away with this weakness and
ultimately succumbed.  
  
2\) dagdharatha. Our second major weakness, that of the gandharva beaten
by arjuna. Many steps were taken by the sire to save us from this
weakness, but as though impelled by fate we never learned any of those
battle skills and now remain frightfully exposed. The more I think of
this weakness it strikes me hard that all the diplomatic endeavors
finally need force to back them.  
  
3\) kosha. Our third major problem, that limits us from striking
fearlessly in cold weather. We will take all the precaution to guard
against this.
