+++
title = "Lavers versus vajrAchArya: was a unicorn really there?"

+++
[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-m-Lkfi09_HI/UTOz4He2v4I/AAAAAAAACks/xroyJLEuBkc/s640/unicorns.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/yOvPlTErQmFa1Zjsq82ImtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Most students of Indian archeology and history are very familiar with an
animal called the unicorn on the seals of the IVC/SSVC. According to one
census they are present on 1159 seals collected from various Indus sites
(approximately 2/3rd of all seals). In addition to seals, 3D images of
this animal with a single horn have been recovered from Chanhudaro,
Harappa and Lothal suggesting that it was not merely an artistic
convention of showing a two horned animal in profile. Also arguing
against this claim is the presence of Indus art, other than seals, where
the unicorn is depicted alongside other animals like a bull and
antelope; the latter display two horns whereas the former has a single
horn. This is also the case when the unicorn is shown on 3-headed animal
seals, where the bull and the antelope always have two horns. The
animals on the Indus seals are among the most realistically depicted
objects of all items we see represented on them. Thus, there is really
no issue in identifying bulls, antelopes, makhors, tigers, elephants,
rhinos, buffaloes, scorpions. Even the constituent parts of imaginary
hybrid animals like the horned tiger can be made out. So in the absence
of any other information, one would reason that the unicorn is also a
faithful depiction of a real animal just like the rest. But the unicorn
is like no known living animal from jaMbudvIpa or elsewhere even if
might have some familiar features seen in other animals. So the question
arises as to what was this animal? The general consensus has been that
it is a mythical animal – a view expressed by white Indologists and
Western archeologists like Possehl and others.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-6K6vHHLnoUw/UTQLu58oOvI/AAAAAAAACl0/siDhdXtkKSQ/s800/unicorn_black.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/_Tg60zh1dL_Zyw6Z2RcoUtMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)  
A 3D unicorn from the SSVC

Nevertheless, it has puzzled us, and many others before us, that this
unicorn on the Indus seals has a certain resemblance to a description of
the unicorn by the yavana physician Ctesias who lived in the Achaemenid
court in Iran for almost 17 years (415-398 BCE; geographically
relatively close to the Indus region). He writes in his Indica, an
account of India regarding the unicorn:

“There are in India certain wild asses which are as large as horses, and
larger. Their bodies are white, their heads dark red, and their eyes
dark blue. They have a horn on the forehead which is about a foot and a
half in length. The base of this horn, for some two hands’-breadth above
the brow, is pure white; the upper part is sharp and of a vivid crimson;
and the remainder, or middle portion, is black. Those who drink out of
these horns, made into drinking vessels, are not subject, they say, to
convulsions or the holy disease \[epilepsy\]. Indeed, they are immune
even to poisons if, either before or after swallowing such, they drink
wine, water, or anything else from these beakers. Other asses, both the
tame and the wild, and in fact all animals with solid hooves, are
without the ankle-bone and have no gall in the liver, but these have
both the ankle-bone and the gall. This ankle-bone, the most beautiful I
have ever seen, is like that of an ox in general appearance and in size,
but it is as heavy as lead and its color is that of cinnabar through and
through. The animal is exceedingly swift and powerful, so that no
creature, neither the horse nor any other, can overtake it. When it
starts to run it goes slowly but it gradually increases its speed
wonderfully, and the further it goes, the swifter. This is the only way
to capture them: when they take their young to pasture you must surround
them with many men and horses. They will not desert their offspring, and
fight with horn, teeth, and heels; and they kill many horses and men.
They are themselves brought down by arrows and spears. They cannot be
caught alive. The flesh of this animal is so bitter that it cannot be
eaten; it is hunted for its horn and ankle-bone.”

People have generally held the view that this is a confused account,
with Ctesias conflating hearsay reports on rhinos, antelopes and asses
into a single unicorn. Calling it an ass might be on account of some
general idea of perissodactyl anatomy, arising from the similarities
between rhinos and equids, on part of Ctesias (after all he was a
physician). Even the Mogol tyrant Babur noticed the relationship between
the horse and the rhino. But there are some aspects of the description
that are clearly at odds with a rhino – the color of the animal, the
color of the horn, its great speed of running, and the ox-like ankle.
This account appears to be more compatible with an animal like the SSVC
unicorn than the rhino. Despite this, some people have dismissed the
link between Ctesias account and the Indus animal (e.g. Possehl), while
others, like the zoologist Lavers who has extensively studied this
issue, have felt that these are not real animals but mythical ones
composed from multiple inspirations. Against this backdrop comes the
work of gautama vajrAchArya who presents evidence that this Indus
unicorn was none other than the original Vedic and post-Vedic R^iShya of
Indo-Aryan tradition. He posits that it represents a real one horned
animal that was not only around in the SSVC but its horns were actually
used in ritual by Arya-s in North India.

Now, several authors, including Lavers have proposed links between the
R^iShyashR^i\~Nga legend and the unicorn. R^iShyashR^i\~Nga is first
mentioned in the tradition of the vaMsha brAhmaNa of the sAmaveda, where
he and his father vibhANDaka are founders of the tradition of saman
singing. His story is elaborated in the itihAsa-s and in the rAmAyaNa he
is the potential niyoga seminal donor in the fertility ashvamedha of
dasharatha. This keeps with the virile nature of the R^ishya seen in the
form of the prominent li\~Nga in the SSVC seals. Several authors, even
some of those who connect the motif of the R^ishyashR^i\~Nga legend with
that of Enkidu in the Gilgamesh, have also admitted possibility of the
SSVC unicorn playing a role in the development of the R^ishyashR^i\~Nga
legend in Indo-Aryan texts. But in large part these authors have
considered the unicorn to be a mythical animal. However, what
vajrAchArya does is to propose that it was a probably a real one-horned
animal known to the SSVC and also probably the Indo-Aryans.

In the earliest layers of the shruti we have multiple references to the
R^ishya. These include one in the RV in the sUkta of devAtithi kANva
(noticed by vajrAchArya) and one in the aindra nivid used in the soma
offering to indra (unnoticed by him). The first goes thus:

R^ishyo na tR^iShyann avapAnam A gahi pibA somaM vashAM anu | (RV
8.4.10ab )  
Come like a thirsty R^ishya to the water tank; drink soma as you please
\[Footnote 1\].

Here vajrAchArya correctly notes that the R^ishya is a wild animal that
has come out of thirst to the water tank (avapAna) that is used by the
domestic animals.

Second goes thus:  
asya made jaritar indra R^ishyAm iva pamphaNataH parvatAn prakupitAn
aramNAt |  
In its \[soma’s\] exhilaration O chanter indra set to rest the agitated
mountains that were like bounding R^ishya-s.

In the AV-P 4.5.6 the virility of the R^ishya is mentioned (wrongly
stated as AV-S 4.4 by vajrAchArya), whereas in AV-P 19.24.2 the diseases
are said to bound away like R^ishya-s when treated by gulgulu (guggulu).
In AV-S 5.14.3 (a pratya\~Ngira ritual) the horn of the R^ishya is
mentioned in singular – this is a key observation that is strongly
argued by vajrAchArya. The single horn is also mentioned in a parallel
mantra in AV-P 7.1.10 (not noticed by vajrAchArya). The form of this
mantra, when compared to that in the AV-S, suggests that there might
have been a form of the pratya\~Ngira ritual that actually involved the
R^ishya horn (potentially negating the translation of vajrAchArya but
not his proposal of the single horn \[Footnote 2\]). Thus, from the
vaidika tradition we can infer the following: 1) the R^ishya was a wild
animal rarely seen in the vicinity of settlements of the Arya-s. While
it is often translated as an antelope, there are multiple other Vedic
terms for antelopes that do not ever seem to be used equivalently with
R^ishya. It was also probably a rare animal suggested by its relatively
infrequent mention. 2) There is evidence for it being considered a
virile animal in the shruti, and this is consistent with both the tale
of R^ishyashR^i\~Nga and the SSVC seals. Moreover, indra being compared
to a R^ishya is also in line with him being compared to other virile
horned animals like vR^iShabha and gaur. 3) It was a animal capable of
bounding and running fast – this is consistent with Ctesias’ account of
the unicorn and not inconsistent with the morphology of the SSVC
unicorn. 4) The comparable references in the AV-P and AV-S suggest that
it had a single horn. However, vajrAchArya’s further claim that this
horn was used to make a the parIshAsa-s for holding the heated pravargya
vessel is rather unfounded: Just because (as he correctly argues) the
horn of the R^ishya is called parIshAsa in the AV tradition it does not
mean that the parIshAsa-s used in the pravargya ritual were made from
that horn. It amounts to arguing that because the rhino is called
khaDga, swords were made from the rhino’s horn\! In any case, as
proposed by vajrAchArya, we do see philological support from the Vedic
and post-Vedic Indo-Aryan tradition for the R^ishya being a one horned
animal with features consistent with the unicorn of the SSVC seals and
aspects of Ctesias’ Indian unicorn. Thus, we do feel we cannot dismiss
the R^ishya and the SSVC unicorn being the same. The Vedic references,
though rather infrequent, do suggest the possibility of it being a real
animal, which goes well with the argument based on the realism of the
SSVC animal depictions made above. Other bits of information from Vedic
and post Vedic texts might be adduced as circumstantial arguments of the
reality of the R^ishya. For instance, the unicorn’s color alluded to by
Ctesias is similar to what the Hindu naturalist varAhamihira states
regarding the R^ishya’s color in his bR^ihat saMhitA (65.2; where he
describes a ram with color similar to it). Likewise the description of a
trap in RV 10.039.8 as a R^ishyada points to the presence of traps that
might have been used to hunt real R^ishya-s. Indeed, the hunting of a
R^ishya by rAma and lakShmaNa is mentioned in the rAmAyaNa:  
tau tatra hatvA chaturo mahAmR^igAn varAham R^ishyaM pR^ishataM
mahArurum | 1.52.102ab  
i.e. they hunted four great beasts – a boar, a R^iShya, pR^ishata (Axis
axis) and a mahAruru (Rucervus duvaucelii). Given that memory of the
R^ishya is there in the much later bauddha texts, pointed by
vajrAcharya, it is quite possible that if not the animal itself some
memory of it was also around during the time of the composition of the
rAmAyaNa. Thus, on the whole the inference of the reality of the
R^ishya, while suggestive and logical, is not entirely unambiguous and
begs for more clear-cut archeo-zoological support.

Before moving on archeo-zoological considerations we shall first touch
upon what comparative linguistics can bring to the table in this regard.
First, from the form of the word, R^ishya appears to be part of the core
Indo-European heritage in Indo-Aryan. While to my knowledge there is no
surviving cognate currently available in old Iranian, we have two
cognates in later Iranian languages. In Wakhi from the Wakhan corridor
and Khotanese, both eastern Iranian languages we have rUsh/rUSh for the
large Argali ram, which can be derived from Old Iranian R^ishya. In
Slavic we have cognates (the Indo-Iranian versions are rhotacized with
respect to them), like losu (Russian), los (Czech) which stand for elk.
Further, these appear to be cognates of Latin alces and proto-Germanic
alkhi (both meaning elk), which are the kentum forms opposed to the
satem forms lacking the initial vowel in the former group. This suggests
that they are indeed descendants of the PIE \*\[hx\]olkis. It appears
that the meaning change primarily happened in the Indo-Iranian branch
with the Iranians appearing to have applied it to a sheep, while Indians
applied it to an animal in India. Based on the cognacy with the elk the
R^ishya has been routinely assumed to be a large Indian cervid close to
the elk like the Sambar or perhaps some other artiodactyl, such as a
bovid or an antelopid. However, given that in Iranian we see a major
change in meaning, there is nothing holding it from being applied to
some other animal in Indo-Aryan. Hence, even though the linguistic
argument might suggest that R^ishya was an animal similar to what
Indo-Aryans were already familiar with in their Inner Eurasian homeland,
there still enough room for it being applied to a different animal in
the subcontinent.

To date no skeletal remains suggestive of such an animal have been
reported from the faunal records of SSVC sites. This by itself should
not be taken as conclusive evidence against a real monocerotic R^ishya –
after all we concluded that it was a relatively rare forest animal and
is unlikely to be found in the urban or even rural faunal record from
the SSVC sites. Despite Ctesias calling the Indian unicorn an equid we
can say with some confidence that it was unlikely to be a perissodactyl.
No equid extant or fossil is known to bear horns suggesting that the
genetic program for horn production was entirely absent in this clade of
perissodactyls. It is also unlikely to be a rhino because the shape of
the horn as noted in the SSVC seals and the Indo-Aryan texts is
inconsistent with the horn of any fossil rhinocerotid leave alone extant
ones. This leaves us with artiodactyls as the most likely candidates,
which is consistent with the characteristic astralagus mentioned by
Ctesias and the depictions on the SSVC seals. Paired horns were probably
either a ancestral feature for artiodactyls or, if the camelids are the
basal-most clade, they were ancestral to the clade uniting the pigs and
ruminants. In addition to paired horns, medial single bony horns are
known from protoceratids, giraffids and pigs, but these are typically
accompanied by paired horns over the eyes and never occur by themselves.
This, along with other anatomical and geographical constraints makes
them all poor candidates for the R^ishya. However, we know of three
enigmatic fossil bovids: Paraurmiatherium from Samos, Greece;
Urmiatherium from Iran; and Tsaidamotherium from Asia with features of
interest in this regard. In the first of these the paired horn cores
come close together, in the second they fuse at the base and in
Tsaidamotherium they completely fuse to form a single shaft. The exact
phylogenetic position of these taxa remains unclear though there is
support for them being within caprinae perhaps close to Ovibos (muskox).
It is possible that forms like Tsaidamotherium emerged on multiple
occasions from forms resembling Urmiatherium via repeated fusion of the
horn cores into a single horn. Given their widespread distribution in
Eurasia, it is quite possible that such forms were found in northern
India. Therefore, if vajrAchArya’s unicorn indeed existed we should
probably find remains of a bovid artiodactyl with the fusion of the horn
cores into a single medial horn – an animal resembling Tsaidamotherium
is a viable model for such an animal, although Tsaidamotherium itself
was a little too far back in time to be the R^ishya itself (\~8-5 Mya).
A member of caprinae would also be in line with the above noted semantic
shift of the old Indo-European word for elk for a caprine in Iranian.

This is not the first time an archeological depiction has suggested the
presence of an extinct animal. The most famous case is that of the
giraffe Sivatherium. A copper figurine of a horned ruminant was found at
Kish, Mesopotamia. The young Edwin Colbert, who was to late become
famous as the author of noted paleontogical works identified this
ruminant as being a late surviving Sivatherium. However, since then the
figure was restored further when its broken horns were found. With the
restored horns the resemblance to Sivatherium is less marked. So some
workers claimed that it was not Sivatherium but a fallow deer. Still the
case is far from settled and it could well turn out to be a depiction of
another giraffid, perhaps a late surviving Climacoceratid? Then we also
have the case of the mysterious
[sharabha](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/05/20/the-arimaspas-dinosaurs-griffins-and-sharabha/).

::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: When we were talking about this to a learned AV scholar from
the mahArATTa country the said scholar proposed that the “standard
device” with holes exuding droplets seen on the SSVC seals in front of
the unicorn actually stands for a soma filter and that the unicorn was
indra as a R^ishya \[See above figure\]. We are not entirely convinced
by the “standard device” being a soma filter, an idea also floated by
the Dravidianist Mahadevan. However, it is possible that it might be
something inspired by the soma filter of the Indo-Aryans. What ever the
case, the “standard device” and the unicorn were very important symbols
for the SSVC peoples. In addition to its preponderance on SSVC seals,
there is a fragmentary seal from Mohenjodaro wherein a procession is
depicted with people carrying the “standard device”, and image of the
unicorn and a flag-like object. Such a procession is unparalleled in
Indic literature and certainly, while mentioned, the R^ishya or any
other unicorn imagery is not so prominent in the earliest Indo-Aryan
texts. In particular the potential religious importance of the unicorn
to the SSVC people might weaken the case for it being a real animal.
Several have suggested that the ekashR^i\~Nga form of viShNu in later
Indo-Aryan tradition might have been inspired by this imagery. It is
also possible that the unicorn motif spread to early China where it was
seen as a teacher of writing.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-4KJBa60QtIw/UTQrnJVe_GI/AAAAAAAACmE/vWcCqAUchI0/s800/unicorn_procession.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/8SJXsTXV_cZ-L_d-IfHLgdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)  
Unicorn procession

Footnote 2: This mantra is deployed in the great shAntika rite specified
in the kaushika sUtra to counter kR^ityA-s in which several
pratya\~Ngira sUkta-s are deployed followed by a final set of oblations
with the 12 names of pratya\~NgirA. AV-S 5.14.3 reads:  
\*R^ishyasyeva parIshAsaM parikR^itya pari tvachaH |  
kR^ityAM kR^ityAkR^ite devA niShkam iva prati mu\~nchata ||

vajrAchArya translates this as:  
O gods, chop off the spell like the single horn of the R^ishya around
its skin and fasten the spell upon him, who prepares it, as (one
fastens) an ornament.  
\*In our oral tradition and also Gujarat the first word is typically
recited as R^ishya; however, chanters from the mahArATTa country recite
it as rishya as printed by Satvalekar.

Now AV-P 7.1.10 reads:  
R^ishyasyeva parIshAsaM parimAya pari tvacaH |  
durhArde cakShuShe kR^ityAM grIvAsu prati mu\~ncatu ||

Here we note that parikR^itya is replaced by parimAya, the kR^ityAkR^it
(the abhichArika who casts a kR^ityA) by the durhArd chakShus (the
malignant abhichArika who uses his eyes to cast the kR^ityA). The niShka
is a necklace and in its place we have the locative for necks. Thus
effectively these two mantra-s are largely cognate and being used in the
same rite should be understood similarly. Now parimAya (in place of
parikR^itya) means to measure around the perimeter. Hence, we hold that
the word parikR^itya is not from the root kR^it, meaning cut but from
kR^it as in an action (to do). So we believe that vajrAchArya’s
translation, by following that of the American indologist Whitney, is
inaccurate. Actually parikR^itya here means going around. Now this
leaves us with the question what going around or measuring around the
skin like a R^ishya’s horn would mean? The SSVC unicorn’s horn is shown
with several circumferential ridges. So one possibility is that in
course of the rite the ritualist draws around subject’s skin in a
circumferential pattern similar to the horn ridges to release the
kR^ityA. It is also possible this action of measuring or going around
the skin was originally done with an actual R^ishya-s horn and by that
action the kR^ityA was supposed to have been released from the subject
and fastened on to the abhichArika’s neck. Indeed, the use of deer horns
is known from AV-S 3.7 where a piece of stag antler is used in treatment
of kShetriya in a ritual described in the kaushika sUtra. John Marshall
who excavated at Mohenjodaro notes that horns of at least four deer
species were recovered with cuts and notches for removing small pieces
probably used in comparable rituals or treatments.
