+++
title = "The end of the heathens"

+++
In 438 BCE the 12 meter image of the great goddess Athena made by the
foremost of the yavana idol makers, Pheidias under the patronage of
Perikles was installed at the Acropolis in Athens. It was built with 1.1
tons of gold, the face and the arms were made entirely from ivory and it
was decorated with gems. It was described thus by the Pausanias in the
100s of the common era:

“*The image of Athena is upright, with a tunic reaching to the feet, and
on her breast the head of Medusa is worked in ivory. She holds a statue
of Nike about four cubits high, and in the other hand a spear; at her
feet lies a shield and near the spear is a serpent. This serpent would
be Erichthonius. On the pedestal is the birth of Pandora in relief*
\[description of the Parthenon temple of Athena\].”

873 years after its installation, the pious Christian emperor Theodosius
II passed an edict to extirpate the already beleaguered heathens:

“*All persons of criminal pagan mind we interdict from accursed
immolations of sacrificial victims and from damnable sacrifices and from
all other practices prohibited by the authority of the more ancient
ordinance, and we order that all their shrines, temples, sanctuaries, if
any even now remain intact, should be destroyed by the magistrates’s
command and that these should be purified by the placing of the
venerable Christian religion’s sign \[the Cross\] – all persons knowing
that if it it shall have been established by suitable proofs before a
competent judge that anyone has mocked this law, the said person must be
punished with death* \[Theodosius II legal edict 16.10.25 Nov 14th, 435
CE\].”

The pretasAdhaka-s swung into zealous action putting the pious emperor’s
directives into practice. They damaged the eastern pediment of the
Parthenon and then uprooted the Athena from its precincts and placed a
cross atop it. Thus, they recycled it as a church for the puMshchalI who
birthed the preta. Subsequently, the Parthenon was to become a Masjid
when fatih sultan Mehmed-II of the Osmans conquered it from the
pretAcharin-s in 1460 and erected a minar. In 1687 during the war
between the two West Asian cults the temple was blown up by the
pretacharin-s leaving the ruins we see today at the Acropolis.

While the image of Athena was uprooted it was not destroyed and was
taken by the last of the great yavana R^iShi-s, Proclus (Πρόκλος), the
mathematician, heathen lawyer, philosopher, hymn composer and ritualist,
to a villa in the southern Acropolian slope. Here the last sacrificers
of the old deities of the yavana-s, besieged and battered, charily
assembled for their rituals, away from the gaze of “those who moved that
which should not be moved” and “the neighbors who abandon sobriety”.
Though “the typhonic winds of Christianity” were hammering their world,
they still took hope as long as the towering figure of Proclus could
still invoke the gods and compose his hymns. Then on April 17th 485 BC
Proclus died at the age 75 – he had stated in a hymn of “mokSha” in his
42nd year that he would attained oneness with the stars. He had lived
through the darkest hour of the heathen world in the near West, yet was
one of its greatest. His end, like that of the great emperor Julian
before him, was to almost mark the end of the brahma and kShatra of that
world.

Even before the convert and enforcer of the pretamata, Constantine, came
to power, it was not without risks for the Hellenes to freely express
their view: The Greek philosopher Porphyry who wrote the brilliant tract
“Against the Christians” was beaten up by a mob of shavapUjaka-s at
Caesarea in Palestine. Thus, it was gradually becoming harder to openly
voice an opinion on the shava or the preta-pustaka without running into
the danger of being attacked by them. All this even when the
shavapUjaka-s were claiming to be persecuted and heathen emperors were
still in power. With the coming to power of Constantine, he passed an
edict that all copies of Porphyry’s “Against the Christians” be burned
and prescribed the death penalty for any one who kept secret copies of
the text. More than a century later Theodosius II and Valentinian II
were still burning copies of Porphyry’s works with much vehemence. It
was the reign of Theodosius II during which the heathen really came to
see the grim darkness of the pretamata bringing an end to their world.
Heathen thinkers like Hypatia the daughter of Theon were murdered by
pretAcharin gangs. Temples were desecrated and Proclus and his school
could only refer to the shavapUjaka-s with cryptic terms. As we have
said many times before on these pages, these events are a chilling
reminder of what can and is happening to us, who uphold the last,
unbroken transmission of the Indo-European heathen tradition. Today in
bhArata it is not easy to criticize the violent West Asian lunacy cults.
The Hindus are losing their rights in their own land despite being the
majority. A parallel to the desecration of the Acropolis could very well
be the next stage. In this context we feel it worthwhile to revisit the
brilliant heathen thinker Georgios Gemistos Plethon [whom we had briefly
alluded to on these
pages](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2011/11/25/fragments-of-west-asian-heathen-thought-late-surviving-hermetica/).

**The paradox of the renaissance**  
The period of the renaissance and the subsequent “age of enlightenment”
are defining aspects of the civilization and intellectual expression of
the modern Leukosphere and its satellite cultures. Indeed, many in the
modern Indian elite also have a superficial knowledge and identification
with the products of the both the renaissance and the “enlightenment”.
There are many in the current day left-leaning leukospheric elite who
sanctimoniously prefer referring to this period as “Early modern” as
opposed to renaissance and like to transfer such terms to bhArata (e.g.
Pollock and his band of South Asianists, and remember whoever uses the
word South Asian to describe us is a dviSha). But even they implicitly
or explicitly trace the primary strands of their identity to the
renaissance. Outside of the scholastic circles there is a general lack
of understanding of the two-faced nature of the renaissance though it is
generally seen as some kind of prelude to the “enlightenment”. The
two-faced nature can be described as the return and expansion of science
through the reintroduction of Greek thought (however misunderstood) one
side, and on the other, the spread of Isaistic violence on a global
scale, with genocides and attacks on old civilizational centers of the
world, along with the emergence of newer, virulent versions of the
Isaistic meme. However, in the Leukosphere even those who acknowledge
this bicephalic aspect, tend to cover up its role in the shaping of
their modern world. They would prefer to state that the “enlightenment”
along with its key features of democracy or socialism attenuated the
earlier Isaistic violence, to bring a better life for all. Indeed, one
could argue based on Steven Pinker’s study that the world has
progressively become less violent. A mlechCha would take that evidence
and tell you that it is because of the “enlightenment”. Indeed, the
typical modern left-leaning Leukospheric academic would say that the
“enlightenment” extinguished religion as it was after all the “age of
reason”. But there are some issues of the progression from the
renaissance to the “enlightenment” which a Hindu student of Leukospheric
history must carefully investigate, unbiased by what their subjects
might tell them. One of these is the amnesia regarding Plethon and his
role at the beginning of the renaissance. Related to this is the
question as to why the renaissance and the “enlightenment’ there after
did not result in the return of Europe to the heathen fold.

**At the juncture of two worlds**  
Leonardo da Vinci is acknowledged by all as one of the most inventive
minds of all times, one might say he was truly the highpoint the
renaissance. What is not widely known is that he was third in the
preceptorial line of descent from Plethon \[Footnote 1\]. While Leonardo
is widely remembered Plethon is largely forgotten or even downgraded.
Yet until shortly after his death he was still a celebrated figure. When
Plethon died on 26th June 1452 he is supposed to have a been a grand old
man, nearly a 100 years of age. Even some of the pretAcharin-s around
him respectfully acknowledged his intellectual attainments, while only
cryptically alluding to his heathenism. They said: “*He was veritably
the paragon of philosophy and every kind of wisdom*”. He was described
as being admired by Greek and barbarian alike for his knowledge of
“secret matters”, metaphysics, literary expression, music, physics,
geometry and arithmetic. One of those who knew him well said at his
funeral that:  
“*They called him Plato and Socrates for he was not inferior to those
two in wisdom, as everybody would agree… He laid down the easiest route
to knowledge for those who chose; he exposed with complete accuracy and
wisdom the false route which misled some men; and he liberated the human
race from its supreme deception. Proof of what I have said lies in the
wise and brilliant writings of that blessed and divine soul; and whoever
faithfully follows them in every respect could not miss the sacred
truth.*”

This acquaintance was speaking in the midst of rabid shavapUjaka-s and
could not afford to be more direct. However, what he was referring to in
the above words was the teaching by Plethon of religion of the Hellenes
to those who chose to see the truth. The “false route” and the “supreme
deception” which captured the human race were references to Christianity
and its “theology” that Plethon had clearly exposed as fallacious in his
writings. Another shava-pUjaka who had the opportunity of studying under
him (and in the line leading to Leonardo \[Footnote 1\]), was much more
direct in a letter of condolence to the two sons of Plethon, Demetrios
and Andronikos:  
*I have learned that our common father and master has shed every earthly
element and departed to heaven, to the place of purity, joining the
mystical chorus of Iacchus \[The god Dionysus\] with the Olympian gods.
I too rejoice to have studied with such a man, the wisest that Greece
has produced since Plato. So if one were accept the doctrines of the
Pythagoreans and Plato about the infinite ascent and descent of souls, I
should not hesitate even to add that the soul of Plato, having to obey
the irrefragable decrees of Adrasteia and to discharge the obligatory
cycle, had come down to earth and assumed the frame and life of
Gemistos.* \[Text edited by Mohler translated by English military
officer Woodhouse\]

It is clear from this private communication to Plethon’s sons that what
he was referring to was Plethon’s complete reversal to heathen Hellenic
thought. When he talks of chorus of Dionysus it is a reference to the
ecstatic music and dance with which the celebrants of the festival of
Dionysus praise and follow the deity. Indeed, Plato in his Ion \[534a\]
refers to the poetry of hymn composers to be an inspired one that flows
out of them, much like the miraculous ecstasy flowing through the
Potniades following Dionysus. Thus, Plethon is said to partake of this
Dionysian ecstasy upon his death in the company of the Theoi. Now,
Adrasteia is one of the nymphs of Rhea, the mother of the gods, who
along with Corybantes \[Footnote 2\] nourished the infant Zeus before he
rose to defeat the Titans. She is supposed to control the inescapable
fate and thus directs the cycle of reincarnation. Hence, Plethon was
literally seen as a reincarnation of Plato in line with the Greek
version of the reincarnation cycles.

In course of his education, Plethon played a major role reviving Greek
knowledge in various spheres. In Lagarde’s work on Plethon, it is shown
that he composed a Greek grammar, studied geography and corrected the
geographical work of Strabo, worked on critically editing the
Cosmographia of Claudios Ptolemaios (Greek “paurANic geography”) and
produced commentaries or lecture notes on Homeric epics and Greek
meters. He also taught mathematics, wrote some papers on astronomy and
devised a new calender. He also extensively studied and produced
summaries of the naturalists Aristotle, Theophrastus, Aelian and Galen.
When was studying the hymns of Pythagoras, Proclus and the corpus of the
Orphic and Homeric hymns he connected to his heathen past and completed
the link to the traditions of his ancestors. He also made a study of
Mohammadanism and the analyzed the nature of the Islamic Jihad in the
West. At this point he came to know of the scholar Elissaeus from the
Osman sultanate, who had translated Aristotle’s works into Hebrew.
Plethon became his student staying with him and serving him in return
for his secret teachings. The pretAcharin-s state with much anger that
Elissaeus, while a Jew, paid little regard to Moses or the beliefs and
observances, which the Jews received from him. Instead, he had learned
the Iranian rituals and incantations (“termed the doctrines of
Zoroaster”) and the heathen practices of the Hellenes \[We have
suspected before that Elissaeus might have accessed cryptic refugia of
the Neo-Platonic tradition that lingered in the territories overrun by
the marUnmatta-s for a fairly long period\]. Upon the death of Plethon a
church father regretted that nothing serious was done by the church to
put a stop to his teaching of heathenism beyond expelling him from
Constantinople. Having come to know of Plethon’s book “Book of Laws”, a
full-fledged exposition of Hellene thought and practice the church
father wrote to a provincial official to gather and burn all copies of
the book. In that letter addressing the dead Plethon rhetorically in
second person he says:  
“*You first learned about Zoroaster, having no previous knowledge of
him, from the polytheist Elissaeus, who was supposed to be a Jew.
Departing from your own country, you lived with him in order to benefit
from his famous teaching at a time when he enjoyed great influence at
the court of the barbarians \[The Osman Sultans Shahid Murad and
Bayazid-I\]. Being what he was, he met his end in the flames, just like
your Zoroaster.*”  
The concealment of Elissaeus was eventually penetrated by the Islamic
agents and he was sentenced to death by immolation by a sharia court as
he was munAfiq and a kAfr rather than a Jewish dhimmi. Similarly, a
member of the Byzantine royal family, Juvenalios, who had openly
forsaken the shavamata for the Greek deities under the influence of
Plethon, was executed for heresy in Constantinople an year before the
latter’s death. It might be worth noting that around the very same time
the Turkic Islamic tyrant Firoz Tughlaq had outlawed the practice of the
dharma in dilli. A brAhmaNa was discovered as still doing so in
concealment, and Tughlaq’s mullahs gleefully had him set on fire along
with his images and pictures. Thus, East and West heathen traditions
were being destroyed by the Mohammedans and Christians in the very same
way. Given this, it is utterly unfortunate that the modern secularized
Hindus do not realize the efforts of their forbears in pushing out the
evil hand of marUnmAda at least to the extant we see today in bhArata.
Interestingly, in the Book of Laws, Plethon cryptically alludes that the
heathens would need to forcibly extirpate the shavamata and marUnmAda in
the future in retaliatory strikes. Even as the Book of Laws was outlawed
in the Christian world and consigned to the flames, some sufi Sheikhs in
Osman empire realized that it was dangerous enough that it need to be
studied and rebutted. Thus, they ended up collecting the fragments that
survived, translated it into Arabic in the late 1400s, and wrote a
rebuttal. The Sheikh who translated it is categorical in stating upfront
that the work was fundamentally at odds with Islam. This again brings
home a point we have repeatedly made on these pages that the
Abrahamisms, despite their differences, are aligned when it comes to
heathen tradition (often missed by the mental cretins among the Hindus,
who despite the clarity of the other side, would want to claim a shared
religious experience with eka-rAkSasa-mata-s).

From our view point there are two notable points regarding the ideas
developed by Gemistos Plethon. First is his pan-heathen vision. Among
the students of Plethon was Kabakes originally of ancient Viking descent
settled in Greece. His immediate ancestors sought to be Christian holy
warriors, but he wrote that he himself had reverted to heathenism early
in life, probably after reading the emperor [Julian’s hymn to the
triadic solar
deities](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/27/emperor-julian/).
He is said to have worshiped the solar deities all the while concealing
his heathenism from the Christians. He became close to Plethon and
practiced heathen rituals while studying mathematics with him. This
worship of the triadic solar deities by them is interesting in light of
the teaching of Plethon on the cognacy of Pythagoras and other Greek
sages, Plato, the ancient teacher Iranian teacher zarathushtra and the
brAhmaNa-s of India. In this he appears to follow Plutarch who also
holds that the doctrine of Plato on the triadic structure of the
universe is comparable to that of the Iranians. He states that in the
Iranian doctrine the three realms of are ruled by the three deities:
Oromazdes (ahura mazda) in the first realm, Arimanes (airyaman) over the
last, and Mithra over the middle section \[Footnote 3\]. Then he
homologizes them with concepts in the Chaldean hymns. Even though he had
very limited material on the non-Greek sources and difficulties in
directly accessing their ancient ritual language (e.g. Avestan or for
that matter even Pahlavi or Sanskrit) he was able correctly identify the
natural link between the diverse heathen traditions. This is a point
which we as the last of heathens should closely note. We need to take
leadership of the pan-heathen system even as the heathen world seems to
be on the brink. Unfortunately, this is not well- understood among
Hindus today (only the vaishya luminary of the modern Hindu revival, Ram
Swarup appears to have made note of this). Of course one may say that
the heathen revivalist movements of Europe are flaky and even deeply
flawed in some ways. While this might be true of some of them, there are
those that are not, though few in number. In any case, this should not
deter us, and we can hardly complain as we have shown little to speak
about in this regard: rather than being the beacon of heathenism for the
whole world, we are presenting ourselves as a secular state, thereby
pouring water on the fire of our historic uniqueness of being the most
complete heathen tradition around, even by standards of the ancient
world. So one of the key objectives of the Hindu revival is to not just
stop the slide towards the end of heathenism but actually revert it on a
global scale \[Footnote 4\].

The second point is Plethon’s global vision of knowledge, which united
the tradition of ritual along with that of mathematics, and the
sciences. This was seen among the Neo-Platonists and is parallel to the
Hindu vision of knowledge, where all shastra-s exist in continuity
within a “shAstra-puruSha”. While this spirit declined in bhArata during
the struggle with the marUnmatta-s, it still existed in pockets, like in
the school of mAdhava and nIlakaNTha somayAjin among the naMbUthiri-s.
It was also the vision of the great Hindu intellectuals like sAyaNa and
vedAnta deshika during the Hindu recovery from the Islamic whirlwind
\[South Indian brAhmaNa-s even bore this vision to the overrun north as
illustrated by the Sanskrit literary activity in the realm of the
[TakarAja-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/10/05/takaraja-s/)\].
But today it is nearly dead – the death of this continuity in knowledge
and ritual practice could very well mark the end of the heathen
civilization, for this is the most important mark of their intellectual
superiority over the unmAda-s. It is here that the western amnesia of
Plethon, with which we initiated this section becomes clear. This is
despite the fact that both the reintroduction of Greek knowledge and the
inspiration for key renaissance figures trace back to Plethon. One major
connection in this regard is the family of the businessman/banker Cosimo
de Medici who was a major admirer/patron of Plethon and gave him a forum
for the exposition of Greek thought. It was under the aegis of this
forum provided by the Medici clan that Leonardo, several other artists
and later Galileo \[who dedicated his Sidereus Nuncius to member of the
clan\] received patronage. Indeed, it offered an enclave were
free-thought at least partly shielded from the wrath of the shavamata.
This patronage of both the sciences and the arts was in no small part
due the original vision of Plethon regarding the unity of knowledge as
seen in the heathen tradition of the Hellenes. However, in the ensuing
years what we saw was the rise of arts and sciences but not the unity of
knowledge with heathenism as a part of it. Instead, we saw the
simultaneous strengthening of the pretamata and its further development
into more virulent forms (e.g. as exemplified by the preta cult
promulgated by the German Luther).

This resulted in two apparently contradictory paths that have
characterized the mlechCha world ever since. First, the followers of the
shavamata quickly realized that Plethon was introducing something really
dangerous to their foundations: indeed, he has himself remarked to a
pretAcharin that both the religions of love and peace would soon be
replaced by heathenism, like that of the Hellenes. At the same time they
saw that the attractive feature of Plethon’s thought was the knowledge
which it brought along on scientific and mathematical topics: this is
apparent from both their and the Moslems’ acknowledgment (even with
tinge of admiration, despite loathing for his heathenism) of the
extensive knowledge of Plethon. Thus, the realized that the best thing
for the shavamata would be to absorb this knowledge and recast it inside
an Abrahamistic framework while throwing out the heathenism propounded
by Plethon. Ironically, this happened right in the academy of the
Medici’s which was inspired by Plethon wherein his descendents in the
preceptorial line like Bessarion and Argyropoulos tried to work his
ideas into the pretamata. This is comparable to the earlier
appropriation of heathen material by the pretamata during the period of
the fall of the Roman empire. On the whole what happened was that the
pretamata was not diluted, but it simply digested the alien ideas and
incorporated them into its corpus. The second trajectory taken by the
pretAcharin-s which at the face of it seems opposed to the first was a
violent rejection of the natural and mathematical knowledge. Right in
the vicinity of the Medicis it was seen in the form of the burning of
paintings by the preta revivalists and eventually the internment of
Galileo. Elsewhere, it manifested as a violent opposition to science,
best exemplified by Martin Luther’s statement on Copernicus:  
“*There is talk of a new astrologer who wants to prove that the earth
moves and goes around instead of the sky, the sun, the moon, just as if
somebody were moving in a carriage or ship might hold that he was
sitting still and at rest while the earth and the trees walked and
moved. But that is how things are nowadays: when a man wishes to be
clever he must needs invent something special, and the way he does it
must needs be the best\! The fool wants to turn the whole art of
astronomy upside-down. However, as Holy Scripture tells us, so did
Joshua bid the sun to stand still and not the earth.*”  
However, the “pratyakSha” of science kept repeatedly hammering on the
“pramANa” of the pretapustaka, with the final blow coming much closer
to our times with the publication of the evolutionary theory by Darwin.
One would have thought that this blow the pretamata would have no leg to
stand on. However, even that did not eradicate the pretamata. Rather,
the two apparently contradictory trajectories continued to coexist in
the mlechCha world with the strengthening a concept called the
separation of the secular from the sacral. This offered an opportunity
for the pretamata to not just survive but even expand by pushing both
its rapine secularized version that continued to engulf heathen
civilizations in the name of various secular constructs and its
unadulterated evangelistic form. This aspect is indeed seen by the
imposition of the same kind dialog on heathen civilizations like our own
wherein we are forced to cut up knowledge by separating secular from
sacral \[One might look up this earlier note in this regard\]. This is
followed by a trivialization of our sacral structures making it easy for
the pretamata \[or for that matter the rAkShasa-mata\] to fill up the
ensuing vacuum.

**Epilog**  
We were lazing on the rim of a tank with a great tower in a university
with Mn, ekanetra and ST. Mn remarked that he has great admiration for
some mlechCha scientists and bloggers, who not only wrote on science but
also such a wide range of “general issues” including social, artistic
and cultural ones. He then showed us some samples of their writings on
his smart phone and remarked that most of us bhArata-s are so
narrow-gauge in our focus on science or technology. Should we not be
inspired by these scientists/bloggers and emulate them in presenting a
broader intellectual vision to include social and cultural issues rather
than just science. Here, we must point out that even though ancestors of
all four of us (including some common ones) were agnichit-s, the smoke
from whose altars rose to the high antarikSha, Mn was one who had
deliberately expunged this knowledge from his head. He had so soaked up
the ways of his occidental teachers that he recently declared that he
felt about the same affinity for Sanskrit as he felt for Urdu or Latin,
and in any case it was way below what he felt for French, German or
English. Given all of this, it was not a big surprise to the rest of us
that his range of “general issues” were purely those defined by what the
occidental professors allowed to be a part of the broader discourse
\[[Note they feel certain matters are largely out of
bounds](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/07/09/western-generalizations-of-religiosity/)\].
The acceptance of this “spectrum of transmission” defined by them is
verily one of the signs of the end of the intellectual tradition of
heathenism in the west and the presence of the heavy hand of its enemies
in the subcontinent. A man of brAhmaNa descent had forgotten that in
bhArata we always respected the sarva-shAstra-vit and did not place
boundaries in our acquisition of knowledge.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: Gemistos Plethon-\>Bessarion-\>Argyropoulos (and others of
the revived Neoplatonic school)-\>Leonardo da Vinci

Footnote 2: The Corybantes are also mentioned by Plato as participating
in an ecstatic dance as part of the retinue of Rhea. Rhea is an ortholog
of the Indo-Aryan goddess aditI. It is possible that the fleetingly
alluded yati-s in RV 10.72.7 in the company of aditI are cognates of the
Corybantes. Plethon placed great importance on the teachings of the
Corybantes in the ancient temple of Zeus as one of the original
teachings of the pan-heathen tradition.

Footnote 3: Indeed the earliest surviving expression of this is seen in
the mantra of gR^itsamada shaunahotra:  
tisro bhUmIr dhArayan trInr uta dyUn trINi vratA vidathe antar eShAm |  
R^itenAdityA mahi vo mahitvaM tad aryaman varuNa mitra chAru || (RV
2.27.8)

They uphold three earths and the three heavens; triadic are their
functions in the assembly \[of deva-s\]. The might of the Aditya-s seen
in the form of the R^ita, pleasing is that might of yours, aryaman,
varuNa, and mitra.

Footnote 4: One could say that we are in a state of weakness, but let us
not forget the wisdom of one our heroes in the struggle against Islam,
the founder of the mahArATTa empire, who called for strikes deep in the
Moslem territories even as they were prosecuting the Jihad with much
violence in his own land. That is what brings victory.
