+++
title = "“Beware The Man Of One Book” – A Case-Study In Slavic Secondary Sourcexa0Over-Reliance"
date = "July 2, 2019"

+++


![2175889-HMAXTCQY-6](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/2175889-hmaxtcqy-6.jpg?w=676)

\[Disclaimer: We’re fully aware that there are a range of sources
utilized in the reconstruction of Slavic Indo-European religion; and
that there is, indeed, occasionally quite capacious use to be made in
such endeavours from the writings of ‘outsiders’ to the traditions in
question, and preservations embedded in later texts.



The following is presented as-is, unaltered, as my own case-study
demonstration of why it’s not a great idea to \*over-rely\* upon such
materials; and why making use of them \*without\* a strong weight of
primary source materials can lead to some …. odd outcomes.



As applies Svarog, and other such matters in Slavic mythography and
religious reconstructionism, I have my own thoughts as to how a
meaningful ‘re-connection’ between the relatively limited datapoints
that we \*do\* have, and what we can definitively state about comparable
elements in ‘better-preserved’ and ‘still-living’ Indo-European
mythoreligious corpuses. But that, as they say, Is A Story For Another
Time. \[-C.A.R.\] \]



“extract from a rant I was having about taking \*too\* seriously
‘secondary sources’ for mythology in a bid to try and make up for
lacking primary texts and living traditions \[or, at least reasonably
well preserved ones…\] :



“to give a further example of why I am circumspect about secondary
sources sans primary evidence to work with …



… one of the ‘major’ texts detailing some pretty key stuff in what’s
today ‘cornerstone’ Slavic ‘paganism’ ….



… is a book from the 1400s, compiling material from several previous
books that’re about 2 centuries older … which themselves include
somewhat fragmentary translation of writings by a Greek Christian
writing almost a thousand years before said final text … who was writing
a more generalized history of what i suppose you might call the
‘Classical World’, coz running up to the Byzantines.



Now, that’s … well, you can see how that’d get pretty problematic to
\*start\* with. But it gets worse.



See, the bits that’re cited for “Slavic paganism” …. are actually bits
which broadly fit into the category of “Egyptian Mythology But Also
History” from the early bits \[chronologically speaking\] of the Greek
writer’s account. Except it’s Egyptian Mythology as done ‘once over
lightly’ by a Greek, who’s somehow transformed all the Egyptian
\[pre-Alexander, too\] deities and such to Greek-named ones, and is
running additionally on an understanding of Greek mythology that’s uh ….
well, let me put it this way – the Greeks weren’t great at their own
mythology, following several hundred years of slippage, even at the
height of Athens, like \*eight hundred years\* before. So it’s perhaps
unsurprising that a Christian writer reinterpreting Egyptian
not-even-really-either-mythology-OR-history through an allegedly
Classical Greek set of lenses slash tie-in-namings … doesn’t do a great
job at it.



Now it gets \*further\* worse.



Because what happened is at some point, several centuries after the
Greek chap, some Slavic compiler basically attempted to take these
not-even-really-Egyptian personages with the slapped on Greek names …
and rename them to names that would be more familiar to a Slavic
readership, and assumedly, therefore, with characterizations for the
Slavic names that matched either the characterization of the figures in
the text he was translating and/or the characterization of the Greek
deities he was renaming. Except he wasn’t great with Greek mythology
\*either\*, and the whole thing’s seriously skin deep anyway.



And that’s \*before\* you take into consideration that the Slavic writer
likely wasn’t that familiar with his own ancestral religion(s), and was
writing in a Christianized period; and hte possibility that he may not
even have been intending to replace this or that Greek or “Egyptian”
figure with a particularly similar “Slavic” one.

So what does this mean?



On the strength of .. well … the above, we get people going around
saying “the chief deity of the Slavic pantheon was a smith god, like
Hephaestus”; when really, the only thing we can likely defintiively say,
is that there was a Slavic deity called “Svarog”, because it’s a name
that’s attested elsewhere \[and also has logical \*linguistic\*
cognate-potential in some other IE languages\] ; I mean, even if the
hammer bit’s ‘broadly’ right, there’s several other explanations which
immediately suggest themselves; and you can instantly see how much
really vitally important theological and mythographical ‘nuance’ is lost
if a whole swathe of things from ‘Sky’ to ‘Sun’ to ‘Fire’ to ‘Lightning’
get bowdlerizedly not-even-replaced with “Hephaestus’ forge has fire.”
\[although there’s an interesting side-point I won’t go into here around
Sun/Lightning/Fire as a Vedic-attested trinity, three deities and three
‘forms of energy’ in order of radiation from source in the high-heavens
down through the mid-atmosphere, to here on Earth\]



… and which , well, proper linguistic analysis actually suggests that
other material contained in that particular source \*might\* be back to
front anyway – like, for instance, there’s a male solar deity \[also\]
mentioned. Ok, cool. “Helios” is the Greek name … which isthen
“translated” to Dazhbog by th Slavic writer …

except that Dazhbog means something somewhat different \[long story\],
and it actually seems plausible that the Slavic peoples may have had a
Solar \*Goddess\* instead \[on the basis of linguistic analysis, but
also comparative analysis with other IE cultures – again, long story\]



The end result of all of this, at present, is you wind up with people
going around going “I have conducted a comparative analysis with the
Vedas … and we have determined that the Vedas are actually Slavic, and
check out this expansive library of “Slavic Vedas” and other such
sources which we have compiled, containing the authentic mythology of
the Slavs!”



To be fair, it’s rather more … complex than all of that. But the fact
is, precisely because we’re flying so blind due to the paucity of
primary accounts from the Slavs, speaking in their own languages, about
their own practices and beliefs, while they were still believing in them
… we don’t even know how potentialy off-target many of the secondary
sources that’re penned initially by Christian writers, compiled and
edited post-facto, potentially ofr propagandtastic purposes by Christian
monks or whatever, \*actually are\* in terms of what they thought they
were seeing.



And even such ‘comparative reconstructionist’ efforts as may be
undertaken, are \*already\* strongly influenced by the other ‘lenses of
perspective’ \[like, in this case, in-name-only recalled Greek
“mythology”\] so as to introduce artificial biases and potentially-false
confirmations right the way down.



And that’s \*before\* we get into the underlying agendas of a few Slavic
‘pagan revivalist’ types …”



\[-C.A.R.\]

