+++
title = "Hittite Ritual Axe; Indo-European Symbolicxa0Explication"
date = "July 19, 2019"

+++


![Hittite Ritual
Axe](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/hittite-ritual-axe.jpg?w=676)

“Man, I’ve had this fine artefact in my head for the past day or so – a
beautiful Hittite ritual axe. Now, I haven’t \*yet\* done serious
research nor work on Hittite and broader Anatolian Indo-European
mythoreligious praxis \[i.e. ritual\], nor their symbolic lexicon.



But I do recall two points from my previous brief delvings in this area.
First, that the Hittite \[and, for that matter, other Anatolian I.E.
peoples’\] Striker/Thunderer Deific, often tended to be depicted
wielding an axe; and, in a manner that is perhaps resemblant of the way
in which the Vajra became an ensign of Royal power in the broader
Hindusphere \[it’s still used to day by, for instance, the Thai monarchy
in such a manner, sort-of\], and \*certainly\* in a manner similar to
the more generalized principles of ‘Eternal Recurrence’ and mythic
embodiment \[i.e. garbing one’s self and one’s own personal narrative
and representations thereof in the resonant (oft-symbolic/thematic)
language of Myth\] – we see relief figures of Hittite kings, posed
exactly like, and adorned in a manner very similar, to the Deity in
question. Including, of course, the Axe held aloft, in wide open-armed
pose for sweeping strike to rain blows down the foemen of the kingdom
with the unrelenting fury of the storm.



The ‘regality’ of such an instrument may perhaps be further attested by
the particular choice of semi-‘heraldic’ beasts which adorn the blade
and attachment to the haft-and-handle.



In particular, the somewhat stylized yet still easily recognizable
horned bull head helps to recall the ‘Bull’ associations prominently
found with an array of Near-Eastern Thunder Gods \[both Indo-European
and Otherwise – and which also percolated back to the Greeks with the
Bull associations of Zeus\] \[while also helping to support the idea
that this is a \*ritual\* blade rather than a serious tool for
war-fighting – given the rather thin connection made between head and
haft via the horns thereof.



The ‘horns’, by which I mean the not-quite ‘points’ at either end of the
axe’s crescent shape, are \*also\* adorned with what appear to be Bulls
– they’re hoofed, hided creatures with short, bovine-like tails, and
swept-back horns themselves.



While on both the mid-portion of the ‘mouth’ of the blade \[and really,
such a crescent axe-head resembles most strongly a glinting smile – c.f
also my favourite Sanskrit visual pun, the mythic blade Chandrahas,
given to Sri Ravan by \*another\* famed Axe-wielder \[Rudra-Shiva\], the
name of said Sword translating, somewhat figuratively as ‘the glinting
laughter/smile of the Moon’ due to the curved shape of the blade, the
war-head in question, as well as the underlying nature and sense of
humour of its inititial wielder. Mahadev, you see, \*always\* gets the
Last Laugh!\], and also upon the top rear of the haft ; we find great
‘big cats’, perhaps mountain lions or leopards \[there’s a hint of spots
upon the blade-mounted figure-in-relief\] – the ferocity, bravery, and
further regal power of which, are immediately clear – especially in the
bellowing, dominating-rather-than-merely-defiant posing with arched back
and extended, elongated neck of the rear sculpted figure.



As a point of brief interest, the Hittite renditions of Sarruma, the Son
of the Storm-Lord \[and, in a rather intriguing ‘twist’ on what we
usually think of in terms of the mono-myth in question, the Son-in-Law
of the Demon-Dragon-Water-Serpent\], would feature his wielding an axe,
and accompanied by a bull or a leopard.



There are also other clear Indo-European resonances that may be further
explored in terms of the symbolism of a Big Cat, including the Lion-skin
worn by Hercules/Herakles \[wherein it is, in no small part, the
strength and the skill required to \*defeat\* such a creature, and
thence ‘claim’ its power as one’s own, as a literal ‘mantle’\], as well
as, and from \*completely the opposite direction\*, the Vahana of Durga
– Dawon, which may also be ‘echoed’ in the prominent associations of
Felines with other cognate figures, including the Nordic Freyja
\[Chariot pulled by Cats – which, given these are the ones the Norse
were familiar with … were likely rather closer to Lynxes than what we
think of today as a cat; and, on a further brief point of rather
relevant etymological excursion, ‘Lynx’ itself derives from the ‘Lewk’
PIE particle from whence we also get notions of ‘Light’, of “Looking”,
and of “Loka” in Sanskrit \[a ‘realm’ – rule as far as the eye can see,
in a political sense, perhaps\] ; the theoretical derivation being that
when one looks out beyond the camp-fire, one sees the Eyes of the Lynx
lurking out there in the darkness, greenly reflecting back at us with
power and potency. And, as anyone familiar with the relevant portions of
the Rigsthula, as well as a few other sources describing the idealized
characteristics of certain Indo-European nobility will be well aware,
the “Dragon-Gaze” which seems almost supernaturally piercing,
discerning, \*disempowering\* of that which it lingers upon if hostile,
\*dominating\* nevertheless all up, is very relevant here; perhaps
forming a further ‘linkage point’ between larger felinoids and
rulership, even before we get into the ‘apex predator’ and ‘rallying
roar’ symbolisms we would more immediately conjure in our minds.\] , and
the later Anatolian-via-geography Phrygian ‘Mountain Mother’ deity,
Cybele. For a more detailed description of how these figures link back
to ‘Sovereignty’, consult my “BHARAT MATA AND THE INDO-EUROPEAN DEIFIC
OF NATIONAL IDENTITY” article. Oh, and while I am on the subject, there
are further male Indo-European divinities with such animalistic
associations – including, rather prominently, Dionysus, Who was often
identified as having came from the East, and Whose chariot was pulled by
Leopards. But I digress.



The point is, even with only the barest knowledge of the symbols and
‘high culture’ nor politics of these ancient Indo-European Anatolians,
we can \*still\* immediately appreciate the incredible beauty, and dare
I say – Majesty – of this fine ritual weapon.



It may be only a few centuries shy of four millennia old, and from a
‘convection zone’ of cultural diversification/cross-influencing, where
the Indo-European beliefs were met with, and melded with, Hurrian,
Urartian, Mesopotamian, Levantine, and other such corpuses pre-existing
their arrival there; yet it nevertheless speaks to us in a language –
that of power, the bringing together of human artifice, and the
intrinsic, immanent symbolism of the natural world, that is therefore,
via the exaltant combos of the two, something greater than either ..
something Divine!”



\[-C.A.R.\]

