+++
title = "Makt-And-Cheese"
date = "July 25, 2019"

+++
![cheesebrain](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/cheesebrain.jpg?w=676)

One of the more … curious things I’ve observed in recent months, is that
the Proto-Indo-European particle which figuratively describes Cheese
\[Medh\] … \*also\* works out as the fundamental root for a number of
later terms for \*Intoxicated\* \[e.g. Sanskrit: Madira, Madate\].

Now, the reason why this is likely the case, is that the Medh particle
in question … which \*also\* underpins the modern English term “Meat”,
funnily enough, refers to something that is ‘greasy’, that is dripping.
Which \*can\* mean something like a chunk of \[raw\] meat, but can also,
clearly, show us something of the processes entailed in the manufacture
of cheese, and also of various ‘intoxicating brews’ – such as the Mead
\[although this is derived from a … very close PIE ‘Medhu’ particle
meaning ‘sweet’, ‘honey’ – and which also supplies us with further,
subsequent terms for ‘intoxication’\], the “Meath”, we occasionally hear
mention of in ancient poetry.

Given the straining process arguably mentioned in the preparation of
Soma, per RigVedic hymnals, which calls for both dairy-fluids and honey,
in addition to the psychoactive infusion(s) in question … which one
could probably substitute in a modern cheese-cloth for the wool
otherwise called for, it is not at all hard to see how this
rather-more-than-figurative linguistic relationship has involved.

Now, I do not for a moment mean to imply that cheese is, actually, a
drug. Although somewhat to my amusement given the frequent and elaborate
co-occurrence of Lord Indra and Soma in RigVedic hymnals, there was a
rather \*glaring\* line in the place I sourced this image from that ran:
“and then 10 minutes later you’re smearing cheese all over your nose and
jumping over coffee tables while shouting about how you’re the god of
thunder?”

But nevertheless. I do fundamentally believe that enjoying cheese –
recently suggested to be something of a positive for overall longevity
itself – is a pretty Indo-European thing to do.
