+++
title = "‘Time And I Against Any Other Two’ – an Indo-European analysis of a maxim.xa0"
date = "July 22, 2019"

+++
![67229428_10162040671015574_2301129583254044672_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/67229428_10162040671015574_2301129583254044672_n.jpg?w=676)

There is an aphorism of the great Baltasar Gracian which I have been
turning over in my mind a fair bit this week. Not least because, upon
closer inspection there’s some \*strongly\* Indo-European \[and,
although Gracian could not possibly have known it, Shaivite – Shakta\]
subtext immanent within it. I shall not repeat it infull here, but the
most directly relevant part goes like this:

“La muleta del tiempo es más obradora que la açerada claba de Hércules.
El mismo Dios no castiga con bastón, sino con saçón. Gran dezir: «el
Tiempo y yo, a otros dos». La misma Fortuna premia el esperar con la
grandeza del galardón.”

The well-regarded Jacobs translation renders it thus:

“Time’s crutch effects more than the iron club of Hercules. God Himself
chasteneth not with a rod but with time. He spake a great word who said,
‘Time and I against any two.’ Fortune herself rewards waiting with the
first prize.”;

Yet the rendering of “muleta” as “crutch”, does not adequately capture
the delicate shade of meaning going here. For while there is, indeed,
some foundation for suggesting that a means, a mechanism of support such
as a staff is relevant … a ‘muleta’ is more prominently, not simply a
stick – but the rod to which the large red cloth of the bull-fighter is
attached. You can see instantly how this fundamentally affects and even
shifts significantly how we interpret Gracian’s metaphor!

Since Gracian chose to further elucidate his sentiment with the ‘wise
words’ of King Philip II of Spain \[the part around ‘Time and I’ being
able to emerge victorious against any two\], it seems somewhat fitting
to do likewise for my own, via the words of Napoleon I Chakravartin:
“Never interrupt your opponent when he is in the middle of making a
mistake”. The bull’s own momentum carries it headlong to its doom.

Now, with that part covered, let’s get on with the comparative
mythography.

The Club of Hercules is, as I pointed out in the ‘THUNDERSTRUCK’ piece
from Thursday, the weapon of the Thunderer/Striker Deity of the
Indo-European Pantheon. Often associated with \*direct\*, forceful
action, and great strength and immediately mighty potency. There are
further metallurgic resonances with such a weapon, as briefly noted in
the aforementioned commentary, but we shall not get into that here.

On the \*other\* hand, however, the ‘Sky Father’ and ‘Wind Wanderer’
Indo-European deific more customarily bears a Staff – sometimes, it is a
Spear, other times a more simple ‘rod’ or ‘wand’, even the Scythe of
Kronus and of Saturn \[with which God shall cut ye mighty foeman down\]
with the Caduceus being a further prominent example.

This device is very interesting, due to the complex symbolism which it
quite naturally entails. In some instances, it \*is\* the Axis Mundi
Itself \[perhaps ‘Herself’ might be more accurate; I am thinking here of
the Trishula of Mahadeva, and also, via interpolation, Gungnir of Odin –
which is made from the Ash a the Heart of the World\], which may very
well stand at the center of the proverbial ‘wheel of time’ \[and is
therefore, in a certain sense, ‘fixed’, ‘unchanging’ – at least,
supernally … its intersection with our universe is rather more
vulnerable to onslaught and decay, especially when gnawed upon by
‘devourers’ of serpentine reference\]. It is also, of course, a
\*weapon\*. Both directly, as well as through its potent power of
illusion and misdirection \[‘maya’ – the ‘illusory’ fabric of ‘reality’
\[ironic/oxymoronic phrasing there, but you get what I mean\], radiates
out affixed \*to\* said Axis Mundi, as well … in a manner, funnily
enough, perhaps not unlike this ‘muleta’ of the Bullfighter\].

Now, I have also covered in greater detail elsewhere, the ambit of the
Sanskrit word “Kaal” – but suffice to say, it simultaneously means
“Time”, “Death”, “Black”, and also can mean “Iron” … and is derived from
a Proto-Indo-EUropean Particle – ‘Kel’ – which figuratively refers to a
‘veil’. Hence, you might say, a notion of ‘Death’ as ‘going beyond the
veil’, to the land beyond mortal ken, that sort of thing. The future, as
a certain Spear-Shaker may have observed, being that “undiscovered
country”.

But “Kaal”, for us, and flowing from thence, MahaKaal, MahaKali,
KaalAgniRudraya, and still further aspects besides, is regarded as the
mightiest force within the universe. The supreme power against Whom none
other can stand. The ultimate inevitability of Time; and depending upon
which sources and interpretation we are running upon, potentially not
simply the Ender of the World Entire … but also, per-chance, the
‘remainder’ Who shall outlast us all.

If you have ever heard the quotation of Oppenheimer at Trinity Sands,
around becoming Death, the Destroyer of Worlds, despite the fact that
this line is a rendition of Vaishnava scripture – the Bhagvad Gita – it
is in much the same veneer, for the word Oppenheimer has translated is
“Kaal”, and given the context of the verse in question, I do very much
believe that “Time” is \*also\* an irreducible part of what is going on
there. \[‘Fate’ or ‘Doom’ – especially in the older Nordic sense – might
somewhat get towards the meaning involved, but that is another matter.\]

So, in terms of God chastening not with a ‘rod’ \[the word used here
also renders, once again, as ‘Staff’\] but with Time, this is also
somewhat true … as demonstrated most directly via those instances
wherein Shiva sent KaalBhairavJI against the foe, or Devi
Durga-Parvati-Shakti emanated/manifested as Kali or related Destroyer
Forms.

While finally, this notion of ‘Fortune’ favouring those who move in
accordance with Time, sees also resonance in the very name of ‘Shiva’ –
the ‘Auspicious One’, ‘Luck’. ‘Bholenath’ and ‘Óski’ – the Bestower of
Boons.

Now, I do not mean to imply that Gracian was aware of all or even much
of this. At least, not directly (he was, after all, acquainted with
various Classical mythology).

But it has often struck me with quite the sense of wonderment how these
deeply embedded Indo-European elements, particularly as expressed
through the Sanskrit Hindu perspectives upon them, turn up ‘resonating’
in all sorts of perhaps otherwise unexpected places.

Linkages which, as with so many other elements, only become more
\*truly\* apparent … with the onrushing passage of Time.

Jai MahaKaal!
