+++
title = "THUNDERSTRUCK – A Brief Comparative of the Weapons of the Striking Son of the Skyxa0Father"
date = "July 19, 2019"

+++
![thunderstruck Arya Akasha
Marked](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/thunderstruck-arya-akasha-marked.png?w=676)  
“Appropriate for Thursday, – a brief look at the Weapon of the
Thunderer/Striker in various Indo-European mythologies.

Now, there’s quite a bit that could be said and unpacked about the
differences between each of these mighty weapons, especially as the
cultures in question continued to develop their own mythological
corpuses and legendariums over the millennia … but what I keep coming
back to is the striking similarities that we continue to see, even
despite this.

In each case, what we have is a weapon that transforms the mighty
strength-of-the-arm of its bearer into percussive force; which generates
a concussive blow, and oft-times sparks, upon striking. In some cases,
these are relatively simple implements – literally ‘just’ a tree-branch
\[which may itself encode yet further saliency, given the rather close
linkage, etymologically and theologically, between Thunderer/Striker
figures and trees\]; or, somewhat more sophisticatedly, a length of
stave that has had an instrument of enhancement such as a weighty
mace-head or axe-head placed upon it. In others, it goes further still,
and becomes a proto-Sword form – as we can see with the Harpe weapon
carried by Perseus \[‘Striker’\] and potentially Kronus \[recall Kronus
as Son of a Sky Father, Ouranos, from this morning’s comparative
diagram\].

Of further interest, are some of the materials thought to be utilized in
their construction. “Vajra” would earlier have been translated mostly as
“Lightning”, “Thunderbolt”, ‘Storm-(Divine-) Force” … however, it
\*also\* came to be associated with the concept of “indestructibility”,
and in later Sanskrit, with Diamonds, as a result. Adamantium, as we
know, is similarly construed – both directly associated with the concept
of being unutterably hard, and in later interpretations, diamonds and
suchlike; although its original etymology also, rather interestingly,
contains a hint of ‘untameable’ to it, as well. Most fitting for the
Storm Lord.

However, we also see accounts – turning up in both Greek, and if memory
serves, Balto-Slavic sources, associating the weapon in question with
Flint. The reasoning for this ought not be hard to fathom – partially
its hardness, and partially its ability to strike sparks, start fires,
just as Thunderbolts are wont to do.

Yet where this gets perhaps a little surprising, is in the fragmentary
accounts preserved in those Northern regions, of a ‘Sky of Stone’ , i.e.
stones \*from\* the Sky, a more lengthy investigation of which is
something I should do at a later date.

For now, we’ll just note that there’s \*also\* several RigVedic
attestations for what effectively amounts to a ‘Meteor-Strike’ being
carried out as a weapon of warfare … and that it’s still, to this day,
often the case that more recent ritual Vajra implements are made from
meteoric iron \[which, after all, would have been one of the few sources
of workable iron prior to some serious technical advances; and when it
comes down, does produce quite the sonic boom and streaking shape of
light!\]; and, further, that often these hammers, axes, maces, and clubs
seem to find themselves \*thrown\* at an opponent, in the course and the
corpuses of their relevant mythological occurrences.

So there you have it.

You’ve been … Thunderstruck. ”

\[-C.A.R.\]
