+++
title = "“Don’t Be Likexa0Varg”"
date = "July 12, 2019"

+++
![dontbelikevarg](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/dontbelikevarg.png?w=676)

“Seriously. I don’t get why anyone who claims to be a proponent of
Northern European Indo-European religious revival would take \*anybody\*
spouting the frankly bizarre notion that “THE GODS AREN’T REAL”
seriously.

There are religions which do not require Gods, this is so. But I am yet
to see any actual evidence that Germanic/Nordic beliefs were among them.
Indeed, \*very much\* the opposite.

What this means, is that if you wish to be an atheist, then that is your
prerogative. I won’t agree with you about some pretty fundamental
elements of both the human \[particularly Indo-European\] experience,
and the nature of reality … but it is what it is.

Yet if you are running any of an array of closely interrelated, either
right-out ‘atheistic’, or “oh, they’re all just archetypes, man!”
positions, while \*also\* claiming to be some sort of Nordic/Germanic
religious revivalist … then you are neither being a very good atheist
\[for what kind of atheist demands the trappings of actual religious
belief, including “Gods”, yet vociferously denounces any and all actual
\*substance\* to the very concept!\], nor are you being anything
approaching a Germanic or Nordic religious adherent.

Because \*that\* would require actual Belief.

Now, this leaves us with one key question. As there is \*no\* support
for “The Gods Aren’t Real” in Nordic/Germanic religion of antiquity or
the relatively more recent past \[in fact, it is quite ironic, given how
knee-jerk swift these sorts are to attack anything and anybody they
don’t like as “Christian\[-ism\]” – the concept was probably first
popularized amongst the Germanic peoples by Christian missionaries\] …
why on earth is it that we keep running across people who attempt to
promulgate the exact opposite?

There are two somewhat coterminous answers.

The first of which, is that they probably like the aesthetic associated
with the religions and mythologies in question; and therefore, co-opt as
much as they can, in order to cover over for their own otherwise
uninteresting personal appearances and/or fundamental world view.

And second, again closely linked to the first, are those people looking
to push this or that pretty unfortunate agenda … who’ve worked out that
they’ll get more people interested and engaged with it, if they’ve got
some ‘outreach materials’ \[by which I mean aesthetics\] that look
“cool”, or at least “familiar” to a certain proportion of the target
audience. You get everything from manifestly a-historical white
supremacist/white nationalist types, through to self-help-book pushers,
and even demon-worshippers, plying this \*exact\* approach.

Now again, this is \*not\* to say that it is impossible to ‘run’ some
religions \[much more so than others\] in effectively ‘Godless’, or more
often, “Godsless” ways, whilst still remaining at least somewhat
‘authentic’ to some sort of actually-existing-historically tradition
within its canon or corpus. I vehemently disagree with them, for various
reasons, but some schools of Buddhism, or some ‘Nastika’ “Hinduism”
approaches, do pretty much exactly that.

This is \*also\* not to say that you can’t be an atheist, or an adherent
to some other, (likely non-Indo-European) religion, and go around
claiming that you disbelieve – either generally, or specifically, likely
respectively – in The Gods. I won’t agree with you, personally, but at
least you’re not a walking internal-contradiction-appropriation that may
often be regarded in a manner tantamount to a parasite upon a much more
vibrant and resurrectingly alive host.

But if you are attempting to claim that you are a Nordic/Germanic
religious revival adherent \[a ‘Heathen’, they seem to like to be
called\] … yet who is \*also\* somehow, some sort of internally,
inherently subversive advocate for the again manifestly anti-canonical
concept that “THE GODS DON’T EXIST” …

… then it is very likely that you are nought but an atheist … in a fancy
hat … who is looking for an intriguing style of conversation-starter
line at parties.

Don’t be one of those.

Go and invent/ruin your \*own\* mythology … somewhere else!”

\[-C.A.R.\]
