+++
title = "Hanuman Jayanti : The Indo-European Situation Of The Striker/Thunderer Deific In Apelikexa0Form"
date = "April 27, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/178608049_853028491976143_5687521151714391292_n.png?w=563)

Today marks Hanuman Jayanti – and, as has become our custom, we present
an (A)Arti-cle in His Honour. A ‘Jayanti’, in case you were wondering,
is one of those wonderful Sanskrit terms with several mutually
reinforcing meanings – it is, at once, a ‘Victory’, but also can mean a
‘Birthday’. So is therefore eminently appropriate to designate, as today
is, the High Holy Day of a particular Deific.

But Who is this Great God? And, for our purposes – how does He connect
to the broader Indo-European mythic field?

It would be tempting to do as many others have – and presume that this
‘monkey’-featured deity, most prominently hailed amidst the Ramayana, is
a figure that is exclusively endogenous to India. A ‘post-Vedic’
incorporation, perhaps, from the forest-dwelling tribesfolk of the
jungle hinterlands of Bharat and little to do with the ‘Aryans’ up until
the latter chose to make Him so. That would be a grave mistake to make
indeed. For even leaving aside the most curious occurrence within the
Grimnismal of what appears to be a hailing of Thor as a ‘curious Ape’ –
there is quite the extensive suite of evidence to show how Lord Hanuman,
Bajrang Bali Himself, is of exactly this Striker/Thunderer deific
complex. Garbed in a manner which, as befits His purpose, may seem
unfamiliar and ‘foreign’ to the foeman – yet to the devotee and the
discerning one is appearant with all the comfort of a long-lost friend.
Such is ever the situation when somebody seeks to deny and to denigrate
this or that irreducibly Indo-European figure as being “non-IE”,
“non-Aryan” as part of a pernicious push to de-Indo-Europeanize the
Hindu Faith. But I digress!

In terms of the Vedic roots for the Hanuman figure , the most prominent
point of origin is, of course, RV X 86 – the rather curious ‘Dialogue
Hymnal’ which features Indra’s Wife complaining to Indra about a certain
‘Vrsakapi’ Who is stealing Indra’s offerings. The … context of this
particular hymnal is rather ribald, and shall not be delved into in any
great depth here. But it is important for our purposes as it has Indra
directly stating that there is no problem – the offerings consumed by
Vrsakapi, they go to the same place as those consumed by Indra. Indra
and Vrsakapi, in other words, are *ritually equivalent*. They are the
Same.

Vrsakapi, in case you were wondering, effectively means ‘Ape-Man’,
although the relevant linguistic particle may easily refer to any such
strong, virile masculine creature of the animal world: a Bull, for
instance, is quite prominent in these terms. It would be tempting to
speculate that the famed Lion-headdress of Herakles might hail
ultimately from similar origins – and that the ‘Animal-Headed’ conceptry
has become differently understood in the different Indo-European
cultures which have carried forward this motif down the ages; in much
the same manner that some of the Nordic phrasings are rather blurry
between when a warrior is wearing the skin of an animal as a garment …
and ‘wearing the skin of an animal’ in a far more essence-tial, primal
sense of being transformed.

It is, of course, interesting to note that Vrsakapi also occurs in
application to two sets of deifics – to Shiva and Agni (but, then, I
repeat myself), but also to Vishnu and Krishna (but then, again … well
you know). As applies the former this is largely what we should expect.
After all, the Bull is a prominent iconographic hailing of the Sky
Father found elsewhere in the Vedas, and also in the Greek Indo-European
comparanda for instance. The mentioning of Vrsakapi amidst the Eleven
Rudras may therefore either be taken as referring to Lord Shiva (and it
is not at all hard to see how *The* Alpha Male might be a somewhat
figurative resonancy to this understanding of the Sky Father; a Lord of
Beasts in another sense – as One Among Them, at the highest possible
apex), or it may refer to the commonly held belief that Hanuman is an
Avatar of Lord Shiva … and therefore, we may somewhat succinctly
surmise, a Rudra Himself. In either case, “Like Father, Like Son” – as
we shall soon see.

The mentioning as applies Vishnu and Krishna is more unexpected … if you
are unsure as to where to look. For as we have previously asserted,
Krishna in particular is a similar expression of the Indo-European
Striker/Thunderer deific complex – just as Lord Hanuman is. Although as
with Lord Hanuman, He represents a particular ‘subtype’ of this complex.
The ‘Demigod’ form – wherein the parentage entails a Divine sending by
the Sky Father, likely via the relevant portion of the Asvamedha rite,
and thus produces progeny with *three* parents: a ‘mortal’ father (in
this case, the Vanara, Kesari), a Divine Father (variously identified as
Vayu or Shiva – but, again, I repeat myself), and a ‘mortal’ mother (the
Vanara woman, Anjani). I shall not go into detail elucidating this
typology, but interested parties should consult my earlier work –
‘Perseus , Krishna , Karna – Three Perspectives Upon The Origin Myth Of
The Indo-European Striker/Thunderer’. And, with a view to more broadly
exploring the situation with accompanying examination of its metaphysics
– ‘The Apple of Odin to Rerir, The Fire-Seed of Agni, The Egg of
Nemesis, The Paternity of Alexander, And The Asvamedha of Dasharatha –
On The Equine Investiture Of The Divine Essence In A King’s Heir-To-Be
In The Indo-European Mytho-Religious Sacro-Political Tradition’.

As we can see from those previous pieces – this is not a solely Hindu
understanding; but one which occurs right the way across the
Indo-European sphere, amidst Greek and Nordic mythology in remarkably
congruent ways.

So – we have an array of material showing Hanuman to be an archaically
attested figure, carried forward with the inexorable storm-force through
the history of our living Indo-European religion. People often confuse –
or dare to presume – that innovation as to ‘exterior’ elements means
outright invention when it comes to the ‘inner essence’ of a figure or a
practice. This is quite frequently not the case – as can clearly be seen
here. The Parentage schema aligns, the ritual schema aligns, and we have
quite direct attestation in the most archaic Indo-European
mytho-religious canon available to us.

But let’s go further.

One of the most prominent of Hanuman’s names is Bajrang Bali – The
Strong Thunderbolt. You can quite clearly see how ‘Bajrang’, akin to
another well-known Hanuman epithet – Bajrangi – derives etymologically
from ‘Vajra’. As it should, given that Lord Hanuman is, of course, the
Striker/Thunderer – wielding a massive, mighty ‘Gada’ (‘Mace’), and
striking with the furious thunderous force. Although it also refers to
His Indomitable Nature – the ‘Vajra’ having a meaning not merely of a
weapon, the Thunderbolt, but also of the ‘Diamond’, the Indestructible.
An epithet clearly demonstrated in its tangible application during the
course of the Ramayana, wherein Ravana’s torturers attempt to break
Hanuman’s will and secure disclosure of information by setting His tail
on fire … and only wind up with a rather fired up Hanuman escaping from
the restraints upon Him as a merest act of will and proceeding to
rampage across the rooftops of Ravana’s capital of Lanka, setting the
city afire through His burning tail without the slightest discomfort
upon Him. This also happens to partially fulfil a prophetic curse
leveled upon Ravana by NandiJI, the seneschal of the Shaivite Household,
that Ravana’s kingdom would be destroyed by monkeys.

The hailing of Hanuman as Maruti – ‘Of Maruta’ – would further fit with
His placement within the Indo-European divine familial schema. Maruta in
this context would refer to Vayu / Rudra (it is an attested epithet of
both – and again, I repeat myself), with Maruti therefore being the Son
of this Wind Lord. And similarly, also inferentially referencing *the*
Maruts, of which the Striker/Thunderer stands at the head of.

This ‘Thunderous’ resonancy also finds itself expressed in the course of
a favourite Hanuman devotional hymnal of mine – the Bajrang Baan
\[‘Arrow of the Thunderbolt’\]. There, a verse begins with ‘जय जय जय
ध्वनि होत अकाशा’ – an emphatic statement that the High Heavens (Akasha)
Resound with the Glory of He; other verses hail the sound of His Name as
imminently preceding the delivery of the Devotee through rains of the
Divine Weaponry bombarding down from the Heavens.

In terms of the theology of Hanuman, there are a few points of
particular, especial interest. One of which concerns just how Hanuman
wound up here in the first place. It is said that Hanuman was,
effectively, cast down from Heaven due to His disposition causing
problems up there – too lacking in seriousness or the apt concern for
the interests of others to stand as a stabilizing pillar for creation …
and a particular incident featuring the attempted devouring of the Sun
due to Its looking like a particularly delicious mango. He was sent down
to live amidst mortal-kind, with His memories of His Divine Nature, and
His accompanying Siddhis \[‘Powers’/’Abilities’\] wiped from His Mind
likewise. He was placed under a geas which meant that these should
remain obliviated to Him until He had started to take life and His role
in a more appropriate manner – working to serve and look after others,
rather than just playing pranks and acting in a seemingly
self-interested manner. The course of the Ramayana also chronicles
Hanuman overcoming this – acting, without quite realizing it, on the
long-arcening pathway back up towards the Heavens; remembering His true
nature and reattaining His prior status of the divine empowerment
through His enacting assistance to Rama, Laxman, and Their quest to
recover Lady Sita. There is a tangible template for all of us mortal
devotees in this, I suspect – we are *all* upon a quest to recover and
become more than we presently are, through the service of a Holy Cause.
Eric Hoffer once said that “Faith in a holy cause is to a considerable
extent a substitute for the lost faith in ourselves.” HanumanJI’s lived
example demonstrates that the faith – and, most importantly, deeds – in
service of just such a Holy Cause, can in fact lead to the ultimate
restoration of Faith in ourselves, as well. The two causes are truly
one!

This typology, the scenario of the Striker/Thunderer, occurring amidst
Humanity, working and living among us and making use of His prodigious
abilities to ‘earn a place amidst the Heavens’ – is not unique to
Hanuman, nor the Hindusphere specifically. We find Herakles working
toward His Redemption, in a slightly different manner, via His Twelve
Tasks … culminating eventually with the Demigod’s proper Apotheosis to
stand amidst the ranks of the Olympians as a ‘true’ and ‘full’ Deity in
His Own Rite. We *also* find the tale resonating out across time and
space – and even though there is much wrong with its telling, the Marvel
Cinematic Universe presentation of the character-arc of *their*
interpretive rendition of ‘Thor’, is also expressive of this patterning.
A deific cast down due to lacking the appropriate seriousness and
‘noblesse oblige’ which comes with great power (‘great responsibility’,
to reference a certain other comic-book mantra), learning amidst the
mortal world the vital integrality of these elements to His true divine
nature, and so recovering this … winning His way back unto the Heavens,
as the hoped-for, longed-for result.

The occurrence of the Striker/Thunderer ‘down here’ amongst us, also
helps to explicate the consistent presentation of this figure as being
the Friend to Man, the Protector of Mankind. We see this in the hailings
of Herakles and of Thor – so it should come as no surprise to find
Hanuman similarly regarded. We may surmise that the Striker/Thunderer
deific is not only a truly fearsome and formidable opponent – but
amongst the greatest of possible allies, benefactors, and indeed
‘Friends’ any man could have. Seemingly also a rather more
‘approachable’ and charitably-minded figure than His Father. Although as
ever in the case of aggressively competent deities – the fact that the
devotee may see a more compassionate and positive facing in no way
diminishes the terrifying wrath of same to the enemy. Indeed, these are
quite contingent and mutually reinforcing meanings – we speak the name
of Hanuman to send demons quailing and fleeing in terror, after all.

A further particular point of coterminity between the figures of
Hanuman, Herakles, and Thor – concerns Their faculty of truly remarkable
strength. Not merely of character (especially as ‘rediscovered’) but in
the physical sense as well – although it is physical strength often
tempered by an intellectual perspicacity as well. The Striker/Thunderer
is no mere lunk-headed brute, but capable of strategy, insight, and
innovation too – much to the unwelcomed surprise of His opponents. In
Herakles’ case, we see this via His tricking Atlas into taking the Sky
back; in Hanuman’s case, via the ‘deal’ of sorts reached with the Surasa
demoness as He attempts to fly across the straits to Lanka. It would be
tempting to engage in a more full-length enquiry as to whether the Tests
of Herakles, and for that matter, the Trials of Thor in Utgard, might
bear close resemblance to various of the Deeds of Hanuman in the course
of His restoration of Siddhis … but we shall save that exploration for
another time.

Yet in terms of physical strength, there is one element to His Tale that
has always resonated with me (well, one amidst many – for we are rapidly
running out of time before I head to Mandir to offer praise and tribute
in person upon this particular Tuesday-night occurrancy!) ; and that is
Lord Hanuman’s picking up and ferrying of Mt Drona in order to bring a
particular healing herb to the fallen Lakshman (Who was suffering from
something akin to ‘radiation poisoning’, to proffer a somewhat
simplistic modern analogy for the scenario in question). Hanuman had
been sent forth to retrieve the *herb*, yet was unable to make it out
amidst the valley it grew in, and so *brought the entire mountain* back
with Him in order that He might save His dear friend (and as a mark of
*just how dear a friend* – when Hanuman opened up His Chest to reveal
His Mighty Heart, therein to be seen were Ram, Laxman, and Sita … for
They were indeed quite directly the major occupants of His chest cavity,
His Heart and core of being in pious devotion to same). There is an
element of humour to this, of course – but also an element of poignancy.
That is true dedication. And it gives tangible expression to the
aphorism we are familiar with – that faith can move mountains. As well
as inverting the Islamic notion that if the Mountain shall not come to
Muhammad, then Muhammad shall have to go to the Mountain.

Although in terms of the ‘Good Guy Hanuman’ understanding, the element
which often springs to mind is another one – concerning the sage
Valmiki, author of the Ramayana (well, one of them) wherein much of this
occurs. It is said that Valmiki encountered Hanuman up in the Mountains
while journeying to seek inspiration for his literary efforts. And
noticed that Hanuman was, in fact, writing His Own account of the events
of the Ramayana, which He shared some of with Valmiki. Valmiki burst
into tears, overcome with both the sheer beauty of Bajrang Bali’s
rendition … and the fact that even an author as eloquent as he would be
unable to ever produce anything of comparable marvel and excellence and
magnificent beauty. Seeing this, Hanuman without a second thought cast
His draft into the nearby glacial stream – determining that it would
cheer up Valmiki to be now able to write the most renowned Ramayana as
the result of the loss of its superior. A streak of ‘humility’ which may
be somewhat divergent from what we might perhaps expect from the more
overtly prideful Striker/Thunderer expressions to the West. There’s
apparently a Temple in India which claims to possess a fragmentary
portion of the HanumanJi Ramayana, written in an ancient script upon
preserved palm-leaves; but that, I shall have to look into at some other
time.

Hanuman, for us here in the Hindusphere, is a great many things. Loyal,
honourable, pious, brave – and possessing an admirable sense of humour,
into the bargain as well. At once an Avatar of the Greatest God (and
there is an interesting suggestion that this might be ‘Patrilineal
Incarnation’ – somewhat resonant with the Nordic ‘Patrilineal
Reincarnation’ understanding), as well as the Greatest Devotee. A
Shaivite by Essence, and yet supremely at ease with what is nowadays
considered a Vaishnava Avatara as well (for those outside a Hindu
audience – suffice to say that Shiva and Vishnu .. do not always get on
so cordially). A God of great violence yet also great tenderness;
employing all the indefatigable and implacable force of the Storm on the
one hand, and all the innate Thunderousness of Laughter and good cheer
upon the other (using said humour to assist, even and especially in
unorthodox ways, the serious path of piety for the dedicated and perhaps
even ‘conventional’ devotee). An incredibly powerful being – but One who
has also become a beacon for the supreme value of compassionate
engagement with others. And a prominent Deity, Who is nevertheless a
tangible template for living for the mortals down here below. A Deva
Whose Form is indelibly and irreducibly associated to India – and yet
Who also finds expression elsewhere throughout the Indo-European World.

Some might suggest that this would render Him a ‘God of Contradictions’.
Art not so.

As we have so often observed, it is most peculiar that people seem to
expect The Gods to have more two dimensionally flat and featureless
personas or characterizations than they do the ordinary humans with
which they might daily happen to interact. The complexity and
multifaceted nature of Hanuman – and the Striker/Thunderer Deific
complex that He so eloquently expresses – is exactly this Reality made
manifest.

Nobody *ever* saw fit to seek to question the roiling clouds of a
Thunderstorm as to its many shiftings of speed and shape and hue ..
insisting, perhaps, that it’s too ‘dark’ to be the bearer of the
Thunderbolt or that the zephyrous winds do not speak just quite the
right language for the listener’s delicate ears and sensibilities. The
Storm is taken as it is – and run away from by those who are unutterably
opposed to it yet may never truly exert domination over same. It has its
own interior logic, and we are blessed to be able to behold in some
small measure – and benefit from the tangible, per-cussive applications
of Same !

To this we can but only add –

Bajrang Bali Ki Jaye !
