+++
title = "Glorious Modern Hindu Art Of Devi As Flame-Speaker Of The Universe’s Inception And Unfurlingxa0Course"
date = "April 30, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/devi-fire-mouth.jpg?w=699)

It is Friday – Devi’s Day – And so therefore, Devi-otional (A)Art(i)
posting !

Absolutely beautiful rendering by Shuvankar Biswas – which does that
rarest of things … takes the established
theological/iconographic/mythological conceptry and *brings it together*
to create something which seems ‘new’ yet resonates with the effortless
weight of ages!

What do I mean by this? Well consider Devi’s Tongue. At first, we should
presume that this is Devi Kali – and that the prominency of the Tongue
is the mark of embarrassment following Her slaying of Shiva; or the
darting Tongue which successfully intercepted all the Raktabija
\[‘Blood-Seed’\] demons.

Except if we look a little closer – we behold something else rather
remarkable. The Tongue has ‘bled into’ the Flame, in its whirl – and
which thence projects back out and around the Devi in the formulaic
representation for the Universe \[c.f the Ring of Fire about Mahadev in
the Nataraja iconographic schema\], even looping around back into what
might appear similar to the Vyomakesha \[‘Heaven-Hair’ – but more upon
that, some other time\].

Why is this occurrent? Well, I am not the artist … I am but a theologian
– but it *instantly* recalled to me the lesser-known Vedic conceptry
around fire in the mouth as an instrument of cosmic creation.

It is this Fire which speaks, empowers, and resonates out as the Fire of
Creation – the Empowered Speech, the Arka, the Seven Tongues of Flame –
in just the manner that the Universe is held to be congealed fire
likewise.

There is prominent presentation in various Upanishads \[the
Brihadaranyaka is the one which springs to mind from my previous work\]
of the Spider ‘spinning’ yet in a sense also ‘speaking’ the universe
into being, as a further metaphoric expression of the typology (which
goes further well with the Indra’s Web conceptry, especially given the
role of Karma in the latter terms). Except where that is more concerned
with the nature of the self existing within the bounds of a universe we
have thusly created – and is fittingly juxtaposed with the imagery of
the bonfire upon the side of the river for the noon-day sacrifices …

… What we are visually encountering here is a far grander and more
expansive vision.

To Speak of the Seven Tongues of Flame accorded to Agni, Brihaspati –
these are the vehicles, the vectors, the streams from Beyond and Above
\[‘Orlog’, Rta-as-Brahman, and in this case, with especial deference to
the *wondrous* theology of Sayana .. Devi Herself – AdiParaShakti\] with
which Vak is expressed , with which She influences the shape and course
of our creation. Indeed, which in a veery real sense, She *is* our
universe \[c.f my earlier work upon Maya Devi as well\].

It is intriguing to note that one of these Seven Tongues of Agni is
*also* called Kali – although here, as we can see, it is more that the
Agni is the tongue of Kali likewise. And Agni, as we all know \[or
should, by now!\] is Shiva.

Yes, usually when we encounter the long tongue of Kali Devi , we are
either expecting the act of Destruction \[which is nevertheless still
present and represented via the Black Hole in the situation of Her Third
Eye ‘midst Her Mighty Brow – resonating with how, for instance, Lord
Shiva’s Third Eye is an ultimate and all-consuming force of destruction,
*also* in Fire .. if He *chooses* for it to be\] , or we are expecting
the tangible gesture of Contrition – of embarrassment.

We shall leave aside the question as to whether Cosmogenesis is supposed
to be an “embarrassing” act or one which mandates the request for
Forgiveness and militates an expression of overt ‘contrition’.

What we are clearly seeing here is something even a-priori to a certain
Indo-European mythic, theological typology: that of the ‘Song-Smith of
the Cosmos’.

We are familiar, of course, with Vishvakarman / Tvastr , and Slavic
Svarog –

Great Gods Who ‘Sing’ the Cosmos into being, and are also regarded as
utilizers of the Fire to fashion the Universe into continued existence
in the first instance (and then some!).

However, considering that we *also* have the Vedic (and other)
attestations for Devi Uber Alles and A Priori to the Sky Father deific

… and everything *else* for that matter …

… well, that would therefore imply that the Cosmic Artificer that is the
Sky Father, is working with already produced materials as a ‘finisher’
more than as their ultimate source.

And that Ultimate Source?

Why, you’re looking at Her !

Jai Mata DI !
