+++
title = "A Brief Note On Tvastr Asxa0Dyaus"
date = "April 2, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/visvakarma4.jpg?w=600)

We had a question to the page about why I’d placed Dyaus and Tvastr in
the same spaces on a recent image.

A good question. I have long maintained that Tvastr is also an
expression of the Indo-European Sky Father deific \[i.e. Dyaus Pitar\].

I have sketched out the typology for the Masque of the Sky Father to
which Tvastr would be linked in my previous work on, for instance,
Slavic Svarog; which we might succinctly surmise to be a “Song-Smith”
(and c.f the Brihaspati hailing of Vishvakarman in the RV as further
demonstration of this typology in practice).

However, the best way of answering your question is to make use of the
Vedic evidence itself. And, at the same time, elucidate the underlying
(Proto-)Indo-European complex to which it reasonably strongly speaks.

The chief element of saliency here is, of course, that around the
provision of the Soma. The situation of Agni bringing the Soma in Shyena
(i.e. Raptor) form is well attested – and has direct cognate value in
the Eddic tradition when we consider Odin’s bringing of the Mead of
Poetry as an Eagle.

This is as we should expect, given that Odin is a strong cognate for
Rudra – and that Agni-Rudra is an incredibly well attested internal
correspondency within the Vedic schema (c.f, for example, the situation
of Kumara relative to Skanda … and then further buttress that when we
consider the circumstances of parentage and other associations for
Heimdallr). I have also recently published an extensive piece
elucidating the oft-under-acknowledged suite of fairly direct
concordancies for Odin and Agni (and, for that matter, have previously
taken a look at a quite direct Odin – Brihaspati scriptural linkage as
well).

The situation of Rudra as being Dyaus is also directly attested within
the Vedas (indeed, it is phrased in one of the major mentions as part of
a direct nexus with Agni being Rudra being Dyaus all in the same line) –
and the linkage of Shiva with Soma is also uncontroversial. Indeed, it
is interesting to note that in the Agnicayana ‘Fire-Bird’ rite – the
Empowering Elixir in question is brought in the bird form of the altar
with alternating Agni/Rudra energies occurring within said sacrificial
blaze. Just as we should expect.

However – there is another Vedic understanding for the bestowing of the
Soma to Indra. Namely, that it is granted to Him by Tvastr, in three
vessels (not coincidentally – the same number as the Vessels of the
Nordic Mead of Poetry).

I do not think that these stories are mutually exclusive – I feel that
they are mutually reinforcing. They are readable together quite easily.
And would seem to suggest an understanding that Agni and Tvastr are not,
in this context, distinct … but rather, different perspectives upon the
same deific. Just as these two ways of phrasing the matter – that of
Indra being in receipt of the Soma from Agni versus that of Indra being
in receipt of the Soma from Tvastr – are different perspectives upon the
same fundamental mythic occurrence.

Indeed, RV III 48 2 makes the situation rather direct when it is stated
that it is in Indra’s *Father’s* Dwelling where the administration of
Soma has taken place … the same space, I would contend, referred to as
Tvastr’s House in a number of other RV Hymnals.

RV II 17 6, meanwhile, suggests it to be \[Indra’s\] Father Who has
manufactured the Vajra … and, again, elsewhere we have attestation for
Tvastr being the manufacturer of the device in question.

And it is also quite feasible to infer that the Cup of Tvastr … i.e.
that which is supposed to *bear* the Soma – means the Moon. Thus
explicating the Chandra-Soma correlation.

So – just as we know Dyaus to be the Father of Indra , it would seem
eminently logical that this Tvastr, referred to with some frequency in
paternal terms relative to Indra and occupying exactly the position
which the underlying reconstructive typology has suggested *should* be
that of the Sky Father in these mythic complexes ..

.. is *also* Dyaus.

And therefore, placed accordingly, within the meme.
