+++
title = "Hekate , The Diva Triformis , The Indo-European Triple-Goddess And The Indo-European Triple-Sun, Triple Realms – Anxa0Excerpt"
date = "April 23, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/d3h5n0e-8fc73d1a-d211-4859-b32e-5f5f02685196.jpg?w=597)

\[Author’s Note: The following represents a brief excerpt from my
earlier work, “Tryambaka Triophthalmos Triformis – The Three Eyes Of The
Indo-European Sky Father As Seen Through Vedic & Hellenic Perspective”.
I present it for our Friday Evening Devotional (A)Arti-cle – in part
because a more directly focused piece is still presently ‘in the works’
for Her. \[-C.A.R.\] \]

The association of the Goddess with these Three Realms is not exclusive
to the Vedic understanding, either – with the Serpent, Dove, and Dolphin
triple-symbol of Greek Demeter similarly representation Her Dominion
over Earth, Air, and Sea \[see my various previous works looking at
Demeter for more upon this oft-less well understood Goddess, especially
in Her proper Indo-European context\]; and in Hesiod’s Theogony, the
eminent Anatolian-Greek theologian in question places significant
emphasis upon the irreducible linkage of Hekate to Earth, Sea, and
Heaven. I declare that it is “irreducible”, because that is,
effectively, as Hesiod himself places it – stating that the dominion in
question was in place “from the beginning”, and unaltered by Zeus (Who,
it is noted, holds Her in most highest regard – resonant with the manner
in which Aditi Vak Saraswati is hailed as the Goddess of Gods in the
Vedic realm … and later, especially Shakta, scriptural canon of ours).

It would also be quite plausible, I suspect, to link in the Roman
concept of the Diva Triformis – the Triple-Form Goddess. This is a
complex figure, and a full consideration of Her is perhaps beyond the
sufficient scope of this piece; however suffice to say that “Diana” is
etymologically a female rendering of the same “Shining / Heavenly”
Indo-European root which informs “Dyaus”, “Jupiter”, “Zeus”, etc.
\[compare Dion & Dione in Ancient Greek\]. This is plausibly similar
also to what we find expressed in the “Ju-” of “Juno” relative to
“Jupiter”, and the “De-” of “Demeter” per my speculative
re-interpretation of the linguistics of the figure in Light of the
underlying comparative theology; Hera, too, should likely fit into this
schema, albeit with a more synonymic approach to producing the
‘(Day)Light’ element to the theonym (see my recent work – “Hera As
Indo-European Goddess – A Preliminary Investigation”). The common thread
of male and female counterpart deifics having strongly resemblant names
bearing the same core elemental theme is also well attested – Varuna &
Varuni, Rudra & Rudrani, Kaal & Kali, Bhairava & Bhairavi, for instance;
or, in Old Norse – Fjörgyn and Fjörgynn.

To bring things back to Diana Herselves – the understanding being
communicated via the Diva Triformis conceptry is one of a multilayered
multifacity, just as we should expect via the dual notions of the Three
Eyes (wherein the same Eyes are at once, Radiances and also
Planes/Worlds). There is, therefore, no inherent contradiction between
those Classical authors who ascribed the identity and essences of the
Diva Triformis upon the basis of what we might term the Tri-Loka (Three
Worlds) (i.e. ‘planetological’) model; and those who instead appeared to
approach the Goddess more via the Tri-Lochana (Three Illuminators)
understanding.

To illustrate that which I mean by this – there are multiple figures and
figurative understandings for this Diva Triformis schema. Some held that
the correct trio was Diana on Earth, Luna in the Sky, and Proserpine in
the Underworld. Others instead had the schema as being Hekate in the
Underworld (which is interesting as – strictly speaking – Hekate should
be a Solar Goddess per the original Anatolian IE conceptry as well as
the direct correlate elements with Vedic Aditi – more upon this in a
moment). These two perspectives are broadly correlate as the Tri-Loka
model – each Goddess-facing is identified with one of the Three Worlds /
Divisions of the Cosmos. Except implicit within the linguistics is the
other model – the Tri-Lochana model of the Three Radiances, Three
Illuminators, Three Celestial Bodies.

By which I mean – Diana is not, per the linguistics, “On Earth” … but
rather, “Illuminating the Earth” as the Daytime Sky – the Sun, in just
the same manner as Dyaus and Dyaus’ Solar Eye. Luna (Selene), meanwhile,
is in the Sky, most certainly – however this is the Night-Time Sky;
illuminating the Night just as the Moon does – the Lunar Eye of the Sky
Father. And as for Persephone and/or Hekate ? Well, this is the
“Underworld Sun” – or, as it happens, the far removed Highest (Outer)
Heaven where the Realm of the Glorious/Ancestral Dead is to be found.
This comes directly under the Reign of Aditi in the Vedic sphere (in
addition to, of course, Varuna (the Sky Father – as is Hades , Dis
Pater) and Lord Yama (Remus, in the Romanic conceptry)), with the Night
both Gulf and Veil between the Daylit Realm of the Living Earth and the
Ultra-Solar realm in question.

Said Highest Heaven, of course, is quite directly proximate to The
Waters in the Vedic understanding – indeed, per one’s reading of RV X
125 \[the famed Devi Sukta\], the position of Devi Aditi is
within/beyond these Waters (as liminal sphere of the Universe),
breathing Life into our universe from the World’s Summit where the Realm
of the (Fore)Father(s) is to be found. I have previously explored in
quite some other works the process of ‘derivation” whereby the Sky
Afterlife/Underworld of the more archaic Indo-European cosmology has
‘migrated’ to be an Underworld beneath the Earth’s surface and our feet
\[‘Patala-Loka’\]; as well as the corresponding ‘shift’ whereby the Sea
of Stars and Ocean of Suns has similarly ‘descended’ to become moored
(indeed, meer’ed – and this is a double-service PIE pun due to the
relevant ‘Mer’ and ‘Mer’ meaning ‘To Die’ (or Disappear) and Sea / Body
of Water, respectively) in the more terrestrial oceans of our world.
Hence the otherwise quite curious conceptry of the Sun and Solar Energy
coming from the Sea still being somewhat preserved via the Horse
association of Poseidon – despite this making less sense if the Seas are
felt to be around one and on roughly similar level to the land , as
compared to the more archaic situation of the Sea up in the Sky (which
also more sensibly renders the Solar expression into our universe as
being congealed emanation of the Absolute, the Undivided – Brahman
Aditi; as with the Vajra and Soma for exactly the same reasoning … but
more upon those points can be found in my other works).

Hence, even though the astute reader may have mentally noted that there
is no overt ‘Sea’ division in the Diva Triformis conceptry – this does
not mean that there lacks an implicit point of resonancy therein for
same.

And thus, we may also handily reconcile two otherwise rather difficult
and different ‘Three Worlds’ conceptual-cosmological schemas – the
predominant Greek division of Heavens, Underworld, Sea ; and the major
archaic Vedic ‘Three Worlds’ understanding of the Earth, Mid-Atmosphere,
and (Higher) Heavens. Although as we have earlier demonstrated via the
citation for RV X 63 2 – the Vedic Rsis were also quite well acquainted
with an alternative Tri-Loka of the Earth, the Heavens, and the Waters.
