+++
title = "A Manifesto For The Resurrective Reincarnation Of The Loka-lized Indo-Europeanxa0Faith"
date = "April 20, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/arya-akasha-manifesto-black.png?w=476)

What follows is not my own writing – although I have had a hand in
editing it, and it has resulted from months of concordant conversations
between myself and its major author, Aldo Rapace.

We feel that it has come to a necessary stage in our Mission, to begin
more openly discussing and working upon these matters – how it is that
we really can begin to truthfully and meaningfully rekindle the Flame of
Faith in the vast Westerly swathe of the Indo-European World.

And give you all elements that you can actively engage with and actively
use.

This Manifesto represents an initial step – a statement and a
declaration of intent, a Path-Way (and that is in the Sanskrit sense of
a Path, also; a Patha-Vay, indeed – both in the sense of वय but also
वायु do we mean the latter particle) for us to follow.

We look forward to your company and your engagement, your support, as we
see where it shall lead! Back from The Heavens, Themselves!

And, as always – remember that which we strive for. Whether I phrase it
in Old Norse, Ancient Greek, Latin, or some other Indo-European
millennia-ancient liturgical language … the cause is the irreducible
same:

कृण्वंतो विश्वमार्यं

Krinvanto Vishvam Aryam – Make The World ‘Arya’ Again

So Shall It Be

\[-C.A.R.\]

Where we stand and where to go from there…

Arya Akasha has long been on a mission to further the cause of
Indo-European Dharma. Both in the virtual world of the internet and
social media and (most importantly) in the real world. The time comes
now to step up the game and to unveil the new phase of the Arya Akasha
endeavor.

As some of you may know, there have been recently discussions going on
in Arya Akasha circles concerning the project of presenting a pan-IE
religious framework, with both theoretical and practical dimensions.
While it is Curwen who is the heart of this project, let me present some
general considerations in this regard.

First of all we have to be clear about where we stand, what is our
situation as Indo-Europeans (IE). Let me get straight to the answer –
with one major exception there is no living, integral Indo-European
civilization, meaning no sovereign IE civilization with IE culture, IE
language and IE religion. There are countries and nations with some IE
culture going on, speaking IE languages, but there is no sovereign IE
religion anymore anywhere.

Or is there?

Enter Bharat Mata… She, who is currently the only sovereign
manifestation of our Heimat. India, the only sovereign IE civilization
still standing among the dark tides of this Dark Age.

There is only one living IE religion in existence today – Sanatana
Dharma (and its heterodox offshoots, which we may consider, to some
degree, as part of the Dharmic current), popularly known as Hinduism.

India is the only land where the ancestral forms of IE religion and IE
social institutions form the basis of modern Indian culture and society.

Some you may point out that there is also Asatru, Hellenismos,
Rodnoverye, Romuva and other western IE revivals. I would kindly ask you
to retrace back a few lines and read again “with one major exception
there is no living, integral Indo-European civilization… anymore
anywhere.” Before you start arguing, do consider what the meaning of
“integral IE civilization means” – it means that the civilization in
question is under the aegis of IE religion, culture, language, social
norms, customs, institutions etc. The keyword here, among all these
keywords, is “civilization”. There is such a thing as a “Hindu
civilization”, as most social, religious and even political scholars
would agree. There is no such thing (anymore) as “Asatru civilization”
or “Hellenic civilization”. Neither Germania, nor Greece are based
primarily on their native forms of the IE religion, culture and social
norms, customs and institutions.

Thus it is probably no surprise that there are 0.4% of US population
that identify as neopagans. And that includes everything from
hard-reconstructionist Germanic heathenism to Wicca. 0.4%, let that sink
in how socially irrelevant neopaganism is in the U.S. The numbers are
hardly better elsewhere in the West, including Russia where the numbers
are as marginal as US numbers, although the social impact is probably
somewhat greater (which is not really saying anything, given how
insignificant it is in the civilizational scheme of things).

The most successful, and indeed arguably demographically relevant, is
Scythian neopaganism (Æss Din). According to some scholars “the movement
has become so widespread among the Ossetians that its success is
“unrivalled” among all Neopagan religious movements.” According to the
2012 complement to the 2010 Russian Census “29.4% of the population of
North Ossetia (comprising Ossetians as well as ethnic Russians) were
adherents of the Ossetian Pagan religion.” This is something indeed
totally unparalleled anywhere else among occidental Indo-Europeans,
where we find neopaganism as a tiny, yet sometimes somewhat vocal
(although those voices that are amplified by the media are often Wiccan
and similar ones), subculture, that is largely irrelevant and mostly
unknown by the majority population.

The origins of Western neopaganism place it firmly as sub-sub-culture of
the New Age subculture, despite possible protestations to the contrary
by some.

But the perhaps more serious problem than “just” the numbers is the
question of legitimacy. The traditional priestly lineages and the
lineages of mystery-initiation were broken in the IE West hundreds of
years ago and somewhere even more than one and a half millennia ago.
Where some of the lineages survived (and yes, it probably happened,
occasionally), they were in one form or another subsumed into the
adopted dominant religion of the West – Christianity.

We can mention an actual example from a remote region of the Moravia’s
White Carpathian mountains, where there was a lineage of so called
“goddesses”, a lineage of female practitioners of magic that is
according to scholars attested already during the times the area was
settled during the early 18th Century by settlers from Ruthenia. It is
from that area that this lineage entered Moravia.

This particular lineage survived into the 20th Century, surviving Nazi
and Communist regimes and went extinct relatively recently, being
extinguished not by any European totalitarianisms of the 20th Century,
but by the consummerist neoliberal society. There were simply no young
females anymore willing to be initiated and to take upon themselves the
vows and responsibilities of this lineage. Thus the last of the
“goddesses” died in 2001 without any successor.

Today the ethnographers and historians try to map the practices of folk
magic possibly connected to this lineage, but its inner mysteries are
gone now.

Why did we mention this lineage though? Because it was a devout
Christian lineage. These “witches” were not pagans, they were definitely
not “neopagans” (and would most probably be appalled by what passes for
neopaganism today), they were devout Catholics. And not just because
“they had to be”. This argument could perhaps stand during the 18th
Century with its witch hunts, but definitely not in the 19th Century
(when the Western neopaganism started to take off) and for sure not in
the 20th Century, when the hold of Christianity over larger Czech
population quickly waned (so much so that Czechs are perhaps the most
secular nation of Europe).

It is certain that no legitimate priestly IE lineage survived in its
original capacity (and there are attested examples of the conversion to
Christianity being sometimes led by the members of the old tribal
priestly elites) and it is quite probable that no initiatory IE lineages
survived, unless subsumed into Christianity, like the White Carpathian
“goddesses” hailing from Ruthenia.

Today’s Western paganisms and heathenisms are thus illegitimate. Yes,
let me repeat it – a structure purporting to be a religious structure
and yet lacking the uninterrupted line with IE priestly and initiatory
lineages, is illegitimate by definition.

This is just a statement of fact. This “illegitimacy” can be amended,
actually, and thus the occidental IE revivals can be made legitimate.
But by and of themselves they are lacking the true connection to the
ancestral higher Tradition.

Now, an argument can be made that we are direct descendants of our pagan
forefathers. Yes, we are. And we are also direct descendants of our
Christian forefathers for the past several hundred years… how many
generations is that? A lot. And in the meantime, the priestly class of
our pagan forefathers disappeared and initiatory lineages went extinct
or were Christianized.

Of course, European Christianity, especially in its folk forms retained
many features of our IE culture and religious elements etc. But without
the care provided by the IE priestly class the very best what
Christianized European folklore preserved is basically the “third
function” form of religion.

While this “folkatrú” is somewhat good enough for very basic forms of IE
spiritual life, it is nowhere close to the necessities of the IE High
Religion. And while it does contain quite explicit pagan elements, it is
also hard (or rather quite impossible) to be disentagled entirely from
its Folk Christian expression, because these pagan elements were
literally fused with Folk Christianity and we run into the danger of
decontextualizing them without having proper pagan context for them to
be placed into.

And while we have remnants of authentic pagan folk traditions, we have
no authentic and legitimate religious and spiritual leaders. Yet, we
have many leaders, many of those who think that their take on the
ancestral religion of their forefathers is the right one, for whatever
reason.

As it is, Western paganisms are basically LARPs. Some are LARPing that
the religion of their ancestors looked like the hyperprogressive
ideologies of today. Others are LARPing that the ancient codices and
laws apply today and that no time effectively divides them from their
favourite pagan era. Often times this is connected with “choose-and-pick
(or, ‘pick-and-mix’) your favourite era, favourite sources, favourite
scholars and their views”. The results are the loss of depth, faux
radicalism and further distance from anything actually resembling
authentic tradition. Most are running with UPGs \[‘Unattested Personal
Gnosis’\] that they present as the “authentic” reading of sources, –
sources which are often problematic to interpret or properly
contextualize for actual scholars dealing with them professionally, and
which thus present actually perfect opportunity for the neopagan
“leaders” to run with whatever it is they like to project onto history
and deal with the rest as “Christian interpolations”. The fact that
basically the whole works are “Christian interpolations” is nothing that
would bother them at all.

Now, having said that, there is indeed one exception to this. A system
that, unlike all other Western neopaganisms which build on fragmentary
materials and lack actual sources for ritual structures, hymns etc., has
basically everything we may need for actual revival – from mythological
cycle, through theology, metaphysics, philosophy, theurgy, to known
ritual structures and actual hymns to the Gods. Yes, you probably know
what I am talking about – it is Hellenic (or Helleno-Roman) system.

Yet even here we lack the lines of initiation. At the very latest these
went extinct with Plethon and the ultimate lack of success he had in his
attempts to revive Hellenismos. Nevertheless, the Hellenic religion
never really went away and ever since the Renaissance it has became
integral part of high culture of most of Europe. In Central Europe you
would be hard pressed to find anything dedicated to Germanic or Slavic
gods after the Conversion, but you find Hellenic gods everywhere, from
gardens and palaces, through sculptures and paintings, to literature. IE
Gods indeed never went away, at least in their Hellenic (or
Helleno-Roman) garbs. That does not mean that we don’t have pieces
missing there, or that what is preserved is of unquestionable quality.
Far from that, but despite any possible problems we may run into in this
regard, these are minimal and almost non-existent compared to what we
run into when trying to revive any other European paganism.

Most other branches were not so lucky as Greeks and Latins, having
mostly lost their high mythology (Slavs, Balts), fragments of which,
heavily distorted, survived as elements of folklore, or with their high
mythology becoming so euhemerized (Insular Celts) so as to present
somewhat problematic picture overall (as far as reconstruction and
revival is concerned). Germanics seemingly have it better (although
still having only a fraction of what survived in Hellenismos), but all
their stuff come basically post-Conversion and also highly garbled (this
of course is probably welcomed by some of the Ásatrú crowd, as that
allows them to discard whatever it is they happen not to like as
“Christian”).

So, perhaps you are thinking, we should go with the Hellenic system,
since it has it all. Well, that’s not the point I am trying to make
here. All modern Western revivals are LARPs, in the sense that they have
no legitimate leadership (which not only has no legitimacy from the
Above, but spend most of its efforts in what amounts to mental
masturbations). Everyone can come in and proclaim himself a head honcho
of this or that “tradition” or school of thought and run with whatever
idiocy it is they want to run with. Like the idea that what they are
engaged in (as opposed, of course, to others doing the revival in a
different way) is some authentic tradition or authentic revival of
authentic tradition. That is just pure delusion. Modern revivals are
just that – they are, literally, products of liberal (post)modernity,
either in its nationalist form or in its globalist form. The ideology of
nationalism is actually older than the oldest neopagan Western revivals
(and yes, there is a time gap between Plethon, which may be considered
either the last of the torchbearers of classical Hellenismos or the
first of the Hellenic revivalists (and perhaps a bit of both), and the
modern Hellenic religious revival). And yet, some of them are LARPing
that they are representing “older” and “more authentic” perspectives.
The truth is that these are usually presented in a highly personalized
manner as envisioned by the personalities involved.

Again, Hellenismos is somewhat insulated against this, only by the
virtue of the sheer amount of actual first hand sources it is running
with.

Now, all this may sound like I am some Westerner LARPing as Hindu and
dissing Western neopagans. Perhaps. I would argue though that if
anything is not-LARPing, then it is this –– going with the only living
and authentic IE religion of today. Provided, of course, that you don’t
try to run it in some “we wuzz White Vedic peoples” manner, but you
approach it with reverence and attitude of a seeker, grateful for being
provided a refuge by the system kept alive and vibrant by our Indo-Aryan
relatives.

So am I dissing Western neopaganism? Not really. On the contrary – if we
want real IE revival in the West, we have to take a sober look at its
current state. And it is a sorry state. Largely irrelevant fraction of
IE speaking Western populations, with largely irrelevant impact, rife
with internecine rivalries and personal animosities, as can be expected,
given the nature of people usually involved.

All is not lost though. Because we have a living IE Tradition, living
religion, living culture and a sovereign IE civilization – Bharat Mata.

Am I proposing for us all to come and become Hindus? Well, that is a
viable option, of course. Most people protesting would be actually
missing the fundamental fact that our Indo-European, or if I may say so
Aryan, gods wear different “masks” among our different branches. Of
course, sometimes the same mask is worn by several gods, and many times
one god wears many masks even within one particular pantheon.
Nevertheless these folks who are already engaged in the revival of their
own ethnic tradition get stuck into the very narrow confines of what
they imagine is the “proper” ethnocultural expression of their
spirituality.

But we have to be totally and actually brutally sincere in our appraisal
of the actual situation. For some branches it is almost impossible to
run with anything even approximating High Religion. Slavs basically lost
it all. The only thing Slavs have are names of gods, a couple of
mentions within the medieval chronicles, post-Conversion folklore
beliefs and practices that can be to some degree reverse engineered (but
that can only go so far and easily runs into the problems mentioned
above). We have no first hand myths from the pre-Conversion era, no
rituals, no liturgy.

So as for Slavic paganism, we can revive lower religion no problem – the
cult of ancestors, the cult of household and nature wights… these sorts
of things. In some areas the Slavic folklore is among the best preserved
of all occidental IE branches, save for Balts. But the higher religion,
the theology, the theurgy… well, we can reconstruct some things to some
(fairly minimal) degree, but that is still a more or less a plausible
reconstruction only. And usually this scholar goes with this
interpretation, that scholar goes with that interpretation and the third
one is trying to come up with a totally new interpretation, so he can
possibly be famous.

So what are we to do? We Slavs speak Slavic languages, which belong to
the Satem branch of IE Tree. And since we know precious little about
actual pre-Conversion Slavic religion from actual pre-Conversion
sources, the best choice is to follow our area of the Tree until we get
to IE sources most relevant to our ancestral religion. Now, that happens
to be the Vedic religion. Not because it was our direct ancestral
religion but because it was the Indo-Aryan redaction of the Andronovo
religion, which was a “dialect” of the Corded Ware religion shared by
Satem Indo-Europeans. There is actually an archaic topographic layer in
Russia that would seem to directly attest to this.

So it would be quite possible to run purely Slavic folklore (and lower
religion in general) with Vedic/Hindu High Religion overlay.

But there can also be another way. But let me get to it later below.

So let’s take a brief stock of where we stand.

\* Every occidental IE branch can fortunately revive its “lower
religion”, aka the folklore stuff.

\* Some branches can revive some aspects of their higher religion (Celts
perhaps, and Germanics, although here it would by necessity kinda force
Norse religious focus), but the restoration of this religion, including
theology, liturgy, theurgy, etc. is literally impossible without the
input from either Hellenic and/or Vedic sources, because they are
missing a lot (and what they have going on is often times in not as good
shape as most adherents of neopagan revivals of these religions assume).

\* Some branches can revive almost everything… well, a branch, to be
perfectly clear – the Hellenic one (or the Helleno-Roman, if Latins
would want to make it somewhat easier upon themselves and follow the
example of ancient Romans in hellenizing Latin religion), here we have
everything – we have actual hymns (several dating to various eras from
Homeric through Orphic to Neoplatonic of the late Antiquity), fairly
good idea of how the rites were conducted (both religious and theurgic),
we have both theological and philosophical works etc. As mentioned
above, it is not without reconstructive problems, so to say, but again,
these are fairly minimal compared with other European paganisms. It also
was the first, and basically the only, Western IE religion that went
from the “tribalistic” to “universal” (during Hellenic Era) and as such
is especially viable for a unifying occidental “IE religious dialect”,
especially given that since the times of Alexander the Great and the
Hellenic world he forged and of the ascent of the Roman Republic and
later of the Empire (whose representatives were very philhellenic) the
idea of “Europe” has been defined by the Helleno-Roman Idea. Thus
Helleno-Roman religion (that should perhaps be based on the Roman
synthesis) is very viable to be the IE High Religion for the IE
Occident. We are almost (we always were, at least ever since the
Renaissance) half way there already as a civilization. That is because
Hellenic (or rather Helleno-Roman) influence on Europe’s high culture
never really went away. Even in the most “Dark Ages” scholars were very
much acquainted with Greek and Roman mythology (although the actual
understanding was sometimes lacking, especially during the early “Dark
Times”) and used its “memes” quite actively, Helleno-Roman gods lived on
pretty actively in astrology and alchemy (albeit in forms which could
often have significant alterations or external incorporations of
content). And the ascent of Renaissance saw some serious attempts at
actual revival of not only Helleno-Roman philosophy, but actual
“paganism” as well. And although Plethon was ultimately unsuccessful, at
that time the gods and myths broke through from the sphere reserved in
the “Dark Ages” only to scholars into the sphere of public high culture.
From the 15th/16th Century onward the gods and heroes and their myths
came forcefully back and since then they never left us.

\* Some branches, like Slavic one, have it tough and can really revive
only the folklore level stuff and only reconstruct to some small degree
some stuff that relates to higher dimensions of IE spirituality. The
easiest way forward is the above mentioned possibility of running
straight Vedic/Hindu (or Hellenic) overlay on top of Slavic folklore
level, but a more comprehensive and ethnocentric approach would be
“Slavification” of the Vedic/Hindu religion (to be done in co-operation
with pundits and Brahmins in order to get it right).

\* All occidental IE branches, Hellenic included, lost the authentic IE
lines of initiation, both priestly and esoteric (as in the mystery
cults) – hence, there is only one way and that is the restoration of
these lines from the living ones of Hinduism. Eventually of course these
western lineages would use domestic imagery proper to specific branches.

Be it as it may, the best way forward would probably be – given the
circumstances (where on one hand we have a strong sovereign IE system,
on other hand we have statistically irrelevant attempts at revival of
dead systems) – some form of pan-IE syncreticism. Now I know that Curwen
doesn’t exactly like this word, but well… it is what it is and in this
case it is certainly not that kind of “syncreticism” Curwen is wary of –
on the contrary it is an expression of coming together of various
compatible elements based on common underlying unity. We have historical
precedents of IE syncreticisms in areas where two or more IE systems met
and influenced each other. It happened throughout the Hellenic world
from the Pillars of Hercules to the Indo-Greek Kingdoms of the East, and
then again during the Roman era. Wherever you went, your gods – under
the names you knew them, as well as under the names others knew them –
went with you from IE West to IE East. When you were paying obeisances
to Hercules in Macedonia, to Verethragna in Seleucid Persia and later to
Lord Vishnu in Magadha, you were paying obeisance to the one and same
Deific. If centuries later, you were worshipping Thunraz in the forests
of northern Germania, and then, as a mercenary you were worshipping
Hercules Magusans in Roman lands, you were worshipping one and the same
Deific.

Did the ways in which various branches conducted worship differ? Yes,
and no. Fundamentally no – we find the IE fundamentals, that derive from
PIE frameworks, among all IE branches. And yes, in particulars, details
and specifics, these ways somewhat differed. Yet, we know almost nothing
of actual ways of worship among Celts, Germanics, Slavs etc. We have
some secondary sources on that, that give us some rough ideas, but we
would have to go with what basically amounts to UPG in order to
“reconstruct” how a ritual looked like, what were its constituent parts,
what were the hymns recited etc.

Everything flows… while fundamentals remain, particulars change. Thus we
can safely discard one of the possible objections – this is not how our
Germanic or Slavic or whatever forefathers would have done it. Perhaps
it truly isn’t. Just as the way the Viking Age Norse did stuff was not
really the same in particulars how Roman Iron Age era German tribals did
it. And how they did it was not the same as how pre-Germanic Nordic
Bronze Age went about things. So this argument is literally
non-sequitur. It is the 21st Century and several centuries have passed
since the rituals were done in the Uppsala Temple for the last time. In
some ways, the “conservative” wing of the revival is just as
cringeworthy as the “liberal” wing, although in quite the opposite ways.
Some “hardcore” Asatru revivalists tend to say “we take our theology
seriously.” And which one would that be? What is the authoritative
source of “Germanic theology”? Is it Snorri? Saxo? Sagas? Mostly
Christian-era codices? Funny that, isn’t it – apart from Roman Iron Age
secondary literature (which tends to be sometimes dismissed by these
types) there are no pre-Conversion sources. In this regard, even
post-conquest Persia had it much easier than post-Conversion Europe,
regarding the primary sources. So these neopagans are literally cobbling
together a mish-mash of post-Conversion sources, while acting like they
are sitting on a high horse. They are not. They are just looking silly
to anyone not blinded by their pretensions. Where “Germanic Doctrine”
differs from the Vedas and Vedic understanding, they say that this
“Germanic Doctrine” has to have precedence. Again – what is exactly this
“Germanic Doctrine” or “Germanic theology”? Well, mostly it comes to pet
theories on what “Germanic theology” might have been by this or that
scholar. Now, given that most of the sources of this supposed “Germanic
theology” are at least 2 000 years younger than the Vedas (and some 1
500 younger than some of the Hellenic sources) and actually are not
anything that was intended to even be religious source by the authors,
in case of any kind of doctrinal conflict it is quite ridiculous to
consider post-Conversion (quite possibly mis)understanding to have
primacy over the Indo-European 2nd Millennium BCE. The actual way of how
to go about it is on the contrary to consider only that which accords
with the Vedic understanding to be really genuine, the rest being of
questionable value.

As one of their critics noted (although let me note that in the context
of that particular discussion he happened to be right for quite wrong
reasons, while the opposing side was wrong for what may be considered
more or less good reasons) “Are you sacrificing humans and livestock
every 9 years like your forebears?” Well, no, they are not. And even if
they were, it would be just a cringeworthy (and of course currently
quite criminal) enterprise, because they have no legitimate priestly
lineages. They may be criticizing modern ideologies like nationalism as
“a construct of liberal modernity, and a century old version of it at
that,” while conveniently skipping over the fact that the current
Germanic paganism is also a construct of liberal modernity “and a
century old version of it at that.” Compared to it, nationalism is
actually older… In short they act like 1 000 years did not pass between
them and the last time Germanic paganism was a thing (meaning as a
dominant culture). That is basically the very definition of LARPing.

Since we have lost so much and it is not quite possible to recover it on
our own, we indeed need to turn to our relatives and the only standing
IE system. Now, we need a person who is a part of the both worlds, so to
say. Part of the IE West, that lost its living traditions (and whose
best preserved tradition is still lacking the legitimate connection back
to itself and to the Heimat). And now is a part of the IE East that
preserved a strong and vibrant living tradition, standing sovereign amid
the dark tides of the Dark Age. And this man is Curwen. But he should
not be doing that alone.

So we have established that the state of the occidental Indo-European
revival leaves a lot to be desired and a lot to be done to get there. We
have also established that the main problem is that we no longer have
any sort of authentic priestly and initiatory lineages. Our religion(s)
was thus subsumed into “Europeanized” Christianity and also survived on
the “third function” (so to say) level in the Folklore. We are thus left
without the proper native structures of High Religion and without the
leading elements as well.

There are several means of how to start amending this situation.

A good start would be to put together a booklet (that may accompany
Curwen’s book, or just stand on its own) wherein Curwen would set basic
ritual framework. Basic in a sense that it would carry a structure that
can be basically traced through various IE branches (and thus presumably
to the Urheimat).

And while containing the important stuff, it should also be easy on us.
Because we are adharmic mlecchas. Whoever doth to protest it, is all the
more adharmic mleccha because he refuses to recognize his fundamental
existential situation. We Westerners live in adharmic societies and we
lack proper religious speech (even though our natural language is
Indo-European), in this sense we are mlecchas. Again, with possible
exception of Hellenics (Yavanas) who indeed have the ritual speech
recorded and preserved. Nevertheless, the adherents of Hellenismos live
in the same adharmic societies as we all do.

Given our state of being, we need something “watered down” and in the
format utilized by so many (more or less cringey) neopagan “how to”
books that describe basics from symbolism through brief (“romanticized”
or on the contrary “decolonized”) history through “solitary rites” to
“group stuff”.

While the framework as such has to be “universal” (as far as IE world is
concerned, that is), it would necessarily be based on the Vedic/Hindu
living ritual stuff. This is the only authentic and traditional way of
how to proceed. Not trying “let’s take all the IE comparatistics studies
and reconstruct PIE ritual, yay”… but taking the only living tradition
in direct touch with the origins of the Urheimat and go from there (and
yes, along the way taking into account IE comparatistics and perhaps
eventually reconstructing PIE framework… hope you see the fundamental
difference here).

It should contain basics like “in the morning do this, in the evening do
that, in the meantime perhaps do some other stuff. Read this, read that.
Learn this and that…, for lunch say this, when washing hands say that”
etc. etc.

This “Hinduism Lite” (or “Hinduism for Goras” or whatever you want to
call it) would be accompanied by “localization” supplements for those of
us, western Indo-Europeans, who may prefer to revive one of the
ancestral religions of IE Europe (I am personally fine with the “High
Religion” of current Indo-Europa being Hinduism, but the added value of
this project actually lies in the “localization” feature) in a manner
that is more traditional than whatever is currently going on with
neopaganism.

So what would be needed is the expansion of IE Comparative Table project
we have going on in Arya Akasha so that we come up with properly
researched and AA approved “localizations”. The idea is for the
religious framework of the rites and piety to be the same, but the
“localizations” would differ. So that Slavic guys can run with something
that is not “Rodnoverye per this or that scholar and his pet theories”,
but with genuine (P)IE structure that is “localized” for Slavic pantheon
(as researched and reconstructed by AA), same for the Viking crowd, the
Celtic crowd… you get the idea.

It has to be simple enough, that it could be followed by an average
Western 9to5 crowd -then it will have an impact.

Again, the idea is to provide this easy-to-follow basic framework in
primarily Hindu expression. Why? Because Hinduism is the only sovereign
Indo-European religion (system… actually) left standing. It is our best
and in fact only chance for revival… actually for even making it through
the dark tides of the Dark Times.

Hindu Wannabes like me can run it with this straight Hindu layer, while
others can run it with their own favourite local “localization”. Because
frankly, apart from Hellenic (or Helleno-Roman) system, no other IE
system is complete enough and/or survived in such a shape that we can
safely reconstruct the ritual structure, the prayers, “mantras”, other
practices etc. And Hellenic system is… not alive to such a degree as
Hinduism, let’s put it this way, for it to be the primary layer of the
intended booklet. I mean I am all for its real revival but it needs to
be revived in pretty much the same way as all other Western IE systems –
Ex Oriente Lux.

So, for most Western IE systems, this universal framework (and we can
also include PIE “localization” for those who would want to go there)
would be a gift from gods.

But that would still not be enough. There may be some formal
organization giving aegis to this, but it can also be a rather informal
network of individuals and groups.

But that’s not the main point I am trying to make here. That is the
necessity of the legitimization from Above. Literally. What I mean by
that? So, say that there would be an AA inspired group in Spain running
their version of proper modern occidental IE religion. In order to
really enliven and empower what they are trying to revive, they would
need to get some formal and basically ritual recognition from a
representative of the only standing sovereign IE religion, presumably a
Brahmin of some renown, or a Sadhu (because it is possible to get
authentic recognition via both priestly and initiatory lineages… it is
not the same, but both have the traditional authority), probably along
the lines of “Yeah, you are barbarians and stuff, but you know you are
kinda ok, and we are willing to talk to you and guide you… and present
you with the authority from Above regarding your specific field”.

Yes, Bharat Mata and Her Sanatana Dharma reign supreme above all. She is
our Mother. I don’t mean it in “Out of India Theory” sense, but in the
sense that regardless of our ultimate origins, Bharat Mata is the only
sovereign manifestation of our Heimat, of our Mother. Sanatana Dharma at
this moment represents the only supreme (culturally and
civilizationally) IE system there is now. And it is also the only IE
system with unbroken lines of transmission and initiation going back to
at least late Andronovo times (and most probably to the Urheimat
Herself). Even if the West would revert back to its IE culture and
civilization (because at this moment what passes for the West represents
actually anti-civilization), perhaps with the Helleno-Roman system as
its overarching “high religion” and “high culture” (there was already an
attempt to do it during the Renaissance, and there could be one again),
we would need to pass the Flame of the living IE Tradition from the
Indo-European East to the Indo-European West. By the virtue of
preserving and maintaining the sovereignty of Indo-European culture and
religion, Indo-Aryans are our elder brothers. The Twice Born priests of
India would have to initiate the new priestly lineages of the West, and
the swamis and gurus would have to initiate the new initiatory lineages
of the revived Western Mysteries. It really depends on how the IE
revival will come about. The West may reassert itself and revive itself
anew, and then the Hellenic system would probably be the best, but of
course not necessarily the only one. Or it may be that the West is too
far gone in its dissolution and the revival will come more or less
forcefully from the Indo-European East. Then the IE world, including
what will be saved in the West, will embrace the forms carried by the
current Sanatana Dharma.

Be it as it may, one way or another, and ultimately the only way for
Indo-European West is to ask the help and assistance of our elder
brothers in translating the “Fire” that has been kept burning at least
from the times of Sintashta/Andronovo and which is currently kept in
India. We would be repeating in a way what happened with the large
import of Sintashta horses to Europe, as western Indo-Europeans
conquered Europe with these Sintashta steeds. With the Steeds of the
Divine Fire translated from our Indo-Aryan elder brothers we would
re-conquer our native lands again.

\[-C.A.R.; posted on behalf of Aldo Rapace\]
