+++
title = "Arya Akasha 5th Anniversary – And Glorious Agni Artxa0!"
date = "April 6, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/167907904_10165008545305574_3125014913805572386_n.jpg?w=1024)

The 6th of April marks the Anniversary of Arya Akasha – both of the
Research Institute’s founding proper, in 2016, as well as our
successfully taking things ‘public’ upon this date three years afore.

With that in mind – here’s some excellent art of Lord Agni, the Vedic
Priest of the Gods, and God of Priests. Hailed as Illuminator and
Hallower – the direct pathway via which we over here in the Hindu sphere
of Indo-European religion often make offerings, and the key portal via
which we ritually interact with the Gods.

To us, Fire represents many things. It is an expression of Piety and
Purity. It is Will and Wisdom. An agent of Communion with the Divine. A
revealer of knowledge (see what I said about poetic-literal
“Illumination”?), a force which purifies, and a means to unlock energy
from the material – as well as being the energy itself.

Fire is also a weapon. And, indeed, this is why Lord Agni is depicted
with Two Heads – one as the warming and guiding/illuminating role of
Flame, as aforementioned – Jataveda \[the Sparks of Insight\]; the
other, the Destroyer – Kravyada – , devours and consumes both our
enemies, and when it burns too hot, anything and everything itself
\[although it is important also to note that Kravyada’s function is to
enable the ‘moving on’ to the next stage via the burning away of
material encumbrances upon us like our corpse – whether this is done in
a Smashana (cremation ground) … or upon a longship sent floating out to
sea – or, indeed, the ‘Wolf’ (‘Kravya’) associations also occurrent in
relation to Flame in both Vedic & Eddic funerary conceptry #NAS\].

In either case, Fire is fundamentally Inspiring, indeed Animating!

Emblematic of the Sky Father – and Sent, Bestowed, and Empowered by the
Mother Goddess.

And in these times, as you may have heard me say in interviews, it is
better to light a flamethrower than to merely curse the darkness. Or, if
you prefer – curse the darkness *with* a flame! \[It should be clarified
here that by ‘darkness’ in the preceding two sentences, I of course mean
the *malefic*, a’suric darkness … not the glorious, holy night of Kaal,
Ratri !\]

I have chosen to share this frankly glorious image of Agni-Deva
\[‘Deva’, also in its PIE predicates, being an excellently appropriate
term – referring to the notion of radiance, celestial brightness\], upon
our Anniversary, for clear reasons.

What we are doing, here at Arya Akasha – is we are bringing
Illumination. We are casting light upon the ancient, the valid, the true
– the connections between the Indo-European cultures, peoples,
languages, and religious mythologies that have lain either unexamined or
lamentably unknown to many people, for far too long now.

We consider this to be a Holy Mission.

And therefore, with that in mind, it seems highly, heavily appropriate
for Lord Agni to be exalted here – upon this, our Victory Day.
\[‘Jayanti’\]

AUM AGNIDEVAYA NAMAHA

JAI ARYA AKASHA JI
