+++
title = "The Black Avenging Form Of The Indo-European Mother Goddess [ Arya Akasha Arkaxa0]"
date = "April 1, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/arya-akasha-avenging-form-of-the-goddess.png?w=800)

As we have explored in an array of previous articles, the Indo-European
Mother Goddess is closely correlate with Cosmic Law (Rta, Orlog, etc.),
and is a truly formidable force in War.

The ‘Black Avenging Form’ Aspect brings these two competencies together
– and sees the Mother Goddess obscure Her beautiful, radiant visage with
a darkened, terrifying and Shadowy countenance.

She is not merely ‘Wrathful’ – but Furious, and represented as an
inescapable quite literal ‘force of nature’ , with all the swiftness and
the pity of a tidal wave or tornado.

We shall not delve deeply into the mutually interrelating mythic
presentations of this Aspect in the various Indo-European descendant
cultures here; however, it is intriguing to note that in each of the
cases of Skaði and Demeter Erinyes, there is a linkage with the division
of time – half spent with the Sky Father, half in more comforting
environs. \[And I should note here that I have long observed Persephone
& Demeter to be fundamentally mythically coterminous\]

As applies Demeter in particular, this correlates the Furious, Destroyer
form with the saliency of Death in the natural world – and the
barrenness of the land amidst the depths of Winter an famine.

The close connexion of these Dark Destroyer Aspects with the mythic
explications for the barrenness of Winter logically sets up a duality –
with the other ‘facing’ to the Mother Goddess that is Restored at the
end of the Furor’s necessity therefore being correlate with Life and
Light.

We see this expressed in each of the Hellenic & Hindu expressions of the
myth: Demeter Erinyes goes to wash off the patina of Shade by bathing in
a sacred river, and is revealed once more to be bright and beauteous.

Parvati, having assumed the Kali War-Form, when this is no longer
required goes to bathe in a sacred river of the Himalayas, where the
Darkness is washed off, revealing the MahaGauri \[‘Great
White/Beautiful’\] Form.

Not to say that there is no scope for Kali to be beautiful or depicted
as such (indeed, quite the contrary) – but there is more going on with
that iconography than meets the eye.

This ‘Shade’ conceptry is linguistically expressed in the context of
Skadi – although due to the seriously fragmentary and convolutedly
interpolated state of the Nordic corpus, it is perhaps unsurprising that
we lack various salient details to this figure and Her occurrence
therein. We are, therefore, engaging in an exercise in reconstructive
theology to situate Her within this broader typology – which logically
links to the other correlate elements also found in both the Nordic and
underlying Indo-European schemas … even though, in the case of the
former, those direct linkages to Skadi may now no longer be so overtly
in evidence.

These include utilizing Her marital status and surrounding mythic
context to link this deific to the broader Mother Goddess as a Wrathful
and Shade form of Same; and Her serpentine association in the context of
the upholding of Cosmic Order, when it comes to the punishment of Loki.

Nevertheless – this is only something we can do precisely *because* the
various parallels were already so strongly in evidence to begin with.

Some might suggest that it is rather remarkable just how strongly the
mythic-theological perceptions of different peoples scattered thousands
of kilometers apart all the way from Iceland to India are.

We take the different view – that as these myths, these mythic
perspectives are remembrances and perceptions of Real Beings, Real Gods,
and Real Elements … that it would be almost rather surprising if these
*weren’t* so closely commensurate.

Jai Mata DI !
