---
title: 'I '

---
<div>

[←](../questions_and_answers/guru_avatara.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](ii_v_shri_surendra_nath_sen.htm)

  

## I

(*Translated from Bengali*)

THINK OF DEATH ALWAYS AND NEW LIFE WILL COME WITHIN — WORK FOR OTHERS —
GOD THE LAST REFUGE

\[*Shri Surendra Nath Das Gupta*\]

One day, with some of my young friends belonging to different colleges,
I went to the Belur Math to see Swamiji. We sat round him; talks on
various subjects were going on. No sooner was any question put to him
than he gave the most conclusive answer to it. Suddenly he exclaimed,
pointing to us, "You are all studying different schools of European
philosophy and metaphysics and learning new facts about nationalities
and countries; can you tell me what is the grandest of all the truths in
life?"

We began to think, but could not make out what he wanted us to say. As
none put forth any reply, he exclaimed in his inspiring language:

"Look here — we shall all die! Bear this in mind always, and then the
spirit within will wake up. Then only, meanness will vanish from you,
practicality in work will come, you will get new vigour in mind and
body, and those who come in contact with you will also feel that they
have really got something uplifting from you."

Then the following conversation took place between him and myself:

Myself: But, Swamiji, will not the spirit break down at the thought of
death and the heart be overpowered by despondency?

Swamiji: Quite so. At first, the heart will break down, and despondency
and gloomy thoughts will occupy your mind. But persist; let days pass
like that — and then? Then you will see that new strength has come into
the heart, that the constant thought of death is giving you a new life
and is making you more and more thoughtful by bringing every moment
before your mind's eye the truth of the saying, "Vanity of vanities, all
is vanity! " Wait! Let days, months, and years pass, and you will feel
that the spirit within is waking up with the strength of a lion, that
the little power within has transformed itself into a mighty power!
Think of death always, and you will realise the truth of every word I
say. What more shall I say in words!

One of my friends praised Swamiji in a low voice.

Swamiji: Do not praise me. Praise and censure have no value in this
world of ours. They only rock a man as if in a swing. Praise I have had
enough of; showers of censure I have also had to bear; but what avails
thinking of them! Let everyone go on doing his own duty unconcerned.
When the last moment arrives, praise and blame will be the same to you,
to me, and to others. We are here to work, and will have to leave all
when the call comes

Myself: How little we are, Swamiji!

Swamiji: True! You have well said! Think of this infinite universe with
its millions and millions of solar systems, and think with what an
infinite, incomprehensible power they are impelled, running as if to
touch the Feet of the One Unknown — and how little we are! Where then is
room here to allow ourselves to indulge in vileness and mean-mindedness?
What should we gain here by fostering mutual enmity and party-spirit?
Take my advice: Set yourselves wholly to the service of others, when you
come from your colleges. Believe me, far greater happiness would then be
yours than if you had had a whole treasury full of money and other
valuables at your command. As you go on your way, serving others, you
will advance accordingly in the path of knowledge.

Myself: But we are so very poor, Swamiji!

Swamiji: Leave aside your thoughts of poverty! In what respect are you
poor? Do you feel regret because you have not a coach and pair or a
retinue of servants at your beck and call? What of that? You little know
how nothing would be impossible for you in life if you labour day and
night for others with your heart's blood! And lo and behold! the other
side of the hallowed river of life stands revealed before your eyes —
the screen of Death has vanished, and you are the inheritors of the
wondrous realm of immortality!

Myself: Oh, how we enjoy sitting before you, Swamiji, and hearing your
life-giving words!

Swamiji: You see, in my travels throughout India all these years, I have
come across many a great soul, many a heart overflowing with loving
kindness, sitting at whose feet I used to feel a mighty current of
strength coursing into my heart, and the few words I speak to you are
only through the force of that current gained by coming in contact with
them! Do not think I am myself something great!

Myself: But we look upon you, Swamiji, as one who has realised God!

No sooner did I say these words than those fascinating eyes of his were
filled with tears (Oh, how vividly I, see that scene before my eyes even
now), and he with a heart overflowing with love, softly and gently
spoke: "At those Blessed Feet is the perfection of Knowledge, sought by
the Jnanis! At those Blessed Feet also is the fulfilment of Love sought
by the Lovers! Oh, say, where else will men and women go for refuge but
to those Blessed Feet!"

After a while he again said, "Alas! what folly for men in this world to
spend their days fighting and quarrelling with one another as they do!
But how long can they go in that way? In the evening of life (At the end
of one's whole course of transmigratory existence.) they must all come
home, to the arms of the Mother."

</div>
