---
title: II

---
<div>

[←](i_shri_surendra_nath_das_gupta.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](vi_x_shri_priya_nath_sinha.htm)

  

## II

(*Translated from [Bengali](sns_b6_270_e5_332.pdf)* )

THE LOSS OF SHRADDHA IN INDIA AND NEED OF ITS REVIVAL — MEN WE WANT —
REAL SOCIAL REFORM

\[*Shri Surendra Nath Sen — from private diary*\]

SATURDAY, THE 22ND JANUARY, 1898.

Early in the morning I came to Swamiji who was then staying in the house
of Balaram Babu at 57 Ramkanta Bose Street, Calcutta. The room was
packed full with listeners. Swamiji was saying, "We want Shraddhâ, we
want faith in our own selves. Strength is life, weakness is death. 'We
are the Âtman, deathless and free; pure, pure by nature. Can we ever
commit any sin? Impossible!' — such a faith is needed. Such a faith
makes men of us, makes gods of us. It is by losing this idea of Shraddha
that the country has gone to ruin."

Question: How did we come to lose this Shraddha?

Swamiji: We have had a negative education all along from our boyhood. We
have only learnt that we are nobodies. Seldom are we given to understand
that great men were ever born in our country. Nothing positive has been
taught to us. We do not even know how to use our hands and feet! We
master all the facts and figures concerning the ancestors of the
English, but we are sadly unmindful about our own. We have learnt only
weakness. Being a conquered race, we have brought ourselves to believe
that we are weak and have no independence in anything. So, how can it be
but that the Shraddha is lost? The idea of true Shraddha must be brought
back once more to us, the faith in our own selves must be reawakened,
and, then only, all the problems which face our country will gradually
be solved by ourselves.

*Q*. How can that ever be? How will Shraddha alone remedy the
innumerable evils with which our society is beset? Besides, there are so
many crying evils in the country, to remove which the Indian National
Congress and other patriotic associations are carrying on a strenuous
agitation and petitioning the British government. How better can their
wants be made known? What has Shraddha to do with the matter?

Swamiji: Tell me, whose wants are those — yours or the ruler's? If
yours, will the ruler supply them for you, or will you have to do that
for yourselves?

*Q*. But it is the ruler's duty to see to the wants of the subject
people. Whom should we look up to for everything, if not to the king?

Swamiji: Never are the wants of a beggar fulfilled. Suppose the
government give you all you need, where are the men who are able to keep
up the things demanded? So *make men* first. *Men* we want, and how can
men be made unless Shraddha is there?

*Q*. But such is not the view of the majority, sir.

Swamiji: What you call majority is mainly composed of fools and men of
common intellect. Men who have brains to think for themselves are few,
everywhere. These few men with brains are the real leaders in everything
and in every department of work; the majority are guided by them as with
a string, and that is good, for everything goes all right when they
follow in the footsteps of these leaders. Those are only fools who think
themselves too high to bend their heads to anyone, and they bring on
their own ruin by acting on their own judgment. You talk of social
reform? But what do you do? All that you mean by your social reform is
either widow remarriage, or female emancipation, or something of that
sort. Do you not? And these again are directed within the confines of a
few of the castes only. Such a scheme of reform may do good to a few no
doubt, but of what avail is that to the whole nation? Is that reform or
only a form of selfishness — somehow to cleanse your own room and keep
it tidy and let others go from bad to worse!

*Q*. Then, you mean to say that there is no need of social reform at
all?

Swamiji: Who says so? Of course there is need of it. Most of what you
talk of as social reform does not touch the poor masses; they have
already those things — the widow remarriage, female emancipation, etc. —
which you cry for. For this reason they will not think of those things
as reforms at all. What I mean to say is that want of Shraddha has
brought in all the evils among us, and is bringing in more and more. My
method of treatment is to take out by the roots the very causes of the
disease and not to keep them merely suppressed. Reforms we should have
in many ways; who will be so foolish as to deny it? There is, for
example, a good reason for intermarriage in India, in the absence of
which the race is becoming physically weaker day by day.

Since it was a day of a solar eclipse, the gentleman who was asking
these questions saluted Swamiji and left saying "I must go now for a
bath in the Ganga. I shall, however, come another day."

III

RECONCILIATION OF JNANA-YOGA AND BHAKTI-YOGA — GOD IN GOOD AND IN EVIL
TOO — USE MAKES A THING GOOD OR EVIL — KARMA — CREATION — GOD — MAYA

\[*Shri Surendra Nath Sen — from private diary*\]

SUNDAY, THE 23RD JANUARY, 1898.

It was evening and the occasion of the weekly meeting of the Ramakrishna
Mission, at the house of Balaram Babu of Baghbazar. Swami Turiyananda,
Swami Yogananda, Swami Premananda, and others had come from the Math.
Swamiji was seated in the verandah to the east, which was now full of
people, as were the northern and the southern sections of the verandah.
But such used to be the case every day when Swamiji stayed in Calcutta.

Many of the people who came to the meeting had heard that Swamiji could
sing well, and so were desirous of hearing him. Knowing this, Master
Mahâshaya (M.) whispered to a few gentlemen near him to request Swamiji
to sing; but he saw through their intention and playfully asked, "Master
Mahashaya, what are you talking about among yourselves in whispers? Do
speak out." At the request of Master Mahashaya, Swamiji now began in his
charming voice the song — "Keep with loving care the darling Mother
Shyâmâ in thy heart. . . ." It seemed as if a Vinâ was playing. At its
close, he said to Master Mahashaya, "Well, are you now satisfied? But no
more singing! Otherwise, being in the swing of it, I shall be carried
away by its intoxication. Moreover, my voice is now spoilt be frequent
lecturing in the West. My voice trembles a great deal. . . ."

Swamiji then asked one of his Brahmacharin disciples to speak on the
real nature of Mukti. So, the Brahmacharin stood up and spoke at some
length. A few others followed him. Swamiji then invited discussion on
the subject of the discourse, and called upon one of his householder
disciples to lead it; but as the latter tried to advocate the Advaita
and Jnâna and assign a lower place to dualism and Bhakti, he met with a
protest from one of the audience. As each of the two opponents tried to
establish his own viewpoint, a lively word-fight ensued. Swamiji watched
them for a while but, seeing that they were getting excited, silenced
them with the following words:

Why do you get excited in argument and spoil everything? Listen! Shri
Ramakrishna used to say that pure knowledge and pure Bhakti are one and
the same. According to the doctrine of Bhakti, God is held to be
"All-Love". One cannot even say, "I love Him", for the reason that He is
All-Love. There is no love outside of Himself; the love that is in the
heart with which you love Him is even He Himself. In a similar way,
whatever attractions or inclinations one feels drawn by, are all He
Himself. The thief steals, the harlot sells her body to prostitution,
the mother loves her child — in each of these too is He! One world
system attracts another — there also is He. Everywhere is He. According
to the doctrine of Jnana also, He is realised by one everywhere. Here
lies the reconciliation of Jnana and Bhakti. When one is immersed in the
highest ecstasy of divine vision (Bhâva), or is in the state of Samâdhi,
then alone the idea of duality ceases, and the distinction between the
devotee and his God vanishes. In the scriptures on Bhakti, five
different paths of relationship are mentioned, by any of which one can
attain to God; but another one can very well be added to them, viz. the
path of meditation on the non-separateness, or oneness with God. Thus
the Bhakta can call the Advaitins Bhaktas as well, but of the
non-differentiating type. As long as one is within the region of Mâya,
so long the idea of duality will no doubt remain. Space-time-causation,
or name-and-form, is what is called Maya. When one goes beyond this
Maya, then only the Oneness is realised, and then man is neither a
dualist nor an Advaitist — to him all is One. All this difference that
you notice between a Bhakta and a Jnani is in the preparatory stage —
one sees God outside, and the other sees Him within. But there is
another point: Shri Ramakrishna used to say that there is another stage
of Bhakti which is called the Supreme Devotion (Parâbhakti) i.e. to love
Him after becoming established in the consciousness of Advaita and after
having attained Mukti. It may seem paradoxical, and the question may be
raised here why such a one who has already attained Mukti should be
desirous of retaining the spirit of Bhakti? The answer is: The Mukta or
the Free is beyond all law; no law applies in his case, and hence no
question can be asked regarding him. Even becoming Mukta, some, out of
their own free will, retain Bhakti to taste of its sweetness.

*Q*. God may be in the love of the mother for her child; but, sir, this
idea is really perplexing that God is even in thieves and the harlots in
the form of their natural inclinations to sin! It follows then that God
is as responsible for the sin as for all the virtue in this world.

Swamiji: That consciousness comes in a stage of highest realization,
when one sees that whatever is of the nature of love or attraction is
God. But one has to reach that state to see and realise that idea for
oneself in actual life.

*Q*. But still one has to admit that God is also in the sin!

Swamiji: You see, there are, in reality, no such different things as
good and evil. They are mere conventional terms. The same thing we call
bad, and again another time we call good, according to the way we make
use of it. Take for example this lamplight; because of its burning, we
are able to see and do various works of utility; this is one mode of
using the light. Again, if you put your fingers in it, they will be
burnt; that is another mode of using the same light. So we should know
that a thing becomes good or bad according to the way we use it.
Similarly with virtue and vice. Broadly speaking, the proper use of any
of the faculties of our mind and body is termed virtue, and its improper
application or waste is called vice.

Thus questions after questions were put and answered. Someone remarked,
"The theory that God is even there, where one heavenly body attracts
another, may or may not be true as a fact, but there is no denying the
exquisite poetry the idea conveys."

Swamiji: No, my dear sir, that is not poetry. One can see for oneself
its truth when one attains knowledge.

From what Swamiji further said on this point, I understood him to mean
that matter and spirit, though to all appearances they seem to be two
distinct things, are really two different forms of one substance; and
similarly, all the different forces that are known to us, whether in the
material or in the internal world, are but varying forms of the
manifestation of one Force. We call a thing matter, where that spirit
force is manifested less; and living, where it shows itself more; but
there is nothing which is absolutely matter at all times and in all
conditions. The same Force which presents itself in the material world
as attraction or gravitation is felt in its finer and subtler state as
love and the like in the higher spiritual stages of realisation.

*Q*. Why should there be even this difference relating to individual
use? Why should there be at all this tendency in man to make bad or
improper use of any of his faculties?

Swamiji: That tendency comes as a result of one's own past actions
(Karma); everything one has is of his own doing. Hence it follows that
it is solely in the hands of every individual to control his tendencies
and to guide them properly.

*Q*. Even if everything is the result of our Karma, still it must have
had a beginning, and why should our tendencies have been good or bad at
the beginning?

Swamiji: How do you know that there is a beginning? The Srishti
(creation) is without beginning — this is the doctrine of the Vedas. So
long as there is God, there is creation as well.

*Q*. Well, sir, why is this Maya here, and whence has it come?

Swamiji: It is a mistake to ask "why" with respect to God; we can only
do so regarding one who has wants or imperfections. How can there be an,
"why" concerning Him who has no wants and who is the One Whole? No such
question as "Whence has Maya come?" can be asked. Time-space-causation
is what is called Maya. You, I, and everyone else are within this Maya;
and you are asking about what is beyond Maya! How can you do so while
living within Maya?

Again, many questions followed. The conversation turned on the
philosophies of Mill, Hamilton, Herbert Spencer, etc., and Swamiji dwelt
on them to the satisfaction of all. Everyone wondered at the vastness of
his Western philosophical scholarship and the promptness of his replies.

The meeting dispersed after a short conversation on miscellaneous
subjects.

IV

INTERMARRIAGE AMONG SUBDIVISIONS OF A VARNA — AGAINST EARLY MARRIAGE —
THE EDUCATION THAT INDIANS NEED — BRAHMACHARYA

\[*Shri Surendra Nath Sen — from private diary*\]

MONDAY, THE 24TH JANUARY, 1898.

The same gentleman who was asking questions of Swamiji on Saturday last
came again. He raised again the topic of intermarriage and enquired,
"How should intermarriage be introduced between different
nationalities?"

Swamiji: I do not advise our intermarriage with nations professing an
alien religion. At least for the present, that will, of a certainty,
slacken the ties of society and be a cause of manifold mischief. It is
the intermarriage between people of the same religion that I advocate.

*Q*. Even then, it will involve much perplexity. Suppose I have a
daughter who is born and brought up in Bengal, and I marry her to a
Marathi or a Madrasi. Neither will the girl understand her husband's
language nor the husband the girl's. Again, the difference in their
individual habits and customs is so great. Such are a few of the
troubles in the case of the married couple. Then as regards society, it
will make confusion worse confounded.

Swamiji: The time is yet very long in coming when marriages of that kind
will be widely possible. Besides, it is not judicious now to go in for
that all of a sudden. One of the secrets of work is to go along the line
of least resistance. So, first of all, let there be marriages within the
sphere of one's own caste-people. Take for instance, the Kayasthas of
Bengal. They have several subdivisions amongst them, such as, the
Uttar-rârhi, Dakshin-rârhi, Bangaja, etc., and they do not intermarry
with each other. Now, let there be intermarriages between the
Uttar-rarhis and the Dakshin-rarhis, and if that is not possible at
present, let it be between the Bangajas and the Dakshin-rarhis. Thus we
are to build up that which is already existing, and which is in our
hands to reduce into practice — reform does not mean wholesale breaking
down.

*Q*. Very well, let it be as you say: but what corresponding good can
come of it?

Swamiji: Don't you see how in our society, marriage, being restricted
for several hundreds of years within the same subdivisions of each
caste, has come to such a pass nowadays as virtually to mean marital
alliance between cousins and near relations; and how for this very
reason the race is getting deteriorated physically, and consequently all
sorts of disease and other evils are finding a ready entrance into it?
The blood having had to circulate within the narrow circle of a limited
number of individuals has become vitiated; so the new-born children
inherit from their very birth the constitutional diseases of their
fathers. Thus, born with poor blood, their bodies have very little power
to resist the microbes of any disease, which are ever ready to prey upon
them. It is only by widening the circle of marriage that we can infuse a
new and a different kind of blood into our progeny, so that they may be
saved from the clutches of many of our present-day diseases and other
consequent evils.

*Q*. May I ask you, sir, what is your opinion about early marriage?

Swamiji: Amongst the educated classes in Bengal, the custom of marrying
their boys too early is dying out gradually. The girls are also given in
marriage a year or two older than before, but that has been under
compulsion — from pecuniary want. Whatever might be the reason for it,
the age of marrying girls should be raised still higher. But what will
the poor father do? As soon as the girl grows up a little, every one of
the female sex, beginning with the mother down to the relatives and
neighbours even, will begin to cry out that he must find a bridegroom
for her, and will not leave him in peace until he does so! And, about
your religious hypocrites, the less said the better. In these days no
one hears them, but still they will take up the role of leaders
themselves. The rulers passed the Age of Consent Bill prohibiting a man
under the threat of penalty to live with a girl of twelve years, and at
once all these so-called leaders of your religion raised a tremendous
hue and cry against it, sounding the alarm, "Alas, our religion is lost!
As if religion consisted in making a girl a mother at the age of twelve
or thirteen! So the rulers also naturally think, "Goodness gracious!
What a religion is theirs! And these people lead political agitations
and demand political rights!"

*Q*. Then, in your opinion, both men and women should be married at an
advanced age?

Swamiji: Certainly. But education should be imparted along with it,
otherwise irregularity and corruption will ensue. By education I do not
mean the present system, but something in the line of positive teaching.
Mere book-learning won't do. We want that education by which character
is  formed, strength of mind is increased, the intellect is expanded,
and by which one can stand on one's own feet.

*Q*. We have to reform our women in many ways.

Swamiji: With such an education women will solve their own problems.
They have all the time been trained in helplessness, servile dependence
on others, and so they are good only to weep their eyes out at the
slightest approach of a mishap or danger. Along with other things they
should acquire the spirit of valour and heroism. In the present day it
has become necessary for them also to learn self-defence. See how grand
was the Queen of Jhansi!

*Q*. What you advise is quite a new departure, and it will, I am afraid,
take a very long time yet to train our women in that way.

Swamiji: Anyhow, we have to try our best. We have not only to teach them
but to teach ourselves also. Mere begetting children does not make a
father; a great many responsibilities have to be taken upon one's
shoulders as well. To make a beginning in women's education: our Hindu
women easily understand what chastity means, because it is their
heritage. Now, first of all, intensify that ideal within them above
everything else, so that they may develop a strong character by the
force of which, in every stage of their life, whether married, or single
if they prefer to remain so, they will not be in the least afraid even
to give up their lives rather than flinch an inch from their chastity.
Is it little heroism to be able to sacrifice one's life for the sake of
one's ideal whatever that ideal may be? Studying the present needs of
the age, it seems imperative to train some women up in the ideal of
renunciation, so that they will take up the vow of lifelong virginity,
fired with the strength of that virtue of chastity which is innate in
their life-blood from hoary antiquity. Along with that they should be
taught sciences and other things which would be of benefit, not only to
them but to others as well, and knowing this they would easily learn
these things and feel pleasure in doing so. Our motherland requires for
her well-being some of her children to become such pure-souled
Brahmachârins and Brahmachârinis.

*Q*. In what way will that conduce to her well-being?

Swamiji: By their example and through their endeavours to hold the
national ideal before the eyes of the people, a revolution in thoughts
and aspirations will take place. How do matters stand now? Somehow, the
parents must dispose of a girl in marriage, if she he nine or ten years
of age! And what a rejoicing of the whole family if a child is born to
her at the age of thirteen! If the trend of such ideas is reversed, then
only there is some hope for the ancient Shraddhâ to return. And what to
talk of those who will practice Brahmacharya as defined above — think
how much faith in themselves will be theirs! And what a power for good
they will be!

The questioner now saluted Swamiji and was ready to take leave. Swamiji
asked him to come now and then "Certainly, sir," replied the gentleman,
"I feel so much benefited. I have heard from you many new things, which
I have not been told anywhere before." I also went home as it was about
time for dinner.

  

V

MADHURA-BHAVA — PREMA — NAMAKIRTANA — ITS DANGER — BHAKTI TEMPERED WITH
JNANA — A CURIOUS DREAM

\[*Shri Surendra Nath Sen — from private diary*\]

MONDAY, THE 24TH JANUARY, 1898.

In the afternoon I came again to Swamiji and saw quite a good gathering
round him. The topic was the Madhura-Bhâva or the way of worshipping God
as husband, as in vogue with some followers of Shri Chaitanya. His
occasional *bons mots* were raising laughter, when someone remarked,
"What is there to make so much fun of about the Lord's doings? Do you
think that he was not a great saint, and that he did not do everything
for the good of humanity?"

Swamiji: Who is that! Should I poke fun at *you* then, my dear sir! You
only see the fun of it, do you? And you, sir, do not see the lifelong
struggle through which I have passed to mould this life after his
burning ideal of renunciation of wealth and lust, and my endeavours to
infuse that ideal into the people at large! Shri Chaitanya was a man of
tremendous renunciation and had nothing to do with woman and carnal
appetites. But, in later times, his disciples admitted women into their
order, mixed indiscriminately with them in his name, and made an awful
mess of the whole thing. And the ideal of love which the Lord
exemplified in his life was perfectly selfless and bereft of any vestige
of lust; that sexless love can never be the property of the masses. But
the subsequent Vaishnava Gurus, instead of laying particular stress
first on the aspect of renunciation in the Master's life, bestowed all
their zeal on preaching and infusing his ideal of love among the masses,
and the consequence was that the common people could not grasp and
assimilate that high ideal of divine love, and naturally made of it the
worst form of love between man and woman.

*Q*. But, sir, he preached the name of the Lord Hari to all, even to the
Chandâlas; so why should not the common masses have a right to it?

Swamiji: I am talking not of his preaching, but of his great ideal of
love — the Râdhâ-prema (The divine love which Radha had towards Shri
Krishna.),  with which he used to remain intoxicated day and night,
losing his individuality in Radha.

*Q*. Why may not that be made the common property of all?

Swamiji: Look at this nation and see what has been the outcome of such
an attempt. Through the preaching of that love broadcast, the whole
nation has become effeminate — a race of women! The whole of Orissa has
been turned into a land of cowards; and Bengal, running after the
Radha-prema, these past four hundred years, has almost lost all sense of
manliness! The people are very good only at crying and weeping; that has
become their national trait. Look at their literature, the sure index of
a nation's thoughts and ideas. Why, the refrain of the Bengali
literature for these four hundred years is strung to that same tune of
moaning and crying. It has failed to give birth to any poetry which
breathes a true heroic spirit!

*Q*. Who are then truly entitled to possess that Prema (love)?

Swamiji: There can be no love so long as there is lust — even as speck
of it, as it were, in the heart. None but men of great renunciation,
none but mighty giants among men, have a right to that Love Divine. If
that highest ideal of love is held out to the masses, it will indirectly
tend to stimulate its worldly prototype which dominates the heart of man
— for, meditating on love to God by thinking of oneself as His wife or
beloved, one would very likely be thinking most of the time of one's own
wife — the result is too obvious to point out.

*Q*. Then is it impossible for householders to realise God through that
path of love, worshipping God as one's husband or lover and considering
oneself as His spouse?

Swamiji : With a few exceptions; for ordinary householders it is
impossible no doubt. And why lay so much stress on this delicate path,
above all others? Are there no other relationships by which to worship
God, except this Madhura idea of love? Why not follow the four other
paths, and take the name of the Lord with all your heart? Let the heart
be opened first, and all else will follow of itself. But know this for
certain, that Prema cannot come while there is lust. Why not try first
to get rid of carnal desires? You will say, "How is that possible? I am
a householder." Nonsense! Because one is a householder, does it mean
that one should be a personification of incontinence, or that one has to
live in marital relations all one's life? And, after all, how unbecoming
of a man to make of himself a woman, so that he may practice this
Madhura love!

*Q*. True, sir. Singing God's name in a party (Nâmakirtana) is an
excellent help and gives one a joyous feeling. So say our scriptures,
and so did Shri Chaitanya Deva also preach to the masses. When the Khole
(drum) is played upon, it makes the heart leap with such a transport
that one feels inclined to dance.

Swamiji: That is all right, but don't think that Kirtana means dancing
only. It means singing the glories of God, in whatever way that suits
you. That vehement stirring up of feeling and that dancing of the
Vaishnavas are good and very catching no doubt; but there is also a
danger in practising them, from which you must save yourself. The danger
lies here — in the reaction. On the one hand, the feelings are at once
roused to the highest pitch, tears flow from the eyes, the head reels as
it were under intoxication — on the other hand, as soon as the Sankirtan
stops, that mass of feeling sinks down as precipitately as it rose. The
higher the wave rises on the ocean, the lower it falls, with equal
force. It is very difficult at that stage to contain oneself against the
shock of reaction; unless one has proper discrimination, one is likely
to succumb to the lower propensities of lust etc. I have noticed the
same thing in America also. Many would go to church, pray with much
devotion, sing with great feeling, and even burst into tears when
hearing the sermons; but after coming out of church, they would have a
great reaction and succumb to carnal tendencies.

*Q*. Then, sir, do instruct us which of the ideas preached by Shri
Chaitanya we should take up as well suited to us, so that we may not
fall into errors.

Swamiji: Worship God with Bhakti tempered with Jnâna. Keep the spirit of
discrimination along with Bhakti. Besides this, gather from Shri
Chaitanya, his heart, his loving kindness to all beings, his burning
passion for God, and make his renunciation the ideal of your life.

The questioner now addressed the Swamiji with folded hands, "I beg your
pardon, sir. Now I come to see you are right. Seeing you criticise in a
playful mood the Madhura love of the Vaishnavas, I could not at first
understand the drift of your remarks; hence I took exception to them."

Swamiji: Well, look here, if we are to criticise at all, it is better to
criticise God or God-men. If you abuse me I shall very likely get angry
with you, and if I abuse you, you will try to retaliate. Isn't it so?
But God or God-men will never return evil for evil.

The gentleman now left, after bowing down at the feet of Swamiji. I have
already said that such a gathering was an everyday occurrence when
Swamiji used to stay in Calcutta. From early in the morning till eight
or nine at night, men would flock to him at every hour of the day. This
naturally occasioned much irregularity in the time of his taking his
meals; so, many desiring to put a stop to this state of things, strongly
advised Swamiji not to receive visitors except at appointed hours. But
the loving heart of Swamiji, ever ready to go to any length to help
others, was so melted with compassion at the sight of such a thirst for
religion in the people, that in spite of ill health, he did not comply
with any request of the kind. His only reply was, "They take so much
trouble to come walking all the way from their homes, and can I, for the
consideration of risking my health a little, sit here and not speak a
few words to them?"

At about 4 p.m. the general conversation came to a close, and the
gathering dispersed, except for a few gentlemen with whom Swamiji
continued his talk on different subjects, such as England and America,
and so on. In the course of conversation he said:

"I had a curious dream on my return voyage from England. While our ship
was passing through the Mediterranean Sea, in my sleep, a very old and
venerable looking person, Rishi-like in appearance, stood before me and
said, 'Do ye come and effect our restoration. I am one of that ancient
order of Therâputtas (Theraputae) which had its origin in the teachings
of the Indian Rishis. The truths and ideals preached by us have been
given out by Christians as taught by Jesus; but for the matter of that,
there was no such personality by the name of Jesus ever born. Various
evidences testifying to this fact will be brought to light by excavating
here.' 'By excavating which place can those proofs and relics you speak
of be found?' I asked. The hoary-headed one, pointing to a locality in
the vicinity of Turkey, said, 'See here.' Immediately after, I woke up,
and at once rushed to the upper deck and asked the Captain, 'What
neighbourhood is the ship in just now?' 'Look yonder', the Captain
replied, 'there is Turkey and the Island of Crete.'"

Was it but a dream, or is there anything in the above vision? Who knows!

</div>
