---
title: VI

---
<div>

[← ](ii_v_shri_surendra_nath_sen.htm)[Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](xi_xv_from_the_diary_of_a_disciple.htm)

  

## VI

(*Translated from [Bengali](pns_b9_250_e5_06_07.pdf) VI & VII*)

REMINISCENCES — THE PROBLEM OF FAMINES IN INDIA AND SELF-SACRIFICING
WORKERS — EAST AND WEST — IS IT SATTVA OR TAMAS — A NATION OF MENDICANTS
— THE "GIVE AND TAKE" POLICY — TELL A MAN HIS DEFECTS DIRECTLY BUT
PRAISE HIS VIRTUES BEFORE OTHERS — VIVEKANANDA EVERYONE MAY BECOME —
UNBROKEN BRAHMACHARYA IS THE SECRET OF POWER — SAMADHI AND WORK

\[*Shri Priya Nath Sinha*\]

Our house was very close to Swamiji's, and since we were boys of the
same section of the town, I often used to play with him. From my boyhood
I had a special attraction for him, and I had a sincere belief that he
would become a great man. When he became a Sannyasin we thought that the
promise of a brilliant career for such a man was all in vain.

Afterwards, when he went to America, I read in newspapers reports of his
lectures at the Chicago Parliament of Religions and others delivered in
various place, of America, and I thought that fire can never remain
hidden under a cloth; the fire that was within Swamiji had now burst
into a flame; the bud after so many years had blossomed.

After a time I came to know that he had returned to India, and had been
delivering fiery lectures at Madras. I read them and wondered that such
sublime truths existed in the Hindu religion and that they could be
explained so lucidly. What an extraordinary power he had! Was he a man
or a god?

A great enthusiasm prevailed when Swamiji came to Calcutta, and we
followed him to the Sil's garden-house, on the Ganga, at Cossipore. A
few days later, at the residence of Raja Radhakanta Dev, the "Calcutta
boy" delivered an inspiring lecture to a huge concourse of people in
reply to an address of welcome, and Calcutta heard him for the first
time and was lost in admiration. But these are facts known to all.

After his coming to Calcutta, I was very anxious to see him once alone
and be able to talk freely with him as in our boyhood. But there was
always a gathering of eager inquirers about him, and conversations were
going on without a break; so I did not get an opportunity for some time,
until one day when we went out for a walk in the garden on the Ganga
side. He at once began to talk, as of old, to me, the playmate of his
boyhood. No sooner had a few words passed between us than repeated calls
came, informing him that many gentlemen had come to see him. He became a
little impatient at last and told the messenger, "Give me a little
respite, my son; let me speak a few words with this companion of my
boyhood; let me stay in the open air for a while. Go and give a welcome
to those who have come, ask them to sit down, offer them tobacco, and
request them to wait a little."

When we were alone again, I asked him, "Well, Swamiji, you are a Sâdhu
(holy man). Money was raised by subscription for your reception here,
and I thought, in view of the famine in this country, that you would
wire, before arriving in Calcutta, saying, 'Don't spend a single pice on
my reception, rather contribute the whole sum to the famine relief
fund'; but I found that you did nothing of the kind. How was that?"

Swamiji: Why, I wished rather that a great enthusiasm should be stirred
up. Don't you see, without some such thing how would the people be drawn
towards Shri Ramakrishna and be fired in his name? Was this ovation done
for me personally, or was not his name glorified by this? See how much
thirst has been created in the minds of men to know about him! Now they
will come to know of him gradually, and will not that be conducive to
the good of the country? If the people do not know him who came for the
welfare of the country, how can good befall them? When they know what he
really was, then *men* — real men — will be made; and when will be such
*men*, how long will it take to drive away famines etc. from the land?
So I say that I rather desired that there should be some bustle and stir
in Calcutta, so that the public might be inclined to believe in the
mission of Shri Ramakrishna; otherwise what was the use of making so
much fuss for my sake? What do I care for it? Have I become any greater
now than when I used to play with you at your house? I am the same now
as I was before. Tell me, do you find any change in me?

Though I said, "No, I do not find much change to speak of", yet in my
mind I thought, "You have now, indeed, become a god."

Swamiji continued: "Famine has come to be a constant quantity in our
country, and now it is, as it were, a sort of blight upon us. Do you
find in any other country such frequent ravages of famine? No, because
there are *men* in other countries, while in ours, men have become akin
to dead matter, quite inert. Let the people first learn to renounce
their selfish nature by studying Shri Ramakrishna, by knowing him as he
really was, and then will proceed from them real efforts trying to stop
the frequently recurring famines. By and by I shall make efforts in that
direction too; you will see."

Myself: That will be good. Then you are going to deliver many lectures
here, I presume; otherwise, how will his name be preached?

Swamiji: What nonsense! Nothing of the kind!

Has anything left undone by which his name can be known? Enough has been
done in that line. Lectures won't do any good in this country. Our
educated countrymen would hear them and, at best, would cheer and clap
their hands, saying, "Well done"; that is all. Then they would go home
and digest, as we say, everything they had heard, with their meal! What
good will hammering do on a piece of rusty old iron? It will only
crumble into pieces. First, it should be made red-hot, and then it can
be moulded into any shape by hammering. Nothing will avail in our
country without setting a glowing and living example before the people.
What we want are some young men who will renounce everything and
sacrifice their lives for their country's sake. We should first form
their lives and then some real work can be expected.

Myself: Well, Swamiji, it has always puzzled me that, while men of our
country, unable to understand their own religion, were embracing alien
religions, such as Christianity, Mohammedanism, etc., you, instead of
doing anything for them, went over to England and America to preach
Hinduism.

Swamiji: Don't you see that circumstances have changed now? Have the men
of our country the power left in them to take up and practice true
religion? What they have is only pride in themselves that they are very
Sâttvika. Time was when they were Sattvika, no doubt, but now they have
fallen very low. The fall from Sattva brings one down headlong into
Tamas! That is what has happened to them. Do you think that a man who
does not exert himself at all, who only takes the name of Hari, shutting
himself up in a room, who remains quiet and indifferent even when seeing
a huge amount of wrong and violence done to others before his very eyes,
possesses the quality of Sattva? Nothing of the kind, he is only
enshrouded in dark Tamas. How can the people of a country practice
religion who do not get even sufficient food to appease their hunger?
How can renunciation come to the people of a country in whose minds the
desires for Bhoga (enjoyment) have not been in the least satisfied? For
this reason, find out, first of all, the ways and means by which men may
get enough to eat and have enough luxuries to enable them to enjoy life
a little; and then gradually, true Vairâgya (dispassion) will come, and
they will be fit and ready to realise religion in life. The people of
England and America, how full of Rajas they are! They have become
satiated with all sorts of worldly enjoyment. Moreover, Christianity,
being a religion of faith and superstition, occupies the same rank as
our religion of the Purânas. With the spread of education and culture,
the people of the West can no more find peace in that. Their present
condition is such that, giving them one lift will make them reach the
Sattva. Then again, in these days, would you accept the words of a
Sannyasin clad in rags, in the same degree as you would the words of a
white-face (Westerner) who might come and speak to you on your own
religion?

Myself: Just so, Swamiji! Mr. N. N. Ghosh (A celebrated barrister,
journalist, and educationist of Calcutta.) also speaks exactly to the
same effect.

Swamiji: Yes, when my Western disciples after acquiring proper training
and illumination will come in numbers here and ask you, "What are you
all doing? Why are you of so little faith? How are your rites and
religion, manners, customs, and morals in any way inferior? We even
regard your religion to be the highest!" — then you will see that lots
of our big and influential folk will hear them. Thus they will be able
to do immense good to this country. Do not think for a moment that they
will come to take up the position of teachers of religion to you. They
will, no doubt, be your Guru regarding practical sciences etc., for the
improvement of material conditions, and the people of our country will
be their Guru in everything pertaining to religion. This relation of
Guru and disciple in the domain of religion will for ever exist between
India and the rest of the world.

Myself: How can that be, Swamiji? Considering the feeling of hatred with
which they look upon us, it does not seem probable that they will ever
do good to us, purely from an unselfish motive.

Swamiji: They find many reasons to hate us, and so they may justify
themselves in doing so. In the first place, we are a conquered race, and
moreover there is nowhere in the world such a nation of mendicants as we
are! The masses who comprise the lowest castes, through ages of constant
tyranny of the higher castes and by being treated by them with blows and
kicks at every step they took, have totally lost their manliness and
become like professional beggars; and those who are removed one stage
higher than these, having read a few pages of English, hang about the
thresholds of public offices with petitions in their hands. In the case
of a post of twenty or thirty rupees falling vacant, five hundred B.A.s
and M.A.s will apply for it! And, dear me! how curiously worded these
petitions are! "I have nothing to eat at home, sir, my wife and children
are starving; I most humbly implore you, sir, to give me some means to
provide for myself and my family, or we shall die of starvation! " Even
when they enter into service, they cast all self-respect to the winds,
and servitude in its worst form is what they practice. Such is the
condition, then, of the masses. The highly-educated, prominent men among
you form themselves into societies and clamour at the top of their
voices: "Alas, India is going to ruin, day by day! O English rulers,
admit our country men to the higher offices of the State, relieve us
from famines" and so on, thus rending the air, day and night, with the
eternal cry of "Give" and "Give"! The burden of all their speech is,
"Give to us, give more to us, O Englishmen! " Dear me! what more will
they give to you? They have given railways, telegraphs, well-ordered
administration to the country — have almost entirely suppressed robbers,
have given education in science — what more will they give? What does
anyone give to others with perfect unselfishness? Well, they have given
you so much; let me ask, what have you given to them in return?

Myself: What have we to give, Swamiji? We pay taxes.

Swamiji: Do you, really? Do you give taxes to them of your own will, or
do they exact them by compulsion because they keep peace in the country?
Tell me plainly, what do you give them in return for all that they have
done for you? You also have something to give them that they have not.
You go to England, but that is also in the garb of a beggar — praying
for education. Some go, and what they do there at the most is,
perchance, to applaud the Westerner's religion in some speeches and then
come back. What an achievement, indeed! Why, have you nothing to give
them? An inestimable treasure you have, which you can give — give them
your religion, give them your philosophy! Study the history of the whole
world, and you will see that every high ideal you meet with anywhere had
its origin in India. From time immemorial India has been the mine of
precious ideas to human society; giving birth to high ideas herself, she
has freely distributed them broadcast over the whole world. The English
are in India today, to gather those higher ideals, to acquire a
knowledge of the Vedanta, to penetrate into the deep mysteries of that
eternal religion which is yours. Give those in valuable gems in exchange
for what you receive from them. The Lord took me to their country to
remove this opprobrium of the beggar that is attributed by them to us.
It is not right to go to England for the purpose of begging only. Why
should they always give us alms? Does anyone do so for ever? It is not
the law of nature to be always taking gifts with outstretched hands like
beggars. To give and take is the law of nature. Any individual or class
or nation that does not obey this law never prospers in life. We also
must follow that law. That is why I went to America. So great is now the
thirst for religion in the people there that there is room enough even
if thousands of men like me go. They have been for a long time giving
you of what wealth they possess, and now is the time for you to share
your priceless treasure with them. And you will see how their feelings
of hatred will be quickly replaced by those of faith, devotion, and
reverence towards you, and how they will do good to your country even
unasked. They are a nation of heroes — never do they forget any good
done to them.

Myself: Well, Swamiji, in your lectures in the West you have frequently
and eloquently dwelt on our characteristic talents and virtues, and many
convincing proofs you have put forward to show our whole-souled love of
religion; but now you say that we have become full of Tamas; and at the
same time you are accrediting us as the teachers of the eternal religion
of the Rishis to the world! How is that?

Swamiji: Do you mean to say that I should go about from country to
country, expatiating on your failings before the public? Should I not
rather hold up before them the characteristic virtues that mark you as a
nation? It is always good to tell a man his defects in a direct way and
in a friendly spirit to make him convinced of them, so that he may
correct himself — but you should trumpet forth his virtues before
others. Shri Ramakrishna used to say that if you repeatedly tell a bad
man that he is good, he turns in time to be good; similarly, a good man
becomes bad if he is incessantly called so. There, in the West, I have
said enough to the people of their shortcomings. Mind, up to my time,
all who went over to the West from our country have sung paeans to them
in praise of their virtues and have trumpeted out only our blemishes to
their ears. Consequently, it is no wonder that they have learnt to hate
us. For this reason I have laid before them your virtues, and pointed
out to them their vices, just as I am now telling you of your weaknesses
and their good points. However full of Tamas you may have become,
something of the nature of the ancient Rishis, however little it may be,
is undoubtedly in you still — at least the framework of it. But that
does not show that one should be in a hurry to take up at once the role
of a teacher of religion and go over to the West to preach it. First of
all, one must completely mould one's religious life in solitude, must be
perfect in renunciation and must preserve Brahmacharya without a break.
The Tamas has entered into you — what of that? Cannot the Tamas be
destroyed? It can be done in less than no time! It was for the
destruction of this Tamas that Bhagavân Shri Ramakrishna came to us.

Myself: But who can aspire to be like you, Swamiji ?

Swamiji: Do you think that there will be no more Vivekanandas after I
die! That batch of young men who came and played music before me a
little while ago, whom you all despise for being addicted to
intoxicating drugs and look upon as worthless fellows, if the Lord
wishes, each and everyone of them may become a Vivekananda! There will
be no lack of Vivekanandas, if the world needs them — thousands and
millions of Vivekanandas will appear — from where, who knows! Know for
certain that the work done by me is not the work of Vivekananda, it is
His work — the Lord's own work! If one governor-general retires, another
is sure to be sent in his place by the Emperor. Enveloped in Tamas
however much you may be, know all that will clear away if you take
refuge in Him by being sincere to the core of your heart. The time is
opportune now, as the physician of the world-disease has come. Taking
His name, if you set yourself to work, He will accomplish everything
Himself through you. Tamas itself will be transformed into the highest
Sattva!

Myself: Whatever you may say, I cannot bring myself to believe in these
words. Who can come by that oratorical power of expounding philosophy
which you have?

Swamiji: You don't know! That power may come to all. That power comes to
him who observes unbroken Brahmacharya for a period of twelve years,
with the sole object of realising God. I have practiced that kind of
Brahmacharya myself, and so a screen has been removed, as it were, from
my brain. For that reason, I need not any more think over or prepare
myself for any lectures on such a subtle subject as philosophy. Suppose
I have to lecture tomorrow; all that I shall speak about will pass
tonight before my eyes like so many pictures; and the next day I put
into words during my lecture all those things that I saw. So you will
understand now that it is not any power which is exclusively my own.
Whoever will practice unbroken Brahmacharya for twelve years will surely
have it. If you do so, you too will get it. Our Shâstras do not say that
only such and such a person will get it and not others!

Myself: Do you remember, Swamiji, one day, before you took Sannyâsa, we
were sitting in the house of —, and you were trying to explain the
mystery of Samâdhi to us. And when I called in question the truth of
your words, saying that Samadhi was not possible in this Kali Yuga, you
emphatically demanded: "Do you want to see Samadhi or to have it
yourself? I get Samadhi myself, and I can make you have it! " No sooner
had you finished saying so than a stranger came up and we did not pursue
that subject any further.

Swamiji: Yes, I remember the occasion.

Later, on my pressing him to make me get Samadhi, he said, "You see,
having continually lectured and worked hard for several years, the
quality of Rajas has become too predominant in me. Hence that power is
lying covered, as it were, in me now. If I leave all work and go to the
Himalayas and meditate in solitude for some time, then that power will
again come out in me."

VII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](pns_b9_250_e5_06_07.pdf) VI & VII*)

REMINISCENCES — PRANAYAMA — THOUGHT-READING — KNOWLEDGE OF PREVIOUS
BIRTHS

\[*Shri Priya Nath Sinha*\]

A day or two later, as I was coming out of my house intending to pay a
visit to Swamiji, I met two of my friends who expressed a wish to
accompany me, for they wanted to ask Swamiji something about Prânâyâma.
I had heard that one should not visit a temple or a Sannyâsin without
taking something as an offering; so we took some fruits and sweets with
us and placed them before him. Swamiji took them in his hands, raised
them to his head, and bowed to us before even we made our obeisance to
him. One of the two friends with me had been a fellow-student of his.
Swamiji recognised him at once and asked about his health and welfare
Then he made us sit down by him. There were many others there who had
come to see and hear him. After replying to a few questions put by some
of the gentlemen, Swamiji, in the course of his conversation, began to
speak about Pranayama. First of all, he explained through modern science
the origin of matter from the mind, and then went on to show what
Pranayama is. All three of us had carefully read beforehand his book
called *Râja-Yoga*. But from what we heard from him that day about
Pranayama, it seemed to me that very little of the knowledge that was in
him had been recorded in that book. I understand also that what he said
was not mere book-learning, for who could explain so lucidly and
elaborately all the intricate problems of religion, even with the help
of science, without himself realising the Truth?

His conversation on Pranayama went on from half past three o'clock till
half past seven in the evening. When the meeting dissolved and we came
away, my companions asked me how Swamiji could have known the questions
that were in their hearts, and whether I had communicated to him their
desire for asking those questions.

A few days after this occasion, I saw Swamiji in the house of the late
Priya Nath Mukherjee at Baghbazar. There were present Swami Brahmananda,
Swami Yogananda, Mr. G. C. Ghosh, Atul Babu, and one or two other
friends. I said, "Well, Swamiji, the two gentlemen who went to see you
the other day wanted to ask you some questions about Pranayama, which
had been raised in their minds by reading your book on Raja-Yoga some
time before you returned to this country, and they had then told me of
them. But that day, before they asked you anything, you yourself raised
those doubts that had occurred to them and solved them! They were very
much surprised and inquired of me if I had let you know their doubts
beforehand." Swamiji replied: "Similar occurrences having come to pass
many times in the West, people often used to ask me, 'How could you know
the questions that were agitating our minds?' This knowledge does not
happen to me so often, but with Shri Ramakrishna it was almost always
there."

In this connection Atul Babu asked him: "You have said in *Raja-Yoga*
that one can come to know all about one's previous births. Do you know
them yourself?"

Swamiji: Yes, I do.

Atul Babu: What do you know? Have you any objection to tell?

Swamiji: I can know them — I do know them — but I prefer not to say
anything in detail.

VIII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](pns_b9_256_e5_08.pdf)* )

THE ART AND SCIENCE OF MUSIC, EASTERN AND WESTERN

\[*Shri Priya Nath Sinha*\]

It was an evening in July 1898, at the Math, in Nilambar Mukerjee's
garden-house, Belur. Swamiji with all his disciples had been meditating,
and at the close of the meditation came out and sat in one of the rooms.
As it was raining hard and a cold wind was blowing, he shut the door and
began to sing to the accompaniment of Tânpurâ. The singing being over, a
long conversation on music followed. Swami Shivananda asked him, "What
is Western music like?"

Swamiji: Oh, it is very good; there is in it a perfection of harmony,
which we have not attained. Only, to our untrained ears, it does not
sound well, hence we do not like it, and think that the singers howl
like jackals. I also had the same sort of impression, but when I began
to listen to the music with attention and study it minutely, I came more
and more to understand it, and I was lost in admiration. Such is the
case with every art. In glancing at a highly finished painting we cannot
understand where its beauty lies. Moreover, unless the eye is, to a
certain extent, trained, one cannot appreciate the subtle touches and
blendings, the inner genius of a work of art. What real music we have
lies in Kirtana and Dhrupada; the rest has been spoiled by being
modulated according to the Islamic methods. Do you think that singing
the short and light airs of Tappâ songs in a nasal voice and flitting
like lightning from one note to another by fits and starts are the best
things in the world of music? Not so. Unless each note is given full
play in every scale, all the science of music is marred. In painting, by
keeping in touch with nature, you can make it as artistic as you like;
there is no harm in doing that, and the result will be nothing but good.
Similarly, in music, you can display any amount of skill by keeping to
science, and it will be pleasing to the ear. The Mohammedans took up the
different Râgas and Râginis after coming into India. But they put such a
stamp of their own colouring on the art of Tappa songs that all the
science in music was destroyed.

*Q*. Why, Mahârâj (sir)? Who has not a liking for music in Tappa?

Swamiji: The chirping of crickets sounds very good to some. The Santâls
think their music also to be the best of all. You do not seem to
understand that when one note comes upon another in such quick
succession, it not only robs music of all grace, but, on the other hand,
creates discordance rather. Do not the permutation and combination of
the seven keynotes form one or other of the different melodies of music,
known as Ragas and Raginis? Now, in Tappa, if one slurs over a whole
melody (Raga) and creates a new tune, and over and above that, if the
voice is raised to the highest pitch by tremulous modulation, say, how
can the Raga be kept intact? Again, the poetry of music is completely
destroyed if there be in it such profuse use of light and short strains
just for effect. To sing by keeping to the idea, meant to be conveyed by
a song, totally disappeared from our country when Tappas came into
vogue. Nowadays, it seems, the true art is reviving a little with the
improvement in theatres; but, on the other hand, all regard for Ragas
and Raginis is being more and more flung to the winds.

Accordingly, to those who are past masters in the art of singing
Dhrupada, it is painful to hear Tappas. But in our music the cadence, or
a duly regulated rise and fall of voice or sound, is very good. The
French detected and appreciated this trait first, and tried to adapt and
introduce it in their music. After their doing this, the whole of Europe
has now thoroughly mastered it.

*Q*. Maharaj, their music seems to be pre-eminently martial, whereas
that element appears to be altogether absent in ours.

Swamiji: Oh, no, we have it also. In martial music, harmony is greatly
needed. We sadly lack harmony, hence it does not show itself so much.
Our music had been improving steadily. But when the Mohammedans came,
they took possession of it in such a way that the tree of music could
grow no further. The music of the Westerners is much advanced. They have
the sentiment of pathos as well as of heroism in their music, which is
as it should be. But our antique musical instrument made from the gourd
has been improved no further.

*Q*. Which of the Ragas and Raginis are martial in tune?

Swamiji: Every Raga may be made martial if it is set in harmony and the
instruments are tuned accordingly. Some of the Raginis can also become
martial.

The conversation was then closed, as it was time for supper. After
supper, Swamiji enquired as to the sleeping arrangements for the guests
who had come from Calcutta to the Math to pass the night, and he then
retired to his bedroom.

  

IX  
(*Translated from [Bengali](pns_b9_258_e5_09.pdf)* )

THE OLD INSTITUTION OF LIVING WITH THE GURU — THE PRESENT UNIVERSITY
SYSTEM — LACK OF SHRADDHA — WE HAVE A NATIONAL HISTORY — WESTERN SCIENCE
COUPLED WITH VEDANTA — THE SO-CALLED HIGHER EDUCATION — THE NEED OF
TECHNICAL EDUCATION AND EDUCATION ON NATIONAL LINES — THE STORY OF
SATYAKAMA — MERE BOOKLEARNING AND EDUCATION UNDER TYAGIS — SHRI
RAMAKRISHNA AND THE PANDITS — ESTABLISHMENT OF MATHS WITH SADHUS IN
CHARGE OF COLLEGES — TEXT-BOOKS FOR BOYS TO BE COMPILED — STOP EARLY
MARRIAGE! — PLAN OF SENDING UNMARRIED GRADUATES TO JAPAN — THE SECRET OF
JAPAN'S GREATNESS — ART, ASIAN AND EUROPEAN — ART AND UTILITY — STYLES
OF DRESS — THE FOOD QUESTION AND POVERTY.

\[*Shri Priya Nath Sinha*\]

It was about two years after the new Math had been constructed and while
all the Swamis were living there that I came one morning to pay a visit
to my Guru. Seeing me, Swamiji smiled and after inquiring of my welfare
etc., said, "You are going to stay today, are you not?"

"Certainly", I said, and after various inquiries I asked, "Well,
Mahârâj, what is your idea of educating our boys?"

Swamiji: Guru-griha-vâsa — living with the Guru.

*Q*. How?

Swamiji: In the same way as of old. But with this education has to be
combined modern Western science. Both these are necessary.

*Q*. Why, what is the defect in the present university system?

Swamiji: It is almost wholly one of defects. Why, it is nothing but a
perfect machine for turning out clerks. I would even thank my stars if
that were all. But no! See how men are becoming destitute of Shraddhâ
and faith. They assert that the Gita is only an interpolation, and that
the Vedas are but rustic songs! They like to master every detail
concerning things and nations outside of India, but if you ask them,
they do not know even the names of their own forefathers up to the
seventh generation, not to speak of the fourteenth!

*Q*. But what does that matter? What if they do not know the names of
their forefathers?

Swamiji: Don't think so. A nation that has no history of its own has
nothing in this world. Do you believe that one who has such faith and
pride as to feel, "I come of noble descent", can ever turn out to be
bad? How could that be? That faith in himself would curb his actions and
feelings, so much so that he would rather die than commit wrong. So a
national history keeps a nation well-restrained and does not allow it to
sink so low. Oh, I know you will say, "But we have not such a history!"
No, there is not any, according to those who think like you. Neither is
there any, according to your big university scholars; and so also think
those who, having travelled through the West in one great rush, come
back dressed in European style and assert, "We have nothing, we are
barbarians." Of course, we have no history exactly like that of other
countries. Suppose we take rice, and the Englishmen do not. Would you
for that reason imagine that they all die of starvation, and are going
to be exterminated? They live quite well on what they can easily procure
or produce in their own country and what is suited to them. Similarly,
we have our own history exactly as it ought to have been for us. Will
that history be made extinct by shutting your eyes and crying, "Alas! we
have no history!" Those who have eyes to see, find a luminous history
there, and on the strength of that they know the nation is still alive.
But that history has to be rewritten. It should be restated and suited
to the understanding and ways of thinking which our men have acquired in
the present age through Western education.

*Q*. How has that to be done?

Swamiji: That is too big a subject for a talk now. However, to bring
that about, the old institution of "living with the Guru" and similar
systems of imparting education are needed. What we want are Western
science coupled with Vedanta, Brahmacharya as the guiding motto, and
also Shraddhâ and faith in one's own self. Another thing that we want is
the abolition of that system which aims at educating our boys in the
same manner as that of the man who battered his ass, being advised that
it could thereby be turned into a horse.

*Q*. What do you mean by that?

Swamiji: You see, no one can teach anybody. The teacher spoils
everything by thinking that he is teaching. Thus Vedanta says that
within man is all knowledge — even in a boy it is so — and it requires
only an awakening, and that much is the work of a teacher. We have to do
only so much for the boys that they may learn to apply their own
intellect to the proper use of their hands, legs, ears, eyes, etc., and
finally everything will become easy. But the root is religion. Religion
is as the rice, and everything else, like the curries. Taking only
curries causes indigestion, and so is the case with taking rice alone.
Our pedagogues are making parrots of our boys and ruining their brains
by cramming a lot of subjects into them. Looking from one standpoint,
you should rather be grateful to the Viceroy[1](#fn1) for his proposal
of reforming the university system, which means practically abolishing
higher education; the country will, at least, feel some relief by having
breathing time. Goodness gracious! what a fuss and fury about
graduating, and after a few days all cools down! And after all that,
what is it they learn but that what religion and customs we have are all
bad, and what the Westerners have are all good! At last, they cannot
keep the wolf from the door! What does it matter if this higher
education remains or goes? It would be better if the people got a little
technical education, so that they might find work and earn their bread,
instead of dawdling about and crying for service.

*Q*. Yes, the Marwaris are wiser, since they do not accept service and
most of them engage themselves in some trade.

Swamiji: Nonsense! They are on the way to bringing ruin on the country.
They have little understanding of their own interests. You are much
better, because you have more of an eye towards manufactures. If the
money that they lay out in their business and with which they make only
a small percentage of profit were utilised in conducting a few factories
and workshops, instead of filling the pockets of Europeans by letting
them reap the benefit of most of the transactions, then it would not
only conduce to the well-being of the country but bring by far the
greater amount of profit to them, as well. It is only the Kabulis who do
not care for service — the spirit of independence is in their very bone
and marrow. Propose to anyone of them to take service, and you will see
what follows!

*Q*. Well, Maharaj, in case higher education is abolished, will not the
men become as stupid as cows, as they were before?

Swamiji: What nonsense! Can ever a lion become a jackal? What do you
mean? Is it ever possible for the sons of the land that has nourished
the whole world with knowledge from time immemorial to turn as stupid as
cows, because of the abolition of higher education by Lord Curzon?

*Q*. But think what our people were before the advent of the English,
and what they are now.

Swamiji: Does higher education mean mere study of material sciences and
turning out things of everyday use by machinery? The use of higher
education is to find out how to solve the problems of life, and this is
what is engaging the profound thought of the modern civilised world, but
it was solved in our country thousands of years ago.

*Q*. But your Vedanta also was about to disappear?

Swamiji: It might be so. In the efflux of time the light of Vedanta now
and then seems as if about to be extinguished, and when that happens,
the Lord has to incarnate Himself in the human body; He then infuses
such life and strength into religion that it goes on again for some time
with irresistible vigour. That life and strength has come into it again.

*Q*. What proof is there, Maharaj, that India has freely contributed her
knowledge to the rest of the world?

Swamiji: History itself bears testimony to the fact. All the
soul-elevating ideas and the different branches of knowledge that exist
in the world are found on proper investigation to have their roots in
India.

Aglow with enthusiasm, Swamiji dwelt at length on this topic. His health
was very bad at the time, and moreover owing to the intense heat of
summer, he was feeling thirsty and drinking water too often. At last he
said "Dear Singhi, get a glass of iced water for me please, I shall
explain everything to you clearly." After drinking the iced water he
began afresh.

Swamiji: What we need, you know, is to study, independent of foreign
control, different branches of the knowledge that is our own, and with
it the English language and Western science; we need technical education
and all else that may develop industries so that men, instead of seeking
for service, may earn enough to provide for themselves, and save
something against a rainy day.

*Q*. What were you going to say the other day about the *tol* (Sanskrit
boarding school) system?

Swamiji: Haven't you read the stories from the Upanishads? I will tell
you one. Satyakâma went to live the life of a Brahmachârin with his
Guru. The Guru gave into his charge some cows and sent him away to the
forest with them. Many months passed by, and when Satyakama saw that the
number of cows was doubled he thought of returning to his Guru. On his
way back, one of the bulls, the fire, and some other animals gave him
instructions about the Highest Brahman. When the disciple came back, the
Guru at once saw by a mere glance at his face that the disciple had
learnt the knowledge of the Supreme Brahman (Chhândogya, IV. ix. 2.).
Now, the moral this story is meant to teach is that true education is
gained by constant living in communion with nature.

Knowledge should be acquired in that way, otherwise by educating
yourself in the *tol* of a Pandit you will be only a human ape all your
life. One should live from his very boyhood with one whose character is
like a blazing fire and should have before him a living example of the
highest teaching. Mere reading that it is a sin to tell a lie will be of
no use. Every boy should be trained to practice absolute Brahmacharya,
and then, and then only, faith — Shraddha — will come. Otherwise, why
will not one who has no Shraddha speak an untruth? In our country, the
imparting of knowledge has always been through men of renunciation.
Later, the Pandits, by monopolising all knowledge and restricting it to
the *tols*, have only brought the country to the brink of ruin. India
had all good prospects so long as Tyâgis (men of renunciation) used to
impart knowledge.

*Q*. What do you mean, Maharaj? There are no Sannyâsins in other
countries, but see how by dint of their knowledge India is laid
prostrate at their feet!

Swamiji: Don't talk nonsense, my dear, hear what I say. India will have
to carry others' shoes for ever on her head if the charge of imparting
knowledge to her sons does not again fall upon the shoulders of Tyagis.
Don't you know how an illiterate boy, possessed of renunciation, turned
the heads of your great old Pandits? Once at the Dakshineswar Temple the
Brâhmana who was in charge of the worship of Vishnu broke a leg of the
image. Pandits were brought together at a meeting to give their
opinions, and they, after consulting old books and manuscripts, declared
that the worship of this broken image could not be sanctioned according
to the Shâstras and a new image would have to be consecrated. There was,
consequently, a great stir. Shri Ramakrishna was called at last. He
heard and asked, "Does a wife forsake her husband in case he becomes
lame?" What followed? The Pandits were struck dumb, all their Shâstric
commentaries and erudition could not withstand the force of this simple
statement. If what you say was true, why should Shri Ramakrishna come
down to this earth, and why should he discourage mere book-learning so
much? That new life-force which he brought with him has to be instilled
into learning and education, and then the real work will be done.

*Q*. But that is easier said than done.

Swamiji: Had it been easy, it would not have been necessary for him to
come. What you have to do now is to establish a Math in every town and
in every village. Can you do that? Do something at least. Start a big
Math in the heart of Calcutta. A well-educated Sâdhu should be at the
head of that centre and under him there should be departments for
teaching practical science and arts, with a specialist Sannyasin in
charge of each of these departments.

*Q*. Where will you get such Sadhus?

Swamiji: We shall have to manufacture them. Therefore, I always say that
some young men with burning patriotism and renunciation are needed. None
can master a thing perfectly in so short a time as the Tyagis will.

After a short silence Swamiji said, "Singhi, there are so many things
left to be done for our country that thousands like you and me are
needed. What will mere talk do? See to what a miserable condition the
country is reduced; now do something! We haven't even got a single book
well suited for the little boys."

*Q*. Why, there are so many books of Ishwar Chandra Vidyâsâgar for the
boys!

No sooner had I said this than he laughed out and said: Yes, there you
read "Ishvar Nirakar Chaitanya Svarup" — (God is without form and of the
essence of pure knowledge); "Subal ati subodh bâlak" — (Subal is a very
good boy), and so on. That won't do. We must compose some books in
Bengali as also in English with short stories from the Râmâyana, the
Mahâbhârata, the Upanishads, etc., in very easy and simple language, and
these are to be given to our little boys to read.

It was about eleven o'clock by this time. The sky became suddenly
overcast, and a cool breeze began to blow. Swamiji was greatly delighted
at the prospect of rain. He got up and said, "Let us, Singhi, have a
stroll by the side of the Ganga." We did so, and he recited many stanzas
from the *Meghaduta* of Kâlidâsa, but the one undercurrent of thought
that was all the time running through his mind was the good of India. He
exclaimed, "Look here, Singhi, can you do one thing? Can you put a stop
to the marriage of our boys for some time?"

I said, "Well, Maharaj, how can we think of that when the Babus are
trying, on the other hand, all sorts of means to make marriage cheaper?"

Swamiji : Don't trouble your head on that score; who can stem the tide
of time! All such agitations will end in empty sound, that is all. The
dearer the marriages become, the better for the country. What a
hurry-scurry of passing examinations and marrying right off! It seems as
if no one was to be left a bachelor, but it is just the same thing
again, next year!

After a short silence, Swamiji again said, "if I can get some unmarried
graduates, I may try to send them over to Japan and make arrangements
for their technical education there, so that when they come back, they
may turn their knowledge to the best account for India. What a good
thing that would be!"

*Q*. Why, Maharaj, is it better for us to go to Japan than to England?

Swamiji: Certainly! In my opinion, if all our rich and educated men once
go and see Japan, their eyes will be opened.

*Q*. How?

Swamiji: There, in Japan, you find a fine assimilation of knowledge, and
not its indigestion, as we have here. They have taken everything from
the Europeans, but they remain Japanese all the same, and have not
turned European; while in our country, the terrible mania of becoming
Westernised has seized upon us like a plague.

I said: "Maharaj, I have seen some Japanese paintings; one cannot but
marvel at their art. Its inspiration seems to be something which is
their own and beyond imitation."

Swamiji: Quite so. They are great as a nation because of their art.
Don't you see they are Asians, as we are? And though we have lost almost
everything, yet what we still have is wonderful. The very soul of the
Asian is interwoven with art. The Asian never uses a thing unless there
be art in it. Don't you know that art is, with us, a part of religion?
How greatly is a lady admired, among us, who can nicely paint the floors
and walls, on auspicious occasions, with the paste of rice powder? How
great an artist was Shri Ramakrishna himself!

*Q*. The English art is also good, is it not?

Swamiji: What a stupid fool you are! But what is the use of blaming you
when that seems to be the prevailing way of thinking! Alas, to such a
state is our country reduced! The people will look upon their own gold
as brass, while the brass of the foreigner it gold to them! This is,
indeed, the magic wrought by modern education! Know that since the time
the Europeans have come into contact with Asia, they are trying to
infuse art into their own life.

Myself: If others hear you talk like this, Maharaj they will think that
you take a pessimistic view of things.

Swamiji: Naturally! What else can they think who move in a rut! How I
wish I could show you everything through my eyes! Look at their
buildings — how commonplace, how meaningless, they are! Look at those
big government buildings; can you, just by seeing their outside, make
out any meaning for which each of them stands? No, because they are all
so unsymbolical. Take again the dress of Westerners: their stiff coats
and straight pants fitting almost tightly to the body, are, in our
estimation hardly decent. Is it not so? And, oh, what beauty indeed, in
that! Now, go all over our motherland and see if you cannot read aright,
from their very appearance, the meaning for which our buildings stand,
and hew much art there is in them! The glass is their drinking vessel,
and ours is the metal Ghati (pitcher-shaped); which of the two is
artistic? Have you seen the farmers' homes in our villages?

Myself: Yes, I have, of course.

Swamiji: What have you seen of them?

I did not know what to say. However, I replied, "Maharaj, they are
faultlessly neat and clean, the yards and floors being daily well
plastered over".

Swamiji: Have you seen their granaries for keeping paddy? What an art is
there in them! What a variety of paintings even on their mud walls! And
then, if you go and see how the lower classes live in the West, you
would at once mark the difference. Their ideal is utility, ours art. The
Westerner looks for utility in everything, whereas with us art is
everywhere. With the Western education, those beautiful Ghatis of ours
have been discarded, and enamel glasses have usurped their place in our
homes! Thus the ideal of utility has been imbibed by us to such an
extent as to make it look little short of the ridiculous. Now what we
need is the combination of art and utility. Japan has done that very
quickly, and so she has advanced by giant strides. Now, in their turn,
the Japanese are going to teach the Westerners.

*Q*. Maharaj, which nation in the world dresses best?

Swamiji: The Aryans do; even the Europeans admit that. How picturesquely
their dresses hang in folds! The royal costumes of most nations are, to
some extent, a sort of imitation of the Aryans' — the same attempt is
made there to keep them in folds, and those costumes bear a marked
difference to their national style.

By the by, Singhi, leave off that wretched habit of wearing those
European shirts.

*Q*. Why, Maharaj?

Swamiji: For the reason that they are used by the Westerners only as
underwear. They never like to see them worn outside. How mistaken of the
Bengalis to do so! As if one should wear anything and everything, as if
there was no unwritten law about dress, as if there was no ancestral
style to follow! Our people are out-casted by taking the food touched by
the lower classes it would have been very well if the same law applied
to their wearing any irregular style of dress. Why can't you adapt your
dress in some way to our own style? What sense is there in your adopting
European shirts and coats?

It began to rain now, and the dinner-bell also rang. So we went in to
partake of the Prasâda (consecrated food) with others. During the meal,
Swamiji said, addressing me: "Concentrated food should be taken. To fill
the stomach with a large quantity of rice is the root of laziness." A
little while after he said again, "Look at the Japanese, they take rice
with the soup of split peas, twice or thrice a day. But even the
strongly built take a little at a time, though the number of meals may
be more. Those who are well-to-do among them take meat daily. While we
stuff ourselves twice a day up to the throat, as it were, and the whole
of our energy is exhausted in digesting such a quantity of rice!"

*Q*. Is it feasible for us Bengalis, poor as we are, to take meat?

Swamiji: Why not? You can afford to have it in small quantities. Half a
pound a day is quite enough. The real evil is idleness, which is the
principal cause of our poverty. Suppose the head of a firm gets
displeased with someone and decreases his pay; or out of three or four
bread-winning sons in a family one suddenly dies; what do they do? Why,
they at once curtail the quantity of milk for the children, or live on
one meal a day, having a little popped rice or so at night!

*Q*. But what else can they do under the circumstances?

Swamiji: Why can't they exert themselves and earn more to keep up their
standard of food? But no! They must go to their local Âddâs (rendezvous)
and idle hours away! Oh, if they only knew how they wasted their time!

X  
(*Translated from [Bengali](pns_b9_263_e5_10.pdf)* )

THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE FOUR CASTES ACCORDING TO JATI AND GUNA —
BRAHMANAS AND KSHATRIYAS IN THE WEST — THE KULA-GURU SYSTEM IN BENGAL

\[*Shri Priya Nath Sinha*\]

Once I went to see Swamiji while he was staying in Calcutta at the house
of the late Balaram Basu. After a long conversation about Japan and
America, I asked him, "Well, Swamiji, how many disciples have you in the
West?"

Swamiji: A good many.

*Q*. Two or three thousands?

Swamiji: Maybe more than that.

Q. Are they all initiated by you with Mantras?

Swamiji: Yes.

*Q*. Did you give them permission to utter Pranava (Om) ?

Swamiji: Yes.

*Q*. How did you, Mahârâj? They say that the Shudras have no right to
Pranava, and none has except the Brâhmins. Moreover, the Westerners are
Mlechchhas, not even Shudras.

Swamiji: How do you know that those whom I have initiated are not
Brahmins?

Myself: Where could you get Brahmins outside India, in the lands of the
Yavanas and Mlechchhas?

Swamiji: My disciples are all Brahmins! I quite admit the truth of the
words that none except the Brahmins has the right to Pranava. But the
son of a Brahmin is not necessarily always a Brahmin; though there is
every possibility of his being one, he may not become so. Did you not
hear that the nephew of Aghore Chakravarti of Baghbazar became a sweeper
and actually used to do all the menial services of his adopted caste?
Was he not the son of a Brahmin?

The Brahmin caste and the Brâhmanya qualities are two distinct things.
In India, one is held to be a Brahmin by one's caste, but in the West,
one should be known as such by one's Brahmanya qualities. As there are
three Gunas — Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas — so there are Gunas which show a
man to be a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya or Shudra. The qualities of
being a Brahmin or a Kshatriya are dying out from the country; but in
the West they have now attained to Kshatriyahood, from which the next
step is Brahminhood; and many there are who have qualified themselves
for that.

*Q*. Then you call those Brahmins who are Sâttvika by nature.

Swamiji: Quite so. As there are Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas — one or other
of these Gunas more or less — in every man, so the qualities which make
a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, or Shudra are inherent in every man, more
or less. But at times one or other of these qualities predominates in
him in varying degrees, and it is manifested accordingly. Take a man in
his different pursuits, for example: when he is engaged in serving
another for pay, he is in Shudrahood; when he is busy transacting some
piece of business for profit, on his own account, he is a Vaishya; when
he fights to right wrongs, then the qualities of a Kshatriya come out in
him; and when he meditates on God or passes his time in conversation
about Him, then he is a Brahmin. Naturally, it is quite possible for one
to be changed from one caste into another. Otherwise, how did
Vishvâmitra become a Brahmin and Parashurâma a Kshatriya?

*Q*. What you say seems to be quite right, but why then do not our
Pandits and family-Gurus teach us the same thing?

Swamiji: That is one of the great evils of our country. But let the
matter rest now.

Swamiji here spoke highly of the Westerners' spirit of practicality, and
how, when they take up religion also, that spirit shows itself.

Myself: True, Maharaj, I have heard that their spiritual and psychic
powers are very quickly developed when they practice religion. The other
day Swami Saradananda showed me a letter written by one of his Western
disciples, describing the spiritual powers highly developed in the
writer through the Sâdhanâs practiced for only four months.

Swamiji: So you see! Now you understand whether there are Brahmins in
the West or not. You have Brahmins here also, but they are bringing the
country down to the verge of ruin by their awful tyranny, and
consequently what they have naturally is vanishing away by degrees. The
Guru initiates his disciple with a Mantra, but that has come to be a
trade with him. And then, how wonderful is the relation nowadays between
a Guru and his disciple! Perchance, the Guru has nothing to eat at home,
and his wife brings the matter to his notice and says, "Pray, go once
again to your disciples, dear. Will your playing at dice all day long
save us from hunger?" The Brahmin in reply says, "Very well, remind me
of it tomorrow morning. I have come to hear that my disciple so-and-so
is having a run of luck, and, moreover, I have not been to him for a
long time." This is what your Kula-Guru system has come to in Bengal!
Priestcraft in the West is not so degenerated, as yet; it is on the
whole better than your kind!

1.  [^](#txt1)Lord Curzon, who took steps to raise the standard of
    university education so high as to make it very expensive and hence
    almost inaccessible to boys of the middle classes.

</div>
