---
title: XI

---
<div>

[←](vi_x_shri_priya_nath_sinha.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm)
/ [→](../sayings_and_utterances.htm)

  

## XI

(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_22e5_11.pdf)* )

INDIA WANTS NOT LECTURING BUT WORK — THE CRYING PROBLEM IN INDIA IS
POVERTY — YOUNG SANNYASINS TO BE TRAINED BOTH AS SECULAR AND SPIRITUAL
TEACHERS AND WORKERS FOR THE MASSES — EXHORTATIONS TO YOUNG MEN TO WORK
FOR OTHERS

(*From the Diary of a disciple*)

(The disciple in this and the following conversations is Sharat Chandra
Chakravarty.)

Disciple: How is it, Swamiji, that you do not lecture in this country?
You have stirred Europe and America with your lectures, but coming back
here you have kept silence.

Swamiji: In this country, the ground should be prepared first; then if
the seed is sown, the plant will come out best. The ground in the West,
in Europe and America is very fertile and fit for sowing seeds. There
they have reached the climax of Bhoga (enjoyment). Being satiated with
Bhoga to the full, their minds are not getting peace now even in those
enjoyments, and they feel as if they wanted something else. In this
country you have neither Bhoga nor Yoga (renunciation). When one is
satiated with Bhoga, then it is that one will listen to and understand
the teachings on Yoga. What good will lectures do in a country like
India which has become the birthplace of disease, sorrow, and
affliction, and where men are emaciated through starvation, and weak in
mind?

Disciple: How is that? Do you not say that ours is the land of religion
and that here the people understand religion as they do nowhere else?
Why then will not this country be animated by your inspiring eloquence
and reap to the full the fruits thereof?

Swamiji: Now understand what religion means. The first thing required is
the worship of the Kurma (tortoise) Incarnation, and the belly-god is
this Kurma, as it were. Until you pacify this, no one will welcome your
words about religion. India is restless with the thought of how to face
this spectre of hunger. The draining of the best resources of the
country by the foreigners, the unrestricted exports of merchandise, and,
above all, the abominable jealousy natural to slaves are eating into the
vitals of India. First of all, you must remove this evil of hunger and
starvation, this constant anxiety for bare existence, from those to whom
you want to preach religion; otherwise, lectures and such things will be
of no benefit.

Disciple: What should we do then to remove that evil?

Swamiji: First, some young men full of the spirit of renunciation are
needed — those who will be ready to sacrifice their lives for others,
instead of devoting themselves to their own happiness. With this object
in view I shall establish a Math to train young Sannyâsins, who will go
from door to door and make the people realise their pitiable condition
by means of facts and reasoning, and instruct them in the ways and means
for their welfare, and at the same time will explain to them as clearly
as possible, in very simple and easy language, the higher truths of
religion. The masses in our country are like the sleeping Leviathan. The
education imparted by the present university system reaches one or two
per cent of the masses only. And even those who get that do not succeed
in their endeavours of doing any good to their country. But it is not
their fault, poor fellows! As soon as they come out of their college,
they find themselves fathers of several children! Somehow or other they
manage to secure the position of a clerk, or at the most, a deputy
magistrate. This is the finale of education! With the burden of a family
on their backs, they find no time to do anything great or think anything
high. They do not find means enough to fulfil their personal wants and
interests; so what can be expected of them in the way of doing anything
for others?

Disciple: Is there then no way out for us?

Swamiji: Certainly there is. This is the land of Religion Eternal. The
country has fallen, no doubt, but will as surely rise again, and that
upheaval will astound the world. The lower the hollows the billows make,
the higher and with greater force will they rise again.

Disciple: How will India rise again?

Swamiji: Do you not see? The dawn has already appeared in the eastern
sky, and there is little delay in the sun's rising. You all set your
shoulders to the wheel! What is there in making the world all in all,
and thinking of "My Samsâra (family and property), my Samsâra"? Your
duty at present is to go from one part of the country to another, from
village to village, and make the people understand that mere sitting
idly won't do any more. Make them understand their real condition and
say, "O ye brothers, arise! Awake! How much longer would you remain
asleep!" Go and advise them how to improve their own condition, and make
them comprehend the sublime truths of the Shâstras (scriptures), by
presenting them in a lucid and popular way. So long the Brahmins have
monopolised religion; but since they cannot hold their ground against
the strong tide of time, go and take steps so that one and all in the
land may get that religion. Impress upon their minds that they have the
same right to religion as the Brahmins. Initiate all, even down to the
Chandâlas (people of the lowest castes), in these fiery Mantras. Also
instruct them, in simple words, about the necessities of life, and in
trade, commerce, agriculture, etc. If you cannot do this then fie upon
your education and culture, and fie upon your studying the Vedas and
Vedanta!

Disciple: But where is that strength in us? I should have felt myself
blessed if I had a hundredth part of your powers, Swamiji.

Swamiji: How foolish! Power and things like that will come by
themselves. Put yourself to work, and you will final such tremendous
power coming to you that you will feel it hard to bear. Even the least
work done for others awakens the power within; even thinking the least
good of others gradually instils into the heart the strength of a lion.
I love you all ever so much, but I wish you all to die working for
others — I should rather be glad to see you do that!

Disciple: What will become of those, then, who depend on me?

Swamiji: If you are ready to sacrifice your life for others, God will
certainly provide some means for them. Have you not read in the Gita
(VI. 40) the words of Shri Krishna, "न हि कल्याणकृत्कश्चित् दुर्गतिं तात
गच्छति — Never does a doer of good, O my beloved, come to grief"?

Disciple: I see, sir.

Swamiji: The essential thing is renunciation. With out renunciation none
can pour out his whole heart in working for others. The man of
renunciation sees all with an equal eye and devotes himself to the
service of all. Does not our Vedanta also teach us to see all with an
equal eye? Why then do you cherish the idea that the wife and children
are your own, more than others? At your very threshold, Nârâyana Himself
in the form of a poor beggar is dying of starvation! Instead of giving
him anything, would you only satisfy the appetites of your wife and
children with delicacies? Why, that is beastly!

Disciple: To work for others requires a good deal of money at times, and
where shall I get that?

Swamiji: Why not do as much as lies within your power? Even if you
cannot give to others for want of money, surely you can at least breathe
into their ears some good words or impart some good instruction, can't
you? Or does that also require money?

Disciple: Yes, sir, that I can do.

Swamiji: But saying, "I can", won't do. Show me through action what you
can do, and then only I shall know that your coming to me is turned to
some good account. Get up, and put your shoulders to the wheel — how
long is this life for? As you have come into this world, leave some mark
behind. Otherwise, where is the difference between you and the trees and
stones? They, too, come into existence, decay and die. If you like to be
born and to die like them, you are at liberty to do so. Show me by your
actions that your reading the Vedanta has been fruitful of the highest
good. Go and tell all, "In every one of you lies that Eternal Power",
and try to wake It up. What will you do with individual salvation? That
is sheer selfishness. Throw aside your meditation, throw away your
salvation and such things! Put your whole heart and soul in the work to
which I have consecrated myself.

With bated breath the disciple heard these inspiring words, and Swamiji
went on with his usual fire and eloquence.

Swamiji: First of all, make the soil ready, and thousands of
Vivekanandas will in time be born into this world to deliver lectures on
religion. You needn't worry yourself about that! Don't you see why I am
starting orphanages, famine-relief works, etc.? Don't you see how Sister
Nivedita, a British lady, has learnt to serve Indians so well, by doing
even menial work for them? And can't you, being Indians, similarly serve
your own fellow-countrymen? Go, all of you, wherever there is an
outbreak of plague or famine, or wherever the people are in distress,
and mitigate their sufferings. At the most you may die in the attempt —
what of that? How many like you are being born and dying like worms
every day? What difference does that make to the world at large? Die you
must, but have a great ideal to die for, and it is better to die with a
great ideal in life. Preach this ideal from door to door, and you will
yourselves be benefited by it at the same time that you are doing good
to your country. On you lie the future hopes of our country. I feel
extreme pain to see you leading a life of inaction. Set yourselves to
work — to work! Do not tarry — the time of death is approaching day by
day! Do not sit idle, thinking that everything will be done in time,
later on! Mind — nothing will be done that way!

XII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_24e5_12.pdf)* )

RECONCILIATION OF JNANA AND BHAKTI — SAT-CHIT-ANANDA — HOW SECTARIANISM
ORIGINATES — BRING IN SHRADDHA AND THE WORSHIP OF SHAKTI AND AVATARAS —
THE IDEAL OF THE HERO WE WANT NOW, NOT THE MADHURA-BHAVA — SHRI
RAMAKRISHNA — AVATARAS

Disciple: Pray, Swamiji, how can Jnâna and Bhakti be reconciled? We see
the followers of the path of devotion (Bhaktas) close their ears at the
name of Shankara, and again, the followers of the path of knowledge
(Jnanis) call the Bhaktas fanatics, seeing them weep in torrents, or
sing and dance in ecstasy, in the name of the Lord.

Swamiji: The thing is, all this conflict is in the preliminary
(preparatory) stages of Jnana and Bhakti. Have you not heard Shri
Ramakrishna's story about Shiva's demons and Râma's monkeys?[1](#fn1)

Disciple: Yes, sir, I have.

Swamiji: But there is no difference between the supreme Bhakti and the
supreme Jnana. The supreme Bhakti is to realise God as the form of Prema
(love) itself. If you see the loving form of God manifest everywhere and
in everything, how can you hate or injure others? That realisation of
love can never come so long as there is the least desire in the heart,
or what Shri Ramakrishna used to say, attachment for Kâma-Kânchana
(sense-pleasure and wealth). In the perfect realisation of love, even
the consciousness of one's own body does not exist. Also, the supreme
Jnana is to realise the oneness everywhere, to see one's own self as the
Self in everything. That too cannot come so long as there is the least
consciousness of the ego (Aham).

Disciple: Then what you call love is the same as supreme knowledge?

Swamiji: Exactly so. Realisation of love comes to none unless one
becomes a perfect Jnani. Does not the Vedanta say that Brahman is
Sat-Chit-Ânanda — the absolute Existence-Knowledge-Bliss?

Disciple: Yes, sir.

Swamiji: The phrase Sat-Chit-Ananda means — Sat, i.e. existence, Chit,
i.e. consciousness or knowledge, and Ananda, i.e. bliss which is the
same as love. There is no controversy between the Bhakta and the Jnani
regarding the Sat aspect of Brahman. Only, the Jnanis lay greater stress
on His aspect of Chit or knowledge, while the Bhaktas keep the aspect of
Ananda or love more in view. But no sooner is the essence of Chit
realised than the essence of Ananda is also realised. Because what is
Chit is verily the same as Ananda.

Disciple: Why then is so much sectarianism prevalent in India? And why
is there so much controversy between the scriptures on Bhakti and Jnana?

Swamiji: The thing is, all this waging of war and controversy is
concerning the preliminary ideals, i.e. those ideals which men take up
to attain the real Jnana or real Bhakti. But which do you think is the
higher — the end or the means? Surely, the means can never be higher
than the end, because the means to realise the same end must be
numerous, as they vary according to the temperament or mental capacities
of individual followers. The counting of beads, meditation, worship,
offering oblations in the sacred fire — all these and such other things
are the limbs of religion; they are but means; and to attain to supreme
devotion (Parâ-Bhakti) or to the highest realisation of Brahman is the
pre-eminent end. If you look a little deeper, you will understand what
they are fighting about. One says, "If you pray to God facing the East,
then you will reach Him." "No," says another, "you will have to sit
facing the West, and then only you will see Him." Perhaps someone
realised God in meditation, ages ago, by sitting with his face to the
East, and his disciples at once began to preach this attitude, asserting
that none can ever see God unless he assumes this position. Another
party comes forward and inquires, "How is that? Such and such a person
realised God while facing the West, and we have seen this ourselves." In
this way all these sects have originated. Someone might have attained
supreme devotion by repeating the name of the Lord as Hari, and at once
it entered into the composition of the Shâstra as:

हरेर्नाम हरेर्नाम हरेर्नामैव केवलम् ।  
कलौ नास्त्येव नास्त्येव नास्त्येव गतिरन्यथा ॥

— "The name of the Lord Hari, the name of the Lord Hari, the name of the
Lord Hari alone. Verily, there is no other, no other, no other path than
this in the age of Kali."

Someone, again, let us suppose, might have attained perfection with the
name of Allah, and immediately another creed originated by him began to
spread, and so on. But we have to see what is the end to which all these
forms of worship and other religious practices are intended to lead. The
end is Shraddhâ. We have not any synonym in our Bengali language to
express the Sanskrit word Shraddha. The (Katha) Upanishad says that
Shraddha entered into the heart of Nachiketâ. Even with the word
Ekâgratâ (one-pointedness) we cannot express the whole significance of
the word Shraddha. The word Ekâgranishthâ (one-pointed devotion)
conveys, to a certain extent, the meaning of the word Shraddha. If you
meditate on any truth with steadfast devotion and concentration, you
will see that the mind is more and more tending onwards to Oneness, i.e.
taking you towards the realisation of the absolute
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss. The scriptures on Bhakti or Jnana give
special advice to men to take up in life the one or the other of such
Nishthas (scrupulous persistence) and make it their own. With the lapse
of ages, these great truths become distorted and gradually transform
themselves into Deshâchâras or the prevailing customs of a country. It
has happened, not only in India, but in every nation and every society
in the world. And the common people, lacking in discrimination, make
these the bone of contention and fight among themselves. They have lost
sight of the end, and hence sectarianism, quarrels, and fights continue.

Disciple: What then is the saving means, Swamiji?

Swamiji: That true Shraddha, as of old, has to be brought back again.
The weeds have to be taken up by the roots. In every faith and in every
path, there are, no doubt, truths which transcend time and space, but a
good deal of rubbish has accumulated over them. This has to be cleared
away, and the true eternal principles have to be held before the people;
and then only, our religion and our country will be really benefited.

Disciple: How will that be effected?

Swamiji: Why, first of all, we have to introduce the worship of the
great saints. Those great-souled ones who have realised the eternal
truths are to be presented before the people as the ideas to be
followed; as in the case of India — Shri Râmachandra, Shri Krishna,
Mahâvira and Shri Ramakrishna, among others. Can you bring in the
worship of Shri Ramachandra and Mahavira in this country? Keep aside for
the present the Vrindâvan aspect of Shri Krishna, and spread far and
wide the worship of Shri Krishna roaring the Gita out, with the voice of
a Lion. And bring into daily use the worship of Shakti — the divine
Mother, the source of all power.

Disciple: Is the divine play of Shri Krishna with the Gopis of Vrindavan
not good, then?

Swamiji: Under the present circumstances, that worship is of no good to
you. Playing on the flute and so on will not regenerate the country. We
now mostly need the ideal of a hero with the tremendous spirit of Rajas
thrilling through his veins from head to foot — the hero who will dare
and die to know the Truth — the hero whose armour is renunciation, whose
sword is wisdom. We want now the spirit of the brave warrior in the
battlefield of life, and not of the wooing lover who looks upon life as
a pleasure-garden!

Disciple: Is then the path of love, as depicted in the ideal of the
Gopis, false?

Swamiji: Who says so? Not I! That is a very superior form of worship
(Sâdhanâ). In this age of tremendous attachment to sense-pleasure and
wealth, very few are able even to comprehend those higher ideals.

Disciple: Then are not those who are worshipping God as husband or lover
(Madhura) following the proper path?

Swamiji: I dare say not. There may be a few honourable exceptions among
them, but know, that the greater part of them are possessed of dark
Tâmasika nature. Most of them are full of morbidity and affected with
exceptional weakness. The country must be raised. The worship of
Mahavira must be introduced; the Shakti-pujâ must form a part of our
daily practice; Shri Ramachandra must be worshipped in every home.
Therein lies your welfare, therein lies the good of the country — there
is no other way.

Disciple: But I have heard that Bhagavan Shri Ramakrishna used to sing
the name of God very much?

Swamiji: Quite so, but his was a different case. What comparison can
there be between him and ordinary men? He practiced in his life all the
different ideals of religion to show that each of them leads but to the
One Truth. Shall you or I ever be able to do all that he has done? None
of us has understood him fully. So, I do not venture to speak about him
anywhere and everywhere. He only knows what he himself really was; his
frame was a human one only, but everything else about him was entirely
different from others.

Disciple: Do you, may I ask, believe him to be an Avatara (Incarnation
of God)?

Swamiji: Tell me first — what do you mean by an Avatara?

Disciple: Why, I mean one like Shri Ramachandra, Shri Krishna, Shri
Gauranga, Buddha, Jesus, and others.

Swamiji: I know Bhagavan Shri Ramakrishna to be even greater than those
you have just named. What to speak of believing, which is a petty thing
— I *know*! Let us, however, drop the subject now; more of it another
time.

After a pause Swamiji continued: To re-establish the Dharma, there come
Mahâpurushas (great teachers of humanity), suited to the needs of the
times and society. Call them what you will — either Mahapurushas or
Avataras — it matters little. They reveal, each in his life, the ideal.
Then, by degrees, shapes are moulded in their matrices — MEN are made!
Gradually, sects arise and spread. As time goes on, these sects
degenerate, and similar reformers come again. This has been the law
flowing in uninterrupted succession, like a current, down the ages.

Disciple: Why do you not preach Shri Ramakrishna as an Avatara? You
have, indeed, power, eloquence, and everything else needed to do it.

Swamiji: Truly, I tell you, I have understood him very little. He
appears to me to have been so great that, whenever I have to speak
anything of him, I am afraid lest I ignore or explain away the truth,
lest my little power does not suffice, lest in trying to extol him I
present his picture by painting him according to my lights and belittle
him thereby!

Disciple: But many are now preaching him as an Avatara.

Swamiji: Let them do so if they like. They are doing it in the light in
which they have understood him. You too can go and do the same, if you
have understood him.

Disciple: I cannot even grasp you, what to say of Shri Ramakrishna! I
should consider myself blessed in this life if I get a little of Your
grace.

XIII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_23e5_13.pdf)* )

BRAHMAN AND DIFFERENTIATION — PERSONAL REALISATION OF ONENESS — SUPREME
BLISS IS THE GOAL OF ALL — THINK ALWAYS, I AM BRAHMAN — DISCRIMINATION
AND RENUNCIATION ARE THE MEANS — BE FEARLESS

Disciple: Pray, Swamiji, if the one Brahman is the only Reality, why
then exists all this differentiation in the world?

Swamiji: Are you not considering this question from the point of view of
phenomenal existence? Looking from the phenomenal side of existence, one
can, through reasoning and discrimination, gradually arrive at the very
root of Unity. But if you were firmly established in that Unity, how
from that standpoint, tell me, could you see this differentiation?

Disciple: True, if I had existed in the Unity, how should I be able to
raise this question of "why"? As I put this question, it is already
taken for granted that I do so by seeing this diversity.

Swamiji: Very well. To enquire about the root of Oneness through the
diversity of phenomenal existence is named by the Shâstras as Vyatireki
reasoning, or the process of arguing by the indirect method, that is,
Adhyâropa and Apavâda, first taking for granted something that is
nonexistent or unreal as existing or real, and then showing through the
course of reasoning that that is not a substance existing or real. You
are talking of the process of arriving at the truth through assuming
that which is not-true as true — are you not?

Disciple: To my mind, the state of the existing or the seen seems to be
self-evident, and hence true, and that which is opposite to it seems, on
the other hand, to be unreal.

Swamiji: But the Vedas say, "One only without a second". And if in
reality there is the One only that exists — the Brahman — then, your
differentiation is false. You believe in the Vedas, I suppose?

Disciple: Oh, yes, for me self I hold the Vedas as the highest
authority; but if, in argument, one does not accept them to be so, one
must, in that case, have to be refuted by other means.

Swamiji: That also can be done. Look here, a time comes when what you
call differentiation vanishes, and we cannot perceive it at all. I have
experienced that state in my own life.

Disciple: When have you done so?

Swamiji: One day in the temple-garden at Dakshineswar Shri Ramakrishna
touched me over the heart, and first of all I began to see that the
houses — rooms, doors, windows, verandahs — the trees, the sun, the moon
— all were flying off, shattering to pieces as it were — reduced to
atoms and molecules — and ultimately became merged in the Âkâsha.
Gradually again, the Akasha also vanished, and after that, my
consciousness of the ego with it; what happened next I do not recollect.
I was at first frightened. Coming back from that state, again I began to
see the houses, doors, windows, verandahs, and other things. On another
occasion, I had exactly the same realisation by the side of a lake in
America.

Disciple: Might not this state as well be brought about by a derangement
of the brain? And I do not understand what happiness there can be in
realising such a state.

Swamiji: A derangement of the brain! How can you call it so, when it
comes neither as the result of delirium from any disease, nor of
intoxication from drinking, nor as an illusion produced by various sorts
of queer breathing exercises — but when it comes to a normal man in full
possession of his health and wits? Then again, this experience is in
perfect harmony with the Vedas. It also coincides with the words of
realisation of the inspired Rishis and Âchâryas of old. Do you take me,
at last, to be a crack-brained man? (smiling).

Disciple: Oh, no, I did not mean that of course. When there are to be
found hundreds of illustrations about such realisation of Oneness in the
Shastras, and when you say that it can be as directly realised as a
fruit in the palm of one's hand, and when it has been your own personal
experience in life, perfectly coinciding with the words of the Vedas and
other Shastras — how dare I say that it is false? Shri Shankaracharya
also realising that state has said, "Where is the universe vanished? "
and so on.

Swamiji: Know — this knowledge of Oneness is what the Shastras speak of
as realisation of the Brahman, by knowing which, one gets rid of fear,
and the shackles of birth and death break for ever. Having once realised
that Supreme Bliss, one is no more overwhelmed by pleasure and pain of
this world. Men being fettered by base lust-and-wealth cannot enjoy that
Bliss of Brahman.

Disciple: If it is so, and if we are really of the essence of the
Supreme Brahman, then why do we not exert ourselves to gain that Bliss?
Why do we again and again run into the jaws of death, being decoyed by
this worthless snare of lust-and-wealth?

Swamiji: You speak as if man does not desire to have that Bliss! Ponder
over it, and you will see that whatever anyone is doing, he is doing in
the hope of gaining that Supreme Bliss. Only, not everyone is conscious
of it and so cannot understand it. That Supreme Bliss fully exists in
all, from Brahmâ down to the blade of grass. You are also that undivided
Brahman. This very moment you can realise if you think yourself truly
and absolutely to be so. It is all mere want of direct perception. That
you have taken service and work so hard for the sake of your wife also
shows that the aim is ultimately to attain to that Supreme Bliss of
Brahman. Being again and again entangled in the intricate maze of
delusion and hard hit by sorrows and afflictions, the eye will turn of
itself to one's own real nature, the Inner Self. It is owing to the
presence of this desire for bliss in the heart, that man, getting hard
shocks one after another, turns his eye inwards — to his own Self. A
time is sure to come to everyone, without exception, when he will do so
to one it may be in this life, to another, after thousands of
incarnations.

Disciple: It all depends upon the blessings of the Guru and the grace of
the Lord!

Swamiji: The wind of grace of the Lord is blowing on, for ever and ever.
Do you spread your sail. Whenever you do anything, do it with your whole
heart concentrated on it. Think day and night, "I am of the essence of
that Supreme Existence-Knowledge-Bliss — what fear and anxiety have I?
This body, mind, and intellect are all transient, and That which is
beyond these is myself."

Disciple: Thoughts like these come only for a while now and then, but
quickly vanish, and I think all sorts of trash and nonsense.

Swamiji: It happens like that in the initial stage, but gradually it is
overcome. But from the beginning, intensity of desire in the mind is
needed. Think always, "I am ever-pure, ever-knowing, and ever-free; how
can I do anything evil? Can I ever be befooled like ordinary men with
the insignificant charms of lust and wealth?" Strengthen the mind with
such thoughts. This will surely bring real good.

Disciple: Once in a while strength of mind comes. But then again I think
that if I would appear at the Deputy Magistrateship Examination, wealth
and name and fame would come and I should live well and happy.

Swamiji: Whenever such thoughts come in the mind, discriminate within
yourself between the real and the unreal. Have you not read the Vedanta?
Even when you sleep, keep the sword of discrimination at the head of
your bed, so that covetousness cannot approach you even in dream.
Practising such strength, renunciation will gradually come, and then you
will see — the portals of heaven are wide open to you.

Disciple: If it is so, Swamiji, how is it then that the texts on Bhakti
say that too much of renunciation kills the feelings that make for
tenderness?

Swamiji: Throw away, I say, texts which teach things like that! Without
renunciation, without burning dispassion for sense-objects, without
turning away from wealth and lust as from filthy abomination — "न
सिध्यति ब्रह्मशतान्तरेऽपि — never can one attain salvation even in
hundreds of Brahma's cycles". Repeating the names of the Lord,
meditation, worship, offering libations in sacred fire, penance — all
these are for bringing forth renunciation. One who has not gained
renunciation, know his efforts to be like unto those of the man who is
pulling at the oars all the while that the boat is at anchor. "न प्रजया
धनेन त्यागेनैके अमृतत्वमानशुः — Neither by progeny nor by wealth, but by
renunciation alone some (rare ones) attained immortality" (Kaivalya
Upanishad, 3).

Disciple: Will mere renouncing of wealth and lust accomplish everything?

Swamiji: There are other hindrances on the path even after renouncing
those two; then, for example, comes name and fame. Very few men, unless
of exceptional strength, can keep their balance under that. People
shower honours upon them, and various enjoyments creep in by degrees. It
is owing to this that three-fourths of the Tyâgis are debarred from
further progress! For establishing this Math and other things, who knows
but that I may have to come back again!

Disciple: If you say things like that, then we are undone!

Swamiji: What fear? "अभीरभीरभीः — Be fearless, be fearless, be
fearless!" You have seen Nâg Mahâshaya how even while living the life of
a householder, he is more than a Sannyâsin! This is very uncommon; I
have rarely seen one like him. If anyone wants to be a householder, let
him be like Nag Mahashaya. He shines like a brilliant luminary in the
spiritual firmament of East Bengal. Ask the people of that part of the
country to visit him often; that will do much good to them.

Disciple: Nag Mahashaya, it seems, is the living personification of
humility in the play of Shri Ramakrishna's divine drama on earth.

Swamiji: Decidedly so, without a shadow of doubt! I have a wish to go
and see him once. Will you go with, me? I love to see fields flooded
over with water in the rains. Will you write to him?

Disciple: Certainly I will. He is always mad with joy when he hears
about you, and says that East Bengal will be sanctified into a place of
pilgrimage by the dust of your feet.

Swamiji: Do you know, Shri Ramakrishna used to speak of Nag Mahashaya as
a "flaming fire"?

Disciple: Yes, so I have heard.

At the request of Swamiji, the disciple partook of some Prasâda
(consecrated food), and left for Calcutta late in the evening; he was
deeply thinking over the message of fearlessness that he had heard from
the lips of the inspired teacher — "I am free!" "I am free!"

XIV  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_25e5_14.pdf)* )

RENUNCIATION OF KAMA-KANCHANA — GOD'S MERCY FALLS ON THOSE WHO STRUGGLE
FOR REALISATION — UNCONDITIONAL MERCY AND BRAHMAN ARE ONE

Disciple: Shri Ramakrishna used to say, Swamiji, that a man cannot
progress far towards religious realisation unless he first relinquishes
Kâma-Kânchana (lust and greed). If so, what will become of householders?
For their whole minds are set on these two things.

Swamiji: It is true that the mind can never turn to God until the desire
for lust and wealth has gone from it, be the man a householder or a
Sannyâsin. Know this for a fact, that as long as the mind is caught in
these, so long true devotion, firmness, and Shraddhâ (faith) can never
come.

Disciple: Where will the householders be, then? What way are they to
follow?

Swamiji: To satisfy our smaller desires and have done with them for
ever, and to relinquish the greater ones by discrimination — that is the
way. Without renunciation God can never be realised — यदि ब्रह्मा स्वयं
वदेत् — even if Brahma himself enjoined otherwise!

Disciple: But does renunciation of everything come as soon as one
becomes a monk?

Swamiji: Sannyasins are at least struggling to make themselves ready for
renunciation, whereas householders are in this matter like boatmen who
work at their oars while the boat lies at anchor. Is the desire for
enjoyment ever appeased "भूय एवाभिवर्धते — It increases ever and ever"
(Bhâgavata, IX. xix. 14).

Disciple: Why? May not world-weariness come, after enjoying the objects
of the senses over and over for a long time?

Swamiji: To how many does that come? The mind becomes tarnished by
constant contact with the objects of the senses and receives a permanent
moulding and impress from them. Renunciation, and renunciation alone, is
the real secret, the Mulamantra, of all Realisation.

Disciple: But there are such injunctions of the seers in the scriptures
as these: "गृहेषु पञ्चेन्द्रियनिग्रहस्तपः — To restrain the five senses
while living with one's wife and children is Tapas." "निवृत्तरागस्य गृहं
तपोवनम् — For him whose desires are under control, living in the midst
of his family is the same as retiring into a forest for Tapasya."

Swamiji. Blessed indeed are those who can renounce Kama-Kanchana, living
in their homes with their family! But how many can do that?

Disciple: But then, what about the Sannyasins? Are they all able to
relinquish lust and love for riches fully?

Swamiji: As I said just now, Sannyasins are on the path of renunciation,
they have taken the field, at least, to fight for the goal; but
householders, on the other hand, having no knowledge as yet of the
danger that comes through lust and greed, do not even attempt to realise
the Self; that they must struggle to get rid of these is an idea that
has not yet entered their minds.

Disciple: But many of them are struggling for it.

Swamiji: Oh, yes, and those who are doing so will surely renounce by
degrees; their inordinate attachment for Kama-Kanchana will diminish
gradually. But for those who procrastinate, saying, "Oh, not so soon! I
shall do it when the time comes", Self-realisation is very far off. "Let
me realise the Truth this moment! In this very life!" — these are the
words of a hero. Such heroes are ever ready to renounce the very next
moment, and to such the scripture (Jâbâla Upanishad, 3.) says, "यदहरेव
विरजेत् तदहरेव प्रव्रजेत — The moment you feel disgust for the vanities
of the world, leave it all and take to the life of a monk."

Disciple: But was not Shri Ramakrishna wont to say, "All these
attachments vanish through the grace of God when one prays to Him?"

Swamiji: Yes, it is so, no doubt, through His mercy, but one needs to be
pure first before one can receive this mercy — pure in thought, word,
and deed; then it is that His grace descends on one.

Disciple: But of what necessity is grace to him who can control himself
in thought, word, and deed? For then he would be able to develop himself
in the path of spirituality by means of his own exertions!

Swamiji: The Lord is very merciful to him whom He sees struggling heart
and soul for Realisation. But remain idle, without any struggle, and you
will see that His grace will never come.

Disciple: Everyone longs to be good, yet the mind for some inscrutable
reasons, turns to evil! Does not everyone wish to be good — to be
perfect — to realise God?

Swamiji: Know them to be already struggling who desire this. God bestows
His mercy when this struggle is maintained.

Disciple: In the history of the Incarnations, we find many persons who,
we should say, had led very dissipated lives and yet were able to
realise God without much trouble and without performing any Sâdhanâ or
devotion. How is this accounted for?

Swamiji: Yes, but a great restlessness must already have come upon them;
long enjoyment of the objects of the senses must already have created in
them deep disgust. Want of peace must have been consuming their very
hearts. So deeply they had already felt this void in their hearts that
life even for a moment had seemed unbearable to them unless they could
gain that peace which follows in the train of the Lord's mercy. So God
was kind to them. This development took place in them direct from Tamas
to Sattva.

Disciple: Then, whatever was the path, they may be said to have realised
God truly in that way?

Swamiji: Yes, why not? But is it not better to enter into a mansion by
the main entrance than by its doorway of dishonour?

Disciple: No doubt that is true. Yet, the point is established that
through mercy alone one can realise God.

Swamiji: Oh, yes, that one can, but few indeed are there who do so!

Disciple: It appears to me that those who seek to realise God by
restraining their senses and renouncing lust and wealth hold to the
(free-will) theory of self-exertion and self-help; and that those who
take the name of the Lord and depend on Him are made free by the Lord
Himself of all worldly attachments, and led by Him to the supreme stage
of realisation.

Swamiji: True, those are the two different standpoints, the former held
by the Jnânis, and the latter by the Bhaktas. But the ideal of
renunciation is the keynote of both.

Disciple: No doubt about that! But Shri Girish Chandra Ghosh (The great
Bengali actor-dramatist, a staunch devotee of Shri Ramakrishna.) once
said to me that there could be no condition in God's mercy; there could
be no law for it! If there were, then it could no longer be termed
mercy. The realm of grace or mercy must transcend all law.

Swamiji: But there must be some higher law at work in the sphere alluded
to by G. C. of which we are ignorant. Those are words, indeed, for the
last stage of development, which alone is beyond time, space, and
causation. But, when we get there, who will be merciful, and to whom,
where there is no law of causation? There the worshipper and the
worshipped, the meditator and the object of meditation, the knower and
the known, all become one — call that Grace or Brahman, if you will. It
is all one uniform homogeneous entity!

Disciple: Hearing these words from you, Swamiji, I have come to
understand the essence of all philosophy and religion (Vedas and
Vedanta); it seems as if I had hitherto been living in the midst of
high-sounding words without any meaning.

XV  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_26e5_15.pdf)* )

DOCTRINE OF AHIMSA AND MEAT-EATING — SATTVA, RAJAS, TAMAS IN MAN — FOOD
AND SPIRITUALITY — 'ÂHÂRA' — THREE DEFECTS IN FOOD — DON'T-TOUCHISM AND
CASTE-PREJUDICES — RESTORING THE OLD CHATURVARNYA AND THE LAWS OF THE
RISHIS

Disciple: Pray, Swamiji, do tell me if there is any relation between the
discrimination of food taken and the development of spirituality in man.

Swamiji: Yes, there is, more or less.

Disciple: Is it proper or necessary to take fish and meat?

Swamiji: Ay, take them, my boy! And if there be any harm in doing so, I
will take care of that. Look at the masses of our country! What a look
of sadness on their faces and want of courage and enthusiasm in their
hearts, with large stomachs and no strength in their hands and feet — a
set of cowards frightened at every trifle!

Disciple: Does the taking of fish and meat give strength? Why do
Buddhism and Vaishnavism preach "अहिंसा परमो धर्मः — Non-killing is the
highest virtue"?

Swamiji: Buddhism and Vaishnavism are not two different things. During
the decline of Buddhism in India, Hinduism took from her a few cardinal
tenets of conduct and made them her own, and these have now come to be
known as Vaishnavism. The Buddhist tenet, "Non-killing is supreme
virtue", is very good, but in trying to enforce it upon all by
legislation without paying any heed to the capacities of the people at
large, Buddhism has brought ruin upon India. I have come across many a
"religious heron"![2](#fn2) in India, who fed ants with sugar, and at
the same time would not hesitate to bring ruin on his own brother for
the sake of "filthy lucre"!

Disciple: But in the Vedas as well as in the laws of Manu, there are
injunctions to take fish and meat.

Swamiji: Ay, and injunctions to abstain from killing as well. For the
Vedas enjoin, "मा हिंस्यात् सर्वभूतानि — Cause no injury to any being";
Manu also says, "निवृत्तिस्तु महाफला — Cessation of desire brings great
results." Killing and non-killing have both been enjoined, according to
the individual capacity, or fitness and adaptability on those who will
observe the one practice or the other.

Disciple: It is the fashion here nowadays to give up fish and meat as
soon as one takes to religion, and to many it is more sinful not to do
so than to commit such great sins as adultery. How, do you think, such
notions came into existence?

Swamiji: What's the use of your knowing how they came, when you see
clearly, do you not, that such notions are working ruin to our country
and our society? Just see — the people of East Bengal eat much fish,
meat, and turtle, and they are much healthier than those of this part of
Bengal. Even the rich men of East Bengal have not yet taken to Loochis
or Châpâtis at night, and they do not suffer from acidity and dyspepsia
like us. I have heard that in the villages of East Bengal the people
have not the slightest idea of what dyspepsia means!

Disciple: Quite so, Swamiji. We never complain of dyspepsia in our part
of the country. I first heard of it after coming to these parts. We take
fish with rice, mornings and evenings.

Swamiji: Yes, take as much of that as you can, without fearing
criticism. The country has been flooded with dyspeptic Bâbâjis living on
vegetables only. That is no sign of Sattva, but of deep Tamas — the
shadow of death. Brightness in the face, undaunted enthusiasm in the
heart, and tremendous activity — these result from Sattva; whereas
idleness, lethargy, inordinate attachment, and sleep are the signs of
Tamas.

Disciple: But do not fish and meat increase Rajas in man?

Swamiji: That is what I want you to have. Rajas is badly needed just
now! More than ninety per cent of those whom you now take to be men with
the Sattva, quality are only steeped in the deepest Tamas. Enough, if
you find one-sixteenth of them to be really Sâttvika! What we want now
is an immense awakening of Râjasika energy, for the whole country is
wrapped in the shroud of Tamas. The people of this land must be fed and
clothed — must be awakened — must be made more fully active. Otherwise
they will become inert, as inert as trees and stones. So, I say, eat
large quantities of fish and meat, my boy!

Disciple: Does a liking for fish and meat remain when one has fully
developed the Sattva quality?

Swamiji: No, it does not. All liking for fish and meat disappears when
pure Sattva is highly developed, and these are the signs of its
manifestation in a soul: sacrifice of everything for others, perfect
non-attachment to lust and wealth, want of pride and egotism. The desire
for animal food goes when these things are seen in a man. And where such
indications are absent, and yet you find men siding with the non-killing
party, know it for a certainty that herein, there is either hypocrisy or
a show of religion. When you yourself come to that stage of pure Sattva,
give up fish and meat, by all means.

Disciple: In the Chhândogya Upanishad (VII. xxvi. 2) there is this
passage, "आहारशुद्धौ सत्त्वशुद्धिः — Through pure food the Sattva
quality in a man becomes pure."

Swamiji: Yes, I know. Shankarâchârya has said that the word Âhâra there
means "objects of the senses", whereas Shri Râmânuja has taken the
meaning of Ahara to be "food". In my opinion we should take that meaning
of the word which reconciles both these points of view. Are we to pass
our lives discussing all the time about the purity and impurity of food
only, or are we to practice the restraining of our senses? Surely, the
restraining of the senses is the main object; and the discrimination of
good and bad, pure and impure foods, only helps one, to a certain
extent, in gaining that end. There are, according to our scriptures,
three things which make food impure: (1) Jâti-dosha or natural defects
of a certain class of food, like onions, garlic, etc.; (2) Nimitta-dosha
or defects arising from the presence of external impurities in it, such
as dead insects, dust, etc. that attach to sweetmeats bought from shops;
(3) Âshraya-dosha or defects that arise by the food coming from evil
sources, as when it has been touched and handled by wicked persons.
Special care should be taken to avoid the first and second classes of
defects. But in this country men pay no regard just to these two, and go
on fighting for the third alone, the very one that none but a Yogi could
really discriminate! The country from end to end is being bored to
extinction by the cry, "Don't touch", "Don't touch", of the non-touchism
party. In that exclusive circle of theirs, too, there is no
discrimination of good and bad men, for their food may be taken from the
hands of anyone who wears a thread round his neck and calls himself a
Brâhmin! Shri Ramakrishna was quite unable to take food in this
indiscriminate way from the hands of any and all. It happened many a
time that he would not accept food touched by a certain person or
persons, and on rigorous investigation it would turn out that these had
some particular stain to hide. Your religion seems nowadays to be
confined to the cooking-pot alone. You put on one side the sublime
truths of religion and fight, as they say, for the skin of the fruit and
not for the fruit itself!

Disciple: Do you mean, then, that we should eat the food handled by
anyone and everyone?

Swamiji: Why so? Look here. You being Brahmin of a certain class, say,
of the Bhattâcharya class, why should you not eat rice cooked by
Brahmins of all classes? Why should you, who belong to the Rârhi
section, object to taking rice cooked by a Brahmin of the Barendra
section, or why should a Barendra object to taking your rice? Again, why
should not the other subcastes in the west and south of India, e.g. the
Marathi, Telangi, Kanouji, do the same? Do you not see that hundreds of
Brahmins and Kâyasthas in Bengal now go secretly to eat dainties in
public restaurants, and when they come out of those places pose as
leaders of society and frame rules to support don't-touchism. Must our
society really be guided by laws dictated by such hypocrites? No, I say.
On the contrary we must turn them out. The laws laid down by the great
Rishis of old must be brought back and be made to rule supreme once
more. Then alone can national well-being be ours.

Disciple: Then, do not the laws laid down by the Rishis rule and guide
our present society?

Swamiji: Vain delusion! Where indeed is that the case nowadays? Nowhere
have I found the laws of the Rishis current in India, even when during
my travels I searched carefully and thoroughly. The blind and not
unoften meaningless customs sanctioned by the people, local prejudices
and ideas, and the usages and ceremonials prevalent amongst women, are
what really govern society everywhere! How many care to read the
Shâstras or to lead society according to their ordinances after careful
study?

Disciple: What are we to do, then?

Swamiji: We must revive the old laws of the Rishis. We must initiate the
whole people into the codes of our old Manu and Yâjnavalkya, with a few
modifications here and there to adjust them to the changed circumstances
of the time. Do you not see that nowhere in India now are the original
four castes (Châturvarnya) to be found? We have to redivide the whole
Hindu population, grouping it under the four main castes, of Brahmins,
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and Shudras, as of old. The numberless modern
subdivisions of the Brahmins that split them up into so many castes, as
it were, have to be abolished and a single Brahmin caste to be made by
uniting them all. Each of the three remaining castes also will have to
be brought similarly into single groups, as was the case in Vedic times.
Without this will the Motherland be really benefited by your simply
crying as you do nowadays, "We won't touch you!; We won't take him back
into our caste!"? Never, my boy!

</div>

1.  [^](#txt1)There was once a fight between Shiva and Rama. Shiva was
    the Guru of Rama, and Rama was the Guru of Shiva. They fought but
    became friendly again. But there was no end to the quarrels and
    wranglings between the demons of Shiva and the monkeys of Rama.
2.  [^](#txt2)Meaning, religious hypocrite. The heron, so the story
    goes, gave it out to the fishes that he had forsaken his old habit
    of catching fish and turned highly religious. So he took his stand
    on the brink of the water and feigned to be meditating, while in
    reality he was always hatching his opportunity to catch the unwary
    fish
