+++
title = "A case report in bhUtavidyA"

+++
S has a remarkable collection of tales concerning her observations at
the interface between disease, folk tAntrika ritual and the high realms
of mantra prayoga. With her permission I retell a few. She had agreed to
revisit this topic many years back but her niece came in the way that
time :-) In the mean time, she consulted her notes and got a chance to
tell us some of the tales, of which we shall reproduce one here in our
own words:

When she was an intern before leaving for the shores of the krau\~ncha
continent, she encountered one such case. A juvenile male patient was
afflicted by pains in his legs and knees. He was taken to a practitioner
of modern medicine who treated him with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. This did not make any difference to the patients pain. Then he
was x-rayed and prescribed injections of steroids, which also failed to
help him in anyway. He then started developing fevers that would
irregularly affect him in the evenings but generally disappear by
morning. When the modern physician failed to treat the patient, his
family took him to an Ayurvaidika, who treated him with massages of
different taila-s and dietary prescriptions. Even as the modern
treatments, these failed too. The Ayurvaidika then told the patient’s
parents to take him to a follower of the nAtha tradition known as bhagat
(a bhakta). The bhagat conducted a “bhUt darshan” in which he claimed
that he was informed by a bhUta the patient was afflicted due a valaga
that had been implanted in their residence. He recommended that the
valaga be uprooted, but the patient’s parents were unable to locate the
valaga in their search of their residence. He then suggested that they
seek help from the bhairava from a temple in the great holy city of
jalandhara \[CP says that he has been to the temple but did not see any
bhagat-s himself\]. So they went there and found a bhagat in that temple
who said that if the valaga was not uprooted then due to his ritual the
effects of the valaga will be transferred to someone else in the family.
The parents accepted this deal and said they would take it from their
son. Three days after the ritual their son was completely relieved of
all the symptoms and now they appeared in his mother instead. They went
again to the temple in jalandhara but could no longer find the bhagat,
and the mother was saddled with the affliction for three years. While
other bhagat-s worked on her, it apparently made no difference.

At this point the patient visited S for some kind of medical relief
because she helped patients of lower economic status with subsidies or
free consultation. In the first visit S suspected some kind of
inflammatory trouble in the joints and treated the patient with an
NSAID. S was intrigued to note that the patient reported no improvement
whatsoever and and in the second visit made a more detailed “chikitsa”.
She asked for X-rays, but at the same time heard of the abhichAra angle
from the patient. At this point she decided to follow two alternative
paths – one treat her with vitamin B complex and D supplements and
explore the possibility of folie a deux-like psychosis. As the former
course was likely to be generally beneficial S decided to prescribe them
anyhow and decided to test the latter by treating with a syrup of
chlorpromazine. After a two weeks she felt some noticeable improvement
but not complete relief. So pursuing the psychosis angle S told her
patient that it might better if she goes to her parents house and stay
there for a month so that she is away from the “abhichAra” while
simultaneously prescribing her chlorpromazine tablets. By doing this S
reasoned she would be additionally breaking off any stimulus caused by
“association with the locus”. S said she sort of fooled her patient
into saying that her treatment will not be complete unless she saw S
again after a month for a final “golI”. She feared that if she was
effectively cured she might never see her again and she would lose
closure on an interesting case. S noted that the prescribed action
resulted in apparently complete remission. However, S said that she got
a shelling from her higher-up for such “indiscriminate” treatment with
an anti-psychotic, but she said she hardly cared as she was happy with
her results.
