+++
title = "Some notes on the shaiva temple celebrations and an excursus on the fishing, diving and hunting festivals of rudra"

+++
An integral aspect of the life of the post-Vedic Hindu community was
participation in the temple celebrations. It was considered highly
beneficial in the tAntrika tradition, both to the individual and the
community, and helps explain the basic premises of the prescriptions of
the mature vAstushAstra. This indeed also explains the archaeology of
medieval bhArata, wherein the temple forms the primary focus of any
human settlement, from city to village. Today, this once pan-Indian
facet of Hindu life can only be experienced in a form comparable to its
historical performance south of mahArAShTra and in Nepal and Orissa,
because centuries of Islamic savagery and a failure to reestablish Hindu
tradition upon the eviction of the Christian barbarians has all but
erased classical Hindu custom in the rest of the subcontinent (although
some vestiges survive beyond the subcontinent in Bali, the refugium for
the Indonesian tradition that also came under the cloud of the West
Asian madness). Thus, we can only imagine based on textual and
archaeological reconstructions the glorious performances of the once
vigorous centers of the Agama tradition, such as those in kashmIra,
vArANasi, the kShetra-s of the pa\~nchanada, tirAbhukti, va\~Nga,
mAlava, jejakAbhukti and the like.

The temple celebration like most Agama traditions of larger Astika fold
has its ultimate origins in the older smArta rites of vaidika period. On
one hand, its community aspects lie in the ancient public festivals of
the vaidika period. The foremost and most ancient of these was the
glorious indra mahotsava. Many aspects of the Agamika festivals are
fashioned on this ancient smArta festival, which probably goes back to
the period of Indo-European unity. Other old vaidika public festivals
are specified by the rAja-karma-sAMvatsarIya sUtra-s, along with the
mantra-s from the atharvaveda which are deployed in them, whose
celebration was the duty of the kShatriya ruler. These include the
autumnal festival of the lustration of horses and elephants along with
some type of military procession (which is retained today in the dashamI
festivities following the autumnal navarAtrI) and the autumnal dIpotsava
(which survives today retaining some old aspects in the form of the
dIpAvalI). The former was also preceded by an apotropaic/protective
veterinary festival to the deva-s agni, vAyu, mitra-varuNa and the
ashvin-s. Elements from this ritual in the form of consecration of water
pots with various oShadhi-s and dhAnya-s placed on a square altar were
adopted by the Agamika festivities. The other aspect, which contributed
to the origin of Agamika celebrations, was related to smArta rites
pertaining to the iconic worship of certain deities that emerged in the
late Vedic period. This aspect included the general elements in the
iconic worship of deities like brahmA, skanda, rudra, viShNu and durgA
in temporary maNDapa-s, hoisting of flags and also the specific ritual
of bathing (snapana) of images (specified for rudra, viShNu and durgA).
The relationship of the above-mentioned ancient rituals to an
interesting, recent archaeological find from an IVC/SSVC site in the
form of a procession (apparently) of a female deity remains entirely
unclear, but might point to some type of vague continuity with practices
from an early period of Indian history. In temporal terms, the Agamika
rites which we shall be discussing are closer to comparable temple
celebrations elsewhere in the Indo-European world, such as those
occurring under the Neoplatonic system in the Greco-Roman world. While
the prototypes were already in place by the late vaidika period, the
Agamika-style rituals, which we shall be discussing here, appear to have
first blossomed with the rise of the gupta-vAkATaka empire that unified
the subcontinent, bringing forth the new Hindu golden age and a period
of monumental temple-building.

The core of the Hindu temple celebration is centered on the principle of
the two-fold nature of the consecrated images: the achala-mUrti-s and
chala-mUrti-s. The former are immovable images made usually of stone
installed in the grabhagR^iha of the Ayatana. The latter are smaller
portable images usually made of metal. The former are worshiped in situ
only by those qualified to access the grabhagR^iha (usually tAntrika-s
of the first varNa and no one else) and is at best seen from outside the
garbhagR^iha by the initiates from the 4 varNa-s, but never touched or
directly worshiped by them. The latter idols, in contrast, are meant to
be seen by all and sundry and are taken out on processions, wherein they
provide a darshana to the people, much like a kShatriya going on his
procession. It is this procession of the portable idols that lies at the
heart of the classical Hindu temple celebration (the utsava). Such
utsava-s are a common feature of the saiddhAntika shaiva,
pA\~ncharAtrika vaiShNava, shAkta, medieval kaumAra, saura and shAstA
systems. While such utsava-s are also practiced by the vaikhAnasa
vaiShNava-s it is not entirely clear if their medieval practice was an
evolute of their earlier versions closer to the late Vedic performances
or a secondary acquisition inspired by their pA\~ncharAtrika counter
parts. The shAkta utsava-s from south India that survive today are
clearly modeled after their shaiva counterparts, though the kAlikA
purANa clearly indicates the presence of a once more diverse shAkta
tradition that partly survives in East India. It is likely that there
were earlier shaiva versions distinct from the saiddhAntika utsava
tradition (as hinted by the bhairavotsava-s, the bhUtamAtR^ikA ritual
alluded to by rAjA bhojadeva, and the foundations of the siddhilakShmI
festival, i.e. the public pratya\~NgirA). Currently, there is
considerable textual material regarding these celebrations from
saiddhAntika shaiva and pA\~ncharAtrika traditions followed, by much
smaller textual collections from the kaumAra, shAstra and shAkta
traditions.

The shaiva temple utsava-s are specified in several of the major
tantra-s of the IshAna-srotas, such as the raurava, sUkShma, kAmika,
kAraNa, ajita, suprabheda, vijayottara and the like. But in actual
practice the paddhati-s of famous deshika-s like somashaMbhu,
trilochanashiva and aghorashiva have considerable influence on the
realized shape of the ritual. In particular, in the Tamil country the
extensive manual of the great aghorashiva, the kriyAkramadyotikA plays
an important role. There is another manual used for the daily
celebratory procession, namely the parArtha-nityapujA-vidhi from the
Tamil country which was written by another Acharya with the same name,
but distinct from the great aghorashiva. These utsava-s or the
celebratory processions have found a place in a several regional poems
such as umApatishiva’s machi makaM pATu from Chidambaram, the chera king
chEramAn perumAL’s poem AdiyulA (centered on his pilgrimage to Kashmir
with the shaiva tamil poet sundaramUrti), ahobala’s
virUpAkSha-vasantotsava-chaMpU in the Vijayanagaran capital,
ShaDakSharI-deva’s account in the karNATa country, and ma\~Nkhaka’s
account in the Kashmirian shrIkaNTha-charita. These expressions testify
the notable imprint left by these utsava-s on the minds of the
beholders. The utsava-s themselves span a wide range of performances
from the daily nityotsava, the pakShotsava-s on the full and new moon
days, the sa\~NkrAnti-s or the solstitial festivities, the
R^ikShotsava-s to mark particular astronomical configurations (e.g. the
full moon in Ardra which is the constellation of rudra as stated in the
veda) and finally the mahotsava-s which could last from 1 to 17 days.

The daily procession, nityotsava, provides a model for all the utsava-s,
which are developed via iteration and modification of the recursive
elements to lead to the culmination in the form of the mahotsava. Thus,
it might be compared to the vaidika formulation of the great rituals
such as the rAjasUya, the vAjapeya and the ashvamedha through a similar
process of elaboration from ground plan of the basic darsha and
pUrNamAsa rituals. It should be noted that the utsava-s, probably even
more than the above-stated great shrauta rituals, are distinct from
regular deployments of mantra practice in that they interface closely
with the laity (i.e. those not or insufficiently conversant with the
principles mantra practice; these might include both “casual” worshipers
and highly involved individuals like those Hindus in the community who
follow the bhakti practices). While certain saiddhAntika tantra-s, like
the sUkShma go into various circum-ritual matters such as temple
employees and their salaries, the primary concern of these as well as
the paddhati-s are rituals. Thus, in laying out the their elaborations
of utsava-s, the tantra-s mainly describe how the ritual activity is
expanded even as the utsava is being enlarged (though it is not blind to
the interface with the non-ritual domain). What exactly comprises the
ritual followed a certain logic that was primarily only understood by
the learned deshika-s – thus, aspects of the utsava that impinge on the
sphere of the ritual are closely regulated by Agamika injunctions,
whereas others are not, and left in the domain of the lay celebrators
\[Footnote 1\]. Thus, there is a distinction in how the utsava is
ultimately “understood” by the tAntrika initiate or knowledgeable
observer and the laity, even though they may share several aspects of
the basic experience.

The nityotsava is performed on a daily basis, in the morning, noon or
evening and is described in detail in the ajitamahAtantra (paTala 25).
After the worship of the main achala-mUrti (typically a li\~Nga) shaiva
ritualist next performs the daily homa of the IshAna-srotas. Before the
procession starts, having completed his homa the ritualist enters the
grabhagR^iha and worships either just the trident or up to 9 deities
(see below) with their respective mantra-s in their respective
chala-mUrti-s with a pa\~nchopachAra pUjA. For the pAshupata missile, he
draws a lotus figure on the center of a bali plate and worships the
missile in it with the famed pAshupatAstra mantra. The trident is placed
on this plate. Thereafter he might make a temporary li\~Nga if needed
and invokes bhava or uses the golakA (the metal sheath of the li\~Nga)
for the same purpose. He may then invoke dharma and yaj\~na in the
sandals of shiva. He then strikes the large bell of the temple to set
the procession in movement. In increasingly more elaborate versions of
the nityotsava, the tantra instructs that along with the trident other
images also be carried in the procession. In its most elaborate form
with all 9 deities, an image of vinAyaka is borne in front of the
possession. This is followed by the image of maheshvara with the idol of
umA carried to the left. Alternatively both of them might be seated
together on the same throne. Behind them the idol of the regent of the
pAshupata missile, known as the pAshupateshvara is carried. He is
followed by the trishUla borne on the bali-vessel. This is followed by
(the golakA) borne aloft on a stick; alternatively a li\~Nga made of
rice or flowers is carried. This is followed by the pAduka-s, then the
vR^iShbha and finally the gaNa chaNDeshvara makes up the rear of the
procession. All the 9 deities or in the simplest form only the trident
is taken around the outer walls of the temple in a pradakShiNa on head
of a putraka \[Footnote 2\], who has had a bath, cleaned his mouth and
who is wearing clean white clothes with an upper garment, a turban, a
pavitra on the fingers, the tripundra on his forehead and flower
garlands. The images are fanned by peacock feather fans and yak-hair fly
whisks, and are shielded by canopies. There is drumming and taurya-gAna
following the ma\~NgiNI tAla (rhythm), flags of shiva are waved, incense
is burned and lamps are lit. However, silence is observed in the gateway
of the temple. After the pradakShiNa is complete in the procession makes
an inner pradakShiNa stopping at the directions of the following gods
and music should be played for each of them as per the following ancient
rhythms:  
indra: East: sama-tAla  
agni: Southeast: baddhAvaNa-tAla  
yama: South: bhR^i\~NgiNI-tAla  
nirR^iti: Southwest: malli-tAla  
varuNa: West: nava-tAla  
vAyu: Northwest: bali-tAla  
soma: North: koTishikhara-tAla  
IshAna: Northeast: ta\~NkarI

The the procession images are brought into the garbhagR^iha with the
playing of the vR^iShatAla music. Then the putraka-s are sent away to
wash their feet. The ritualist does a pa\~nchopachAra pUja to the
images. Then he lifts up the trishUla from the bali plate with the
pAshupatAstra mantra and reciting it again places it to the right side
of achala li\~Nga. In the case of an invasion by an enemy the ritual is
done only inside the temple with the trishUla.

The mahotsava is a much larger affair which itself comes in many forms
which are named as per the encrypted numeration of days (AMT paTala 27):
bhauvana (7), shAkta (9), raudra (11), saura (12), mAnava (14), pakSha
(15). Of these, aghorashiva states in kriyAkramadyotikA that the
mahotsava of 9 days is the ideal one. These may be performed to coincide
with particular specified nakShatra, or the birth nakShatra of a king or
patron, or the date of founding of the temple or village. These
festivals are marked by the making and hoisting of the bull flag. The
bull flag is made of a white denim-like cotton cloth that can be up to
10 ells in length and 2.5 ells in breadth with a double triangle free
edge typical of Hindu flags. In the center of the cloth a white bull is
drawn in with a prominent hump. The mouth, horns, hooves, ears, dewlap,
genitals, and lips are painted red and the eyes are black and white. The
tail is painted yellow, and the arse painted orange. Bull is depicted
with a garland of small bells. Ten trees namely, sAla, tamAla, kramuka,
madhuka, champa, veNu, ashoka, punnAga, shirISha and bilva are specified
as being acceptable for the flag post. The flag itself has additional
components such as the second supporting staff, the “shoulder” planks, a
cotton hoisting rope, a metal ring for the rope, a darbha grass garland,
a golden tortoise or bull for the hole where the staff is inserted and a
brick barricade for the staff. All of these are specified in great
detail. This just gives an idea of the kind of ritual detail to material
that is found in the tantra-s. This is combined with considerable mantra
practice that is only familiar to the shaiva initiates. The fire altars
for the ritual are also rather elaborate, just as in a larger shrauta
ritual. There is one outer rim of eight altars in the 8 directions with
a central large one. In the outer eight the oblations are made to bhava,
sharva, IshAna, pashupati, ugra, rudra, bhIma and mahAdeva with their
respective mantra-s as specified in the kAraNAgama. In central altar an
offering is made to shiva. In a similar circuit the homa with the first
four brahma mantra-s is offered in their respective directions followed
by the fifth in the central altar. For the fire offerings, the
ritualists wear new clothes (necessarily covering his chest with the
upper garment) and turbans and accompany the sAdhaka-s who might sponsor
the rituals and the putraka-s who carry the idols. The pUrNAhuti in the
central fire is performed with the recitation of the famed vyomavyApin
mantra or just the pa\~nchAkSharI. There is also a ceremony of the
weapons of rudra and other deva-s, wherein metal replicas of these
weapons are worshiped. In addition to maheshvara, who is the central
deity of the festival, other deva-s are also given special worship in
specific days. In the classical 9 day festival for example, vinAyaka is
specially worshiped on day one for warding of obstacles (the raurava
tantra recommends worship prajApati on day 1 and the various
gaNeshvara-s of rudra on day 3). On day two prajApati is worshiped, on
day five indra is worshiped (day four as per the system of the
suprabheda and day 6 per raurava, also recommended by aghorashiva), on
day 7 viShNu (day 6 per suprabheda) is worshiped, on day 8 the vasu-s
are worshiped on day 9 the marut-s are worshiped (sadAshiva as per
suprabheda). The tantra-s also recommends that every day a special meal
be prepared one deity or entity on each of the nine days and dedicated
to them. The recommendations detailed by the raurava, kAmika and
suprabheda goes thus:  
vinAyaka: curd-rice (dadhyanna), a laDDu, jack fruit and modaka with
molasses.  
bhUta-gaNa-s: ghee-sesame-kidney bean-(or south Indians interpret it as
cowpea) rice and sweet curds with saffron  
Ancient sages: lotus root fry, with tips of darbha grass and rice with
ghee  
indra: cucumber with dish of foxtail millet, ghee and turmeric.  
viShNu: sweet rice (guDAnna), ghee and jack fruit.  
prajApati: saffron pAyasa and fried rice with cumin.  
rudra: coconut-sesame-ghee rice  
mahesha: green rice and curds  
sadAshiva or the marut-s: sweet curd rice with lime pickle.

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-pbkyXOLhKEw/UQDQj-sedNI/AAAAAAAACi4/xxrO9-LuAdg/s640/somAskanda1.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/22QrdBQoTXPNSjcGN7rDzdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The primary utsava mUrti for the mahotsava along with the trishUla is
somAskanda where rudra is depicted along with umA and the infant kumAra
in a peaceful state. Along with this primary mUrti additional mUrti-s
that are a necessary feature of the mahotsava processions are umA,
kumAra, vinAyaka, the vR^iShbha, nandikeshvara and caNDeshvara. In the
Tamil, chera and Telugu desha-s they might additionally have separate
portable platform with statues of human figures important in lay shaiva
traditions, such as madhurai nakkIrar (whose tale is well-known in Tamil
and Telugu poetry), appar, sundarmUrti, j\~nAna-saMbandhar,
mAnikyavAchakar, rudra-pashupati nAyanAr, the king chEramAn perumAL, and
the hunter kaNNappa (Tel: boya tinnaDu). The tradition of the makuTAgama
is distinct from the other shaiva tantra-s in specifying that there
should be different idols used as the main shiva idol for each of the
nine days instead of the somAskanda recommended by the rest. These are
by day (morning and evening):  
umAsahita-chandrashekhara  
sukhAsana-harihara  
ardhanArIshvara-ga\~NgAdhara  
kalyANasundara-vR^iShArUDha  
nandikeshvara-mahArUDha (might be shown trampling the rakshas rAvaNa)  
bhairava-tripurAntaka  
kAlAntaka-kAmAri  
gajAntaka-nR^ityeshvara (a dreadful naTarAja in the form of
bhuja\~Nga-bhairava is used by some).  
On the ninth day there is only a morning procession with naTarAja or
somAskanda.

The ritualist ties rakSha-s on the icons and utters incantations as
though protecting them from any evil from the crowds. When he ties these
rakSha on male deities he deploys the mR^ityu\~njaya mantra with a
terminal tryaMbakAya namaH. When he ties rakSha-s on female deities he
uses their respective mUlamantra-s. In terms of participation, the
inclusive shaiva tradition suggests that there are participants from all
four varNa-s in the processions. In the teaching of the vijayottara
tantra it is stated that the it should attempted to have the
participation of all types of worshipers of shiva in the procession: the
smArta-s reciting mantra-s to rudra from the four veda-s, archaic
pAshupata-s who might be reciting the pa\~nchabrahma mantra-s, shaiva-s
of lakula’s tradition or kAlAmukha-s who recite stotra-s of their
tradition, kApAlika-s who hold a trident and skull bowl singing the
jarAbodhIya sAman, bhairavAcharin’s singing stava-s from their tradition
to svachChanda, kApAlIsha, tuMburu and others, and finally kaula-s
singing stotra-s to the bhairava-s conjoined with kAlI, kubjikA, the
trika goddesses and tripurasundarI (of course the procession itself is a
saiddhAntika affair at its core).

In the account of the shaiva mahotsava held in the Vijayanagaran capital
we also hear of vaiShNava brAhmaNa-s participating in the festival.

The mahotsava also involves several other special rites such as the
rathotsava on the 7th day of the festival. Special large ratha-s are
stored in or near the temple premises and are used for this ceremony. It
is preceded by a homa and a ritual of smearing of anguents. The ratha-s
are decorated and then the image of the deities taken on the procession
are placed on their respective ratha-s after that various deities are
invoked into different parts of the ratha and the ratha-s are pulled by
the participants along with recitation of svasti mantra-s from the
shruti by brAhmaNa-s moving in front of the procession. After they get
into the path for the circumambulation of the village or town where the
festival is held tauryagAna is sung at the back of the procession. The
rudra girls (rudra-yoShitaH or rudra-gaNikAH) dance on the sides of the
procession. The deities are symbolically offered refreshments in the
form of coconut-water, vaTaka-s made of mudga and jaggery. It concludes
with gifts for those who have pulled the ratha-s and lunch for the
brAhmaNa-s. Other special rites include the rite of making and smearing
the black ointment from the resin of Aquilaria agallocha on the night of
the 8th day and continuing over the next two days (a potential
inheritance from earlier atimArga shaiva-s, the black ointment which
gives the kAlAmukha-s their name). There is also the ceremony where the
rudra girls make a powder by pounding ku\~Nkuma, vibhUti, turmeric,
sahadevI herbs, and sandalwood (the chUrNotsava) when the vyomavyApin
mantra is chanted. This powder is dusted on the images of the gods
during the procession and also on the participants. This might happen on
the 6th and 9th days of the festival.

One of the most striking aspect of the mahotsava that appears to have
started becoming otiose even by the medieval period was the mR^igayAtra
or the hunting festivity. This happens on the 8th evening even as the
deshika is preparing the black ointment. While this might be called a
hunting expedition, it also has a military aspect to it. In this
procession the image of rudra is mounted on a horse with his pinAka bow
and pAshupatAstra in addition the trident and other weapons. It is
initiated with a military tAla (rhythm) being beaten on the bherI and
paTaha drums and the blaring of conchs and pipes as though an army is
setting forth for an invasion. The image of rudra is completely
surrounded by rudra girls mounted on horses wearing full armor in an
invasionary formation. The van of the procession has the rudra girls
armed with bows and arrows in a concave array to perform an encirclement
maneuver, either in the context of a hunt or a cavalry attack \[Footnote
3\]. They are backed by further rudra girls armed with swords, lances
and shields. In the middle is the image of shiva on a horse \[Footnote
4\] with the tall bull banners being held aloft on either side of him
and finally the rear is made up by another division of rudra girls with
bows and arrows. This military display was certainly serious as we have
one account from the period of the Vijayanagaran monarch bukkadeva’s
rule where action was seen. In the karNATa country Mohammedans are said
to have interfered with the mR^igayAtra and derided shiva like the
[bauddha-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/05/25/the-anti-shaiva-rants-of-the-nastika-s/),
when the mR^igayAtra force attacked them and put some to sword and
dispersed the rest.While in more recent times the mR^igayAtra is a mock
affair the evidence from Tamil accounts suggests that in the choLa
period it was a full-fledged hunt with the participation of the choLa
rulers. This aspect is a hold out of a more ancient tradition regarding
rudra which goes back to the proto-Indo-European period. The cognate of
rudra in the Germanic world, Odin is also known to lead the hunt riding
on his horse, in which he might be accompanied by the Valkyries (c.f.
rudrayoShit). In the Huldr saga from Denmark he is described as being
aided by three divine women in his stag hunt. In the Greek world the
cognate of rudra, Apollo along with his sister Artemis are also
associated with the hunt. In addition he too is surrounded by nymphs
(Νυμφηγέτης: leading the nymph-band), or muse goddesses (Μουσαγέτας:
leading the muse band). In the Arya world this aspect of rudra is well
preserved from the earliest layers. In the shatarudrIya he is praised
as:  
namo mR^igayubhyo namaH | shvanibhyash cha namaH | vo namaH ||  
i.e. the one who is in the form of deer hunters, and one who hunt with
dogs. This aspect of rudra also emerges in the astronomical tale of his
hunting prajApati in the form of a deer or an antelope as he ran towards
rohiNI or uShA. In the shivapurANa we have vIrabhadra hunt down the
yaj\~napuruSha trying to flee in the form of a stag from dakSha-s
ritual. In the mahAbhArata’s kairAta parvan, when rudra appears with umA
and his gaNa-s in the form of kirAta hunters, he is said to be
surrounded by thousands of kirAta women (kirAta veSha prachChannaH
strIbhish chAnu sahasrashaH | 3.40.2a). It is this point that arjuna
makes a special note of when he challenges rudra
(kirAta-veSha-prachChannaM strI-sahAyam amitrahA | 3.40.17). As we have
discussed before rudra is accompanied by a band of armed female deities
even in the shruti. It is these who are simulated by the rudra girls in
the mR^igayAtra. Thus, preserved within the saiddhAntika festival
tradition is an ancient feature of the rudra-like deities of the IE
world.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-I0bjpPG1Uo0/UQQrtOwPT8I/AAAAAAAACjM/-kSDsLRlvgU/s640/rudra_apollo.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/5rEl0zJOqcWktPMKdn9zEdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)*Left:
Apollo and Artemis with a deer from an Attic cup; rudra with a mR^iga on
the coin of Indo-Iranian ruler huvishka*

This finally leads us to two other shaiva festivals which are now almost
gone out of vogue. These are the fishing festival and the pearl-diving
festival. These are parallel to the hunting festival occurring within
the mahotsava, but occur independently as standalone utsava-s. Given
that they are mentioned in the sUkShmAgama, which shows several
archaisms, it is quite possible that it reflects a fairly ancient
tradition. After all even the shatarudrIya records the manifestation of
the rudra-s as fishermen (namaH pu\~njiShThebhyo namaH |). The fishing
festival or the matsya-lIlA is performed in the period when the sun
travels from Pisces to Virgo and one lasting 5-8 days is considered the
best. It was primarily performed by the rAjA and rAj\~nI along with the
shaiva ritualist. It is said to be best done in the sea, but
successively lesser versions may be done in rivers or tanks. In this
festival mahesvara and umA and mounted on portable platform and taken to
the water body in a simulation of their procession to fishing site. As
in other utsava-s the deities are tied with rakSha-s and flags of rudra
are carried along with beating of drums and blowing of conches. The
procession is led by the deshika and the royal family. Then when they
reach the fishing site they go by boat and capture a large shining fish
on as though it has been caught by shiva and umA. Then they release it
back into the water and perform feeding on fishes uttering the vAmadeva
mantra. After the mantra is uttered, the rudrayoShit-s sing special
songs known as the matsya-lIlA gAna-s. The festival ends daily with a
ritual bath of the icons and a shAnti homa (of course we are not
detailing here the other elaborate mantra practices that accompany the
entire matsya-lIlA). At the end there are prAyaschitta-s and the flowers
are placed on the heads of the ritualists and royalty using the
melAmantra. The sUkShmAgama is supposed to have preserved an example of
the matsya-lIlA gAna but the version in our possession does not contain
it.

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-TtJeS4BOJRk/UQTcZ1BiW8I/AAAAAAAACjg/BcZmIh8sRQQ/s640/shiva_fishing.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/_Gxe3G_5Q10IfS_XPQvtNdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

*rudra hunting at shrIshailaM (nR^isiMha of ahobilaM also seen) and
fishing. Paintings from the reign of sarfoji bhosle the last Hindu ruler
of Thanjavur now housed in the Chennai government museum*

The pearl-diving festival or the mauktika-grahaNa is performed in the
first half of the months of phAlguna, chaitra or kR^ittikA, with the
dates specified by a detailed set of prescriptions regarding
astronomical configurations. The core of the rite involves a procession
with the images of shiva and umA on a palanquin to the ocean shore.
There a ritual maNTapa is set up with a central fire altar and four
doors with festoons. In it a throne is also set up on which the images
of the deities are placed and offered worship. Then the deshika
initiates the worship of the deity of the sea and seeks permission for
diving for pearls with mantra-s specified in the sUkShmAgama. A female
florist and the deshika stand flanking the images on the deities on the
right and left and in front of them the singers sing the lIlA gAna-s
specific for this occasion. Then they head to the ocean where dives are
conducted to collect pearls through the day. Having collected pearls
they return with the deities to the temple. After several rituals and
bathing associated with the re-entry of the deities they place them in
the garbhagR^iha. There, the pearls which were found are placed before
the deities along with wealth. The wealth is then distributed to the
deshika, the patrons, and parts are kept aside for the deities. It is
likely that this festival emerged primarily in the coastal centers where
pearl-diving was a major activity.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Footnote 1: The logic of ritual is very important element of Hindu
thought that forms the foundation of the Astika dharma or the sanAtana
dharma. It was this foundation that was attacked by the nAstika-s such
as the tathAgata, the nagna and maskarin of the cowshed. However, the
former two systems eventually fell back to reinstate the logic of ritual
via the backdoor. However, the discussion of this logic is a topic in
itself, which we might revisit at a later point. For now we shall point
to a curious parallel in the yavana world mentioned by Plutarch
suggesting that perhaps this logic was probably present even there (even
though it is not usually understood in the modern west as such) –
Lysimache the priestess of the goddess Athene Polias was asked by the
muleteers who had ferried the holy vessels to the Acropolis temple in
Athens for drinks. She refused stating that if she obliged such an
action might become part of the ritual. This suggests that yavana-s had
a logic comparable to that of the Hindus of what constitutes ritual and
what cannot be allowed to wander into its domain.

Footnote 2: A putraka is an initiated assistant to the deshika, but he
has not attained the high dIkSha that is supposed to completely
obliterate his pashupAsha.

Footnote 3: This maneuver is reminiscent of the Mongols, who used it
both in hunting and war. The great kha’khan Chingiz saw the Mongol hunt
as not just a food-gathering operation but also as training for war.

Footnote 4: In the shruti there is a mantra describing rudra mounted on
his white horse-  
A tvA vahantu harayaH sachetasaH shvetair ashvaiH saha ketumadbhir
vAtAjavair balavadbhir manojavair AyAhi shIghraM mama havyAya sharvO3M
|| (bodhAyana mantra pATha 351 c.f. maitrAyaNIya saMhitA of KYV). This
mantra is deployed in some traditions while \[the image of\] rudra
mounts the horse.
