+++
title = "Johannes Germanus Regiomontanus and hisxa0rod"
date = "2021-03-21"

+++
Even before we had become acquainted with the trigonometric sum and
difference formulae or calculus are father had pointed to us that there
was an optimal point at which one should stand to observe or photograph
features on vertical structures, like on a tall gopura of a temple or a
tree. That point can be calculated precisely with a simple Euclidean
construction. Hence, we were rather charmed when we encountered this
question in a German book on historical problems in mathematics. It was
posed in 1471 CE by Johannes Germanus Regiomontanus to a certain
professor Roderus of Erfurt (Figure 1): At what point on the \[flat
ground\] does a perpendicularly suspended rod appear the largest (i.e.
subtends the largest angle)? Let the rod be of length
![a](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=a&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
and it is suspended perpendicularly at height
![h](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=h&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
from the ground. The question is then to find the point
![P](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
at which
![\\angle\\theta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%5Ctheta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
would be the largest. This is also the kind of question that often
repeated itself in some form in the lower calculus section of our
university entrance exams. So it is not a difficult or unusual problem,
but it has a degree of historical significance. Before we look into its
solution, let us first talk a little about its proposer, who as an
enormously important but not widely known figure in the history of
science and mathematics in the neo-Occident.

[![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/regiomontanus1.png)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/regiomontanus1.png)

**Figure 1. The rod of Regiomontanus**

Born in 1436 CE at Unfinden, in what is today Germany, Regiomontanus
seems to have shown signs of early genius. Seeing this, his parents sent
him at age 12 to Leipzig for formal studies and then he proceeded to
Vienna to obtain a Bachelor’s degree at age 15. His genius came to the
notice of Georg von Peurbach, a German astrologer, who wished to produce
a corrected and updated translation of the Mathematike Syntaxis
(Almagest via Arabic) by the great Greco-Roman astrologer and
mathematician Klaudios Ptolemaios of Egypt. He hoped in the process to
establish the geocentric theory on a firm footing and use the newly
introduced Hindu decimal notation for the ease of calculations. However,
von Peurbach’s Greek was not up to the mark to effectively translate the
original but he transmitted his mathematical and astrological knowledge
to Regiomontanus, whom he treated as his adopted son, before his death
at age 38. On von Peurbach’s deathbed, Regiomontanus promised to
continue his work on the Syntaxis and also create a synthesis of the
mathematical knowledge that was present in it with the new knowledge of
the Hindus and the Arabic neo-Platonic revolution that was entering
Europe from the Mohammedan lands.

The Regiomontanus took up the task with great diligence by mastering the
Greek language and started composing verse in it. He then took to
traveling around Greece and Italy collecting Greek and Latin manuscripts
collection to revive the lost knowledge of the ancients. In the process,
he found a manuscript of the yavana Diophantus that he could now handle
using the elements of Hindu bījagaṇita transmitted to Europe from the
Mohammedans. He then became the court astrologer of the Hungarian lord
Matthias Corvinus Hunyadi who staved off the further penetration of
Europe by Mehmed-II, the conqueror of Constantinople, through several
campaigns. As a ruler with literary interests, he had looted several
manuscripts from Turkish collections in course of his successful raids.
These offered additional opportunities for the studies of Regiomontanus.
Having established an observatory in Hungary for Matthias, he returned
to Germany and built an observatory equipped with some of the best
instruments of the age and also adopted the newly introduced printing
technology to start his own press. As a result, he published a widely
used ephemerides with positions of all visible solar system bodies from
1475 to 1506 CE. He also published a remarkable geometric work titled
“De Triangulis Omnimodis (On triangles of every kind)” wherein, among
other things, he introduced the Hindu trigonometric tradition to Europe.
To my knowledge, it also contains the first clear European presentation
of the sine rule and a certain version of the cos rule for triangles.
Regiomontanus also recovered and published the striking Latin work
“Astronomica” of the nearly forgotten heathen Roman astrologer Marcus
Manilius from the time of the Caesar Augustus. This beautifully poetic
work would be of interest to a student of heathen religious traditions
and Hindu belief systems because neo-Hindu astrology was after all
seriously influenced in its belief structure of the Classical world. As
a sample, we leave some lines of old Manilius here:

*impensius ipsa*  
*scire iuuat magni penitus praecordia mundi,*  
*quaque regat generetque suis animalia signis*  
*cernere et in numerum Phoebo modulante referre.* (1.16–19)  
It is more pleasing to know in depth the very heart of the universe and
to see  
how it governs and brings forth living beings by means of its signs and
to speak  
of it in verse, with Phoebus \[Apollon\] providing the tune.  
-translated from the original Latin by Volk

Two years after the publication of his ephemerides, Regiomontanus was
summoned to Rome to help the Vatican correct its calendar. He died
mysteriously at the age of 40 while in Rome. His fellow astrologers
believed it was prognosticated by a bright comet that appeared in the
sky in 1476 CE. Others state that he was poisoned by the sons of the
yavana Georgios Trapezuntios, whom he had met during his
manuscriptological peregrinations. He had a kerfuffle with Trapezuntios
after calling him a blabberer for his incorrect understanding of
Ptolemaios and apparently the latter’s sons had their revenge when he
was visiting Rome. Thus, like his friend von Peurbach, Regiomontanus
died before he could see the published copy of his work on the Syntaxis.
However, it was posthumously published as the “Epitome of the Almagest”
in 1496 CE, 20 years after his demise in Rome. Looking at this book, one
is struck by the quality of its production and the striking synergy of
its text and lavish mathematical illustrations. Even today, with the
modern computer languages like
![\\LaTeX](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5CLaTeX&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
(TikZ included) and
![GeoGebra](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=GeoGebra&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
and our collection of digital fonts one would be hard-pressed to produce
something nearing the quality of Regiomontanus’ masterpiece published at
the dawn of the Gutenberg printing revolution.

[![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/regiomontanusmed.jpg)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/regiomontanusmed.jpg)  
**Figure 2. A yavana and a śūlapuruṣa in anachronistic conversation: The
frontispiece of Regiomontanus’ Epitome of the Almagest showing him
questioning Ptolemaios under the celestial sphere.**

Regiomontanus is said to have had a lot more material to write and
publish that never saw the light due to his unexpected death. One of
these was the possibility of the motion of the earth and
heliocentricity. In this regard, we know that he criticized astrologers
of the age for accepting the Ptolemaic model as a given without further
analysis. Moreover, he demonstrated that his own astronomical
observations contradicted predictions made by the geocentric models of
the time. We are also left with tantalizing material reported by his
successor Schöner that hint that he was converging on the movement of
the Earth around the sun. After Regiomontanus had passed away, the young
German mathematician Georg Joachim Rhäticus deeply studied the former’s
works to become a leading exponent of trigonometry in Europe. He
befriended the much older Polish astronomer Copernicus and taught the
latter geometry using the “De Triangulis Omnimodis” of Regiomontanus, a
copy of which with Copernicus’ marginal notes still survives. Rhäticus
also urged Copernicus to publish the heliocentric theory. This raises
the possibility that Rhäticus was aware of Regiomontanus’s ideas in this
regard and it helped crystallize Copernicus’s own similar views. In the
least, the geometric devices that both Copernicus and later Tycho Brahe
needed for their work were derived from Regiomontanus, making him a
pivotal figure in the emergence of science in the neo-Occident. \[This
sketch of his biography is based on: *Leben und Wirken des Johannes
Müller von Königsberg* by E. Zinner\]

[![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/regiomontanus2.png)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/regiomontanus2.png)  
**Figure 3. Construction to solve the Regiomontanus problem.**

Returning to his problem, we can game it thus (Figure 3): The rod of
length
![a](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=a&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
suspended perpendicularly at height
![h](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=h&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
subtends the
![\\angle\\theta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%5Ctheta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
at the ground. This angle can be written as the difference of two
angles: ![\\angle\\theta
=\\angle\\alpha-\\angle\\beta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%5Ctheta+%3D%5Cangle%5Calpha-%5Cangle%5Cbeta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
Let the distance of the point on the ground from the foot of the
perpendicular suspension of the rod be
![x](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=x&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
We can write the tangent difference formula for the above angles using
Figure 3 as:

![\\tan(\\theta)=\\tan(\\alpha-\\beta)=
\\dfrac{\\tan(\\alpha)-\\tan(\\beta)}{1+\\tan(\\alpha)\\tan(\\beta)}=
\\dfrac{\\dfrac{a+h}{x}-\\dfrac{h}{x}}{\\dfrac{x^2+h(a+h)}{x^2}}=\\dfrac{ax}{x^2+h(a+h)}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctan%28%5Ctheta%29%3D%5Ctan%28%5Calpha-%5Cbeta%29%3D+%5Cdfrac%7B%5Ctan%28%5Calpha%29-%5Ctan%28%5Cbeta%29%7D%7B1%2B%5Ctan%28%5Calpha%29%5Ctan%28%5Cbeta%29%7D%3D+%5Cdfrac%7B%5Cdfrac%7Ba%2Bh%7D%7Bx%7D-%5Cdfrac%7Bh%7D%7Bx%7D%7D%7B%5Cdfrac%7Bx%5E2%2Bh%28a%2Bh%29%7D%7Bx%5E2%7D%7D%3D%5Cdfrac%7Bax%7D%7Bx%5E2%2Bh%28a%2Bh%29%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)

We can see from Figure 3 that as the point on the ground moves towards
the foot of the suspension, both ![\\angle\\alpha, \\angle\\beta \\to
90^\\circ](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%5Calpha%2C+%5Cangle%5Cbeta+%5Cto+90%5E%5Ccirc&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002),
thus ![\\angle\\theta \\to
0^\\circ](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%5Ctheta+%5Cto+0%5E%5Ccirc&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
If the point on the ground moves away from the foot of the suspension,
both ![\\angle\\alpha, \\angle\\beta \\to
0^\\circ](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%5Calpha%2C+%5Cangle%5Cbeta+%5Cto+0%5E%5Ccirc&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
and again ![\\angle\\theta \\to
0^\\circ](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cangle%5Ctheta+%5Cto+0%5E%5Ccirc&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
Thus, somewhere in between, we will have the maximum
![\\theta](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctheta&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
and it will be in the interval
![\[0^\\circ,90^\\circ\]](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5B0%5E%5Ccirc%2C90%5E%5Ccirc%5D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
In this interval, the tangent increases as the angle increases. Thus, it
will reach a maximum when the function
![y=\\tfrac{ax}{x^2+h(a+h)}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=y%3D%5Ctfrac%7Bax%7D%7Bx%5E2%2Bh%28a%2Bh%29%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
reaches a maximum. We would find this maximum by differentiating this
function and finding where
![\\tfrac{dy}{dx}=0](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctfrac%7Bdy%7D%7Bdx%7D%3D0&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
This approach, using calculus, is how we would have answered this
question in our university entrance exam. One will observe that this
function has a rather flat maximum suggesting that, for the purposes of
viewing a feature on a tall vertical object, a relatively approximate
position would suffice. While this principle of extreme value
determination by calculus was known in the Hindu mathematical tradition
by at least the time of ācārya Bhāskara-II (1100s of CE), there is no
evidence that any of this Hindu knowledge of calculus was transmitted to
Regiomontanus. In Europe, a comparable extreme value principle was
informally discovered much later by the French mathematician Michel
Rolle in 1691 CE who actually rejected differential calculus. So how
would Regiomontanus have solved in 1471 CE?

It is believed that he used the logic of the reciprocal. When
![y=\\tfrac{ax}{x^2+h(a+h)}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=y%3D%5Ctfrac%7Bax%7D%7Bx%5E2%2Bh%28a%2Bh%29%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
is maximum its reciprocal
![y=\\tfrac{x}{a}+\\tfrac{h(a+h)}{ax}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=y%3D%5Ctfrac%7Bx%7D%7Ba%7D%2B%5Ctfrac%7Bh%28a%2Bh%29%7D%7Bax%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
would be minimum. We can see that if
![x](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=x&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
becomes large, then
![\\tfrac{x}{a}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctfrac%7Bx%7D%7Ba%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
term would dominate and it would grow in size. Similarly, when
![x](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=x&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
becomes small, the
![\\tfrac{h(a+h)}{ax}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctfrac%7Bh%28a%2Bh%29%7D%7Bax%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
will dominate and it would grow in size. The 2 opposing growths would
balance when
![\\tfrac{x}{a}=\\tfrac{h(a+h)}{ax}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Ctfrac%7Bx%7D%7Ba%7D%3D%5Ctfrac%7Bh%28a%2Bh%29%7D%7Bax%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
This yields
![x=\\sqrt{h(a+h)}](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=x%3D%5Csqrt%7Bh%28a%2Bh%29%7D&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
With this in hand, we can easily use the geometric mean theorem in a
construction to obtain the desired point
![P](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
(Figure 3). This also yields another geometric relationship realized by
the yavana-s of yore regarding the intersection of the tangent at point
P on a circle and a line perpendicular to it that cuts a chord (here
defined by the suspended rod) on that circle: The distance of the point
of tangency
![P](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=P&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
from its intersection with the line containing the said chord is the
geometric mean of the distances of their intersection to the two ends of
the chord.

We may conclude with some brief observations on the history of science.
Regiomontanus is a rather striking example of how the founder of a
scientific revolution can be quite forgotten by the casual student due
to the dazzling success of his successors. In the process, the existence
of scientific continuity between the Ptolemaic system and the
heliocentric successor might also be missed by the casual student. His
life also provides the link between the popularization of the Hindu
decimal notation in the Occident by Fibonacci and the birth of science
in those regions by the introduction of Greek and Hindu tradition via
the Arabic intermediate. While Hindu astrology was influenced by the
Classical astrological tradition there is no evidence that the Ptolemaic
system ever reached India. The Hindus instead developed their own
astronomical tradition that appears to have rather early on used a
potentially heliocentric system of calculation culminating in the work
of ācārya Āryabhaṭa-I, who also discovered a rather brilliant algebraic
approximation for the sine function. However, soon there was a reversal
to a geostationary, giant-earth model under Brahmagupta, the rival of
the Āryabhaṭa school. In the realm of astronomy, the totality of these
developments resulted in epicyclic systems or eccentric systems that
paralleled the Occidental models in several ways. On the mathematical
side, it spawned many high points, such as in trigonometry, ultimately
resulting in the emergence of an early form of differential calculus by
the time of Mañjula that was subsequently advanced by Bhāskara-II. This
line of investigation culminated in the works of the Nambūtiri-s in the
Cera country with the emergence of what could be termed full-fledged
calculus. Remarkably, this was paralleled by the revisiting of
Āryabhaṭa-I and the move towards heliocentric models by the great
Nīlakaṇṭha Somayājin. Partial heliocentric models for at least the inner
planets, along with the prediction of the Venereal transit of the sun
was also achieved by Kamalākara, a Mahārāṣṭrī brāhmaṇa, in the 1600s.
Notably, only the earlier phase of the Hindu trigonometric tradition was
transmitted to the Occident at the time of Regiomontanus. None of the
Hindu studies towards calculus found their way there and they appear to
have been rediscovered in the Occident about 2 centuries after
Regiomontanus. Despite possessing a mathematical and astronomical edge,
in the centuries following Nīlakaṇṭha, the Hindu schools, facing a
dilution from the chokehold of the Mohammedan incubus, did not spawn a
scientific upheaval of the order that took place in Europe in the
centuries following Regiomontanus.
