---
title: THE GITA

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Notes of Lectures and
Classes](notes_of_lectures_and_classes_contents.htm) /

[←](class_lessons_in_meditation.htm)

## THE GITA

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 6, pp. 175-76.)

*\[Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes of a Bhagavad-Gitâ class delivered
Thursday, May 24, 1900, in San Francisco, California\]*

The Gitâ is the gist of the Vedas. It is not our Bible; the Upanishads
are our Bible. It \[the Gita\] is the gist of the Upanishads and
harmonizes the many contradictory parts of the Upanishads.

The Vedas are divided into two portions — the work portion and the
knowledge portion. The work portion contains ceremonials, rules as to
eating, living, doing charitable work, etc. The knowledge came
afterwards and was enunciated by kings.

The work portion was exclusively in the hands of the priests and
pertained entirely to the sense life. It taught to do good works that
one might go to heaven and enjoy eternal happiness. Anything, in fact,
that one might want could be provided for him by the work or
ceremonials. It provided for all classes of people good and bad. Nothing
could be obtained through the ceremonials except by the intercession of
the priests. So if one wanted anything, even if it was to have an enemy
killed, all he had to do was to pay the priest; and the priest through
these ceremonials would procure the desired results. It was therefore in
the interests of the priests that the ceremonial portion of the Vedas
should be preserved. By it they had their living. They consequently did
all in their power to preserve that portion intact. Many of these
ceremonials were very complicated, and it took years to perform some of
them.

The knowledge portion came afterwards and was promulgated exclusively by
kings. It was called the Knowledge of Kings. The great kings had no use
for the work portion with all its frauds and superstitions and did all
in their power to destroy it. This knowledge consisted of a knowledge of
God, the soul, the universe, etc. These kings had no use for the
ceremonials of the priests, their magical works, etc. They pronounced it
all humbug; and when the priests came to them for gifts, they questioned
the priests about God, the soul, etc., and as the priests could not
answer such questions they were sent away. The priests went back to
their fathers to enquire about the things the kings asked them, but
could learn nothing from them, so they came back again to the kings and
became their disciples. Very little of the ceremonials are followed
today. They have been mostly done away with, and only a few of the more
simple ones are followed today.

Then in the Upanishads there is the doctrine of Karma. Karma is the law
of causation applied to conduct. According to this doctrine we must work
forever, and the only way to get rid of pain is to do good works and
thus to enjoy the good effects; and after living a life of good works,
die and go to heaven and live forever in happiness. Even in heaven we
could not be free from Karma, only it would be good Karma, not bad.

The philosophical portion denounces all work however good, and all
pleasure, as loving and kissing wife, husband or children, as useless.
According to this doctrine all good works and pleasures are nothing but
foolishness and in their very nature impermanent. "All this must come to
an end sometime, so end it now; it is vain." So says the philosophical
portion of the Upanishads. It claims all the pain in the world is caused
by ignorance, therefore the cure is knowledge.

This idea of one being held down fast by past Karma, or work, is all
nonsense. No matter how dense one may be, or how bad, one ray of light
will dissipate it all. A bale of cotton, however large, will be utterly
destroyed by a spark. If a room has been dark for untold ages, a lamp
will end it all. So with each soul, however benighted he may be, he is
not absolutely bound down by his past Karma to work for ages to come.
"One ray of Divine Light will free him, reveal to him his true nature."

Well, the Gita harmonizes all these conflicting doctrines. As to
Krishna, whether or not he ever lived, I do not know. "A great many
stories are told of him, but I do not believe them."

"I doubt very much that he ever lived and think it would be a good thing
if he never did. There would have been one less god in the world."

[→](the_gita_i.htm)

</div>
