---
title: THE GITA — I

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Notes of Lectures and
Classes](notes_of_lectures_and_classes_contents.htm) /

[←](the_gita.htm)

## THE GITA — I

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 6, pp. 205-7. Cf. Ida Ansell's notes of "The
Gita I", *[Complete
Works](../../volume_1/lectures_and_discourses/the_gita_i.htm)*, I.)

*\[Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes of a Bhagavad-Gitâ lecture delivered
Saturday, May 26, 1900, in San Francisco, California\]*

The Gitâ is to the Hindus what the New Testament is to the Christians.
It is about five thousand years old, and the day of religious
celebrations with the Hindus is the anniversary of the Battle of
Kurukshetra about five thousand years ago. As I said, the Vedas are
divided into two great divisions, the philosophical and the Karmakânda,
or work portion.

Between the kings, who promulgated the philosophic portion, and the
priests a great conflict arose. The priests had the people on their side
because they had all the utility which appealed to the popular mind. The
kings had all the spirituality and none of the economic element; but as
they were powerful and the rulers of the nation, the struggle was a hard
and bitter one. The kings gradually gained a little ground, but their
ideas were too elevated for the masses, so the ceremonial, or work
portion, always had the mass of the people.

Always remember this, that whenever a religious system gains ground with
the people at large, it has a strong economic side to it. It is the
economic side of a religion that finds lodgement with the people at
large, and never its spiritual, or philosophic, side. If you should
preach the grandest philosophy in the streets for a year, you would not
have a handful of followers. But you could preach the most arrant
nonsense, and if it had an economic element, you would have the whole
people with you.

None knows by whom the Vedas were written; they are so ancient.
According to the orthodox Hindus, the Vedas are not the written words at
all, but they consist of the words themselves orally spoken with the
exact enunciation and intonation. This vast mass of religion has been
written and consists of thousands upon thousands of volumes. Anyone who
knows the precise pronunciation and intonation knows the Vedas, and no
one else. In ancient times certain royal families were the custodians of
certain parts of the Vedas. The head of the family could repeat every
word of every volume he had, without missing a word or an intonation.
These men had giant intellects, wonderful memories.

The strictly orthodox believers in the Vedas, the Karmakanda, did not
believe in God, the soul or anything of the sort, but that we as we are
were the only beings in the universe, material or spiritual. When they
were asked what the many allusions to God in the Vedas mean, they say
that they mean nothing at all; that the words properly articulated have
a magical power, a power to create certain results. Aside from that they
have no meaning.

Whenever you suppress a thought, you simply press it down out of sight
in a coil, like a spring, only to spring out again at a moment's notice
with all the pent up force as the result of the suppression, and do in a
few moments what it would have done in a much longer period.

Every ounce of pleasure brings its pound of pain. It is the same energy
that at one time manifests itself as pleasure and at another time as
pain. As soon as one set of sensations stops, another begins. But in
some cases, in more advanced persons, one may have two, yes, or even a
hundred different thoughts enter into active operation at the same time.
When one thought is suppressed, it is merely coiled up ready to spring
forth with pent up fury at any time.

"Mind is of its own nature. Mind activity means creation. The thought is
followed by the word, and the word by the form. All of this creating
will have to stop, both mental and physical, before the mind can reflect
the soul."

"My old master (Shri Ramakrishna.) could not write his own name without
making a mistake. He made three mistakes in spelling, in writing his own
name."

"Yet that is the kind of man at whose feet I sat."

"You will break the law of nature but once, and it will be the last
time. Nature will then be nothing to you."

[→](the_gita_iii.htm)

</div>
