+++
title = "An Ayudha when used in Ayudha puja is a literal weapon,and not supposed to be anythingxa0else"
date = "2018-01-14"

+++
Vayuna:…during Navarati the focus is on Sarasvati here and then each
temple will have its own festival days

Devala: Why Sarasvatī?

Vayuna:The only part of Navaratri that is celebrated in KL is the last
three days. Ayudha Puja basically and Sarasvati is the Devi that is
worshipped.

Devala: Sarasvati is invoked in aydhas?Here,we celebrate Mahalaya+from
shashthi onwards

Vayuna: Well the modern equivalents that the students keep. Books.

Devala: Books aren’t Ayudhas. What they call Vasant Panchami in North
India is explicitly Sarasvati Puja here.

Vayuna:That is how the tradition came out to be here. Some keep pen
also.Of course the farmers keep their instruments and factories their
machinery

Devala: Vishvakarma Puja is the day for that(keeping
instruments,machinery,etc). It’s the wrong day\[for instrument
pūjā\].Also Skanda Purana I think explicitly spells out the procedure to
worship Sarasvatī that day(on Vasant Panchami/Sarasvati Puja).

Vayuna:Here everything is conducted on the last three days\[of
Navaratri\]. We keep the books on the evening of the eighth day and take
them back on the morning of the 10th after puja.

Devala: But tools are worshipped in Vishvakarma Puja!As for Ayudhas…even
a damn humble lathi will do!

Vayuna:Here its explained away as metaphorical. The knowledge in the
books is the weapon.

Devala: Of course. I’ve also seen those explanations,but it is a wrong
one.When days specially for sarasvatī(books/related stuff) and
viśvakarmā(tools/related stuff) exist,the day for Ayudha Puja implies
nothing but literal Ayudhas. What I am objecting to is the abuse of
metaphor. By the way,Vishvakarma Puja falls on the last date of Bhadra
in the Bengali calendar(basically,the last day of Bhadra on Sauramana
calendars is supposed to be Vishvakarma Puja). And Sarasvatī
Pūjā/Vasanta Pañcamī falls on the śuklapakṣa pañcamī of the Chandramana
month of Māgha.

Vayuna: Well in a sense the metaphorical explanation works. Only the
second varṇa has actual āyudhas. The others take it up as
āpad-dharma.What āyudha does a brāhmaṇa have or a farmer or
brahmacāri/student or artisan have except his tools?

Devala: Others too had it. Please note [the cases listed
here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2012/12/15/a-hindu-view-on-gun-rights/)
by a friend. And Medhatithi was not really having Muslims in mind. And
in many cases,people from all varṇas ultimately did join armies. Call it
āpaddharma or whatever.

Vayuna: Well yes,functionally most Nairs were of the second varṇa…as
were a few Ezhavas. And yesyes ayudhas for self-defense should get more
popular among Hindus. Ideally it would have made sense for only soldiers
to worship Ayudhas. But since we are in Kali yuga and surrounded,
everyone needs to do that.

Devala: Even Medhatithi recognized the need for weapons amongst the
common folk.And I’m not even insisting on guns (though that’s a
minimum). At least a humble lathi. We did have martial arts/traditions
involving lathis alone.


