+++
title = "Aspects of Hinduxa0atheism"
date = "2018-01-12"

+++
Note:In this post,I am not going to consider Savarkar’s position. Having
put that out of the way,let me put it out:In the classical darśanas of
Hindu philosophy,not all of them accept an Īśvara,yes(a supreme God),but
all of them were āstika,not nāstika(accepted the Veda as pramāṇa in some
format or the other-at least accepting the śruti and allied traditions
as śabda uttered by an āpta). And the allied traditions of sāṃkhya and
yoga accept the realms of devas,with the sutrakara in the third pada of
the Yogasutras saying ‘jñāne sūrye saṃyamāt’ and the various
commentators describing the knowledge of the realms of the devas which
is gained in the method referred to in this sutra. Vaiśeṣika/Nyaya too
end up taking the praxis of yoga for soiterological purposes,so nothing
more needs to be said here,and Vaiśeṣika too admits the importance of
the Veda. Purva Mimāṃsā may not accept an Īśvara,but its atheism is more
of the ‘ackschually,there are no separate devatas apart from the mantra
and the ritual.The deity is the mantra’ sort of thinking. And as to the
position of Īśvara in Śaṇkarādvaita,this [article explains it very
nicely](http://www.academia.edu/2172253/Krishna_in_Advaita_Vedanta_The_Supreme_Brahman_in_Human_Form).
I need not talk about the various other Vedantic schools.

Most people who take up the ‘Hindu atheist’ label are basically cowards
who are too ashamed to admit that all their traditions spoke of
devatās(regardless of whether they were capable of giving all the goals
sought by their traditions or not). Not a single one of them denied the
existence of devatās.
