+++
title = "Acknowledgements"

+++
The history of the book and the commercialization of print in The nineteenth century remain largely uncharted areas in South Asia. This major monogran the legendary Naval Kishore Press of Lucknow (est, 1858) then the foremost publishing house in the subcontinent-represents something of a breakthrough. It analyses an Indian publisher's engagement in the field of cultural production with a detail and rigour hitherto unknown. 

Describing early centres and pioneers of print in North India, the author traces the coming of the book in Hindi and Urdu. The career of Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-95) is viewed as exemplifying the publisher's rise to prominence in the colonial public sphere. Ulrike Stark examines the publishing house in its roles as commercial enterprise and intellectual centre. Against a backdrop of cultural, social, and economic developments, she analyses the production of scholarly and popular books in religion, medicine, historiography, and literature, identifying the contributions of individual scholars, literati, and translators associated with the press. 

The business relationship between publisher and colonial government receives special attention as an example of the transactional character of the colonial encounter. Aspects of patronage, competition, and contested agency in textbook production are foregrounded. 

Concluding with an analysis of patterns of Hindi and Urdu publishing, the book portrays the Naval Kishore Press as an intellectual microcosm reflecting a still vibrant composite culture. 

This book is invaluable for anyone interested in print culture, intellectual networks, and the cultural history of modern India. The right books always seem to find me at the right time. My first encounter with books printed by Naval Kishore in nineteenth century Lucknow took place in the mid-1990s. I had recently joined the South Asia Institute of Heidelberg University and was looking for a suitable topic for a postdoctoral research project when, one day, a librar jan asked me to inspect a box of old, dusty, and brittle Hindi and Urdu books stacked away in the basement of the Institute Library. The con tents of the box turned out to be nothing less than a treasure. Instead of being discarded, the books moved several floors up into my office. They formed the starting point of a fascinating journey into the history of the book in South Asia and became the subject of a Habilitationsschrift submitted in 2004. 

During the years I spent in researching and writing this book, I have received much invaluable advice and support from a great many people. I am deeply indebted to Professor Monika Boehm-Tettelbach for years of mentorship, constructive advice, and inspiration. She was always there to guide and support me with formidable scholarship and critical insights. I owe her more than words can express. 

A large number of colleagues and friends have provided critical com ments, advice, and assistance. In particular, I would like to thank Dr Ravi Ahuja, Mala Al-Farooq, Dr Georg Berkemer, Dr Christoph Emmrich, Dr Harald Fischer-Tiné, Lila Hüttemann, Dr Jörg Gengnagel, Dr Anindita Ghosh, Dr Christina Oesterheld, Dr Thomas Lehmann, Amtul Manan Tahir, Professor Fateh Muhammad Malik, Professor Jamal Malik, Dr Margrit Pernau, and Dr Srilata Raman. 
I owe special thanks to Professor Vasudha Dalmia for support and encouragement over the years and for inviting me to Berkeley at a criti cal time. In Benares, the late Dr Dhirendranath Singh readily shared his formidable knowledge of Hindi print culture with me. 
In Lucknow I have to thank many people for their outstanding support and hospitality. Many families spontaneously welcomed me into their homes and provided me with an unforgettable experience of Lakhnavi 
Acknowledgements 
food and Lakhnavitahzib.Iam deeply grateful to the family and descen dants of Munshi Naval Kishore, particularly Rani Ram Kumar Bhargava, Dr Ranjit Bhargava, and his wife Shrruti Bhargava for their interest in and support of my work. Dr Ranjit Bhargava not only wholeheartedly supported my project and gave me permission to work on the premises of the Naval Kishore Estate (Raja Ram Kumar Book Depot), but also put some rare private papers at my disposal and shared family memories with me. Shrruti Bhargava welcomed me into the family and fed me dur ing long hours of archival research. 
I would like to thank Nasir Abid for first introducing me to his beau tiful city and giving me a glimpse of Sarshar's Lucknow; he helped establish contacts and opened many doors. Archival doors were also miraculously opened by the late Ashok Priyadarshi. Mrs Nirmala Sharma provided hospitality and made me feel at home in her guesthouse. 
Very special thanks are due to Ram and Dee Advani for their support, affection, and encouragement since my first visit to Lucknow in 1996. As for so many scholars who come to Lucknow. Ram Advani's book shop has been a refuge and a haven for me. I consider myself fortunate to have found a brother and very dear friend in him. 
I am deeply grateful to my friends who gave me shelter, food, and en couragement during my research trips to India and England: Anshu and Sanjiv Narayan and their family provided me with a second home in Delhi; Kathleen Lawless, the late Burhan Tufail, Henie Lustgarten, and Phil Weitzman have been wonderful hosts during many visits to the Bri tish Library. 
I am greatly indebted to the librarians and staff of various libraries and archives for their courtesy and efficiency in handling all manner of enquiries: the South Asia Institute Library (Heidelberg), the British Library (London), the Indian Institute Library (Oxford), the National Archives (New Delhi), the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library (New Delhi), the Uttar Pradesh State Archives (Lucknow), the Amiruddaula Public Library (Lucknow), and the Library of the Nadwat al-Sulama (Luck now). Dr Graham Shaw at the British Library, Elizabeth Krishna at the Indian Institute, and Nusrat Naheed at the Amiruddaula Public Library were especially generous with their time and knowledge. 
Lila Hüttemann, Dr Indra Sengupta-Frey, Dr Guriqbal Sahota, and Rajeev Kinra read parts of this book in draft and offered valuable advice and suggestions. I owe special thanks to Kate Sullivan and Arnab Dey for their careful and perceptive reading of the entire manuscript and to Michaela Dimmers for helping me with illustrations, layout and much 
Acknowledgements 
xii 
more. Bao Do with his enormous expertise in computing and layout worked miracles in transforming my manuscript into a publishable book at a critical time. Professor Clinton Seely provided valuable assistance in getting the manuscript ready for publication. Jason Grunebaum has been very generous with his time, patiently helping me with finishing touches. Dwaipayan Sen did a great job helping me compile the index. 
I am grateful to the Humanities Division of the University of Chicago nd especially Dean Danielle Allen for their generous financial support in getting this book published. 
Lastly, I owe very special thanks to my wonderful family and friends who provided encouragement and emotional support over the years. You kept me grounded and in remembrance of the things that are really important in life. 
