+++
title = "Introduction"

+++
> The promise of the history of the book is simplv this, than it will nor tolerate a simplistic or reductionist understanding of the relation ship between culture and socien. 
> -David D. Hall. Cultures of Print 

The history of the book in India is a history largely untold. This study is an attempt to shed light on the social, cultural, and material aspects of book production in nineteenth-century North India. During this transitional period in Indian history, a new institution arose in the urban literary-cultural sphere, signalling the triumph of print: the commercial publishing house. Through a case study of the Naval Kishore Press of Lucknow (est. 1858), the largest Indian-owned printing press and publishing house in the subcontinent at the time, this study investi gates the impact of the commercial book trade on the diffusion and laicization of knowledge, and on processes of intellectual formation, modernization, and cultural renaissance in North India. More specifically, it explores the role of a singularly influential and prolific publisher in the production, transmission, and canonization of printed texts in the North Indian languages of Hindi and Urdu during a decisive moment in their shared and divided history. 

In focusing on an Indian publishing house, this study enters a fas cinating world of artisanal, scholarly, literary, and entrepreneurial talent. Book printing and publishing in nineteenth-century India was a venture as much entrepreneurial as intellectual. I trace a history which starts from the rise of the Naval Kishore Press and concludes with its position as the most successful business enterprise in nineteenth-century Indian publishing. In doing this, I am as interested in the economics of book production as in what has been called the 'human face' of the book trade (Isaac/McKay 1999). Print generated new professions and introduced a distinctive figure into the colonial public sphere: the commercial printer publisher. This book aims to show, through a famous example, that the foremost pioneers in Indian commercial publishing were not just savvy businessmen. Rather, they were men deeply engaged in the intellectual and literary life of their time who shared its larger cultural, cognitive, and social concerns. The more successful among them combined learn ing cultural expertise, and antiquarian interests with craftsmanship and a keen sense of business. Exercising the various roles of entrepreneur, publicist, literary patron, philanthropist, disseminator of knowledge, and educator, the great icons of early Indian publishing-Fardunji Sorabji Marzban in Bombay, Munshi Harsukh Rai in Lahore, Maulvi Abdul Rahman Khan in Kanpur, Mustafa Khan and Munshi Naval Kishore in Lucknow—assumed importance not only as early industrialists but also as intellectual pathbreakers and intermediaries. In investigating the life and career of one of them, I seek to explore the motivation of such men generally-people for whom printing and publishing was not just a busi ness but a vocation. 
The policy, success, and impact of the Naval Kishore Press (hereafter NKP) are inextricably linked to its founder-proprietor, whose multifaceted life presents an extraordinary tale of fortune. Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-95), the central character of this book, set out as a journalist and printer; his fame, however, rests on his achievement in both general and scholarly publishing. To narrate his life is to narrate the story of an Ind ian Hindu who participated in the revival of Hindu traditions while acting as one of the foremost promoters of Islamic learning and preservers of the Arabic and Indo-Persian literary heritage in the subcontinent. Naval Kishore belonged to the North Indian service gentry. He embodied the synthesis of Indo-Muslim and Hindu learned traditions in an exemplary fashion-most poignantly captured in Khvaja Abbas Ahmad's succinct characterization of him as a 'Muslim pandit and Hindu maulvi'. Yet Naval Kishore also belonged to the new generation of Indians who had received some Western education and been exposed to ideas of Western enlightenment rationality. Underlying his self-perception was a strong sense of the publisher's cultural mission in society. This was to shape the policy of his firm in such a way that it combined capitalist principles of profit making and increasing turnover with literary and cultural patron age. This policy accounted for the development of the NKP as a vibrant intellectual meeting place, where scholars and literati of various backgrounds would gather and interact. 
To date, virtually nothing is known about female participation in the early North Indian publishing trade, perhaps the sole exception being that of Mallika, the cultured young Bengali protégé and companion of Bharatendu Harishchandra, who collaborated with the great Hindi author in his literary ventures. Harishchandra set up a small pub lishing house and bookshop for her (Madan Gopal 1972: 174; Dalmia 2004). 
Introduction 
It is the dual nature of the publishing house-as a modern, capital oriented industrial enterprise and an important site of intellectual, lite rary, and scholastic pursuits-which this books seeks to explore. Book publishing at the NKP-whether in Arabic, Persian, Sanskrit, Hindi, or Urdu-was never inspired by the profit motive alone. Rather, it was in formed by the twin objectives of revitalizing India's cultural and literary heritage and of contributing to Indian modernity through the diffusion of knowledge and education. Combining commercial with educative, scholastic, and aesthetic aims, such a policy followed the imperatives of cultivation and entertainment; it included literature both 'high' and 'low' and sought to address the scholarly elite and the general reading public alike. How these objectives were achieved will form a major concern of my book. 
Through an investigation of the internal structures and external rela tionships of the publishing house, I attempt to reconstruct the process by which the House of Naval Kishore' set about creating a distinct identity for itself. The period under review spans the years from 1858 to 1895. The first date marks the establishment of the firm, which, conveniently enough, coincides with a transformative moment in Indian history. The second date marks the death of Naval Kishore, which brought to a close a major phase in the history of the publishing house. 
While drawing inspiration from the genre in which much publishing history is written, this book is only in part a conventional 'house history, for it also seeks to address larger questions of the transformations in literary culture and learned practice induced by commercial printing. Often cited, a comment made by the Urdu cultural historian Abdul Halim Sharar in his famous swan song of Lakhnavi culture Lucknow: The Last Phase of an Oriental Culture still remains one of most poignant formu lations of the vast and lasting impact of the NKP on the North Indian literary and cognitive domain: ‘The Newal Kishore Press is still the key to the literary trade. Without using it no one can enter the world of learning (Sharar 1975: 108). 
With its focus on the second half of the nineteenth century, this book is not a study of the shift from oral to written culture. Nor is it primarily concerned with the transition from manuscript or scribal culture to print culture initiated in Hindi and Urdu at the turn of the nineteenth century. 
2 For the interface of orality and literacy see, e.g., the classic study by Walter J. Ong (Ong 1982) and the works authored and edited by Jack Goody (Goody 1968; 1986; 1987; 2000). 
An Empire of Books 
Instead, it addresses a third paradigm shift in the history of print in India. which I call the commercialization of print. The term 'commercializa tion', as used here, refers to a number of parallel and interconnected pro cesses that shaped the regional-language book trade from around the 1840s: the introduction of new reproduction techniques and the ensuing shift to industrialized mass production; the decline in production costs and the concomitant possibility of reduction in book prices; the transition from European to large-scale Indian ownership, agency, and investment in the book trade; the rise of the marketplace as a dominant force in lite rary culture; the emergence of commercial genres; and, finally, the crea tion of a new class of professional authors. In short, commercialization describes the transformation of the printed text from artifact and cultural asset into a cheap and easily available consumer commodity. As such, it is intimately linked to wider economic, social, and cultural shifts induced by colonialism-notably, the dawning of the age of industrial capitalism, the spread of colonial literacy and formal education, and the rise and economic empowerment of an Indian educated middle class.' 
Preparing the Ground: Towards a History 
of the Book in India Much has happened since Elizabeth Eisenstein, in her seminal work on print culture The Printing Press as an Agent of Change (1980), decried “the persistence of a venerable philosophical tradition of proud ignorance 
? Focusing on commercialization and industrial mass printing does not mean ignoring the highly complex ways in which print and oral cultures continued to coexist throughout the century, both contesting and complementing each other. Heeding Roger Chartier's warning against a 'too simplistic opposition between oral culture and scribal or print culture' (Chartier 1984:231), recent research has increas ingly stressed the need to overcome the orality versus print dichotomy. Scholars have highlighted the fact that print did not replace orality, but supplemented it. Sheldon Pollock points to the often simultaneous orders of oral, manuscripts and print cultures (Pollock 2003: 15), while Stuart Blackburn, in his investigation of printed folklore in Tamil Nadu (Blackburn 2001; 2003), makes a strong case against the traditional idea of the mutual exclusivity of print and orality. The notion of an inimical relationship between print and oral cultures, he contends, is closely linked to other misconceptions: one being a 'pristine' oral culture later 'polluted' by print, and another what he calls the 'untenable dichotomy' between orality and modernity. His argument regarding Tamil folklore—that print, 'far from widening the gap between literary and oral culture, actually bridged it and brought them together in the form of printed folklore (ibid.: 3)—finds a North Indian parallel in the creative interface of orality and print existing for popular forms of musical drama (Hansen 2001) and narratives of the 
Introduction 
concerning material and mechanical phenomena' (Eisenstein 1980: 24). The history of the book has since developed into a thriving discipline which encompasses not only analytical bibliography and cultural history, but also the material, economic, and legal aspects of book production and distribution, the professional practices of the industry, and the after life of books as seen through reading practices, libraries and the operation of the book market' (Maclean 1999:12). Although the study of the printed book dates back much further, its academic beginnings in the West are taken to lie in the 1950s and are generally associated with Lucien Febvre and Henri-Jean Martin's pathbreaking L'Apparition du Livre (1958, trs. into English as The Coming of the Book). Accompanying the rise of book history as a distinct area of scholarly investigation has been a steadily increasing number of competing methodologies pertaining to analytical and descriptive bibliography, history, the sociology of knowledge, literary and reception studies, and so forth, which at one point prompted Robert Darnton to speak of an interdisciplinarity run riot' (Darnton 1982: 67). 
A quarter century later, the multiplicity of methodologies remains. while the sheeramount, high quality, and depth of scholarly investigations into European book history is overawing. Classic studies of European print culture have tended to view the transition from manuscript to print culture as a communications revolution and have described the printed book as an intellectual ferment that effected major cultural, social, and political transformations. Identifying increased dissemination, standardiz ation, and fixity as the main features of print culture, Eisenstein in parti cular has laid much stress on the preservative powers of print. (Eisenstein 
1980:51-159). Her mechanistic interpretation of print culture has been challenged most forcefully by Adrian Johns in his compelling study of *print in the making' in early modern England (Johns 1998). Focusing on prevailing practices of piracy and unauthorized printing, Johns opposes Eisenstein's key concept of intrinsic fixity' to the ‘uncertainty' of early print culture. He does so by highlighting issues of the reliability of print ed knowledge—a reliability that authors and scholarly printers often found hard to obtain. His argument that print entailed not one but 'many cultures', and that these cultures of the book were themselves 'local in character' (Johns 1998: 30), underpins the necessity of studying print cultures in their particular geographic, social and cultural contexts. 
Persian/Urdu dāstān and qissa genre. Qişşas were refashioned in print, while also circulating back and forth between oral narration, print, and performance (Sangari 2004: 215).An Empire of Books 
Although considerably removed in time and space, Johns's funda mental concern with the reliability and authoritativeness of early printed texts is of direct relevance to the South Asian context, as has been demonstrated by Francis Robinson in his seminal essays on the adoption of print by nineteenth-century Indian Muslims (Robinson 1993; 1996). In India, it was during the second half of the century that the transition from 'uncertainty' to 'fixity' first took place, with printer-publishers like Naval Kishore standing at the juncture of early and modern, i.e. com mercial, print culture with its mass production technologies. Yet fixity was never absolute. As Frances Pritchett has shown through the example of the qişşa, some genres resisted fixity and continued to show a high degree of textual fluidity even after they were consigned to print (Pritchett 1985: 34–5). 
Compared to the huge number of excellent empirical and theoretical studies on the history of the book in the West, book history in South Asia is still in its formative phase. Despite a general consensus that print, in its twin manifestations of the newspaper and the printed book, was crucial to the project of Indian modernity and effected major transformations in the cultural. literary, and political domains, scholars of South Asia have only recently begun to respond to the immense challenge posed by the history of the book in Indian regional languages. A persistent trend has been concentration on the newspaper and periodical press-according to Veena Naregal the 'most suitable site to analyse the structure of exchan ges and meanings of publicity established through print' (Naregal 2001: 190). Given the intimate nexus between the spread of print and the deve lopment of modern regional language journalism, most research has in turn focused on the socio-political impact of the press and its role in the diffusion of public knowledge, in generating critical opinion, and in shap ing Indian nationalism. But few critics have acknowledged the pivotal function of the newspaper media in expanding interest in the printed word prior to the emergence of the 'cheap book' trade. 
Compared with the sustained scholarly interest in the press media, the history of the book has received little, and very uneven, attention. While the advent and early phase of book printing in India have been relatively well documented, no comprehensive account has been offer ed of the development of the commercial book trade and industrializa tion of the print medium in Indian regional languages in the nineteenth century. This is not surprising in light of the fact that India still lacks a 
See, e.g., Khare 1964; Chakraborti 1976; Sharma 1996; Narain 1998. 
See, e.g. Priolkar 1959; Diehl 1964; Rhodes 1969; Kesavan 1985-97; Shaw 1981 and 1998; Rohatgi and Godrej 1989; Ross 1999. 
Introduction 
national book history. Fortunately, however, this neglect is beginning to show signs of waning. For instance, a relatively recent volume entitled Print Areas. Book History in India (2004) promises to be the first in a series of studies devoted to the systematic exploration of book history in India. 
The fact that academic contributions to the history of the book in India and, more specifically, in Hindi and Urdu, are still limited in number naturally does not make the task any easier. The study of the printed book in the subcontinent continues to pose particular problems to re searchers. The difficulties confronted include the scarcity of basic em pirical data on just about every aspect of production, transmission, and consumption. Factual knowledge of material, infrastructural, and opera tional aspects of the regional language book trade, of author-publisher and publisher-bookseller relations, of readership and consumption prac tices is still limited. Seldom extant, Indian publishers' and booksellers' archives are not readily accessible and lie mostly untapped. British official records, our principal source of publication data, are not always reliable and in their concern with statistics provide only a limited insight into the operations, networks, and underlying motivations of indigenous pub lishers. In this situation, research has tended to focus on book-producing and disseminating institutions with a recorded history-early European and missionary printing presses, government colleges, schoolbook and translation societies. North India's indigenous publishing houses have received little scholarly attention, despite their pivotal role in shaping a market for the Hindi and Urdu book.? To my knowledge there exist only two monographs on early Indian publishing houses in the Hindi and Urdu region (Singh 1986; Shams Badauni 1995). 
The history of the book cuts across established academic disciplines and has been accurately described as 'polyvocal' and 'inevitably inter disciplinary'. While one might observe with Darnton that scholars of book history in Indian regional languages still find themselves crossing paths in a no-man's-land located at the intersection of a half-dozen fields of study' (Darnton 1982: 65), it seems more apt to point out that this very 
For a pioneering work in Indian book history, dealing with Bengali, see Khan 1999. 
? For nineteenth-century India there exist no clear-cut lines between printer and publisher, their differentiation into separate institutions occuring only in the twentienth century. For reasons of simplicity the terms ‘printing press', 'press', and 'publishing house' will be used interchangeably throughout this book to refer to the kind of busi ness enterprise that prepared, printed, and issued books for public distribution or sale. 
An Empire of Books 
multidisciplinarity has in fact greatly energized the study of book history in South Asia. Significant impulses have been received from disciplines concerned with the study of nationalism, popular cultures, and the form ation of Indian public opinion. Recent debates on the Habermasian public sphere and on Benedict Anderson's influential concept of nationalism (Anderson 1983) have naturally foregrounded issues pertinent to print. Anderson's articulation of the role of print-capitalism' in the emergence of the 'imagined community' of the nation posited the creation of national print-languages' and 'monoglot mass reading publics' as a powerful factor in forging national identities. His argument has since been qualified in a number of important ways by, among others, Anthony D. Smith, who cautions against overgeneralizing the power of the printed word in societies that possessed various other means of public mobilization.' Yet, even while the various critiques of Anderson must be acknowledged here, his concept of 'print capitalism' cannot and will not be dismissed altogether. Print capitalism, in its most basic sense of the convergence of capitalism and print technology', is nicely exemplified by the House of Naval Kishore, whose role in shaping the North Indian printing industry has been with good reason compared to that of the legendary J.N. Tata in the Indian steel industry (Nagar 1991). "Print capitalist appears to me to be a particularly apt epithet for an individual who built up India's larg est publishing concern from scratch, combining the roles of single largest employer in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, founder-editor of 
According to Anderson, print cultures shaped nationalist ideologies in a threefold way: they created 'unified fields of exchange and communication', gave a new 'fixity to the language which over time helped to build that image of antiquity so central to the subjective idea of the nation', and created new languages-of-power' that were different from the older administrative vernaculars (Anderson 1991: 44-5). 
9 "The portrayals of the nation that stirred people into action were oral, audial and visual rather than literary, a matter of symbols, songs, images, reports and rituals (Smith 1998: 139). This important point has been raised in a different context by Peter Burke who, outlining the importance of the new print media for Lutheran reform in sixteenth-century Germany, stresses the fact that the true mass media at the time were still oral and visual (“The Public Sphere-Past and Present', public lecture at Heidelberg University, 25 June 2002). For further criticism of Anderson, see Chatterjee 1993: 4-6; Tønnesson and Antlöv 1996: 6-9; Bayly 1996a. Dilip Menon (Menon 2002), in a study of lower caste Malayalam novels, vehemently re jects Anderson's 'axiomatic twining' of the nation and the novel, arguing that rather than 'narrating the nation', lower-caste novels were more concerned with addressing questions of fashioning the self, of caste collectivity, and religious imagination in the face of colonial modernity. 
Introduction 
North India's most influential Urdu daily newspaper, large landed proprie tor, and pioneering investor in new businesses such as the Lucknow Paper Mills. 
The Publishing House and the 
Literary System Robert Darnton's often-cited communications circuit' has provided a classic analytic model for theorizing the life cycle of a book through the stages of production, transmission, and consumption (Darnton 1982).! While the communications circuit has recently come under critique for being too rigid, overly deterministic, and lacking contextualization, cultural theory has offered a more dynamic methodology for the study of book history in the form of the Pierre Bourdieu's influential 'fields of cultural production (Bourdieu 1993). In Bourdieu's theory the literary field is a 'relatively autonomous structured space which has its own specific 'laws of operation but is embedded within and subject to the in direct influences of a larger field of power. Bourdieu's articulation of the literary field has been called a 'radical contextualization'. As a theory of context it offers a framework that not only encompasses the various agents operating in the field of literary production but also the changing social, economic, political, and technological conditions by which it is affected." The internal organization of the field. Bourdieu contends, is marked by hierarchical structures and a fundamental opposition between two sub-fields, namely 'restricted production' (small-scale avant-garde publishers who invest in works of literary and aesthetic value, believe in art for art's sake', and are concerned with the excellence of their craft) and large-scale production' (commercially oriented publishers, who invest in the mass production of saleable texts and measure value in purely financial terms). From being 'functionaries' in Darnton's model, publishers and other cultural intermediaries in Bourdieu's theory advance to being 'symbolic brokers in the field' who can confer cultural status on a given text and assert 'principles of cultural legitimacy' (McDonald 1997: 20). 
10 Envisaging the different segments and agents in the book's life cycle from a "holistic' viewpoint, the communications circuit maps its journey from the author to the publisher, printer, bookseller, etc. to the reader. The circuit runs full cycle from reader back to author, since writers are themselves readers who address implicit readers and respond to reviews. 
Il This paragraph draws on the insightful discussion of Darnton's and Bourdieu's theory offered by Peter D. McDonald (McDonald 1997: 9-21). 
An Empire of Books 
In theorizing the role of the publishing house, this book also draws on another methodological framework that highlights contextualization, notably Peter U. Hohendahl's articulation of the institution of literature'. Theoreticians of the 'institution' have variously used the term to designate concrete, material organizations on the one hand and ideological form ations'—that is, a wider set of rules, values, norms, and practices-on the other. Taking into account these various uses, Hohendahl, in his study of mid-nineteenth century German literary culture (Hohendahl 1989), has advocated the concept of the institution as a helpful analytical category for exploring the inner coherence between literary and social history. Drawing on concepts of the public sphere, in which the institution of literature is embedded, his approach is concerned with the conditions under which textual production and consumption occur. 12 Hohendahl stresses the historicity of the institution of literature. His theory of insti tutionalization' outlines the formation of a network of interacting sub institutions in the literary domain. It allows us to view the publishing house as an institutional space operating within a discursive and inter actionist sphere of other sub-institutions involved in literary production and transmission. Depending on their nature, function, and agenda, these act as authorities, controlling agents, or innovators in questions of literary tradition and canon formation. 
In the South Asian context, Francesca Orsini has successfully drawn on Hohendahl's useful conceptual framework in her study of the Hindi public sphere in 1920–40. She demonstrates how educated Indians ad vanced their political, social, and literary agendas through creating institutional spaces (Orsini 2002). In applying the theory of the institution to the literary field of nineteenth-century North India, we encounter struc tures (sub-institutions) specific to the colonial situation, such as Orient alist scholarship, the Anglo-Indian press, and the colonial education system. Thus, of particular interest to this study is the question of how, within this institutional configuration, the publishing house interacted with other sub-institutions—indigenous scholarship, literary associa tions, public libraries, the ‘vernacular' press, colonial education and its school curricula, and so on. 
12 “The publicly grounded institution of literature is subject to indirect pressures exerted by political and economic issues on the public sphere. Traditional literary history, which is oriented towards authors, works, or genres, cannot contribute much to the institutional character of literature and thus can comprehend diachronic pro cesses only as isolated series of events' (Hohendahl 1989:45). See also Hohendahl's influential The Institution of Criticism (1982). 
Introduction 
11 
As research on print culture in the West has shown, histories of publishing houses are not limited to author-publisher relations, edit orial practices, and sales and marketing, but have contributed to our understanding of various material, socio-historical, economic, and orga nizational aspects of cultural production. In the exploration of nineteenth century Hindi and Urdu literary culture, the role of the publisher is an understudied area. Breaking new ground in that sense, this book proceeds from the assumption that the commercial publishing house assumed a dual function within the literary field that was both reflective and inno vative. The successful publisher's choices not only responded to reader ship tastes and reflected processes of canonization as well as current trends in literary activity, they also shaped these processes. In selecting, rejecting, and revising manuscripts, publishers were, as Leslie Howsam suggests, astute interpreters' of contemporary tastes or, more metaphor ically, 'canaries in the coal-mines of the contemporary culture, testing the atmosphere in which they were doing business' (Howsam 1998: 13). Publishers also influenced tastes: new editions, frequent reprints, cheap formats, and serialization had a direct bearing on enhancing the audience of a given text. The imprint of a publisher could invest a book with pres tige; a contract with a reputed publishing house could be a step in an auth or's canonization. 
In probing how the publishing house interacted with other institutions within the broader configuration of the institution of literature, this book is also concerned with the radical shifts in structures of patronage gene rated by print. The rise of the printed book coincided with the gradual dissolution of traditional patronage systems that centred around the court and that were shaped by a strong bond between the poet or writer, his royal patron, and his audience of connoisseurs. Within such milieux authors had depended on their wealthy patrons for financial security and social prestige. With the coming of print and the decline of courtly patro nage, literature acquired new organizational forms. Mass printing techno logy not only altered the relationship among the participants in literary production, it also changed the function of the book. In metropolitan Britain, as much as in colonial India, the printing press was put to 'utilit arian' ends, the colonial state emerging as one of the principal patrons of the printed book. More than mere intermediaries between author and reader, publishers now rose to become important literary patrons. 
Another principal new source of patronage was the reader. While pri vate patronage continued to be of importance, printed products were increasingly sustained by a new Indian consumer class. With the book's 
12 
An Empire of Books 
gradual transformation into a commercial commodity, literary production and transmission were for the first time subsumed to the forces of the marketplace, the fate of a literary work and its author depending on its saleability and reception (Das 1991: 38-9). 
That Naval Kishore was at the same time a scholarly, literary, and general publisher has major implications. In Bourdieu's terms, he spanned the two sub-fields of restricted' and 'large-scale production. His policy of offering the literary canon of classic authors to a large public in in expensive and linguistically accessible formats, for example, was a means of reconciling the traditional concept of cultivation of the mind with the capitalist principle of profit-making. While literary studies in the areas of Hindi and Urdu have traditionally tended to focus on 'high' culture, in recent times the stimulating impact of interpenetrating studies of popular and print culture has entailed a shift of attention towards popular and ‘lowly' genres. My investigation into a commercial publishing house cuts right across these distinctions. In it, the boundaries between 'high' and 'low', and 'elite' and 'popular' literature are often blurred. In trying to bring the printed book within the reach of the broadest possible audi ence, Indian commercial publishers catered for both the upper and the lower end of the market. Although much of the literature viewed here be longs to the domain of high culture, including a broad selection of Hindi and Urdu literary and religious classics, the commercial use of print also entailed the mass production of various forms of 'cheap' chapbook literature and an often undiscussed but significant body of non-belletris tic texts—religious and mythological tracts, medical and astrological manuals, song books, legal forms and almanacs. While located outside the canon of high textuality, these staples of the commercial book trade were widely consumed across castes and classes. In exploiting their sales potential, a 'respectable' publisher of Naval Kishore's means and stature was no different from the many small and cheap' presses ope rating in the world of popular print. Consequently, the term 'literature will be used here throughout in a general, inclusive sense, comprising both literary and ‘non-literary textual genres. 
Literacy, Readership, and Consumption An important aspect of book history is concerned with literacy and the practice of reading. To say that print culture had a profound impact on 
13 Indeed, as McDonald points out, the two sub-fields are an 'idealized opposition', while in actual practice 'few agents are ever exclusively committed to a single position in the field' (McDonald 1997: 14). Rather, they occupy positions which combine the two perspectives in various degrees. 
Introduction 
13 
literacy is a truism, but since few scholars have hitherto taken up the for midable task of tracing the nature of this development in the South Asian context, we know little about the exact mechanisms at work. It is one thing to acknowledge the impact of print on literacy, and quite another to trace the precise modes and processes by which new readerships were constituted. With its focus on aspects of production and transmission, An Empire of Booksis not intended to and indeed cannot be an examination of readership and reading practices. Yet some of the analytical problems posed by the categories of literacy and the reading public are addressed here because they have a direct bearing on my concern with the nature. extent, and limits of commercial publishing. 
In the subcontinent the printed book entered, and came to flourish in. a world deeply imbued with oral traditions: it coexisted and interacted with old and strong oral cultures. At the same time. India boasted a rich and highly refined manuscript culture. A helpful concept in understanding the impact of printed texts and their generally high valorization in the Indian context is the distinction between literacy and literacy awareness'. introduced by C.A. Bayly in his Empire and Information (1996). Even if pre-colonial and colonial Indian society was largely non-literate, it was also, as Bayly argues, 'a society acutely aware of literacy, where even the poor could gain access to writers and readers at a cost', and where illiteracy did not preclude sophistication in using others' learning (Bayly 1996: 13, 38). The power and prestige of writing and the written word was acknowledged not only by the literate castes but by a much larger section of the population. Even to the illiterate, the printed book could constitute an object of veneration and seem a prized possession.lt 
Literacy, as a category of analysis, remains problematic in several respects. For one thing, it is difficult to give a close estimate of the size of the literate public in nineteenth-century North India, given the scanty statistical evidence. As research in the Bengal region has shown, even in the pre-colonial period basic literacy among non-elite castes may have been more widespread than has been generally assumed (Ghosh 1998: 187). In this context, one is well advised to remember Roger Chart ier's articulation of the 'wide range of reading abilities' existing between literacy and illiteracy (Chartier 1984: 236–7). The problems surrounding the issue of literacy are already fully evident in the colonial Census Reports, our principal statistical source. A predominantly rural region, 
14 The educationist Raja Shiva Prasad reports an encounter with a villager who proudly showed him a missionary tract 'which a Padri Sahib had given him at Ballia fair, and which he had kept with the greatest care possible, doubly covered, for his son when he was of school-going age.' AECR 1884: 316. 
14 
An Empire of Books 
the North Indian plains showed a generally lower level of literacy than the coastal regions. Yet various factors such as the development of commerce, the level of patronage exercised by indigenous rulers, and the concentration of scribal and merchant castes-accounted for signi ficant sub-regional variation. According to the NWP Census of 1872. male literacy was around three per cent, while female literacy was close to nil. 15 The 1881 Census listed 6.6 per cent of the male population in the province as 'literates' or 'scholars', an expression of British officials grappling with the need to further distinguish between the functional ly and fully literate. At 6.4 and 6.6 per cent, literacy among Hindus and Muslims was almost equal and stood in stark contrast to the high literacy of 51.6 per cent prevailing among Jains. Furthermore, there was a marked urban-rural divide. The condition of life among the rural population offered little opportunity or incentive for acquiring more than basic reading skills. Literacy was naturally much higher among the urban population and was reinforced by the impact of formal education. Of special signifi cance in the present context is the subtle but important distinction between literacy and habitual book reading (Altick 1957: 31). An Indian trader who knew how to read and write in the Mahajani script may not have taken to reading literary works. A rural government school pupil, having acquired some basic reading skills over a year or two of schooling, may never have bought a book in later life and could even have lost the ability to read through lack of practice. 
Female literacy is another issue that needs to be addressed. Attitudes towards female literacy and education underwent dramatic change in the course of the century, and had a direct bearing on the number of lite rate women and their reading habits. During the early nineteenth century the notion of female literacy was surrounded by strong fears and social taboos. Traditional superstitions invoked the harmful effects of a woman's knowledge of how to read and write-moral depravity, failure to secure a husband, or even widowhood (Borthwick 1984: 60–1; Forbes 1996: 33). Over time, perceptions changed: under the combined influence of colonial literacy schemes, social reform, and Indian nationalism the ability to read and write came to be regarded by many as a useful asset, indeed 
15 NWP Census 1872, Vol. 1: 31–2. In Avadh literacy was even lower. 
1 In 1881 the proportion of school-going boys in the age group five to nine ranged from 12 percent in Aligarh to 19 percent in Lucknow. Report on the Census of the NWP&Oudh and of the Native States of Rampur and Native Garhwal, ... 1881: 91 
Introduction 
15 
a requirement, in a young woman's religious and domestic education (Chatterjee 1993). The British introduced the first textbooks for girls; Indian support came from reformist literati. The powerful plea for female literacy made by Nazir Ahmad in Miras al-arus (The Bride's Mirror, *1869)--the first bestseller and presumably the first piece of modern fiction widely consumed by female readers of Urdu—was reiterated by Altaf Husain Hali in Majūlis an-nisa (Assemblies of Women, 1874)." Indian nationalism propagated the new ideals of companionate marriage and the enlightened mother who, on the strength other education, was a capable manager of domestic affairs and educator of her children, the future builders of the nation. 
While the habit of book reading gradually ceased being condemned as harmful per se, attitudes towards female reading remained deeply ambivalent. Even Indian advocates of female education nourished latent fears of wrong reading that would bring out women's supposedly innate immorality and perfidious character (Sangari 1999: 147-63). Raja Shiva Prasad's testimony before the Education Commission of 1882 is a case in point. Eager to refute colonial stereotypes of the backwardness of Indian women, he contended that Indian women were more educated, more intelligent, more free ... than the Europeans have any idea of", while at the same time cautioning that he knew of cases where women have gone astray by knowing how to read and write's As long as such patriarchal anxieties prevailed, books 'suitable for women' remained confined to a prescriptive and carefully monitored canon of textbooks and didactic works. Small in number and restricted by patriarchal ideo logy, the potential of the 'female market in North Indian languages, I would suggest, was too limited to be commercially exploited in the period under review. Unlike Britain or even contemporary Bengal, in North India it was not before the turn of the century that publishers began to target the Hindi and Urdu female readership as a distinct and commer cially viable market. Having said this, it is important to note that women, both as readers and listeners, did exist as a category in publishers' minds for a wide range of non-gender-specific publications. Women had access to and were eager consumers of the products of print culture to a much larger degree than literacy figures suggest.19 
17 Minault 1986; 1998: 38-55. 18 AECR 1884: 323. 19 For an illustration of this point, see Sangari 1999; Ghosh 2002; Joshi 2002.16 
An Empire of Books 
What do literacy figures, unsatisfactory though they are as evidence. tell us then? Mostly, that to focus only on the low levels of literacy re veals very little about contemporary Indian readers' consumption of printed texts. A much more promising approach has been adopted by Priya Joshi in her fascinating account of the Indian consumption of the British novel in late-nineteenth-century India (Joshi 2002). Joshi analyses consumption patterns through a study of library holdings and borrowing practices. In the process she convincingly argues against the use of class as an analytic category in defining readership. 
By contrast, other critics invoke class in their exploration of hetero dox reading cultures defined by gender, community, and social status. No doubt, as cheap printed matter became more accessible, the reading public expanded to include larger sections of the lower social strata, who in turn shaped their own print cultures. Departing from a critique of the dominant analytical framework for studying Bengali culture—which has remained 'primarily concerned with middle class intellectuals' and 'dominant print culture shaped by the educated elite'-Anindita Ghosh has brought the lower-class reader into focus (Ghosh 2002). Her study of the popular commercial publishing trade in mid- to late-nineteenth century Bengal suggests that the number of lower-middle-class urban and rural homes which consumed popular forms of printed literature was much larger than is usually assumed. Numerous 'cheap' presses in Calcutta's Battala area thrived on the tastes of these petty bourgeois readers, running a brisk trade in popular print which even surpassed the limited output of the city's more ‘respectable presses. Ghosh highlights the importance of this 'small book' trade in resisting the dominant cultural and literary norms that the 'culturally chauvinistic' bhadralok (genteel middle classes) tried to impose on non-elite groups.20 
While I follow Joshi in rejecting a class-based classification of read ership, this book throughout makes reference to the common reader', 'general reading public', and 'mass reading public'. I am fully aware that these terms constitute highly problematic analytical categories. The 'mass reading public', particularly, can only be a contextualized heuristic device. Given the fact that the Indian masses lacked both the education and the economic means to read and buy books, we can hardly speak of a mass reading public in the sense described by R.C. Altick in his seminal The English Common Reader (1957). To cite a famous example from 
20 For the disciplining' of popular print on the part of the bhadralok, see also Roy 1996. 
Inroduction 
17 
British publishing history. Charles Dickens's Pickwick Papers created the first genuine British mass audience for literature with a circulation of 40,000 within the first five months of serialization in 1836 (Hughes/ Lund 1995: 151). Circulation figures for Indian periodicals are, of course, a far cry from this. Yet the gulf is much less evident when it comes to first print runs of belletristic works, where a figure of c: 1000 copies was frequently found in both the British metropolis and India. 
Within the specific limits of the Indian context, the term 'mass reading public can still make sense if we do not take it as a numerical variable to be measured against the entire population, but as a category indicative of the transformation in the size and nature of the literate audience which was brought about by the combined effects of colonial literacy and the commercialization of print. As I aim to show in this book, the common reader and the mass reading public certainly existed as potential catego ries in commercial publishers' minds. The connotation of mass' in India was simply different, referring to thousands rather than tens of thousands. In their immediate concern with the expansion of the reading public, a principal aim of Naval Kishore and his confreres was to bring printed literature to the people. Publishers deployed special advertising strategies and invested in promotional schemes to attract the broadest possible audience. Successful commercial publishing not only meant enlarging the number of readers by satisfying existing tastes and shaping new ones, it also meant inducing more and more people to buy books. Here, the financial factor was crucial. As will be shown, the NKP's policy of popularizing the printed book-a policy firmly based on reprints of clas sics, translations, and inexpensive books in small formats—was key to the firm's success. 
In this context, Naval Kishore's patronage of the public library, another novel institution in the colonial literate sphere, assumes significance. Even if few in number and confined to urban spaces, public libraries were important multiplicators of print. Unlike Europe, in contemporary India the reader who did not want to regularly invest in books had limited avenues for cheap access to books. The flourishing railway libraries system of Victorian England, with its cheap pocket editions, did not have its Indian counterpart at this time, while commercial circulating libraries with their fresh arrivals from England catered almost exclusively to Europeans and the English-educated Indian elite. As Joshi has shown, British publishing firms carefully cultivated the colonial marketplace. In the wake of Macmillan's highly successful Colonial Library Series (est. 1886), all major British publishers at some point started their own 
18 
An Empire of Books 
Foreign, Colonial, or Imperial library series (Joshi 2002: 94). For readers of Indian languages no such facilities existed. In this situation, the newly emerging public libraries and the reading rooms of colleges and learned societies assumed an important role in cultivating the reading habit. 
The history of the public library system in northern India remains to be written.2In the metropolis the appalling lack of public library facilities had been brought to public notice in 1848. After a heated debate, the controversial Public Libraries Bill was passed in 1850. levying a rate in support of public libraries (Altick 1957: 224). When. in its wahe, the scheme of setting up public libraries was placed on the colonial agenda. it found immediate support among the Indian educated elite. In trying to assess the role of public libraries in creating larger audiences, one has to remember that they not only functioned as institutionalized sites for private reading and public lecturing but also as book-borrowing facilities, making more books available to more readers at very little cost. This said, it is important to understand that public libraries at the time were not 'public' in the modern sense of the word—of giving free access to everybody. The term typically refers to a subscription library maintained and managed collectively by the subscribers and sustained by government grants (Mishra 1979: 22). 
The foregoing discussion raises the question of whether there was a print 'revolution' in nineteenth-century India. Outlining historical continuities and the evolutionary aspect of intellectual transformation. C.A. Bayly has pointed to the existence of sophisticated systems of written social communication in the pre-print era. Print in itself did not create an information revolution, contends Bayly; rather, it speeded up the velocity and range of communication among existing communities of knowledge' (1996a: 243). Scholars in literary studies have highlighted the persistence of pre-print forms of textuality and tend to agree that the putative print revolution was not a generic revolution. Leaving aside the new surge of textbook literature, the most common types of books pro duced were similar to those in the pre-print era. The basic tendency, as 
21 The first permanent public library in India was set up in Calcutta in 1818, when the private holdings of the college library of Fort William were made available to the general public. For the first time a collection of 8341 printed books and almost 3000 manuscripts was made accessible not only to Europeans but to literary men in general in India'. Part of its holdings later merged into those of the Calcutta Public Library opened in 1836 (Kopf 1969: 187-9; Joshi 2002: 53-9). For early circulating and public libraries in Bengal, see Ohdedar 1966; Kabir 1987; for Maharashtra, see Mahajan 1984. Misra 1979 provides a general overview of the development of public libraries in India. 
Introduction 
19 
Blackburn has argued, was not to produce new genres or texts, but rather to reproduce more texts in old genres. Orsini has offered a poignant formulation of print culture as genres reproduced and genres introduced (Orsini 2004: 435-6). 
In its concern with commercial publishing, An Empire of Books propo ses to look at the print 'revolution as a quantitative rather than qualitative or generic shift. It argues that one of the most revolutionary' aspects of print was that, once it reached the stage of commercialization, it provided a hitherto unknown general access to the products of written culture among literate audiences. India's legendary richness in manuscripts easily allows one to forget that, for the average Indian reader, manuscripts were expensive and hard to come by, as borne out by perennial contempo rary complaints. This, to a certain extent, also holds true for the printed book in its early phase. The step from the rare and costly manuscript to the mass-produced printed book-costing barely one-tenth the price of a manuscript, if not less (Davis 1983: 16) and available through a rapidly expanding network of distribution sites and agents--- was indeed revolutionary. To illustrate this point: Naval Kishore, an Indian publisher of Hindu origin, was most likely the world's first publisher to issue in 1868 a finely printed Qur'an at the sensational price of Rs 1, 8 as, thus bringing the holy book within reach of an unprecedented number of ordi nary Muslims. While general accessibility remains to a certain extent a theoretical construct and does not imply that every Indian at all times had books within his reach or could actually afford to buy them, commer cial mass printing altered power configurations within the cognitive and literary domain. Knowledge was no longer the preserve of small elites but expanded into the public realm. 
To study a publisher's production and sales figures can help to estab lish the general popularity of an author or genre, and possibly to infer the canonical status of a given text, yet it reveals little about the composition of the readership in terms of religious affiliation, class, and gender. Likewise, the study of a commercial publishing house cannot enlighten us about individual tastes, consumption practices, and a book's impact, but may provide valuable insights into consumption trends and thus help 
22 See also Bayly 1996a: 242. 
23 As Jonathan Rose suggests, one should be wary of the assumption, 'widely shared among students of popular culture', that the influence of a given book is directly proportional to its circulation' (Rose 1995: 205). The sensational Victorian novelist G.W.M. Reynolds, arguably the most widely read author in England at the height of his career (and a favourite with Indian readers, too), easily outsold Charles Dickens in the metropolitan market, but failed to register in contemporary Victorian 
20 
An Empire of Books 
provide answers to the vexed question of the circulation of printed books. As we will see, contemporary British officials and Indian observers dif fered widely in their assumptions about the impact of the printed book on reading behaviour (Chapter 1). Modern critics, too, depending on their academic background and agenda, tend to disagree in their assessments. While Pollock cautions that in the subcontinent the printed book remained, and continues to remain, 'out of the reach of many people (Pollock 2003: 22), Joshi invokes an India in which Indians passionately. power fully, and persistently read—and often wrote-seemingly everything that the empire of print purveyed and made available (Joshi 2002: 280). Indeed, there is ample evidence that more reading was done than the bare circulation of newspapers or sales figures of books would suggest. While it is impossible to determine how many readers or listeners were reached by a given book, the printed book introduced new cultural prac tices, allowing for both individual and shared reading 24 Crities have pointed to the importance of prevailing practices of shared reading and reading aloud in providing access to literary and print culture among non-literates. Like newspapers and periodicals, books were read to house hold members, friends, and menials or to wider audiences in public set tings. Even conventional forms of recitation located in the traditional domain of religious public performance started to make use of the printed text.25 Against this backdrop, Ghosh's questioning of the assumption that literacy is a necessary precondition for identifying consumers of print literature (Ghosh 2002: 4332) seems particularly relevant. 
The issue of readership then leaves us with more queries than answers. Much rigorous empirical research needs to be done before we can say what and how much was being read by whom. For Hindi and Urdu, espe cially, the study of consumption, reading practices, and reader response remains a huge scholarly enterprise which will require the collective 
reader surveys of favourite authors and did not secure a place among canonized authors in English literature. 
24 James Long, in his 1859 survey of the Bengal book trade, calculated that there were six million readers or listeners for over 600,000 copies of Bengali books issued in 1857, at the rate of 10 persons per book. His estimate for newspapers was about the same, with 2950 copies being read by approximately 30,000 readers. No similar estimates exist for North India. In 1853, 39 newspapers and periodicals were circulated in the NWP in a total of 1839 copies. In the following year, circulation had gone up to 3223 copies and would continue to rise rapidly. 
25 See, e.g., Long 1859; Roy 1996: 46; Metcalf 1990: 21; Naregal 2001: 31-2; Ghosh 2002. 
Introduction 
21 
effort of a body of scholars. Such an investigation must necessarily draw on very different sources from the ones on which this book is based, and include a survey of private testimonies-autobiographies, memoirs, letters, the proceedings of literary associations, the invent ories and borrowing records of public libraries, and so on. 
Indigenous Responses to Print 
Commercial publishers operated in and negotiated a field of conflicting opinions in relation to print. Members of the English-educated Indian elite generally welcomed the printing press as an agent of enlightenment, progress, and social change. On establishing the first modern' school in Benares, Jai Narayan Ghoshal, an ex-superintendent of the Calcutta police, rich merchant, and convert to Christianity, in 1818 requested the London Church Missionary Society to send a printing press to Benares, judging it one of the most effectual means' for 'enlightening the mind of his countrymen. Without the possibility of multiplying and dispersing textbooks and treatises on different subjects throughout the country, he contended, the progress of knowledge must be very slow.and the Hindus long remain in their very fallen state, which is a very painful consideration to a benevolent mind'. 26 Some forty years later, the foremost Benares educationist Raja Shiva Prasad so highly estimated the importance of print that, in his widely used alphabetical primer Varnamālā (Garland of Letters, 1860), he inserted under the letter 'ch' an illustration of a printing press (chāpe kikal) amidst the familiar drawings of animals and vehicles. Among Muslim intellectuals, Sayyid Imdad Husain, editor of the Dehli Urdū Akhbār, showered praise on colonial officials in 1853 for having introduced the first printing presses in Delhi, thereby encouraging his countrymen to set up their own presses and participate in the diffusion of knowledge. May God increase their number every day, he piously hoped. 27 Noting that the printing press had brought all sorts of learned books within easy reach of the common people', the great Bharatendu Harishchandra asserted in 1883 that it had doubtless led to the dawning of a new age for mankind' (Harishchandra 1989: 564). In Bengal, the anglophile Brahmo Samajist Bholanauth Chunder went as faras claiming 
26 Cited in Long 1848: 70. Ghoshal's application included a request for one or two suitable missionaries to be sent along as supervisors of the press, men of learning who may be able to satisfy the inquiries of the learned of this ancient city on subjects of science and history as well as of religion.' 
27 Dehli Urdu Akhbar of 8 August 1853. I am grateful to Margrit Pernau for providing me with the original text of the editorial. 
22 
An Empire of Books 
that 'Nothing less than Hindoostan ought to be given away to the English in grateful reward for their introducing the art of printing' which, he enthusiastically asserted, was 'emancipating thousands of minds from the yoke of a superstition that held us as brutes for centuries' (Chunder 1869: 229). 
While such a view was certainly not shared by many. the enthusiasm that print generated did not remain confined to the progressive and mod ernizing sections of society. Print also made inroads into the milieux of traditional education and religious orthodoxy, overcoming religiously and socially grounded reservations. A potent means of propagating ideas and exerting influence, print was adopted by the orthodox and reformers, by traditionalist, revivalists, and modernists. It cut across boundaries, providing a powerful example of the limitations of the outdated tradition alist-modernist dichotomy. Generating a vast corpus of tract and pam phlet literature, it shaped the dissemination of religious knowledge and had a profound impact on the nature of religious teaching. As scholars of Indian Islam have shown, reformist Muslims were among the first to avail themselves of the printing press (Metcalf 1982; Robinson 1993. 1996, 2001). Print was crucial to the spread of Islamic reformist ideas, opening up a whole new discursive sphere of religious debate. Avril Powell, in her compelling study of the religious interface between Christ ian missionaries and Muslims in pre-Mutiny India, has demonstrated the great familiarity of leading Indian 'ulama with printed translations of the Bible and missionary tracts, which shaped the Christian-Muslim encounter (Powell 1993). The use of printed texts on both sides, often assuming the proportion of pamphlet wars, enlarged the audiences of traditional forms of public religious disputation (munāzura) beyond local confines. 
Among those concerned with the impact of print on contemporary Hinduism, William Pinch has outlined how, within Hindu sectarian groups, the popularization of print encouraged processes of self-reflexi vity and led to an 'increasing doctrinal self-consciousness' in bringing to light and juxtaposing the variety of local, often conflicting, exegeses. In the process, principal sectarian texts were reinterpreted and put to a specific use (Pinch 1996: 54). Following the example of both Christian missionaries and Bengali reformers, Hindu religious leaders, while steeped in the world of oral transmission, recognized the power of the printed word and began to exploit it to propagate their views. Perhaps the most salient example is that of Swami Dayanand Sarasvati, founder of the Hindu reformist Arya Samaj. Jordens reports an angry outburst of the Swami who, when touring the Punjab in the 1870s, found that not a 
Introduction 
single printed copy of the Veda could be procured in the town he was visiting, while missionaries were busy translating and selling cheap edi tions of the Bible in every regional language. Davanand seized, if some what belatedly, the opportunities provided by print: he established his own press and started seeing his lectures and teachings into print, thus turning from public speakerto publicist of the pen' (Jordens 1978: 166). 
Yet the Indian reaction to print was not without its ambivalences. There were reservations even among those modernizing sections of the intelligentsia who welcomed print and availed themselves of its possibi lities. In opening up an easy and cheap avenue to knowledge, print chal lenged exclusivist elite notions of higher learning. Its impact on traditional religious education, especially, was seen as a mixed blessing. Sayyid Ahmad Khan, commenting on Shah Abdul Aziz's Urdu translation of the Qur'an, remarked in the 1840s: ( Alpresent every commoner believes himself to be a scholar and every ignoramus regards himself as a learned man. Merely on the basis of having read a few chapbooks on religious issues and a translation of the Qur'an, and that too in Urdu, with some ordinary teacher or just through his own effort, he considers himself as a jurist and an exegete and dares to preach and opine on issues. "28 The great poet Mirza Ghalib, in a lighter vein, poked fun at a learned friend of his, insinuating that the latter owed his entire erudition to having pur chased fifty rupees' worth of two-penny books' (Rahbar 1987: 127). Evidently, the general accessibility and democratizing trajectory of the printed book provoked latent fears about appropriations of elite know ledge by the populace. 
Genteel traditions of learning were not the only issue at stake. Increas ing attention has recently been paid to the larger divides between elite and popular cultural norms, reinforced by commercial print, which led to a project of sanitizing literary tastes and marginalizing popular cultures on the part of upper-class elites (Roy 1996; Gupta 2001). The colonial state, while deploying print as a vehicle of ideology and essential tool in education, had similar reservations about print, manifest in its preoccu pation with 'taste' and 'refinement'. 
Publishers and the Colonial State 
Critics have looked at print as an instrument of colonial ideological domination, especially in the domain of education. Print, as Veena Naregal has pointed out, was not only a new communicative technology, it also 
28 Cited in Naim 2003: 17. The quote is taken from Sayyid Ahmad Khan's Asar as-sanādid (first published in 1847). 
24 
An Empire of Books 
signified 'a shift from prevailing assumptions about the distribution of cultural and political power' (Naregal 2001:4). At the cultural level it in troduced 'radical shifts in assumptions about language, literacy and the "literary” (ibid.: 146). Rather than focusing on print only as a colonial project, An Empire of Books seeks to examine an Indian publisher's own cultural and literary agendas. Nonetheless, the relationship between publisher and colonial state remains central to this book. 
The rise of the NKP roughly coincided with a major shift in colonial education policy following Charles Wood's Education Despatch of 1854. In a clear departure from the anglicist policy laid out in Macaulay's infamous Minute on Education and the ensuing English Education Act of 1835, it ushered in a new era in colonial education marked by the offi cial promotion of the modern regional languages and their literatures..." The policy shift provided a distinct impetus to the nascent domestic pub lishing industry in Hindi and Urdu. Publishers were widely co-opted into the colonial literacy and education project. To the colonial state, itself a large player in the publishing field, Indian commercial publishers were both collaborators and financial rivals. The state had a vested interest in encouraging private agency, which was to be duly instrumentalized in favour of the British civilizing mission. At the same time, it needed to assert its claims to cultural hegemony, and its economic interests through keeping a check on the extent of agency and the proliferating operations of indigenous printer-publishers, especially in the lucrative and highly competitive textbook sector. As will be shown, state control over the publishing trade happened via three powerful mechanisms: licensing, censorship, and patronage. 
Marked by cooperation and contestation, the publisher-state interface provides a salient example of the transactional character of the colonial encounter at large. In making this point a guiding assumption of this book, I follow recent approaches that replace the old interpretive model of colonialism as an 'oppressive structure', or as a one-way relation of dominance and conquest, by a theory of transaction (Trivedi 1993; Joshi 2002). Indian publishers engaged with the state in a dynamic relationship that, if by no means symmetric or egalitarian, was based on continuous negotiation, dialogue, and exchange. This transactional character pow erfully illustrates Eugene Irschick's formulation of the creation of know ledge as a 'dialogic process' (Irschick 1994). 
29 Aimed to create an Indian anglicized elite, the English Education Act made the promotion of European literature and sciences the primary object of British educational efforts and decreed that all educational funds were to be employed on English education alone. 
Introduction 
25 
These concerns willin various degrees inform the individual chapters of this book. Chapter 1 looks at North Indian print culture in its wider historical perspective. It traces the emergence of the printed book in Hindi and Urdu from its beginnings to the phase of commercialization, introducing several important figures and centres in early publishing. It also addresses issues of state intervention in the book trade--press legislation, registration, and obscenity laws. Chapter 2 is devoted to the biography and public life of Munshi Naval Kishore. The commercial history of the NKP is outlined in Chapter 3 Chapter texamines the rela tionship between the House of Naval Kishore and the colonial state, des cribing the nature and extent of collaboration in official and textbook printing and highlighting various areas of contestation. Chapter 5 takes a look within, probing the publishing house as an intellectual space and outlining the NKP's contribution in the field of scholarly publishing, Chapter 6 looks at a second cornerstone of the House of Naval Kishore, and a publishing success of a different kind, namely its Urdu newspaper Avadh Akhbār. Chapter 7. finally, examines the publisher's engagement with Hindi literature and literary tradition. 
This Introduction would not be complete without alerting the reader to some limitations of this book: scholars of Urdu literature will imme diately notice that it devotes a special chapter to Hindi but does not con tain a separate chapter on the Urdu publications of the NKP. Given the firm's outstanding importance in Urdu publishing and the 'inestimable services' (Russell 1992: 86) it rendered to Urdu literature, this calls for an explanation. The reasons have mainly to do with the genesis of this book. My academic background is in Hindi literature, and I thus first conceived it as an investigation into a little acknowledged aspect of NKP publishing, namely the firm's promotion of Hindi and Sanskrit lite rature.30 Approximately a third of NKP publications are works in Hindi (including Khari boli, Brajbhasha and Avadhi) and Sanskrit. However, it soon became apparent that this was too limited an approach. To adopt the broader perspective of a book historian and probe the history and 
30 This neglect of the NKP has to do with a general trend in Hindi literary studies, which for the nineteenth century have tended to concentrate on Benares, Allahabad, and Agra, focusing on Bharatendu Harishchandra (1850-85) and other prominent figures of his literary coterie. Developments in Hindi literature outside these esta blished centres have received much less attention, especially if they happened in a place like Lucknow, a city traditionally associated with Indo-Muslim and Urdu culture. Further, one has to note that studies of Hindi literature in the nineteenth century, if not text-immanent, often focus on issues of cultural, political, and social ideology. By contrast, there is a paucity of empirical work on the material, technological, and organizational aspects of the literary sphere.26 
An Empire of Books 
impact of the publishing house seemed an undertaking of much greater pertinence to the study of literary culture and intellectual history in nineteenth-century India. As a result, this book, while concerned with both Hindi and Urdu, shows a certain bias for the former and may occa sionally be seen to falter when it comes to assessing aspects of Urdu literary culture. 
The second reason for not delving deeper into Urdu is the problem of sheer quantity. To narrate the story of the NKP and offer a detailed account of the firm's Urdu publications is well beyond the scope of a single book. Given the awesome total of an estimated 5000 titles published by Naval Kishore during his lifetime, of which over 2000 are in Urdu, even a superficial analysis of this large body would have blown this book to an unpublishable size.3. Besides, a substantial number of mono graphs and papers on the House of Naval Kishore is already available to Urdu-reading scholars and students. To leave the complex task of pre senting an in-depth study of the firm's Urdu publications to an expert in the field seemed all the more advisable in light of the fact that a large portion of NKP Urdu titles consists of Islamic literature---religious clas sics in translation, treatises in the Islamic sciences, sectarian tracts and pamphlets, works of Sufi mysticism-which call for contextual analysis by a scholar of South Asian Islam rather than of literary studies. To compensate for this lack, I have included an extensive appendix of NKP Urdu publications in the hope that this will encourage further research by those interested in Urdu. 
This said, the book does reflect as much as possible the huge and important literary, linguistic, religious and cultural undertaking that Urdu publishing at the NKP presented. It does so in a deliberate attempt to overcome a well-established academic tradition-partly rooted in the historic dichotomization of Hindi and Urdu-to deal with the two langu ages and literatures separately. Such separation has, both inadvertently and deliberately, reinforced the existing divide. One of the most important insights in writing this book has been that to view Naval Kishore's engage ment with India's past and present literary cultures from an exclus ive ‘Hindi' or 'Urdu' perspective would be a highly dissatisfactory and misguided undertaking. Such an approach, moreover, would fail to give an authentic and adequate picture of the cultural notions and intellectual 
31 The NKP comprehensive catalogue prepared by Prag Narayan in 1895 included 4500 titles. Not listed in it are titles printed at the firm's Kanpur and Lahore branches. Their number is estimated at another 500 (Siddiqi 1981: 15). 
Introduction 
27 
climate that informed the policy of the House. As Orsini has argued with much insight, a study of Hindi publishing would necessarily have to be one of Hindi and Urdu publishing, for they were part of an osmotic lite rary system' (Orsini 2002:68). As the present investigation into a Luck now-based publishing house seeks to show, her argument holds all the more true for the nineteenth century. Underlying the NKP's policy was a strong notion of a cultural continuum between the Hindi and Urdu literary spheres, which, despite internal shitis in emphasis and external contestations, was never dismissed. 
A similar shortcoming of this study concerns the vast and important contribution made by the NKP to book publishing in Persian and Arabic. Given my linguistic limitations, I could only scratch the surface of the firm's pioneering and formative influence in diffusing religious, literary, and scientific knowledge in the classical Oriental languages. The House of Naval Kishore engaged in the commercial mass production of Arabic and Persian books at a time when printing in the Middle East was still in its infancy, and thus developed a thriving export business. Its large corpus of religious and secular texts in Arabic and Persian made a distinct im pact in India and the larger Islamic world. As one observer asserts, "Even an Islamic country was not able to stimulate the history of Islam in the same way as did the Naval Kishore Press' (Siddiqi 1981:17). This outstanding contribution to Islamic publishing still awaits proper evaluation. 
A particularly aggravating circumstance in the making of this book, sadly familiar to those studying Indian print culture, was the paucity of primary sources. Despite the NKP's historical significance, nothing has survived of the publisher's archives but for a few stray documents. In the absence of account books and ledgers, business correspondence and private papers, this study was undertaken without the very documents that constitute the most important sources for the book historian. The more or less regular coverage in colonial records of various aspects of NKP commercial activity could only partly fill this lacuna. As a result, basic questions concerning the publisher's interaction with booksellers and traders, his financial statements and sales records, the motivation underlying promotional schemes and their nature and scope, and so on, can only be answered tentatively. Equally frustrating, the central issue of author-publisher relations, which makes for so much compelling and insightful writing on publishing and the book trade in Victorian England, could only be addressed in a most rudimentary fashion. It remains to be seen whether this book can provide some encouragement to future 
28 
An Empire of Books 
researchers to take up the complex task of reviewing the fascinating history of early Hindi and Urdu publishing from the perspective of authors. 
One final point: in giving publication details of a large number of ori ginal works or translations in Persian, Sanskrit, Hindi, and Urdu, this study at times borders on a descriptive bibliography. I am fully aware that this can be tedious, especially for readers with a more general interest in Indian book history. Yet to insist on bibliographical detail seemed a methodological imperative in view of the fact that publication data on nineteenth-century books in Indian languages are not easy to come by and usually have to be collected in a painstaking process from a variety of sources.32 Much solid and meticulous bibliographical groundwork needs to be done to provide the empirical underpinnings for a more sys tematic theoretical discussion of the history of the book in South Asia. In assembling data that have not been recorded earlier in an English language source, the present book is an attempt in this direction. In order not to overburden the text, a good deal of the bibliographical information has been relegated to the various appendices. The aim in compiling these is to offer a database of Hindi and Urdu imprints amenable to fu ture analysis. 
32 For example, James F. Blumhardt's important catalogues of Hindustani and Hindi printed books in the library of the British Museum fail to list publishers' names. 
