+++
title = "Note on Transliteration and Conventions"

+++
For the sake of readability, no diacritical marks have been used for 7 personal and geographical names, nor for Indian terms that have I become part of the English language. Indian language names and scripts also appear without diacritics. For personal names, modern transliteration has been used, except in the case of some famous figures who are still better known by contemporary forms (e.g. Rammohan Roy). The English forms of some Indian place-names (e.g. Lucknow, Benares, Delhi, Calcutta) have been retained. The state of Avadh also often appears in its old British spelling, Oudh', especially when colonial institutions are discussed (e.g. Oudh Educational Department). 
A special difficulty of this study is that it deals with terms and book ritles in five different languages, namely Hindi, Urdu, Sanskrit, Persian, and Arabic. To use a different transliteration system for each language would have made it thoroughly unreadable, while confusing the reader unnecessarily. For this reason I arrived at a compromise. Words in Hindi and Sanskrit are transliterated according to the systems used in R.S. McGregor's Oxford Hindi-English Dictionary and M. Monier-Williams Sanskrit-English Dictionary. For Sanskrit terms the inherent vowel a has been retained (hence Rāmāyan in Hindi and Rāmāvana in Sanskrit). Transliteration of words in Urdu, Persian, and Arabic follows the system used in J.T. Platts, A Dictionary of Urdū, Classical Hindi, and English with some minor modifications. The Persian izāfat is indicated by -e. The same word may sometimes be transliterated variously, depending on whether it occurs in a Hindi or Urdu context. 

There exists a baffling variety of contemporary spellings for the name of the central character of this book, Munshi Naval Kishore (correctly transcribed as Navalkishor in Urdu and Navalkisor in Hindi). Some of these represent 'corrupt' English pronunciation. The publisher himself signed his name 'Newul Kishore' in English documents. In opting for Naval Kishore I have chosen a compromise between the most common variant and the principles of modern transliteration. 

Throughout this book Naval Kishore Press (NKP) titles issued  from Lucknow, Kanpur, and Lahore have been marked by an asterisk preced the year of publication. The date after the asterisk indicates the ves 
the year of first publication from the NKP only, and often does not coincide with first printed edition of a given title. Also, despite my best efforts publication dates given for NKP first editions may not always be accura for the firm did not keep a complete and accurate record of its imprints dating from c. 1858–65. To complicate matters, lithogran and typeset versions of the same text, as well as reprints in different format, were often announced as 'first editions, while reprints of oth publishers' titles were generally designated as 'second' editions on NKP title pages. 
Unless otherwise indicated, all translations from the original Hindi and Urdu are my own. 
