+++
title = "A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836–1895)"

+++
In 1884 the American Methodist Bishop John F. Hurst, on a tour 
through India, happened to visit the NKP. While Hurst was greatly i impressed by Munshi Naval Kishore's multifarious activities in the promotion of religious, especially Islamic, literature, he also perceived them as antagonist to Christian missionary efforts and accordingly viewed the publisher with some reservation. To Hurst, Naval Kishore was the embodiment of the shrewd oriental trader turned modern print tycoon. His portrait of the publisher is remarkable for being informed by a funda mental cultural misunderstanding: 
He (Naval Kishore) is a Mohammedan, and makes no secret of it. But with the publisher's instinct he keeps his religion in the background. He never puts his faith at the top of his bill-heads. He is a broad man-broad in everything except Christianity, and it is not likely that the Gospel has a more vigorous hater in the whole Gangetic Valley than this wily man. But he is no bigoted professional. Bitter hater as he is of Hinduism and of all the numerous non-Muhammedan faiths, he seems as ready to publish books for the promotion of Brahminism and of its rival faith, Buddhism, as to issue apologies and text-books in behalf of Islam. (Hurst 1887: 353) 
The modern researcher will hardly commit the same blunder as this ill informed American visitor. Yet it remains a difficult endeavour to recons truct a person's life mainly on the basis of secondary sources and with few personal documents as corroborating evidence. This is especially true for someone like Munshi Naval Kishore, who had already become a celebrity, and thus an object of myth during his lifetime. No com prehensive biography in English or, for that matter, in any other European 
108 
An Empire of Books 
language has been written on the Lucknow publisher. Existing biogra phical accounts in Hindi and Urdu invariably go back to a number of nineteenth-century sources, all of them tainted by a highly stylized portrait and glorification of his person. The first and most important of these sources, a Brajbhasha verse biography entitled Jivancaritra (*1895), was composed shortly after Naval Kishore's death by Pandit Bandidin Dikshit, an NKP employee and author of several devotional works in Hindi. Around the same time, a short account of the publisher's life by Ramji Das Bhargava, another press employee and presumably a relative of Naval Kishore, was published in the Oudh Review, a literary magazine issued from the press.' In 1903 there followed Jivancaritar, an Urdu biography by the Lucknow Kayastha Lalji Munshi, a prolific author and long-standing associate of Naval Kishore's firm. Lalji's account draws heavily on Dikshit's biography and is largely identical in content but for a few supplementary anecdotes. 
More panegyric than biography in the classical sense, both the Braj bhasha biography and, to a lesser extent, its Urdu prose version are characterized by their eulogistic style, large-scale omissions, and a per vasive insouciance with regard to chronology. They not only give a very limited picture of Naval Kishore's life, but also contain numerous in accuracies and factual errors which have been perpetuated in modern biographical accounts. These can be found, for example, in the special commemorative numbers of the journals Nayā Daur (Urdu) and Uttar Prades (Hindi), published in the early 1980s. While the contributions in both magazines, particularly the Nayā Daur issue, provide much valuable information on Naval Kishore, they also suffer from the problems inherent in the commemorative genre—notably an eagerness to pay tribute to the publisher and extol his achievements—which clearly go to the detriment of critical examination and scholarly accuracy. This also appears to be a major flaw in the only comprehensive modern biography of Naval Kishore, an Urdu work entitled Savāniḥ-e Munshi Navalkishor (1995) by Amir Hasan Nurani. Nurani served as honorary secretary to the pub lishing house from 1949 to 1964. His study combines a biographical sketch of Naval Kishore with an account of the history of the firm; it in cludes an exhaustive list of NKP publications in Urdu, Persian, and Ara bic. While offering an insider's view, it abounds in inaccurate statements 
The article is reprinted in S.Q. Khan 1980: 185–9 and Nurani 1982: 52-61. 2 Nayā Daur 1980; Uttar Prades 1981. 
3 This monograph is based on an earlier, less detailed biographical sketch. See Nurani 1982. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836–1895) 
109 
and unsubstantiated claims. For all its shortcomings, Nurani's account constitutes the most thorough investigation into the publisher's life to date. It appears all the more relevant in light of the fact that Indian scholarship during the past two decades has failed to produce any subs tantial or original research on the subcontinent's erstwhile largest pub lishing emporium. A recent conference volume, resulting from a seminar held at Lucknow University in 1998 (Zamani 2000), gives ample proof of the current lack of scholarly interest by its largely repetitive character and conspicuous absence of fresh insights. 
The rewriting of Naval Kishore's biography calls then for a critical distinction between myth and reality. It will be attempted here on the basis of the aforementioned sources, as well as hitherto unexploited Bri tish records, other English-language material, and a few personal docu ments authored by the publisher himself. An important caveat relates to certain aspects of the publisher's life which, in retrospect, may have as sumed significance different from the time of their occurrence. Caution must be exercised, for instance, with regard to painting a stereotypical portrait of Naval Kishore as a great symbol of Hindu-Muslim unity' or a herald of 'national integration'. Latter-day biographers have readily succumbed to this temptation which, admittedly, seems justified by hind sight. Yet it remains doubtful whether such epithets would have come naturally to Naval Kishore's contemporaries. Without wanting to overstate the case of the shared Hindu-Muslim elite culture, nineteenth century Lucknow-and Avadh for that matter-enjoyed strong cross communal alliances. As Francis Robinson has shown, the dominant factor in local politics tended to be an Urdu-speaking elite connection based on landed interest, which remained so strong that even in the 1890s com munal matters were of little consequence (Robinson 1974). Hence, per haps more than in any other North Indian urban centre at the time, the cultural and literary climate prevailing in Lucknow was shaped by an urban intelligentsia that would still identify itself in terms of a larger composite culture rather than being preoccupied by the distinction be tween Hindus and Muslims. It was only later in life when, under the im pact of emerging Indian nationalism, Naval Kishore became involved in national politics, that he was first compelled to perceive his public role in communal categories. 
Equally, in looking into the motives of Naval Kishore's involvement in philanthropy, education, and literary patronage, this book refrains from interpreting it solely as a function of his altruistic concerns and reformist ideas. No doubt such motives existed, for Naval Kishore was a publisher with a cultural vision and a social mission. However, he was 
110 
An Empire of Books 
also, as has been conveniently overlooked by many, a shrewd entrepre neur and businessman who, in order to succeed in the increasingly competitive market of commercial publishing, had to build multiple networks and deploy his social alliances in the name of business interests. too. 
2.1 Family Background, Education, 
and Apprenticeship 
Naval Kishore was born into a wealthy family of Hindu service gentry, whose genealogy can be traced back to the fourteenth century. During the Mughal reign several of his ancestors had entered imperial service and risen to the position of influential jāgirdārs. His great-grandfather Indra Singh was a military commander in the army of the Maratha confe deration, who fought in the famous battle of Panipat in 1761. His grand father, Pandit Balmukund, held the post of treasurer of Agra in the service of Shah Alam II. In 1792 Balmukund received jāgirs in the region of Agra, Mathura, and Aligarh. It was here, in the small town of Sasni in Aligarh district, that Naval Kishore's father, Pandit Yamuna Prasad, settled and lived as an affluent zamindār.5 Some sources also mention him as a trader, without, however, specifying the kind of trade he was engaged in. 
Surprisingly, earlier biographers have rather casually bypassed the issue of the family's caste affiliation, identifying them variably as Kayas thas, Dhusars, or Bhargava Brahmins, but without according the matter any further attention. In actual fact, far from representing a straightforward issue, the question of what caste Naval Kishore belonged to poses some difficulties that merit closer attention. In its complexity it reflects the fluid nature and flexibility of jāti and varņa norms prevailing during the first half of the century, while also illustrating the emergence of caste consciousness and a more homogeneous 'caste society' in the second half. His story is in short that of a Dhusar turned Bhargava, involving a 
4 See, e.g., Z. al-Hasan 1980; Nurjahan 1980; Nurani 1995: 22-4; Uttar Prades 1981: 28. 
The town of Sasni lies in tahsil Hathras in Aligarh District. The family is said to have settled in the village of Bastoi, sometimes wrongly referred to as Naval Kishore's birthplace. Since there exists no place by the name of Bastoi in Hathras, I take it to be a misreading of Basgoi. Cf. Census of India 1891. District Census Statistics NWP&Oudh. Aligarh District, 1895: 10. 
*For a comprehensive treatment of these developments, see S. Bayly 1999. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
111 
shift in varna affiliation from Kshatriya to Brahmin. While many of the actual forces at work in the process remain obscure, an attempt will be made here to trace this development in its successive stages. 
What renders the issue of Naval Kishore's caste even more compli cated is a widely prevailing notion that he was born in a family of North Indian Kayasthas. While Nurani (Nurani 1995: 20) and with him several Western scholars seem to unquestioningly accept this notion. I have not come across any conclusive evidence in support of it. There is a cons picuous absence of references to Naval Kishore's caste in contemporary sources pre-dating the 1880s, with the single exception of an entry on the title page of the first Sanskrit book published from the NKP.a Bhāgavata Purāna edition of 1869. which expressly refers to Naval Kishore as being 'born in a family of Kshatrivas' (ksatrivyakule jātah). It can be as sumed with some certainty that the publication, being an important one, went through Naval Kishore's own hands and that the statement found his implicit consent, reflecting the family's self-perception as Kshatriyas. From this it could indeed be inferred that he was a Kshatriya Kayastha, as many Upper Indian Kayasthas had begun claiming Kshatriya sta tus at the time. Yet Kayasthas were by no means the only ones to claim Kshatriya descent: various merchant castes also did so. As Kuar Lachman Singh noted in his Historical and Statistical Memoir of Zila Bulandshahar in 1874: "The Banias are now considered pure Vaisya, although the majority of them claim their descent from Kshattri progenitors' (Singh 1874: 167). Nor does the fact that Naval Kishore maintained close links with the Lucknow Kayastha community automatically make him a Kayastha. In the 1870s several important pamphlets on Kayastha caste history and the controversial issue of the community's varņa affiliation were printed at his press. Significantly, not one of these texts identifies the publisher as a Kayastha. Furthermore, if Naval Kishore's Kayastha affiliation were true, it is surprising that there is not a single reference to his subcaste in either private or official records. In view of the fact that North Indian Kayasthas generally identified themselves by one of their twelve subdivisions, this silence in contemporary documents seems odd indeed. British records of the time make no mention of Naval Kishore's caste, while extant late nineteenth-century biographies fail to provide any conclusive evidence on the question, for they are works commissioned at a later point in time when Naval Kishore's identity as a Bhargava Brahmin was already consolidated. 
7 See Carroll 1978: 233-50. 
112 
An Empire of Books 
It is only from the 1880s that we are on firmer ground. From that time various documents can be found which expressly identify Naval Kishore as a member of the Dhusar (dhūsar, also: dhūmsar), and subsequently, Bhargava caste. The Dhusars of the NWP constitute an interesting. hitherto little-studied instance of an upwardly-mobile North Indian merchant caste. They were a traditional trading caste whose homeland lay in the region of Gurgaon in Haryana (then Punjab), with Rewari as their main religious centre. From there the community migrated to the towns of the NWP where, much like the Agarvals, they entered into trade with the colonial rulers. This migration seems to have taken place in the early decades of the nineteenth century, leading to high concen trations of Dhusars in the towns and trading centres of the north-west: Kanpur, Mathura, Farrukhabad, Fatehpur, Jaunpur, Hamirpur, and Lucknow. Reverend M.A. Sherring, in his Hindu Tribes and Castes as Represented in Benares (1872), remarks that “Their occupation, like that of the majority of Vaisyas, is trade and commerce; some take to the profession of soldiers. Under Mahomedan rule the caste was in a flour ishing condition' (Sherring (1872] 1974: 293). A quarter century later, the ethnographer William Crooke described the Dhusars as a 'rising, ambitious, thriving class, excellent clerks and men of business'(Crooke 
their great wealth and influence. 
Excellence in penmanship was a distinctive feature of the Dhusar community. Their scribal tradition and a shared history in clerical and service employment put them in close proximity with the Kayasthas. a circumstance that may explain why Naval Kishore is often taken to be a Kayastha. His family background perfectly corresponds to the following description of the Dhusars given by India's eminent anthropological scholar Jogendra Nath Bhattacharya: 
The Dhunsars are found chiefly in the Gangetic Doab, between Delhi on the west and Mirzapore on the east. There are many big landholders among 
8 The 1865 provincial Census counted a total of 4239 members of the 'Dhoosur' community. Census of the NWP 1865, vol. r: General Report and Appendices, Allaha bad 1867, app. B: 22-3. The 'Dhusar Baniahs' of Sahranpur district were said to have come from Rewari about 1840 (Elliott 1859: 284). See also Census of India, 1891, vol. XVIII: The NWP&Oudh, pti, Allahabad 1894. 
By contrast, the Dhusar-Bhargavas did not take to Western education. The 1891 Census, in its tables showing 'Education by caste and religion' lists only 77 out of a total of 6557 male adults as having received an English education. Literacy among female caste members was almost nil. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
113 
them. They take their name from Dhusi, a flat-topped hill, near Rewari, in Gurgaon. They are all Vishnuvites, and there are no Jains among them. They do not devote themselves entirely to trade: In fact their chief profession is penmanship, and they combine in themselves the office aptitude of the Kayasth, with the Baniya's capacity for mercantile business. Under Maho medan rule, they occasionally filled many high offices of State. Under the present regime a good many of them hold such appointments in the public service as are open to the natives of this country now. (Bhattacharya (1896) 1968: 169-70)10 
The Dhusars are a prime example of an upwardly mobile trading caste for whom the colonial market economy meant growing prosperity and local influence. Their newly-achieved affluence, in combination with their importance in Mughal and subsequently. colonial service enabled them to claim Brahminical descent. Tracing their genealogy to the mythi cal rsi Bhrgu, they adopted the name Bhargava, thus positioning themselves in the fold of the ancient Brahminical clan of the Bhrgus or Bhargavas, descendants of Bhrgu'.!! This process of social mobility was initiated in the 1870s, a time of heightened caste and varna consci ousness, demonstrated by the example of Kayasthas, Kashmiri Brahmins, and various other communities. At first the Dhusars' claim to Brahminical status did not go uncontested by other Brahmin castes. In 1874 Kuar Lachman Singh reports that 
This clan was always reckoned in the Bania division ... [b]ut now they lay claim to a place in the Brahmanical list. They have made out several stories in support of the claim, but none of them is admitted by true Brahmans. Having failed in inducing the other castes to call them Brahmans, they have adopted a new name for their caste, viz. Bhargava, or descendants of Brigu [sic] ...' (Singh 1874: 169) 
10 Bhattacharya evidently drew on the heavily biased account in the British Settlement Report, which identified the Dhusars as 'mostly hard landlords and wealthy men' and described them as combining the office aptitude of the Kayasth with the keen scent for money making and the flinty hard-heartedness to a debtor characteristic of a Banya' (cited in Crooke 1974: 302). 
11 In ancient Sanskrit literature the Bhrgus come to prominence in the Mahābhārata, a major repository of Bhargava mythology and genealogy. V.S. Sukthankar was the first to discuss the formative influence of the Bhargavas upon the development of the surviving redaction of the great epic, a process for which he coined the term 'Bhrguization' (Sukthankar 1936). His views have been discussed by R.P. Goldman in his seminal study of the Bhỉgus and Bhargava mythology in the Mahābhārata (Goldman 1977). 
114 
An Empire of Books 
Merely two decades later the community's Bhargava affiliation was widely accepted. Crooke, writing in 1896, states: 'Their pretensions to Brahmanical origin are admitted by Brahmans themselves, and they are now usually known as Bhārgava or "descendants of Bhrigu" ... In the hills they appear to be in some places Banyas and in others Brahmans' (Crooke (1896] 1974: 301). Evidence for the caste's transitory status during the period 1870–1900 is also afforded by the British Census re ports. Whereas the 1865 and 1872 Census of the NWP still classified the Dhusars as vaishyas or baniās, both the Punjab Census of 1883 and the NWP Census of 1891 had extrapolated the 'Dhusar-Bhargavas. from the list of baniā castes, listing them as a separate category instead.12 At an individual level the process is paralleled in Naval Kishore's transition from Dhusar to Bhargava, as evinced in the title pages of several NKP Hindi and Sanskrit publications of the 1880s: while up to the early 1880s the publisher is usually eulogized as an 'adornment of the Dhusar line age' (dhū(m)sar-vamśāvatams), from around 1883 the corresponding entry reads 'adornment of the Bhargava lineage' (bhārgava-vamsā vatams).13 
Following a typical pattern of nineteenth-century caste formation, the new caste status was consolidated by the establishment in 1889 of a national caste association, the Akhil Bharatiya Bhargava Sabha or All India Bhargava Conference. As will be shown below, Naval Kishore played a key role in this process. 14 The community established its headquarters in Mathura; several smaller Bhargava Sabhas began ope rating in Agra, Sahranpur, and Jaipur. Of these, the Jaipur Bhargava 
12 Due to the similarity in names, in the 1872 Census the British data collectors committed a serious blunder by mixing up the Dhusars with the low-caste community of the 'Dusar' or 'Dúsádd' (dusārh). The resulting statistics were grossly incorrect. D. Ibbetson in the 1883 Punjab Census noted about the Dhusars: 'They are of Brah minical origin, as is admitted by the Brahmans themselves, and it is possible that some of them may have recorded themselves as Brahmans in the schedules. Indeed, I find 1600 Dhusar Brahmans returned... but whether these are the same men as the Dhunsars of Rewari, I cannot say ... They are almost exclusively clerks or merchants, though, like the Khattris, some of them have risen to eminence in the army, and the Court.' 
13 See, e.g., the NKP Hindi translations of the Linga- and Bhavisyapurāna (1881), which identify Naval Kishore as a Dhusar. Moreover, the former title refers to him as Munshi Naval Kishore Varma. The earliest references to his Bhargava caste affiliation can be found on the title pages of the Caurāsi bārtta (1883) and the NKP Hindi prose version of the Mahābhārat (1886). 
14 For a general debate of caste consciousness and the emergence of caste associations in the late nineteenth century, see Carroll 1978: 233-50. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
115 
Sabha appears to have been the oldest and most vibrant-it is recorded to have launched an Urdu monthly called Rudād-e Bhargava Sabhā as early as 1882.15 Later it maintained a caste journal in Hindi, Bhärgava Patrikā. The Jaipur Sabha was also instrumental in supplying British ethnographers with the caste's own account of its history, which high lighted the historical importance of Bhargavas as family priests and ministers to Hindu kings." In its 1970 special issue on Munshi Naval Kishore, Bhārgara Patrika provides a detailed family pedigree, identify ing him as belonging to the Bhargava Sharma lineage, Cyavan sub-line age, Gaur Brahmin sub-branch, and Dhusar Bhargava Brahman division of the sub-branch. According to this account, the religious affiliation of the family was that of Sanatana Dharmis (Bhargava 1970: [24]). 
Like the majority of north-western trading castes, the Dhusars were Vaishnavas. Their ascent to Brahminical status was accompanied by a strict adherence to orthodox and dharmic regulations. This process of Sanskritization' was described by E.T. Atkinson in his Himalayan Gazet teer (1882) for the Dhusars of the hill regions, and corroborated by Crooke for the community living in the plains: 'They regulate their lives by the most orthodox rules of Hinduism and are particularly careful in the observance of Hindu ceremonies' (Crooke [1896] 1974: 302-3). The Sanskritization of the Dhusars also entailed the construction of a textual tradition along Sanskritic lines, of which the Dhūsi mahātmva (1901), composed by one Mathuraprasad Bhargava, provides a typical exam ple. Naval Kishore was to make his own distinctive contribution to the promotion of the community's literary heritage in seeing the works of the eighteenth-century Dhusar sant poet Charandas into print. 
Naval Kishore's family boasted a tradition of Hindu scholarship, his 
15 RPIR 1882: 188. 
16 Traditions within the caste regarding its origins and pedigree vary. For the dominant tradition, which traces the caste back to Bhrgu's son Chivan (Skrt. Cyavana). see Kishori Lal, 'Essay to be read before the Annual Bhargava Conference regarding the origin of the name of Bhargava and Nautor', Jaipur 1916 (OIOC, VT 3890a, in Urdu). 
17 "The practices of both Brahman and Baniya Dhusars are the same, and in one point both differ from ordinary Hindus. They take their food before puja or morning prayer, whilst ordinarily all perform their puja first and then eat. Of late years, however, they have begun to adopt the more orthodox custom. They do not eat animal or other prohibited food, nor do they drink spirits. They worship the orthodox deities and consider Brahma, Siva and Vishnu as one god under different forms, The Brahman Dhusar marries with his caste fellows, and the Baniya Dhusars with Baniya Dhusars, avoiding always the same gotra or a family having the same favourite deity' (Atkinson [1882] 1973: 443).116 
An Empire of Books 
grandfather and father were known as Sanskrit pandits. The young Naval Kishore, too, was trained in the Sanskrit scriptures and was sometimes addressed as Pandit Naval Kishore before he came to be generally known as Munshi Naval Kishore. Yet Vaishnavism and Hindu scholastic tradi tions form only one aspect of the broad cultural milieu in which the future publisher was born and raised. As members of the landed service gentry who had performed clerical and military functions for the Mughal empire and its successor states, his family was deeply steeped in Indo Persian culture and had embraced Muslim courtly etiquette. In combining Hindu learning with Indo-Persian scholastic and literary traditions and a Persianized lifestyle, they epitomize the composite culture of the Indo Gangetic belt, for which the Urdu language has coined the term 'ganga jamni'.18 Naval Kishore was a product of this shared cultural tradition, his subsequent life and career clearly mirroring the composite cultural landscape in which he grew up. 
Childhood, Education, and Apprenticeship 
Naval Kishore was born on 3 January 1836 (paus pūrnimā, vs 1892) in the village of Rirha near Mathura, home of his maternal grandparents. He was the second of five sons of Pandit Yamuna Prashad and Yashoda Devi. Rirha, a village no longer inhabited which today forms part of the town of Baldeo in Sadabad tahsil,'' was part of the ancestral zamindāri and the place where Naval Kishore's ancestors had settled prior to the family's migration to Sasni in Aligarh district. According to the testimony of Dr Ranjit Bhargava, the genealogical records of the family which bear Naval Kishore's name are still kept by local priests in Baldeo.20 These findings refute all other claims regarding the controversial issue of Naval Kishore's birthplace, notably that Rirha is identical with Rahera, a place near the town of Sahar in the erstwhile Mughal sarkār of the same name.21 
18 For a discussion of the historic dimension and specific features of North Indian composite culture, see, e.g., Khan 1987 and Alam 1999. 
19 Previously, Baldeo belonged to Mahaban tahsil. Its population in 1891 was 534, of which 130 were Baniyas. Census of India 1891. District Census Statistics NWP&Oudh. Muttra District, 1893:21. For the religious significance of Baldeo, see Growse 1883: 292. 
20 Private communication, March 1998. 
21 Z. al-Hasan 1980; Nurani 1995:22-4. Al-Hasan claims that Sahar was home to an eminent family of Dhusar-Bhargavas, who received jāgirs and the hereditary title of Munshi' on account of their high office and great learning. He presumes this family, which lived in the haveli of one Udhailal Dhusar, to be Naval Kishore's 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naal Kishore (1836-1895) 
117 
The young boy spent his early childhood at his grandparents' home in Rirha. At the age of six he was called to his parental home in Sasni for his primary education. Not surprisingly, the biographical sources in Braj bhasha and Urdu differ significantly as to the nature of this education: while Dikshit speaks of an instruction imparted by Hindu pandits, Lalji Munshi and all subsequent Urdu sources state that Naval Kishore visited the local maktab, that is, the primary village school in which elementary reading and writing in Persian and Urdu were taught. These statements are, as T.R. Metcalf has shown through the example of the Avadh ta'alluq. dārs, not at all contradictory (Metcalf 1979: 358-61). We may safely assume that Naval Kishore received his religious instruction from Hindu pandits at home, while he was simultaneously taught Persian, Urdu, and presumably also some Arabic at the village makiab. 
Naval Kishore was a studious and intelligent child. Consequently, in a decision that was to enhance the composite character of his education even further, his father enrolled him at Agra College. It must be pointed out here that the unanimous claim of Naval Kishore's biographers that his admission to Agra College took place as early as 1845 is incorrect. While his name is absent from the college lists of scholarships and prizes between 1845 and 1852, it appears for the first time in an official British record of 1852-3, containing a list of twenty-eight Youths from a distance who have, during the past year, come to Agra for the sole pur pose of being educated'. Next to his name and place of origin, the entry lists the exact date of Naval Kishore's admission to the college as 1 May 1852.22 
Since most of its records were destroyed during the 1857 uprising, the history of Agra College is much less well researched than that of its famous sister institutions, the Benares Sanskrit College and Delhi College. Established in 1823 on the basis of an endowment by an affluent Hindu Pandit, Agra College functioned as the third major governmental Anglo-Oriental College in North India. Although it was open to students of all denominations, its student body was predominantly Hindu, with over two-thirds of its pupils receiving government or private scholar ships.23 Perhaps more so than other colonial institutions, Agra College 
ancestors. Due to frequent droughts in the area, they left the place and settled in Sasni. 
22 GRPI. NWP, 1852-3: 6. 
23 The 'Hindu character of Agra College was emphasized much later in the context of Hindu nationalist agitation. The government's plans to close the college on the grounds of irrentability and divert its funds to the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental 
118 
An Empire of Books 
placed a strong emphasis on catering to the educational needs of the commercial and professional classes in the NWP, its objective being 'to diffuse more widely than Native Schools the possession of useful know ledge, to give a command of the language of ordinary life, and of official business—to teach, principally, Hindee and Persian, with the native mode of keeping accounts (Leelavattee), and to have instruction in Sanscrit and Arabic.?24 By 'useful knowledge' was meant the teaching of geogra phy, astronomy, and mathematics according to the European system, subjects introduced in due course in 1827. It was through a combination of oriental learning and modern European sciences that the students of Agra College were to be rendered fit for state employment or commercial life. The College Principal J. Middleton, in true utilitarian spirit, endea voured to raise up a class of men who are well qualified to take their part in the practical duties of life.' To this purpose, he noted, the sciences were particularly, though by no means exclusively, studied: 'Mathematics and natural philosophy are the branches of learning in which the pupils attain the highest proficiency, though their acquaintance with English literature is also considerable.?26 A look at the syllabus of the English Department corroborates his statement: the students of Agra College were trained in Milton, Shakespeare, Bacon, and Pope. 
Following the introduction of English classes in 1831, a separate Department of English was established at the college in 1835. This meas ure resulted in a remarkable drop in student enrolment in the oriental languages.27 By the time Naval Kishore joined the college in 1852, 272 
College in Aligarh met with fierce protest, as borne out by a 'Statement made at a Public Meeting ... against the abolition of the Agra College by the citizens of Agra', which was submitted to the Education Commission of 1882. It claimed that the establishment of the present college was due solely to Hindu influences, for the grants made to Pandit Ganga Dhar came from a most orthodox Principality of Hindu chiefs, viz., from the Peshwa. Ganga Dhar himself was a Brahmin of the first water, and after his death the Government too thought it proper to employ the money of a Brahmin on purposes wholly and solely Braminical[sic], viz., the study of the Vedas. Though one now cannot hear the chanting of Vedic prayers in the ample hall of the Agra College, though one now cannot meet with students of the Vedas in the college precincts, but still this fact can never be ignored nor its value lessened that the col lege is still essentially a Hindu institution.' AECR 1884: 413. 
24 Selections from Educational Records, vol. 1, 1859-1871, Delhi 1960: 240. 25 Selections from Educational Records, 1781-1839, Calcutta 1920: 186. 
26 General Report on the State of Popular Education in the Bengal Presidency, for 1847-1848. 
27 Selections from Educational Records, pt I, 1781-1839: 95. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
119 
out of a total of 311 students on the college rolls were studying English.28 As these figures indicate, by mid century there was a marked demand for Western education and English-language skills. Admittedly, Agra College was slow to receive the same kind of large-scale acceptance that British educational institutions were enjoying among the elite clas ses in Lower Bengal and elsewhere. Naval Kishore belonged to a small minority of approximately 2000 pupils enrolled in the British colleges and Anglo-Vernacular schools of the NWP at the time." Yet his father's decision to send his bright young son to Agra College is indicative of a remarkable shift in attitudes among the aftluent service gentry in the NWP. Much had changed since the times when W. Adam had noted the lack of encouragement, in his 1835 report, of the study of English in this part of India. 
Naval Kishore was enrolled in the Oriental Department of Agra Col lege as one of seventy students who learnt Persian in combination with English. While nothing is known about his performance in English, he excelled in Persian and was rewarded a Junior Persian scholarship of Rs 6 in 1853 and 1854.0 It would seem, however, that the general standard of the Persian classes left much to be desired. As an official report not ed, the lower Persian class contained no less than seven divisions, making it impossible for teachers to monitor students' progress, while the textbooks were 'sadly jumbled up together. The report concluded: "The Persian Mouluvees have been evidently left to themselves, and in all such cases, the elementary knowledge of Persian can be as well acquired in the bazar schools, as in the Government College."?! Complaints about the 'entire want of discipline' in the junior Persian class, particularly, had already been raised in a previous report. With regard to Naval Kishore's veteran Persian teacher, Muhammad Rahim, who had joined Agra College as early as 1824, mention was made of the great age of the Moonshee, who has not apparently sufficient energy left, either to teach his pupils effectively, or to control them 32 
It is generally claimed that during his college days Naval Kishore developed a keen interest in literature and journalism, which apparently led him to contribute articles to a local Urdu paper called Safir-e Āgra. 
28 GRPI. NWP, 1852-3: 10. 
29 Robinson 1974: 34 discusses the limited appeal of government schools in the NWP. 
30 GRPI. NWP, 1853-4: 24. 31 GRPI. NWP, 1854-5: 42-3. 32 GRPI. NWP, 1852-1853: 16. 
120 
An Empire of Books 
While the first part of this claim may be true, the second is almost certainly incorrect, for there is no evidence of the existence of Safir-e Agra prior to 1856. By contrast, it is attested that a journal by the same name was launched by Naval Kishore in January 1856, that is, some time after his college days.33 Much of the confusion regarding Naval Kishore's first journalistic endeavours seems to stem from an equivocalline in Dikshit's biography that runs to the effect that Naval Kishore received a government grant in reward of the outstanding quality of his contributions as editor of Safir-e Agra.34 It seems that Dikshit, in an understandable attempt to attribute an early aptitude for journalism to the subject of his biography, mistook the college scholarship for a grant given to Naval Kishore in his capacity as editor. 
Naval Kishore never graduated from Agra College. In being a 'school dropout' he conforms to a commonly-found pattern among the new pro fessional class of journalist-editors and publishers. 25 Despite leaving Agra College prematurely, he remained attached to the institution all his life. In 1882 he became a member of the Local Board of Trustees that took over the financial management of the college, and also helped finance a boarding house. At this critical juncture in the college's history, he contributed largely to its finances, thus helping the institution to survive.36 
The year 1854 marked a decisive turn in Naval Kishore's life: he left Agra to take up employment in the famous Koh-e Nur Press of Lahore. Established in 1849 by Munshi Harsukh Rai (1816-90), a Kayastha from Sikandarabad, the Koh-e Nur Press had quickly risen to fame through its paper Koh-e Nūr, the first regular Urdu newspaper in the 
33 Khurshid 1963: 124–6. There is no mention of Safir-e Agra in Siddigi's work on pre-1857 Urdu journalism (Siddiqi 1962). Sabiri in his standard work on Urdu journalism states that Safir-e-Agra was first published on 19 January 1856, with Naval Kishore serving as its editor (mohtamim) (Sabiri 1953 [i]: 500). In his later study of 1973 he seems to have succumbed to the popular version, for, contradicting his earlier statement, he claims that Naval Kishore developed a liking for journalism and began writing for the Safir-e Agra at the age of 15. His articles were well received and he consequently abandoned his education at Agra College (Sabiri 1973: 321). 
34 The verse reads: 'Patr Safir Agra nām/svayam pracār kin matidhām/jāni des unnati parinām// Ati udār sarkar lakhi budhi vidyā parvin/srimannavalkisor ko niyat vazifā kin' (Dikshit 1895: 6). Abrar makes a dubious claim that he saw articles written by Naval Kishore during his college days (Abrar 1980: 39). 
35 M.K. Ranade in his 1864 Report on Vernacular Literature notes the high number of school dropouts among Marathi authors and publishers (cited in Naregal 2001: 185). 
36 PGNWP&Oudh. Educational Dept., November 1891: 34. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
121 
Punjab. Apparently, the young Naval Kishore was brought to the notice of Harsukh Rai by the latter's brother Makkhan Lal Rai, a subjudge of Agra and family acquaintance. On his brother's recommendation, Harsukh Rai called Naval Kishore to Lahore to offer him employment in his rapidly expanding business. 
Naval Kishore could hardly have chosen a better place for his apprenticeship. On the basis of Koh-e Nür, Munshi Harsukh Rai's press was prospering. Koh-e Nür marked the beginning of serious Urdu journ alism in the Punjab. It was first published on 14 January 1850, a few months after the British annexation of the province, and enjoyed the support of the Punjab Administration Board. In fact, it was on the invitation of the colonial authorities that Harsukh Rai, who had previously served as editor of Jām-e Jamshed in Meerut, had moved to Lahore to start his own Urdu paper. Initially a mere news magazine that contained abstracts from the Government Gazette, rules, acts, and other government news, Koh-e Nūr soon broadened its range of contents (Sheo Narain 1916: 51 2). By the time Naval Kishore joined the Koh-e Nur Press in 1854, it had grown into the most popular and influential Urdu newspaper in the Punjab. Its circulation amounted to 349 subscribers, surpassing that of all other papers in the province. The paper was considered to be 'produced and conducted on principles advocated by the Government (Khan 1991: 246); its loyalty and supportive stance were duly rewarded by government patronage. At the same time, Koh-e Nür was popular with the native elite and enjoyed the patronage of the rulers of Kashmir and Patiala." 
During his time at the Koh-e Nur Press, Naval Kishore not only became acquainted with the various aspects of printing, publishing, and news paper editing, but also advanced from an apprentice's position to that of one of Harsukh Rai's leading employees. In the process, Naval Kishore became Munshi Naval Kishore. There is some controversy regarding his exact position at the press, the sources variously referring to him as 
37 Harsukh Rai rose to a position of eminence in colonial Lahore. He was a member of the Municipal Committee and of the Anjuman-e Panjab. Besides Koh-e Nür, he launched the literary monthly Khurshid-e Panjab (1856) and became the proprietor of Tohfa-e Kashmir (1877), the first Urdu paper in Kashmir. Details in Siddiqi 1962: 126-7; 212-17; Sabiri 1953 [i]: 371-422; Bool Chand 1933: 30. 
38 Out of these 349 subscribers, 162 were Hindus, 121 Muslims, and 40 Europeans. The number of books published by the press in the same year amounted to 15 titles. SRGNWP, vol. iv, pt xxiv, 1856, art. X: 'Note on the Native Presses'. 
39 Davis 1983: 84. Koh-e-Nür survived until 1904. For further details, see Khurshid 1964: 55-64; Khan 1991: 243-79. 
122 
An Empire of Books 
apprentice, editorial assistant, or editor of Koh-e Nür. This is apparently due to the fact that Naval Kishore, after an initial two years at Harsukh Rai's printing press, temporarily left Lahore and returned to Agra, where on 19 January 1856 he launched his own Urdu paper under the name of Safir-e Agra. This is borne out by a notice published in Koh-e Nür of 25 - March 1856, which was itself reprinted from Rivāz-e Nür of Multan (Khan 1990: 286).40 Since no copies of the short-lived Safir-e Agra have survived, our knowledge about the paper is limited to the bare facts that it was a weekly of twelve pages, sold at a subscription rate of Rs 12 per annum (Sabiri 1953[i]: 500). What prompted Naval Kishore to leave the Koh-e Nur Press is not known. Presumably, he simply wished to start his own business. There is an unsubstantiated claim that he left Lahore due to growing tension between him and Harsukh Rai (Ejazi 1980: 55). In the light of subsequent events, however, this seems unlikely. 
While Naval Kishore was busy establishing himself in Agra, the Koh e Nur Press faced a serious crisis when, in March 1856. Harsukh Rai was arrested for adultery and sentenced to three years in prison.41 A sneering commentary in the Lahore Chronicle of 12 March 1856 suggests that by this time he was no longer in official favour, and that the harsh sentence was politically motivated: 
The sentence has also ... given the most lively satisfaction to all classes of the native community, by whom Harsook Rai was alike feared and detested. His habit of levying black mail on respectable native officials, under threat of exposing their alleged misdeeds, was a source of intolerable oppression to the community, and large revenue to himself. Many circumstances cons pired towards the success of his nefarious system. In the earlier part of his career he contrived to deceive most of our European officials as to his real character. He consequently holds “Testimonials", such as any native gentle man would be proud of, from the most distinguished of our functionaries, including Sir Henry and Sir John Lawrence. Under the sanction of these great names he has contrived for years to carry on an infamous traffic in reputations; while the very fact that his principal partner in business was Bunnoo Lall, the head shereistadar of the Chief Commissioner's office, has helped, in the eyes of the timid natives, to place him beyond the reach of the Law. We even hear that since his imprisonment, Hursook Rae has been heard to boast that Bunnoo Lall would get him out of Jail in ten days, 
40 In outlining these events I follow the interpretation offered by Khan (1990: 286–7). 
41 Harsukh Rai's 'crime' involved a Kashmiri Muslim woman. For details, see the Lahore Chronicle, 8 March 1856: 156. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore : 1836-1895) 
123 
or at any rate as soon as the Chief Commissioner should return to Lahore a boast which we doubt not Sir John Lawrence will feel it his duty to make a note of . 
Meanwhile, the Koh-e Nur Press was run by Munshi Hira Lal. The predicament of the firm worsened when Munshi Divancand, the rival proprietor-editor of Cushma-e Fair in Sialkot, shrewdly exploited the situation to launch his own new paper, Khurshid-e ūlim. Kol-e Nur complained in an editorial that Divancand had purposely sent copies of his third-rate, non-sensical and mindless newspaper' to all its subscribers, encouraging them to abandon Koh-e Nür and buy Khurshid e Cālim instead." 
Apparently, it was at this critical juncture that Naval Kishore stepped in as an intermediary and managed to settle the feud between the two adversaries. He may have also been instrumental in procuring the bail of Rs 200 to effect Harsukh Rai's release from prison. Out of gratitude, Harsukh Rai offered him the post of manager of the Koh-e Nur Press at a monthly salary of Rs 15(Singh 1986:65). Naval Kishore consequently abandoned his own project and returned to Lahore. This must have been by September 1857, for he figures as manager of the Koh-e Nur Press on the title page of a special supplement of Koh-e Nür published on the occasion of the fall of Delhi on 21 September 1857 (Bool Chand 1932: 32). During the following months he played a major role in running the press and in ensuring that Koh-e Nür remained one of the few Indian newspapers in the Punjab that continued throughout the Mutiny. By the end of 1857 it still boasted 257 subscribers (Khurshid 1963: 180). 
During his years at the Koh-e Nur Press, Naval Kishore not only con ceived the idea of setting up on his own, he also acquired the necessary technical and entrepreneurial skills to do so. More importantly, he was given the opportunity to make himself known to the British authorities as a loyal supporter of the colonial regime during the critical days of the 1857 uprising. This, as we shall see, would prove to be a crucial asset in his future projects. It is not known exactly when Naval Kishore left the Koh-e Nur Press for good. In late 1857 or early 1858 he temporarily re turned to Agra, from where he proceeded to Lucknow to start a new chapter in his life and career. 
42 Koh-e Nūr, 11 March 1856, cited in Khurshid 1964: 56. 43 Khan 1991: 271; Sabiri 1973: 244-5. 
44 He was reportedly released on 10 August 1857 (19 zi'l hijja 1273 AH), Sabiri 1973: 232–3. 
124 
An Empire of Books 
2.2 Setting up Business in Lucknow 
At twenty-two years of age, Naval Kishore settled in Lucknow to set up shop on his own. On 23 November 1858 he opened a small printing press with the official approval of Sir Robert Montgomery, Chief Commissioner of Oudh, and under the special patronage of Colonel Saunders A. Abbott, Commissioner and Superintendent of the Lucknow division. It is likely that Naval Kishore moved to Lucknow at the very instance of Montgomery or Abbott, both of whom had been posted in the Punjab before taking up office in Lucknow: Montgomery had held the post of Judicial Commis sioner of the Punjab prior to his transfer from Lahore to Lucknow in April 1858. Colonel Saunders Abbott was transferred from Hoshiarpur in the same month. In a document of 1886, Naval Kishore professes to have come to Lucknow 'under the patronage of Sir Robert Montgomery. the Chief Commissioner of Oudh and Colonel Abbott, Commissioner of Lucknow' and goes on to say that 'These gentlemen extended, in conside ration of my loyalty and of what I had done in the Punjab for the British Government, their patronage to my newly-established Press and favoured me with the printing of all English and Vernacular documents connected with their Establishments.:46 
Lucknow was then a city of some 500,000 inhabitants (Taban 1995: 724–6)."'Even though it was severely affected by the 1857 uprising, to an aspiring young printer-journalist it presented much better opportunities than Agra. The city's rise to political and cultural prominence dates back to 1775, when Nawab Asaf ud-Daula shifted the capital of Avadh from Faizabad to Lucknow. Under the nawabs of Avadh, Lucknow flourished. It developed into a large and prosperous metropolis and became the scene of a vigorous commercial, intellectual, and literary life.48 The muni ficent patronage of the nawabs attracted artisans and artists, poets and 
45 Naval Kishore's lasting gratitude towards Abbott is attested in his Tavārikh-e nādir al-asr (Navalkishor [1863] 1990), the only work authored by the publisher himself. It combines a short account of Abbott's life and administration with a topographical sketch of Lucknow, its rulers and localities. 
46 Statement of the Newul Kishore Press', see below, Chapter 4. 
47 Estimates vary greatly, ranging from 300,000 (Thornton 1857) to up to 1,000,000 inhabitants. Taban's estimate is based on figures reproduced from a contemporary local newspaper. 
48 Perhaps more than any other North Indian city, Lucknow has captured the imagination and received the continuous attention of travellers, scholars, and other observers. The last three decades have seen an increasing production of academic literature on the city. For the period of the nawabi, see, e.g., Barnett 1980; Llewellyn Jones 1985; Fisher 1987; Kidwai 1993; Mohan 1997. For the post-Mutiny period, 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
125 
scholars from all over India and beyond, making Lucknow the splendid new centre of Indo-Persian courtly culture and Urdu poetry. The repeated ransacking of the Mughal capital of Delhi by both Central Asian and indigenous invaders further enhanced the city's attraction, accounting for a large-scale migration of poets and scholars to the safe haven in the east.*' Among those who left Delhi to take refuge in Lucknow were some of the greatest figures in eighteenth-century Urdu poetry, Mir and Sauda, as well as some eminent vounger poets such as Insha and Mushafi. 
Lucknow's importance as a religious centre and seat of Islamic schol arship pre-dated the rise of the Mughal successor state of Avadh to poli tical power. From the early eighieenth century the learned men of Farangi Mahall, a religious seminary run by a family of famous Sunni scholars and mystics, had turned Lucknow into the foremost centre of Islamic learning in India. Altracting scholars and students from all over India and the wider Islamic world, Farangi Mahall played a vital part in the revival and consolidation of the rationalist tradition in Islamic sciences (ma'qūlāt). The influential curriculum developed by its leading Cālim Nizamuddin Ahmad, named Dars-e Nizamivia after him, remained the dominant system of Indian Islamic education up to the late nineteenth century 50 Yet the religious importance of Lucknow was not confined to its role as the major seat of Sunni scholarship and religiosity. As Juan Cole has outlined in a compelling study, the nawabs of Avadh made Shia Islam a powerful and central force in state politics and administra tion (Cole 1989). Under their patronage, Shi'a Islam was firmly institu tionalized in the state apparatus, leading to the consolidation of a powerful and self-confident Shiite culture in constant interaction with the Shi'a heartlands in Iraq and Iran (Robinson 2001:24). The climax of this evo lution was the introduction of a formal Shifa judicial system and the establishment of a royal madrasah in the 1840s. 
Lucknow suffered enormously from the British annexation of Avadh and the effects of the 1857 uprising. However, it had not yet lost its role as an eminent intellectual, literary, and religious centre when Naval Kishore moved to the city in 1858. While the legendary decline of the 
see, e.g., Oldenburg 1989 (1984); Hasan 1990; Graff 1997; Joshi 2001. For the city's importance as a religious centre see Cole 1989; Malik 1997; Robinson 2001. 
49 For the exodus of poets from Delhi to Lucknow and the city's new role as the centre of Urdu literature, see Naim/Petievich 1997. 
50 For the history and importance of Farangi Mahall and an analysis of the Dars e Nizami, see the seminal studies by Francis Robinson (Robinson 1984, 1987, 1993; reissued together in Robinson 2001) and by Jamal Malik (Malik 1997).126 
An Empire of Books 
city had already set in and was most strongly felt in the economic sphere, Lucknow retained its fame as the epitome of refined Perso-Islamic civil ization and was to remain the capital of Hindustani high culture (Robin son 1997:199) for some time to come. When, in the wake of the 'Mutiny', Mirza Asadullah Khan Ghalib cast an envious look at the eastern metro polis, it contained all the nostalgia for a Delhi that was no more. Now the role of preserving Urdu culture had to be assigned to Lucknow: 'Nowa days, the people of Dihli are either Hindus or common workers or men in khaki or Panjabis or Gorās [i.e. Europeans). Which of these do you intend as the speakers of praiseworthy language?' lamented the famous Delhi poet. 'Lakhna'u life is a different story: there, the population has not been replaced. While the princedom is no more, people of all sorts of skills and accomplishment still live there' (Rahbar 1987: 132-3). 
For Naval Kishore, the vacuum created in the central spheres of public and economic life in the immediate aftermath of 1857 turned out to be of advantage in several respects: with most of the earlier presses of the city destroyed or forced to close down, competition in the printing business was virtually eliminated, while real estate and housing could be acquired cheaply, given the right talent for speculation. The city, moreover, offered a vast human potential of highly skilled artisans, scholars, and men of literature who were without a job and easily available for employment. Another crucial factor favouring Naval Kishore's projects was Luck now's return to politicial importance and its newly acquired role as the capital and administrative centre of the Avadh provincial government. 52 In the process of reconsolidating power and re-establishing social order in the city, the British heavily relied on the co-operation of the indigenous elites who had to be incorporated into the new administrative set-up or encouraged in other ways. In implementing the three imperatives of ‘safety, sanitation, and loyalty' (Oldenburg 1989: xv) such collaboration was vital. To enlist the services of a loyal and trustworthy Indian printer 
51 As A. Azmi notes: 'Immediately after the annexation in 1856 the total industries were crippled either by the abolition of duties on the imported articles or by legislation and enhanced duty. The local artisans suffered severely due to the cessation of demand and were thrown out of job. They either migrated or became day labourers. Much of what remained of crafts and commerce was completely ruined during the Mutiny and the subsequent repressive policy of the British Government. Taking a very conservative view, at least 15% to 20% of the trading and manufacturing class must have either perished or migrated or became day labourers' (Azmi 1970: 169 70). 
52 For a detailed account see Oldenburg 1989. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
127 
was a matter of paramount importance. These circumstances help to explain the official support lent to Nawal Kishore at the time he set up his enterprise. The decisive prerequisite for British patronage, however, was the fact that he had given ample proof of his loyalty while editor at the Koh-e Nur Press during the tumultuous times of 1857. 
Private Marters "The Creator bestowed upon him the beauty of Venus and the qualities of Jupiter. He is himself the conjunction of two auspicious stars' (Russell/ Islam 1994: 293). These are the words used by Mirza Ghalib to describe his junior contemporary. Ghalib's poetic appraisal is fully substantiated by the few surviving photographic portraits of Munshi Naval Kishore. They depict a well-built and handsome man whose impressive stature was further enhanced by his elegant attire in the Lakhnavi style (Fig. 1). In the absence of private papers, little is known about the publisher's domestic life, his outlook and opinions in matters of family, worldly affairs and religious issues. As noted earlier, Naval Kishore was raised in a milieu of orthodox Vaishnavism. No information, however, is avail able as to his private religious practice. In 1850, aged fourteen, he was married to Sarasvati Devi (d. 1901), the daughter of a wealthy zamindār from Rirha. Out of the marriage came three daughters, one of whom died before reaching adulthood. A long-awaited son was born to the couple in 1862, but he also died in infancy. Since the union produced no further male offspring, in 1872 Naval Kishore adopted his nephew Prag Narayan, the son of his younger brother Ramsevak, who was to become his heir and successor. Curiously, Prag Narayan was not brought up by Sarasvati Devi but by a Muslim woman whom Naval Kishore seems to have taken as his second wife. Nothing is known about the background of this woman, who was generally addressed as Begum Sahib and ran a separate house hold in the Man Singh Haveli in Lucknow's Rakabganj quarter. Appa rently, the Hindu publisher's marriage to a Muslim woman did not compromise his social standing. It did, however, create some disturbance at the time of Prag Narayan's own marriage when some people, assuming him to be Begum Sahib's natural son, objected to his getting married to a Hindu girl (Nurani 1995: 33). 
Like many Indian pioneers of print, Naval Kishore was a self-made man. Upon his arrival in Lucknow in 1858 he was virtually empty-handed. Endowed with a rare enterprising spirit and supported by British patronage, over the next thirty-seven years he single-mindedly devoted 
128 
An Empire of Books 
Fig. 1: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-95) 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naral Kishore (1836-1895) 
129 
himself to building up a publishing house of unparalleled dimensions. Naval Kishore's business operations, along with the history of the growth of the NKP, will be dealt with in the following chapters. In order to un derstand how a single individual could build up from scratch what was to become the largest printing and publishing concern in South Asia, however, it is vital to first take a closer look at the various public roles and spheres of intluence of northern India's foremost commercial printer publisher. As will be shown below, the print capitalist Naval Kishore not only solidified his business by seeking alliances with various influential sections of post-1857 colonial society in Lucknow and beyond, but also assumed the role of publisher in a fashion that combined entrepreneurship with traditional notions of patronage. Engagement in philanthropy and social reform, an educationist's mission, and political ambitions are the various facets of a public life that command closer attention. 
2.3 The Public Life of an Indian Publisher 
Given the absence of personal documents and the paucity of information on Munshi Naval Kishore's private life, his views and opinions, values, and motivations must be inferred from his public appearance, that is from the multifarious socio-cultural, reformist, and political activities he became engaged in following his rise to prominence in Lucknow society. Naval Kishore came to Lucknow as an outsider who had no con nections with the city's traditional elites. His assimilation into the urban professional class and rise to the position of one of the city's leading notables provides an interesting example of new hybrid elite formation." It also illustrates new mechanisms of social ascent afforded by the colo nial public sphere in the post-1857 period. Undoubtedly, the economic power wielded by the publisher and the prosperity that came with the growth of his firm were crucial factors in his social ascent. However, colonial society also provided other mechanisms to rise socially, which became particularly important for the aspiring new middle class of gov ernment officials, urban professionals, businessmen, and publicists. The most efficient among these mechanisms, spanning both colonial and indigenous arenas of the public domain, were philanthropy and the patron age of charitable, educational, and religious institutions. It would be naive to interpret the publisher's engagement with charity merely as a disinterested monetary contribution to the good cause, as has been the 
53 For new elite formation in Lucknow, see Oldenburg 1989: 199–238. 
130 
An Empire of Books 
general trend in biographical writing on him. Rather, it was a 'social in vestment in the sense highlighted by C.A. Bayly in his seminal work on the North Indian merchant class (Bayly 1992). In probing the operations of the merchant family firm, Bayly clearly established the importance of the 'social dimension' of business life.34 Drawing on Bayly. Douglas E. Haynes, in an essay on the relevance of gift-giving in nineteenth-century India, has argued that studying the philanthropic activities of South Asian commercial magnates significantly enhances our understanding of their social and political motivations (Haynes 1987). Rich merchants'engage ment with philanthropy typically followed traditional Indian patterns of donation (dāna), particularly to religious institutions, educational charities, schools, and hospitals, while drawing at the same time on modern concepts of civic welfare and educated citizenship. 
Against this backdrop, the extent to which Naval Kishore deliberately utilized philanthropy and patronage to maintain and enhance his social position needs to be analysed more thoroughly. Naval Kishore was the proverbial benefactor of widows and heathens who gave largely to all kinds of social and charitable causes. Without wanting to call into question the genuineness of his altruistic commitment and charitable intentions, these investments must be viewed as more than just munificent acts in the cause of society and social uplift. For one thing, philanthropy, in as much as it assumed modern forms of public civic engagement, was a prime means of securing the good will of the colonial rulers. As Sanjay Sharma has argued in his study of famine relief in the early nineteenth century, the colonial state clearly favoured institutionalized forms of charity-aimed at public projects such as schools, libraries, and hospitals. and organized along the lines of committees and voluntary associations over established patterns of indigenous charity, which were often deemed to be lacking in public spirit (Sharma 2001: 192). That Naval Kishore was acutely aware of this becomes evident at a later stage in his career, when he would regularly invoke his dual role of large-scale employer and social benefactor in order to pressurize the colonial authorities (see Chapter 4). 
The publisher's philanthropic activities and his liberal patronage to a large number of institutions formed part of a wider strategy of establishing networks of social alliances with both the colonial government and vari ous groups within the indigenous mercantile and social elite. In promoting a climate of mutual trust between individuals and social groupings, such social networks were of prime importance to his business enterprise. 
54 See especially Chapter 10, ‘The Merchant Family'. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
131 
Naval Kishore followed an established practice among commercial mag nates when he began to assidiously build a network of alliances that was to serve his commercial and non-commercial interests alike. 
Conquering the Public Sphere: 
Posis and Patronage Wealth based on landholding and commerce, influence wielded in local society as an entrepreneur and publicist, and close ties maintained with the British authorities were the three pillars that sustained Naval Kishore's ascent in colonial Lucknow. They also elevated him into the category of ra'is or 'urban magnate'. The urban ra'is, as defined by Bayly, was an agent of informal political authority' who characteristically exercised his patronage and control through a network of cross-caste and cross community connexions and was consequently sought out by the British in his function as a local intermediary. These same attributes also qualified Naval Kishore as what Francis Robinson has aptly termed the 'inevitable municipal board man' (Robinson 1973: 74–5). A new figure in post-1857 urban society, the Indian municipal commissioner was typi cally a commercial or professional man of substance who maintained a relationship of mutual interest with the government and who frequently used the municipal commissionership as a means of consolidating his local influence and as a stepping stone to a future career in politics. 56 Naval Kishore, as will be shown presently, was a case in point. In 1875 he was nominated as a member of the Lucknow Municipal Committee, a position which he held for the next eighteen years as a representative of the Ganeshganj ward. The personal prestige and influence that came with this position on the municipal board were enhanced by several 
55 Bayly 1971: 290. Bayly defines the social category of rais as 'magnates distinguished by their degree of control over resources and groups in the urban political system, and also by the degree of their influence with the local authorities who controlled the inflow of wealth into town society and to some extent confirmed its statuses' (ibid.: 293). Ra'ises, by implication, were neither a caste nor a class but "a category of political power whose main characteristics were ability to mediate with higher authority and to control webs of patronage beneath' (ibid.). 
56 Robinson greatly stresses the prestige and influence that came with a municipal commissionership (Robinson 1973: 73–4). His assessment has been challenged by Oldenburg, who finds him confusing opportunities to make money with real political power' (Oldenburg 1989: 85). 
57 The Lucknow Municipal Committee was established in 1862. In 1864 it com prised nineteen elected and six ex-officio members. It was a precursor of the Municipal 
132 
An Empire of Books 
other honorary positions. While implying official recognition of his servi ces to society, they served to tie him further to the colonial administra tion's interests. In 1881 he was made an Honorary Assistant Commissio ner, and in the following year an Honorary Magistrate. He sat on the Oudh-Rohilkhand Railway Board, was an Honorary Inspector of Jails, and an Honorary Manager of the Government Printing Press at Allahabad. 
Naval Kishore's appointment to these various posts was both preceded and accompanied by continuous acts of patronage to public institutions. In his active support of social welfare schemes, educational projects, and local infrastructural measures he corresponded to the British ideal of an enlightened and cooperative member of the indigenous elite. His liberality and progressive outlook situated him within an envisaged class of local elite citizens who were to constitute 'the pillars of the new urban society' (Oldenburg 1989: xvii) and act as reliable intermediaries for the British in public arenas. 
One of the chosen fields of charitable activity for the rich mercantile and professional classes in colonial India was what David Arnold has described as “medical philanthropy' (Arnold 1993: 270). An opportunity to engage in this kind of highly valorized philanthropic work presented itself to Naval Kishore's contemporaries in the early 1880s with the establishment of the Lady Dufferin Fund. Created by and named after the vicereine, Lady Hariot Dufferin, the fund was designed with the ex press purpose of providing medical aid to Indian women, and of training native nurses and female doctors, particularly in obstetrics. In its wake. Lady Dufferin Hospitals were established in a number of urban centres. As an active local committee member and benefactor of the fund, Naval Kishore used his paper Avadh Akhbār to publish fund-raising appeals in support of the planned Lucknow hospital. He also sponsored an entire wing of the new hospital building with a large donation of Rs 15,000. 
Such munificence was bound to favourably impress even the most senior officials. Lieutenant Governor Sir Auckland-Colvin, in outlining the fund's success in a public speech, made explicit mention of the large sums provided by the liberality of Munshi Newal Kishore', adding that this liberality was 'eminently characteristic of him?.58 Of far greater consequence than medical philanthropy, however, was Naval Kishore's 
Board which came into existence under the operation of the Local Self Government Act in 1884. OAR, 1863-4: 69. See also Oldenburg 1989: 75-95. 
58 Selections from Speeches of the Lieutenant-Governors of the NWP, 1867--1891, 1890: 153. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
133 
sustained involvement in the educational sector. In Lucknow, he gave large donations of books to local institutions such as the Canning College and the Lucknow Museum. His financial assistance to Agra College has already been mentioned. Various other institutions of colonial higher education received his support. In the 1880s he helped revive Bareilly College by joining a fund for the promotion of collegiate education in Bareilly, and later became a member of its Board of Trustees, together with Deputy Collector Raja Jai Kishen Das, C.S.I., and other prominent citizens.59 In 1887 he was appointed a Fellow of the University of Allaha bad, having financed a new library building and presented the institution with a large donation of books. 
The establishment of the Lucknow Jubilee High School in the same year was largely the result of the publisher's efforts. At the time, only two Anglo-Vernacular schools were operating in Lucknow. That both were run by missionaries was a matter of considerable concern to the colonial authorities. As the Avadh DPI observed, the absence of a secular Anglo-Vernacular school, subject to government control and inspection, in India's fourth-largest city was hardly acceptable. This state of things is, I believe, without a parallel in any Province or Presidency within the Empire', he pointed out. Following several abortive attempts, the scheme to establish a government school only materialized in 1885 when Naval Kishore came forward with concrete proposals for an endowment and monthly subscriptions in support of a new school. He was supported in his efforts by his influential fellow citizen Rai Bahadur Brij Bhukan Lal, registrar at the Judicial Commissioner's Office, Honorary Magistrate, and Secretary to the Trustees of the Husainabad Endowment. The two men had been associated with one another for a long time and had coope rated in various arenas such as the Municipal Committee and the Jalsah e Tahzib, Lucknow's first voluntary association, about which more will be said later. When nothing came of Naval Kishore's initial proposals, on 26 April 1886 he again addressed the authorities, reiterating his offer of an endowment of Rs 15,000 and promising an additional monthly stipend of Rs 50. He also recommended a mul building known as the Malka Jahan ki baradari or Agha Mir ki deorhi as a suitable site to house the new school. The building, a former residence of Nawab Ghaziuddin's 
59 PGNWP&Oudh. Educational Dept., June 1885: 3. 60 PGNWP&Oudh. Educational Dept., March 1887: 3. 
61 Brij Bhukan Lal (b.1820) belonged to a family of Kayasthas. In 1882 he received the title of Rai Bahadur in recognition of his long and faithful services as Registrar of the Judicial Commissioner's Court (Manual of Titles 1889: 114). 
134 
An Empire of Books 
Prime Minister Agha Mir, was well known to Naval Kishore since it had previously housed his printing presses.62 On the basis of his endowment and a further contribution of Rs 7500 by Brij Bhukan Lal, the Educational Department was able to secure the building and progress with its plans to set up a school. Naval Kishore busied himself with raising further capital from the local gentry. The institution, which was to impart primary and secondary education in English and the regional languages to students 'irrespective of race or creed', was finally opened in 1887 and named Lucknow Jubilee High School, its opening coinciding with Queen Victoria's Jubilee. The two principal Indian donors were made lifetime members of its Board of Trustees. 
Education had become a mission and a lifelong concern for Naval Kishore. As is evident from his activities both in publishing and in the wider public domain, the spread of education among his contemporaries meant to him a dual engagement, with the promotion of advanced scholar ship on the one hand, and the dissemination of knowledge among the Indian masses on the other. His concept of knowledge, being non-elitist and democratic, was also non-exclusive and all-encompassing, according importance to both Indian and Western thought, and to Hindu and Islamic scholastic traditions. The wide range of private and official educational schemes and institutions that he supported through a combination of scholarships, book donations and pecuniary assistance point to an essen tially humanist vision that transcended the narrow boundaries of com munal affiliation. 
Naval Kishore's patronage of several eminent Islamic institutions corroborates this point. The same man who founded a traditional Sanskrit pāthśālā on the banks of the river Gomti in Lucknow made the preser vation of India's Islamic literary heritage one of his primary concerns. In keeping with this objective, Naval Kishore was eager to aid one of the most prestigious institutions of Islamic learning in northern India, the Dar ul-ulum at Deoband.63 His donations of numerous standard works of Islamic literature were a welcome asset to the seminary's library and 
62 PGNWP&Oudh. Educational Dept., March 1887: 4. 
63 Metcalf 1982: 104. By contrast, little is known about the interaction between Naval Kishore and Farangi Mahall. At least one Farangi Mahall scholar served at the NKP, while a number of important works produced by the learned men of Farangi Mahall and published by Naval Kishore suggest a more or less regular cooperation. One prominent example is the commentary of Rumi's Masnavi-e ma'navi (*1873) by Maulana Abdul Ali Bahr al-'Ulum, of which Naval Kishore obtained the copyright from Farangi Mahall. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
135 
were gratefully acknowledged by the Deobandi (ulama. This is evinced in the school's yearly reports. While the second annual report of 1867 8 still lamented the dearth of Arabic textbooks and difficulty in procuring them, subsequent reports expressed their warm gratitude to Munshi Naval Kishore who despite the great distance had initiated a continuous supply of books free of charge. The eminent Deobandi teacher Manazir Ahsan Gilani would later emphasize the momentous impact of these donations, It has to be understood, writes Gilani, 'that for a long time it was with the help of the books donated by this one non-Muslim that the teachers and students at the Dar al-Culum at Deoband fulfilled their religious and scholarly requirements, understood the Qur'an and solved the linguistic problems of Hadith:05 
For all his support of an institution that represented orthodox Islamic learning, Naval Kishore openly sided with the modernist cause of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan (1817-98) and the Muslim reformist movement. The relationship between the two men was a close, longstanding, and eventually turbulent one. It dates back to at least the year 1864, when Sayyid Ahmad Khan founded the Scientific Society at Ghazipur, the largest and most influential among early voluntary associations in north ern India.66 Naval Kishore joined the society as a subscribing member on 15 September 1864 and promptly began supporting it with book donations. In 1868 Sayyid Ahmad Khan had his Ahkam-eta'ām-e ahl-e kitāb (Fig. 2), a treatise on the permissibility of interdining with Christians, published from the NKP Kanpur. More publishing collaborations fol lowed, among them reprints of Sayyid Ahmad's early critical edition of ĀPin-e Akbari (Institutes of Akbar, *1869) and of his widely acclaimed topographical work on Delhi Asār as-sanādid (Vestiges of the Nobles, *1876).67 Naval Kishore was clearly an admirer of the great Muslim reformer, and in the early 1870s actively supported the latter's controversial reformist journal Tahzib al-Akhlāq through the columns of his own paper Avadh Akhbär (see Chapter 6). Therefore, when Sayyid Ahmad Khan campaigned for the establishment of the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College in Aligarh in the 1870s, he was able to count on the publisher's liberal support. The educational and ideological objectives of the college, its reconciliation of traditional Islamic teaching with the 
64 Rūdād-e salānah 1284 h, cited in S.T. Khan 1980: 173. 65 Cited in Ali 1980: 93 (my translation from the original Urdu). 66 Details on the society in Lelyveld 1996: 77-80. 67 The NKP edition of Asār as-sanādid was a reprint of the first edition of 1847.An Empire of Books 
136 
وطعام الزين و 
الشبح كرا 
. 
الله حق 
ا لا 
لا 
ا سمها 
ة 
الهوية 
بها م 
اس سارین خان کی نامو لوی شاه عبدالعزيصان نواز کی دراوس م تروکی تو کوجاج لجهد ولی پیام نوریه در فکر این حرفا 
صوتی و تناقات المجرد 
را وارد به همه 
اهلیییی است 
Fig. 2: Title page of Sayyid Ahmad Khan, 
Ahkām-e ta'ām-e ahl-e kitāb (1868) 
A Life in Print: Murshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
137 
secular rationalism of Western science in a reformist agenda, closely corresponded to Naval Kishore's ideas of how to reform education and lead Indian Muslims on the road to progress. Consequently, fund-raising appeals were published in Aradh Akhbar, while Sayyid Ahmad Khan's speeches soliciting support to the college were publicized in printed pamphlets.68 Naval Kishore made a personal donation of Rs 10,000 to the college funds and contributed books worth Rs 20.000. In the 1880s the two men would again collaborate and finally part ways in the anti Congress movement. 
As mentioned earlier, one of the new measures arising from the colonial state's educational agenda in the post-1857 period was the estab lishment of public libraries. The scheme was enthusiastically endorsed by the Indian intelligentsia who adopted it as a project of their own. Pub lic libraries, though generally supported by government grants, depended heavily on Indian sponsorship for their upkeep and the supply of books, Not surprisingly, publishers like Naval Kishore volunteered to furbish these new institutions of an emerging middle-class reading culture. The public libraries patronized by his firm spanned a wide geographical re gion, including not only the libraries of Lucknow, Meerut, Faizabad, Bareilly, and Barabanki, but also the Lyall Library in Aligarh, the Punjab Public Library (Charles Aitchison Memorial Library) in Lahore, and the Lansdowne Library in Calcutta. Several libraries in the princely states of Jammu and Kashmir, Jaipur, and Patiala were also supplied with NKP books. It is a fortunate circumstance that Naval Kishore's largesse was not limited to India. The Indian Institute Library of the Bodleian Library 
the time of its foundation by Sir Monier Monier-Williams in 1884. Today, this well-preserved collection reckons among the largest collections of nineteenth-century NKP books outside India and is probably only outdone in size by the holdings of the British Library.09 
Educational patronage of such scope and variety not only served as a means to consolidate Naval Kishore's position within indigenous 
68 Two such pamphlets are listed in the QLP Oudh, namely, 'A lecture delivered by Sayyid Ahmad Khan at Lahore, regarding the proposed Mahommadan University' (*1874); and 'Rules regarding the foundation and management of the proposed Mahommadan University' (*1874). 
69 See Sir Monier-Williams's inauguration speech of 14 October 1884. How can the University of Oxford best fulfil its duty towards India?', Oxford and Cambridge Undergraduates' Journal, 16 October 1884. Another large collection of NKP books outside India can be found at Tokyo University. 
138 
An Empire of Books 
circles: like philanthropy it also presented him with an opportunity to ingratiate himself with the colonial authorities. His continuous support of colonial schemes and institutions undoubtedly did much to strengthen an already thriving business relationship with the British and served to enhance further the amount of official patronage accorded to his firm. The implications of colonial patronage for the NKP's commercial history and the nature of the business collaboration with the British will be dis cussed in detail in Chapter 4. At present, we are more immediately con cerned with the impact of Naval Kishore's own acts of philanthropy and patronage on his social ascent in colonial society. 
From the mid-1870s British acknowledgement of Munshi Naval Kishore's position among the foremost members of the Lucknow urban elite is manifested in a large number of invitations to official functions and social gatherings organized by senior representatives of the colonial state.70 Some of these invitations—to the Chapter of the Order of the Star of India in 1876, to the Viceregal darbār in Lahore in November 1880, and to the Viceroy's Levee in November 1885—were in fact 'press tickets', extended to Naval Kishore in his capacity as proprietor of the leading Urdu daily in the provinces. At the same time, he gained entry into the more limited circle of Indian elite members whose presence was requested at social events of a more exclusive kind. These events included an 'evening fête' at the Lahore Shalimar gardens hosted by Sir Robert Henry Davies, Lieutenant Governor of the Punjab, during the visit of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales to India in 1875-6, a garden party given by Richard Temple, Lieutenant Governor of Bengal, on the same occasion, and an evening party given by Lieutenant Governor Lord Lyall to meet the Viceroy and Countess of Dufferin in 1885. The publisher's admittance into this restricted sphere of formal social interaction between the colonial state and the Indian elite is significant for it testifies to his status as an established community leader. As it turned out, it was precise ly the influence Naval Kishore wielded in local society, rather than his achievements in the field of literature and learning, that ultimately accounted for the British decision to bestow an official title upon him. 
Naval Kishore had to wait a long time before his services to society were officially recognized by the government. He received a foretaste of such recognition in January 1877 when on the occasion of the Im 
"I am grateful to Dr Ranjit Bhargava for kindly putting at my disposal some twenty such original invitation cards dating mainly from the 1880s. 
139 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
the first class Kaisar-E-Hind medal." However, it took eleven more years, several appeals in the Urdu language press, and the personal intervention of Lieutenant Governor Sir Alfred Lyall before he was nonoured with an imperial title. Lvall, who was acutely aware of Naval Kishore's far-reaching intluence within the Indian community, took a personal interest in having a title bestowed on the publisher and re commended him for the Companion of the Order of the Indian Empire. When his initial recommendation failed to produce the desired results, Lyall wrote to the Viceroy's Private Secretary, Sir Donald Mackenzie Wallace, to reiterate his request. His letter of 19 October 1887 deserves to be quoted in full, for it clearly reveals Lyall's ulterior motives in advocating the expediency of the measure: 
My dear Mackenzie Wallace, 
You may remember that when I submitted the list of persons recommended for honours in commemoration of Her Majesty's Jubilee, Munshi Newul Kishore of Lucknow was one of those recommended for the C.I.E. I subse quently learnt, with some regrel, that the honour would not be conferred on him; and I write again on the subject before leaving India, because I think it possible that some of the reasons upon which he was recommended may not have been fully apprehended. Newul Kishore holds rather a special position in these Provinces; he is a man of wealth; he is the proprietor of a large business, and he owns the leading native newspaper (vernacular) in Upper India. His energy and activity have placed him in relation with various classes and interests throughout this part of the country and the adjoining Native States, to a degree which has acquired him much influence, and which keeps him widely acquainted with all that goes on. I am told that he also carries a large book trade with Afghanistan; and it is certain that he shows much enterprize as a publisher in various departments. In short, he is a man who might be very useful, both from his connection with native journalism and book-printing, and from the extensive means that he posses ses of keeping himself and others informed of the state of feeling and opi nion on any questions that concern the native community. He is by no means unwilling to find himself on good terms with the Government; and his intelligence and sagacity make it quite worth while to keep up communi cations with him. I myself have no doubt whatever as to the expediency of encouraging him, and attaching him more or less to the interests of our ad ministration. At any rate I believe it would be a mistake to let him discover 
71 For a classic account of the Imperial Assemblage and its impact, see Cohn 1983. 
See, e.g., the comments in the Ahsan al-Akhbār, Agra Akhbār, and Tuti-e Hind (Meerut), SVN 1880: 178: 1886: 828 and 1888: 36–7. 
140 
An Empire of Books 
that the Government does not think that he merits any special consideration. He would be much gratified if the C.I.E. were given to him; and as I think his position in the Provinces is such that the honour might be fitly and wisely bestowed upon him, I shall be very glad if an opportunity occurs of again sending up his name. His Excellency the Viceroy may possibly be not less disposed to consider favourable the recommendation, as it is the last of this kind which I am making before quitting the Lieutenant-Governorship. 
Believe me, 
Sincerely yours (Sd.) A.C. Lyall?3 
This time, Lyall's pressing request met with a favourable reply. Con 
Order of the Indian Empire' (C.I.E.) was conferred on Naval Kishore. The bestowal of the prestigious title onto a representative of the Indian newspaper and publishing trade was widely acclaimed in the Urdu press. Most papers in a self-congratulatory manner chose to interpret it as a long-overdue tribute to the Indian-language press rather than just a personal honour to the Lucknow publisher. A marked exception was the satirical journal Avadh Punch, an old-time rival of Avadh Akhbār, which sardonically greeted the new 'Companion of the Order of the Indian Empire' as a 'Sycophant of the Empire'. 74 
Thus far we have looked at Naval Kishore's interactions in an arena of the public sphere that was dominated and controlled by the colonial state, namely the domain of local self-government, of honorary positions and official social functions organized by the British. Juxtaposed to it and frequently overlapping was the vibrant indigenous public sphere shaped by vernacular newspapers, caste associations, literary and social reform societies, and other voluntary bodies. As will be shown below, Naval Kishore moved easily between these two frequently interacting public worlds. 
Caste Connections 
Munshi Naval Kishore's lifetime coincided with a period of rapid mod ernization in Indian society. Its implications were felt in all spheres of 
The Viceregal Papers of the Marquess of Dufferin and Ava, OIOC, Neg 4367. vol. 52: 342-3. 
74 SVN 1888: 36–7 and 498. 
141 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
me, including religion. In the process of negotiating, reformulating, and asserting religious identity, the modernizing Hindu nation rediscovered the institution of caste with its concomitant moral and dharmic impli ations. As Susan Bayly has argued, the new consciousness of caste 
Id its formalized expression of caste associations in the latter half of the nineteenth century was more than just a reaction to colonial schemes of classifying Indian society along hierarchical lines (S. Bayly 1999). Rather, Indian thinkers and social reformers came to view caste as a tool in the social and cultural regeneration of India, investing it with the new meaning of a bond of moral community at the national level (ibid.: 166). Underlying this idealised corporation view'. as Bayly calls it, was the notion that caste was vested with moral messsages. Hence the em phasis that newly-emerging caste assocations placed on social service and reformist activities. Agendas of community uplift had a clearly patrio tic thrust and would ultimately entail the uplift of the Indian nation at large. In the modern public arena, caste affiliation came to be portrayed as 'an expression of citizenship and spiritually informed nationality which had the potential to fulfil and regenerate the modern Hindu.. Caste asso ciations in this configuration functioned as 'enlightened citizenries' (ibid.: 173; 166). 
Naval Kishore's efforts in formulating a corporate caste identity and supporting the interests of his caste community must be viewed against this backdrop. If his engagement with caste issues was in many ways typical of his times, it also provides a salient example of how the new men of print utilized their position to publicize and foster community interests (Bayly 1996a: 345). Pre-dating Naval Kishore's active involve ment in the formation of the Bhargava caste association in the 1980s was a marked interest in the concerns of the Kayastha cominunity. In the 1870s he, on various occasions, lent his support to the eminent Lucknow Kayastha leader Munshi Kali Prasad, a pleader at the Judicial Commis 
Dharm Sabha and simultaneously launched an Urdu bimonthly called Kāyastha Samācār.75 When, in the following year he set up the Kayastha 
institution. A 1882 record of the Kayastha Pathshala draws attention to his generous contribution to the school library, noting that the library owed its existence chiefly to the Lucknow publisher, 'who had generously 
75 Details in Carroll 1975. For the Kāyastha Samācār see Carroll 1973 and Sabi 1953 [ii]: 445-6. 
142 
An Empire of Books 
made a gift of such works as have been printed in his press, and who had promised to give to the library such books as may be printed in his press hereafter.'76 Furthermore, he funded three out of the six scholarships attached to the school.77 
Given my earlier attempt to show that Naval Kishore himself was not a Kayastha, it is significant that not one of the sources originating from within the community identify him as a caste member. Why then should he actively support a caste community that was not his own? We have 
educational schemes and institutions. It will be argued here that he had a vested interest in lending special support to the Kayastha community, his own enterprise relying so heavily on the expertise of the large number of Kayasthas employed as translators, compositors, and scribes. There were strong professional and personalties: for example, the head Persian translator in the NKP's Department of Translation, Munshi Gokul Par shad, was a Kayastha who also happened to be the first editor of Kāvastha Samācār. Also, the publisher's assocation with the Kayastha leader Kali Prasad seems to have been a close and personal one. In the 1870s the NKP issued several tracts in Urdu, Hindi, and Sanskrit that dealt with the controversial issue of the Kayasthas' origin and varna status. 78 Fore most among them was Kali Prasad's Kāyasthavarnanirnay (*1875), a predecessor to his better known English Kayastha Ethnology (Kali Prasad 1877).79 This treatise, in which he painstakingly tried to prove the Ksha triya origin of North Indian Kayasthas, became a key text in formulating a distinct community identity. Printed at the Lucknow American Methodist Printing Press, it was distributed by the NKP, which acted as agent for the Kāyastha Samācār's Allahabad office. The 1879 NKP catalogue contained a separate list of the office's publications. 
In the 1880s Naval Kishore's focus visibly shifted from the Kayastha to the Dhusar-Bhargava community. As outlined earlier, in the last de cades of the nineteenth century the Dhusars underwent a process of social mobility in which their new identity as Bhargava Brahmins was 
76 AECR 1884: 377. 77 Ibid. 
78 E.g., Kāyastha dharm darpan (*1870), an Urdu tract by Pandit Ramcaran Sharma, and the Sanskrit Kāyastha-kula-bhāskara (*1873) by the same author. 
79 The Kayastha Ethnology: being an inquiry into the origin of the Chitraguptavansi and Candrasenavansi Kayasthas (Lucknow: American Methodist Mission Press 1877). For the impact of this text and the controversy over the Kayasthas' caste 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
143 
formulated and consolidated. More than a mere witness to this process, Naval Kishore took a leading part in it. He acted as one of the founder members of the community's first nation-wide caste organization, the Akhil Bharatiya Bhargava Sabha or 'All India Bhargava Conference', established in Mathura in 1889. Reporting on the inaugural meeting held on 31 December 1889 'under the auspices of the members of the Dhusar community', Hindustani noted: 
Among others, Munshi Newal Kishore.C.I.E of Lucknow, Munshi Girdhar Lal, Vakil, Agra, and Lalas Sita Ram and Jagan Prasad, Honorary Magis trates, Muttra, were present, and Seth Lachnam (sic) Das. C.I.E., presided. The meeting resolved to establish a school from public subscription. Munshi Newal Kishore will contribute Rs 25 a month...S0 
As this passage suggests, the nascent association brought together urban professionals and commercial raises of considerable financial means and public influence. In Seth Lachman Das, a member of a powerful merchant and banking family of Mathura, it had found an eminent patron. Education, social reform, and support of caste interests were the main targets on the association's early agenda. The fact that the second Bhar gava Conference was held at Naval Kishore's private Lucknow residence in December 1890 points to his prominent position in the early days of the caste association. On this particular occasion various social issues, particularly the controversial Age of Consent Bill, were discussed. A resolution was passed, advising caste members not to have their sons married before the age of sixteen. The proceedings of the conference were subsequently publicized in Avadh Akhbār, by then the most widely read Urdu daily in North India.81 The third Bhargava Conference took place at Mathura in December 1892. Again, an illustrious congregation assembled: Munshi Naval Kishore and the Agra pleader Munshi Girdhar Lal, the association's secretary, presided over the sessions. Among the prominent dignitaries present were Seth Lachman Das, this time joined by Lala Mangilal, the head manager of his banking business, and Raja Jai Kishen Das, Deputy Collector of Morabadad and an eminent former Hindu spokesman of the Aligarh movement. On the members' request, 
80 Hindustāni, 12 January 1890, SVN 1890: 37. 
81 SVN 1891: 47. The event here is referred to as the 'Annual meeting of the Bhargava Social Conference'. 
family history, see Growse 1883: 14-15. 
144 
An Empire of Books 
Seth Lachman Das agreed to oversee and financially support the caste association's newly established Sanskrit pārh śālā which was to impart education to both boys and girls. Raja Jai Kishen Das promised a monthly grant to the institution.83 
Naval Kishore consolidated his prominent position within the caste association by giving ample financial support to its educational and social reform schemes. On the occasion of his adopted son Prag Narayan's marriage he donated Rs 8,000 to the Bhargava Sabha, followed later by an even larger sum of Rs 15,000. In 1891 he gave Rs 1000 to the Vidhva Kosh Bhargava Sabha, a charitable fund established in Agra for the support of Hindu widows. The Bhargava Boarding House in Agra receiv ed a generous donation of Rs 20,000 at the time of its foundation in 1890, followed by a permanent annual grant of Rs 1500. It seems that in his munificence Naval Kishore was continously outdoing other community members, to the extent that it actually caused some embarrassment. This is suggested by the association's report of 1891-2, which remarked on the financing of the Bhargava Boarding House: 
No further necessary payments had to be made for the building. However, to support the students Munshi Naval Kishore, C.I.E., has bestowed a certain sum and has kindly agreed to bestow the same sum this year. But to put such a burden on a single individual and have all one's hopes depend on a single gentleman means to discourage the spirit of brotherhood, generosity and munificence of the community. We must all make an effort to fulfil the promises we made and complete this task of our community and our asso ciation according to our capacity. 84 
The establishment of the Bhargava Sabha consolidated the identity and public influence of the community and gave its interests a common thrust. For men like Seth Lachman Das and Naval Kishore it had the additional benefit of bringing them into personal contact with other influential men of trade and commerce, thus providing a forum for the corporate interests 
It is worth noting that apart from a temple in Rewari and a Shiva tem ple reportedly built by him in the Civil Lines of Kanpur,85 extant sources 
83 Karravāi cahāram jalsa-e Cam Bhārgava sabhā, Agra 1893: 36. The document lists the members of the Sabha's managing committee, most of them public servants and lawyers. 
84 Ibid.: 10. 
* See the website of the Bhargava community at http:/www.bhargava. indiainformation.com. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
145 
provide no evidence of Naval Kishore engaging in religious patronage. mke other commercial magnates who would liberally contribute to 
building of temples or patronize religious festivals and bodies (Bayly 1971:298), he seems to have taken a limited interest only in investing in religious charity. As suggested earlier, his public engagement transcen ded narrow boundaries of caste and religious community to focus on wider issues of education, social reform, and the spread of knowledge and progressive thought among his contemporaries. An ideal forum to help promote these causes presented itself to him in the many voluntary and civic associations that evolved as a constitutive feature of urban public life in colonial India from the 1860s. 
Voluntary Associations and Civic Engagement Reflecting the formation of a new political and literary public sphere, the 1860s saw the rise of an 'associational culture', so which found its imme diate expression in a proliferation of debating clubs, scientific institutes, and literary or reformist societies. With its focus on education, literature and social reform, this new form of organized indigenous agency grew out of the need of the educated Indian elite to debate the implications of colonial rule and participate in the process of Indian modernization. Em bedded in, and representative of the nascent public sphere, the new associational culture was informed by notions of enlightened and active citizenship.87 While emulating the discursive forms of Western liberalism, it also drew inspiration from age-old Hindu concepts such as sevā ('service') and dānā (gift-giving'), investing them with new meanings of 'service to society' and 'associational philanthropy' (Watt 2006: O. 96). For men like Naval Kishore the new voluntary associations fulfilled various functions: they not only allowed for participation in the East West encounter at the cultural, literary, and scientific level, but also pro vided a forum in which to debate public affairs and become actively engaged in 'modern' forms of philanthropy. More importantly, they form ed the nucleus of future political representation by providing an institutional framework for the urban elite's self-styled role as spokesmen of indigenous society, and as intermediaries between the colonial state and the Indian masses. Associations, in Anil Seal's pointed formulation, 'brought nineteenth-century India across the threshold of modern politics 
86 For the concept of 'associational culture', see Harris 1993; Watt 2005. 87 For the colonial citizen as an educational ideal see Kumar 1991:23–46.146 
An Empire of Books 
(Seal 1968: 194). Implied in this political trajectory was the intelligentsia's use of the associational sphere to postulate its own hegemonic claims. 88 
We have already noted Naval Kishore's subscription to Sayyid Ahmad Khan's Scientific Society in 1864. Four years later, he acted as one of the founder-members of Lucknow's first literary and reformist society, the Jalsah-e Tahzib (Assembly of Refinement/Culture') or 'Lucknow Reform Club', as it was rather insipidly dubbed in English. Established in 1868 by a group of eminent Hindu and Muslim citizens, the Jalsah-e Tahzib represented a cross-section of Lucknow's upcoming middle class and professional elite, consisting largely of government servants, men in the legal profession, doctors, and publicists. In an illustration of the intimate nexus existing between the culture of association and new forms of communication and knowledge transfer made available by print, a large section of its members were journalists, newspaper editors, and publishers. It is significant that, at the level of caste, the assocation drew its membership from the city's traditional elites—Kayasthas, Kashmiri Brahmins, and sections of the Muslim aristocracy. The Jalsah was founded partly in response to the establishment of the Avadh ta'alluqdārs' British Indian Association in 1861 and with a view to counterbalancing the influence that the rural elite had begun to exert in the urban public sphere of post-'Mutiny'Lucknow. Yet what really brought its members together across traditional boundaries of caste and religious community was the upcoming hybrid urban elite's shared vision of their new role in society: while these men commanded considerable influence in their respective communities, their avenues of political participation were still extremely circumscribed and usually limited to a seat on the Muni cipal Committee. As a collective cross-communal project, the Jalsah provided an institutional basis to the common aspirations of Lucknow's functional elite. Even as they had to confine their activities to the cultural and social domain, the Jalsah's members nourished political aspirations. The association soon counted high British officials among its patrons but prided itself in maintaining an essentially Indian identity. 89 Patriotism, openness to reforms, an educational mission and a self-conscious as sertion of Urdu culture were implicit elements of its self-image. 
88 For an elaboration of these points, see, e.g., Seal 1968: 194–244; Robinson 1974: 85-7, Lelyveld 1996: 77-82; Naregal 2001: 232–52. 
89 I have given a detailed account of the Jalsah's foundation, membership, early activities and self-perception in a separate paper; see Stark 2001. For an insightful documentation of the society's early years based on primary sources, see also Siddiqi 1956. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
147 
ne Jalsah's early years were marked by a high degree of activity. ike other civic associations il engaged in intellectual debate, social reform and education, and particularly espoused the cause of female education. Public lectures were organized on a wide range of subjects relating to history, education, law, social reform and the progress in science and technology. Representing the city's Urdu-speaking elite, the Jalsah also acted as a body of cultural entrepreneurs' (Joshi 2001: 2); it propagated the use of Urdu not just as a refined literary idiom but as a language fit for modern scientific and political discourse. In 1869, largely as a result of its efforts, the first public library was set up in Lucknow. State and private agency worked together in furnishing the institution, which was put under the Jalsah's management. The library received a great boost when it was selected as an official deposit library for the province in the early 1870s. Naval Kishore, who from 1869 served as one of the Jalsah's directors, not only acted as a liberal donor of books and capital to the library, but also took charge of the Jalsah's public relations'. He printed its journal Risāla-e Jalsah-e Tahzib (succeded by Muraqqa-e Tahzib) and widely publicized the society's affairs through his paper Avadh Akhbār. When in 1870 Mir Aulad Ali, professor at Trinity College, Dublin, came to Lucknow to deliver a lecture on the 'Customs and Manners of the English', he advanced the speaker stravel expenses and later published the lecture in pamphlet form. While the Jalsah clearly benefited from his support, to Naval Kishore, it provided an ideal arena in which to consolidate his position in local society. 
As I have argued elsewhere, the Jalsah, though outwardly a literary and reform society, carried from the outset the seeds of nationalist thought and claims to political representation. Its self-perception as a body repre senting public opinion and its self-styled role as an intermediary between the government and its Indian subjects is already manifest in its bye laws of 1868 (Stark 2001:57-8). The establishment in 1877 of a second civic society in Lucknow, the Rifah-e Amor Public Welfare Associa tion', was a logical extension of these claims. Its membership overlapped with the Jalsah, its outlook, however, was decidedly more political. The Rifah-e Am focused on issues of national importance and aimed to operate on a supra-regional level. Claiming to represent 'all classes of the native community', it soon became the centre of political activity in the city (Joshi 2001: 30). The two societies merged in the 1880s. Naval Kishore played a leading part in the Rifah-e Am's affairs. In 1880 he organized a public meeting to receive the illustrious Marathi social re former Behramji Malabari on his campaign through North India to raise 
148 
An Empire of Books 
the 'Age of Consent'. During the meeting, he himself gave a speech in favour of the abolition of child marriage (Baijnath 1886: 12-16). 
Naval Kishore's patronage of indigenous societies was not limited to Lucknow but extended to a wider network of associations in the region. In 1865 Garcin de Tassy noted his membership in the Society of Agra for the propagation of useful knowledge' (LLH 1865:278). The reference is presumably to the Satya Sabha, a precursor of the Anjuman-e Agra, the principal society for the propagation of Western knowledge and culture in the city after 1870. In 1877 Naval Kishore became actively in volved in a committee for the reduction of marriage expenses among Indians. Together with Munshi Pyarelal, the president of the Anjuman e Hind, he organized several meetings at Lahore and Lucknow, the pro ceedings of which were subsequently brought to public notice in Avadh Akhbār (LLH 1877: 66–7). Of more specific interest, since it links him to the Hindi agitation of the 1870s, is his role in the establishment of the Bharat Barshia National Association of Aligarh. This learned society was founded in 1878 by several eminent citizens, among them Raja Jai Kishen Das, C.S.I, and Raja Tikam Singh of Mursan, with the purpose of promoting education and literature in European and Indian languages. It was instrumental in setting up Aligarh's first public library, the Lyall Library. The institution was established through public funds. With a contribution of Rs 5000 Naval Kishore headed the list of donors. 90 Other activities on the society's agenda included the promotion of female edu cation and the translation of scientific works, both western and oriental, into Hindi (Nevill 1909: 87). To this end, a subcommittee called Bhasha Sambarddhini Sabha or 'Society for the Enhancement of Hindi' was established. The Bharat Barshia National Association later figured among the organizations that submitted pro-Hindi memorials to the Education Commission of 1882. The publisher's association with it will be outlined in greater detail in Chapter 7.91 
In operating through a network of associations, Naval Kishore found himself in constant interaction with other eminent contemporaries Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Raja Jai Kishen Das, Pandit Shri Kishen, Raja Shiva Prasad, and many others. In their simultaneous and flexible engagements in a variety of philanthropic, literary, social reform, and political bodies, these members of the Indian intelligentsia represented a new type of public man' reminiscent of Ernest Gellner's 'modular 
90 SVN 1885: 733. 
"Report on Administration for the NWP&Oudh, for the year ending 31 March 1893: 306. 
149 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
man', a constitutive feature in his conceptualization of modern Civil Society (Gellner 1994:97-102). To the modular man, the emerging culture of association provided new modes of combining into specific-purpose, ad hoc, limited association and of testing the effectiveness of highly specific, unsanctified, instrumental, revocable links or bonds (ibid.: 
100). 
There is yet another facet to Naval Kishore's rise as a 'public man: in the process of consolidating his social position he aimed high and sought to establish close relations with intluential contemporaries, be it Indian sovereigns and dignitaries, or senior colonial officials. One of the Indian nobles he counted among his associates and benefactors was the ruler of Rampur, Nawab Kalb-e Ali Khan (r. 1865-86), an eminent patron of literature and the arts. As a letter written by Mirza Ghalib to Hargopal ‘Tufta' in November 1865 informs us, on the occasion of his second daughter's marriage, Naval Kishore approached the nawab for financial support, which was amply granted (Russell/Islam 1994:3-7), That he returned the favour by serving as an inofficial adviser to the Rampur court (M.H. Khan 1980) may be the kind of story cherished by biographers rather than historical fact. Relations, at all events, were close and cordial, as borne out by the publisher's frequent sojourns at Rampur, and the fair number of works produced at Rampur that figured on the NKP's list. Other Indian rulers with whom Naval Kishore was closely associated included the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, the Maharaja of Patiala, and the Raja of Jaipur, Savai Ram Singh 11 (r. 1834–80). The latter apparently held him in such esteem that he offered him a high ministerial post in the Jaipur state. Judging it wiser to maintain his independence and remain in the business line, the publisher humbly declined. 
Equally, Naval Kishore hardly let an occasion pass when it came to honouring eminent representatives of the colonial state, be it through publications produced at his press (see Chapter 5) or through the support of commemorative schemes and committees. One typical instance is that of the 'Muir Memorial Committee, founded in 1876 at the instigation of the Maharaja of Benares and headed by Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Raja Jai Kishen Das, Raja Shiva Prasad and others. The committee proposed to set up a memorial statue for the late Lieutenant Governor Sir William Muir at Allahabad. With a donation of Rs 250 Naval Kishore headed the list of donors of non-aristocratic origin.? In 1890 he joined a committee set up in Lucknow to establish a memorial of public utility for the late 
92 Aligarh Institute Gazette of 28 July 1876: 447-502. 
An Empire of Books 
150 
ctor-General of Police, Mr McConaghey, and publicized the cause vadh Akhbār. In the following year he chaired a public meeting held Kaiserbagh to commemorate the death of Chief Commissioner J.W. inton and other European officers killed during the British annexation 
of Manipur.93 
In view of such overt demonstrations of loyalty, how did Naval Kishore 
ceive British rule and its political, cultural and social ramifications? here is evidence to suggest that his attitude was not free from the typi 
mbiguities and paradoxes that Sudhir Chandra has depicted as a 
ent characteristic of educated consciousness in colonial India (Chandra 19 
andra 1992). Like many intellectuals of his generation, Naval Kishore perienced no apparent contradiction in combining loyalty towards the British empire with patriotic concerns, and faith in the benefits of Western civilization with a strong sense of pride in India's rich cultural and literary 
itage. In trying to assess his personal attitude one has to look beyond The exigencies of a close and long-standing business relationship with 
British. As Chandra suggests, it is important to acknowledge the ergence between belief and practice' (ibid.: 32) in Indian intellectual 
sciousness at that time. For one thing, there were the pragmatic aspects of lovalism. The businessman Naval Kishore had a vested interest in maintaining good and stable relations with the British, his principal and 
ost powerful client; the newspaper-proprietor Naval Kishore aimed for British recognition without wanting to risk alienating the predomi nantly Indian readership of his paper; the philanthropist and educator in him was always ready to support the government in matters close to his heart that is, education and social reform. However, it would be wrong 
believe that Naval Kishore's commercial interests and his self-styled role as an intermediary between the government and the Indian public automatically made for an uncritical and servile attitude towards colonial rule. His political adversaries, as we will see, were always ready to attri bute such motives to him. In actual fact, however, his loyalty drew on a much more complex set of factors and beliefs. 
Some of the ambiguities underlying Naval Kishore's views on colonial rule can be gleaned from the evidence he gave before the Public Service Commission in December 1886. The commission had been appointed in response to growing public discontent over the underrepresentation of Indians in the Indian Civil Service. One principal issue of controversy 
93 Avadh Akhbār, 13 September 1890, SVN 1890: 452; Avadh Akhbār, 13 May 1891, SVN 1891: 330. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 151 
was the holding of simultaneous examinations in India and England for British and Indian candidates, a measure vehemently opposed by spokes men of educated opinion in the NWP&Oudh. - When questioned on the issue, Naval Kishore pleaded for equal employment opportunities for British and Indian civil servants, while readily conceding that British civil servants should be paid higher salaries. When asked about the dif ficulties that overseas travel entailed for orthodox Hindus, he argued that in the name of progress, traditional notions of impurity must gradually disappear. At the same time, he was evidently concerned with the threat that going abroad posed to Indian identity, having witnessed the cultural alienation and offensive emulation of Western behaviour of many a 'foreign-returned' compatriot. In the odd stenographic style of the proto col, Naval Kishore's description of a typical England-returned' officer reads as follows: 'He neither likes Indian people nor their mode of living, neither would he like to take off his shoes while eating food: he would like to have English boots on and to dine at table; and he does not like Indian wives; therefore I want to put a stop to going to England.95 The description seems almost too cliché-ridden to be taken at face value. Indeed, two decades earlier, the publisher had not been opposed to foreign travel at all, but through his paper Aradh Akhbar had offered information on the subject (LLH 1867: 355). Naval Kishore's statement before the Public Service Commission merely provides a glimpse of his ambivalent views concerning some aspects of colonial rule. A better understanding of his attitude towards the wider political and social implications of the British presence in India can be gathered from his engagement in the anti-Congress movement. 
2.4 The Publisher as Politician: Naval Kishore 
and the Anti-Congress Movement 
Munshi Naval Kishore's political aspirations, as has been shown above, remained for a long time confined to Lucknow and the arena of ordinary local politics. This was to change when the Indian nationalist movement gained momentum in the early 1880s. There is a persisting myth, per petuated by biographers and other commentators that Naval Kishore was a fervent nationalist who represented Lucknow during the first ses sion of the National Congress held at Bombay in 1885. This could not be 
94 See Robinson 1974: 114; 118. 95 Proceedings of the Public Service Commission, vol. 11. NWP & Oudh. 1887:69 
70. 
152 
An Empire of Books 
further from the truth. In actual fact, the Lucknow delegate was Munshi Ganga Prasad Varma, the proprietor of the rival Urdu paper Hindustāni and another prominent figure in the Lucknow publishing trade. Naval Kishore, much to the contrary, joined the opposition against the Congress no sooner than it emerged in the NWP&Oudh under the leadership of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan. Gathered in the United Indian Patriotic Association, the anti-Congress forces set out to demonstrate to the governinent and public in Britain that the National Congress, far from being representative of Indian opinion, was a seditious organization. 96 
Although there is no shortage of documentary evidence to show that Naval Kishore was among the foremost members of the anti-Congress movement in the province, his role has not been sufficiently acknowled ed. That he was indeed a person to be reckoned with among the anti Congressmen is documented in various contemporary sources. A poignant example is a poem appearing in Balkrishna Bhatt's journal Hindi Pradip of July 1888. In one of its verses, it singled out the three leading opponents of the Congress-Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Raja Shiva Prasad of Benares, and Munshi Naval Kishore-accusing them of being interested in personal gain only. The verse freely translates as follows: 
They got together for at all costs the Sabha had to be stopped,97 the Sayyid came running, the Raja came running, came running the Bania Munshi Kishore, hurriedly a brother came running, to amass wealth and riches galore.98 
C.A. Bayly has characterized the anti-Congress league as a precarious coalition of interests, explaining the ‘uneasy alliance' between Sir Sayyid, Raja Shiva Prasad, and Naval Kishore as 'an attempt to build up support among a functional group, the upper landowners, old service communi ties, and commercial magnates' (Bayly 1975: 143). Naval Kishore, who 
96 This objective was clearly laid out in a pamphlet entitled Showing the Seditious Character of the Indian National Congress and the Opinions held by Eminent Natives of India Who are Opposed to the Movement, edited by Theodore Beck for the Association in 1888. Besides an introduction and statement by Beck, it contained anti-Congress statements by the Raja of Bhinga, the Maharaja of Benares, Munshi Imtiaz (Ali, Sayyid Husain Bilgrami (on behalf of the Nizam of Hyderabad), Sayyid Ahmad Khan and Chaudri Nusrat Ali. 
97 'Sabha' here refers to the Indian National Congress. 98 Mel hon cāhat duniyā mem kavanhu yatan sabhā ruk jāya 
saiyad daure rājā daure daure munsi banij kisor cattpath ek bhatrhu daure dhan cintāmani lehu bator.' (cited in Singh 1991: 58, my translation). 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
153 
combined the functions of urban rais and wealthy landholder and whose association with Sir Sayyid went back a long way, seemed destined to act as an intermediary between the Muslim leader and the Avadh ta'alluq dārs. In December 1887 Sayyid Ahmad Khan opened his campaign against the National Congress with a speech delivered before the Muslim Educational Congress at Lucknow. In its wake a local anti-Congress committtee was set up at Lucknow by Munshi Imtiaz Ali, Legal Advisor to the Avadh ta'allugdārs, Nawab Mirza Mehdi Ali Khan, Pandit Shri Kishen, Naval Kishore, and others. When in August 1888 Sayyid Ahmad tried to bring together the anti-Congress forces in the United Indian Patriotic Association, Naval Kishore was eager to offer his support. His intervention came at a critical juncture in Hindu-Muslim relations within the anti-Congress movement, for Sir Sayyid had recently alienated the Hindu ta'alluqdārs by derogatorily styling the Congress a Hindu insti tution'. In September 1888 Naval Kishore called on Sayyid Ahmad Khan in Nainital to inform him about the ill feelings that his remarks had gene rated and to discuss how the cooperation of the Avadh ta'alluqdars in the United Indian Patriotic Association could best be secured." The consultation resulted in an agreement that a general meeting of the Avad aristocracy should be convened by the taʻalluqdārs' British Indian Association.100 
The meeting duly took place in Lucknow on 22 November 1888. It was an apparent success. However, the very next day a serious contro versy arose between Sayyid Ahmad Khan and the other anti-Congress leaders over two issues: the first concerned a resolution, based on a pro posal by Raja Shiva Prasad, that two separate associations under Hindu and Muslim leadership should immediately be formed in Lucknow and Aligarh, with the Raja of Bhinga and Sayyid Ahmad Khan as respective presidents and secretaries. The United Indian Patriotic Association was 
99 See Naval Kishore's letter to the editor, The Pioneer. 1 December 1888: 6. Strangely enough, it appears that Naval Kishore was never a formal member of the United Indian Patriotic Association. His name is not included in the list of donors and members of the Association published in The Pioneer of 4 December 1888. More curiously still, Muhammad (1972: 245-6) reproduces a letter of Sir Sayyid, dated 8 August 1888 and published in The Pioneer of 10 August 1888, in which Naval Kishore is listed as an official contact of the United Indian Patriotic Associaton in Lucknow. On verifying the original source, I was surprised to find that the letter in The Pioneer does not contain his name. 
10 For the proceedings of the meeting, see The Pioneer of 24 November 1888: 5. The article is reprinted in Muhammad 1978 (3): 938 42. 
154 
An Empire of Books 
to merge into a new general association named 'Indian Loyal Association' (“Anjuman-e Khairkhahan-e Mulk-e Hind'). The second bone of conten tion was a petition drawn up by the Maharaja of Benares urging the gov ernment to take legal action against the National Congress on grounds of its 'seditious' character.101 Sayyid Ahmad Khan, who had agreed to both resolutions, must have had second thoughts, for on 26 November he published a letter in The Pioneer, in which he categorically denied the change of name of the United Indian Patriotic Association, his acceptance of the post of secretary to the Aligarh branch of the proposed Indian Loyal Association, and his support for the anti-Congress petition. 102 To the other anti-Congress leaders this meant a gross and deliberate misinter pretation of the meeting's proceedings. Raja Shiva Prasad angrily refuted Sir Sayyid's statement in The Pioneer of 30 November 1888. Naval Kishore followed suit and in the issue of 1 December sided with the Raja, expressing his outrage at Sayyid Ahmad Khan's behaviour 
because of the proof it affords that, having once put his hand to the plough of evidently earnest effort to sink sectarian differences and race antagonism in one united effort by the two great communities of these Provinces to combat the political danger which now threatens the best interests of the people of the country, he has allowed self-interest and personal considera tions to carry him away into an abandonment of a worthy scheme-a grand national movement. ... Sir Syed Ahmed has forgotten that the very alphabet of a great reformer's lesson is that at all times and under all temptations he shall, in his public acts, rise superior to the suspicion of self-interest. Far be it from me to attempt to depreciate the work done by Sir Syed Ahmed and his Patriotic Association. He and it have done right good service; yet I am in hopes that the wider and grander scheme, which has for the present fallen through, will in the not very distant future be an accomplished fact, all the more successful because of its recent misadventure. Nor do I desire to raise a controversy. I address you only because Sir Syed Ahmed has somewhat misrepresented our proceedings and attempted to throw reproach upon Hindu willingness for amalgamation with Mahomedans in the struggle against the Congress movement—a willingness for which I am in a great measure responsible; for it was I, when Sir Syed Ahmed appealed to Hindus to join the Patriotic Association, who interviewed him and discussed a scheme whereby Hindus and Mahomedans would be enabled to make a united and harmonious effort to roll back the wave of sedition spreading over the country.103 
101 Ibid. 
102 The letter is reprinted in full in Muhammad 1972: 247-9. 103 The Pioneer, 1 December 1888: 6. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
155 
Naval Kishore felt personally lei down, for he went on to give a detailed account of both his private consultation with Sir Sayyid at Nainital and the proceedings of the Lucknow meeting, contradicting Sir Sayyid's statements in each instance. In his disappointment, he accused the Muslim leader of having sacrificed Hindu-Muslim unity in the anti-Congress movement for selfish motives: 
He told us that he had made a great name for himself and the Indian Patriotic Association, and that he and his association were strong enough to work without the aid of the Hindu and Mahomedan Associations of Oudh, and he would not allow the identity of the Patriotic Association to be lost in the untried Indian Loval Association; and having split hairs over the change of name, he sat down and in our presence wrote his resignation of the Presi dentship of the Aligarh Branch of the Indian Loyal Association which he had accepted on the previous day. The fact of the matter is that Sir Syed Ahmed having slept over the proceedings at the meeting had a vision por traying the possibility of his being considered not quite such an important personage as a member of the general council of the new association as he would be as a sole director of the Patriotic Association, and he has unfortunately allowed his dread of a possible small loss of power to influence him in upsetting a scheme which would have worked immense good to the people of both communities. 10. 
Naval Kishore's insistence on the issue of Hindu-Muslim unity indicates how strongly he resented Sir Sayyid's introduction of a communal ele ment in a cause that demanded solidarity and joint action. Given the mutually reverential and cordial relations that the two men had enjoyed thus far, the acrimonious overtones of his letter are startling and can only be taken as an indication of the extent to which he felt personally betrayed. Nonetheless, Naval Kishore quickly jumped at the occasion to pose as the spokesman of the new Indian Loyal Association and reiterate its message of Hindu-Muslim solidarity. He concluded his letter with a defiant message: 
Much as the members of the Indian Loyal Association regret Sir Syed Ahmed's desertion from its ranks, they are not dismayed at the prospect before them. He has been the one disturbing element in the excellent spirit displayed in last week's effort to unite Hindus and Mahomedans in these Provinces for the fight against the trouble which threatens the well-being of the people and the peace of the country. But we still have many influential Mahomedans, and if they and our Hindu brethren will work cordially and manfully, our new association promises the brightest results. We shall, 
104 Ibid.156 
An Empire of Books 
hope, build up an enduring monument, and if encouraged by our success Sir Syed Ahmed and his following ever care to join us, we shall give them a cordial welcome.105 
This was a far cry from his earlier respect for Sir Sayyid. Whether in the wake of this altercation the relationship between the two men was ever the same remains doubtful. The petition demanding the suppression of the Congress as a seditious movement was signed in January 1889: while it included Naval Kishore's signature, Sayyid Ahmad Khan's name was absent.106 
The events of November 1888 clearly exposed the fragile nature of the United Indian Patriotic Association, which did not survive much longer. They also show that Naval Kishore did not hesitate to abandon his long-standing alliance with Sayyid Ahmad Khan and his solidarity with the Muslim cause when he saw the larger aims of the anti-Congress movement put in jeopardy. In light of this, his motivation in supporting the United Indian Patriotic Association demands some elaboration. Surely, an organized anti-Congress association provided him with an opportunity to protect his own interests, which were to a large extent commercial in nature and directed at maintaining a mutually beneficial collaboration with the British. The colonial government had for decades been his most important customer and business partner, and moreover a perennial source of patronage that guaranteed the firm's survival. To preserve the status quo was of prime interest to the businessman Naval Kishore; any radical political change could result in instability and withdrawal of support, putting the very existence of the publishing house at risk. However, the above-cited letter also suggests that the economic factor alone is too simple an explanation and that Naval Kishore's opposi tion to the Congress drew on a more complex set of motives. First and foremost, it rested on the belief that the progress of the Indian nation could only be achieved under British rule. His vehement reaction to the accusations brought forth by the Congress leader Allan Octavian Hume in The Pioneerin November 1888 provides further corroboration of this. Targeting prominent anti-Congressmen, Hume had made some disparaging remarks about Naval Kishore's social standing and trust worthiness and had insinuated that the true motive of his involvement in anti-Congress politics was the fear of losing privileges and British con tracts. Greatly angered by these accusations, Naval Kishore responded 
105 Ibid. 106 Hindustān, 12 January 1889, cited in Singh 1991: 65. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
157 
in kind, accusing Hume of being impatient of contradiction, vulgarly abusive of all those who disagree with him, and unreasonably dogmatic'. He then clarified his position: 
I am at a loss to understand to what I am to attribute Mr. Hume's selection of me as one of the leaders of the Opposition, in the Congress matter. Icer tainly yield to no one in earnest desire and determined effort to promote the advancement of the true interests of my country and countrymen, though not by Congress lacticsbut I am a humble worker in the cause of India's regeneration, and though for more than a quarter of century that has been the purpose of my life, both in private effort, and through my newspaper, yet I have been content to co-operate with and not lead in what is known as the Anti-Congress movement. Not that I am by any means half-hearted in the struggle. On the contrary, I am in as deadly earnest against the Congress as Mr. Hume is for it, and so long as God gives me life, my time, my talents, and my means, such as they are, will be devoted to the Anti-Congress cause. But I have always maintained that the leaders of the Opposition movement should be men of position, wealth and influence, and I still hold to that view. But if I am surprised at the honour Mr. Hume has done me, I know that I am in good company, and I am flattered by the compliment. Ac cording to his own showing I am and have been an unknown nobody, and yet he has given me prominent place among the good men and true who are engaged in leading the people to a true understanding of the pit-falls of the Congress agitation-influential men who are doing their level "best to frustrate methods and expose proposals which are fraught with danger to the peace and security of the Indian peoples". Better to be damned in such company, and by such a master of scurrilous abuse as the prophet, priest and apostle" of the Congress-wallahs has proved himself, than to be found on the side of the self-constituted patriots who seem determined, if the authorities will only allow them a little more latitude, to force disaster and ruin upon the noble work of progress, advancement and freedom, which the British Government has pledged itself to establish in India, and which during the past thirty years it has honestly endeavoured to redeem. 107(emphasis 
added) The letter, while not devoid of self-fashioning, testifies to Naval Kishore's conviction that colonial rule was the sole guarantor of peace, stability, and progress in India. The Congress to him was an association of sedition mongers who, by instigating revolt in India's easily influenced illiterate masses, were far from working for the good of the common people and the progress of the nation. The government's lenient attitude towards the Congress, he warned, could have disastrous consequences: 
107 The Pioneer, 21 November 1888: 7. 
158 
An Empire of Books 
unless the Government steps in, and that quickly, and adopts measures for the suppression of the seditious talk and writing of the old, disappointed place-hunters and the young hair-brained political adventurers who form the backbone of the Congress agitation, it must be prepared to cope with a convulsion of the country, compared to which the great Mutiny will have been child's play. It is so easy to awaken discontent and to fan the flame that it must come about that the more ignorant of the people, led away by the constant abuse of Government, its measures and its officials, which the Congress-wallahs indulge in so barefacedly, and goaded on by long-drawn and oft-repeated teachings of the wrong, the injustice and tyranny under which they exist-it must come about that they will be driven into giving vent to their worked-up passions. And while a just and severe punishment will fall upon them, and Indian progress be thrown back half a century, those who instigated them and were mainly responsible for their ignorant outburst, will be safe from harm. Down in Bengal there may be no harm in preaching sedition to the agricultural population for Bengal has never been known to have produced a fighting man. But in the United Provinces and in the Punjab, our most warlike races are to be found among the rural peasantry. and it would be no difficult matter to play upon their ignorant but brave na tures ... I warn the Government in all solemn earnestness that so surely as it declines to take effectual measures to extinguish the Congress propaganda, so surely will the loyalty of the masses be estranged from it. The people are being instigated not to pay the “unrighteous" demands made upon them in the way of taxes; they are told that if they demand this and that concession, in a body, they will get them; they are taunted with their poverty, and are mockingly told that they deserve their fate so long as they are content to remain “dumb, driven cattle". What must all this tend to when easily excited natures are worked upon? The ignorant people misconstrue the placid in difference of the authorities to a fear to interfere with the power of the Congress-wallahs. The Government may know and understand the impotency of these agitators, but the masses may be led to believe in their tall talk-and then what must be the result? (ibid.: 7-8) 
The arguments contained in the letter not only show Naval Kishore reiter ating colonial stereotypes about ‘martial races', they also place him in the category of Indian loyalists who called for political moderation, being convinced that India was not ready for self-government and could only advance under colonial rule. Such elite loyalism, as Bayly has argued, cannot be interpreted simply as 'expediency, greed or sycophancy', but drew 'on genuine political ideas' (Bayly 1998: 122). Naval Kishore's arguments are characteristic of elite paternalism, as evident from his stereotypical representation of the Indian masses as 'benighted', ignorant, and devoid of agency. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
159 
Loyalism and a paternalistic attitude also shaped his opinion on the question of democratic rule in India. Emotions ran high when, in 1889 90, Bradlaugh's Indian Councils Bill was discussed. In opposing the introduction of the elective principle on the Legislative Council, Naval Kishore and Sayyid Ahmad Khan found themselves joining ranks again. During an anti-Congress meeting held at the publisher's Lucknow resi dence on 30 April 1890 a resolution against the Bradlaugh Bill was pas sed and a memorial in favour of a nomination system adopted instead.los Two months later, Naval Kishore ventured to explain his position in a public speech during an anti-Congress rally held at Kanpur. Predictably, this made him a prime target for the pro-Congress papers. Simha Sahāy (Amritsar) asserted that 'Raja Shiva Pershad and Munshi Newal Kishore ... are no longer looked upon as Hindus', 100 while Hindustani commented that “The memorials got up by Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan and Munshi Nawal Kishore present the strange spectacle of intelligent men declaring themselves unfit for the grant of any privileges to them by Government.'110 Hindustan (Kalakankar) made a caustic remark that Naval Kishore, 'far from being an orator, cannot speak properly', and went on to comment in an equally sarcastic vein: 'Munshi Newal Kishore, in commenting upon the proposal of the Congress regarding the introduction of the elective principle, declared that natives were not yet fit for the exercise of such a right, but that when they became fit for it, Englishmen would voluntarily retire from this country! This is loyalty indeed! The Anti-Congressionists say that when they are fit for the right of election they will expel the English!'!!! 
Naval Kishore's attitude provides a typical example of the classic liberal-gradualist answer of the majority being as yet unprepared for full political status' (Naregal 2001: 245–6) prevalent among parts of the educated elite. Criticism of his political views was especially harsh in Lucknow. Always eager to attack the rival publisher and his paper, the Lucknow pro-Congress papers Hindūstānī and Avadh Punch had no interest in probing the deeper motives of his opposition to the Congress. Naval Kishore tried in vain to fight off allegations, constantly reiterated in these papers, that he acted out of a situation of economic dependence and was motivated only by self-interest. He was quoted saying that he 
108 The proceedings of this meeting were published in Avadh Akhbār, 5 May 1890. 109 Simha Sahāy, 9 July 1890, SVNP 1890: 265. 110 Hindustani, 11 May 1890, SVN 1890: 308-9. 
111 Hindustān, 4 July 1890, SVN 1890: 429-30. The speech was published in Avadh Akhbar, 10 July 1890 which was not available to me. 
160 
An Empire of Books 
would lose government printing contracts worth two lakhs of rupees if he joined the Congress; it was alleged that Lieutenant Governor Sir Auckland Colvin had personally talked him into opposing the Congress, 112 As will be shown in Chapter 6, much of the criticism was directed at Avadh Akhbar. The government's liberal patronage of the paper was taken as a clear indication of its servility and incapability of representing national interests. 
It is difficult to dissociate political opposition from professional rivalry in the routine attacks against Naval Kishore and his paper. From the moment the publisher entered the arena of local politics through his seat in the Municipal Committee—thereby acquiring a position that was bound to profit his business relations with the British-the rival Lucknow press had begun to keep a suspicious eye on his official and unofficial dealings with the colonial administration. That such suspicion was not altogether unfounded is borne out by an incident in January 1892 involving William Young, the NWP&Oudh Judicial Commissioner. On the eve of his re tirement, Young had hastily issued an order to the provincial civil courts to the effect that, in future, all petition-writers working at the courts were to exclusively use forms of plaint, etc., printed at the NKP. The measure threatened to diminish the already meagre income of the petition-writers who used to obtain cheap forms from local presses. The matter was rendered particularly delicate by the fact that Naval Kishore had organized a farewell party in honour of Young and had assisted the British official in winding up his household. Not surprisingly, there was an outcry in the local press. Hindustani lost no time in publicly denouncing Young's order as a case of blatant favouritism. In an article headed 'The Massacre of the Poor', it sardonically remarked: “When Munshi Newal Kishore was busy in selling Mr. Young's house furniture and other things and was getting up an address for presentation to him, no one thought that the Munshi would be soon and richly rewarded for his services.'113 
The attack on Naval Kishore was part of an exchange of blows that had been going on for same time between him and Ganga Prasad Varma, both in the Municipal Committee and in their respective papers Avadh Akhbār and Hindustani. Naval Kishore soon found an occasion to retaliate. During the municipal elections in Ganeshganj in March 1892, he appeared as chief canvasser for the anti-Congress candidate, Babu Shri Ram. 114 
112 Hindustān, 12 January 1889 and 15 July 1888, cited in Singh 1991: 65 and 103. 113 Hindustāni of 17 February 1892, SVN 1892: 60. 
114 Babu Shri Ram, a Kayastha ta'alluqdār from Faizabad, was a lawyer at the Judicial Commissioner's Court and Vice-president of the Municipal Board. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
161 
As such, he presented an application to the city magistrate, accusing Ganga Prasad Varma and his Congress candidate, Pandit Bishan Narayan Dar, of having defamed the Municipal Board in an election manifesto published in Hindustani.115 When the application was rejected, Naval Kishore again appealed to the city magistrate, charging Varma with an offence against the Press Regulation Act-Varma had failed to state the name of his press on the printed copies of the said manifesto. This time Varma was found guilty and ordered to pay a fine of Rs 100. What pub lic service Munshi Naval Kishore has done by bringing a contemporary into trouble may be best known to himself and his fellow-slaves of the Deputy Commissioner', sneered Varma's Hindustani. 110 While the fine was later reduced to the symbolic sum of Rs 5, Naval Kishore's rancorous behaviour towards a fellow Indian publisher did not go down well with the Urdu press. 'Munshi Nawal Kishore, C.I.E. who poses as a friend to the Government and the country, should be ashamed of his coward ly and malicious conduct', commented Najm al-Akhbar of Etawah on 12 May 1892.17 'It is true that the Hindustani is always ready to expose him, but he was not justified in seeking to revenge himself in the way he did.' The battle between the two men, however, was far from over. When, in 1893, the Lucknow Municipal Board elected its delegate to the Provin cial Legislative Council, Naval Kishore again supported Babu Shri Ram against the Congress candidate. When Babu Shri Ram won by a majority of one, Congressmen contested the election results and accused Naval Kishore and his candidate of having won the election by pressurizing the delegate in question (Singh 1991: 144-5). 
Naval Kishore's involvement in opposing the Congress continued unabated until death cut short his political ambitions. He died on 19 Feb ruary 1895 from what appears to have been sudden heart failure. 118 Mourned by Hindus and Muslims alike, and accompanied by a large 
115 Pandit Bishan Narayan Dar, an eminent member of Lucknow's Kashmiri Brahmin community, was a well-known lawyer and one of the foremost Congress leaders in Avadh. 
116 Hindustani, 27 April 1892, SVN 1892: 154. 117 SVN 1892: 92, 114, 177. 
118 The Pioneer, 21 February 1895, reported the cause of his death as 'heart disease'. The Tribune, 27 February 1895, carried a detailed account on its frontpage: 'The death of Munshi Newal Kishore was quite sudden and he had not to suffer the agonies and pains of death. He was all right on Monday and was engaged in his work till late at night. He felt some heaviness and preferred to fast during the night. He had a disturbed sleep. At about 4 A.M. he passed a stool whereafter he could with difficulty walk to his bed. For fifteen minutes he felt pain in the chest. The Doctor of the 
162 
An Empire of Books 
procession, his remains were taken to Allahabad by a specialtrain, where the funeral rites were performed on the banks of the Ganges.119 Upon his death, his outstanding contribution to India's cultural renaissance and the revival of Indian literature was widely acknowledged. However, his involvement in national politics during the later years of his life remained controversial and did not sit comfortably with the tide of nationalist sentiment that had begun to sweep the country. The Hindoo Patriot of Calcutta was typical in commenting that 'The Munshi belonged to the old school but whatever his politics might be, as a man he was such that it was impossible to know him and not to respect him.'120 Yet the most striking expression of the extent to which Naval Kishore's venture into politics would cast its shadow over a lifetime's achievement in the lite rary-cultural domain is the tongue-in-cheek and thoroughly ambivalent obituary published in the Lahore Tribune of 23 February 1895: 
Munshi Newal Kishore, who died at Lucknow was a successful man in life if success is to be measured by the accumulation of wealth. He was undoubtedly a man of resource and enterprise and the founder of a fortune which is estimated at from 15 to 20 lakhs. But it was as a politician, as an opponent of the Indian National Congress and one of the founders of the Indian Patriotic Association that came from nowhere and went from whence it came that Munshi Newal Kishore became known to the public. Nothing need be said in disparagement of his memory, especially as there is a good deal to admire in his character and to recommend his example to his countrymen. Of course in such success as Munshi Newal Kishore there must be selfishness, but that is not the only secret of wealth. Ill-gotten wealth is not a thing to be envied, but when wealth is come by in the main honestly, as was the case with Munshi Newal Kishore, the qualities at the bottom of such a character are worthy of study. Patience, perseverance, courage and great elasticity of spirit are necessary to the success of an enterprise and to the accumulation of such a fortune. To establish such a large press which becomes the centre of so much literary activity is a great achievement in itself, of which full credit should be given to Munshi Newal Kishore. In all enterprise, all trade and business an unselfish man cannot prosper because there is no mercy in competition and every man must fight for his own hand. [...] But when one comes to politics and other matters in which there is room for the development of unselfishness a successful man 
Hazratgunj Dispensary was called but before he could prescribe medicine the Munshi breathed his last.' 
119 The Tribune, 23 February 1895. 120 The Hindoo Patriot, 22 February 1895. 
A Life in Print: Munshi Naval Kishore (1836-1895) 
163 
of business, whose life has been devoted to the accumulation of wealth and also to advancement in the favour of the authorities, feels like fish out of water. Munshi Newal Kishore made a mistake when he drifted towards politics, but who shall judge him uncharitably? Let us all admire what was admirable in him. 
