+++
title = "An Indian Success Story: The House of Naval Kishore"

+++
The House of Naval Kishore provides the kind of fascinating success story that enlivens the history of the book. It is a story im 
bued with the spirit of modernization and pioneering entre preneurship so eminently characteristic of indigenous agency in the early phases of Indian industrialization. This chapter traces the commercial history of the NKP. It sketches the process by which the firm developed from humble beginnings into an industrial enterprise of unprecedented proportions. Seeking to outline the dimensions of industrial book production and the mechanisms underlying it, the first four sections ad dress aspects of the NKP's internal organization, technology, marketing strategies, and distribution networks. The final section will turn to author publisher relations, an underresearched aspect of Indian literary and literate culture. 
As noted earlier, in writing the business history of the NKP one is faced with the formidable difficulty that no business records, account books, or commercial correspondence of India's erstwhile largest printing and publishing firm have been preserved. This state of affairs is by no means specific to the NKP, but forms a characteristic difficulty in studying the Indian publishing trade. However, in the case of the NKP the absence of records appears to be a rather recent phenomenon. The late A.H. Nurani, in his various monographs on the NKP published from 1982 to 1995, still had some archival material at his disposal. A. Zamani affirms the existence of sixteen different kinds of publisher's ledgers used at the NKP. However, she may not actually have seen any of these records, 
? I.e. (1) Booksellers' Ledger; (2) Balance of Lost and Found Books; (3) Books under Inspection and/or Ready for Printing; (4) Account-book; (5) Various Book Notifications; (6) Occasional Survey; (7) Books Eaten by White Ants; (8) Mis cellaneous Publication Book;(9) Day Book;(10) Expenses; (11) Despatch of Books; 
An Indian Success Story 
165 
for the only internal source she quotes from is a document of 1889. Mohamad Tavakoli-Targhi, who visited the press in 1992, claims to have rescued over 1000 document fragments including registers of published books, lists of workers, land deeds, and scholarly correspon dence which were 'carelessly dumped in a heap to be later sold as ferti lizer' (Tavakoli-Targhi 1993: 18)—and to have classified and stored them. I did not have access to these records. As a result, while making use of the scarce information contained in NKP books and the publisher's catalogue, the following account is largely based on secondary sources originating outside the publishing house. It draws on a variety of nine teenth-century and later documents, but relies particularly heavily on British administrative records which provide the most comprehensive empirical data on the firm's output, printing expenses, sales, etc. While aiming to give a coherent picture, my narrative cannot claim to be ex haustive. 
3.1 The Early Years (1858–1865) 
When Munshi Naval Kishore arrived in Lucknow in 1858, equipped with an Indian-made hand press and a few lithographic stones, he encount ered a vacuum: local competition in the printing business had been virtu ally wiped out by the events of 1857. The opening of his printing shop in November 1858 marked a turning point in the history of print in Lucknow. As the first Indian to newly open a press in post-Mutiny Lucknow, he heralded a new era of the mass-produced book. He not only set printing in Arabic, Persian, and Urdu on a sound commercial footing, but also established himself as the city's first publisher of Hindi and Sanskrit books. The way in which Naval Kishore reshaped local print culture has been highlighted by Sharar: 
When the monarchy collapsed, Munshi Newal Kishore opened his press. Although its printing could not compare in elegance with that of the Mustafai Press, it was run on such sound commercial lines that it produced a greater quantity of Persian and Arabic books than any other press would have had the courage to attempt. The fact is that the interest taken in the printing press in Lucknow was such that it needed an energetic and ambitious man 
(12) Warehouse Memorandum; (13) Lithographic Office; (14) Typographic Office; (15) Survey of Pillaged Books in the Warehouse; (16) Internal Affairs and Queries. See Zamani 1980.166 
An Empire of Books 
like Munshi Newal Kishore to take full advantage of it. Eventually the Newal Kishore press gained such pre-eminence that it revived all Eastern literatures and Lucknow acquired great distinction in this field. Lucknow benefited in that it was able to meet all the literary demands of Central Asia, including those of Kashgar, Bukhara, Afghanistan and Persia. (Sharar 1975: 107-8) 
Upon his arrival in Lucknow, Naval Kishore rented a small place in a neighbourhood known as Agha Mir ki Deorhi in Wazirganj, where he set up a humble printing shop. In the typical manner of early Urdu presses it was named Matba -e Avadh Akhbar or "Avadh Akhbar Press' after the Urdu journal simultaneously launched from it. Originally a lithogra phic press, the printing shop was equipped within its first year with type presses at the instance of the local colonial authorities. Naval Kishore was fortunate to have found a patron in Colonel Saunders A. Abbott, the commissioner and superintendent of the Lucknow Division from 1858 to 1863. Abbott not only arranged for machinery and equipment to be sent from Calcutta, but also patronized the young printer-journalist by giving him a number of printing contracts. Since Naval Kishore had started off with very little capital of his own, this kind of official support was essential to the growth of his enterprise. Following several contracts for textbook printing, he received a particularly lucrative official com mission when, in 1861, he was authorized 'to print and sell on his own account' Jāmi al-favā'id (*1861), a compilation of conversion tables and tables of weight measures for use of putwaries, ameens, zemindars & others in Oude'. Yet the commission that was to permanently change the fortunes of the press was still to come: in the same year, and presum ably also at the behest of Abbott, the NKP received a contract to print the Urdu translation of the newly enacted Indian Penal Code, Ta zīrāt-e Hind.? Deputy Inspector Nazir Ahmad, the principal translator, personally came to Lucknow to oversee the printing. The Urdu Penal Code was issued in 1861 in 30,000 copies, sold at Rs 3 each. While entailing a con siderable profit for the publisher, the successful execution of this impor tant commission also marked a major breakthrough in Naval Kishore's business relations with the British. From this point onwards he came to be officially recognized as a first-rank publisher. Charles Wingfield, the Avadh Chief Commissioner, referred to the NKP as the most excellent press in the province, which dealt with all orders to one's entire satis faction (S.Q. Khan 1980: 186). 
2 A Hindi version followed in 1868. 
An Indian Success Story 
167 
Apparently British patronage was not the only means of support for the young printer-publisher during the first years. According to Nurani, initial financial assistance also came froman altogether different source, namely the reputed Islamic scholar Maulana Ahsan Kakori who at the time held a high government post at Barabanki. On Maulana Ahsan's advice Naval Kishore started issuing popular religious tracts and excerpts from the Qur'an. When the Maulana later declined the repayment of his loan, Naval Kishore reciprocated the favourextended to him by publishing the scholar's work Ahiūl al-anbiva. 
Religious tracts, prayer books, and individual chapters of the Qur'an on the one hand, legal forms, registers, and school textbooks commis sioned by the British on the other, formed the main output that sustained the printing press during its early years. The second pillar of the NKP was its prospering Urdu newspaper Avadh Akhbar (see Chapter 6). Within a couple of years, printing and publishing was no longer confined to texts in English, Arabic, Persian, and Urdu, but also extended to Hindi and, subsequently, Sanskrit works. If the NKP was the first press in Lucknow to take up printing in the languages associated with Hindu cul ture, it did not remain so for long. Other presses to publish the occasional Sanskrit or Hindi texts were the Samar-e Hind Press of Pandit Baijnath, the Gulzar-e Hind Press of Pandit Bihari Lal(est. 1864), and the Prakash e Hind Press of Kalicaran.. Yet none of these small presses ever engaged in Hindi printing on a larger commercial scale. 
The early years of the NKP coincided with a period of general eco nomic growth, brought on by the assumption of direct government by the British crown. The overall technological and infrastructural progress in the 1860s favoured the growth of the young enterprise in several im portant ways: while Naval Kishore initially had to import machinery and raw materials from Calcutta at very high expense, the procurement of 
3 Nurani 1995: 30. Maulana Ahsan Kakori Ahsan' (c. 1833-91) belonged to a family of Culama of Kakori, a country town (qasbah) in the vicinity of Lucknow which produced a number of eminent Muslim scholars and officials (Malik 1997: 265-8). He was the younger brother of the distinguished na't-poet Muhsin Kakori and himself an author of several scholastic works. He held various government offices including the post of chief judge (sadr al-sudūr), and after his retirement served as minister in the princely state of Bhopal. I am grateful to Professor Jamal Malik, Erfurt, for this information. 
4 There also exists a small number of early Nagari imprints issued from local Muslim-owned presses, e.g. the Gulshan-e Kashmir Press, the Aziz al-Mataba and the Safir-e Hatmam Press (1867). OAR, 1869-70, app. Statistics of instruction: literary and scientific': cxlix-xlix. 
168 
An Empire of Books 
equipment and the diffusion of books were soon facilitated and rendered less expensive by the rapid improvement of transport and communication. The expansion of the postal service and, particularly, the extension of the railway line that reached Lucknow in 1862 were essential to these developments. 
If not quite the proverbial one-man enterprise, the NKP started off with only a small handful of employees. The earliest surviving document which gives us some idea of the staff, internal organization, and production capacity of the press in its first years is an article appearing in the Avadh Akhbār of 8 January 1862, in which Naval Kishore reviewed the annual progress of his firm. Having gratefully acknowledged the support of his British benefactors Colonel Abbott and Henry Stuart Reid, the new DPI in the NWP, the publisher proudly stated that books worth thousands of rupees' had been issued from his press during the past year. Printing in English and in the Oriental languages was undertaken separately in the Typographic and Lithographic Departments. The superintendent of the former was an Englishman by the name of Walter Williams. Next to him the firm's Typographic Department employed at least five other Europ eans, among them the head accountant. Their names as given in Avadh Akhbār do not correspond to those appearing in the New Calcutta Directory, which in 1862-3 for the first time listed the 'Newal Kishore Printing Press' in its 'Mofussil' section. The entry in the 1862 directory gives T.L. Allemand as manager and R. Smith as printer, whereas the corresponding 1863 entry identifies R. Craven as manager and T.H. Williams as printer.? 
From the very outset, the staff included members of the different reli gious communities. In contrast to the Typographic Department, which was run by Englishmen, the Lithographic Department was entirely under Indian supervision. Most of the Muslims and Hindus on its managing staff hailed from distinguished Lucknow families. Among them were several men with prior experience in the printing trade: the superintendent (dārogha) of the lithographic presses was Shaikh Nisar Ali, the veteran ex-proprietor of Lucknow's eminent Murtazawi Press which had gained distinction in Arabic and Persian printing during the time of the nawabs. With his vast experience in printing and publishing, this septuagenerian 
For a reprint of this article, see Bilali 1980: 70-2 and Nurani 1995: 36–9. 
• The Urdu spelling makes it difficult to read the names correctly. I read them as Mr R. Smith, Mr Gladis, Mr Gomes, Mr Alexander and surprisingly in this male dominated space-Miss Poole. 
New Calcutta Directory (pt 5) 1862: 192 and 1863: 205. 
An Indian Success Story 
169 
was a great asset to Naval Kishore. Munshi Shiv Parshad, who had ini tially been hired as a scribe for Avadh Akhbar, was appointed the first manager of the Lithographic Department. He later rose to become the general manager of the NKP, a position in which he faithfully served the 
muntil his death in the late 1890s. It appears that for some time he was also associated with the editorship of Avadh Akhbar. Shiv Parshad was a poet of Urdu who wrote under the pen name .Wahbi and has a Kullivāt e Wahbi (*1880) to his credit, a work that has often been wrongly ascribed to his namesake Raja Shiva Prasad of Benares. The head proofreader (muşahhih) in the Lithographic Department was Maulvi Muhammad Hadi Ali Ashk' (d. 1865), a renowned Islamic scholar, poet, and master calligrapher who had previously served at the Muhammadi Press of Haji Harmain Sharifain. Other noteworthy figures on the early statt were Mit Hashmat Ali, master calligrapher and stone-corrector (musleh-e sang): Shaikh Amir Ali, illustrator (nagusto): and Munshi Ali Muhammad Khan, printer in the Lithographic Department. Munshi Amirullah 'Tas lim', Munshi Ashraf Ali Ashraf", Munshi Govind Parshad 'Fiza , Mun shi Jvalaparshad, Munshi Imdad Husain, Hafiz Ali Bakhsh, Lala Pyarelal and Lala Jankiparshad were the first among an impressive range 01 master calligraphers who were to render service to the NKP (see Chap ter 5). 
The Lithographic Department witnessed a rapid growth. By the fourth year of its existence, it already operated twenty-five hand presses and employed around 300 pressmen and workers. By this time, Naval Kishore's rapidly expanding printing shop had run short of space. To accommodate the growing number of hand presses it had to be relocated twice, first to Golganj, then to Rakabganj. Here, Naval Kishore rented a large building known as Ajodhya Kothi, formerly in the possession of Maharaja Mansingh. These shifts of premises took place in the early 1860s. Around the same time, further presses were installed in a place formerly known as the maktabkhāna (school-house) of Suleiman Qadır, a building located between Lalbagh and Kaisarbagh (Nurani 1995: 36). The acquisition of these new buildings marked the beginning of a pro longed phase of expansion, during which the firm was to extend both its 
8 The SVN somewhat incorrectly lists him as the 'publisher' of Avadh A from 1883 onward to at least 1897. 
9 The first to confound Munshi Shiv Parshad Wahbi' with Raja Shiva Pras was Garcin de Tassy (see HLHH III: 268 and 273). The French scholar's error has been perpetuated in most Urdu texts and has led a number of contemporary critics to associate Raja Shiva Prasad with the editorship of Avadh Akhbār. 
170 
An Empire of Books 
physical presence and business operations far beyond the narrow confines of Lucknow. 
3.2 The Phase of Expansion (1865–1892) 
By the mid-1860s the NKP had risen to the position of largest privately owned printing and publishing firm in North India. After 1869 the provin cial government, in its annual administration reports, rarely failed to emphasize the firm's high reputation, superior workmanship, and leading position among the approximately thirty printing presses operating in the province of Avadh. The NKP's third and final shift to Hazratganj, the modern and fashionable market area in the Civil Lines of Lucknow, took place in 1870. More than just another change of location, this shift signi fied an actual as well as symbolic move into the heart of colonial power in the province. The very fact that Naval Kishore had been allotted land for purchase in Hazratganj, a privilege generally accorded only to influ ential ta'alluqdārs, suggests his growing influence with the colonial authorities. The new location of the printing works testified to the NKP's prominent status while visibly marking its close association with the British administration. 
Naval Kishore settled in Kothi Inayat Sultan, which formed part of a handsome old building known as Begum Kothi. Built by Nawab Amjad Ali Shah as a palace for his queen in 1844, Begum Kothi had been the site of severe fighting during the 1857 uprising. Some parts of Begum Kothi were later transformed into the General Post Office (Hay 1994: 87-8). At the same time, the publisher acquired prime real estate for the erection of further buildings on the premises, among them a building that today houses the Central Bank. Veena Oldenburg supplies us with the interesting detail that, on constructing his private residence, Naval Kishore submitted plans in 1869 for both a native-style dwelling and an English-style bungalow to the British authorities. In keeping with the colonial architecture of Hazratganj, the native-style house plan was rejected and the bungalow plans approved (Oldenburg 1989: 124). Soon afterwards, he also bought Mubarak Manzil, a building forming part of the Moti Mahal complex built by Nawab Ghaziuddin Haidar. 
With sufficiently more space available now, lithographic and type printing was undertaken in two separate establishments located in these different buildings. By far the larger establishment was the Matba -e Avadh Akhbar or 'Avadh Akhbar Press' in Kothi Inayat Sultan, adjacent to the General Post Office. It was here that most of the lithographic work 
An Indian Success Story 
171 
was undertaken, including the printing of Avadh Akhbār and other Urdu journals. The daily output of the press in 1870 was reported to be 12,000 juz, that is, 192,000 printed pages. Kothi Inayat Sultan also served as organizational headquarters to the firm, dealing with all incoming orders and business correspondence. The second establishment, the Matba-e Navalkishor or 'Naval Kishore Press' in its narrower sense, was a conti nuation of the earlier Typographic Department. Situated in Mubarak Manzil, it employed around 150 people and concentrated on typesetting, while occasionally executing some lithographic work as well.! It is important to note that this distinction of names was not maintained in later times, with Naval Kishore Press more and more becoming an um brella term to refer to the House of Naval Kishore. The publisher's im print variously appeared as Avadh Akhbar Press, Naval Kishore Press (Navalkisor kā chāpāklānā; Navalkisor kā vantrālaya) or Naval Kishore Lithographic Press (Navalkisor kā silāvantra). 
A decade after its opening, the NKP was doing brisk business. In 1869 Naval Kishore reported a credit balance of Rs 250,000.11 The rapidly growing market demand for printed matter, increased production, and concomitant expansion of the sales and distribution network called for a sophisticated organizational structure. In order to assure smooth and efficient running, the administration of the expanding firm was divided among thirteen different departments. Their various tasks are listed in Table 3.0 below. 
The shift of offices to Hazratganj in 1870 entailed several important additions to the printing firm. First, a type foundry was installed in which English, Urdu, and Nagari types were cast. The type foundry was at once a means of asserting greater autonomy and a profitable sideline: its types not only supplied the NKP's own needs but were also offered for sale (Hurst 1887: 355). Second, a large warehouse was set up for the storage of paper and books. The third important new addition to the business was the 'Naval Kishore Book Depot', which served as a retail site and sales agency in Lucknow itself. It formally consolidated the im portant transition from mere ‘Printers' to 'Printers, Publishers, and Book sellers', which had already been initiated through the establishment of various sales agencies outside Lucknow in the mid-1860s (see below). 
John F. Hurst, the American visitor to the press in 1884, gives the following description of the Hazratganj premises: 
10 Avadh Akhbar, 19 April 1870, cited in Siddiqi 1980: 50. 11 Ibid.: 51. 
172 
An Empire of Books 
TABLE 3.0 Organizational Structure of the NKP 
Department 
Tasks 
1. Lithographic Press 
2. Lithographic Press Office 3. Type Press Office 
4. Department of Copying and 
Calligraphy 5. Department of Composition 
6. Marketing and Advertising 
Department 
Lithography of books in Arabic, Persian, Urdu, Hindi, and Sanskrit Bookbinding and stitching Binding and stitching of type-set books in Eng lish, Hindi and Sanskrit 
Copying of manuscripts and books, preparation of of drafts for lithography Composition, compilation, and translation of books, and Translation preparation of textbooks, proof-reading, and editing Acquisition of orders from private customers and booksellers, preparation and distribution of book catalogues Direct sale of books to wholesalers, retailers, and private customers Packing and dispatch of books Registration of books printed and sold, fixing of book prices Selection of manuscripts suitable for printing; proofreading and correction of drafts; publication of book catalogues, advertisements Orders and correspondence Accountancy Maintenance of buildings 
7. Sales Department/Book Depot 
8. Dispatch Department 9. Records and Registry 
Department 10. Proofreading and Publication 
Department 
11. Correspondence Department 12. Accountancy Department 13. Maintenance Department 
SOURCE: Nurani 1995: 46-8. 
The buildings are numerous, but low, mostly of one story, after the native fashion, and exceedingly plain. Many of them are mere sheds, where the work is done in full view of others on the premises. The roofs are of brick tiling. These buildings cover a vast space, which is divided into many alleys and nondescript passageways, running at all angles with each other, and describing such curves as one can find in the denser parts of Luebeck or Nuremberg. I entered the premises by a long lane running at right angles from the main street. No one in passing along the street would suspect, un less he should turn into the lane, the number of men hard at work at the 
An Indian Success Story 
173 
farther end, or the wonderful magnitude of their operations. ... The huts have no wooden floors. Mother Earth is the common resting-place. The men and boys in great numbers sit on the earthen floor in all possible posi tions, and carry on their work. They set type. read proof and bind the sheets while sitting squat on the ground. (Hurst 1887: 353) 
Another significant consequence of the rapid increase in the firm's busi ness volume and the persisting problem of limited space was that Naval Kishore started to employ a large number of subcontractors to carry out printing work for his press. This innovative scheme of subcontracting was to greatly encourage indigenous enterprise in the local printing trade. The system worked in such a way that the publisher gave permission to experienced and trusted pressmen to shift a hand press to their private home and operate it from there, instead of on the firm's premises. The condition laid down by him was that the pressmen would only receive half of their daily remuneration in cash, the other half being used as instalments to pay for the hand press until it became their own. As a re sult hand presses were established in every muhalla of Lucknow and everyone gave some name to his press', asserts Nurani. All these presses worked for the Naval Kishore Press and, if need arise, also took on work from the outside' (Nurani 1995:45). One of the presses reportedly set up in this way was the Nami Press of Maulvi Qutbuddin (est. c. 1874), which subsequently rose to become one of the foremost printing establish ments in the city. 
A special and seemingly different case of a subcontracted printer was that of the Mumbai al-Ulum Press at Mathura. Set up in 1860 and operated jointly by two brothers, Lala Kanhaiyalal Bhargava and Vamshi dhar Bhargava, this press for some time monopolized early Hindi and Sanskrit printing in the western pilgrimage town. Contacts between the NKP and the Mumbai al-Ulum Press date back to at least 1868, when Vamshidhar Bhargava commissioned the NKP Kanpur branch with the printing of an illustrated pilgrimage manual entitled Banvātrā (Forest journey). A first edition of the manual had already been issued by Vamshidhar in 1865. It was the first imprint from Mathura that the French Orientalist Garcin de Tassy ever came across, causing him to express his astonishment over the existence of a printing press in this sacred town which of late has been reduced to some sort of village' (LLH 1866: 315). Presumably Banyātrā sold so well that the Bhargava brothers wanted to market it on a larger scale. Their press may not have had the necessary capacity to do so, which would explain why the commission went to the NKP. The situation was reversed in the early 1880s, when the NKP 
174 
An Empire of Books 
issued various commissions to the Mumbai al-'Ulum Press to lithograph Sanskrit and Hindi works. The reasons for this can only be speculated upon: they may have had to do with the fact that the Mathura press had excellent Nagari scribes at its disposal (Fig. 3).!? However, following Kanhaiyalal's death in 1883, the Mumbai al-Ulum Press was not doing well. It only sent in five titles for official registration in 1885, while the following year's report contains one last entry of the press with a single work.13 In view of this, Naval Kishore's commissions may equally well have been a form of support extended to a caste-fellow in times of financial need. 
The steady growth of the NKP was accompanied by a well-planned strategy of geographical expansion. Its beginning was marked by the opening of a large new printing press in Kanpur on 1 September 1865.14 Located 90 km south-east of Lucknow, Kanpur was an obvious choice: as a military station and distribution point for country produce and Europ ean imports the town was rapidly developing into one of the most impor tant industrial centres in northern India.is As C.A. Bayly has shown, there was a considerable influx of monied capital from Avadh into Kanpur. Conditions prevailing in the town after 1860 particularly favoured the growth of 'a fringe of enterprises which lay somewhere between the old business world or trade in luxuries and agricultural produce and the world of the pen-pusher and government servant. Printing, bookselling, the commission agency for land sales—all these brought the professional man and the mahajan together' (Bayly 1992: 447–8). Since Kanpur was rapidly eclipsing Lucknow as a trading centre, it was imperative for an entrepreneur like Naval Kishore to establish his presence there. The long-term adverse effects of the rise of Kanpur on the Lucknow trade have been described by William Hoey, who noted in 1880: "The damage done to Lucknow by Cawnpore is chiefly by the diverting of wholesale business from Lucknow to Cawnpore. The present cheapest and most direct route between Lucknow and Calcutta is via Cawnpore. Hence 
12 Among these lithographed titles were Gokulnath's Caurāsi barttā (-1883) and Vacanāmrt (1883), the Sanskrit Rūpávali (1883), and Hir Rānjhā kūh (1884). With the exception of the last work, all were written by the same scribe, one Pandit Keshavdas. 
13 RPIR 1885:45: 1886: 61. For more details on the Mumbai al-"Ulum Press, see Krishnacarya 1966: 45-6; Singh 1986: 70, and Khan 1990: 350. 
14 This is the date given by Khan 1990: 238. 
For a detailed account of the industrialization of Kanpur and its role as a new financial centre, see Bayly 1992: 439-48. 
An Indian Success Story 
175 
माजकाजाIOGY 
हीररांझाकू० 
अजनलालकृत 
ONTal 
Cocorticod 
HWANINimiyar 
श्रीयुतभुमीनदलकिशोरमाहवमालित अवध THIमाचारकीसाशानुसारस्थानमथुरामम्बैरल उलूमयमशिला INS 
नमें मुन्धी कन्हैयालालवैकुंठवासीकल सायहिडनः सातमीधरकेपबंधसेक्षापागवामाहमई सनराईसवी 
Fig. 3: Title page of Hir rānihā kūh, Mumbai al-Ulum Press (1884)176 
An Empire of Books 
Lucknow retailers of imported goods, cloth and iron for instance, and retailers from all places beyond Lucknow buy in the Cawnpore market (Hoey 1880: 30). 
Naval Kishore's Kanpur press was situated on the banks of the Ganga near Sarsaiya Ghat. Under the joint management of Maulvi Muhammad Ismail and Munshi Lalta Prashad, it rapidly developed into the NKP's largest and most important branch. No business records from Kanpur have survived. British records first mention the press in 1867-8 under the name of 'Cawnpore Gazette Press', after the journal it initially issued. The same sources report an output of nineteen book titles totalling 22,700 printed copies for the year 1867-8. By 1870 the press employed up to 200 workmen and turned out 8000 juz, equalling 128,000 printed pages, a day.16 Throughout the 1870s its production capacity much exceeded that of the mother firm in Lucknow. While later its output was substantially reduced, the Kanpur press remained the NKP's most important branch and continued to operate until around 1949. 
The five years following the opening of the Kanpur press in 1865 were a period of intense expansion, during which Naval Kishore sought to establish himself as a bookseller and distributor over a much wider geographical region: first, a printing press was set up in the eastern town of Gorakhpur and put under the supervision of Maulvi Majub Ahmad. This seems an odd choice, for though Gorakhpur, located approximately 250 km east of Lucknow, may have enjoyed some local importance for trading agricultural produce, it was otherwise a remote and educationally backward town, which would only develop into a flourishing trade centre with the coming of the railway line twenty years later. For Naval Kishore to set up a printing press in a place that, prior to 1866, was not even serv ed by the Imperial Post can hardly have been a commercial decision." Rather, it may be explained in the context of colonial efforts to enhance education in the region. Around the same time, the NKP opened several branch agencies (kothis) that functioned as sales and distribution sites in the trading places of Lahore, Delhi, Faizabad, and Muzaffarpur (Bihar). The Delhi agency was located in a building known as Kothi Ajanti in the busy market area of Dariba Kalan. It was run by Shaikh Nisar (Ali, the former superintendent at the Lucknow press. With the establishment of a further branch agency and bookshop in the eastern town of Patna 
16 SRGNWP, 1868. 'Publications registered at the Curator's Depot': 225; Avadh Akhbār, 19 April 1870, cited in Siddiqi 1980: 50. 
"In 1866 the Imperial Post opened a postal line between Benares and Gorakhpur which was served by runners. 
177 
An Indian Success Story 
(Azimabad), the firm made an important foray into the vast eastern Indian market. During the eighteenth century Patna had risen to prominence as a stronghold of Persian and Urdu literary culture in Bihar. The NKP Patna branch catered specifically to traders from Purnea, Chittagong, and Dacca, who apparently were particularly keen on buying books in Urdu. As the Aradh Akhbūr of 19 April 1870 proudly announced, the 
elhi and Patna agencies kept books worth Rs 50,000 in stock for sale (cited in Siddiqi 1980: 50). 
The establishment of a branch office in Bombav in 1871, while further expanding the range of the NKP's domestic trade, marked an important step in the firm's international trade with the Middle Eastern and European market. The Bombav branch was managed by Mir Ibn Hasan, a trusted and experienced former supervisor of the Lithographic Department at the Lucknow press. Ibn Hasan also served as the Bombay correspondent of Avadh Akhbar. The new agency immediately turned into a busy trading spot and was frequented by foreign traders from various countries. As DPI Colin Browning reported in 1871: 
To this Depôt resort traders from Persia. Muscat, Baghdad and Arabia. The Kuran meets with a ready sale. Merchants from Java in May and June 1871. are said to have bought large numbers of the Kuran. Munshi Nawal Kishor had an interview with the Persian envoy at Bombay in 1871, and hopes through his influence to open a trade with Persia. Dictionaries are in request. There is some trade with Leipzig and with London through Messr Trubner [sic] and Co. 20 000 copies of the Kuran are reported to have been sold dur ing the year. Before the war with France and Prussia, a few books were oc casionally purchased by French gentlemen, with whom Munshi Nawal Kishore corresponded." 
In the same year Naval Kishore was invited by the Raja of Patiala to open a printing press in the princely state with the express purpose of launching a newspaper. Before long, a typographic press was set up in Patiala. It assumed operations in September 1871 under its first director Munshi Raunaq Ali, formerly an editor of Avadh Akhbār, who had been especially delegated from Lucknow for the task. Within a month, he launched the Patiālā Akhbār, the first official organ in the state."Set up for official and informational purposes, the Patiala branch only produced a small number of books. The NKP catalogue of 1879 lists a mere three 
18 RPE Oudh, 1871-2: 174. 
19 LLH 1874: 79. Raunaq Ali died in 1876 and was succeeded by Sayyid Muhammad Ali. See Khan 1990: 124-5. 
178 
An Empire of Books 
titles, among them a historiographical work entitled Tārikh-e Gorakhpūr (History of Gorakhpur, *1872). 
The Punjab had for a long time been a coveted market for Naval Kishore. As mentioned earlier, he was already operating a sales agency in Lahore in the mid-1860s. Yet it was not before 1883 that he was able to open a full-fledged printing press in the place of his formative years in printing and journalism.20 Situated in the Mochee Gate area, the Lahore press was furnished with the latest innovation in printing technology, a steam press. It was run by Maulvi Majub Ahmad, who had previously been in charge of the Gorakhpur press. Official sources suggest that the Lahore establishment largely survived on government contracts, for its output in printed titles during the first years was minimal. Subsequently, it also specialized in printing religious tracts in Arabic, mostly individual chapters from the Qur'an. These tracts were produced in large print runs of up to 10,000 copies, and offered to the public at the low price of one anna. Next to producing books and pamphlets in Arabic, Persian and Urdu, the Lahore press also started to issue Punjabi literature written in the Gurmukhi script. Alongside popular Punjabi epics, its publications included various eminent works of the Sikh religion such as Bālā janam sākhi (*1890), Pothi das granthi (*1892) and Gurūgranth (*1893).21 Among its Hindi publications in Gurmukhi script, an annotated edition of Tulsidas's Rāmāyaṇ (*1890) and a Hindi Bhagavad Gitā (*1891) are worth mentioning. However, perhaps the most famous book to be issued from the NKP Lahore press in 1883 was an Urdu title, namely the second revised and enlarged edition of Muhammad Husain Azad's immensely influential masterpiece of Urdu literary criticism Ab-e hayāt (Water of life).22 After Naval Kishore's death in 1895, the Lahore press continued to operate under various names (Naval Kishore Steam Press; Naval Kishore Gas Printing Works; Kashi Ram Press Ltd) until at least 1939.23 
The last step in the NKP's expansion consisted of the opening of a press in the princely state of Kapurthala in 1892. It was managed by 
20 There is no mention of the establishment in the list of licensed printing presses contained in the Gazetteer of the Lahore District 1883-4 (Lahore: Punjab Government 1883-4: 189). Thacker's Directory carries a first entry of the Lahore press in 1887. 
21 Catalogue of Books Registered in the Punjab under Act XXV of 1867, 1885-95 (OIOC; SV 412). 
22 The first edition of Āb-e hayāt was published from Lahore's Victoria Press in 1880. For a translation and discussion of the work, see Azad 2001. 
23 Thacker's Indian Directory 1895-1939. Kashi Ram apparently held me per manager of the Lahore NKP. 
179 
An Indian Success Story 
Ganeshi Lal, presumably a nephew of Naval Kishore, who received a monthly stipend of Rs 100 from the Maharaja of Kapurthala for his services (Barrier/Wallace 1970: 66). 
Despite the large investments implied in the establishment and main tenance of the various new printing works, Naval Kishore did not neglect the mother firm in Lucknow. In the late 1880s the Lucknow press under went modernization. While visiting the firm in 1884. John F. Hurst had expressed his surprise at the absence of power-presses and marvelled at the large number of English-made presses still of primitive contrivance (Hurst 1887: 354) he had encountered instead. Hurst's visit came too early, for just then the NKP was on the verge of a momentous leap into modern printing technology. Around 1885 several modern power-presses 
were operating at the Lucknow press under European supervision.-* 
manner of most Indian commercial enterprises, was conducted as a family business. The employment of Ganeshi Lal and other relatives in leading positions suggests as much. In addition to being in charge of the Kapur thala press, Ganeshi Lal served as superintendent of the Avadh Akhbar Press and as personal assistant to Naval Kishore. He also represented the NKP as 'bookseller, publisher and general agent. Other relatives employed in supervising positions were Manoharlal Bhargava, the superintendent of the printing department and manager of the book depot, and Ramji Das Bhargava, editor of the Oudh Review. Naval Kishore's adopted son Prag Narayan Bhargava was personally trained by him to become the future head of the firm. 
As has been noted, the various branches and agencies of the NK gained prime importance as trading points for the new commercial com modity that the printed book had become on the Indian and foreign market. The firm's export trade formed a particularly important and profitable aspect of business since it catered to a vast market of Islamic countries that were yet to develop a full-fledged printing industry of their own. The Lucknow and Kanpur printing presses were frequented by traders from Kashmir, Bukhara. Yarkand, and Afghanistan who, after selling their goods in India, stopped over on the way back to their respective countries 
24 PGNWP&Oudh. Educational Dept., December 1991: 10. Until recently, an old electric press of G. Mann & Co. Makers Ltd, Leeds, was still in use at the Raja Ram Kumar Book Depot. 
25 Thacker's Indian Directory 1890–5 
180 
An Empire of Books 
to purchase large numbers of Arabic and Persian books, especially edi tions of the Qur'an and other religious works. According to Naval Kishore, half the books exported to Bukhara and Afghanistan in this manner hailed from his press.26 The reputation enjoyed by the NKP beyond the borders of India, particularly in Afghanistan and Iran, is attested by two frequently retold anecdotes: the first relates to the visit to India in 1885 of the Amir of Afghanistan, Shah Abdul Rahman. During a darbār held in his honour in Ludhiana, Shah Abdul Rahman, in the presence of the Viceroy Lord Dufferin and an assembly of Indian notables reportedly honoured Naval Kishore when he refused to accept the publisher's traditional present and, instead, presented him with an expensive shawl, given as a token to an ‘emperor of learning'. Similarly, the Shah of Iran, on the occasion of a speech delivered before an assembly of Calcutta publishers in 1888, allegedly stated that he came to India with the express purpose of meeting two people: the viceroy and Munshi Naval Kishore (Sabiri 1953 [ii]: 117). 
According to some sources, the NKP also maintained an agency in London. Its history, however, remains obscure. Since none of the sources furnish any details on it, the existence of an NKP overseas agency in the metropolis seems doubtful.27 In fact, it may simply be a misnomer for the firm's existing trading connections with London. These involved transactions with the famous firm of Nicholas Trübner (1817-84), the Heidelberg-born bookseller and publisher who was known in the London book trade as 'the prince of oriental publishers' (Howsam 1998: 141). Trübner had set up business in Paternoster Row in 1851; in 1889 his firm merged with Kegan Paul's, a major player in the Indian colonial market.28 It was through the firm of this intermediary between Europe and the East' that NKP imprints from around 1867 reached the metropolis. The flow of oriental books imported from Lucknow is amply documented in Trübner's American and Oriental Literary Record (1865–91). 
From the outset, the NKP strove to develop a dual profile as a general and scholarly publishing house. Its range of publications grew fast, expanding continuously in scope and size and including both 'high' literary and commercial genres. In the absence of business records, no data is available for the first decade of the firm's existence. Garcin de Tassy refers in 1867 to an NKP catalogue which already listed almost 
26 RPE Oudh, 1871-2: 174. 
27 Nurani 1995: 74. After 1895, further branches were established in Ajmer and Jabalpur. 
28 Details in Joshi 2002: 108. 
An Indian Success Story 
181 
600 titles (LLH 1867: 378). Starting from 1868, the first official recordings of NKP publications can be found in the government's Quarterly List of Publications, 29 which after 1875 were supplemented by the yearly Reports on Publications Issued and Registered. On the basis of these sources Table 3.1 tries to give an overview of the firm's growing turnover by listing yearly numbers of registered NKP titles and relating them to the total of books registered in the NWP&Oudh. 
Because of the unreliability of the data (discussed in Chapter 1), Table 3.1 displays great fluctuation. Especially during the first years of 
TABIL: 3.1 
NKP Publishing Figures: Registered Titles 
per Year, 1868-95 
Year 
No. of titles registered from NKP Lucknow 
No. of titles registered from NKP Kanpur 
Total NKP 
of NKP titles of all Dublin publications registered 
in the NWP&Oudh 
1868 1874 1876 
40 
ܕܐܐ 
1877 
322 
19 (3rd quarter only) (no books registered) 
82 35 1172 *145 ** 74 *195 
*124 
1878 1879 
075 260 
227 **137 
*82 
1880 
**63 *173 *392 
* 202 
594 
141 222 207 161 
50 163 165 
191 385 372 213 
1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 
265 
393 
259 
374 
128 115 54 38 
127 
64 13 43 
93 133 100 78 
**Mainly from the NKP'. **no books registered from the NKP during the last quarter of the year. SOURCES: QLP Oudh; RPIR et al. 
29 Assembled in the Catalogue of Books Registered under Acr XXV of 1867_ Oudh 1868-1875 (OIOC; SV 412). I am grateful to Graham Shaw for directing my attention to this catalogue. 
182 
An Empire of Books 
registration, the data was often incomplete. However, it suggests that the decade following 1877 was the high-water mark of production and that after 1890 a visible decline set in. The zenith was reached in the years 1877 and 1882, when Naval Kishore's publishing house command ed a seventy-five and fifty per cent share, respectively, of all titles regis tered in the provinces. 
Put in absolute terms, NKP production figures look equally impressive: during the financial year 1872–3, production reached a total of 104,025 printed volumes, valued at Rs 41,806. That the large majority of books were British commissions testifies to the pervasiveness of educational publishing at the time: 98,000 volumes, priced at Rs 13,901, had been ordered by the Oudh Education Department alone.30 During the following year, production figures leapt to a total of 399,271 volumes, showing a fourfold increase.31 In 1876 there was a noticeable decline, the total go ing down to 265,355 volumes, of which 104,000 were commissioned by the Education Department. The latter figures are significant since they demonstrate that within a relatively short period of time non-educational literature had immensely gained in importance. Non-educational titles in this year accounted for more than sixty per cent of the NKP's total production. Among these a high proportion of 74,000 copies were first editions (as against 86,750 reprints), a fact that further testifies to a thriving marketplace. The ratio between Urdu and Hindi titles issued from the NKP will be discussed in Chapter 7. For now, it is important to note that, while Urdu books continued to outnumber those in Hindi/ Nagari, Hindi publications continuously gained in importance. Suffice it to say at this point that by the early 1870s the Lucknow press had estab lished itself as a strong presence in the Hindi literary marketplace, defying a popular notion which associates the Hindi book trade with places like Benares and Allahabad only. 
Throughout his career in publishing, Naval Kishore displayed an indefatigable zeal in seeking out additional sources of income. The year 1894 saw his last effort to diversify with the establishment of the Lucknow Iron Works. The factory presumably grew out of the NKP's type foundry. 
number of ninety workmen. From the outset it did brisk business, sus tained mostly by government contracts 
30 OAR, 1872–3: 123. 31 OAR, 1873-4: 96. 32 PGNWP&Oudh. General Administration Dept., June 1895: 27. 
An Indian Success Story 
183 
In the course of the NKP's expansion the number of people employed by the firm rose steadily. Between 1870 and 1876. over 700 press hands were working at the Lucknow presses alone. By 1880 the number of workmen and employees had gone up to over 900, turning Naval Kishore into the single-largest Indian employer in the NWP&Oudh." The average wages his printers received at that time ranged from 8 to 12 annas per day. Lithographers earned slightly less, with a daily bannas to l rupee. All in all, a monthly sum of Rs 15.000 had to be spent on wages and sala ries (S.Q. Khan 1980: 188). 
With the introduction of steam power in the 1890s, the NKP came to qualify as a factory under the Indian Factories Act of 1891. It was the only Indian-owned printing press in the NWP&Oudh to fall under this category, the other three firms being the British-run Methodist Publishing House (Lucknow), the Oudh and Rohilkhand Railway Press (Lucknow) and the Allahabad Government Press. Not surprisingly, the introduction of steam power entailed a reduction in the NKP's workforce. By 1895 the average daily number of operatives employed at the Lucknow print ing works had gone down to 287 male adults and 45 male children. Labour conditions for these children had been considerably improved by the Factory Act of 1881. the first important measure of factory legis lation in India. While the act did not regulate the working hours of adults, it was explicitly directed at Indian child labour, giving statutory protection to working children for whom a minimum age of seven was prescribed, The working hours of children aged between the ages of seven and twelve were limited to nine per day and child workers were also entitled to four holidays per month. 37 In keeping with the 1881 Factory Act and the amended 1891 Indian Factories Act, the NKP was regulated by midday stoppage. Sunday was a general holiday. The press was also subject to four official inspections per year, including one by the British Medic Officer. Prior to the enactment of these state regulations, little is know about the lot of the NKP's workforce. In the absence of a publishers 
Vn 
33 RPIR 1876: 42. Avadh Akhbar, 16 August 1870, cited in Haidari 1980: _.. 
34 See 'Statement of the Newul Kishore Press' below. Chapter 4. The high number of 1200 workers and employees, given by Haidar and others for 1884, must refer to all the printing works and branches of the press. 
35 Gazetteer of the Province of Oudh II, 1985: 393. 
36 PGNWP&Oudh. General Administration Dept.. June 1995 · Annual statement on the Working of the Factory Act in the Lucknow District for the year 1894:27. 
37 For an overview of early labour legislation, see Mukhtar 1930: 11-30 1941: 49-54. 
S 
184 
An Empire of Books 
archive, it is extremely difficult to assess labour conditions at the firm before the introduction of colonial factory legislation. Contemporary reports on Indian factory labour unanimously deplore the disgraceful, oppressive, and unsanitary labour conditions prevailing in Indian factories at the time. However, there is some evidence to suggest that Naval Kishore took the social responsibility coming with his position as a large-scale employer seriously. The various social security schemes he is reported to have introduced for his workers and employees included pension schemes for retired persons and allowances for the dependants of de ceased employees. Apparently he was also concerned about sanitary provisions and employed several allopathic doctors, hakims and vaidyas to look after his workforce (Sabiri 1953 [ii]: 115). 
3.3 Printing Books: Traditional Craftsmanship and 
Modern Technology As noted earlier, a decisive factor in the rapid spread of lithography in India was the fact that it was a comparatively inexpensive technology. The material required was limestone, nitric acid for preparing the stone, a special kind of greasy ink, and paper.38 While in European lithography from about 1830 stone started to be replaced by zinc plates, Indian printers continued to use stone as the printing surface throughout the nineteenth century. Hence, large numbers of stones continued to be imported from Europe, especially Germany. Lithographic stones and other printing equipment were widely advertised in English and vernacular newspapers. An advertisement in the Lahore Chronicle of 30 August 1856, for example, not only offered transfer paper, lithographic writing ink, chalks, and sponges, but also boasted of the best German lithographic stones', which were said to be carefully selected and of the very highest quality. Im porting stones from Europe, however, was expensive and time-consum ing. Consequently, many Indian printer-publishers turned to the cheaper alternative and began using local stone. As early as 1826, a suitable limestone had been discovered at Kurnool in the Bellary district of Madras Presidency which, after a period of experimenting, yielded good results.39 
Despite the high cost involved, Naval Kishore preferred to use stones of foreign origin. In 1872 he made a purchase of 616 new lithographic 
38 For an excellent introduction to the various printing techniques used through the ages, see Griffiths 1996. 
39 Shaw 1998: 108-10. For details on the physical appearance and operating mechanisms of early lithographic hand presses, see Twyman 1967; Szrajber 1997. 
185 
An Indian Success Story 
stones, involving a considerable expense of Rs 18,000.0 The Reverend Hurst on his visit to the press in 1884 noted that the engraving stone hailed from Germany, that it was 'precisely the same as that used by the Leipsic engravers', and was constantly imported in large quantities (Hurst 1887: 354). From the financial point of view, the cost of importing good-quality foreign stone was justified by the fact that each lithographic stone yielded a large number of impressions and could also be reused for new impressions. once its surface had been ground down. As a result, the firm was faced with a steady increase of lithographic stones that already bore inscriptions and had to be stored for further use. Apparently, by 1895 their number had grown to a huge total of 21.000 (S. Q. Khan 1980: 188). The resulting problem of space was tackled by a special storage system. Storing the stones was a delicate operation, which Naval Kishore took care to personally supervise. 
The preparation of the lithographic stones underwent little change during the course of the century: the stone was first washed with diluted nitric acid and then rubbed with gum arabic to prevent further grease from adhering to it. Two principal techniques of lithography were common: one was to directly inscribe on the stone surface with greasy ink and in a laterally inverted script. This method required the expertise of specially trained calligraphers. The other, by far more common. technique was described as transfer. Here, the text was first copied with a greasy medium unto a special type of transfer paper. The paper copy was then transferred unto the stone surface by placing the paper face downwards on the stone and moistening it until the soluble layer dissolved and left the greasy drawing on the stone." In either case, the actual print ing was done on flat-bed scraper presses worked by hand. It is to winam Hoey, officiating city magistrate and license tax officer in Lucknow from 1878, that we owe a rare account of the technical procedure lithography and its attendant expenses, as observed in a small Lucknow printing shop in 1880. It deserves to be quoted in full: 
Sāligrām, whose printing press is in Subhānnagar, is now printing a book called 'Khāliq Bāri' of 16 pages on white Serampore paper (20x 26). 16 pages or 8 leaves make what is called a juz. One sheet of the paper in use suffices for 2 juz and one ream of this paper which costs Rs. 6 consists of 20 dastas (quires) of 25 sheets each. The press-man cuts each sheet into 4 pieces, and one sheet gives 2 juz. One quarter of a sheet can be pri 
40 QAR, 1872-3: 123. 41 Details in Griffiths 1996: 102-3.186 
An Empire of Books 
from one stone at a time. Four copies, that is four stones, are required to print one juz. The copy writer who writes up the sheets which are transferred to stone receives 4 a[nna]s per copy or one rupee per juz. The copy is written on French paper and the materials with which the paper is prepared for copy-writing are applied by the printer, usārā (gamboge), arrowroot, 
2 pages and the cost is 1 an[na] 3 pies per dasta (quire). If bought by the ream it is only one rupee per ream. The materials used to prepare the paper come to Rs. 1-9 per ream. A whole ream prepared costs Rs. 2-9. A copy when transferred to stone will give a thousand, nay, an almost unlimited number of impressions. Two sheets of French paper are necessary for one stone for printing this book. One side only of a paper is printed in a day, and one impression is called 'tao'. A thousand tāus is the daily average for a press. Four labourers are employed in a press; one press-man, one pechkash, one isfanjia (sponge man), and one rulia (a lad who applies the ink roller to the stone). The press-man receives 3 a[nna]s; pechkash 2 a[nnals; isfanjia 2 a[nna]s and rulia 1 an[na] per diem. The press-man damps the paper for the press and cuts the sheets. When the sheets have been printed off the daftari who works by contract, folds and stitches the book. He receives 6 a[nna]s per thousand. The cost of printer's ink is about 6 a[nnals per thousand impressions for one stone, and miscellaneous expenses for oil and cloths for each press are only one anna per diem. The proprietor of the press sells this book at 3 pies per copy wholesale price to retail book-sell ers, who retail at two paisa. 
A calculation from above data will show that an edition of 1000 copies costs Rs. 11-2 and sells for Rs. 15-10, that is an edition of 1000 copies of a vernacular work printed in this size, which happens to be that most current, brings the printer Rs. 4 per juz. 
The more usual practise for printers to have a large business is to sell their publications to wholesale book-sellers who supply retailers at 40 juz the rupee and retailers vend at 32 juz the rupee. These are the prevailing prices for books printed on Serampore paper of the size 22x29, 20x26, and 18x22, and this system of sale is called ajza qimai. Registered books and school books printed by authority are sold at what is termed pukhtā qimar or a fixed prize. (Hoey 1880: 82-3) 
Hoey's detailed account of the printing of Khāliq bāri, a standard and frequently reprinted Persian vocabulary, invites a comparison with the NKP. While the technical procedure hardly differed from the above des cription, the size of operations at the NKP was infinitely larger, with approximately 350 hand presses in use at the time (Nurani 1972: 74). The NKP's own fifteenth edition of Khāliq bārī, issued in 1875 in a print run of 1250 copies, was identical in size and number of pages with the text produced at the Shaligram Press. Since textbook prices were fixed, 
187 
In Indian Success Story 
it was sold at the same retail price of 2 paisa per copy. A price comparison with an earlier NKP edition of 1869 indicates how the overall reduction in printing costs impacted on price rates: within the short time span of six years the sales price of Khaliy bari had gone down by fifty per cent from 1 anna to half an anna (that is, 2 paisa). 
Prices, of course, also depended on the size of the edition. The number of copies of non-educational NKPuitles in Hindi and Urdu displays great variation. First editions usually ranged from 27510 1250 copies, depend ing on the kind of publication and in case of commissions, on the kind of agreement the firm had entered into with the author or person commis sioning the manuscript. In keeping first editions comparatively small, Naval Kishore exercised the caution that was necessary to stay afloat in the commercial market. From the publisher's point of view, the greatest risk was involved in promoting texts of contemporary poetry. fiction, or learned treatises-especially, but by no means exclusively, in the case of unknown authors. Such texts were generally issued in much smaller print runs than the staple fare of the commercial book trade-religious texts, prayer books, astrological manuals, folktales, etc. By far the highest print runs, of course, were for school textbooks commissioned by the British authorities, about which more will be said in the next chapter. Here, first editions generally ranged from 550 to 5500 copies. Reprints of widely used textbooks, such as Raja Shiva Prasad's standard geo graphy, Jām-e Jahānnumā (Hindi: Bhugolirtānt), could easily command print runs of 10,000 or 20.000 copies at a time. 
Apart from the print run, there were other obvious factors determining the price of a non-educational title, such as the book's format and number of pages, the quality of paper and binding, whether or not the book included illustrations. A standard means of making books of substantial size accessible to the readership was to break them up into individually sold volumes and parts. The sizes most frequently used for Persian, Urdu, and Hindi books were foolscap, royal octavo, and royal quarto. Bindings of NKP books exhibit great variety, ranging from thin paper covers or cardboards to expensive leather bindings, often in half-morocco. As in the wholesale book trade in Britain, the prevailing practice was to buy books as unbound sheets rather than as sewn and bound finished products. 
The Paper Problem Highlighting the importance of paper to the development of the periodical and book publishing industry in Victorian England. S. Bennett has pointed to the centrality of paper in shaping modern urban culture: Paper was to 
188 
An Empire of Books 
the urban revolution what iron was to the industrial revolution. The output of paper marked the advance of urbanism just as surely as the output of iron marked the advance of industry' (Bennett 1990: 166–8). Paper was fundamental to commercial mass printing. To printer-publishers in the subcontinent, it was also the most problematic of the various raw mater ials. Right from the beginning of Indian-language printing in the eighteenth century, its supply posed a major and perennial problem. As Graham Shaw notes: 
Perhaps no other problem of material vexed the eighteenth-century Calcutta printer as much as that of paper. Two kinds were commonly in use: Indian hand-made paper, usually referred to as Patna paper after one of the chief centres of manufacture, and which Carey's biographer George Smith characterized as "a dingy, porous, rough substance", and imported "Europe paper", higher in quality but also in price. Quite frequently the same work would be printed on both types of paper, the European paper version adding 
between a quarter and a half to the selling price. (Shaw 1981: 35) After 1800 the leading supplier of Indian-made paper to the printing presses in eastern and northern India was the paper-mill of the Serampore Mission Press. After an initial period of trials and setbacks, it achieved remarkable results in improving the quality of manufactured paper. - Yet the Serampore mill was scarcely able to keep pace with the rapidly growing demand of a flourishing domestic print industry. As a result, Indian-made paper remained in short supply throughout large parts of the nineteenth century.43 
The slow growth of the Indian paper industry may in part be explained by an ordinance passed under Charles Wood in the 1850s to the effect that the entire supply of paper used for government printing was to be met by paper imported from England. Introduced to maintain quality standards and presumably to ensure the durability of official documents, the measure backfired. The resulting situation was described by W.H. Lowe, a British official put in charge of setting up the Allahabad Govern ment Press in 1858. He noted the total undependability of the Calcutta market: '[W]hatever can be procured is generally inferior in quality and exorbitant in price. The reason of this is that all the large presses in India import their own paper and materials and never resort to the dealers except in case of emergency.'44 Yet these circumstances fail to offer an 
42 Details in Khan 1999: 224-8. 
** For the indigenous paper industry in various Indian regions, see Liotard 1883; Bhattacharyya 1988; Mehta 1991. 
44 Home Dept. Public Branch, October 1858, no. 297: 6. 
189 
An Indian Success Story 
explanation as to why European investment in the Indian paper industry remained confined to Bengal and why, despite the progress in infrastruc ture and transport, it never extended to the north-west. Until the late 1870s both official and commercial printing presses in the vast region of northern India were forced to buy their paper from the mills in and around Calcutta or import it from Europe. In either case, prices were often prohibitive.45 At the NKP.both Serampore paper and high-quality paper from England, Germany, or France was used for printing. The expenses for foreign 'white' (safed) paper as compared to the Indian-made paper of light brownish colour (generally called bādāmi) were considerable. With his keen sense of business, Naval Kishore soon realized that in the absence of a paper mill in North India the paper trade was a promising field to venture into. Consequently, from around 1870 he began to trade in paper. The Avadh Akhbār of 19 April 1870 carried the following announcement: "The press proprietor, in addition to dealing in books, deals in all kinds of paper. In particular, each month large supplies of paper are ordered directly from German (sic), London and France. *" To the publisher this step not only meant making a virtue of necessity, but also constituted a welcome opportunity to diversify. 
Importing paper for resale in the domestic market was not without its risks, as can easily be gathered from the large sums involved in the transactions: in 1871 Naval Kishore purchased paper worth Rs 140,000 from England, while in the following year paper worth Rs 105,000 was acquired through the Calcutta-based German firm of Ullmann, Hirschhorn & Co. as well as through the merchant house of George Henderson & Co. The firm of Henderson was closely associated with the newly estab lished paper mill at Bally near Calcutta, a large industrial enterprise under British ownership and management.47 The risks and, at the same time, alluring promise of profit implied in the paper trade are the theme of a frequently retold anecdote in Naval Kishore's biography: on one occasion, during an auction in Calcutta, the publisher, with calculated daring, acquired an entire shipload of seemingly spoilt paper. When it later turned out that the paper was of much better quality than expected, he was able to resell it at a high profit. 
Despite the investment in foreign paper, the publishing house con tinued to use Indian-made paper in large quantities. This is suggested by a complaint raised in a British report of 1872 to the effect that the paper 
45 For paper manufacturing in Lucknow, see Hoey 1880: 127-9. 
46 Avadh Akhbar, 19 April 1870, cited in Siddiqi 1980:51 and Lalji Muns 6-7. 
47 RPE Oudh, 1871_2. 175: RPE Oudh, 1872-3: 120. Bhattacharyya 1900 
190 
An Empire of Books 
used at the NKP was “always coarse:48 It is also borne out by the NKP's 1879 catalogue, which featured various types of paper distinguished by colour and quality: books were printed on white (safed), henna-coloured (hinnāļi), dove-coloured (fākhta) or, more rarely, light blue (ābī) paper. The different qualities comprised 'fine, superior' ('umda), 'glossy' (ciknā) and 'thick' (gunda) paper. Often the same title was made available in various paper qualities. 
The difficult situation pertaining to paper only changed in the late 1870s, when the colonial government introduced special measures to promote the growth of the indigenous paper industry and to support the establishment of new paper mills. In seizing the occasion to his advantage, Naval Kishore once again displayed remarkable entrepreneurial foresight: he was instrumental in establishing the first paper mill in the NWP&Oudh. To this end, he founded a company of shareholders in 1879. Support for the project came from the affluent class of the Avadh ta'alluqdārs, who supplied much of the original capital (Metcalf 1979: 278). The capital of the company was fixed at Rs 600,000, divided into 6000 shares. Set up in 1879, the Lucknow Paper Mills, or Upper India Paper Mill Co. Ltd, 49 started operating in 1880. Despite the initial flow of local capital, the company went through some teething trouble when, following an order of a plant and machinery from England, it incurred high debts. When the shareholders became suspicious and began to sell their shares at a loss, Naval Kishore was reportedly forced to step in and clear the debts from his own pocket (Sabiri 1953 [ii]: 118). 
These events may provide the backdrop to a petition addressed to the government in June 1880 by the secretary of the paper mill, Babu Kali prasad. The petition asked for official patronage, insinuating that the company founders' confidence that such patronage would be afforded to them 'formed the most powerful incentive to their launching out in a project involving the outlay and risk of such a large capital.'50 As the paper mill's largest proprietor, Naval Kishore maintained a tight grip over its affairs. For a number of years he served as its honorary manager and also sat on its board of directors. His ties with the management of the paper mill were cemented even further when he arranged the marriage of his adopted son Prag Narayan to the daughter of one of the mill's high officials (Nurani 1995:33). A notice published in the Delhi Punch (Lahore) 
48 PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., June 1872: 35. 
The name was later changed to Upper India Couper Mill Co. Ltd. 50 Home Dept. Public Branch, July 1880, no. 245 (B). 
191 
An Indian Success Story 
of 21 February 1883 suggests that the management of the Lucknow paper mill was subject to a fair amount of nepotism. It portrays Naval 
ishore's involvement in setting up and running the mill in a generally unfavourable light: 
A correspondent of the Delhi Punch ... makes some complaints about the Paper mill company of Lucknow. The writer stated that, when the establish ment of the mill was projected, Munshi Nawal Kishor, the proprietor of the Oudh Akhbar, repeatedly published articles in that paper holding out pros pects of a dividend at 10 per cent. These high hopes induced even many poor people to invest their small capital in the speculation. Now the manager of the mill has declared a dividend at 8 annas per cent for three months. It appears that the men employed at the mill are all relatives of the manager of the mill, and are overpaid. The Government should take the projectors to task for deceiving the public by publishing false prospectuses, and compel them to buy the shares of poorer shareholders at par. to save them from loss, or it should itself purchase the whole business at cost price. 
It is not known whether this appeal had any effect. Its allegations in any case seem curious in light of the fact that by 1883 the paper mill was al ready in a flourishing state. It had received a great boost in 1881 when the government, in a shift from its earlier policy, issued an order to the effect that country-made paper should, as far as possible, be used in all government offices (Liotard 1883: 1). With 340 employees and a yearly turnout of nearly Rs 390,000 in 1882, the paper mill was counted among Lucknow's largest industrial enterprises. It not only became the main supplier of paper to the printing presses in the NWP&Oudh, but also started catering to the Punjab. The paper produced at Lucknow was con sidered to be of good quality, while remaining inexpensive. While it did not quite match the standards of foreign paper, it was well suited to Indian needs. One foreign observer described it as 'very tough, though not pleasing to the eye or agreeable to the touch' (Hurst 1887: 394). 
The low-cost factor was of vital interest to the colonial administration, particularly with regard to its textbook-printing scheme. One of the Luck now mill's largest customers, the Punjab Educational Department reported in 1883: 
Every effort has been made to reduce the price of our vernacular books, and this has been done by two means: 1st by adopting the new style in print ing books; and 2nd, by the use of country-made paper from the Upper Indi: 
51 Delhi Punch, 21 February 1883, SVN 1883: 191 52 RA NWP&Oudh. for the year ending 31 March 1883: 141. 
192 
An Empire of Books 
Paper Mills Company of Lucknow. This paper is called Bādārni, or half 
it is substantial and cheap, and cheapness is a great consideration with native students, especially those of vernacular schools. The price of English printing paper is about 5 annas per pound, including cost of transit to Lahore while that of the paper from the Upper India Mills is about 3 annas per 
pound.53 
The prime objective of cheapness, if paramount at the time, was to show its adverse effects in the long run: the paper produced at the Lucknow paper mill shares the self-destructive quality characteristic of much industrially manufactured paper in the nineteenth century (Bennett 1990). Whether imported or Indian-made, the paper used for book printing at the NKP was generally highly acidic with the invariable consequence that NKP imprints have been subject to a slow but steady deterioration. 
Old Traditions, New Technology, and 
Quality Standards The introduction of modern technology, the mechanization of the pro duction process and the imperatives of cheapness and rapidity prevailing in industrial mass printing had fundamentally altered the process of book production. At the same time, commercial publishing did not repre sent a total rupture with traditional practices of book making and notions of what constituted a fine imprint. At the House of Naval Kishore, tradition prevailed in many respects. The firm's concern with fine books and superior craftsmanship is particularly evident in the way in which texts continued to be carefully prepared for lithographic printing by its scribes and master calligraphers, of whom more will be said in Chapter 5. It is most visibly reflected in the physical appearance of NKP lithographed books. As has been noted before, for large parts of its Arabic and Persian publications, as also many of its Urdu titles, the Lucknow publishing house adopted the distinctive style of formatting lithographic books that had been developed by the early Lucknow printers during the 1840s and 1850s. While this style drew heavily on the manuscript tradition, it was in time further adapted for commercial printing. The result was a standard format and title page layout that was different from the style prevalent, for example, in Bombay. To the trained eye NKP books are easily distin guishable from those produced by any other lithographic press in India. 
53 Rept. on Popular Education in the Punjab and its Dependencies, 1882–3: 122 
193 
An Indian Success Story 
A characteristic feature borrowed from the manuscript tradition was the unwan or superscription. In NKP books it usually appeared as a small and simple drawing on the reverse of the heavily ornamented title page.*** Glosses were found on the margins, in small handwriting; marginal commentaries were written in slant. As Olga Scheglova notes: 'An important achievement of Munshi Nawal Kishor was to fit very large works such as Khwāndamir's Randat al-safā or Arabic and Persian dic tionaries into a single volume. He did this with the aid of thin paper, small handwriting and lithographic artistry' (Scheglova 1999: 10). Scheglova identifies a distinct Naval Kishore style, to which she attri butes a far-reaching impact: "For several decades, this style attained in India the status of an accepted canon. It also exerted a significant influence on the graphic design of books produced by Central Asian lithographers (ibid.: 15). The Naval Kishore style provided a model to publishers in places like Lahore, Delhi, and Kanpur, who would in turn introduce their own variations. 
The concern with tradition was also manifest in the production of a special category of printed texts, the sacred scriptures. Even while sub jecting the scriptures to the profane process of mass production, the NKP remained sensitive to the meaning of the written text as a sacred item and the weight it carried as an object of reverence. The printing of the Qur'an, in particular, was carried out in accordance with the sacred status of the text and implied a meticulous observance of Islamic precepts: all those involved in the preparation of copies and the printing of the Qur'an—a task which, significantly, was performed exclusively by Mus lim employees-had to take a ritual bath before embarking on their work. Smoking or chewing pān (betel leat) was strictly forbidden in the rooms where copies of the Qur'an were being prepared or printing was under way. Unlike other used stones, old lithographic stones bearing the words of the Qur'an were not destroyed but buried (Hasan 1981: 11). Similar measures ensuring ritual purity and a reverential handling of the sacred scriptures were adopted for printing the most revered texts of the Hindu and Sikh religion, viz. the Bhagavad Gitā and the Guru Granth Sahib. 
The notion of quality was important to Naval Kishore, who took pride in introducing high standards in commercial publishing. Good work manship and careful editing were equally important prerequisites building up his firm's reputation. Great care was taken to ensure that in printing was neat, the calligraphy fine and pleasing to the eye, and that 
ZIP 
Persian 
54 See Scheglova 1999 for a detailed description of the title pages of N books. 
194 
An Empire of Books 
the transmission of texts from manuscript copies was accurate and cor rect. Readers of NKP books were expressly told that the work they had purchased had been corrected and edited by expert proofreaders. State ments to the effect that the text had undergone careful revision by the firm's maulvis or pandits regularly featured on the title pages. The edition of Keshavdas's Kavipriyā satik (*1886), for example, named a team of seven pandits who had been involved in proofreading and correcting the text. Another typical notice, found in a Hindi rendering of Madhava's Sarkara-digvijaya (Shankara's Conquest of the Regions, *1870), a popu lar hagiographical account on the life of the great philosopher Shankara carya, stressed the fine quality of the edition: 
This work has been printed at the Naval Kishore Press by order of Pandit Debiprasad, Deputy Collector in Ghazipur district. Since this excellent work has not been previously translated into any vernacular language and in view of its fine paper, beautiful calligraphy and neatness, the price is not high. For the sake of widely diffusing this new work and for the convenience 
exclusive of mail charges. Those who are interested are kindly requested to send an advance payment or letter to the afore-said pandit or to the press. The book will then be despatched to you. 
Throughout the years the NKP managed to maintain a generally high standard for its publications. Yet there were occasions when notions of accuracy and fine presswork had to be sacrificed to commercial demands. The sheer size of printing undertaken at the firm and the imperative of cheapness could not but leave its mark on some of the publications, especially in the textbook sector. While nothing much could be done if the calligraphy lacked neatness or the printing turned out bad, in case of faulty composition or sloppy editing lists of errata (ghalatnāmalşahih nāma, suddhpatr) were sometimes inserted. 
3.4 Marketing Books: Strategies of Advertising 
and Diffusion 
My father's uncle, Maulvi Ahmad, was very fond of travel and trade at a time when people were frightened of leaving their homes. He went as an agent for Haji Harmain Sharifain from Lucknow as far as Rawalpindi, taking thousands of books with him in bullock carts and other similar con veyances. He used to say that in those days books were very rare. On see ing books printed in Lucknow, people would open their eyes wide and be drawn to them like moths to a candle. They were so eager that at whatever 
195 
An Indian Success Story 
town or village Maulvi Ahmad arrived, his coming was known beforehand and his arrival was attended by great pomp and ceremony. When he came to a village, he was surrounded by people, a crowd would collect and any book he offered, at whatever price, was willingly accepted and reverently placed on the brow of the purchaser. (Sharar 1979: 107) 
Whether the air of romance attributed to the spread of the printed word in Sharar's recollections was still prevailing in the era of commercial publishing is a difficult question to answer. The organization of the book trade in Indian languages constitutes one of the least explored areas in the early history of print in the subcontinent. The operating mechanisms and level of interaction amongst the various agents who formed the links in the distribution chain from publisher to bookseller to reader are yet to be explored in the Indian context. Beyond the obvious facts that publishers either relied on their own sales agencies or else sold to wholesale book sellers and retailers who, in turn, marketed books to individual buyers, our knowledge of the distribution channels of the printed book is still insufficient. Little, for example, is known about the social identity and range of activities of the South Asian counterpart of the European colporteur. This itinerant hawker, or 'bookwallah' as he was dubbed by British expatriates, played a key role in spreading printed literature to the vast internal market of small town and rural India. As early as 1822, a resident of Murshidabad wrote to The Friend of India that he was glad to perceive that everyday the natives are increasing in their sales of native books: there are now in and near the city of Moorshedabaad no less than four walking booksellers that I know of. In speaking to one last week, he informed me, that upon an average he sold to the amount of 3 Rupees per month.' Characteristically, the same observer could not refrain from adding that The books sold by these, of course, are great trash, but I suppose a press has never yet been introduced among a people without some alloy.'56 A second, and rather more picturesque, account given by an Englishwoman in the 1830s corroborates the existence of a special group of itinerant hawkers engaged in the sale of English books to British expatriates and English-educated Indians: 
To book-hunters especially, a very interesting character is to be tout British India in the shape of the book-wallah or book-hawker-a sort of 
55 Bayly 1996a; 219. For early soldiers', East India Company, factory and culating libraries catering to the Europeans in India, see Lockyer 1977. For European firms investing in the colonial market, see Joshi 2002. 
56 Friend of India, vol. 5, 1822: 86, cited in Ghosh 1998: 177.196 
An Empire of Books 
literary pedlar who wanders about from town to town and from station to station with much patience, and an apparent love of books and periodicals which such glorious old book-worms as our Roscoe and Charles Land would have greatly admired. Without this dispensor of heavy and light literature in our splendid Eastern dominion, we may doubt if India would be as secure as it is. Through the travels of the book-hawker, many antidotes to poisonous writings are administered; educated natives purchase English philosophical treatises, mathematical works, magazines—all with equal exposure; the poorer Hindi or Mahomedan, with Lord William Bentinck's famous remark ringing in his ear—'Education is the first want, education the second, education the third want of India!'-dives into the box or bundle (to the astonishment of the patient coolie or native porter who carries it) for a grammer [sic] or spelling-book; while the burra sahib, his wife and daughter [...] startle at the sonorous voice exclaiming from the door, or beside the refreshing kus-kus tatties,- Book-hawker, Sir!' (cited in Ohde dar 1966: 120-1) 
Missionaries and Christian book societies had begun building up their own networks of colporteurs at an early point in time. By the 1870s colportage accounted for half of the regional-language circulation of the British and Foreign Bible Society. Interestingly, missionary colportage was an unpopular job and positions were difficult to fill, as reported the 1874 Conference on Urdu and Hindi Christian Literature in Allahabad (Davis 1983: 26). Indian printer-publishers followed the missionary example and adopted colportage for disseminating their books. Our knowledge, however, is largely confined to Bengal: among early Calcutta printers and booksellers, Gangakishore Bhattacarya led the way in employing hawkers as early as 1816. By 1857 over 200 hawkers were said to be working for the Calcutta presses. Many of them hailed from an agricultural background, working as colporteurs for part of the year only and cultivating their fields during the rainy season. Once again, Long is a valuable source of information on the effectiveness of the colportage system: 
These men may be seen going through the native part of Calcutta and the adjacent towns with a pyramid of books on their heads. They buy the books themselves at wholesome price, and often sell them at a distance at double the price which brings them in probably 6 or 8 Rupees monthly, though we know of one man who realizes by book hawking more than 100 Rupees monthly ... The Natives find the best advertisement for a Bengali book is a living agent who shows the book itself. Various valuable Bengali works have been printed, which have rotted on a Book-seller's shelves simply 
197 
An Indian Success Story 
because the agency of hawkers was not brought into action. (Long 1859: xiv) 
Long's observation on the advantages of colportage over sale in stores and sales depositories is corroborated in the 1857 report of the Vernacular Literature Society of Calcutta. According to this report, few books were sold at the society's depoi, whereas encouraging results were achieved through door-to-door selling by hawkers. Interestingly, the Vernacular Literature Society employed several female hawkers who gained direct access to the secluded domestic sphere of respectable Bengali women and reportedly sold books in large numbers.57 The response to this most direct kind of marketing was vivid, testifying to an urgent demand: when unable to pay for books in cash, people often exchanged them manuscripts (Ghosh 1998: 181). 
Compared to Bengal, we still make do with the sketchiest sense of the colportage system in the early Hindi and Urdu book trade. No doubt, North Indian publishers and booksellers followed their Bengali confreres in resorting to the agency of hawkers for disseminating printed mattern the small town and rural market. Local fairs assumed prime importance in this context. In 1884 the Methodist missionary B.H. Badley gavene following description of bookstalls set up during the annual mela Tulsipur, a small town in eastern Gonda district: 
The book shops are generally small, and not very attractive. They consist chiefly of native publications, printed in pamphlet form on yellow paper, and seldom bound. A few are school-books, but most are filled with stories of gods and goddesses, and illustrated by rude cuts drawn by Hindustani artists. The books are spread out upon the ground on a piece of cloth, and are generally carried from place to place in bundles, not in boxes. (Badley 1884: 148-9) 
Even for large-scale commercial publishers like Naval Kishore, col portage was still the most effective means of reaching a wider readership outside the urban centres. John Hurst noted in 1884: 
The practical way by which the native publisher, like Kishore, gets his publications before the public and secures a large sale is by the system of colportage. The drummers circulate through the country very industriously, and know just where to go in order to secure the largest and best patronage. They are very quiet in their methods. What successful book agent the world 
57 Vernacular Literature Society, Report from February 1856 to March Calcutta 1857, cited in Khan 1999: 380. 
198 
An Empire of Books 
over does not know that too much talking is likely to spoil a sale? (Hurst 1887: 356) 
Other sales structures existed for the urban market. As we have seen, Naval Kishore took the step from Printers and Publishers' to 'Book sellers' early on, by setting up his own sales agencies (kothi). At the same time, he increasingly resorted to the agency of professional booksellers, whose operations covered a wide geographical region. 
In this context, a publisher's notice inserted in the 1865 NKP edition of Malik Muhammad Jaysi's Padmavat (reproduced in translation below) assumes particular importance. It not only contains one of the first copyright notices found in an NKP book, but also supplies some rare information on early sales sites. From it we learn that, by 1865, Naval Kishore was already maintaining kothis in Faizabad, Muzaffarpur, Delhi, and Lahore, while also relying on an extensive distribution network beyond these locations. This network involved several fellow printer publishers, whom Naval Kishore commissioned as sales agents for his firm. The system seems to have worked in a reciprocal way for, as will be shown, the NKP in its turn marketed books for a number of presses in Lucknow and beyond. Obviously, effective marketing and competition were not mutually exclusive. 
A substantial item in the cost of publishing was advertising. From the early days of commercial publishing in India, the most conventional means of advertising books was the newspaper advertisement. This format was not only a sure means of reaching a large number of readers and prospective buyers; for the many printer-publishers who ran their own paper it also had the additional benefit of minimizing advertising costs. Naval Kishore regularly announced new and forthcoming publi cations in Avadh Akhbār, including both his own and other publishers titles. Such announcements were also crucial in soliciting advance subscriptions and inviting the patronage of the wealthy for expensive publications. 
A second effective means of advertising were the books themselves. In using the book as an advertising medium, readers who might not be reached by any other means could be directly addressed. NKP books usually included selected or complete lists of titles available in a given language; at a later stage they often also contained blurbs for other topic related titles. Accompanying these lists were special notices instructing the reader on how to order books from the press. 
Given the sophisticated organization of the NKP, where several de partments dealt exclusively with marketing and distribution, it is no 
An Indian Success Story 
199 
Announcement 
On account of it being a new version and a first edition and in accordance with Act XX of 18[417.54 an entry of this book has been made in the Government Regis try Book. Without permission by the undersigned proprietor of the press no one shall attempt to publish it. 
The Undersigned Naval Kishore, Press Proprietor 
This book can be purchased by customers at the locations listed below: Address & Location Name of Town Address & Location Name of Town Maulvi Ali Yar Khan Bareilly 
Munshi Naval Lucknow and Maulvi Hidayat 
Kishore Press Yar Khan Hafiz Muhammad Faizabad 
Munshi Naval Kanpur Amir, kothi Munshi 
Kishore Press Naval Kishore Press Maulvi Majub Ahmad. Gorakhpur Nizami Press 
dirro manager, Munshi Naval Kishore Press 
Maulvi Ishfaq Rasul dirto 
Mirza Muhammad Agra 
Ali Beg 
Maulvi Abdul Qadir Patna 
Muhammad Machu ditto Sarai Pachchim 
Khan, manager llahi Darvaza 
Press 
Maulvi Abdul 
dinto 
Nisar Ali. 
Delhi Hamid, gomashta, 
superintendent, Nizami Press 
kothi Munshi Naval Kishore Press 
Muzaffarpur 
Lahore 
Kothi Munshi Naval Kishore bookshop, Maulvi Nazim Ali Khan 
Maulvi Abdullah, kothi Munshi Naval Kishore Press 
Muhammad Bashir 
Monghyr 
Maulvi Ali Yar Khan Muradabad and Maulvi Hidayat Yar Khan 
Maulvi Vilayat Husain, Calcutta muhalla Amratala 
58 I.e. an Urdu version of a Hindi reworking of the text by Maulvi Ali Hasan. 
59 Due to a copyist's mistake, the original Urdu text gives a wrong date, notably 1817. The reference, however, is clearly to the Indian Copyright Act (XX of 1847). 
200 
An Empire of Books 
surprise that a publisher of Naval Kishore's means was constantly concerned with developing more effective marketing strategies. Indeed, he was among the first Indian publishers to bring out his own book list (fihrist-e kutub). Regularly compiled by skilled calligraphers, this catalogue was distributed to wholesale traders, retailers, and, on request, to private customers, as well.60 An important means of addressing both professionals of the book trade and the general reading public on a supra regional level, the catalogue not only gave an overview of the firm's publications but also included additional information of mercantile and general nature. It was, for one, a means of soliciting manuscripts. Readers and writers were invited to bring to the notice of the press any literary composition or compilation deemed worthy of publication, whether old or new. Invoking India's great cultural diversity, the 1874 catalogue en couraged readers from different parts of the country to enlighten the publishing house on the state of the arts and sciences in their region of origin' (Fihrist 1874: 45). Furthermore, readers were informed that provisions for the translation of books into Hindi and Urdu had been made at several NKP branches, and applications were invited from com petent individuals for the post of translators from English, Arabic, Persian, and Sanskrit. Authors wanting their works printed for non-commercial purposes were offered full coverage of the costs involved in printing and distribution against the payment of what was termed a contributory sum'. By contrast, authors of scientific, scholarly, or legal works designed for textbook use were asked to transfer their copyright to the NKP. Further agreements would be reached once the book was accepted by the [Text book?] 'Committee'. In the name of preserving and diffusing useful knowledge, the firm made a special request to bibliophiles, asking them to notify the NKP of the contents of their private libraries and submit old and rare manuscripts for publication. In return, they were promised complimentary copies of the printed volume and the safe return of their manuscripts (Fihrist 1879: 3). This seems to have been little incentive for collectors to part with their prized possessions, and indeed most of the time such transactions involved substantial payment on the publisher's part. 
A comparison between the NKP's 1874 and 1879 catalogues indicates the rapid expansion and diversification of its programme within a 
60 Two such catalogues, of 1874 and 1879, are preserved in the OIOC (Fihrist 1874, 1879). 
An Indian Success Story 
201 
relatively short time span. With more than a hundred different categories, the 1879 classified catalogue gives us an accurate idea of the wide variety of fictional and non-fictional literature in various languages produced by the firm. 
Also included in the 1879 catalogue was a list of book dealers from whom NKP titles could be purchased. Reproduced in Table 3.2 below, it reflects the expansion of the firm's sales network to various parts of India and even to the metropolis. The House of Naval Kishore, in its turn, acted as a distributing agent for several smaller printing firms of Lucknow, Kanpur, Delhi, and Meerut. This is borne out by a substantial number of non-NKP titles included in the catalogue. 
The 1879 catalogue also contained on its front pages various noti fications in which conditions for the printing and purchase of books, terms of payment, modes of dispatch, etc., were laid down. Preceding them was the publisher's solemn declaration that he did not look to per sonal profit but was intent on the promotion of the arts and sciences among literate audiences. In keeping with this objective, book prices were kept at a minimum and only the lowest rates had been entered in the catalogue. 
Since fixed prices obtained for educational books, they were excluded from discounts or commissions. For most other titles, retailing agents were offered standard commissions ranging from ten per cent for orders worth up to Rs 50 to twenty per cent for orders exceeding Rs 100. Inte restingly, a special incentive was given to promote the sale of books in Sanskrit and Hindi. Purchasers who bought Sanskrit and Hindi books worth Rs 100 in cash received additional books worth Rs 25 free of charge. Different conditions obtained for wholesale traders, who were given discounts for bulk orders. These were generally subject to nego tiation. The system was known as ajzā qimat or 'price by sheet' (juz, pl. ajzā), since discounts were fixed according to the number of unbound sheets bought (1 sheet = 2 juz). 
While wholesale traders usually acquired books directly from the NKP's various sales agencies, retailers and private customers often lived too far away from the big towns to frequent these sites. Large num bers of books were ordered by correspondence and dispatched by book post or rail. Distribution thus heavily relied on the colonial postal and transport system, whose role in the functioning and expansion of the commercial book trade can hardly be overstated. According to an estimate given by Naval Kishore in 1870, the average number of communications 
202 
An Empire of Books 
NKP Classified Catalogue of 1879 
Books on Islam (Urdu) Exegesis Hadith Sunni jurisprudence Shia jurisprudence Miscellaneous religious 
works Books on Hindu Religion (Urdu) Publications of the Office of 
the Kayasth Samacar, 
Allahabad Books in Hindi (in Nagari script) Epics Puranas Vedanta 
Poetry 
Legal Publications Religious disputes Sunni Urdu 
and Shica Nagari 
Ethics and Sufism Kaithi script 
Rare collections of Urdu; Kaithi Mahajani scholarly works 
script 
Geomancy English 
Kulliyāt, divān, qasā'id 
Tazkirah Books of the Education 
Didactic tales in prose Department 
and verse Urdu 
Lexicography Persian 
Medicine Arabic 
Medical dictionaries Sanskrit 
Biographies of saints and Nagari and Kaithi 
prophets English 
Histories of emperors 
Persian grammar Books in Arabic 
Turkish grammar Qur'an in book form and Prosody and rhyme 
in miniature editions 
Textbooks/primers Selections from the Qur'an Hindu religion Exegesis Hadith 
Books in Urdu Jurisprudence 
Textbooks/primers Principles of jurisprudence Grammar and syntax Rhetoric 
Prosody and rhyme Theology 
Calligraphy Inheritance law 
Letter-writing Miscellaneous religious Arithmetic and geometry 
works 
Logic Lexicography 
Histories of prophets History 
History of kings etc. Ethics 
Human medicine Medicine 
Veterinary medicine Philosophy 
Medical dictionaries Literature 
General dictionaries Rhetoric 
Female education Logic 
Ethics and Sufism Religious disputation 
Kulliyāt, divān Grammar and syntax 
Masnavi Books in Persian 
Wāsokht 
Tazkirah Exegesis 
Rare collections Hadith 
Music Jurisprudence 
Astrology Theology 
Tales (prose and Miscellaneous religious 
verse) works 
Music 
Tales, etc. Medicine Astrology Miscellaneous 
Textbooks/primers Books in Sanskrit Grammar, Dharmshastra, 
etc. Astrology (Sanskrit with Urdu transl.) (Sanskrit with Hindi transl.) Books in English Textbooks/primers History 
Tales/Narrative Dictionaries Miscellaneous Various Maps Maps of India Maps of Arabia and the Near 
East Asia, Africa, America Avadh, small and large Maps of the Turco-Russian 
war, etc. 
An Indian Success Story 
203 
TABLE 3.2 The NKP's Sales Network in 1879 
Name of Bookdealer 
Location 
City 
1. Calcutta 2. Calcutta 3. Calcutta 
ta 
4. Calcutta 
5. Calcutta 6. Patna 7. Bombay 
8. Bombay 
Shaikh Vilayat Husain.bookdealer Sundaryapati Maulvi Muhammad Kamil, bookdealer Taltala Bazar Miyam Ahmadullah. bookdealer Wellesley Street No. 9, 
near Madrasa Aliya Shaikh Nasiruddin, bookdealer 
Wellesley Street No. 84, 
Rahmani Press Miyam Rahmatullah. bookdealer Dharmtala Daftaripati Maulvi Abdul Ghaffur, bookdealer Korth ? Qazi Fateh Muhammad and Qazi Salih Muhammad Brothers 
The late Haji Muhammad Ibrahim. Bhendi Bazar bookdealer Mullah Nuruddin, bookdealer 
Bhendi Bazar Headmaster Kayasth Pathshala 
Bahadurganj The Manager. Naval Kishore Press Sarsaiya Ghat Nizami Press 
Patkapur Maulvi Haji Hidayat Yar Khan. 
Chauk Bazar bookdealer Maulvi Haji Ali Yar Khan, bookdealer Katra Manrai Agent, Naval Kishore Press Bookshop Dariba Kalan Miyam Chiraghuddin, bookdealer Kashmiri Bazar Agent, Naval Kishore Press Trubner Company (sic) 
Ludgate Hill 
9. Bombay 10. Allahabad 11. Kanpur 12. Kanpur 13. Moradabad 
14. Bareilly 15. Delhi 16. Lahore 17. Patiala 18. London 
addressed to the NKP each year was an astounding 25,000 letters. In light of this it is no coincidence that the firm's Lucknow warehouse and head office were situated adjacent to the General Post Office.62 
Payment for book orders was strictly in advance. It was effected in cash, by money order, bill of exchange, or cheque. Smaller amounts could also be paid in stamps. Customers were urged to insure and register their cash payments if remitted by mail. They were also asked to abstain from sending telegrams or unstamped letters to the NKP. All 
61 Avadh Akhbar, 19 April 1870, cited in Siddiqi 1980: 50. 
62 Urdu sources generally claim that the post office was established with the express purpose of meeting the NKP's needs. 
204 
An Empire of Books 
communications were to include postal stamps for the firm's reply. Given the surge of letters that reached the firm each year, it proclaimed itself unable to cover the expenses involved in postage. Equally, all dispatch costs were to be met by the customer. 
In including various advertisements for stationary and general merchandise, the 1879 list reveals the full extent and diversity of the NKP's trading activities. As a bookseller, Naval Kishore was also a sta tioner dealing in pens and ink; his firm sold cloth for bookbinding in various colours and different kinds of paper imported from London's famous John Dickinson Company and the German firm of Ullmann, Hirschhorn & Co. Lithographic stones imported from England and types of Nagari founts were advertised alongside popular patent medicines (Fihrist 1879: 122–3). The NKP had been appointed sole distributor for the celebrated medicines' of one Dr De Roos, which were extensively advertised in Avadh Akhbār and sold exclusively on the premises of the press. More surprisingly, Naval Kishore also acted as a broker for several Lucknow-based general merchants. Advertised in the 1879 catalogue was a great variety of general merchandise, including household ware, perfume, drapery, and haberdashery. All these items could be ordered through the NKP's Lucknow agents against remittance of advance payment in cash and a brokerage fee. With brokerage rates ranging from 1 anna per rupee for small orders of less than Rs 100 to half an anna per rupee for orders valued at Rs 250 to 1000, and to a standard two per cent for bulk orders exceeding Rs 1000, the publisher had opened up another attractive sideline for himself (Fihrist 1879: 3). 
By the 1880s the firm apparently boasted a substantial clientele of European customers. According to the testimony of John Hurst, in the mid-1880s Munshi Naval Kishore issued a comprehensive English version of his catalogue, which listed almost 2500 titles on more than eighty-eight pages and was supplemented by an alphabetical index of another twenty pages. Hurst presumed it to be the first time Kishore has given full publicity to the Anglo-Indian world of the issues from his press' (Hurst 1887: 354). While I could not trace this English catalogue, its existence raises the question of the extent of British expatriate and metropolitan consumption of oriental literature. 
Diversity was key to commercial publishing. Consistent with its other marketing practices, the NKP tried to induce readers to buy books through a variegated selection of titles that would appeal to individual preferences. Religious classics were issued in various formats, suiting the financial means and intellectual demands of an increasingly heterogeneous reader ship. The Holy Qur'an, for example, was made available in as many as 
An Indian Success Story 
205 
19 different editions, meant to suit every pocket and every degree of theological sophistication. A Hindi classic such as the Rāmāyan of Tulsi das was offered in plain and illustrated, hardcover (kitabnumā) and paperback (patrānumā) editions, with or without annotations. The firm's abridged and illustrated pocket Ramīvān as well as its 1882 edition in "very large letters', designed especially for children and the elderly, were proudly advertised as the only editions of their kind. A publisher's notice in the large-letter Rāmāvan extolled the efforts of its calligrapher Pandit Murlidhar, a Gujarati Brahmin of Agra, who was said to have spent several years of intense labour in copying out the text in large and pleasant letters. so that the aged devotees of Hari, 100, could read il without difficulty. To be able to react to the variegated demands of the marketplace had indeed become the hallmark of a successful publisher. 
3.5 Author-Publisher Relations The four great figures in the creation of the nineteenth-century Urdu novel-Nazir Ahmad, Ratan Nath 'Sarshar'. Abdul Halim Sharar, and Hadi Ali Rusva—were each in one way or the other connected with the House of Naval Kishore. Nazir Ahmad published his masterpiece Mira al-Carūs with the NKP. Ratan Nath 'Sarshar' served in the firm's Trans lation Department and as an editor of Avadh Akhbar, in which his novel Fasāna-e Azād was first serialized to wide popular acclaim. Abdul Halim Sharar also served on the paper's editorial board. Rusva, in 1899, immortalized the NKP in his celebrated tale of a Lucknow courtesan, Umrao Jān Adā. 
As noted earlier, in the absence of publisher's records frustratingly little is known about Naval Kishore's dealings with writers, the agree ments he entered into with contemporary authors, and the terms of the contracts. Information on this fundamental aspect of the publishers activities is largely confined to some particularly famous cases and only comes piecemeal. For the time being, it cannot even be said what kind of author-publisher contract was most commonly in use at the House of Naval Kishore. If metropolitan models are a measure to go by, the general practice among authors and publishers in the latter half of the nineteenth century was to enter into one of the following forms of agreement: 
(a) Outright sale of copyright to the publisher for an agreed amour (b) Assignment of copyright for one edition or for a specified period, al 
which it reverted to the author (c) Profit-sharing, usually in the form of a half-profit arrangement (d) Payment of royalty to author on sales (e) Publication at author's expense and risk. (Allen 1897: 17)Tror 
206 
An Empire of Books 
The last form, which implied the least risk for the publisher—not even royalties were payable and the author bore all expenses— was usually limited to new authors, whose commercial value was unpredictable. Outright sale of copyright was one of the simplest forms of contract: in England it had remained the most common form throughout the eighteenth century and well into the nineteenth (Patten 1978: 22).63 In the absence of original contracts, our principal source of information for the period up to 1880 is a list of NKP copyrights included in the firm's 1879 book catalogue (Table 3.3). It contains 125 titles, plus an extra 25 copyrights of textbooks. Since however, the list is incomplete, the actual number of copyrights acquired by the firm over time must have been higher. Over one-third of the copyrights related to the firm's own translations, which usually involved high expenses and had to be properly safeguarded against piracy. A good proportion of original works registered in Naval Kishore's name were by authors employed by the NKP, others were by minor authors. By contrast, but for a few exceptions, famous names in contemporary Urdu or Hindi literature are conspicuously absent from the list. This may be taken as an indication that established authors of re pute were reluctant to part with their copyrights and instead opted for some other form of contract. It is significant that, by this time, Naval Kishore had the collected poetry (kulliyāt, dīvān) of over fifty Urdu poets on his list, including some famous contemporary names such as Ghalib, Bahadur Shah 'Zafar', and Abdul Ghafur Khan 'Nassakh'. Yet the NKP only owned four copyrights, namely that of the divans of Nassakh and of three minor Lucknow poets, Amir, Wasti, and Ashiq. 
Perhaps the earliest known instance of an eminent Urdu literary figure ceding his copyright to the NKP is that of Mirza Rajab Ali Beg 'Sururi (1787–1867), the author of the famous prose romance Fasāna-e Cajā'ib (A Tale of Wonders) and himself a native of Lucknow. Sometime in the 1860s, during what must have been one of his many episodes of financial distress, Rajab Ali Beg sold the copyright of his collected letters Insha e Surūr and of Fasāna-e 'ajā'ib, by then a decidedly popular work, to Naval Kishore. A second prominent name is that of the poet, literary critic and tazkirah writer Abdul Ghafur Khan 'Nassakh' (1834-89), a leading representative of the Bengali Muslim intelligentsia, who is some times called the doyen of Urdu poetry in Bengal. Precisely why Nassakh chose to publish with Naval Kishore and sell him the copyright of his collected Urdu poetry is not known, but can certainly be taken as an 
63 See ibid.: 22-7 for other common forms of contracts. 
An Indian Success Story 
207 
TABLE 3.3 Copyrights Owned by the NKP in 187964 
No. Title of Copyrighted Work 
Author/Translator 
Savvid Ghulam Haidar Maulvi Abdul Qayyum Maulvi M. Aman al-Haq Maulvi Fakhruddin, trs. 
Mullah Majruddin Khani 
Abdul Ali Muhammad 'Bahr al-(Ulum' 
1 Sharh-e Ta'zirat-e Hind 2 Makhzan al-nazair 3 Aman al-lughār 4 Tafsir-e Qadiri. Urdu irs. of 
Tafsir-e Husaini 5 Majma'ah-e aurad mustandah 
Muhashsha-e karistan 6 Sharh-e Masnavi-e Maulāna-e Rum 7 Hāshia-e kitāb-e 1 jä:-e khusrani 8 Inshā-e asrūr-e frimesan 9 Marla al-Culum va Makhzan 
al-fanūn 10 Sharh-e Kulliyāt-e khäqani 11 Masnavi Sumbulistan 12 Farhang-e Sikandarnāma 13 Insha-e Safdari 
Wajid Ali Khan 
Muhammad Sadiq Ali 
Mir Ibn Hasan Mufti Ghulam Safdar 
Urdu Titles 
Debi Parshad Rajab Ali Beg 'Surur' 
14 15 16 17 
Nazm-e parvin Inshā-e Surür Shams al-zuha Futūḥāt-e Wāqidi, Urdu trs. 
Maulvi Basharat Ali Khan and Sayyid Mehdi Husain, trs. Hakim Amanat Ali, trs. 
18 
20 21 22 23 
Tazkirat al-khulafā manzum, verse trs. of Futūḥāt-e Wāqidi Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, Urdu trs. Şaulat-e Afghāni Futūḥāt-e Hind Tarikh-e ţilism-e Hind Tārīkh-e Cahdnāmajāt va iqrārnāmajāt, Urdu trs. Government Gazetteers, 7 vols 
Pandit Ajodhya Parshad and Pandit Kanhaiyalal, trs. Haji Muhammad Zardar Khan 
Inayat Husain Totaram 'Shayan', trs. Pandit Kanhaiyalal, trs. 
24 
64 Not including copyrights of school textbooks. 
208 
An Empire of Books 
TABLE 3.3 (contd.) 
No. Title of Copyrighted Work 
Author/Translator 
25 Tārikh-e Bonapārt Napolyan, 
Urdu trs. 26 Tārīkh-e baghāvat-e Hind, Urdu trs. Pandit Kanhaiyalal, trs, 27 Muqaddama-e kamishan Baroda, Pandit Pyarelal, trs. 
Urdu and Hindi trs. 28 Tārikh-e rājparsasti 
Debi Parshad, trs. 29 Mirāt al-salātin, Urdu trs. of Gokul Parshad, trs. 
Siyar al-muta'akhkhirin 30 Mukhtasar-e Sair-e gulshan-e Hind Baburam, ra'is of Kanpur 31 Bahāristān also called Gulzārshāhi Ghulam Sarvar Lahori 32 Kārnāma navā”ın 
Debi Parshad 33 Wācióāt-e panj-hazār sālah Radhelal, ra'is of Mohan 34 Makhzan-e hikmat 
Ghulam Sarvar Lahori 35 Tārikh-e makhzan-e Panjāb Ghulam Sarvar Lahori 36 Sarod-e ghaibi 
Sayyid Muhammad Ali Choya 37 Ilāj al-ghurrabā, Urdu trs. 
Ghulam Imam 38 Tibb-e Akbar, Urdu trs. 
Hakim Muhammad Husain Nanautawi, trs. Qarābādin-e Shifā'i, Urdu trs. Hakim Muhammad Hadi Husain Khan, trs. 40 Qarābādin-e Zakā’i, Urdu trs. Hakim Muhammad Hadi Husain Khan, trs. 41 Mujarrabāt-e Akbari, Urdu trs. Hakim Vajid Ali Mohani, trs. 42 Muālajāt-e Ihsāni 
Hakim Ihsan Ali 43 Murraqabāt-e lḥsāni 
Hakim Ihsan Ali 44 Ilāj-e Iḥsāni 
Hakim Ihsan Ali 45 Maqālāt-e Iḥsāni 
Hakim Ihsan Ali Ilaj al-amrāz 
Hakim Muhammad Hadi Husain Khan, trs. 47 Iksir al-qulūb, Urdu trs. of 
Hakim Muhammad Nur Karim, trs. Mufarriḥ al-qulüb Kimiyā-e Canāşirī, Urdu trs. of Hakim Muhammad Nur Karim, trs Qārabādīn-e Qadiri Majma al-bahrain tibb-e yūnāni Hakim Muhammad Haidar Khan 
va angrezi Zakhīrah-e khvarāzmshāhi, Hakim Muhammad Hadi Husain Khan, trs. 
Urdu trs. 51 Amritsāgar, Urdu trs. 
Pandit Pyarelal, trs. 52 Makhzan al-adviyah, Urdu trs. Hakim Muhammad Nur Karim, trs. 53 Lughāt-e Sarvari 
Ghulam Sarvar Lahori 
48 kr 
An Indian Success Story 
209 
TABLE 3.3 (conid.) 
No. Title of Copyrighted Work 
Author/Translator 
54 Arbae Canāsir 55 Qissa-e gulāb cameli 56 Nikār-e Ihsan 57 Tahzib-e Ihsani 58 Akhlāg-e Sarvari 59 Rahbar-e rāh-e haqq 60 Kulliyāt-e Nassakh 61 Divān-e Amir 62 Divān-e Wästi 63 Divan-e Ashiq 64 Masnavi Sa dain 65 Masnavi Mirāt al-mashriqam 66 Majmūľah-e wāsokhtha 67 Sarāpā-e sukhan 
Tazkirah-e Gulshan naghme 
Candalib 69 Ajā'ib al-makhlūgāt, Urdu irs. 70 Matla' al-Kulüm va Makhzan 
al-funūn, Urdu trs. 71 Matla' al-mujā'ib, Urdu trs. of 
Ma'lūmāt al-'āfaq 72 Hirz-e Suleimāni 73 Nāfa -e khalā'iq 74 Tilism-e ruhani 75 Indarjāl, Urdu trs. 76 Qānūn-e sitar 77 Ghuncah-e rug 
Muhammad Nasir Ali Raja Shiva Prasad Hakim Ihsan Ali Hakim Ihsan Ali Ghulam Sarvar Lahori Muhammad Zardar Khan 
Abdul Ghafur Khan Nassakh' Amir Ahmad Amir' Sayyid Farl Rasul Khan Wasti Pandit Kanhaiyalal 'Ashiq Anvar Husain Taslim Hakim Inayat Husain Dehlavi (collection of wasokhi) Sayyid Muhsin Ali (comp.) Hakim Qutbuddin Khan Dehlavi 
68 
Gokul Parshad, trs. Zain al-Abidin, Irs. 
Mehdi Ali Khan, Irs. 
Khvaja Ashraf Ali Muhammad Zardar Khan Maulvi Husain Ahmad Lala Svamidayal. trs. Sayyid Safdar Husain Khan Nizam ud Daula Navab Muhammad Mardan Ali Khan 
Totaram Shayan', trs. Totaram Shayan Rajah Ali Beg Sururi Sayyid Fakhruddin Husain Sukhan' Maulvi Hamid Ali Shevan Muhammad Husain Jah Kumvar Jagat Singh, trs. 
78 Alif-Laila, Urdu trs. 79 Alif-Laila mangum 80 Fasāna-e 'ajā'ib 81 Sarosh-e Sukhan 82 Tilism-e hairat 83 Tilism-e fazāhat 84 Wagai-e rājkumār, Urdu trs. of 
Durgeshnandini 85 Fasāna-e ma qaul 
Sayyid Ghulam Haidar Khan 
210 
An Empire of Books 
TABLE 3.3 (contd.) 
No. Title of Copyrighted Work 
Author/Translator 
86 87 88 89 90 91 
A'in-e Cuqūl Jāda-e taskhir Jogannāma Qissa maqtul jafā Sikandarnāma, Urdu trs. Nāla-e Manzūr manzūm Masnavi bāgh-e Cāshiq Iksir-e hidāyat, Urdu trs. of Kimiyā-e sa ādat Durr-e mukhtār, Urdu trs. 
Sayyid Ghulam Haidar Khan Navab Muhammad Haidar Ali Khan Batin Akbarabadi Muhammad Amiruddin Maulvi Haidar Ali Khan Bilgrami, trs. Maulvi Sayyid Manzur Ahmad Pandit Kanhaiyalal 'Ashiq Fakhruddin 'Fakhr', trs. 
93 
94 
Muhammad Khurram Ali and Muhammad Ahsan Nanautawi, trs. Muhammad Sujan Khan, trs. Maulvi Vahiduddin Muhammad Rizvi Muhammad Zahiruddin Bilgrami Maulvi Basharat Ali Khan, trs. 
Maulvi Munir, trs. 
Ghulam Sarvar Lahori Khvaja Abdul Majid, trs. 
Muhammad Zahiruddin Bilgrami Ghulam Hasnain `Allamah Kinturi, trs. 
95 Kanz al-daqā'iq, Urdu trs. 96 Davāzdah majlis 97 Asrar-e Karbalā 98 Mazāq al-'ārifin, Urdu trs. of 
Ihya Culüm al-din 99 Sirāj al-sālikin, Urdu trs. of 
Minhāj al-Cābidin 100 Guldasta-e karāmat 101 Minhāj al-nubūwat, Urdu trs, of 
Mādārij al-nubūwat 102 Tazkirat al-shohrā manzūm 103 Asrar-e ghaflat 104 Qānūn-e Shaikh bū Ali Sinā, 
Urdu trs. 105 Sharh-e qānūn-e mu āhada, 
Urdu trs. of Act IX of 1872 106 Sukhsāgar, Urdu trs. 107 Bhāgvat mangūm-e Khushtar 
Lakhnavi 108 Rāmāyan manzūm-e Khushtar 109 Mahābhārat manzūm 110 Rāmāyan manzüm 111 Premsāgar, Urdu trs. 112 Bhaktamāl 113 Bahār-e Bindrāban 114 Samar-e bahār-e Bindrāban 115 Gyānsāgar 116 Kāyasthdharmdarpan 
Muhammad Abdul Qayyum Khan, trs. 
Makkhanlal Jagannath Sahai Khushtar' 
Jagannath Sahai Khushtar' Totaram 'Shayan Shankardayal 'Farhat' Lala Svamidayal, trs. Raja Pratap Singh Acarya Bindraban Acarya Bindraban Girdhari Lal Sahranpuri Ramcaran 
An Indian Success Story 
211 
TABLE 3.3 (contd.) 
No. Title of Copyrighted Work 
Author/Translator 
117 Yogavāsistha. Hindi irs. 118 Hātim Tai, Hindi trs. 119 Alif Laila, Hindi trs. 120 Amrtsägar, Hindi trs. 121 Amarkos, Hindi trs. 122 Vratārk, Hindi trs. 123 Dāstānse Amir Hamza. Hindi its. 124 Stri darpan 125 Fasāna-e 'ajā'ib, Hindi trs, 
Pandit Kanhaiyalal. trs. Jivanram Jat, trs. Pandit Pyarelal, trs. Pandit Kalicaran, Irs. Mahesh Datt Shukla, trs, Mahesh Dari Shukla, trs. Pandit Kalicaran, Irs. Madhav Prasad 
Pandit Ramratan Vajpeyi, trs. 
SOURCE: Fihrist 1879. 
indication of the publisher's widespread reputation in Urdu literature which reached as far as Bengal. The two men knew each other personally: Nassakh, a Deputy Magistrate in the British administrative service, had met Naval Kishore during a visit to Lucknow in 1867.65 The most im portant work included in the Kullivāt-e Nassākh (*1874) was Sukhan-e shu'arā (Discourse of the Poets), a large anthology of almost 900 poets, compiled by the poet over a period of twelve years and completed in 1864–5. The publication in 1874 of this understudied work was a considerable step forward in establishing the canon of contemporary Urdu poets. Garcin de Tassy deemed it of such importance that he re printed the full list of poets in an appendix to his Discours of 1876.66 
Perhaps one of the best sources on author-publisher relations in nineteenth-century Urdu literature, which also offers some insight into what could go wrong in seeing a work into print, is the extensive correspondence of Mirza Asadullah Khan Ghalib (1797-1869). While most of the original correspondence between Naval Kishore and Ghalib 
is lost, the poet's letters to other correspondents allow us to reconstruct at least some aspects of their relationship. Even if Ghalib's case is special, involving as it did the most prominent of contemporary Urdu poets, some generalizations may be drawn from it regarding the way in which Naval Kishore interacted with his authors. 
By the time Ghalib and Naval Kishore established personal contact in the early 1860s, the great poet had undergone various troublesome 
65 Nassakh mentions his acquaintance with the publisher in his autobiography, Khudnavisht savānih-e hayāt-e Nassakh (Abdus Subhan 1986: 96). 
66 For a discussion of important Urdu tazkirahs of the nineteenth century, see Pritchett 2003. 
212 
An Empire of Books 
experiences in his dealings with editors and publishers, which had left him wary. The publication of his Persian prose work Panj āhang had been disappointing. Of the two printed versions, Ghalib found one de fective and the other abounding in mistakes. As he complained to a friend: “The copyist made "corrections" in my prose of which only my heart can tell. Were I to tell you that no line is free of mistakes, I should be pitching it too high. But I can say without exaggeration that no page is free of mistakes' (Russell/Islam 1994: 266). The ensuing publication of his Urdu divan turned out to be even more vexing, involving a series of mishaps. Initially, Ghalib had somewhat rashly entrusted the manus cript to a nondescript publisher of Meerut and had experienced great difficulty in retrieving it. 67 Having wrested the divan 'from the hands of that unjust usurper', he decided to commit it to the press of his friend Munshi Shivnarayan at Agra, but for some reason changed his mind and instead gave it to the Delhi-based Ahmadi Press-a mistake he was soon to regret. 
Meanwhile, in early 1860 Naval Kishore approached Ghalib regarding publication of his collected Persian works. While the publisher's initial letter has not survived, it is significant to note that it was he who took the initiative in contacting the poet, and not vice versa. Ghalib replied on 18 July 1860, in a letter written in Persian, indicating that his three published Persian prose works-Panj āhang, Mihr-e nīmrūz, and Dastanbū—were available for reprint. He also promised to supply the publisher with a few recently composed Persian ghazals. As a subsequent letter to Nawab Ziyauddin Ahmad Khan reveals, Naval Kishore's suggestion had put the poet in a spot, for he was not in possession of a single manuscript of his Persian poems and had to urge his correspondent to part with his copy, so that it could be forwarded to the publisher. Throughout 1861, negotiations for having the Persian verse printed were under way. What may have finally convinced Ghalib to turn away from his previous publishers and entrust the Persian Kulliyāt to the upcoming Lucknow publisher was his dismay at receiving an utterly defective volume of his Urdu divan, newly released from the Ahmadi Press in August 1861. Ghalib was appalled and seems to have instantly regretted not having entrusted his divan, too, to the NKP. 'Alas!' he wrote to a friend. When the Lucknow press prints a man's diwan, it raises him to heaven. The 
67 On 11 June 1860 Ghalib wrote to a friend: “That fellow who asked me for my Divān is not even an acquaintance. ... He is not a human being but a ghost, a demon! Nasty and foul!... So. I am now asking him to return my Divān. He refuses to give it back. I hope to God that I can retrieve it. You too pray' (Rahbar 1987: 237). 
An Indian Success Story 
213 
calligraphy is so good that every word shines radiant! May Delhi and its water and its press be accursed! 08 Meanwhile, he considered his ties with Naval Kishore close and amicable enough to commend his unemp loyed shāgird Mir Ghulam Hasnain Qadri Bilgrami to the publisher. Armed with Ghalib's letter of introduction. Qadr Bilgrami set out for Lucknow and was promptly given employment in the firm's editorial office. (He was to remain with the NKP for some time. despite his repeated complaints to Ghalib about his low salary.) 
By the beginning of 1862, the manuscript of Ghalib's collected Persian verse was lying with the NKP. Moreover, the poet had decided to entrust the firm with the publication of his Qarie Burhān, a sharply worded critique of the Persian dictionary Burhan-e qaris, which was to spark ort a fierce controversy on publication (see Chapter 5). For a young publisher like Naval Kishore it was a matter of great prestige to have a nerary figure of Ghalib's standing on his list. The announcement of the two forthcoming titles was given due prominence on the front-page ot Avaan Akhbār of 1 January 1862. Advance subscriptions for the Kullivat were called for, offering readers a special subscription rate of Rs 3, ast, as against the later sales price of Rs 5.0 Qārise Burhān was released in March 1862. ‘The printing of Qāte i Burhan is finished, and I have receive one copy which is the author's right', Ghalib informed his friend Alai on 19 June 1862. 'Other volumes I have ordered as a customer and the 
them. I am trying to raise the money. If I manage it, I'll send it on (Russell/Islam 1994: 272). The order referred to by Ghalib involved fifty copies of the Qātie Burhān which he meant to distribute among his friends and well-wishers. The money seems to have come forward soon afterwards, for in the same month Ghalib made it known that the entire stock of the bound copies of Qāti - Burhān' was now in his possession and that he had purchased it according to the terms of his contract (Rahbar 1987: 252). 
Things went less smoothly with the Persian Kullivāt which, although announced at the beginning of the year, was not forthcoming. On 3 May 1862 Ghalib wrote to Qadr Bilgramito enquire about the status of priming and raise a number of questions concerning the insertion of the customary odes and chronograms. Apparently Ghalib had been requested to compose 
68 For a full wording of the letter in which Ghalib complains bitterly in sloppiness of both copyist and publisher, see Russell/Islam 1994: 259. 
69 The announcement for Kulliyat was in Urdu, that of Oāti -e Burhan Both are reprinted in Nagwi 1980: 116–17. 
rsian. 
214 
An Empire of Books 
the customary chronogram indicating the date of printing of his Kulliyāt, for in a subsequent letter to Qadr Bilgrami he refused to comply, main taining that it could be done by the people at the press'. From Qadr Bilgrami's reply he learnt that the printing of the Kulliyāt had been post poned: the book's calligrapher had gone on leave and, to make matters worse, its proofreader Maulvi Hadi Ali had been taken seriously ill. Ghalib was particularly impatient to see his collected Persian verse in print, since his own health at the time was rapidly deteriorating. He ex pressed his growing anxiety in June 1862: I cannot see the printing of the collected verse being finished during my life-time' (Russell/Islam 1994: 272). With the Kulliyāt's publication delayed by another year, his patience was put to the test. The volume was at last ready in June 1863. 
It was only in December 1863, when Naval Kishore called on Ghalib during a visit to Delhi, that the two men came face to face for the first time. The meeting left a vivid impression on Ghalib, who seems to have been quite taken by the good looks and agreeable manners of his junior contemporary. Moreover, negotiations with the publisher had turned out in Ghalib's favour. On 3 December 1863 he reported to Ala'i: 
My kind and considerate benefactor, that man of kindness incarnate, Munshi Naval Kishor came by the mail. He met me, and your uncle, and your cousin Shihab ud Din Khan. The Creator bestowed upon him the beauty of Venus and the qualities of Jupiter. He is himself the conjunction of two auspicious stars. I hadn't said anything to you, and accepted that ten copies of [my Persian collected verse cost fifty rupees. But now when I mentioned it to him he agreed to accept the price that had originally been advertised in the newspaper-three rupees, four annas per copy. At this rate ten copies come to thirty-two rupees, eight annas, and thirty-two rupees, eight annas is what you are to pay. In all, sixty-five rupees will have to be sent to the Avadh Akhbar Press. I shall be ordering on the 10th or 11th of December this month. I'll give the thirty-two rupees eight annas to Ali Husain Khan, or I'll send it to Lucknow—whichever you say (Russell/Islam 1994: 293 4). 
The passage suggests that Ghalib had sold the copyright of his Kulliyāt to the NKP. As we have seen, however, there is no mention of it in the list of copyright works included in the 1879 catalogue. 
Naval Kishore published two more works by Ghalib during the poet's lifetime, notably a small booklet entitled Du ā-e subah ma tarjuma-e nasr va tarjuma-e manzūm (*1867), containing Urdu prose and verse renderings of the Islamic morning prayer, and the Kulliyāt-e nasr-e Ghālih (*1868), in which Ghalib's Persian prose works were for the first time 
215 
An Indian Success Story 
assembled in one volume. Further titles followed after the poet's death, including reprints of his collected letters, Ūd-e Hindi (* 1874), and the aforementioned Urdu Divān (*1877). The latter was reprinted from the Nizami Press edition, which again raises the question of copyright. 
Among Ghalib's pupils, a poet who followed his great master in choos ing to publish with the NKP was Nawab Mardan Ali Khan 'Ra'na (d. 1879), a ra'is of Muradabad. Ra'na, who also used the pen name "Nizam', was a prolific poel and historian in Persian and Urdu. Up to 1858 he was employed in the Punjab Revenue Department. He became associated with the NKP in the early 1860s as a frequent contributor to Avadh Akhbar. In 1867 he went to Marwar, where he rose to the position of prime minister and became a key figure in cultivating Persian and Urdu literature in the princely state. Naval Kishore published most on his works, including Ghuncah-e rág (*1863), Navā-e gharib (* 1863), Zabt-e ishq (*1864), and Muhr-e nubūn'at (*1872). A volume of his collected poetry, Kullivāt-e Nigām, followed in 1875.7! On occasion, Mardan Ali Khan supplied the publisher with rare manuscripts from his private library, the most famous being a manuscript of the Divan of Shan Wali Allah Gujarati (1667-1707/8), of which a lithographed edition was published from Lucknow in 1878. 
How little is known about author-publisher contracts and the puo lishing history of even the most famous works of nineteenth-century Urdu literature is exemplified by the case of Maulvi Nazir Ahmad (1831-- 
back to the year 1861, when he was sent to Lucknow to oversee the print ing of his Urdu translation of the Indian Penal Code. As Deputy Inspector of Schools, he remained closely associated with the press during the following years. Naval Kishore at the time issued several of his minor writings, including a translation of a British official's account of the 1857 uprising entitled Musa'ib-e ghadr (The Tribulations of the Rebellion, *1863), which Nazir Ahmad had undertaken at the instance of his superior in the education department, Shiva Prasad (Russell 1992: 114). In later years, the author apparently felt quite embarrassed about his involvement in publicizing this particular work, for he never mentioned it in his writ ings. Left to him, Musõib-e ghadr probably would not have seen a second edition. However, the copyright of the text lay with Naval Kishore, w 
70 The 1868 lithographed edition comprised 212 pages and was pri copies. An enlarged version of 422 pages was issued in 1100 copies 
7 Ra‘na also authored a local history entitled Tärikh-e Marwār. Further details in Sh. A. Khan 1981: 59: Avadh Akhbar, 19 April 1870. cited in Nurani 19216 
An Empire of Books 
can hardly be blamed for trying to cash in on the author's fame when he brought out a second edition in 1896 (Siddiqi 1971: 209). 
The year 1869 saw the publication of Nazir Ahmad's famous didactic tale Mirāt al-'arūs (The Bride's Mirror) for which he received a prize of Rs 1000 under the Allahabad Government Gazette Notification. Mirāt al-'arūs has rightly been called the first bestseller in Urdu fiction. Three years after its release, it had already sold in almost 10,000 copies. 72 By 1888 the novel had been translated into various languages and had sold over 100,000 copies.73 When Mirāt al-'arūs was first brought to official notice in 1869, the government at once ordered 2000 copies with a view to including it in the school syllabus. The author was permitted to retain the copyright and make suitable arrangements on his own part for printing it' (Ahmad 2001: 203). Whether it was by Nazir Ahmad's own choice or by order of the educational authorities that the printing commission went to Naval Kishore, cannot be said. Mirāt al-Carūs was first released in December 1869 in a lithographed edition. The print run was 3100 copies, priced at twelve annas each. The 1879 NKP catalogue carried an entry to the effect that the title had been registered by its author, which however does not reveal anything about the precise terms of the agreement reached between author and publisher. Evidence suggests that Nazir Ahmad may have either sold the copyright to the firm or given it on lease, for the NKP continued to reprint the text, issuing a seventh edition of 15,000 copies in 1894. This, in turn, would mean that other editions of Mirāt al-Carūs such as the one issued from the Qaisari Press of Bareilly in 1880 were pirated. Indeed, it may safely be assumed that due to their enormous popularity Mirāt al-Carūs as well as Nazir Ahmad's subsequent novels were subject to large-scale piracy. 
For the printing of these subsequent works Nazir Ahmad did not re main with the NKP. Meanwhile transferred to Kanpur, he gave the contract for Banāt an-na'sh (The Daughters of the Bier, 1872), the sequel to Mirāt al-Carūs, to the local Nizami Press. Two years later his masterpiece Taubat an-Nașūḥ (The Repentance of Nasuh) was issued from the Mufid e Am Press at Agra in a first lithographed edition of 1600 copies. 74 The existence of simultaneous reprints of Taubat an-Nasūh from the Nizami Press and the Mufid-e Am Press in 1879, both bearing copyright notices, 
- Banāt an-na(sh (Agra: Mufid-e Am Press 1879), preface. 
Russell 1992: 265. Further details in ibid.: 92-4 and Naim 1984. See also the afterword by Pritchett in Ahmad 2001: 204-21. 
74 RPIR 1875: 82. 
An Indian Success Story 
217 
suggest that the author had ceded his copyright to the government, which then divided the printing work among various presses. However, by the time the fourth edition of Taubat an-Nasuh came out in 1882 (2000 copies), Naval Kishore had acquired the copyright of the text. This is borne out by a publisher's notice included in the twelfth NKP edition of 1914, to the effect that the fourth and all subsequent editions of the novel had been issued from the NKP with the author's permission." 
From 1877 to 1884 Nazir Ahmad served in the princely state of Hyde rabad. Upon his return to Delhi in 1884, he resumed his writing and in the following year completed Muhsinār: Fasāna-e Mubtala (The Story of Mubtala, literally an afflicted person), in which he dealt with the evils of polygamy. For its publication he returned to Naval Kishore, who issued an appallingly slovenly edition of 600 copies in 1887. Finding both the calligraphy and printing defective, Nazir Ahmad did not renew the contract, but decided to publish a fresh edition under his own super vision. By this time he seems to have been thoroughly exasperated by the various badly executed editions of his work, for in 1889 he decided to abandon his earlier publishers and enter into an exclusive contract with the Delhi-based Ansari Press. Whether the author's discontent stem med from licensed editions or from cheap pirated copies of his wo remains open. It also remains a mystery how, despite the existing copy right contract with the NKP. an edition of Taubat an-Nasūh could be issued from the Ansari Press in 1889 with the author's consent. In its preface Nazir Ahmad made the following statement: 
For some time I have been observing with much gratitude and joy that all classes of readers appreciate my books much more than is their due. At the same time I am deeply afflicted by the fact that the faults in composition, the badly executed calligraphy, the poor quality of the paper and the launy printing have generated general discontent. It was for lack of opportunity, nay out of carelessness, that I have not paid attention to this before. Now I have made up my mind that I will no longer allow my books to be spoilt. Therefore after amendment and revision I have started to have all my books registered afresh and published through the good offices of the Ansari Press of Maulvi Talattuf Husain Sahib in Delhi. According to my wishes Maulvi Talattuf Husain Sahib has entered into a special agreement with Muhammad Nazir Husain Sahib, bookseller. that no person whosoever and under no circumstances shall attempt to print my books or have them 
75 Taubat an-Nasuh, 12th ed. (Lucknow: NKP 1914), publisher's notice. Khan 1979: 311. 
218 
An Empire of Books 
printed, otherwise he will be liable to pay both damages and a fine. And whosoever wants to deal in [my] books should deal with Muhammad Nazir Husain, bookseller, Greater Dariba, Delhi.76 
Authors, as Nazir Ahmad's case shows, were flexible in choosing their publishers, and prompt in dismissing them. Unlike today, few authors at the time identified with a particular firm. The most pressing questions, however, are left unanswered: who made the profit from Nazir Ahmad's books which sold in tens of thousands? How much of the share went to the publisher, and how much to the author? 
Next to Nazir Ahmad, the only other famous author of modern prose fiction on Naval Kishore's list was Pandit Ratan Nath Dar, poetically surnamed 'Sarshar' (1846-1902). Sarshar belonged to a family of Kash miri Brahmins of Lucknow. He joined the press as editor of Avadh Akhbar in 1878, Naval Kishore having successfully lured him away from the rival Avadh Punch. Soon afterwards, Sarshar's famous novel Fasāna e Azād (Azad's tale) was serialized in Avadh Akhbār to wide popular acclaim. He resigned from his job as editor in 1880 but remained attached to the NKP into the 1890s. His association with the House of Naval Kishore, with whom he published several more novels, will be outlined in more detail in Chapter 6. 
Even for a publisher of Naval Kishore's standing, negotiations with authors were not always successful. When he approached Lucknow's celebrated marsiya poet Mir Babar Ali Anis (1802-74) with the suggestion of publishing his collected poetry, his request was declined. Although the two men were personally acquainted and Anis might have materially profited from seeing his elegies promoted by a reputed local publishing house, he refused for some reason to consign his compositions to print. Only a few marsiyas appeared in Avadh Akhbar. It was only after the poet's death in 1874 that Naval Kishore could proceed with his project. He lost no time in assigning the task of collecting whatever marsiyas by Anis could be found to Maulvi Tassaduq Husain, who had recently joined his team of editors. The task was not an easy one, for the poet's manuscripts were scattered in the homes and private collections of Urdu literati in Lucknow and beyond. Tassadug Husain's painstaking efforts resulted in a printed collection of 118 elegies entitled Marsiyahā e Amīr Anis (*1877). Had it not been for the publisher's perseverance, many of them would have been lost to posterity. By contrast, it required 
• Cited in Khan 1979: 312-13. Strangely, the accompanying signature of Nazir Ahmad bears the date 1873, which must be a misprint. 
An Indian Success Story 
219 
no effort on Naval Kishore's part to acquire the collection of Lucknow's second great marsiva poet. Mirza Salamat Ali Dabir (1803-75). Following Dabir's death, his son Mirza Muhammad Auj' personally took his father's manuscripts to the publisher. The collection, including 78 marsiyas in two volumes, duly appeared in 1876." 
Among less known authors, Mufti Ghulam Sarvar of Lahore formed a long-standing alliance with the NKP. A descendant of the great Sufi Shaikh Baha'uddin Zakaria of Multan, Ghulam Sarvar was a highly reputed scholar and a prolific author of religious, historiographical, and lexicographical works in Persian and Urdu. His connections with the NKP can be traced back to 1875, when he offered the copyright of his dictionary Lughāt-e Sarvari (also known as Zubdat al-lughar) to Naval Kishore. Once the deal was done, the publisher sent for corrected proofs from his Lahore agency and had the work published in March 1877. At this time, author and publisher seem to have entered into an exclusive contract. Over the following years Ghulam Sarvar published a large number of works with Naval Kishore, including three historiographical titles (Tārīkh-e makhzan-e Panjāb. Bahāristān-e tārikh, and the Persian Ganjinah-e Sarvari, all * 1877), various collections of religious poetry (Na't-e Sarvarī, *1878: Guldasta-e karāmat, *1880 and Tuhfar-e Sarvari, *1881), and two works on ethics (Akhlāq-e Sarvari and Gulshan-e Sarvari; *1878). Fifteen years later, Ghulam Sarvar still remained loyal to the NKP and commissioned the firm with the publication of his second lexicographical work Jāmi al-lughāt-e Urdū (*1892), an advanced dic tionary containing idioms from science and medicine.78 
While over time Naval Kishore built up a reputation as a major pub lisher in Hindi, prominent contemporary Hindi authors are conspicuously absent from his list. The reasons for this may lie in competition and copyright laws, as will be discussed in Chapter 7. The educationist Raja Shiva Prasad of Benares stands out as the only renowned figure in H writing who published several works with Naval Kishore. Shiva Prasad was a long-time associate of the NKP, having closely collaborated with it while Inspector of Schools in the 1860s and 1870s. The two men also shared common political views and worked side by side in the anti Congress movement. It is no surprise then that in the 1880s Shiva Prasad chose to cede the copyright of most of his Hindi and Urdu works, including 
77 See LLH 1876: 25 for a reproduction of the publication notice carried i Akhbar of 7 April 1876. 
78 According to the RPIR of 1878, he also edited the Urdu journal » Panjāb (Punjab Gazetteer). DIPL: 206; Storey 1953: 1043. 
l-e 
220 
An Empire of Books 
his most widely-selling textbooks, to his friend' Naval Kishore. Later in life he also consigned his Urdu autobiography Savānih-e umri to the Lucknow publisher, who printed it in 300 copies in 1894. 
3.6 The Naval Kishore Press After 1895 Upon his death in February 1895, Munshi Naval Kishore left a flourishing enterprise and a huge fortune to his adopted son and designated heir Munshi Prag Narayan Bhargava (1872-1916). Under Prag Narayan's management the firm continued to prosper for some time. Yet, as the twentieth century progressed, it became clear that the heyday of North India's largest publishing house was over. Drastic reductions in British patronage, lower public demand for Persian and Urdu literature, increased competition in the publishing trade and adverse political circumstances combined to bring about its slow but steady decline. 
When Munshi Prag Narayan assumed charge of the family business, he was well prepared to do so: following his education at the Jubilee High School, at Agra College, and the Lucknow Canning College, he had been apprenticed at the NKP and risen to the post of superintendent. Prag Narayan profited socially and economically from the fact that Naval Kishore had substantially augmented the ancestral property by investing large amounts of his profits in landed property acquired from various taʻalluqdārs (Metcalf 1979: 274). Apart from the ancestral zamindārī in Aligarh District, Prag Narayan held estates in the districts of Gonda, Barabanki, Unao, Kanpur, and Hamirpur.79 As a large landed proprietor he was admitted into the ranks of the Avadh ta'alluqdārs. He gained membership of the British Indian Association and for some time served as its joint secretary. His successful assimilation into the traditional landed elite allowed him to seek marriage alliances for his children in this hitherto hermetic social group.80 His case illustrates a typical pattern among Hindustani commercial classes, who over time shifted their social and political bases from an urban ra'is background to landowning and zamīndāri associations (Bayly 1971:296). 
19 H.R. Nevill in his Aligarh Gazetteer reports: 'The Bhargava family of Sasni holds six mahals in the Sikandra Rao tahsil and five in Hathras, paying in all Rs 3,264: while to the same caste belongs Munshi Prag Narayan, Rai Bahadur of Lucknow, the son of the celebrated publisher Newal Kishore, who owns a property of one whole village and six mahals in tahsil Sikandra Rao, with an area of 4657 acres and a revenue demand of Rs 9,529' (Nevill 1909: 115). 
For the rise of Lucknow's urban notables to the status of ta'alluqdārs, see Oldenburg 1989: 230-6. 
221 
An Indian Success Story 
Under Prag Narayan and his relative Manoharlal Bhargava, superin tendent of the press, the NKP continued to do brisk business. By 1902 three new book depôts had been opened in Jabalpur, Nagpur, and Raipur. Between 1907 and 1911 the publishing house won several prizes at international exhibitions in Calcutta, Paris, and Brussels (Bhargava 1981: 31). In addition to Avadh Akhbar, in 1901 Prag Narayan launched Avadh Samācār, a Hindi weekly that was curiously announced as being 'espe cially suited to agriculturists, tradesmen and females of India.'' Among his many publishing ventures, two biographical compilations deserve special notice since they remain ofundiminished interest to modern-day scholars of South Asia: Sahifa-ezurin(*1902), a two-volume compilation in Urdu published on the occasion of the Coronation darbār, which contains over 2000 biographical entries and 500 pictures of Indian chiens and princes, and its English counterpart entitled Who's who in India. Containing Lives and Portraits of Ruling Chiefs, Nobles. Tiiled Person ages and Other Eminent Indians (*1911).$?J.R. McLane has underlined the importance of these collective biographies as prime examples of the growing interaction, overlapping interests, and mutual favouring among landholders and urban professionals (McLane 1977: 201-2). The inclusion of Indian nationalists and urban professionals such as Prag Narayan himself in the category of 'titled personages and other en Indians' vividly testifies to changing perceptions within India society. 
Endowed with the same enterprising spirit as Naval Kishore, Prag Narayan not only invested in the modernization of the publishing house but also sought to diversify and open new sources of income. With 
81 Thacker's Indian Directory 1902. 
82 The following biographical sketch largely relies on the information conta in this work, as well as a short account given in Uttar Prades 1980: 29-9. 
83 The Cyclopedia of India (1908: 362) contains the following description: The works, godowns, etc. occupy a very considerable area at Hazratganj, and no expense has been spared in equipping them with the latest printing and steam machinery. They do a very extensive business, giving employment to about 500 men. The works are specially equipped for printing in all the vernaculars of India, and experts are retained who can handle any of the local languages, Arabic, Persian, Urdu, Hindi. Mahratti, Urya, Punjabi, etc. besides English. In consequence, Wor from all parts of India, as well as from foreign countries, such as Persia... The press do their own typecasting, having modern machinery for the purpose or castg type in various languages. They also do electro-typing and stereotyping. a. processes necessary for their work. Lithography is a speciality. They also descriptions of educational works at prices which place them within rea Very poorest ...'. 
krit 
222 
An Empire of Books 
establishment of the 'Newal Kishore Emporium and Fire Arms Depot' and the ‘Newal Kishore Ice Factory' in Kanpur, he built up a mostly family-run commercial empire which provided employment to over 1500 people.84 Managed by his younger brother Govind Prasad Bhargava, an engineering graduate, the Lucknow Iron Works grew into a thriving business of 300 employees that largely performed government contract work. Prag Narayan further extended his influence in commercial circles as a member of the Upper India Chamber of Commerce, director of the Upper India Paper Mills Company, and president of the U.P. Chamber of Commerce. He also successfully entered the banking business, acting simultaneously as the director of the Bhargava Commercial Bank in Jabalpur and the Bharat National Bank in Delhi, and as treasurer to the Delhi and London Bank. In recognition of his public services, he was conferred the title of Rai Bahadur in 1909. His rise in the world of trade and commerce was accompanied by a political career that followed the regular paths: as a member of the Lucknow Municipal Board he was elected to the Legislative Council of the United Provinces in 1912. Subse quently, he was made a Member of the Imperial War Council and of the Imperial Legislative Council of India. 
As a trustee of Agra College and in various other offices Prag Narayan continued his father's involvement in charitable and educational causes. However, it seems that he was especially generous in his support to institutions representative of Hindu culture. For example, he gave a large grant of Rs 10,000 to the Benares Hindu University (Sundaram 1936: 635) and set up a trust for the restoration of ancient Hindu temples. 
Following Prag Narayan's death, his son Bishan Narayan (1898 1931) assumed charge of the family business. Bishan Narayan is best remembered for the services he rendered to Hindi literature through the famous Hindi literary magazine Mādhuri, launched in 1922. Its first editor was his nephew, the enterprising Dularelal Bhargava. Under Dularelal Bhargava and a number of other illustrious figures-Rup Narayan Pandey, Krishna Bihari Mishra, and Premchand-Mādhuri became a greatly influential institution in the Hindi literature of the 1920s 
34 Ibid.: 363. Thacker's Indian Directory of 1917 further testifies to the family character of the firm: 'Newal Kishore Press, booksellers, printers, publishers, statnrs., bankers, imptrs. of printing and ice machines, &c.: Propr. Hon. Rai Bahdr. M. Prag Narain Bhargava. Pte secy B. Umrao Lal Shrivastava. Persnl. Asst. B. Mukut Behari Lal Bhargava, B.A. Supt. printing dept. B. Manohar Lal Bhargava, B.A. Mangr., book dept. & Newal Kishore emporium B. Mohan Lal Bhargava. Agt. Banking bch. M. Jugul Kishore. Sundt "Oudh Akhbar" B. Mukat Bihari Lal Bhargava, B.A. (p. 276). 
An Indian Success Story 
223 
and 1930s.85 As Orsini has shown, its attractive presentation and openness to a variety of themes, styles, and opinions distinguished Mädhuri from other contemporary journals, making it 'the foremost forum in Hindi for literary discussion' (Orsini 2002: 57). Yet, despite the journal's wide popularity, Bishan Narayan never recouped the large investment that Mādhuri meant for him, but is said to have incurred a financial loss of 
almost Rs 20,000 in sustaining it. 
Soon after Bishan Narayan left the family business to his two sons, Munshi Ram Kumar Bhargava (1915-71) and Munshi Tej Kumar Bhar gava (1919-87), conflicts began to emerge in the family. As a result, the management of the firm had to be entrusted to a Court of Wards under the aegis of the British collector of Lucknow. By this time the publishing house was already running at a loss, and the threat of retrenchment of employees and salary cuts had divided the staff into opposing factions. One of those immediately affected by the situation was Premchand, who has left us a vivid account of the tensions gripping the firm. 
The establishment of a new branch in Ajmer in 1938 could not conceal the fact that the NKP's days were numbered: in 1947 Partition brought with it the loss of the Pakistan market, while the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition Act of 1950 severely affected the family fortunes. The mortal blow to the House of Naval Kishore came in the same year, when, for lowing a rift between the two brothers, the firm was divided into two separate enterprises, renamed Ram Kumar Book Depot and Tej Kumar 
85 Himself a poet of Brajbhasha, Dularelal Bhargava initiated a revival of Braj bhasha poetry through Mūdhuri. Around 1927 he started his own literary publishing house, the Ganga Pustak Mala (Orsini 2002: 75-6: 388). Premchand's association with Mādhuri lasted from February 1927 to October 1931. During that time he not only served as editor of Mūdhuri but also worked in the NKP book depot, preparing textbooks and children's books (Madan Gopal 1964: 261-5: Amrit Rai 1990: 33, 266). 
86 On 11 September 1931 Premchand wrote to Davanaravan Nigam: 'There is al new development here. Manager X, who is the leader of the group hostile to me, has got a new supporter in one Y, who has been taken on as a canvasser. Ever since his appointment, Y has been trying to dominate the affairs of the business house. Taking me for his enemy from the very first day, he has been trying to get me throw out. A move for economy was already afoot. He has now thought of getting the entire editorial staff dismissed, and securing books written in the name of responsible a influential persons, preferably members of the (textbook selection) committee. stupid people here do not realise that what they pay me can be easily realised trom a single book that I write. In fact, they haven't yet paid me even half of what they have earned from books written by me, and also that the royalties which they have to the influential ones are very high' (cited in Madan Gopal 1964: 330). 
224 
An Empire of Books 
Book Depot. Both continued to function separately until recently. The Tej Kumar Book Depot kept up the NKP's venerable tradition of pub lishing religious and literary classics in inexpensive editions. Moreover, it reprinted a substantial number of approximately ninety Hindi and eighty five Urdu works first published during the days of Naval Kishore. 
External and internal factors thus combined to bring about the slow but steady decay in the firm's fortunes in the course of the twentieth century. The process is clearly reflected in the NKP's production figures: of the estimated total of 12,000 titles issued from the publishing house during its lifespan of almost a century, about 5000 were published during Naval Kishore's lifetime, 3000 during the time of Prag Narayan, and 2000 each during the time of Bishan Narayan and his two sons. These figures only serve to highlight the outstanding individual achievement of the firm's founder-proprietor. 
