+++
title = "The Colonial Factor: Patronage, Collaboration, and Money Matters"

+++
As noted in the previous chapters, British patronage was one of the 
main factors accounting for the NKP's rapid growth and expan - 1 sion. Without wanting to downplay Munshi Naval Kishore's own achievement as a business entrepreneur, it is hardly overstating the case to say that colonial patronage significantly distinguished the history o the NKP from that of other Indian publishers. In this chapter, the business relationship between the NKP and the colonial authorities, along with the circumstances attending colonial patronage. will be analysed in greater detail. The picture that emerges illustrates the complex transactional re lations between Indian private entrepreneurship and state authority, depicting at once an intense and extremely successful business colla boration and a sustained dispute over market shares and profits, as well as agency and control in the publishing market. 
Some of the locally determined factors underlying the initial support extended to Naval Kishore when he set up his press in 1858 have already been outlined. The patronage by individual British officials, however, also needs to be situated within the context of government policy towards the Indian-language press and print media in the wake of the 185 / uprising. Undoubtedly, the events of 1857 had greatly enhanced British suspicion of the 'native' press and demonstrated the urgency of bringing 1 closer scrutiny. At the same time, there was an acute need to estabnsh closer relations with the vernacular press so that in future more effective use could be made of this indispensable means of gaining access to the public. A powerful medium in disseminating information and generating public opinion, the press had to be carefully encouraged. The la power from Company to Crown in 1858 brought with it an attempt to226 
An Empire of Books 
restore public confidence, first signalled in Queen Victoria's proclama tion of non-interference in 'native' customs and beliefs. The renewed emphasis on caution and conciliation' (Metcalf 1990: 95) translated into a selective application of liberal principles; it was reflected in press legislation. Governor General Lord Canning initiated a policy of simulta neous control and encouragement, in which surveillance and patronage were carefully weighed against each other. Official patronage, especially on the part of the Education Department, came to serve as a potent means of rewarding and controlling editors and publishers.' 
Viewed against this backdrop, the NKP's collaboration with the colo nial administration displays all the characteristics of a symbiotic relationship: at the time of setting up business, Naval Kishore relied heavily on British patronage in the various forms of a license grant, tech nological and material support, and printing contracts. The Avadh provin cial authorities, on the other hand, had a vested interest in securing the collaboration of a loyal representative of the Indian-language press in the politically sensitive post-Mutiny days. An editor-publisher of proven loyalty such as Naval Kishore was an asset to be co-opted and duly instrumentalized in the process of reconsolidating power and counter acting anti-colonial sentiment. At the pragmatic, political, and ideological level, the establishment of the NKP was a welcome opportunity for the new rulers at Lucknow. Moreover, it saved them from having to invest in their own printing works, an important financial consideration given the fact that plans were already under way to establish a large government press at Allahabad, at an estimated monthly operating cost of no less than Rs 8800.2 
There may have also been considerations of safety and greater public acceptance in opting to rely on a 'native' publisher. The objective, clearly, was to convert Naval Kishore's printing press into an instrument of colonial rule, to be deployed in the dissipation of information and the spread of 'useful' knowledge in the Indian languages. Implied in this was the printing of legal acts and government notifications and, equally important, the production and dissemination of educational material in Persian, Urdu, and Hindi. The colonial administration soon became the NKP's major client; official commissions constituted the single most important source of income and provided a strong financial backbone 
Bayly 1996a: 340–1; Barns 1940: 249-62; Sharma 1996: 42-5. 
See W.H. Lowe's 'Proposition for the future establishment of a Government Press', Home Dept., G.G.S. Public, October 1858: no. 297 (NAI). 
227 
The Colonial Factor 
for the Lucknow publishing house. If this placed Munshi Naval Kishore in a precarious position of economic and moral dependence, the profits gained from British printing contracts became a crucial factor in subsi dizing the oriental publications for which his firm achieved its unique reputation in India and beyond. The impact of this constant flow of capital, which sustained the press over the years, cannot be overstated. It is im portant to understand that publishing in the oriental languages, on the scale and diversity undertaken at the NKP, would not have been possible but for the profits derived from job printing for the colonial government." There is a distinct irony to the fact that one of the first books to bear the imprint of Naval Kishore is not a classic of oriental literature but an Eng lish treatise, issued in July 1859. which, fittingly enough, is entitled Our Finances. Its author, George Campbell was Judicial and Financial Com missioner of Avadh and future Lieutenant Governor of Bengal.* 
The NKP's business collaboration with the colonial authorities ex tended to various administrative departments which regularly, or on specific occasions, commissioned items for print, initially in both English and the Indian languages, and later, after the opening of the Allahabad Government Press, mainly in Hindi and Urdu. Once the NKP had estab lished a reputation for itself, printing orders no longer remained confined to the regional authorities but also began coming in from the higher ad ministrative departments of the Government of India in Calcutta. In 1874, for example, Naval Kishore forwarded a bill for Rs 1000 to the Foreign Secretary. The bulk of such printing commissions reflected the mundane side of a booming bureaucratic apparatus, consisting of legal and revenue forms, registers, acts and ordinances, and a variety of government documents in Urdu and Hindi. Occasionally, there were lucrative commis sions for printing in English, as for instance in the case of Census returns. 
The superior workmanship and reliability of the NKP, the continuous flow of old and new books on religion, literature, the arts and sciences emanating from the press, and Naval Kishore's sustained efforts in trans lating Arabic and Persian classics into the modern languages met with increasing British recognition and, in turn, patronage. The Oudh Adminis tration Report of 1871-2 approvingly noted that “The spread of vernacular and oriental classics is much aided by the establishment of Munshi Naw 
3 According to Ranjit Bhargava, the NKP book depot which sold mostly non educational publications, always ran at a loss. Private communication, March 
4 A copy of this work is preserved in the OIOC. 
5 Procs, of the Chief Commissioner of Oudh in the General Dept. (Ho 1874, no. 559. 
228 
An Empire of Books 
Kishore, whose books find their way all over India and are even exported to Bokhara, Persia, Arabia and Afghanistan'.“The 1875 report concurred, stating that "The press of Munshi Nawal Kishore continues to hold the first place in Oudh. All large and valuable publications, classical and vernacular, are the outcome of this press.'? In 1877 the Secretary to Government found Naval Kishore standing 'far ahead in the number and value of his publications' among Lucknow and Kanpur publishers.8 
A decisive factor in the success of the business co-operation with the British were the reasonable rates that Naval Kishore was able to offer. His services not only tended to be cheaper than those of most of his Indian competitors, but at times even put the government's own printing presses on the spot. In March 1874, following a comparison of prevailing rates, the Superintendent of the Lucknow Central Jail Press found himself faced with the official query of whether his press would be able to supply vernacular forms at NKP rates. The reply, on this one occasion, was in the affirmative. 
On the face of it, business transactions between the NKP and the colonial authorities appear to be an example of a highly successful colla boration between state and private agency, in which a feeling of mutual benefit prevailed. On closer investigation, however, it becomes apparent that relations were by no means free from conflict. As will be shown below, the business relationship between the commercial publisher and the colonial state involved constant negotiation which could easily turn into open confrontation. The issues at stake were money and profit mar gins, the extent and limits of patronage, but also fundamental questions of agency and control over the publishing market. The latter was especially pronounced in the domain of textbook publishing, where state and private agency both collaborated and competed. 
4.1 Textualizing Mass Education: 
The Textbook Venture The spread of formal education and the colonial state's increased en gagement with the primary and secondary sectors resulted in the urgent need for written instructional material in Indian regional languages. While 
6OAR, 1871-2: 118. 7 RPIR, NWP&Oudh, 1875: 106. 8 RPIR, NWP&Oudh, 1877: 119. 
Procs. of the Chief Commissioner of Oudh in the General Dept. (Home), March 1874, no. 32. 
229 
The Colonial Factor 
traditional forms of Indian education centred around the teacher, colonial education was firmly built on textuality, and from the outset gave prime importance to the printed textbook. In Krishna Kumar's apt formulation, the prescribed textbook became 'a sacred icon of required knowledge, it was treated as 'the de facto curriculum, rather than as an aid' (Kumar 1991:64). Under colonial aegis, textbooks came to constitute the most widely produced and distributed category of printed matter in the modern Indian languages. In business relations between the NKP and the colonial administration, textbook production in Hindi, Urdu, and the classical languages assumed central importance, accounting for an intense collabo ration throughout the century. If not always profitable from the publisher's point of view, it represents an important aspect of Naval Kishore's in volvement in official printing, for it had a direct bearing on linguistic standardization and the formation of readerships in Hindi and Urdu. The ideological implications of colonial textbook production have been dealt with elsewhere and are not of prime concern in the present context." Instead we will focus on economic aspects and the ways in which colonial government, in its massive programme of introducing a new educational tool among the masses, employed a double strategy: secums the help of private Indian enterprise, and, at the same time, jealously guarding its control over the textbook sector. 
A brief overview of the history of the printed textbook in India maybe helpful here: the production of textbooks in Indian regional languages had first been undertaken by, and for some time remained the sole domain of, Christian missionaries. As noted earlier, the Serampore Mission Press and the Baptist Mission Press in Calcutta were the most active pioneers in the field. The establishment of the Calcutta School Book Society in 1817 constituted a landmark in the history of early schoolbook production, it being one of the first combined efforts of Europeans and Indians in the promotion of education." Significantly, it insisted on secular knowledge and pointedly excluded all religious texts. Similar schoolbook and education societies were set up in Bombay (1816/1821), (1820), Benares (1820), and Agra (1833). Supported by the Sik Orphan Press, the Agra School Book Society assumed prime importance 
owell 
ta 
10 For textbook ideology, see e.g., Kumar 1991:64–70: Bayly 1998: 7/-, 1999: Stark 2000; Naregal 2001:55-78; Stark 2004a. 
11 The early history of the Bengali and Hinditextbook is relatively went See Laird 1967 on the missionary contribution and Basak 1959 on th School Book Society. For Hindi textbooks, see Vedalankar 1969: 113-03 1997: 169–74. 
230 
An Empire of Books 
for the NWP. As Naregal has pointed out, these early schoolbook and educational societies were important in establishing 'structures of ideological mediation between the colonial state and the Indian educated elite. More than just producing an impressive number of educational texts, they provided a 'minimal collaborative space for the construction of colonial ideology' (Naregal 2001: 66–7). 
The age of the mass-produced textbook in Hindi and Urdu dawned in the 1840s and 1850s. The Vernacular Education Despatch of 1854 form ally institutionalized state education, instigating a process described as the 'vernacularization of Indian education. In its wake, educational de partments were established in the various provinces; they assumed charge of all aspects of education, including textbook production. Prior to 1854 the NWP had already been the site of far-reaching official efforts in the field of education which would later earn them credit for being the pio neers of the policy of extending primary education among the masses' (ECR 1882:41). Besides the opening of halkabandi and vernacular model schools, the pioneering measures of Lieutenant Governor James Thomason also included the levy of a local rate for educational purposes and the introduction of a series of elementary textbooks in Hindi and Urdu meant to address the dire need for suitable reading material for use in the new schools.12 Circulated under the name of Ram Saran Das Series, the Hindi titles remained in use for decades. They served as linguistic models for the emerging Hindi prose style and played an important role in standardizing the language (Dalmia 1997: 172–4). Yet, contrary to the intention of Thomason's scheme, they remained largely confined to government schools and were seldom put to use in traditional indigenous schools. This was partly owing to the fact that many private schools run by Indians continued to insist on imparting classical training in Sanskrit and Persian and did not teach Hindi or Urdu. Others catered only to spe cific castes or professional groups and had no use for Hindi and the Nagari script, using Kaithi and Mahajani instead. As John Nesfield noted in a somewhat sweeping statement in 1882, the 'vernacular' was not studied in any of the indigenous schools' in Avadh: 
Pupils taught in the Kaithi and Mahajani schools can neither read a Nagri book nor write in the Nagri character. Those taught in Sanscrit schools cannot avoid learning the Nagri character, because Sanscrit books are written in Nagri; but they never study a modern Hindi book or practise Hindi com 
12 Vedalankar 1969: 149–53. By 1851, 78 textbooks had been lithographed, for which see ibid.: 236–44. 
The Colonial Factor 
231 
position. Those taught in the Persian schools are never set to read an Urdu author or to write an Urdu leiter. The first aim of Primary schools should be to teach pupils to read and write their own Vernacular; but this is what the Indigenous schools studiously avoid.!? 
Moreover, indigenous schools continued to emphasize oral transmission and learning by rote. If writing was involved, it usually meant that students would copy out texts onto slates. As Nesfield remarked, the sole reason why most pupils in the Sanskrit pathsālās mastered the Nagari script fairly well was that in the absence of textbooks they were compelled to be constantly copying out some Sanscrit text.! 
While failing to make a more profound impact in traditional schools, the printed textbook became an essential feature of state education. Text book production accounted for a large portion of the work undertaken at the government presses. Brought to a temporary standstill by the 1857 uprising, printing at the Agra Government Press resumed with vigour in December 1857. By the end of 1858, 64 different titles were ready for use in schools. Print runs ranged from 250 to 100.000 copies and aggre gated over 500,000 copies in total.15 Yet it quickly became apparent that the colonial state alone could not cope with the awesome task of providing the Indian masses with this new educational tool. Private enterprise had to be enlisted. As we have seen, Naval Kishore was among the first Ind ian printer-publishers whose collaboration was sought. Henry Stuart Reid, first DPI in the NWP Educational Department (est. 1855), favoured his enterprise with contracts for textbook printing. A second supporter emerged in the person of Babu Shiva Prasad, Joint Inspector of Schools in the Benares Circle from 1856. Among the earliest textbooks printed at the NKP were a number of widely used Urdu works composed by this eminent champion of primary education. The first was Shiva Prasad's four-volume geography of the world, Jām-e jahăn numā (*1858-9, Fig. 4), which remained the standard geography textbook in Urdu-medium schools for decades. With its publication date of 1858–9 it must be one of the first substantial books ever printed at the NKP. A second edition of 5000 copies followed in 1860, priced between six and ten annas per volume. Editions of the abridged version of the geography, Chotā jām e jahān numā, and of Shiva Prasad's Urdu rendering of Sandford and 
13 'Indigenous schools in Oudh and North-West Provinces', Calcutta Review: 75, 1882: 305-6. 
14 Ibid.: 304 15 Rept. on the State of Popular Education NWP, 1856–7 and 1857-8: 38. 
An Empire of Books 
232 
و 
جامائننا 
الی 
TAMIIA WA N N II MAYU 
کی 
دوسری جلد 
VOLUME IL 
بموجب حکھنانا یہ تقابلی قابلیٹ گورنربہادر اکتالین اما در استعانت خداو نعمت بنا لیا اور اس ماحب بار 
.. الشواره نے اپنی بنائی ہوئی مہندی کی کتاب جو گولستان کے اردینا 
سیر ملک کی کرنی 
به تماشا کتاب مین کچال 
مسا 
ج 
. 
مطمنشی نول کشور مین 
) 
چھا گئی 
" 
وما عیسوی 
I 
مریدنیه ...دجه 
سب 
Fig. 4: Title page of Jām-e jahān numā (-1860) 
The Colonial Factor 
233 
Merton, a didactic tale by Thomas Day, were produced in the same year. Since the demand for such textbook classics remained continuously high, printing contracts were particularly lucrative. 
Textbooks also constituted the earliest specimens of Hindi typesetting at the NKP, testifying to the fact that Hindi printing at the press was in troduced at the instance of the British authorities. Most of the early Hindi textbooks issued from the press were reprints of the Agra textbook series. They included Parārivom ke hisāb ki pustak Hindi bhāsā mem (*1860) and Sukhlal's Kitäh jantri (*1861), two books on village accountancy; Reid's Sūrajpur ki kahāni (*1862), an instructive prose tale for villagers; and Shrilal's Jnan cālisi (*1862, Fig. 5), a collection of forty instructional maxims.Printed in large type-set editions of 3000 to 5000 copies, these booklets were priced at one anna per copy, and were thus readily affordable. 
Business relations with Reid's successor, M. Kempson, who was ap pointed DPI in 1861, started off on a less promising note. Whatever agreements Naval Kishore had come to with Reid, it would seem that he was interpreting them far too liberally. In March 1863 Kempson issued a set of regulations for Deputy Inspectors which contained a special paragraph to the effect that, without direct orders from the Inspector, Deputy Inspectors were not to purchase books for school use from any source other than the curator's depot in Allahabad. This rule, he explained, was rendered necessary by the wholesale piracy of Educational works printed by the Government on the part of a Lucknow printer, one Newal 
Kishore’.17 
Following the establishment of a separate Educational Department in Avadh in 1864, the focus of the NKP's commercial relations in the text book sector naturally shifted back to Lucknow. Since the production of textbooks in Hindi and Urdu was a pressing issue, the Oudh Educational Department dispensed with the expensive and time-consuming task of setting up its own printing works; instead it granted the NKP monopoly rights to print and publish educational books. 18 In return, Naval Kishore promised to permanently keep a sufficient supply of books in stock, in order to meet the demand of the department at any time. More importantly, he also took upon himself the entire financial risk implied in surplus pro duction, outdated editions, and unsaleable stock due to curricula changes. 
16 First published in Agra 1851 and 1852, respectively. 17 Rept. on the Progress of Popular Education NWP, 1862-3, app. C, 20 A. 18 RPE Oudh, 1869–70: 113. 
234 
An Empire of Books 
जान 
चालीसो 
श्रीमन्महाराजाधिराज पश्चिमदेशाधिकारी श्री युत लेफ्टिनेंट गवर्नर बहादुर की 
माधानुसार पश्चिमदेश की पाठशालों के विद्यार्थियों के 1191 लिये पण्डित श्रीलाल ने ।। 
बनाई॥ 
.. लखनऊ Riमुंशी नवलकिशोर के प्रेस में छापी गई 
- सन् १८६३ ई. Printed 2000 Copies, price 1 Anna per copy. I ३००० जिल्ल छपी कीमत फौजिल्द ~, 
READ 
Fig. 5: Title page of Jñān cālisi (1862) 
The Colonial Factor 
235 
The considerable financial risk implied in this agreement is borne out by the sales figures of 1869: in this year, the value of books purchased by the government from the NKP. and the value of the actual sales effected, showed a large deficit of Rs 3390.19 Nonetheless, the publisher profited from the arrangement. Overtime, his interaction with the state authorities intensified to such an extent that Avadh officials came to consider the NKP an integral part of their educational apparatus. At the same time, there was no doubt as to who remained in control of textbook production. As one haughty official put it: The Nawal Kishore Press, though it is owned and managed by a private person, may be considered the Press of the Educational Department. 20 
As a result of this intense collaboration, textbook production in Avadh almost doubled within a short time span of six years. Its full dimension is reflected in Table 4.0, which lists the number of books sold by the Oudh Educational Department and the money effected from sales. 
The collaboration between the NKP and the Oudh Educational Depart ment also extended to the distribution of textbooks. The Educational Department had its own book depot, which was divided into two sec tions—for English and vernacular publications. Each section consisted of a central depot in Lucknow and twelve branch depots in the provincial districts. Naval Kishore acted as manager of the central vernacular depot in Lucknow, and, by special agreement, was also put in charge of the English depot.21 In this capacity he assumed sole responsibility for the distribution of textbooks to the branch depots. These came under the 
TABLE 4.0 Textbook Production in Avadh: Books Sold by the 
Oudh Educational Department, 1865-71 
Year 
No. of books sold 
Value of books sold (Rs) 
1865-6 1866-7 1867-8 1868-9 1869-70 1870-1 
32,520 39,162 54,154 50.542 55.542 60,623 
4, 988 5,885 9,013 
9,570 12.607 10,183 
SOURCE: RPE Oudh, 1868-71 
19 RPE Oudh, 1870–1: 133. 20 OAR, 1873-4: 96. 21 RPE Oudh, 1871-2: 172.236 
An Empire of Books 
supervision of Deputy Inspectors who, acting as his agents, were responsible for textbook distribution to village schools. On account of this monopoly, Naval Kishore did not receive the sales commission of ten per cent usually given to inspectors in charge of the branch depots. The arrangement, however, held other advantages for him, since it allowed him not only to sell the bulk of the textbooks produced at his press to the Educational Department, but also to engage in selling textbooks on his own account. In 1872 educational books to the value of Rs 19,769 were purchased by the government, of which Rs 12,205 worth of books were sold. These figures only refered to the transactions of the government book depots and did not represent the sales effected by Naval Kishore to “persons not in the Educational Department'. 
Given this mutually favourable configuration, textbook production and distribution in Avadh was extremely efficient. How well it was or ganized becomes evident in view of the problems faced by the NWP provincial government at the time: here, due to the lack of an efficient distribution system, the rural population was observed to experience 'very great difficulties' in obtaining books. To make textbooks more ac cessible, plans were under way to open book stores under the charge of schoolmasters, rather than leaving distribution to the Deputy Inspectors in the district headquarters alone. Interestingly, in trying to provide better facilities for the supply of books in rural areas, the authorities were reluctant to rely on the agency of Indian booksellers. Underlying this reluctance were both economic considerations and a general attitude of mistrust towards 'native' agency, a seemingly characteristic feature of M. Kempson's tenure as DPI. As one report contended, “The scheme would be expensive; it would be necessary to pay the book vendors fixed salaries, and the account keeping would be intricate and troublesome.'22 
The price of textbooks was settled by the DPI, usually in consultation with Naval Kishore. The low rates and favourable conditions offered by the publisher were of vital interest to the British. Given that only a small minority of Indians was able to afford elementary education for its 
children, the production of inexpensive textbook material was a crucial prerequisite in the scheme of mass primary education. In 1872 DPI Colin Browning noted with great satisfaction that, in joining hands with a local publisher, textbook prices in Avadh had been reduced to a minimum: 
This department owing to the enterprise of Munshi Nawal Kishore is exceed ingly well managed at very trifling cost. The lithographic and printing charges obtaining at Bombay, Allahabad and Lahore are known, and the price is 
22 
Report on the Progress of Education in the NWP, 1871-2: 104. 
The Colonial Factor 
237 
fixed at a lower rate than any that rule there. Munshi Nawal Kishor's works are marvels of cheapness, and care is taken that all educational works should be correctly and clearly lithographed. 
The collaboration between private and state agency was, therefore, not only profitable to both parties involved, but ultimately benefited North Indian students and the general public at large. With their textbooks be ing less expensive than those issued by any other Educational Department in India, the Avadh authorities had every reason to pride themselves in the outcome of this joint effort: 
Owing to the establishment of so large a press school books are mostly very cheap. In our primary village school course for Urdu-Persian students 16 books are used costing Rs 2-10-6 or as the course extends over 4 years the annual cost is Rs 0-10-7 to each student. The total cost of primary school books in Bengal is Rs 2-12-6. The total cost of books for a Hindi scholar at a primary school is Rs 2-11 or the annual cost is about Rs 0-10 9. In the Middle Class Urdu school course the cost of books is Rs 6-9-0 and in the Hindi Middle School Course the price is Rs 5-6. So the annual cost of books for a pupil educated in Urdu and Persian up to the middle class standard is Rs 1-1-6 and for a Hindi student is (-13-5.-- 
In terms of the number of titles, the textbooks issued from the NKP by 1870 already exceeded 200 different works in Hindi and Urdu.-- The de mand was high, not just in the NWP&Oudh but also in Bengal and Bihar. Occasionally, textbooks produced in Avadh were also despatched to the Central Provinces, which still lacked an Urdu press capable of coping with large official commisions.26 
Around that time, Naval Kishore approached the Punjab Government to obtain permission to print regional-language textbooks for use in Punjab schools. His plans to conquer the Punjab market with cheap texts, how ever, came at an inopportune moment, for the Punjab DPI W.R.M. Holroyd had recently embarked on an ambitious campaign to improve the Educational Press at Lahore. Holroyd's endeavour was not only to make the government book depot self-sufficient, but also to render the Edu cational Press at Lahore superior to any other Lithographic Press at pre sent existing in Northern India." Seeing the success of his project 
23 RPE Oudh, 1871-2: 172. 24 RPE Oudh, 1872-3: 121. 25 Avadh Akhbār, of 19 April 1870, cit. in Nurani 1995: 55. 26 RPE Oudh, 1872-3: 121. 
27 Letter from Holroyd to Secretary of Govt., Lahore. 10 December 1800. FG. Punjab. Educational Dept.. January 1869: 26. 
238 
An Empire of Books 
threatened by a commercial publisher's initiative, he was naturally anxi ous to defend what he considered his own territory. In the process, he went as far as soliciting official sanction to prosecute Naval Kishore *should he print certain educational works, the copyright of which has been registered.°28 Naval Kishore was issued an official warning that in case of copyright infringement he would be liable to legal action. The government's stern refusal to cede textbook copyrights to an Indian printer was not well received by the local press. Pointing to the valuable services that Naval Kishore had rendered to Indian literature, the Rohil khand Akhbār of 12 November 1870 applauded his initiative and criticized the Punjab Government for not complying with the Munshi's reasonable request'.29 The wider backdrop to this critique was the growing dissatis faction with the government's refusal to give more job work to private enterprises, the rejection of Naval Kishore appearing to be a typical ins tance of this prejudice. Apparently, the authorities did not relent: criticism of the government's reluctance to cease its monopoly on educational printing continued to be voiced in the Punjab press.30 It was only in the 1880s that a shift in policy resulted in greater official encouragement for private enterprise. Naval Kishore must have quickly jumped at the oppor tunity to assert his presence in the Punjab market, for by 1884 he is re ported to have entered into contracts 'for supplying books in the Indian tongues to schools in large portions of the Punjab' (Hurst 1887: 353). Eventually, however, the Punjab Government opted in support of local enterprise and in 1887 gave an exclusive contract for printing and distri buting textbooks and maps issued under the authority of the Educational Department to the Lahore-based Mufid-e Am Press of Munshi Gulab Singh.31 Understandably, Naval Kishore was not willing to easily relin quish his share of textbook printing in the Punjab. When, in 1891, new contracts for government printing work were offered, he again appeared as one of the bidders. At this point the alarmed Punjab presses were cal led into joint action. If their rates were lower than those offered by Naval Kishore, they argued, there was no reason why the contract should be given to a resident of another province.32 Their protest was heeded: educa tional printing was made over to a local contractor. Reportedly, the result was a rise in textbook prices.33 
2 
20 PG. Punjab. Educational Dept., July 1870, B No. 5. 29 SVN 1870: 443-4. So Koh-i Nür n.d. and Mufid-e CĀm, 15 July 1874, SVN 1874: 2 and 293. "Cyclopedia of India, vol. 2: 324. 
Akhbār-e Am, 21 August 1891, SVNP 1891: 299. Sirmur Gazette, 29 February 1892, SVNP 1892: 62. 
239 
The Colonial Factor 
Shifting our attention back to Avadh, the arrangements with the Educa tional Department remained in force, more or less undisturbed, until 1877. Official acknowledgement of the NKP's valuable collaboration in the textbook venture was poignantly summed up in the 1877 provincial Gazetteer, which asserted that the cause of education was much enhanced by the private enterprise of Naval Kishore, 'whose busy press dissemi nates, even beyond the utmost limits of the empire, a cheap, abundant, and useful literature, and is of greater public benefit and importance than many State institutions' (Gazetteer 1877: Ixi). Soon afterwards, the amalgamation of the NWP&Oudh ushered in significant changes for the firm. It not only initiated a slow withdrawal of government patronage, but also a curtailment of Naval Kishore's monopoly in textbook pub lishing. 
Following the amalgamation of the provinces, Naval Kishore faced a new situation that was markedly different from the privileged position he had enjoyed in Avadh. For one, the NWP provincial government ran its own government press in Allahabad, which monopolized the produc tion of textbooks whose copyright belonged to the government. That Naval Kishore obtained the privilege to print and publish new or revised editions of these copyright works speaks volumes for his negotiating skills. In doing so, he was forced to accept lower rates than previously offered to him in Avadh. 34 Despite this initial financial setback, over time he was able to regain some of his previous status as 'official textbook publisher. In the wake of the amalgamation, the English book depot in Lucknow was abolished in 1880. However, the authorities had a vested interest in maintaining the city's vernacular depot. It was regarded as a great convenience', even more so since Naval Kishore had 'always dealt liberally' with it.35 Under his experienced management the depot was in deed running strong. In the following years it effected record sales, with the number of books sold rising steadily: from 78.000 in 1882 to 135,679 in 1883 and 141,681 in 1884.36 
The publisher's cooperation with the state authorities reached new heights in 1886 when, following considerations to make over government printing to commercial agency and distribute more work to Indian-owned presses, the provincial government decided to close down its educational 
ed 
fernment 
34 Books for which the copyright did not lie with the government were purc directly from their authors or publishers and then distributed by the Gover Book Depot or the NKP. AECR 1884: 108. 
35 RPE NWP&Oudh. for the year ending 31 March 1880: 61. 
36 The latter figure included maps and slates. RPE NWP&Oudh, for the ending 31 March 1883; and for the year ending 31 March 1884: 132. 
ear 
240 
An Empire of Books 
book depot at the Allahabad Government Press. Among the tenders invit ed for the purchase of stocks, Naval Kishore's offer was given preference. Consequently, in March 1886, the entire stock of educational works amounting to a huge total of approximately 500,000 volumes—was sold to him and transferred to Lucknow. The implications of this transaction were momentous: while the duties of the British curator were from now on confined to the storage of official publications, the registration of books, and the control of public libraries, the responsibility of production, distribution, and sale of departmental vernacular textbooks in the provin ces was made over entirely to the House of Naval Kishore.37 In negotiating the deal, Naval Kishore had obviously hoped to expand his monopoly, for he stipulated that no educational work must thereafter be published by the Educational Department at the Allahabad Government Press or elsewhere. Not surprisingly, his demand was rejected outright. More over, the authorities deemed it necessary to explicitly remind him that no monopoly was being conferred on him for the sale of any books that, ‘with the expressed or implied assent' of the Educational Department, had up to this point been purchased for use in government schools from other private firms.38 
If, in taking over the book depot, Naval Kishore's intention had been to cement and further expand his monopoly, the transaction soon turned into an immense financial liability. Besides the actual purchase price of Rs 24,000, it entailed further investments exceeding Rs 100,000 for a new building in Hazratganj, new lithographic and steam printing presses, as well as the astounding number of 10,000 lithographic stones. Moreover, the Allahabad book depot had scarcely been purchased when a series of curriculum alterations threatened severe financial losses. When the publisher saw his hopes of what he loftily described as doing a service to the Government and country' thwarted, he embarked on a crusade for the expansion of his monopoly. In the process he became embroiled in a fierce controversy over copyrights. 
4.2 Copyright Controversies At the time of selling the educational book depot to Naval Kishore, the provincial government decided to advertise its textbook copyrights (of which there were ten) for sale to private enterprise. The publisher imme diately intervened, requesting that no sale of copyrights be effected until 
NWP&Oudh Administration Rept., for the year ending 31 March 1886; 49. ** PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., January 1887: 26. 
241 
The Colonial Factor 
the large stock of books he had just purchased was entirely exhausted. Consequently, it was agreed upon that the government would hold on to its copyrights for another five years. One financial risk successfully averted, Naval Kishore set about tackling the vexing problem of curricula changes. In at least one instance he managed to influence official deci sions on textbook selection by successfully advocating his commercial interests: in November 1889 he was informed by John Nesfield, then Inspector of Schools in Avadh, that he should no longer print copies of the Jughrāfiya-e Hind shomāli and Jughrāfiva-e duniva, two standard Geography textbooks used in primary and secondary schools, since they were to be replaced by Hill's textbook on Geography. Naval Kishore replied that he still had over 4000 copies of the said titles in stock and requested their continuation in the Avadh schools for some more time in order to prevent heavy losses. "Nesfield complied and issued a notice to all Deputy Inspectors that as soon as Hill's Geography had been sold off, they could revert to the former books. This was a indeed a special personal favour, for, as Nesfield cared to inform the publisher, he had acted without official authorization. 
Encouraged by, but seemingly not content with the privilege accorded to him, Naval Kishore soon afterwards addressed Nesfield again in order to reiterate his fears concerning the introduction of new textbooks. Follow ing the amalgamation of the NWP&Oudh, he stated, frequent changes had occurred in the curricula, each resulting in a loss of thousands of ru pees to his press. He was particularly concerned about the introduction into the syllabus of books whose copyright did not belong to government. Most were authored by officers of the NWP Educational Department. These officers, he asserted, have made it a trade, and a very promitable one too, of writing vernacular books for the schools in their own control, and get them printed and published by their own authority and under the protection of authority conferred on them in virtue of their office. "AS a result, most of the books he had taken over from the government depot had been superseded and had become unsaleable. The accompanying loss was so heavy that the depot risked being closed.41 
The list of proposals that Naval Kishore came up with to remedy his predicament presented a thinly disguised attempt to extend the monopoly 
39 Letter to Inspector of Schools, 2nd Circle, NWP&Oudh. PGN September 1890: 3. 
40 Ibid.: 5. 41 Ibid.: 5-8. 
242 
An Empire of Books 
he had thus far enjoyed in Avadh to the entire United Provinces. His pro posal, in particular, that the copyright of all educational books should be secured by government, and that authors should be given an honorarium in compensation, implied the hope that the exclusive right of printing and publishing such titles would automatically go to the NKP. In putting forward his arguments, the publisher took great care to act the role of a disinterested advocate of the people and loyal supporter of the colonial scheme of mass education. To this effect, he not only insisted that a continuous and cheap supply of textbooks could best be assured by one single large firm, but also posed as a moral guardian of official textbook production: 
The resolution of the Government of India published last year laid particular stress upon the moral training of our children, but what in reality may be called morality is in the majority of cases conspicuous by its absence in the vernacular books introduced in our schools. Books forming the curriculum of the Indian schools, especially those taught in the lower classes, the stu dents of which are of an impressionable age, treat of those familiar objects not unknown even to those small boys, but conveying no moral or lesson in them. And it is admitted by all thoughtful persons that generally slur and void of morality tone (sic) of the great mass of the indigenous literature forms a serious barrier to the moral and intellectual progress of the Native community.42 
In February 1890 Naval Kishore brought his correspondence with Nes field to the notice of the DPI of the NWP&Oudh, again urging the exten sion of his monopoly. The DPI then consulted Nesfield, who not only strongly recommended the continuance of the monopoly Naval Kishore enjoyed in Avadh, but also advocated its extension to the NWP. There were 'obvious advantages' in having one central depot and publisher for the entire United Provinces. Nesfield supported the publisher's proposal that authors should be given an honorarium instead of copyright and also denounced the malpractice that, in sharp contrast to Avadh, educational officers in the NWP were allowed to publish, sell and appraise their own textbooks. The prices of these were often exorbitantly high, and certain ly far in excess of those charged by Naval Kishore. Moreover, seeing the profits that could be made from textbook publishing, educational officers in Avadh had begun to claim the same privileges as enjoyed by their colleagues in the NWP. The practice, thus, needed to be curtailed." 
42 Ibid.: 7. 
Letter to DPI. NWP&Oudh. 21 April 1890, ibid.: 11-13. 
243 
The Colonial Factor 
nhis ensuing report to government, the DPI concurred with Nesfield's views and advised that the copyright of textbooks should generally be obtained by government, and that only those authors whose books were officially sanctioned for curricula use should be permitted an honorarium. However, he cautioned, the scope of educational printing in the NWP was too large and too much of a responsibility to be undertaken by a single firm only. Consequently, it was agreed that, in order to distribute the work more equally, and at the same time ensure an efficient and cheap supply of textbooks, tenders were to be invited from several com petent printing firms.t1 
As a result of these deliberations, on 16 September 1890 the provincial government issued a momentous order to the effect that no new textbook could be introduced into the curriculum of which the copyright had not previously been secured by government. In other words, all new textbooks used in NWP&Oudh schools would henceforth become government pro perty. However, in order for new books to be produced and sold at the lowest possible price, printing tenders were to be called for. This ruling, as the Secretary to Government explained to an alarmed Naval Kishore, applied only to new textbooks introduced into the curriculum; it was not the government's intention to disturb arrangements regarding books previously in use. 45 
In requiring that printing tenders be called for, the September 1890 ruling supported the principle of competition and entailed a redistribution of official printing commissions to the various printing firms in the pro vinces. In the process the NKP's workmanship and rates came under closer scrutiny. During its meetings in April and October 1891, the Verna cular Textbook Committee reported cases of overcharging on the part of Naval Kishore and advocated that printing should be given to ou presses, notably to Munshi Gulab Singh's Mufid-e Am Press in Lahore, whose workmanship was judged decidedly superior to that of the The Lahore firm, moreover, promised 'much greater probability quality of workmanship and paper and the price to be charged for each book that is sold will be adhered to.'46 Following the committee s recom mendations, in March 1892 DPI White ordered that contracts for printing Urdu textbooks in the NWP would in future be given to the Mufid-e Am Press, while Hindi textbooks would be printed by the Methodist rubnis ing House in Lucknow. Predictably, Naval Kishore interpreted the order 
44 Ibid.: 13-14. 45 PGNWP&Oudh. Educational Dept., December 1891: 13. 46 PGNWP&Oudh. Educational Dept., July 1892: 16. 
244 
An Empire of Books 
as a serious encroachment upon his 'customary rights'. He immediately complained to the provincial government, insinuating that his tenders had not been fairly considered and that, moreover, the DPI's decision was against the September 1890 ruling.47 In rejecting his 'rightful claims' to the printing for the NWP, the authorities had altogether lost sight of the work done by him for the past thirty years in connection with the Oudh Educational Department.48 For lack of valid arguments against his rival publishers he resorted to polemic: 'One should have naturally thought that in the selection of publishers, regard would be given to the encouragement of local industry and the benefit of persons of the province, in preference to total strangers and persons of speculation whose sole object is to enrich themselves without doing anything for the country ...49 His second point, regarding the printing of Hindi textbooks, seemed more valid: why should government give a contract to the Methodist Publishing House, which was owned by a religious body, and whose sole object was the propagation and spread of certain religious doctrines and principles?'50 
In a move that can be seen as characteristic of his negotiations with the state authorities, Naval Kishore also played the 'social card', invoking the large body of almost 1000 workmen to whom his firm provided employment. These workers were allegedly quite unfit for Government or any other service and ... in the event of the NKP being deprived of Government patronage and support, would be thrown out of employment and reduced to a state of misery and privation in these hard times.'51 To what extent this profession of humanitarianism was genuine rather than just a pressure tactic is difficult to say. 
At government level there was confusion over whether the contracts that DPI White had given to other publishers concerned new textbooks only and thus did not interfere with the September 1890 ruling. Once again Nesfield, who in the meantime had succeeded White as officiating DPI, was consulted. By that time his attitude towards Naval Kishore's firm had taken a dramatic and surprising turn. Not only was he no longer supportive of the NKP, he openly voiced his hostility towards Naval Kishore. In his report to government, Nesfield declared the publisher's 
Letter to Secretary to Govt., NWP&Oudh, 9 April 1892, PGNWP&Oudh, Educational Dept., July 1892: 9-10. 
48 Ibid. 49 Ibid. 50 Ibid. 51 Ibid. 
The Colonial Factor 
245 
complaint to be wholly untenable and groundless, since the monopoly he enjoyed in Avadh, and in Avadh only, was in no way encroached upon.S2 In all other divisions of the United Provinces the Educational Department was at perfect liberty to employ new contractors for work, as had recently been done by White. Nesfield seized the opportunity to bring a number of charges against the NKP, and openly accused Naval Kishore of malpractices such as overcharging and violation of copyright. To this effect he included the testimonies of various booksellers and authors who had allegedly been dealt with unfairly by the Lucknow pub lisher. On the given grounds, he finally, and in a complete reversal of his former stance, urged that Naval Kishore's monopoly in Avadh be discon tinued: 
In fact it was high time that the Educational Department in the Oudh districts turned over a new leaf in the matter of village schoolbooks. Munshi Newal Kishore has enjoyed this monopoly for some 30 vears, and I think that on the whole he has profited by it more than the schools have done. The books affected by his monopoly are old and in many respects out of date. Deputy Inspectors and teachers are tired of them. There is a want of new blood ... Better books and better printing can be got elsewhere. Moreover, it is time that the department should be released from the risk of bad paper and al most illegible printing in which (contrary to contract) his books are sometimes issued, and from the risks to which the poor village schoolboys are exposed of being charged unauthorized prices in order to enrich one of the wealthiest publishing firms in Upper India. 
Despite the serious nature of the charges, the Lieutenant Governor ruled in favour of the NKP. In June 1892 he ordered that the firin's monopoly for Avadh be continued for another seven years, encompassing all se text-books for Oudh, whether text-books already in use or text-books selected from time to time by the Text-book Committee 54 It would seem that Naval Kishore was at this point reaping the fruits of over three de cades of loyal collaboration: as was especially emphasized, the Lieutenant Governor was not prepared to assent to the proscription in this manner of a local press which, whatever may be its defects, has in the past done good service ... and has given to Oudh the first example of an indust enterprise on a large scale. By contrast, with regard to the NWP, the 
52 Letter to Secretary to Govt., NWP & Oudh, 16 June 1892, ibid.: 12-13. 53 Ibid.: 14. 54 Letter to DPI, NWP & Oudh, 30 June 1892, ibid.: 16-18. 55 Ibid.: 17.246 
An Empire of Books 
DPI was authorized to place contracts for 'any existing text-books or any new text-books' with any firm that made the most advantageous ten der to government. These orders were to be regarded by the Department as final and by Naval Kishore as fully and exhaustively disposing of any claims which his press may have to special consideration on account of its past connection with the Educational Department, '56 
It soon became clear that the vague expression ‘all school text-books for Oudh' was open to widely differing interpretations. While British officials presented Naval Kishore with a list of ten titles, notably those whose copyright lay with government and which had earlier been conferred unto the Mufid-e (Am Press, 57 the publisher chose to take the expression literally, interpreting it as his exclusive right to print all textbooks used in Avadh. Accordingly he voiced his protest. By this time Nesfield was truly exasperated with what he perceived as Naval Kishore's rapacity, and threatened him with legal consequences: 
Munshi Newal Kishore, C.I.E., is not a novice in matters of trade; and he must be well aware that he cannot under the imaginary shelter of a Govern ment order take unlawful possession of the property of others, and that he will be involved in a lawsuit or a series of lawsuits if he prints any book or books the copyright of which is private property ... 
Munshi Newal Kishore has been repeatedly informed by me of late years that private authors have a perfect right to select their own printers and publishers, and that no pressure could or would be put upon them to employ his press for his special enrichment or benefit in preference to any other. His claim to compel authors to use his press and no other for the printing and publication of educational books is one of the most rapacious and extraordinary demands ever put forth by a publisher living under a civilised Government.58 
The controversy over copyrights had turned into a fierce personal con frontation between the two men, as indicated by the increasingly exacerbated tone of their correspondence. Indignated by Nesfield's dis paraging remarks, Naval Kishore retorted in the same vein: he not only insisted on his interpretation of matters, but in order to underpin his argument cited the example of educational officers of rank-Raja Shiva 
56 Ibid.: 18. 
i.e., in Urdu: Mufid al-mubtadi; Talim al-mubtadi, Arithmetic in Urdu; Mufid al-Inshā; Khilgat al-bavāns in Hindi: Varna prakāsikā; Kaithi varnamālā, Bāl śiksa. Arithmetic in Hindi, Patra hitaišinī and Srsti kā varnan. 
3° Letter to Inspector of Schools, 2nd circle, Lucknow, 20 August 1892. PGNWP&Oudh. Educational Dept., June 
58 
The Colonial Factor 
247 
Prasad, M. Kempson, Nazir Ahmad—who had willingly ceded their copyrights to government for public good, while others kept their copyrights, thus 'making themselves rich at the expense of poor students'. To illustrate his point, he inserted an exhaustive list of textbooks which, as he alleged, had recently been introduced into the curriculum in open contravention of the 1890 ruling, since their copyright was never secured by government, but still lay with the authors, all of them educational officers. That the list was headed by a large number of titles authored by none other than Nesfield himself amounted to an open declaration of war.39 Naval Kishore further defended himself against the charges brought forth by Nesfield. He also thought it expedient to bring the matter before the provincial government, requesting clarification as to the exact extent of his monopoly.60 
As a result, government asked Nesfield for an explanation, especially with regard to Naval Kishore's allegations concerning the textbooks ʻunlawfully introduced. Nesfield was only too glad to reiterate his accusa tions against Naval Kishore, whom he found behaving 'as if he was a licensed monopolist of the Dark Ages, entitled to trample upon private enterprise and crush the efforts of rival printers and publishers more honest than himself.'61 He also cast serious doubts on the publishers veracity and accused him of a deliberate attempt to deceive the govern ment through a series of false allegations. Nesfield painstakingly set out to prove that each and every one of the ten textbooks on his list had been introduced into the curriculum prior to the September ruling. Finally, he reiterated his demand that the NKP's monopoly be cancelled and indicated that he would be able to prove from his long acquaintance with the House of Naval Kishore that 'the good services in the past for which he claims to be rewarded are something worse than mythical'.62 
This time Nesfield's letter did not fail to make an impact. In November 1892 Naval Kishore received a final communication from the government in which the extent of his monopoly was laid down in unequivocal terms: the monopoly was limited to the Avadh region and extended only to text books hitherto printed by him as well as to those new textbooks introduced by the Avadh textbook committee for which the copyright was secured by government in accordance with the September 1890 ruling. The pub lisher's claim that he should also be given the right to print scho 
59 Letter to Offg. DPI, 12 September 1892, ibid.: 97-100. 60 Letter to Secretary of Govt., 29 September 1892. ibid.: 93-4. 61 Letter to Secretary of Govt., 31 October 1892, ibid.: 104. 62 Ibid.: 107. 
LV 
248 
An Empire of Books 
already in use in Avadh but hitherto printed by other firms was rejected as 'wholly inadmissible'. The government seized the opportunity to severely reprimand Naval Kishore, stating that they would have expected of him the propriety of resting content with the very favourable con cession made to [him]' and exacting that he at once withdraw the charges made against the Educational Department should he wish his privileges 
to continue. 63 
Naval Kishore had to all appearances lost the battle and been humbled in the process. For Nesfield, however, the affair was not yet over. Three months later he submitted a long report to government in which he addressed the issue of copyright and authorship in principal. His objective was to expose the practice prevalent in Avadh, i.e. that textbook copyrights should belong exclusively to government, as impracticable and nonsensi cal.64 Having proved that government itself had on several occasions infringed the rules laid down in the order of September 1890, he pointed out that no such rules existed in any other province of India, that they were in fact the outcome of the rapacious instincts of Munshi Newal Kishore' and should therefore be cancelled. Bound by its own ruling, the Educational Department had forsaken its freedom of choice and action, since it could no longer introduce into the curriculum any book whose copyright belonged to some author or publisher: such a state of things, Nesfield maintained, was 'intolerable', for it placed the department 'in a worse position than any other Educational Department in India or in 
over, the 1890 ruling had an adverse effect on literary activity: the prospect that no schoolbook could be prepared without the DPI's written author ization and that copyright had to be yielded to government was bound to discourage authorship, since it deprived an author of the 'legitimate fruit of his own labours and skill.' In conclusion, Nesfield asserted that 'No really valuable book will ever be written under these conditions. In point of fact no such book has been written since these rules were issued.'60 The order, therefore, ought to be repealed. 
While the government's immediate reaction to Nesfield's queries is not known, there is evidence to suggest that his advice was heeded. In 1893 a new Provincial Textbook Committee was formed. One of its tasks, as stipulated in an appendix to its constitution, was to ascertain 
Letter to Proprietor, NKP, 17 November 1892, ibid.: 108. Letter to Secretary of Govt., 6 February 1893, ibid.: 109-15. 
65 Ibid.: 111. 66 Ibid.: 112. 
The Colonial Factor 
249 
whether a textbook author was willing to assign the right and risks of publication to government or whether he preferred to publish at his own risk. Authors were thus free to choose but still needed official approval in order for their books to be introduced to the school curriculum. The government on the other hand, reserved itself the right to remove 'at any time and without notice any textbook introduced under these rules from the official curriculum and declared itself not liable to pay compensation for any financial loss resulting from such removal." 
While all this was going on. Naval Kishore had acquired the copyrights of several bestselling textbooks, including twenty standard works by Raja Shiva Prasad (Jām-e jahăn numa: Qissa-e Sandfard-o-Martan: Itinas timir nāśak, etc.) and the widely used history textbook Waqi'ar-e Hind by Karimuddin. At a later stage he ceded the copyright of Waqi'at-e Hind to the government. This act of generosity was duly acknowledged in a later edition of the book, which informs us that the proprietor of the NKP was 'deserving of high credit, since he had 'without renumeration, actuated solely by the idea of the public good handed over the copyright to government.68 
The controversy over textbook copyrights has been described at some length to highlight the strongly competitive nature of the textbook market and the various conflicting interests involved in it. Rather than just exemplifying Naval Kishore's toughness in trade bargaining, it provides a good illustration of the amount of negotiation it took for a commercial 
age. Accounting for the largest portion of the Indian publishing sector, educational printing remained a highly contested arena throughout the nineteenth and well into the twentieth century. 6° Control over the textbook market not only carried larger implications of cultural hegemony and ideological domination, determining what kind of knowledge was pro pagated and by whom; economically speaking, it also meant control over a rapidly expanding and profitable business. The colonial state found itself facing an obvious dilemma: while it relied on Indian collabo ration and had to encourage indigenous enterprise through patronage, it also had a vested interest in securing its own share in the flourishing and lucrative textbook publishing market. For the average Indian commerc publisher, on the other hand, the stakes were even higher: to be given or denied a share in textbook printing could decide the viability 
67 PGNWP&Oudh. Educational Dept., December 1894: 63. 68 Editorial notice, 1897. Waqi'ât-e Hind, Bombay 1900, preface. 69 For the early twentieth century, see Orsini 2002: 95–7. 
LV 
250 
An Empire of Books 
enterprise. As we have seen, in trying to get their share of the pie Indian printer-publishers not only faced stiff competition from one another, they also had to vie with the interests of the government and individual colonial officials. In such a situation, it took an adamant and shrewd negotiator like Naval Kishore to succeed. 
4.3 Money Matters As noted in the previous section, the amalgamation of the NWP&Oudh in 1877 constituted a watershed in the commercial relations between the NKP and the colonial administration. It affected not only textbook pro duction but also all other areas of collaboration. Previously, the Lucknow publishing house had enjoyed a privileged and barely contested position: personal contacts and direct interaction on the spot had ensured a smooth and highly effective collaboration with the Avadh administration, while also encouraging a kind of semi-official favouritism on the part of local officials. The amalgamation of the provinces not only brought Naval Kishore in contact with a more remote, impersonal, and tightly controlled administration, it also entailed new policies regarding the distribution of government patronage among Indian presses. Moreover, the fact that the Government of the amalgamated provinces operated its own Gov ernment Press in Allahabad, called for a fundamental redefinition of the NKP's role in official publishing. In his initial assessment of the new situation, M. Kempson, by then DPI of the United Provinces, gave a fav ourable résumé: 
The absorption of the publishing trade at Cawnpore and Lucknow is re markable. It is chiefly due to the enterprize of Munshi Newal Kishore of Lucknow who, following the example of the kings of Oudh, before the annexation, has opened a branch press at Cawnpore, which is more con veniently situated for the resort of book merchants from Upper and Central and Western India. Nearly one-half of the publications at Cawnpore and Lucknow together are from his presses; and his only important rival is the old Nizami Press at Cawnpore, which is famous for the excellency of its lithography. The increasing cheapness and excellence of Newal Kishore's work is gradually absorbing the public patronage. I have already noticed one beautiful specimen of the lithographic art from his establishment. The demand for inexpensive books, however, necessitates the use of infe rior sorts of paper and inferior calligraphy in the majority of instances. 
Newal Kishore's position as an employer of labour is unique in the Pro nce, and I am glad to add that he is a liberal and considerate master. His 
The Colonial Factor 
251 
services to the Education Department in Oudh have been invaluable and I wish to see them still further utilized in the North-Western Provinces.'' 
However, with Allahabad as the new seat of government, Naval Kishore found himself confronted by a number of new decision-makers who were not personally acquainted with him and who soon came to regard the former, often semi-official, business agreements between the NKP and the Avadh administrators with growing suspicion. Foremost among them was Colonel A. Dodd, Superintendent of the Allahabad Government Press, who had been put in charge of carrying out the amalgamation of the government presses. His first assessment of the NKP's future status was decidedly more reserved than Kempsons: 
I have, as a rule, plenty of work to occupy my vernacular press in Allahabad, and am not anxious to add to it for the present. Munshi Nawal Kishor has apparently been encouraged by the Oudh authorities to procure machinery and materials on the strength of Government patronage. I would recommend that present arrangements be allowed to stand-at any rate, experimentally for two years, provided that the work executed gives satisfaction, and that the sale of charges does not exceed that sanctioned for his press. I have provided Rs 14,000 in my revised budget under job work' to meet bills on his account.71 
Such words did not augur well for the NKP's future. Naval Kishore re ceived a foretaste of the changing climate when his attempt to introduce higher rates for government subscriptions of Avadh Akhbār failed. Likewise, a petition to the new government in which he asked for financial support to maintain his press in Kanpur, was declined. 72 It appears, how ever, that it did not take him long to overcome these initial setbacks and form new alliances, for by the early 1880s we find the NKP enjoying the lion's share of official British patronage to commmercial and private presses in the amalgamated provinces. As indicated in Table 4.1, the firm received at the time over two-thirds of all official printing orders. 
The only other chief beneficiary of state patronage was the Pioneer Press in Allahabad, with which in 1889-90 the NKP shared commissions 
70 RPIR 1877: 117. 71 PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., May 1877: 23. 
72 PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., June 1877, App. B. no. 218; and October no. B, 124. The reasons for this application, which appears strange in firm's overall growth, are unknown. They may be related to the changed administi setup or to the effects of the devastating drought and famine of 1876-80 on the general economy. 
252 
An Empire of Books 
TABLE 4.1 Offical Patronage Accorded to Presses in the NWP&Oudh 
1880-1 
1881-2 
% 
1882-3 Rs 
Rs 
% 
R 
% 
NKP Other presses 
14,244 8,781 
61.9 38.1 
37.836 5,034 
88.2 11.8 
22.851 6.186 
78.7 21.3 
Total 
23.025 
100 
42.870 
100 
29.037 
100 
SOURCE: PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., May 1886: 16. 
of almost Rs 56,000, that is over 84 per cent of the total sum. Two years later, there was a slight reduction in patronage to the two presses, with the ratio dropping to 78 per cent or a total of Rs 68,964. The remainder of the work was distributed among seventeen smaller presses, each receiving between Rs 200 and Rs 1000. The gulf was indeed huge and prone to incite resentment.73 
These figures were brought to official attention in the context of a sustained controversy between the NKP and the colonial administration. It was occasioned by an official enquiry into the working of the Allahabad Government Press and Book Depot, particularly its account and pay systems. The officer in charge of the enquiry was W.H. Dobbie of the Accounts Department. In April 1885 Dobbie submitted his report in which he heavily criticized the unequal distribution of government patronage and the blatant favouring of Naval Kishore's firm by the Gov ernment Press, demanding a revision of prevailing arrangements. Refer ring to an earlier arrangement that secured a yearly supply of work worth R$ 26,000 to the NKP, Dobbie stated: 
It is evident (1) that the distribution of the patronage of the Government has been very unequally made, Munshi Newal Kishore having been awarded by far the greatest amount; (2) that prior to January, 1882, there are no ord ers that so large a share of that patronage should be given to Munshi Newal Kishore; (3) that subsequent to that date, although there is no sanction of Government to 80 per cent. of their patronage being given to him, yet there is a sanction to the lion's share of that patronage being so given, the per centage varying with the provisions made in the budget; and (4) that in 1883-84 the limit sanctioned by Government to which work might be given to him was exceeded. 74 
GNWP&Oudh. General Dept., July 1890: 4; October 1892: 3. 14 PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., May 1886: 17. 
The Colonial Factor 
253 
Dobbie further criticized the 'excessively high' rates granted to the NKP which, according to his estimate. exceeded the prevailing government rates by nearly double. While the rates for work done by private presses were generally fixed in accordance with the rates of the Government Press, and had in the course of time undergone a reduction of 60 per cent, those accorded to the NKP still remained at a level that had been fixed as early as 1874. There was no official sanction for this. Moreover, Naval Kishore was found to be making undue profit by supplying the paper required for government printing himself and charging the British very high rates for it. Dobbie summed up his report with an impressive calculation to the effect that, by granting the NKP special rates, the government had incurred a loss of Rs 19.000 during the year 1883-4 alone. In conclusion, he emphasized the necessity of keeping a better check on Munshi Naval Kishore's bills.75 
Following the report, Colonel Dodd received official orders to submit an explanation as to the special rates paid to Naval Kishore and the ar rangements regarding the supply and rates of paper.76 Not surprisingly, Dodd had a vested interest in repudiating the charges which impugned his authority and cast doubts on the way he was running the Allahabad Government Press. In a statement of September 1885 he justified the special patronage accorded to the NKP: 
Apart from the frequently expressed wish of the Government that Munshi Newal Kishore's claims to liberal patronage should be steadily borne in mind, all the circumstances connected with the maintenance of his press and the Munshi's own services to the State establish his title to a far larger share of official favour than need be awarded to other private institutions in the province. Roughly I should say the numerical strength of his establis ment equals the aggregate of nearly all the other presses in the North-West and Oudh. He employs close to 900 men at a monthly cost of over Rs ou in salaries and Rs 4000 in contingent expenditure, in addition to pensionary allowances to some 50 former employers. Of his own personal services the cause of education and enlightenment I need not enlarge. The translation and sale at his own risk of important official and semi-official publications, his munificent contributions to the several literary societies in India and England, and other voluntary works, valuable and costly, are well known to the Government. For my own part, considering his resources, and his enterprising labours, official and private, I would advocate an exte rather than any withdrawal, of the present patronage accorded to Munshi Newal Kishore was certainly a loser by the amalgamati 
75 Ibid.: 18-19. 76 Letter from Chief Secretary of Govt., 28 May 1885, ibid.: 38. 
254 
An Empire of Books 
two provinces, so that any undue favouritism I may be accused of having shown him of late would seem more than justified by the action of the Oudh 
authorities in years gone by.77 As for the preferential rates accorded to the NKP, Dodd pointed out that they had been fixed earlier by the Avadh authorities and that he saw no reason to intervene, particularly since it had been the professed desire of Lieutenant Governor Sir George Couper that the NKP's privileges be continued after the amalgamation. Moreover, the rates were justified by the fact that they included the cost of paper as well as by the special conditions that Naval Kishore offered the British in that he held himself financially responsible for all risks of a too large edition and all the ex pense of reprints to meet supplementary demands, as well as the storage and distribution of the forms. '78 Lastly, Dodd defended Naval Kishore against the accusation of charging exaggerated rates for paper. 
Despite Dodd's advocacy of the NKP's case, the special rates hitherto accorded to the firm were withdrawn by a government order of 15 Jan uary 1886. Although Naval Kishore's claim to special patronage was duly acknowledged, it seemed expedient, against the backdrop of mount ing public pressure, that in future his firm be placed on the same footing' as other presses in the provinces. The publisher reacted to the deci sion on 8 June 1886 with a letter of complaint to the Chief Secretary to Government, in which he emphasized the distinct status of his enter prise and explained why he considered himself entitled to special pri vileges: 
Sir, 
Some little time ago I received from the Superintendent Government Press an extract from an order of Government, anent revision of rates of work done for Government in our Press. With reference thereto I beg to state that the principle set forth in it by the local Government of recognizing the claims of all the presses alike is highly praise-worthy and no objection can be raised by any party to it. But the case of my Press is a special one which is evident from the statement submitted herewith. This special favour has been shown to me since the establishment of the Press in 1858 and up to date it has been continued. I am still in hopes that the local Government will not be so unkind as to withdraw the privilege extended to me, not only during my life time, but also during that of my heirs, when it takes into consideration the system and policy adopted by the Press and by myself similar to what the Government does in the case of loyal Zemindars. 
77 Ibid.: 45. 78 Ibid.: 46. 
The Colonial Factor 
255 
Regarding the Superintendent's order for submission of tender for work, I most respectfully beg to say that such a course takes away from me all the privileges I have been enjoying during the last 28 years. I beg to remind you of a circumstance, which happened at the time of amalgamation of the two Provinces in 1877. I had the honour of accompanying Colonel Dodd to Government House, when if my memory does not fail me (and I think he also recollects), Sir George Couper was pleased to explain both in English and Hindustani that the privileges which I had been enjoying under the kind patronage of the Oudh Government should also be extended to me after the amalgamation. I am highly thankful for having been allowed to enjoy the same privileges. In 1882 I complained to the Government of not receiving work continually and when the matter was referred to Colonel Dodd, he was pleased to draw out a scheme which was approved of by Government, promising me about Rs 26,000 worth of work every year, a promise which was kept up to about the 31st January last. 
Regarding the rates, I beg to state that with the exception of the Judicial and Revenue Forms, printed especially for Oudh and for which special rates were sanctioned 17 years ago, a time when the rates of the other pres ses were very high, my rates were comparatively cheaper and I think it is only proper that the same rates be continued. I suffered loss at that time, and taking this into consideration, they should not be reduced, though paper may have become somewhat cheaper than before. This is included in the promised work of the value of Rs 26,000. The remaining portion of the whole work is rated by the Superintendent, Government Press. The benefits arising from the special rates are expended in giving pensions to super annuated hands of the Press and donations in the shape of money and books. But if the rates for these two Forms are reduced, I shall be under the painful necessity, either of putting a stop to the pensions, &.c., or of making reductions in my establishment on a large scale, and the effect will tell hard on the people of Oudh, so many of whom are employed. And if in the face of this reasonable but humble representation, the Government is bent on reducing the rates, I beg the favour of having timely notice of their decision, that I may arrange accordingly with my large establishment. In conclusion, I beg to draw your attention to the statement I append hereto and request you to be kind enough to submit the same to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor and Chief Commissioner for his favourable consideration. 
[...] Newul Kishore 79 
The letter has been quoted in full because it affords a good illustration the strategies employed by Naval Kishore in his dealings with the British 
79 Original autograph letter, UPSA, File no. 288.256 
An Empire of Books 
authorities. Thinly disguised beneath an outwardly deferential attitude was the self-assertive stance of a large entrepreneur who was acutely 
aware of the influence he commanded in both economic and public life. His status as the single-largest Indian employer in the provinces put Naval Kishore in a powerful position vis-à-vis the government. The way he exploited this circumstance to exert pressure on the state authorities is reminiscent of many a modern-day industrialist. His allusion to the adverse effects that a reduction in rates would have on the social fabric of the province was a barely concealed threat. 
The letter's argument was underpinned by the accompanying 'State ment of the Newul Kishore Press'. Composed by Naval Kishore himself, this rare and elaborate document provides an eyewitness account of the history, publishing policy, and achievements of the NKP while also revealing a good deal about the publisher's self-image. It attests to his self-perception as a leading representative of the indigenous elite, who in his steadfast loyalism and commitment to the cause of social welfare and education considered himself an indispensable collaborator of the British in the common agenda of 'uplifting the Indian masses. As a uni que first-hand testimony from inside the publishing house the 'Statement' deserves to be reproduced here in its entirety: 
Statement of the Newul Kishore Press 
I established this Press in 1858, when the Province of Oudh was a scene of general, if not universal rebellion, and when peace had yet to be restored. The Province was virtually in the possession of armed rebels and warlike preparations on the part of the British Government were in progress to crush their rebellious spirit. I came here under the patronage of Sir Robert Montgomery, the Chief Commissioner of Oudh and Colonel Abbott, Commissioner of Lucknow. These gentlemen extended, in consideration of my loyalty and of what I had done in the Punjab for the British Government, their patronage to my newly-established Press and favored me with the printing of all English and Vernacular documents connected with their Estab lishments. My Press was then the first of its kind in the Province, and as Railways were not then in existence, I had to incur a great deal of expense and trouble in having the materials needed, to make it a success, fetched from Calcutta. 
2. In 1867, although the Government Press was opened for the publication 
of the Government Gazette, the flourishing condition of my Press at tracted towards it and almost monopolized the Vernacular printing of the different Departments of the Publice Service; and consequently the Press received sufficient work to keep it in good working order. 
The Colonial Factor 
257 
3. Under the auspices of the Local Authorities, the policy pursued was 
that of translating and publishing the standard works of the well-known ancient authors of the country, the object being to prevent the effacement of their names. This policy received special encouragement from the officers of various grades employed in the Province, and nearly all the money earned was devoted to the great work associated with it. About 2000 works of various celebrated authors have been, in pursuance of this standing policy of the Press, printed and published, and no less than 500 different books of the most useful kind have been translated from Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, English and Nagri into the Vernacular and printed for the benefit of all classes of our country men. The Press has moreover laid out a good deal of capital in publishing new books and compilations of authors of fame and in this way it has subserved the cause of education and progress and rendered thereby material 
help to the Government. 4. This liberal policy has always been steadily kept in view by the Press; 
nearly Rs 10,000 are annually expended in work of this sort viz, that of compiling and publishing new works of a useful stamp. Manuscripts of books of new authors and translations are pouring in from all quarters and as soon as those on the table are disposed of, fresh ones come in 
and demand fresh outlay and labour. 5. The Government has expended hundreds of thousands of rupees on 
procuring copies of valuable Sanskrit, Arabic and Persian works. Even in Oudh, a large sum is annually set apart by Government for the Asiatic Society of Calcutta to help in the publications of books of ancient authors. The work which that Society has done with the liberal assistance of the Imperial and Local Governments in 100 years, has been done in 
this Press to a very great extent during the entire period of its existence. 6. A reference to the list of books prepared according to Act XXV ON 
1867 will show that, of the newly published books of a scientific charac ter, which have emanated from all the Presses in Oudh, and the N.-W. Provinces and the Panjab, the majority by far have been issued from this Press. Its claim therefore to Government patronage, is decidedly 
more valid than that of any other Press. 7. The Newul Kishore Press has, in consequence of its attempts to further 
the work connected with the Department of Public Instruction, been a loser. Since 1864, the prices of School books have been reduced to such an extent, that the aforesaid Department has on the whole been a gainer. The prices of Vernacular Books in other Provinces are four or five times the amounts the Department of Public Instruction in Oudh is 
called upon to pay. 8. The accounts of the Press show that in supplying books to st 
S at 
cheap rates, it has rendered assistance to the Department of Public Ins truction to nearly two lacs of rupees. The book department con 
258 
An Empire of Books 
with the Press sustains great losses, when books are struck out of Pub lic Instruction curricula, as well as on account of varieties of accidents, such as books being eaten up by white-ants, &c., &c. The existence of our book department is a source of very great saving to Government, as it is not obliged to organize a department of its own to execute orders from Schools and to keep accounts by means of a paid establishment, as the entire responsibility of such an organization has been assumed 
by us. 9. In the Oudh Educational Reports honorable mention is always made of 
the Press, the utility of which together with the assistance rendered to the cause of Public Instruction, has thus been again and again brought 
to the notice of the Local Government. 10. Again the works printed on this Press have been, by special arrange 
ments, sent in large numbers to foreign cities, such as Bokhara, Yarkand, Cabul &c., as well as to northern Persia and Europe. And in this way the peace enjoyed by India under a benevolent Government and the great improvements that are being effected under its auspices are noised 
abroad and the prestige of the British name is raised in foreign lands. 11. The great officers of Government and residents of Oudh and the North 
Western Provinces can bear testimony to the fact that scientific works and productions of ancient authors which were at one time not available, 
have been brought within reach of the poorest of Students. 12. It is also worthy of consideration that in consequence of our reduced 
prices and the amount of work rapidly and at the same time neatly done, a general reduction of rates is being realized and thus a saving to Government is being ensured. For instance, the Government used to expend about two lacs of rupees for Patwari and Settlement Forms. When Mr Buck was the Director of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, the foundation was laid at my suggestion of a permanent reduction of rates of printing, the consequence of which has been an annual saving of more than a lac of rupees to the land-holders. And the Government, moreover, incurs no loss as it formerly used to do. If arrangements for the printing of these forms were made with the Gov ernment Press, an establishment consisting of highly paid officers would have been a necessity and considerable expenditure would have been incurred. But this has been saved by our Press doing the work cheaply, 
and being content with small profits. 13. Owing to the annexation of Oudh, the people of Lucknow were thrown 
into great distress, which has been mitigated by the charitable institution, the foundation of which was laid in 1863. Government contributes Rs 15,000 annually to its funds. This general distress has been to a very limited extent alleviated by the employment it [i.e. the NKP] has given to hundreds of persons. Its present establishment consists of 900 per sons, who but for its existence might have been without employment. 
259 
The Colonial Factor 
It is to be noted that some expense is always incurred in giving our hands the preparatory training without which they can be of no service to us. It is a well-known fact that in Government and Railway Presses in different parts of the country, thousands of persons are working who learnt their duties in this Press; and though we have been losers, the public has gained. Through the little assistance accorded to the Press by Government, general distress in Lucknow has thus been to a small 
extent mitigated. 14. Over and above trying to improve the country in the ways indicated, 
the following steps have been taken towards introducing improvements. i.—Great assistance has been given towards founding and maintaining the Lucknow Reform Club (Jalsa Tahzib) in the shape of money and books; and thus a great step has been taken towards the spread of useful knowledge and civilization in these parts of the country. ii.- Libraries have been organized in large cities and towns in different parts of the country in honor of Government officers of distinguished merit and marked benevolence; and books worth thousands of rupees have been presented to these Libraries. In this way also the cause of education and civilization has been subserved. (1.) Muir College, Allahabad, in the name of Sir William Muir. (2.) Kayastha Pathshala, Allahabad. (3.) Canning College, Lucknow in the name of Sir George Couper. (4.) Carmichael Library, Benares, 
One set in the name of Mr Carmichael. 
One set in the name of Mr Kempson. (5.) Public Library, Barielly (sic), in the name of Sir John Ingnis. (6.) Public Library, Fyzabad, in the name of General J. Reid. (7.) Bhargav National Association, Muthra. (8.) Library Jummoo, Cashmere, in memory of Maharaja Ranbir Singh. (9.) Library Jeypore, in memory of Maharaja Ram Singh. (10.) Library Patiala, in memory of Maharaja Mahendra Singh. (11.) Punjab Public Library, in the name of Sir Charles Aitchison. (12.) Indian Institute, Oxford University. Oxford, in the name of 
Mr Sparks. iii.- The Press has done much to encourage the art of Khoosh Nawisi (Caligraphy) [sic] Naqqashi (Drawing), as well as the study of Arabic and Sanskrit; and it has moreover employed lots of trained men for these purposes. iv.-Omitting minor items of assistance, the Press has made the follow ing grants of money and books: (a.)-The sum of Rs 15,000 has been promised and therefore may be 
considered as given to the Lucknow Municipal Committee for the establishment of a School. 
260 
An Empire of Books 
(b.)—Rs 15,000 to the National Association called the Bhargav Sabha. (c.)-Rs 1000 to the Bareilly College. (d.)—Rs 1000 to the Kayasth Pathshala. (e.)—Besides these grants, twenty-five scholarships from Rs 2 to 
Rs 15 per mensem, have been promised for the benefit of poor students, and a lump sum has been promised for the benefit of 
poor students in the Agra College specially. (f.)—The Press moreover allows its superannuated servants and 
families of those who did good service and are now dead, pensions 
amounting to Rs 3000 a year. 15. This Press issued an English Newspaper in 1859,80 with the sole view 
of assisting Government; but it was discontinued when there was no necessity for its existence. It has however maintained up to date a first class Vernacular Daily, called the "Oudh Akhbar", to discuss all political questions and to keep the people informed of all administrative affairs, social improvements, &c. This Journal has furthered the cause of edu cation and loyalty by original articles as well as by translations of select Speeches in Parliament, &c., &c. 
The Oudh Akhbar has been confessedly a power in these Provinces and its voice has been invariably raised in behalf of measures, political and social, fitted to do good to the country, and no paper has done more to promote loyalty among the people of the country than the Oudh Akhbar. For instance, it helped materially by its articles, &c., in the organization of the Canning College, and it received through Col. Bradford, the thanks of the Government for its articles in behalf of the great Delhi assemblage for the purpose of recognizing Her Majesty's assumption of the title of the "EMPRESS OF INDIA."The Oudh Akhbar had about a hundred articles in behalf of the amalgamation scheme, and the difficulties thrown in its way by the opponents of the scheme are well-known to Col. Erskine and Mr Woodburn. The Oudh Akhbar did much good during the Afghan War in 1878-9, in interpreting the real motives of Government and removing misunderstandings. During the Egyptian War with Arabi Pasha and also in the Soudan affair, it did its best to promote loyalty among the excitable portion of our Maho medan fellow-subjects. It also raised its voice in favour of Government in 1885, when war with Russia seemed imminent. It is needless to specify the various ways in which the Oudh Akhbar has been trying to 
benefit the people and to promote loyalty amongst them. 16. Through the influence of this paper and the public confidence inspired 
by it, the Paper Mills of Lucknow were established and the benefit the country has derived is incalculable. These Mills have reduced the price 
I presume this to be the Oudh Gazette. 
The Colonial Factor 
261 
of paper 50 per cent., and effected a saving of nearly 25 lacs of rupees annually to Government. The proprietor of this Press had the honor of establishing the Mills and conducting their business for five years and a half as their Honorary Manager, and of making the scheme a success 
by incurring personal losses. 17. The Press has obtained Medals and Certificates for its valuable assis 
tance during the time of the Exhibitions. 
Newul Kishores? The 'Statement combined a self-assertive and unequivocal claim to patronage and special privileges with an impressive enlisting of argu ments underpinning the indispensability of the services that Naval Kishore had rendered and continued to render to the government and the Indian public in his various public roles of publisher, newspaper pro prietor, industrialist, employer, and social benefactor. It left no doubt as to his influence within indigenous society and stressed his function as a mediator between the government and the public in political and social matters. In proudly enumerating Naval Kishore's multifarious achieve ments in publishing, and in cleverly combining a list of his past contribu tions to social and educational charity with the promise of future benefits, it insinuated that all former achievements were put in jeopardy by the proposed measures. Moreover, these measures clearly included an ele ment of social injustice on the part of the British authorities. The gist of the statement was that, instead of cutting down privileges, the government ought to be grateful to Naval Kishore and accordingly continue favouring his enterprise. 
As it turned out, Naval Kishore's well-crafted Statement was of little avail. The colonial authorities were unwilling to go back on their decision to reduce the NKP's rates, asserting that the 'special reasons that n hitherto justified the granting of higher rates ‘no longer existed', and that 
it was neither necessary nor expedient that they should be continued. However, they did recognize the need for a compromise and propos ed to compensate for the publisher's loss by assigning him a greater amount of work. Subsequently, the fixed allowance of work was raised to Rs 30,000 a year. 83 This was achieved by according the NKP the right to print and distribute police forms. That Naval Kishore stubbornly chose to ignore the newly fixed rates and for some months kept on submitting 
81 UPSA, File No. 288. 82 PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., April 1887, File No. 288. 83 PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., December 1888, File No. 288. 
262 
An Empire of Books 
bills at the old rates was generously overlooked. However, officials were acutely aware that to accord him any further privileges was sure to entail a public outcry, cautioning that 'the large share of patronage already given to his press has excited the comment and remonstrances of other presses.'84 
A new bone of contention presented itself in 1888 when Colonel Dodd, who had continuously objected to the decision to raise the NKP's share of work to Rs 30,000, decided that Naval Kishore should henceforth only be allowed machine rates for hand work, thus hoping to bring down the payments made to the NKP to the former Rs 26,000. The same work, Dodd argued, could be done by machine at the Allahabad Government Press. By this time, the perennial struggle over rates and Naval Kishore's insistence on defending his privileges was wearing out the patience of even senior officials. “This case is a continual source of vexation', lam ented Chief Secretary W.C. Benett.85 
There was more to come. In July 1890 Naval Kishore again appealed to the government. Still not satisfied with the fact that the majority of official vernacular forms were printed at his press, he requested that the remainder also be bestowed upon him.86 The offer he made in return, notably to produce all Urdu forms by lithography instead of type-printing, provides some interesting insight into the limited acceptance of type-set texts among the contemporary Urdu readership. It was 'only with diffi culty', Naval Kishore asserted, that the people could read Urdu printing type throughout the province. He therefore intended to get all vernacular work printed in good lithography.'87 His proposal to charge all litho graphic work at type-printing rates ten per cent lower than those prevailing at the Government Press would amount to a great financial saving to the British. The letter closed on a defiant note, with Naval Kishore once again alluding to the endangered existence of his firm and appealing to the British to fulfill their 'obligations' towards the NKP: 
It is as well here to point out that this Press has suffered a great loss in the trade of Oriental Books exported beyond the Western frontier on account of a tax imposed by the Amir of Kabul, while the internal supply of the Oriental literature is now considerably diminished on account of the very extensive spread of English education; besides under the present 
PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., March 1891, Notes and Orders [p. 1]. 
85 Ibid.: 3. 
86 Letter by Naval Kishore, 18 July 1890. PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., March 1891: 1. 
87 Ibid. 
The Colonial Factor 
263 
circumstances the educational text books are supplied by their respective authors (though at a much higher rate than the prices of the publications of this Press), the arrangement of publishing and supplying of which was hitherto under the control of the Book Depot. 
Therefore there is no remedy but to ask the Local Government to save from ruin a firm in which about one thousand persons are working in every grade and position, and by the favour and help now asked for this Press hopes to publish the remaining works of the Oriental Science hitherto no where published. 
This Press has been printing official work for the last 33 years with great promptness, and has ever been ready to execute the orders of the Government, therefore it has established some claims for favour at the hands of the Government. 
Naval Kishore's claim that his firm was close to ruin was nothing but ex aggeration to the colonial authorities. His proposal was declined outright. What motivated the government's decision were no longer financial considerations alone but also mounting public pressure. Giving in to Naval Kishore's demands would have provoked large-scale resentment among contending printer-publishers who had grown increasingly jealous of the NKP's privileges. There will certainly be a howl raised if Naval Kishore gets what he wants—the monopoly of vernacular printing the financial secretary warned. His fears were not unfounded: several years later, following the Bengal Government's decision to shift printing work from the government press to Indian-owned presses in the districts, Najm al-Hind (Jaunpur) still urged the NWP&Oudh Government to follow suit and 'also encourage any other Press but the one at Lucknow.” 
As the previous sections have shown, in matters of finance Naval Kishore was not a person to give in easily. In March 1894 we again find him appealing to the British authorities, this time with the complaint that the agreement to give him work worth Rs 30.000 had not been kept. Worse than that, his firm was facing a new and serious threat on account of the plans of the new Superintendent of Government Press, Frank Luker, to charge only machine rates for lithographic work done on hand presses. Naval Kishore warned that this might force him to close the press, which had been working for so many years with credit and satis faction to public and Govt.':91 Luker's plans were based on the fact that, 
88 Ibid. 89 PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., March 1891, Notes and Orders: 5. 90 Najm al-Hind, 16 September 1894, SVN 1894: 397. 91 Handwritten (autograph?) letter, 2 March 1894. UPSA. File No. 8600. 
264 
An Empire of Books 
meanwhile, five lithographic steam presses had been installed at the NKP, which allowed for a substantial increase in production while greatly reducing manufacturing costs. This, to him, more than justified a reduction in rates. Moreover, he was of the opinion that the settled amount of Rs 30,000 included the cost of paper, for which Naval Kishore allegedly charged the British at a rate that was 6.25 per cent higher than that of the government paper suppliers. Luker accused Naval Kishore outright of using paper of a lower weight and quality than stated in his bills to government. Overcharging was attempted in nearly every bill, and so great had his distrust of the press become that he had requested that all completed work be sent to the Government Central Press for inspection and delivery.92 
There must have been some truth to these repeated allegations. Signifi cantly, at this point, Naval Kishore for the first time relented and accepted the terms imposed on him by government. Barely a month after launching his complaint, he agreed to accept the new rates and also announced that he would gladly forgo the liberal rate of 6.5 percent above the Government Press rates for paper ‘so as to avoid all chances of dispute in this matter'. In accepting machine rates, Naval Kishore pointed out, he was forced to replace more and more handpresses by printing machines, meaning an extra investment estimated at Rs 50,000. In return, he asked for a com paratively moderate sum of 'not less than Rs 20,000 worth of printing work' to be allotted to the NKP. This sum to him constituted the absolute minimum, not only to make operations profitable but to guarantee some degree of job security for his workforce. Otherwise, there was a risk that a large number of workmen 'who as a rule live from hand to mouth would be out of work for a considerable part of the year." 
The government's immediate reaction to this letter is not known, since unfortunately at this critical juncture the documents stop. The NKP continued to receive government patronage right into the twentieth century, albeit at a substantially reduced rate. A memorial submitted to the Lieutenant Governor of the United Provinces by Naval Kishore's heir and successor Prag Narayan in 1904 indicates that official patronage had reached its height in 1889-90, with an approximate value of printing work amounting to Rs 40.000. By 1895-6 this amount had undergone a drastic reduction, coming to Rs 14,200. In 1904 government patronage 
etter to Secretary to Govt.. NWP&Oudh, 9 May 1894. PGNWP&Oudh. General Dept., May 1894, UPSA, File No. 866c. 
93 Handwrit 
written (autograph?) letter to W.H.L. Imfrey, 2 April 1894, UPSA, File No. 866c. 
The Colonial Factor 
265 
did not exceed a meager Rs 2.100.9+ It was at this point that Prag Narayan, faced with the prospect of having to dismiss a large number of workmen, appealed to the government for more work. The received printing com missions, he argued, could hardly meet the requirements of so large an establishment as the demand for vernacular books is diminishing day by day.'» While the validity of this argument remains debatable, the golden days of government patronage were clearly over. 
94 Memorial submitted to JJ. de la Touche, Lieutenant-Governor of the United Provinces, UPSA, File No. 866c. 
95 Ibid.Calligraphers, Scholars, 
and Translators: The Publishing House as an 
Intellectual Space 
'Munshi Sahib,... I thought you were in Qanungos' Muhalla, Sikandarabad, and in fact you are sitting smoking the long-stemmed Lucknow hookah at the Avadh Akhbar Press in Raja Man Singh Mansion in Lucknow, and talking to Munshi Newal Kishor.' 
-Ghalib to Hargopal ‘Tufta', 12 February 1865 
T he British annexation of Avadh in 1856 and the cataclysmic events 
of 1857 severely affected cultural and commercial life in Lucknow. 1 To the large number of poets and musicians, artisans, calligraphers and scholars who had been attracted to Lucknow by the legendary genero sity of the Avadh court, the end of the navābi meant the loss of both a means of subsistence and a distinct cultural centre. In the aftermath of the 'Mutiny', the newly emerging commercial presses at Lucknow not only provided a means of livelihood to many, they also helped to fill the cultural lacuna by opening up a new institutional space for literary and intellectual pursuits. At a time when traditional structures of court patron age were rapidly disintegrating, presses came to constitute a new type of semi-public intellectual arena, which served as a discursive forum to members of different knowledge communities. The NKP is an excellent, if extraordinary, example of how a publishing house, notwithstanding its commercial aims, evolved into a vibrant intellectual microcosm where maulvis and pandits worked side by side in translating old texts and generating new ones, where mushairas were held, and where the urban 
Unlike today's commercial book industry, nineteenth-century printing and publishing houses had not yet witnessed the division of text composi tion, printing, and publishing from one another. Readers, editors, and 
