+++
title = "Avadh Akhbar: Politics, Public Opinion, and the Promotion of Urdu Literature"

+++
The news of every continent is openly published. The world's new's is revealed to the world. Nothing which happens anywhere is hidden. All that happens upon the face of the earth is like a mirror. 
-Altaf Husain Hali", Musaddas 
n a manner characteristic of nineteenth-century Indian publishing houses, the NKP not only engaged in printing and marketing books 
but also issued its own 'vernacular' newspaper.' The firm's repu tation in the literary field and its impact in the colonial public sphere are inextricably linked to its famous Urdu paperAvadh Akhbār. That contemp orary sources often refer to Munshi Naval Kishore as the 'Editor' or *Proprietor of Avadh Akhbar', rather than designate him by his profession of publisher and press proprietor, is a telling reflection of the importance assumed by the paper both within the firm's organization and in the wider public image. 
Launched in early 1859, Avadh Akhbār (hereafter AA) was Naval Kishore's most lucrative journalistic venture and a great success with the Urdu reading public. At a time when most Urdu papers were short lived, it remained in circulation up to the year 1950, its lifespan of almost a century-from the Crown's assumption of direct control over India to the first years of Independence covering a crucial period in the history of colonial India. In 1877 AA became the first Urdu daily in northern India. It was to remain the only commercially viable Urdu daily newspaper for a whole decade, until its first serious rival emerged in the form of the 
An earlier version of this chapter was published in AUS 18.1, 2003: 66-94. 
352 
An Empire of Books 
Paisa Akhbār (est. 1887) of Lahore, a paper emulating the concept of the British penny paper.- Exemplifying the early phase of commercialization in the Urdu newspaper trade, AA was read across a wide geographical region ranging from Delhi to Hyderabad and from Lahore to Calcutta. This chapter traces the history of the paper's first forty years, during which it made a distinct impact on the emerging Urdu public sphere. Out lining the growth, contents, and policy of AA, it looks at both economic and human factors in the making of an outstanding success in nineteenth century Urdu journalism. 
Through AA, Naval Kishore joined the ranks of eminent Hindu publi cists who figure prominently in the history of nineteenth-century Urdu journalism. By the time he launched AA, Urdu journalism was already well established. Urdu had received a great boost in 1837 when it replaced Persian as the court language in the NWP. Previously, it had not been a popular language for prose and journalistic writing, a field still occupied by Persian. The earliest ventures in Urdu journalism were not successful, as illustrated by the chequered career of the short-lived Jām-e jahan numā, the first Urdu paper issued from Calcutta in 1822. It was only when Urdu was accorded official language status that newspapers and journals began to appear in considerable numbers, the Dehli Urdū Akhbār (est. 1837), Sayyid al-Akhbār (est. 1841), and Khair Khwāh-e Hind (est. 1837) of Mirzapur counting among the first influential papers. The 1840s and 1850s witnessed a steady increase in Urdu papers and periodicals; they soon became a conspicuous presence in social and political life.? 
Compared to other urban centres in North India, Urdu journalism started late in Lucknow. This was due to the strict censorship that prevail ed in the city following the temporary closure of local presses by Wajid 
Ali Shah in 1849. No sooner had the navābi come to an end than at least seven Urdu weeklies were launched in Lucknow in 1856–7 (Khan 1991: 294_355). The two most influential were Tilism-e Lakhna'ū, issued from the Muhammadi Press (est. 1856) of Maulvi Muhammad Ya'qub Ansari 
2 According to Muhammad Sadiq (1995: 616), the Paisa Akhbār marked a turning point in Urdu journalism and a dividing line between older and modern journalism in that it initiated the diffentiation between the literary journal and the newspaper as a mere purveyor of news. In actual fact, the matter is hardly that simple, for Urdu newspapers continued to include poetry and fiction in their columns. AA is a case in point. For the difficulties in providing a theoretically rigorous distinction between newspaper and literary magazine in the nineteenth century, see Law 2000: xv. 
"Out of the 19 newspapers in circulation in the NWP in 1848, 11 were in Urdu, 5 in Persian, and 3 in Hindi. 5 of the Urdu papers were owned by Hindus. By 1884 5 there were 25 Urdu as compared to only 2 Hindi papers in Avadh. 
Avadh Akhbar 
353 
of Farangi Mahall, and Sihr-e Sāmiri, issued from Pandit Baijnath's Samar-e Hind Press (est. 1856). Both papers provided intimate details of contemporary life in Lucknow between the annexation and the 1857 uprising; their tone was fairly critical of British policy. Local journalism had only just begun when the 'Mutiny' brought the city's thriving print industry to a complete standstill. The vacuum that Naval Kishore encount ered on his arrival in Lucknow in 1858 and the initial absence of local competition in the newspaper trade did much to enhance the growth of AA during its early years. The paper's lasting success, however, must be attributed to several other factors. 
First, there was British patronage in the form of subscriptions and the overall support extended to the firm. As outlined in Chapter 4, the NKP received the lion's share of official patronage accorded to the presses in the NWP&Oudh. A large proportion of the profits made from government job work was reinvested in Oriental book publishing; some went into sustaining AA. The government, moreover, patronized the paper by subs cribing to a number of copies which were distributed to schools and col leges in the provinces. If official statistics are a measure to go by, colonial patronage of the paper was not quite as substantial as later voices made it out to be: with 50 out of 820 copies in 1877, 94 out of 732 in 1886, and 94 out of 521 in 1895, government subscriptions hardly ever exceeded 20 per cent of the paper's total circulation (see Table 6.1). 
The second success factor was the professional management of the paper. AA was one of the first Urdu papers to be run along sound commer cial lines. It partly financed itself through advertisements. Compared to British newspapers at the time, which made larger incomes from advertis ing than from sales (Brown 1985: 16), the proportion of space given to advertisements seems relatively small. A typical issue of AA in 1871, for example, comprised sixteen pages of which an average of four would be given to advertising. Over time, however, advertising came to account for an increasingly important part of the paper's revenue. In 1879 the rate obtaining for occasional small advertisements was 2 annas per line and column. Rates for regular commercial advertisements depended on how often an ad was placed in the paper and ranged from Rs 12 for inser tion once a month to Rs 60 for insertion six times a month (Fihrist 1879: 
4 The circulation of AA during the nineteenth century never exceeded 850 copies. It has to be borne in mind, however, that circulation figures at no time reflect actual readership. Newspapers like AA were widely recirculated and frequently read out to groups of non-literate people in both private homes and public arenas. See Joshi 2001: 38–9; Stark 2002: 69–70. 
354 
An Empire of Books 
4). By that time AA carried regular advertisements for branded goods and for patent medicines such as the widely advertised Holloway's pills and ointments or the celebrated medicines' of Dr De Roos, of which the publishing house acted as sole distributor. Local firms such as Murray & Co., a large retail company selling wine and general merchandise, and the Shaikh Haji Muhammad Bakhsh Company, a contractor of tents and uniforms, began placing regular full-page ads in the paper. Naval Kishore, of course, also used the paper as a cheap medium to extensively advertise and solicit subscriptions for his publications. In the early days of AA, announcements of important books such as Ghalib's Persian Kulliyāt would feature prominently on its front page (AA of 1 January 1862). Later, such notices were relegated to the interior or back of the paper but still appeared so frequently that in 1876 the Delhi-based Nusrat al-Akhbār was prompted to accuse AA of being totally self-interested': 'The editor has been instructed not to write any article beneficial to the public, but only to print reviews of the books (published by the press.'' 
The third success factor, to be discussed later, were the various indi viduals who led the paper. AA had the distinction of being headed by a number of eminent editors who were scholars, poets, or prose writers in their own right. This also accounts for the paper's influential role in the promotion of modern Urdu literature, for, in the typical fashion of early Urdu papers, AA combined the functions of newspaper and literary jour nal. It carried poetry, fiction, and essayistic writing and evolved into a forum for literary debate, attracting the contributions of eminent Urdu literati of the day. The press office of AA, then, was not only a site where information was generated, it was also a vibrant meeting place for the Urdu literary scene. 
6.1 From Weekly to Daily: The Making of 
an Urdu Newspaper Either because the study of a commercially produced newspaper does not fall within the purview of modern Urdu scholarship, or because of the scarcity of extant early issues, AA has received surprisingly little attention outside the standard works on Urdu journalism. In tracing the 
5 Nusrat al-Akhbār of 1 August 1876; cit. in Sabiri 1953, ii: 97–8. 
A study of AA needs to be preceded by a survey of issues available in Indian and foreign libraries. According to Nurani, some files from 1862 and 1870 are preserved in the Aivan-e Ghalib Library, Delhi. The Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Library, Patna, holds issues of AA from 1866, 1869, 1870-2, and 1875. The OIOC has in stock al most complete runs of the paper between 1875 and 1884. 
Avadh Akhbar 
355 
early history of the paper, the following discussion will address several inaccurate claims concerning its format, frequency, and editorship. 
As with many early Urdu papers, there is some disagreement over the date of first publication: while most authorities on Urdu journalism maintain that the first issue of AA did not appear before January 1859, Amir Hasan Nurani asserts that on the closure of the firm's Kanpur branch he chanced upon the inaugural issue of the paper dating from 26 November 1858. Unfortunately, he lent the rare document to an unnam ed scholar and could not retrieve it (Nurani 1995: 136). While there is no reason to disbelieve Nurani, later editorial notices appearing in the paper contradict his information and support the 1859 date.? Most importantly, the issue of 8 January 1862 was marked as volume 4, no. 2, which clearly indicates the year 1859 for the first volume. This, however, does not al together preclude the possibility that Naval Kishore did indeed launch a first issue in 1858. Given the many tasks he had to attend to on opening his press, he may at first not have been able to publish his new paper on the intended weekly basis. Regular weekly publication of AA only took off a couple of weeks later, starting a fresh count with volume 1 in Jan uary 1859. 
AA was initially a four-page weekly in the standard format of early Urdu papers, that is, 18 x 22 cm. Its frontispiece was adorned with a drawing of the Chattar Manzil and Farhat Bakhsh palace complex, evoking the erstwhile grandeur of navābi Lucknow. It is worth noting that the frontispiece in its layout bears a striking resemblance to that of The Illustrated London News, one of the most popular Victorian weeklies at the time (Fig. 12). 
AA appeared each Wednesday. It was well received and during the following years successfully competed against the rapidly growing num ber of Urdu papers. By 1864 its size had increased to sixteen pages (LLH 1864:245). Simultaneously, the format was enlarged to 22 x 29 cm. So overwhelming was the success of AA that, on opening his Kanpur press in September 1865, Naval Kishore decided to launch a local edition in the form of the Kānpur Gazat. Muhammad Ismail, the manager of the 
7 An editorial notice in AA, 22 December 1871 referred to the paper's lifespan with the words 'This is the thirteenth year of God's divine grace', pointing to 1859. A similar notice in AA, 2 January 1874 expressly stated that 'In this factory, in 1859 (a paper] called Avadh Akhbar was put into circulation.' 
8 Garcin de Tassy's claim that by 1867 the size of AA had further increased to 24 pages (LLH 1867: 372) is inaccurate. Regular issues of the paper in 1871 still comprised no more than 16 pages on average.356 
An Empire of Books 
THE ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS 
Glu 
BATURDAY, KOVEAGR 1859. 
(V 
A SCYTLADENT, HY 
22nd August, 1871. 
Fig. 12: Title pages of The Illustrated London News and Avadh Akhbār 
Avadh Akhbar 
357 
Kanpur branch, became its editor. Within two years, however, improve ments in communication between Lucknow and Kanpur had rendered the Kanpur edition superfluous—it was discontinued (LLH 1867: 373). 
The next step in the growth of AA illustrates the direct impact of gov ernment measures on the still volatile newspaper market. In 1871 the standard postage for newspapers was reduced from one anna to half an anna. With newspaper distribution depending almost entirely on the colonial postal system, postage had from the outset constituted a vital factor in the commercial history of the vernacular press. Nothing much had changed since 1822, when Harihar Datt had solicited the government for free postage, complaining that the circulation of his weekly Jām-e Jahān Numā had been 'materially impeded and obstructed even in spite of my best exertions and efforts to extend it.' This, Dutt maintained, was ‘in consequence of its being liable to payment of full postage, which has restrained many intending subscribers in the mofussil from patronising the said News Paper' (cited in Nair 1990: 35). 
The adverse effects of postage on circulation continued to be a vexing problem for Indian newspaper proprietors. So much so that in March 1869 Naval Kishore initiated a campaign for the reduction of postage for newspapers and periodicals and rallied a group of twenty-five influential newspaper proprietors and editors from all over North India, Calcutta, and Bombay in drawing up a petition to the government. The petition was rejected (Stark 2002: 67–8). Yet the government seems to have had second thoughts, for in 1871 it introduced a 50 per cent reduction in the standard postage. Not surprisingly, the measure had a catalyzing effect on the Urdu newspaper trade. It not only led to a 'striking increase in the number of new launches, but also benefited well-established papers like AA which were able to attract larger numbers of subscribers. From August 1871 AA began to appear twice a week, and from May 1875 three times a week. Even after the reduction, postage continued to account for a considerable proportion of readers' expenses: in 1877 the annual cost for ordinary subscribers was Rs 20 excluding and Rs 30 including post age, postage thus comprising a third of the costs. Higher subscription rates of Rs 40 and Rs 50 obtained for the gentry and nobility. One major exception concerned distribution of the paper to large urban centers: if these were directly connected to the railway line and showed over fifty subscribers, postal fees were covered by the press. The provincial 
'OAR, 1871-2: 128. Khurshid 1963: 180. See also S. Ghosh 1998: 73-6 for the impact of postal charges on the circulation of early Bengali papers. 
358 
An Empire of Books 
government at the time subscribed to 50 copies charged at ordinary subscription rates: Naval Kishore's attempt to introduce higher rates for government copies was rejected outright. 
AA did much to enhance the spread of the newspaper reading habit among the urban and rural gentry and the educated middle class in the NWP&Oudh. The paper typically drew its subscribers from among a cross section of the higher social strata of Muslim nobles, taʻalluqdārs, ra’ises, urban professionals, and government servants. An idea of its readership can be gathered from the 'List of Receipts' (rasid-e zar) that regularly appeared in the paper, indicating the names of individual subs cribers and the fees paid by them. The following list, taken from the issue of 11 April 1875, gives the amounts received in March 1875. As the many different amounts suggest, payment was highly irregular: 
His Highness Shahzada-e Alam-o-Alamiyan Sahib-e 
Ali Mirza Mustafa Ali Haidar Bahadur. Prince of Avadh 
Rs 4-11 His Highness Maharaja-e Rajgan Huzur 
Sri Maharaja Sahib Bahadur, ruler of Kapurthala Rs 2-7 His Highness Nawab Muhammad Abd al-Vasih 
Khan Sahib Bahadur, ruler of Rajgarh 
Rs 13-6 His Highness, Mansur al-zaman Nawab Muhammad 
Sikandar Khan Sahib Bahadur, ruler of Radhanpur Rs 15-13 Ali Janab Huzur Sri Maharaja Anand Rao Nawab 
Sahib Bahadur, ruler of Dhar 
Rs 15 The Hon'ble Kumvar Surat Singh Sahib Bahadur, 
ruler of Nahan [?] 
Rs 20 The Hon'ble Nawab Mumtaz ud-Daula Muhammad 
Faiz Ali Khan Bahadur, C.S.I, Political Agent, Kotah state 
Rs 3-4 The Hon'ble Nawab Zulfikar ud-Daula Bahadur, ra'is Rs 4 The Hon'ble Raja Nilkanth Dahojshah Sahib Bahadur Rs 30 Raja Shivnath Singh Sahib Bahadur, ra'is 
[no amount given) Babu Devkumar Singh Sahib Bahadur, ta'alluqdār Rs 2-11 (Agha Ali Khan, Former Governor of Avadh a.k.a 
Agha'i Sahib, ra'is-e azim 
Rs 12 Hazrat Sayyid Muhammad Baqir Sahib Isfahani Rs 23-4 Munshi Muhammad Shihabuddin Sahib, mir munshi Rs 22 Munshi Hasan Khan Sahib, prime minister of Sarkar-e 
Ali Raja Muhammad Suleiman Shah Sahib Bahadur 
Rs 11-10 Mr Wagentreiber Sahib Bahadur, Government 
Reporter, The Vernacular Press of Upper India Rs 23-4 
Avadh Akhbar 
359 
Mr W. Walker, Assam 
Rs 10 Mr [?] Davies Sahib Esq. Barrister-at-Law 
Rs 2 Sayyid Muhammad Khan Sahib, ra'is 
Rs 15 Babu Suraj Kumar Parshad Sahib, rais 
Rs 23-4 Maulvi Muhammad Nazir Ali Khan Sahib. 
Secretary at the Judge's office 
Rs 15 Sayyid Muhammad Ali Sahib, court pleader 
Rs 10-11 Muhammad Jangbaz Khan Sahib, merchant, 
Sadr Bazaar 
Rs 2 Mirza Abdul Karim Sahib, dealer in books 
Rs 20 Muhammad Fateh Khan Sahib, Major, Cavalry Rs 17-10 Muhammad Asadullah Sahib, court pleader 
Rs 0-1 Sayyid Muhammad Sahib, subregistrar 
Rs 7-8 Vaman Rao Prabhakar Sahib, Secretary Library Rs 13 Pandit Krishan Rao Sahib, tahsildār 
Rs 15 Munshi Kishorilal Sahib Bahadur, sadr amin 
Rs 15 Mirza Amirullah Sahib 
Rs 6 Munshi Durgaparshad Sahib, Superintendent of Jails Rs 10 Amir Singh Sahib Bahadur, Major. Cavalry 
Rs 6-8 CAlimuddin Sahib, jailor 
Rs 10 Govarn Parshad, police sergeant 
Rs 2-12 Pyarelal Sahib, merchant, Sadr Bazaar, Chavni Rs 11 Pandit Dayanarayan Sahib, tahsildār 
Rs 10 Divan Lalta Parshad Sahib, Sarkar Bharatpur 
Rs 6 Babu Keshab Dip (?) Anandmal, Secretary [?] 
Rs 10 Babu Isri Parshad Sahib 
Rs 4 Thakur Sahib, ra'is, Milvadah, Ratlam, by means of 
Munshi Muhammad Nasiruddin Sahib, Superintendent's Office 
Rs 23 Lala Narottam Lal Sahib 
Rs 6 Maulvi Nadiruddin Sahib, schoolteacher 
Rs 23-4 Babu Sher [?] Singh Sahib 
Rs 16 Bhavani Din Sahib, Kathiawar 
Rs 10 Babu Raghubar Sahai, Deputy Registrar in the 
Judicial Commissioner's Office 
Rs 15 Babu Paramesharidas, government servant in the 
Judicial Commissioner's Office 
Rs [?] Babu Udharsingh Sahib 
Rs 6-8 Rai Godar [?] Sahai Sahib 
Rs 0-8 Munshi Fida Ali Sahib 
Rs 5-12 That the formula of AA met with wide public approval is also evident from a subscriber's enthusiastic letter to the editor published in the issue of 19 July 1870. In it, the advantages that AA was seen to have over other Urdu papers were clearly spelled out: 
360 
An Empire of Books 
Munshi Sahib, your paper is a fountainhead of eloquence and a source of enchantment. Who am I to praise it- Big words from a little mouth'! Judging from the multitude of news and the acceptance on the part of our contemp oraries one could rightly call it the mother of newspapers' (umm al-akhbār). A great many newspapers are filled with news culled from it, and these newspapers have a fixed number of pages only. (By contrast), your paper offers an unlimited succession of pages-sometimes one finds more than twenty pages and more than three sections in it. Latest news from provinces far and near and useful articles of the most pleasant and excellent kind are inserted, and in a mind-pleasing feast of meaningful poetic oration, it also carries [items on) history, ghazals.qasidas, etc. News from England reach your paper very fast. In the issue of 28th June, I came across events that had occurred in London on 21st and 22nd June. Even letters from London don't reach within six days, while your paper gives readers information on the sixth day! Even earlier, the arrangement of the writings contained in the paper was always of the most excellent kind. But now the new arrangement as found in the issue of 28th June is particularly pleasing, that is news, letters to the editor, correspondent, etc., local news, selections of rules from the Government Gazette, general and special public notices, and verse compositions of outstanding poets. Each content has been assigned a sepa rate section so that all kinds of enthusiasts will find an assembly of desired writings in one place. If the paper were to introduce a special section giving news of the Education Department, it would gain even further in attractive ness. 10 
Leading educational institutions such as the Dar al-'Ulum at Deoband received free copies of AA from the press, as evident from a profuse note of thanks included in the seminary's annual report of 1877." That the paper also enjoyed growing popularity among those sections of society who could not afford to subscribe to a newspaper regularly is borne out by the quaint testimony of a correspondent of AA who, writing from Hoshangabad in 1874, complained of the common malpractice of servants of the post office who were in the habit of opening the covers of the paper 
10 (My translation), AA, 19 July 1870, cit. in Haidari 1980: 26. 
Il The report stated: 'Our special thanks are due to Janab Munshi Nawal Kishore, proprietor of Oudh Akhbar, and Janab Rao Amar Singh, proprietor of the newspaper, Safeer-e Badhana, that despite the fact that both these gentlemen are Hindus, they send—applause and a hundred thousand applause over their generosity and favour their precious newspapers free of charge to this Madrasah. All the counsellors of this Madrasah thank them from the bottom of their hearts and pray for the good of all of them that Allah Most High bestow progress constantly upon their newspapers and presses and maintain their power and independence' (cit. in Rizvi 1980: 129). 
Avadh Akhbar 
361 
addressed to him. Not only did they read it themselves, they circulat ed it among their friends, on which account the paper reached him very late. 12 
One eminent subscriber who publicly welcomed the growing influence of AA was Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan. In the opinion of the great Muslim reformer, Naval Kishore was to be credited with having popularized the notion of a news magazine and created widespread public awareness for modern concepts of information among Urdu speakers in the NWP&Oudh (Haidar 1981: 20). In an article published in his own reformist journal, Tahzīb al-Akhlāq (est. 1870), Sir Sayyid expressed his hope to see AA expand even further: 'Avadh Akhbar has been a very respected paper be fore and nothing can be added to it now. We hope that our contemporary journalists willimitate Avadh Akhbar, and as for Munshi Naval Kishore's magnanimity—God's blessings upon him—we hope that his paper will appear on a daily basis in the manner of the large renowned English newspapers. May God let it be so.''S The praise and good wishes were mutual, for AA openly sympathized with Islamic modernism and the Ali garh movement. It did its best to support Tahzīb al-Akhlāq when, soon after its inception, the paper faced severe opposition from the Muslim orthodoxy. The editor of AA at the time, Ghulam Muhammad Khan "Tapish', was a long-standing supporter of Sir Sayyid. He not only reprint ed various articles published in Tahzib al-Akhlāg, among them Sir Say vid's review of William Hunter's influential The Indian Musulmans: are they bound in conscience to rebel against the Queen? (AA, 22 December 1871), but he also adopted a policy of refusing to include in the columns of AA any article or letter that took an open stance against the Muslim reformer. 14 As a result of this active support for the controversial reformist journal, AA in turn became a target for Sir Sayyid's orthodox opponents. As Ghulam Muhammad Khan informed Sir Sayyid in a confidential letter, on a visit to Kanpur Naval Kishore had been summoned by the Deputy Collector, Maulvi Imdad Ali, and severely reprimanded for “bring ing about the ruin of his paper by having employed a Christian editor'. The allusion was to the many articles by Sayyid Ahmad Khan that AA used to reprint. Out of consideration for his enterprise in Kanpur, Naval Kishore could not but humbly submit to the scolding. Nonetheless, as the letter went on to report, the Deputy Collector had mounted a diatribe 
12 AA, 16 October 1874, SVN 1874: 493. 13 Tahzib al-Akhlāg, 1 jamādi alsāni 1288 h, cit. in Khurshid 1963: 180–1. 14 See Ghulam Muhammad Khan's letter to Sir Sayyid, cit. in Rizvan 1980: 232. 
362 
An Empire of Books 
against the editors of both papers. Ghulam Muhammad was eager to assure Sir Sayyid of Naval Kishore's friendship and esteem, but also pointed out that the publisher was operating under many constraints. Finally, he urged Sir Sayyid to occasionally write to the publisher and assure him of his solidarity and their common cause.! 
Eagerly anticipated by Sayyid Ahmad Khan, the shift of AA to a daily paper came in 1877. A special supplement to AA announced on 23 May 1877 that starting from 1 June 1877, the paper was to be published on a daily basis, initially for a six-month trial period. The bold venture followed public demand, for readers had for some time expressed a keen desire to receive information on a more regular-daily-basis. Moral and financial support came from prominent citizens such as Lucknow's veteran printer publisher Maulana Haji Harmain Sharifain, C.S.I, and Deputy Collector Raja Jai Kishen Das, C.S.I., the former secretary of the British Indian Association. Muhammad Abdullah Khan Bahadur of Tonk promised a yearly subscription of Rs 100 in support of the venture. Extolling his generous contribution, the paper hoped that other members of the local aristocracy and affluent classes would follow suit (AA, 25 May 1877). 
That AA could continue as a regular daily even after the six-month trial period is closely linked to the specific historic context, notably the urgent need for news that the Turko-Russian war (1877-8) and the Second Anglo-Afghan war (1878–80) were creating among North Indians, parti cularly among Muslims. The paper provided extensive coverage of the wars. In the process, it introduced new features such as a special column entitled 'Latest news from the battlefield' (maidān-e jang ki tāzatarin khabarem) and inserted maps and illustrations. It is interesting to note that even though AA was never an illustrated newspaper, the visual ele ment became increasingly important in its coverage, especially of foreign news. Readers were, among others, regaled with large drawings of the Paris International Exhibition of 1878 (AA, 1 Oct 1878), of scenes from a Kabul war camp (AA, 28 Feb 1879; Fig. 13), and of a Zulu warrior chief (AA, 31 May 1879). 
There was another factor in sustaining the publication of AA on a 
15 Letter from Editor Oudh Akhbar to Syed Ahmad Khan (undated), cit. in Husain 1966: 210-11. Given AA's unrelenting support of Sayyid Ahmad Khan, it is curious that in 1873–4 the NKP published a number of pamphlets authored by one of his most outspoken critics, Maulvi Ali Bakhsh Khan, who wholeheartedly condemned him as a heretic. 
16 For a similar increase in sales of British newspapers provoked by the Turkish crisis, see Brown 1985: 40. 
363 
Avadh Akhbar 
ضمیمه اود و خاطبونه فردی نامند نمره به پا م م 
ایمن ترین و گرانی وای 
، گالم گیث 
. واکتر صاحب 
الراب 
= 
د 
Yt 
تکابل - میم ما تم اطارات 
Fig. 13: Scenes from the Second Anglo-Afghan War, 
Avadh Akhbār of 28 February 1879 
364 
An Empire of Books 
daily basis: following the appointment of Pandit Ratan Nath 'Sarshar' as editor, serialization of his famous Urdu novel Fasāna-e Azād (The Tale of Azad) began in August 1878. It was the first time that serialized fiction was successfully introduced in an Urdu newspaper. A landmark in modern Urdu fiction, Fasāna-e Āzād met with an unprecedented public interest which gave a great boost to the paper. 17 The survival of AA as a daily, then, rested on a combination of contemporary politics and modern prose fiction. Information and entertainment as the two sustaining factors can hardly be dissociated from one another, for Sarshar cleverly incorpo rated current political affairs into his fictional narrative: readers of Fasāna-e Āzād were made day-to-day witnesses of the hero's journey to Europe and his brave exploits in fighting the Russians on the side of his Turkish fellow-Muslims. 
6.2 Contents and Policy AA was a product of the colonial experience in that it aimed to be a modern, professional news magazine. It emulated British models, its coverage including local, national, and international news. In the name of spreading education and enlightenment among the Urdu reading public, AA aimed high, aspiring to be nothing less than the North Indian equivalent of The Times of London (AA, 1 January 1879). The news section made up the largest portion of the paper, which prided itself in being able to cover the whole world'. 
How was efficient news coverage achieved and what were the chan nels of information transfer? It was only three years prior to the inception of AA that the opening of the first telegraph lines in India had induced radical changes in the dissemination of news in the subcontinent.18 No modern news agencies, however, were operating in India before the year 1866, when Reuters started extending its services there.Reuters, 
17 This was rather late as compared to Britain where serial fiction was by no means an invention of the Victorian era but dates back to the eighteenth century. For the history of serialized fiction and instalment publication in Britain, see Law 2000. 
18 The rapid development of the telegraph system has been summed up by David Arnold: 'From a few miles of line in 1851, telegraphs had been extended over 4,250 miles of India and linked forty-six receiving stations by the end of 1856: they ran from Calcutta to Agra and the northwest as well as connecting Bombay, Madras and Ootacamund. By 1865 there were 17,500 miles of telegraph lines, rising to 52,900 miles by the end of the century' (Arnold 2000: 113). 
19 Opened in 1855, the first domestic lines were from Calcutta to Bombay via Agra, from Agra to Peshavar, and from Bombay to Madras. Reuters set up its first 
Avadh Akhbar 
365 
however, was too expensive for the majority of Indian newspaper editors to make use of its services. To ensure a rapid and steady flow of infor mation, Naval Kishore relied on a more traditional system of information distribution and operated his own network of correspondents posted in the major urban centres of India. As a contemporary saying had it, in every district and every princely state one would find correspondents of the colonial government and of Munshi Naval Kishore (Sabiri 1953 [ii]: 112). A substantial portion of the domestic and foreign political news was reprinted from English newspapers, particularly The Times (London), The Pioneer (Allahabad), and Friend of India (Calcutta). News items re garding the Islamic world were culled from Persian and Arabic news papers. Generating news and information was also turned into a public, collective concern in which the participation of the readership was explicitly invited: those who would regularly supply the paper with impor tant, recent, reliable and interesting news items' were promised free copies of AA in return. 
While introducing new concepts of modern informational culture, AA retained some features of the traditional newsletter as described by Michael H. Fisher (Fischer 1993: 79-81). For one, there was the physical appearance of the handwritten and lithographed sheets. The paper retained the term 'akhbārāt' for various categories of news; it adopted a Persian ized vocabulary and cultivated a fairly ornate style. Published in two parts, on Wednesday and Friday, a typical issue of the paper in 1871 combined elements of traditional and modern newswriting in its standard departments. In the following contents overview (Table 6.0) the original Urdu has been retained to show how this intermingling of the traditional and the modern was reflected in the vocabulary used to label the various sections. 
By 1878 telegraph news had moved to the front part of the paper, whereas the advertisement and local news section had been relegated to the back. While directly prompted by the wars, this increased emphasis on rapid coverage of domestic and external affairs also formed part of a wider policy shift: AA slowly moved away from older conventions of 
office in Bombay in 1866. Other offices in Calcutta, Madras, and Karachi followed, supplying the Indian press not only with foreign but also domestic information. The opening of the London-Bombay submarine telegraph cable in June 1870 greatly speeded up the transmission of news from England. Details in G. Storey 1951: 62 8; see also Barns 1940: 311 and Raghavan 1994: 63-4. For traditional systems of information distribution, see Bayly 1996a, esp. chs 1-4.366 
An Empire of Books 
TABLE 6.0 Avadh Akhbār in 1871 
Part One (issued on Wednesday) 
Part Two (issued on Friday) 
1. General advertisements 
1. Lucknow (ishrihārāt mamali) 2. Poetry (nam) 
2. Telegraph news (akhbārāt tār-barqi) 3. Correspondence (khat-kitūbar) 3. Editorial (aditorval) 4. Proceedings of the Committee, etc. 4. Correspondent (kūraspāndan) 
(mazāmin kamiți vaghairah) 5. Telegraph news (ukhbārāt tār-barqi) 5. Translations from the English (tarjuna 
ungrezi) 6 Editorial (aditorval) 
6. Reprints from other papers (manqūlār) 7. Correspondent (kāraspāndan!) 7. Correspondence (khat-kitābat) 8. Translations from English news- 8. Translations from the Government Gazette 
papers (tarjuma ungrezi akhbārāl) (Tarjumu gavarnman! gazar urdi) 9. Miscellanea (akhbărāt mukhtalif) 9. Special notifications (ishtihārāt ghair 
mamüli) 10. Local news/Lucknow (lokal akhbārās) 
ma 
assembling and presenting news, towards a new kind of efficient and professional journalism based on Western models. 
The local section of the paper, providing information on current affairs in Lucknow, was comparatively small. Next to news items on crimes and spectacular incidents, it regularly featured the timetables of the Oudh Rohilkhand Railway (printed in Urdu and Nagari script), legal notices, and the timings of court sessions.20 It also covered a wide array of cultural events, including mushā iras, public lectures and, most importantly, the activities of local civic associations such as the Jalsah-e Tahzib. Musha Ciras organized by the NKP and taking place regularly on its premises received special coverage. The reports on these gatherings, which at tracted both well-known and minor Lucknow poets, read like an inventory of local poetic talent. The AA of 1 January 1878, for example, carried the following notice: 
20 The railway timetable had become an integral part of suburban newspaper content in London's local papers since the 1840s (Harris 1990: 110). In introducing this feature, AA obviously acted on official instructions. 
Avadh Akhbar 
367 
A special gathering of poets took place on Monday at the Avadh Akhbar Press. The occasion was graced by eminent poets among the noblemen of Lucknow. The pattern-line was 'sac to vah hai ki burā hotā hai acchā honā' (True it is, indeed, that being good is bad). But since, due to the lack of time, the distinguished poets had only been informed one day in advance, there were very few ghazals that conformed to the pattern-line. Indeed, most did not conform to it. The audience gained extreme delight from the compositions of Janab Nawab Sirajud Daula Bahadur Junun', Janab Mirza Haidar Sahib 
Afsun', Janab Darogha Mir Vajid Ali Sahib 'Taskhir', ra'is of Lucknow, Janab Munshi Ghazanfar Ali Sahib Halim', Mir Afzal Ali Sahib Afzal', the sons of Janab Tadbir ud Daula Munshi Muzaffar Ali Khan Bahadur, and other distinguished gentlemen. The honourable proprietor of the press 
was extremely grateful for the kindness of all these gentlemen.21 Besides its variety of news items, the paper contained articles on social and cultural topics, education and literature. In matters of social change, it generally adopted a reformist and progressive stance: for example, it urged the government to take strict measures against female infanti cide (AA, 19 July 1870) and condemned the 'sinful practice of polygamy (AA, 26 July 1870).-? It equally condemned sati and urged both Hindu and Muslims to advance widow remarriage (AA, 21 November 1875). Education needed to be modernized: the AA of 11 February 1887 appealed to the Hindu intelligentsia in the provinces to not stay behind in the com petition for modern education but establish their own college on the model of the Aligarh Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College.23 Public welfare' or 'rifah-e 'ām' was a frequently invoked key concept in such articles, in the name of which the paper also gave vent to public grievan ces. Complaints ranged from the want of proper sanitation in Lucknow (AA, 15 March 1869) to the introduction of new taxes by the Municipal Committee which, together with the government income-tax, were said 'to have disgusted the people at large, and created a general disaffection and distrust towards the ruling power' (AA, 28 June 1870),24 While such reports professed to give voice to public discontent, they were generally moderate in tone and clearly testify to the paper's self-styled role as an intermediary between the government and the Indian people. 
21 (My translation), cit. in Sabiri 1953, II: 95. For other mushairas and their participants, see Nurani 1995: 201. In the usual fashion, the poetic contributions presented at these gatherings were published in collections entitled Guldasta. 
22 SVN 1870: 289. 23 SVN 1887: 99. 24 SVN 1869: 126; SVN 1870: 252. 
368 
An Empire of Books 
The political outlook of AA was characterized by loyalty towards the colonial state and support for its policies. Official British opinion con sidered the paper to be moderate and respected' and early on noted the ability with which it was written.-- Yet at times this moderate and cautious stance could border on a kind of opportunism that was suspicious even to British eyes. As an official report noted in 1881: 
Of the Oudh papers the best is the Oudh Akhbar. This paper is, however, somewhat timid in tone, and rarely ventures to advocate strongly any important measures till satisfied that they are likely to find favour with Government. Though a consistent and admiring supporter of Lord Lytton's various measures, no sooner did it hear of his resignation than it hastened to advocate those changes in policy which seemed likely would take place 
under the new Government." Following the formation of the Indian National Congress in 1885, AA be came a prime target for the nationalist Urdu press, particularly once its proprietor Naval Kishore had joined ranks with Sayyid Ahmad Khan's United Indian Patriotic Association and assumed a leading position in the anti-Congress movement. As noted earlier, it is difficult to dissociate political opposition from professional rivalry in the bitter attacks on AA that various Urdu journals begun to indulge in at the time. The continu ously large share of government patronage that Naval Kishore's firin and, with it, AA enjoyed was indeed prone to incite jealousy. The rival Urdu press routinely portrayed Naval Kishore as a sycophant of the colonial empire who, in opposing the Congress, was motivated by self interest and servility alone. AA was declared unable to represent national interests. Avadh Punch defamed the paper as a money-minded 'bania akhbār', while Hindustan accused it of consisting chiefly of translations of articles abusive of natives' taken from The Pioneer and the Civil and Military Gazette.27 Ganga Prasad Varma's Hindustāni denounced it along with other anti-Congress papers that allegedly thrived on government patronage: 
The Oudh Akhbar, the Aligarh Institute Gazette and the Kashi Patrika receive large sums of money from the local Government. Indeed, those three verna cular journals chiefly depend on Government aid for their support and would not long survive the stoppage of the subsidies. ... In return for the 
Home Dept., Public Procs., August 1879: 292-303: February 1883: 187–8 (B); OAR, 1869-70: 145. 
RA NWP&Oudh, for the year ending 31 March 1881: 359. 27 Cit. in Singh 1991: 25; 65. 
Avadh Akhbar 
369 
subsidies which the newspapers above referred to receive, they blindly support all government measures and proceedings, in utter disregard of the interest of the people. Hence the payment of such subsidies is subversive of the freedom of the press. It is almost needless to say that the people have no confidence in the Oudh Akhbar, the Aligarh Institute Gazette and the Kasi Patrika.? 
AA in its turn claimed to have public opinion on its side and retorted that the public trusted the colonial government more than it did the seditious Congress and its organs. In lashing out their polemics, the pro-Congress papers deliberately overlooked the deeper motives of Naval Kishore's opposition to the Congress. No doubt, the publisher had to protect his commercial interests and was careful not to endanger business relations with his major customer by publishing anti-British propaganda in his paper. Yet to narrow his motivation down to economic dependence is certainly overstating the case. AA was not a loyalist paper by constraint but by choice. It firmly believed in the benefits of colonial rule. Loyalty and support of colonial rule, as understood by the proprietor and editors of AA, did not automatically exclude a critique of government. True to its claim of representing public opinion, the paper was on occasion quite capable of articulating dissonant 'native' views. C.A. Bayly has poig nantly described its stance as 'covert criticism of British rule in Hindustan along the lines of old patriotism, but in the voice of unalloyed loyalism? (Bayly 1998: 91). 
The coverage of the visit to Lucknow of the Prince of Wales in May 1876 provides a characteristic example of this stance. The paper not only published numerous poetic eulogies to the distinguished visitor, in its issue of 28 May it also contained a critical piece entitled 'Can the Indian Subjects be Content with the British Government?' which openly expressed dissatisfaction with an administration that failed to cater to the basic needs of a populace assaulted by poverty and hunger." 
AA also liked to pose as a spokesman of the Indian-language press and frequently took up its cause in its columns. The issue of 25 August 1874, for example, carried a complaint about the government's double standards in dealing with the English and Indian-language press, stating that it was 'extremely unjust that, while Government grants special indul gences to editors of English newspapers, and exalts them to high offices 
29 
28 Hindustānī of 6 July 1890, SVN 1890:452. See also the Simha Sahay of 20 May 1890, SVNP 1890: 197. 
29 For a summarized reproduction of this article, see LLH 1876: 8-12. 
V 01 
370 
An Empire of Books 
in the public service, it should confer no such 
fer no such favours on the editors of ular newspapers. '30 In sharp contrast, an anonymous article entitled "The English Papers are jealous of our Free 
hisn papers are jealous of our Freedom' ('Angrezi akhbār hamāri āzādi par khār khāte haim) in the issue of IT AF vernacular press enjoyed a freedom of express the English press which, motivated by envy: 
envy, was therefore provoked into claiming that such freedom was undeserved, premature, and danger ous." Undoubtedly, careful sifting of AA will produce further such exam ples. A detailed assessment of its content, socio-political profile, and public impact remains to be undertaken. Agams 
ertaken. Against the backdrop of Naval Kishore's active involvement in national politics, such an investigation will also have to address the intricate question a tical profile of AA was shaped by its proprietor rather than its various eaitors. In any case, it promises to provide valuable miss to now leading Urdu daily in North India was walking the tightrope between loyalty to the colonial government and the increasing exigencies of Indian nationalism. 
What can be safely said at this point is that from around 1890 AA's 
ion was stagnating. By the turn of the century the paper had lost 
1 of its former appeal. According to Balmukund Gupta, editor of the politically trenchant Hindi iournal Bhāratmitra, this was due to the paper refusal to engage in nationalist politics. In resisting modernization and refusing to formulate its own distinct 'policy', the veteran journalist opined, AA had failed to keep up with the tide of the times. Moreover, despite the paper's monetary resources and its excellent staff, the selection of English news items was 'nonsensical' and their translations into Urdu 'barely intelligible'. Writing in 1905, Gupta concluded: "[AA] is exactly the same as it was twenty years ago, and for this very reason it has not established a reputation for itself in the newspaper world during the past twenty years. Most newspaper readers won't even know its name' (Gupta 1994: 262–3). To this critical observer at the beginning of the new century AA no longer met the needs of modern journalism, but had become a 'lagir kā faqir' and a 'besund kā hāthi'..2 
30 SVN 1874: 355. 
31 Contrary to a curiously misinformed but frequent claim in writings on AA, the article was not entitled 'Our Freedom'. Nor, for that matter, was it the first instance of Bal Gangadhar Tilak voicing his famous slogan 'Swaraj is my birthright' in an Indian newspaper. 
52 1.e., a 'conventionalist and an elephant without a trunk'. Indeed, the paper did not show any substantial increase in circulation since the 1880s. In 1904 its circulation was still no more than 800 copies (Sharma 1959: 367). 
Avadh Akhbar 
371 
6.3 Promoting Urdu Literature: 
Editors and Contributors The self-proclaimed aim of AA was to work towards the progress and welfare of India by informing and educating the Indian public through broad news coverage. At the same time, the paper assumed the function of a literary journal. It promoted poetry and prose writing, covered literary events, announced new publications and provided a discursive forum for the Urdu literati. While the paper attracted the contributions of some leading literary figures from outside Lucknow, its role in the promotion of Urdu literature and the consolidation of a modern prose style goes specifically to the credit of several eminent intellectuals among its editors. According to Sabiri, no other Urdu paper of the period boasted such an illustrious range of editors as AA (Sabiri 1953, II: 59). While some of them were already well-known figures in the intellectual and literary world when they joined the paper, others used AA as a stepping stone in their future careers as publicists and writers. 
Although we have a fair picture of the various personalities associated with the editorship of AA, to establish a definite chronology of the paper's editors remains problematic. Since there was no formal declaration of the editor on the front cover, and since, according to common practice, editorial pieces generally remained unsigned, their names can only be gleaned from references within the paper or from secondary sources. With many contradicting statements standing in the way, the following account can only be tentative." Also, given the scarcity of extant issues for the period 1859–75, we can do little more than establish the identity of the various intellectuals that AA was able to attract. To assess their contributions and the way in which their writings helped to shape the profile of AA remains subject to the future availability of source material. 
The first issues of AA were almost certainly edited by Naval Kishore himself. However, he was soon forced to delegate this time-consuming task to others. In 1859 Maulvi Hadi Ali Ashk', who has already been introduced as one of the NKP's foremost scholars and calligraphers, was appointed the first formal editor of AA. Due to his failing health Ashk was not able to carry out the demanding job for long, but had to abandon it in 1864.34 It is not clear who took over after him. According to Garcin de Tassy, Munshi Shiv Parshad, the manager of the NKP, as sumed the editorship in 1864. The French scholar, however, may have 
33 The following paragraphs draw largely on Sabiri 1953 (II) and Haidari 1980. 
34 In 1864 the publication of Ghalib's Kulliyāt, for which Maulvi Hadi Ali prepared the calligraphy, had to be suspended due to his frail health. 
372 
An Empire of Books 
confused the tasks of press manager and e 
and editor: he certainly made a rather consequential mistake in confounding 
Shiv Parshad with his name sake Raja Shiva Prasad of Benares_the eminent educator and text hool author who ever since has been erroneously associated with the editorship of AA (HLHH3.26873) Munshi Shiv Parshad had originally been hired as a calligrapher for AA. By 1864 
A Á By 1862 he had risen to the post of manager of the NKP. He was a poet of Urdu who adopted the takhallus Wahbi' and has a Kulliyāt-e Wahbi (*1880) to his credit. Specimens of his verse frequently appeared in AA. 
According to an editorial notice published in a later issue of AA, it as the reputed Farangi Mahall scholar Mufti Fakhruddin Ahmad Fakhr' 
(d. 1892) who took over the editorship from Maulvi Hadi Ali, presumably in early 1865.35 His contribution in the NKP's translation 
artment has already been noted. Fakhruddin did not remain editor of AA for long. In 1866 he was succeeded by Muhammad Mehdi Husain Khan, the ex-proprietor of the Riyaz-e Nur Press (est. 1oT) of Multan 
ind former editor of an Urdu weekly of the same name. It appears that Mendi Husain Khan had been forced to close his press in 1856, following 
a sentence of imprisonment of several years. He joined lease from jail.36 
Following Mehdi Husain Khan, in 1867 the post of editor was assumed by Maulvi Raunaq Ali (1846-76), a scholar and poet of Persian and Urdu who wrote under the pen names 'Afsun' and 'Raunaq'. The son of a taʻalluqdārof Barabanki district, Raunaq Ali had come to Lucknow in 1859 to receive his higher education in Islamic learning from Khvaja Azizuddin Kashmiri and Maulvi Nazir Ali, the Arabic professor at the lahmudabad madrasah. He joined the NKP as a proofreader for AA but 
as soon promoted to the position of editor. Naval Kishore seems to have thought highly of him, for in 1870 he sent him to Patiala to oversee 
The notice states: 'In this factory in 1859 [a paper] called Avadh Akhbar was put into circulation. It was launched at a time when the government forces were busy exterminating the mutineers. In the beginning its editor was Maulvi Hadi Ali Ashk. Maulana Afzal al-<ulama Maulvi Mufti Fakhruddin Fakhr for many days served as the editor. He is the same Maulvi Sahib who published a translation of the Kimiya e saʻādat entitled Iksir-e hidāyat. He is also preparing, with perfect eloquence, an Urdu translation of the Tafsir Husaini for the press. Some time later Mehdi Hasan ISIC), who was formerly a correspondent of the Riyāz-e Niūr of Multan, was in charge of the editorship of the paper. In 1870 Maulvi Ghulam Bakhsh [sic] Khan Tapish assumed the responsibility of the editorship with great fervour.' (AA, 2 January 1814, my translation), cit. in Sabiri 1953, II: 58-9. 
Khan 1991: 259–65: Khurshid 1963: 123. 
Avadh Akhbar 
373 
the establishment of a new printing office in the princely state. In October 1871 Raunaq Ali launched the Patiālā Akhbār at the request of the Maharaja of Patiala. He died in 1876 at the early age of thirty (LLH 1876: 
136–7). 
A new era dawned for AA in 1870, when Maulvi Ghulam Muhammad Khan (d. 1904) became its editor. A native of Delhi, he had spent part of his youth in the company of the Nawab of Patauri and subsequently gained experience as a journalist and editor in Meerut and other places. He was also a pupil of Mirza Ghalib and composed poetry in Persian and Urdu under the pen name Tapish'. During the eight years of his editorship AA thrived.37 His close and amicable relationship with Naval Kishore, however, took a dramatic turn in September 1876 when, following a serious altercation between the two men, Ghulam Muhammad Khan left the press. Apparently he felt that he was not receiving due recognition for his intellectual exertions and the effort he put into running the paper. The row may have also been sparked off by his editorial policy, for around that time AA had come under heavy criticism by Nusrat al-Akhbār of Delhi, which in its issue of 1 August 1876, wrote: 
[AA] has not exercised any good influence on the customs of Lucknow. It has not created unity and harmony between Sunnis and Shifas, nor has it spared the people there from calamity. Perhaps it regards writing on religious matters as contrary to the rule; but at least it is a blessing that there is no special discussion by Mushtari and Zohra. 38 Instead, it covers domestic law suits of Lucknow. Outsiders are flustered by such disputes. What is new about it, compared to all other papers, is that it is very self-interested. It desires no one's welfare. The editor is instructed not to write any article beneficial to the public, but only to print reviews of books (published] by the press. 39 
Whatever the reasons for Ghulam Muhammad leaving AA, it was none other than Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan who personally came to his defence: in an article that appeared in the Aligarh Institute Gazette of 29 September 1876 he expressed his deep regret over Ghulam Muhammad's departure and pointed out that Naval Kishore had carelessly let go of one of the most capable editors of his paper, to whom AA owed its entire success.40 
37 It seems that Munshi Fida Ali Aish was assistant editor at the time. Nurani 1995: 74. 
38 Two famous courtesans and poetesses of Lucknow who took part in some of the literary debates held in AA. See Kazim Ali Khan 1986: 138. 
39 (My translation) cit. in Sabiri 1953 (ii): 97–8. 40 Aligarh Institute Gazette of 29 September 1876. 
374 
An Empire of Books The article did not fail in its purpose: a week later, the Aligarh Institute Gazette was happy to report that Ghulam Muhammad had resumed editorship of AA.41 Yet he did not remain with the paper for much longer, but several months later decided to resign and leave the NKP for good. In March 1877 he informed readers of AA that, having devoted his energy to the paper for some eight years and having ruined his health and eyesight in the process, he would quit AA and start his own paper, Mushir-e Qaisar e Hind, instead. 42 
Consequently, a notice was published in AA of 27 April 1877 soliciting applications from learned individuals for the post of editor. The necessary qualifications were excellent compository skills in Urdu and a perfect knowledge of Arabic, Persian, and English. There is a rather dubious claim, probably going back to Garcin de Tassy, that, following Tapish, for a short period Maulana Sayyid Amjad Ali Ashhari' (b. 1848/49) took charge of the paper. This claim is not substantiated by biographical accounts on Ashhari.43 Indeed, it would seem strange that this distin guished scholar of Persian and Arabic should give up his high administrat ive post in the state of Bhopal and shift to Lucknow. In January 1881 Ashhari established his own printing press Amjad al-Mataba in Bhopal, from where he launched the journal Dabir al-Mulk. A prolific poet and writer, he made an important contribution to historiographical and biographical literature in Urdu.44 
Mention has already been made of the next and most famous editor of AA, Pandit Ratan Nath 'Sarshar' (1846-1902). If AA must be credited with having ‘launched the career of one of the most important prose fic tion writers in Urdu' (Naim/Petievich 1997: 171), it was Sarshar who, in 
Brahmin family settled in Lucknow, Sarshar received his education at Canning College and later took up employment as a schoolteacher. He had for some time contributed articles to various journals, particularly to Sayyid Sajjad Husain's satirical Avadh Punch (est. 1877), when, on 10 August 1878, Naval Kishore appointed him editor of AA (Mookerjee 1992: 57-8). Apparently Sarshar had been introduced to the publisher 
41 Aligarh Institute Gazette of 6 October 1876. 
42 Part of Ghulam Muhammad Khan's article has been reproduced by Garcin de Tassy (LLH 1877:40–2). For further details, see also Sabiri 1953 [ii]: 99-104. 
43 See, e.g., Salim Hamid Rizvi, Urdū adab ki taraqqi mem Bhopāl kā hissa (Bhopal 1965: 174-6). I am grateful to Claudia Preckel for directing my attention to this work. 
44 Ibid. See, e.g., his biography of Mir Anis, Hayāt-e Anis (1904), which he wrote on the suggestion of Shibli Nomani. 
Avadh Akhbar 
375 
by DPI R.T.H. Griffith and employed with a view to counteracting the fierce attacks on AA that Avadh Punch had begun to indulge in at the time (Saxena 1990: 325). Needless to say, Sarshar's change of sides did little to alleviate the tension between the two papers. On the contrary, the pub lication of Fasāna-e Azād and the ensuing boost it gave to the circulation of AA provoked jealous attacks and criticism from Avadh Punch. The result, according to Sadiq. was 'an open war between the two papers, which, after a crescendo of abuse and whacking blows on both sides, re sulted in an honourable truce (Sadiq 1995:418). This is not quite accurate, for the attacks continued throughout the 1880s: in August 1880 Avadh Punch accused AA of being an anti-Muslim paper. In 1886 serialization of Sarshar's novel Sair-e-Kohsār, a titillating narrative about a young Nawab's illicit affair with a low-caste woman, prompted Avadh Punch to publicly urge the government to take legal action against Naval Kishore for publishing a 'very obscene' novel in a paper delivered to countless schools in the province.5 
Fasāna-e Azād was published in instalments in AA from August 1878 to January 1880. It started out as a series of humorous sketches (zarāfat) appearing in loose succession from 13 August onwards. 16 With its vivid and humorous portrayal of contemporary social life in Lucknow, it took the reading public by storm and, from January 1879, was published at daily intervals. Later it assumed the form of a special supplement to AA, printed on loose sheets of white paper as against the brown paper used for the newspaper (Madan Gopal 1964: 31). While Sarshar's claims to Fasāna-e Azād being a 'modern novel remain controversial,47 its pub lishing pattern marked the breakthrough of a new narrative genre in Urdu—the serialized novel. As the first piece of original fiction in Urdu written expressly for publication in a newspaper, Fasāna-e Āzād broke new ground: for one, it was a text conceived in instalments, demanding self-contained units which were sufficiently barbed with suspense to hook the reader to the plot before he was relegated to the next issue of the 
45 Avadh Punch of 20 May 1886, SVN 1886: 406. 
46 For the publishing history of Fasānā-e Azād, see Mookerjee 1992: 78-80. As Mookerjee points out, the common notion that the novel was published in AA from December 1878 to December 1879 is based on an incorrect statement given in the 
issues of AA: August 13, 28; September 6, 9, 13, 19, 23, 27; October 3, 9, 18; Novem ber 7. Publication in daily instalments began in late January 1879. 
47 For a discussion of Fasāna-e Azād under this aspect, see Mookerjee 1992: 87 97; Russell 1992: 87-92; Asaduddin 2001: 84–6.376 
An Empire of Books 
paper by the inevitable 'bāqi ū’inda ...' ('to be continued...'). Daily intervals imposed enormous pressure on the writer. The regular doses of opium that Sarshar was allegedly supplied with by the publisher may be a reflection of this. More important than the demands that the new mode of writing put on the author, however, was the new form of reader writer interaction prompted by serial publication in a paper. Reader reac tion to Fasāna-e Āzād was vivid, testifying to the existence of a critical literary public eager to discuss the notion of realism in literary fiction. Readers of AA sent in letters of criticism or suggestions to which Sarshar readily responded with comments or ad hoc modifications in the plot of his narrative (Mookerjee 1992: 102-33). 
As R. Patten has pointed out in the context of the unprecedented success of Charles Dickens's Pickwick Papers, serial publication was a chief means of democratizing and enormously expanding the reading and book-buying public in Victorian England (Patten 1978: 45). In India, too, if much later than in Europe, serialized fiction became a staple and important part of literary magazines and periodicals. Its wider impact on the development of modern fiction and the growth of the reading public in North India still awaits study.48 
Sarshar contributed to the success of AA not only with Fasāna-e Azād, but with numerous articles on literary, educational, political, and social themes in which he advocated progressive thought, enlightenment, and modernity along the lines of what was called the 'New Light'. In his first editorial he laid out the editor's tasks as fourfold, notably (1) to serve his countrymen and lead them to prosperity, (2) to teach them to improve their ways, (3) to bring Indian views to the notice of the govern ment, and (4) to 'illuminate with the radiance of the sun of refinement the dark chambers of the heart of those who languish in the pitch darkness of unfathomed ignorance, begging for light' (cited in Mookerjee 1992: 58). Accordingly, under his editorship, increased coverage was given to social reform issues. His editorials reflect a particular concern with edu cation and the status of Indian women. Moreover, in their poignant and sometimes humorous literary style, they gave a new dimension to journal istic prose in Urdu and assumed model character for many later writers. 
Other famous early instances of serialization include Bankimchandra's Anandamath, published in the monthly Bangadarshan (1881-2); the Hindi translation of his Durgeshnandini serialized in Kavivacansudhā; Abdul Halim Sharar's Urdu historical romances serialized in his Dilgudāz in the 1880s and 90s; and, of course, 
modern Hindi fiction. 
Avadh Akhbar 
377 
Sarshar could self-mockingly pose as an inveterate hemp smoker', who in a fictitious letter to the proprietor of AA complained about the outrageous articles against drug-smoking and drinking through which the paper's new editor had driven half of Lucknow's population out of the city. He could equally well address the ailments of society in a more serious manner, never losing sight of his objective of bringing "New Light' to his compatriots. 
Sarshar resigned from the editorship of AA on 1 February 1880 but remained attached to the NKP for some time. His novels Fasāna-e Jadid (later published in book form as Jām-e Sarshār) and Sair-e Kohsār ap peared in serial publication as special supplements to AA in 1880 and 1886, without, however, enjoying the same kind of success as Fasāna e Azād. Sponsored by Naval Kishore, Sarshar was able to return to his fascination with Don Quixote, which had already inspired Fasāna-e Azād, and complete a long-cherished project of preparing an Urdu version of Cervantes' great picaresque novel. His Khuda'i Faujdar was published from the NKP in 1894 (Mookerjee 1992: 229). 
It is difficult to reconstruct the various editors of AA after Sarshar, the reason being a shift in the paper's organizational structure: the issue of 11 February 1880 announced that the NKP was to take charge of the paper and that no formal editor would be appointed in future. Instead, a group of 'excellent and experienced persons' would be employed to run the paper.49How strictly this policy was adhered to cannot be said. Among those subsequently associated with the editorship were Ghulam Hasnain Qadr Bilgrami (d. 1884), Maulvi Ahmad Hasan 'Shaukat' Merathi, Mirza Hairat Dehlavi and several others who have already been mentioned in connection with the NKP's translation department, such as Munshi Debi Parshad 'Sihr'. By far the most outstanding figure on the editorial staff during the period, however, was Abdul Halim Sharar (1860-1920), the great Urdu essayist and cultural historian of Lucknow. Sharar had spent his childhood in Lucknow and studied at Farangi Mahall. In 1809 he joined his father at the court in exile of Wajid Ali Shah in Matia Burj, from where he contributed his first articles to AA. When, in 1880, he re turned to Lucknow in search of a job, he was promptly employed by Naval Kishore as assistant editor at a monthly salary of Rs 30. With Sharar as editor, AA went a step further in according Urdu prose writing a prominent place in its columns, while also giving increased coverage 
49 AA, 11 February 1880, cit. in Khurshid 1963: 184–5. This also explains why from 1883 onward the SVN list Munshi Shiv Parshad, the manager of the the editor/publisher of AA. 
378 
An Empire of Books to subjects of cultural and social interest. Contributing articles on a great variety of topics, Sharar remained with AA until at least 1884, when he went to Hyderabad as a special correspondent of the paper. Soon after, he started his own monthly magazine Dilgudāz.50 
Next to its formal editors, AA also attracted the contributions of eminent Urdu literati, not least because it was among the first Urdu papers able to offer remuneration to its contributors. Unfortunately, the sources are silent as to the customary amounts paid. Inviting 'useful, excellent, and interesting articles written in idiomatic and fluid English or Urdu', notices in the paper made a discreet promise of 'adequate compensation' (kāfi 
other than Mirza Ghalib who submitted articles on a number of topical themes, among them a piece on the Afghanistan war (AA, 22 April 1862). Ghalib from the outset was a keen reader of AA. His correspondence suggests that within the first year of its existence AA was circulated and read by the Urdu intelligentsia across a wide geographical region. When, in November 1859, Ghalib's friend and publisher Munshi Shivnarayan “Aram' forwarded him a copy of AA from Agra, Ghalib returned it with the comment that there was no need to waste postage since he already received the paper through his cousin Ziyauddin Khan, a regular subs criber (Russell/Islam 1994: 220). Several months later, in a letter to Munshi Naval Kishore dated 18 July 1860, Ghalib announced his own subscription to AA (K.A. Khan 1980: 140). About to enter into a publishing agreement with Ghalib, Naval Kishore did not deem it suitable to ask the venerable poet for payment and began sending him the paper free of charge. In a letter to Ala'i dated 13 December 1863 Ghalib, who was in continuous financial distress at the time, gratefully acknowledged the savings of Rs 24 that his respected friend' Naval Kishore had thus af forded him. 'True', he hastened to add with his customary pride, 'I send forty-eight stamps every year to cover the postage' (Russell/Islam 1994: 295). 
Among Ghalib's shāgirds who contributed to AA we find Ghulam Hasnain Qadr Bilgrami and Nawab Mardan Ali Khan 'Ra'na' (d. 1879). The latter, a ra'is of Murabadad, was a regular contributor to the paper in the 1860s and continued to write for it even after his rise to the position 
50 Sharar's famous literary controversy with Pandit Brajnarayan Cakbast over the foremost masnavi-writer of their times did not, as sometimes claimed, take place in AA but in the columns of Dilgudāz and Avadh Punch in 1905. The NKP, however, published the debate in book form as Mubāhasa-e Gulzār-e Nasim ya'ni Ma'raka-e Cakbast va Sharār (1913). 
Avadh Akhbar 
379 
of Chief Minister in Jodhpur State in 1870. The way in which these re presentatives of Urdu literature adopted the modern medium of the newspaper to publicly expound their views not only on literary but also social and political affairs, to either engage in a critique of colonialism or to extol the benefits of Western civilization, deserves to be explored in greater detail.S1 AA also had a foreign correspondent in London and counted among its regular contributors the eminent Orientalist scho lar and linguist Edward Henry Palmer (1840–82). Palmer, a Fellow at St John's College, Cambridge, had an excellent command of Arabic and Persian. He had studied Urdu with Sayyid Abdullah of University Col lege London and was proficient enough in the language to compose original pieces of Urdu poetry. He contributed articles and poems to AA from the early 1860s. 
Finally—and although it falls outside the time frame of this study a claim frequently raised in Urdu sources shall be addressed here, since it concerns no less famous a literary figure than the great Hindi and Urdu writer Munshi Premchand. The claim that Premchand was one of the paper's editors in the twentieth century is not supported by any of the standard biographies on him. In 1914 Premchand actually declined an offer to join the editors of AA. The busy professionalism reigning in the press office of a daily newspaper did not suit his disposition. As he ex plained to his friend Dayanarayan Nigam: 
Here, even though I am a slave, I have a lot of freedom, for I have no boss sitting on my head nor am I answerable to anybody. That's why I feel free. And I shudder to think of the daily office routine of ten-to-five, with constant mental exertion, and a paper to be published daily. I don't think I can do it. My literary work here is like a pastime; it would then become a profession. (Amrit Rai 1991: 90) 
Premchand, however, did become associated with the NKP much later, when he was appointed editor of the Hindi literary journal Madhuri in 
51 Kazim Ali Khan gives a list of issues of AA which carry contributions by Ghalib and various of his shāgirds or announcements of their works. (K.A. Khan 1980: 136–50). 
52 It is not clear whether Palmer himself was the official correspondent of AA. AA of 22 August 1871 carried the following statement which (unless a form of self praise) suggests two different persons: 'The English Correspondent of the 'Oudh Akhbar' had bestowed great praise on the poetry of Mr Edward Palmer ... He writes that Mr Palmer composes excellent and delectable verses in Qasaid which have extorted praise from the Arabic poets' (cit. in Saxena 1941: 316). For Palmer, see also Arberry 1960: 122-59; LLH 1864: 245-6. 
380 
An Empire of Books 
TABLE 6.1 
Avadh Akhbār: Circulation, Frequency, Editors 
Year 
Frequency 
Editor 
Circulation/ Government subscriptions 
1858 1859-64 1865-6 
weekly weekly weekly 
ca. 400 
1867-9 1870 
weekly weekly 
1871 
weekly/ bi-weekly bi-weekly 
1872 
bi-weekly 
Munshi Naval Kishore Maulvi Hadi Ali Ashk Maulvi Fakhruddin Fakhr/ 
Muhammad Mehdi Husain Khan Maulvi Raunaq Ali Afsos' Maulvi Ghulam Muhammad Khan 
Tapish' Maulvi Ghulam Muhammad Khan 
Tapish Maulvi Ghulam Muhammad Khan 
Tapish' Maulvi Ghulam Muhammad Khan 
*Tapish Maulvi Ghulam Muhammad Khan 
Tapish Maulvi Ghulam Muhammad Khan 
"Tapish Maulvi Ghulam Mohammad Khan 
*Tapish' Maulvi Amjad Ali 'Ashhari'/Pandit 
Ratan Nath 'Sarshar' Pandit Ratan Nath Sarshar' 
1874 
bi-weekly 
1875-6 
600 
1877 
820/50 
bi-weekly/ thrice-weekly thrice-weekly! daily daily 
1878 
719/50 
1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 
daily daily daily daily daily daily daily 
Editoral board consisting of several 
persons, including Abdul Halim Sharar (assistant editor from 1880-2), Mirza Hairat Dehlavi, Munshi Shiv Parshad, Maulvi 
Ahmad Hasan 'Shaukat', Munshi Debi Parshad Sihr' 
1886 
daily 
1887 
daily 
719/50 685/? 715/? 620/? 620/90 605/94 605/94 732/94 732/90 660/94 660/94 595/94 595/94 690/94 690/94 550/94 550/94 540/94 540/90 521/87 503/92 503/92 521/92 521/94 
1888 
daily 
1889 
1890 1891 1892 1893 
daily daily daily 
daily 
daily 
1894 
daily 
1895 
daily 
Avadh Akhbar 
381 
1927. In this position, he may well have contributed occasional pieces to AA. 
While giving a preliminary overview of the rich material contained in AA, this chapter could only hint at some of the issues raised by the study of the most influential and widely-read Urdu newspaper in nineteenth century colonial India. AA merits much closer analysis for it offers a prime example of how, under the impact of colonialism, modern infor mational culture took shape in the Urdu public sphere, while at the same time the forum for literature and literary discourse expanded into a new medium that was available to the general public across various regions and communities. As pointed out by M. Asaduddin, in engaging in an 'intellectual-cultural-literary encounter between East and West, periodi cals and newspapers like AA had a wider bearing on colonial society, in that they became a vibrant and contested site for negotiating the terms of colonial modernity' (Asaduddin 2001: 82). Perhaps one of the most fascinating points of investigation in this context is provided by the ongoing dialogue that AA kept up with its readers and subscribers. Official patronage notwithstanding, in order to not only survive but flourish in the volatile and highly competitive arena of nineteenth-century Urdu journalism, AA was heavily dependent on the goodwill and support of its readers. To exercise its role as a representative and mediator of public opinion, AA had to listen closely to their voice. 
6.4 Other Journalistic Ventures 
The immense success of AA and steadily growing demand for information among the Urdu reading public encouraged Naval Kishore to further invest in the newspaper trade. He was quick to recognize the market po tential of the newspaper media which, if run on a sound commercial basis, could be turned into a profitable business. Consequently, over the years various Urdu newpapers and journals were launched from the NKP Lucknow and the firm's other printing offices. One of the first was the Pațiālā Akhbār, an Urdu weekly started soon after the opening of the Patiala press in September 1871. As already noted, it was put in charge of the former editor of AA, Munshi Raunaq 'Ali. By a special arrangement between Naval Kishore and the Maharaja of Patiala, the paper contained as a supplement the 'Patiala State Gazette', an official organ put under the supervision of the Patiala Council. By 1880 the circulation of the Pațiālā Akhbār had gone up to 300 copies. The Patiala state subscribed to over 130 copies which were distributed to the local colleges and law 
382 
An Empire of Books 
courts.53 Following the example of Patiala, in 1892 the NKP launched the weekly Kapurthālā Akhbār from its Kapurthala branch. It was edited by Sayyid Hamid Husain. Its initial circulation was no more than 75 copies; 50 were taken by the Raja of Kapurthala, the remainder distributed among state officials (Barrier/Wallace 1970: 66). 
In January 1895 Naval Kishore ventured into a new field of journalism with the Oudh Review (Avadh Rivīū), a monthly literary magazine in Urdu. Emulating the model of the European ‘review, the new periodical was devoted exclusively to cultural topics and to contemporary literature of both Indian and foreign provenance. Its express purpose was to cater to Urdu readers' increased appetite for leisure reading. The programme was spelled out in the inaugural issue: the Oudh Review was to include contributions on novels, drama, narrative, pleasantries and humour, poetry, biography, scientific and moral essays, events and news of the month, newspaper and book reviews', as well as translations of the works of 'Europe's famous and celebrated novelists'. 54 Starting off with a fairly high circulation of 500 copies, the Oudh Review might have turned into another successful project but for the sudden death of Naval Kishore within the first month of publication. For some months the periodical was continued by its editor Ramji Das Bhargava. In September publication was temporarily suspended but resumed after some time. The review survived until at least 1902 (Nurani 1995: 21).55 
The aforementioned papers were all owned by Naval Kishore. In ad dition, he was in charge of printing and distributing a number of periodical publications run by government or private institutions. This meant a lucrative additional business for the firm. Among them was the official Urdu organ of the Oudh Educational Department, Akhbar-e Sarrishta-e Talim-e Avadh or Educational Department Gazette. Its editor was Pandit Shivnarayan, the untiring secretary of the Jalsah-e Tahzib. Next to pro 
news and articles on educational topics as well as short narrative pieces. It was not designed for the general reading public but for the department's staff and teachers: of its total circulation of 720 in 1869, 679 copies were distributed to the schools in the province, 30 went to the journal's contri butors, and 6 to private subscribers 56 After 1873 Naval Kishore also 
53 LLH 1874: 79; Barrier/Wallace 1970: 106. 54 (My translation), cit. in Nurani 1982: 44–5. 
39 Neville in his Gazetteer refers to it as 'a well got up monthly magazine with a circulation of 500, owned and edited by Ramji Das, (a) relative of the founder' (Neville 1904: 87). 
56 Oudh Education Rept., 1869–70, No. 402: 69. 
Avadh Akhbar 
383 
took charge of printing the Jalsah-e Tahzib's official organ, Risälah-e Jalsah-e Tahzib, a periodical on social, educational, and political sub jects.57 
If generally a profitable sideline, in one instance the printing of an ex ternal journal turned into a major source of vexation for the publisher. In the early 1870s Naval Kishore was temporarily put in charge of publishing the journals of the Avadh taʻalluqdārs' British Indian Association (Anjuman-e Hind-e Avadh). The association maintained two weeklies, Akhbār-e Anjuman-e Hind (Urdu) and Lucknow Times (English), the latter being a successor to Oudh Gazette. Both journals had initially been printed at the Lucknow Times Press, owned by Maharaja Man Singh of Mehdona, vice-president of the Anjuman-e Hind. Man Singh's case provides a striking example of the financial risk involved in such amateur engage ment with the print media: not only did he incur considerable financial loss in purchasing the press, he apparently spent Rs 100,000 in subsidizing the publication of Oudh Gazette (T. Metcalf 1979: 335). The Anjuman e Hind had agreed to a monthly contribution of Rs 300 in support of the maintenance of the press, on the condition that the appointment and dis missal of its editors were left in its own hands.58 Following Man Singh's death in September 1870, the Anjuman's members asked Naval Kishore to take charge of the Lucknow Times Press. In concluding the deal, the publisher agreed to carry out printing jobs for the Anjuman amounting to Rs 1000 per annum free of cost. Matters came to a pass when Naval Kishore failed to comply with his obligations. Moreover, he had allowed an article abusive of the ta'alluqdārs to be published in the Lucknow Times of 5 March 1871. The Anjuman's secretary, Mirza Abbas Beg, decided to take action against him and before long presented Naval Kishore with a bill that claimed the outstanding amount for the promised printing work (Ahmad 1937: 82-3). It is not clear what happened next, but in December of the same year the proprietorship of the Lucknow 
Times Press was transferred to Mirza Abbas Beg. The new proprietor promptly began to engage in private trade, having agreed to divide the profits 'in the proportion of seven annas in the rupee to Moonshee Nawal Kishore in return for the balance owing to the latter.:59 Apparently, this share was never paid. Moreover, Mirza Abbas Beg failed to pay back a sum exceeding Rs 2000 which he owed Naval Kishore for purchasing another press and for having three numbers of the Lucknow Times printed 
57 OAR, 1873-4: 98. 58 Akhbār-e Anjumān-e-Hind, August 1872, SVN 1872: 441. 59 Akhbār-e Anjumān-e-Hind, August 1872, SVN 1872: 442. 
384 
An Empire of Books 
at the NKP. With the money not forthcoming, Naval Kishore lodged a suit against Abbas Beg. The Anjuman-e Hind, which as before had continued to pay its monthly contribution of Rs 300 towards the maintenance of the Lucknow Times Press, was set down as a defendant; it protested in vain that it had never had any real connection with the press. While the outcome of the lawsuit is not known, the episode provides another poignant example of Naval Kishore's adamant stance in matters of finance. In this particular instance he was even willing to risk severing his close and longstanding relations with the influential Avadh 
ta'alluqdārs' association.60 
60 No details were available for the Buddhi Prakās, a Hindi fortnightly published from the NKP from 1889 to c. 1898. Apparently the earliest Hindi magazine to appear in Lucknow was the monthly Bhārat Dipikā, started in 1881. A newspaper called Dinkar Prakāś was established around 1883 but did not survive for long (Chandra 1959: 366–7). 
