+++
title = "Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu"

+++
Concluding a humorously disparaging travel sketch of Lucknow in 1871—a city of filthy lanes, debauched and reactionary Hindu 
Harishchandra listed the localities worth visiting as ‘Aminabad, Hazrat ganj, the traders' shops, Chauk, the printing press of Munshi Naval Kishore, and the photographer's shop of Nawab Mashkur ud Daula'.' It was with good reason that the House of Naval Kishore attracted the at tention of the great pioneer of modern Hindi literature: at the time it was not only the largest establishment of its kind in the entire subcontinent, but also the single-most important institution in the mass production of low-priced printed books in Hindi.? 
Epitomizing urban Indo-Muslim culture and the highly refined Persian ized style of Urdu poetry, nineteenth-century Lucknow is not a place one would automatically associate with Hindi literature. If, for the contempo rary Hindi literary scene flourishing in Benares and Allahabad, Lucknow occupied a somewhat peripheral position, this is even more true for modern scholars of Hindi literature, whose passing references to the city in the nineteenth century are generally confined to Insha Allah Khan and his early linguistic experiment Rāni Ketki ki kahānī. As a result, the NKP's contribution to Hindi publishing, and with it the preservation 
journal Kavivacansudhā (vs 1928). 
2 For an earlier version of this chapter, see Stark 2004b. 
3 The Urdu poet Insha Allah Khan (d. 1817) was for some time associated with the court of Lucknow. Around 1803 he composed Rāni Ketki ki kahāni, also known as Kahāni theth hindi mem, a prose tale written 'in pure Hindi', i.e., an idiom which, while representing the spoken idiom of the genteel, was to contain no Persian or Arabic words. It later came to be acknowledged as one of the first works in standard Hindi.386 
An Empire of Books 
of the Hindu literary and cultural heritage, has been largely ignored. Dhirendranath Singh was the first to highlight the full scope of this con tribution in his study of the Khadgavilas Press of Bankipur: in his survey of early Hindi publishing he singled out the NKP as the only institution to publish a large and varied selection of Hindi books during the period 1858-80(Singh 1986: 64). This chapter will explore the NKP's activities in promoting and popularizing Hindi literature, both traditional and modern, during a period that marked the early rise of Hindi in the public sphere. 
As discussed in Chapter 4, it was at the behest of the colonial autho rities that Naval Kishore first took up Hindi printing. When, in 1860, he began to operate several letterpresses for Hindi in his shop, it was with the sole purpose of printing official forms, administrative documents, and textbooks in the 'vernacular'. The earliest extant NKP imprints in Hindi are two textbooks on village accountancy dating from 1860-1. At first, Hindi printing remained essentially confined to educational works; nearly all of the fifteen Hindi titles submitted for official registration in 1869 were for educational purposes rather than for the commercial mar ket. Educational publishing in itself reached astounding proportions: according to King's analysis of publishing patterns, almost 55,000 Hindi books were printed in Lucknow in 1868, accounting for over a quarter of the city's total book production and outnumbering Benares by 45,000 printed volumes (King 1994: 43). While indicating the sheer size of the colonial textbook venture, this remarkable figure tells us little about what was actually bought and read by the nascent Hindi readership. In order to find out about readers' tastes during this early period, one would have to turn to the hitherto largely unexplored area of the bazaar, with its out put of cheap'tales, religious tracts and prayer books, ritual, astrological and pilgrimage manuals, almanacs, and so on. Due to the ephemeral na ture of these products of early print culture, such a study poses enormous difficulties. However, as Krishnacarya's catalogue of early Hindi im prints (Krishnacarya 1966) suggests, respectable' publishers, too, reli ed heavily on the popular bazaar genres in order to stay afloat in the market. 
Prior to the 1860s there was not much of a market for printed matter in Hindi beyond the aforementioned genres. Despite the fact that Nagari, including its cursive variant Kaithi, was the script most popularly used 
4 See Appendix III for a chronological list of major NKP Hindi publications. 
The distinction between educational and non-educational titles was, of course, rarely clear-cut. Texts such as Tulsidas's Rāmāyan or Lalluji Lal's Premsāgar would figure in both categories. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
387 
(Dalmia 1997: 176), and that Hindi played an important role in primary education, it had not yet been accorded official language status. With the exception of the hill districts of Kumaon and the Saugor and Nerbudda (Narmada) Territories of the NWP, in the colonial public sphere Hindi was largely dysfunctional, since it could not provide an avenue into the highly coveted public service. As King has argued, this anomalous situa tion was due to the contradictions inherent in British language policy: "The British educational system fostered a Hindi-speaking elite, served as an agent of social mobilization, and provided a stimulus to the growth of Hindi literature and the use of the Nagari script. The British adminis trative system, by recognizing only Urdu and the Persian (Urdu) script for official purposes, supported a group-perceived chiefly as Muslims though including many Hindus—opposed to the interests of Hindi advo cates' (King 1994: 118). As a result, the use of Hindi as a print language remained largely confined to missionary and educational publishing. The situation was to change dramatically from the 1860s, when official support and a changing cultural climate combined to give a tangible boost to literary activity in Hindi. This activity was in part inspired by the protest against the neglect of Hindi and the attendant demand for its official recognition that had followed the introduction of Urdu as the court and administrative language in the NWP, Bihar, and part of the Central Provinces in 1837. By the 1860s the controversy over the court language had gained momentum, rallying supporters of Hindi and the Nagari script in a plea for greater official use of their language. The pro posed scheme of instituting a vernacular university in the NWP led to a public debate on whether this 'vernacular' was to be Urdu or Hindi, further fuelling the rivalry between the two languages. In 1868 the Allahabad Institute made a declaration in favour of Hindi and the Nagari script. In the same year Shiva Prasad published his influential Memoran dum. Court Characters in the Upper Provinces of India, in which he took up the cause of Hindi and vehemently attacked the government for forc ing a 'foreign language', Urdu in Persian characters, upon the 'helpless masses'. The memorandum had strong anti-Muslim overtones; it express ly linked its plea for making Hindi the court character to the restoration of 'Hindu nationality and revival of Sanskrit culture. Drawing on the myth of the antiquity of Hindi, the language of Hindustan before the Muslim invasion, Shiva Prasad made a case for Hindi to be the legitimate successor of Sanskrit, for it provided the common linguistic bond for the whole of North India. 
For a more detailed analysis of the Memorandum, see King 1994: 130-1. 
388 
An Empire of Books 
Such formulations helped to strengthen the notion of a separate Hindi identity. Once the Hindi agitation had found a common voice, it also began to receive official support. An important first step was made in 1872 when Hindi was granted official language status in the Central Pro vinces. In 1880 the Bengal Government ordered the exclusive use of the Nagari or Kaithi script in large parts of Bihar. By contrast, in the NWP&Oudh, the majority of British administrators continued to favour Urdu. Even though Hindi had found an influential supporter in M. Kemp son, DPI from 1861 to 1877, it was not before 1900 that it was accorded equal status with Urdu. Its late triumph has been described as an 'incon 
Although official recognition was still some forty years away, from the 1860s Hindi was definitely on the rise. The resulting impetus to print ing and publishing was not only visible in a dramatic upsurge of Hindi readers and manuals' (McGregor 1974: 74), but also in an increased activity in the literary marketplace. The impact on the market was both quantitative and qualitative: the thus far limited array of printed works in Hindi expanded considerably in size and scope. That the new support of Hindi was 'an aspect of the larger cultural consciousness rather than a direct product of encouragement at official level' (ibid.) is most visibly reflected in a rise in the proportion of non-educational works as compared to those devoted to educational subject matter. A NWP report of 1869 noted an 'abundance of religious works with around twenty titles, total ling 27,000 copies. Equally important, it also acknowledged for the first time the existence of twenty-eight books of light reading', a substantial number. The noticeable increase in Hindi titles was attributed to 'a considerable anxiety on the part of educated Hindus in this part of India, to bring the Hindi language forward as the proper vernacular of the peo 
ple.'8 
The nascent Hindi reading public grew increasingly self-conscious in its choice of reading matter: inspired by Hindu revivalist and nationalist sentiment, Hindi readers turned to their religious as well as literary herit age. The new cultural consciousness generated a process of retrospective reflection on what constituted the Hindi literary tradition; over time it led to the first attempts at the formation of a literary canon. Publications such as Raja Lakshman Singh's model translation of Kalidasa's Sakuntalā 
For an account of government language policy, see King 1994: 53-79. 8 PGNWP. General Dept., 13 March 1869: [4). 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
389 
(1863), Shiva Prasad's anthology of Hindi pieces entitled Gurkā (1867), and Harishchandra's journal Kavivacansudhā (est. 1868), provided major impulses in a pervasive cultural process in which Hindi and its literature were gradually made into prime symbols of Hindu national identity. Vasudha Dalmia (1997) has brilliantly analyzed the evolution of Hindi as the national language of the Hindus as a threefold process in volving first, the dichotomization from Urdu and concomitant assertion of the autonomy of Hindi; second, the standardization of the language by means of grammars, dictionaries, and school textbooks; and third, its historicization, that is the construction of an ancestry and unbroken lite rary tradition going back to the great Sanskrit past (ibid.: 148). How were these developments reflected in the Hindi publishing market? To what extent did a large commercial publisher like Naval Kishore participate in or even try to actively influence this process? 
An astute entrepreneur, Naval Kishore could not but react to the new cultural consciousness and concomitant demand for greater public use of Hindi. The circumstances clearly called for an investment in Hindi publishing. Technically it was a small step, the firm being already in possession of the necessary typographic equipment and know-how to print in Nagari. Consequently, while continuing to print educational material for the British, from the mid-1860s Naval Kishore began to en gage in Hindi publishing on his own account. His initial selection of titles was tempered by entrepreneurial caution and clearly reflected a market oriented approach, limited as it was to works of assuredly high popularity. In making his choices, he looked to the chief presses of Bombay, Agra. and Benares for guidance, as is suggested by a substantial number of low-priced NKPreprints of Hindi works previously published elsewhere. Ultimately, however, Naval Kishore's publishing strategy was geared towards enhancing the market for Hindi through a combination of the tested classics and a selection of previously unpublished works. His ap proach was at once conservative and innovative; it firmly relied on a varied selection, low pricing, and effective marketing. 
What does the NKP's early Hindi list tell us about reading tastes in the late 1860s? What genres were represented, and what kinds of books were most likely bought for religious, instructional, or recreational pur poses? Readers were most interested in devotional literature in Brajbhasha and Avadhi, particularly the classics of the great medieval poets Tulsidas and Surdas. Popular prose tales of the Baitāl paccisi kind and pilgrimage guides such as Avadh yātrā (Journey Through Avadh) and Banyātrā 
390 
An Empire of Books 
(Forest Journey), a text describing the traditional circumambulation of Braj, were next in popularity. A further bestselling category, to be dis cussed later, consisted of medical and astrological manuals. Finally, the NKP, like all major presses, issued its own Hindi almanac. 
As the above categories indicate, the time was not yet ripe for new lite rary genres, which only appeared on commercial publishers' lists after c. 1870. The NKP's early Hindi list tallies with McGregor's observation that until the end of the 1860s there occurred little of the hoped-for lite rary development, with most literary publications being, as before, edi tions of medieval Brajbhasha verse (McGregor 1974: 74). According to the British publication report of 1865, even a place like Benares produced only a 'very small amount of publishing work': no more than sixteen Hindi and Sanskrit titles were issued from the Benares presses during the latter half of the year, out of which two were almanacs and twelve re prints. The sole new Hindi work was a commentary on Tulsidas's Rāmā 
yan.10 
Not surprisingly then, the market for non-educational Hindi books at first hardly satisfied Naval Kishore's commercial aspirations. In 1870 we find him complaining that, with the exception of Tulsidas's Rāmāyan and Lalluji's Premsāgar, Hindi titles were not selling well. The publisher had reason to be impatient, for by that time he had already invested in some twenty-five titles. With the Hindi reading public still in the making, it was imperative to offer incentives for people to read and, as importantly, purchase books. The most promising way to enlarge the audience for printed texts was to draw on a familiar corpus of religious classics. Whether newly edited or issued in cheap reprints, these were crucial in stimulating an interest in other genres as well. Another strategy was to rely on inexpensive mass-produced editions. In the scheme of popularizing Hindi literature, the two criteria of affordability and accessibility were paramount. At the NKP, an “average' first print run for a non-educational Hindi title ranged from 550 to 1250 copies, while reprints could easily amount to several thousand copies. 550 copies appears to have been the lowest number to make the production of a title commercially viable. With prices generally not exceeding a few annas in the case of small tracts or booklets, and a maximum of two or three rupees for voluminous publications of several hundred pages, the NKP tried to keep Hindi 
Avadh yātrā was based on the Padmapurāna and Skandapurāņa. Its compiler Munshi Rai Gursharan Lal was a pleader at the Gorakhpur court. 
10 Home. Public Branch. 7 June 1866, nos 18–19: 2. II RPE Oudh, 1871: 175. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
391 
books within the reach of the average urban reader. Its 1869 typeset edition of the Rāmcaritmānas, for example, comprising 600 pages, was sold at Rs 3. The 1870 lithographed Padmāvar of 360 pages was sold at Rs 2. The bulk of publications, however, consisted of small booklets in the anna-range, that is chapbooks containing prayers, devotional verse, popular tales, etc. 
In the Hindi literary marketplace, the transition from a publishing sys tem dominated by religious literature to a system that put more emphasis on secular titles took place roughly from the 1870s onwards. Having said this, it is important to remember that the distinction between the two cate gories is hardly clear cut, particularly in the case of large sections of pre nineteenth-century Hindi poetry. The NKP's expansion into the domain of secular literature after 1870 is suggestive of the larger trend. At this point, Hindi publishing entered a new phase, increasing rapidly in both size and scope. While religious and devotional titles continued to prevail on the publisher's list, the growing secularization of subjects found its reflection in the introduction of new generic categories: rhetoric poetry, drama, and prose fiction. The successive stages of the NKP's shift from the sacred to the secular are outlined in detail below. 
7.1 Popularizing the Classics of Hindu 
Devotional Literature It is hardly surprising that, when embarking on Hindi publishing, Naval Kishore first turned to the classics of Hindu devotional (bhakti) literature and in doing so, to the most widely cherished devotional text, the great Hindi epic Rāmcaritmānas (Holy Lake of Ram's Deeds) by Tulsidas. Since the release of the first printed edition in c. 1810 from Calcutta, the Rāmcaritmānas or Rāmāyan Tulsikrt, as it was commonly known, had remained a steady seller. Most Indian commercial publishers relied on it, as testified by more than a hundred printed editions prior to 1890 (Lutgendorf 1994b: 77). Individual chapters of the text, especially Kis kinda kānd and Sundara kānd, were also prescribed as school textbooks, and were hence in high demand. The NKP brought out its first Rāmcarit mānas in 1863, in an illustrated lithographed edition. Another edition, sponsored by the Lucknow Pandit Dindayal Tripathi, followed in 1865.12 
12 Although written by the same scribe Pandit Murlidhar, a Nagar Brahmin, the two lithographed editions of 1863 and 1865-6 are distinct from one another. A copy of the earlier NKP Rāmāyaṇa preserved in the OIOC gives no date on its title page, but bears a stamp of the British Museum dated 8 February 1866. Given the time it took 
392 
An Empire of Books 
At this early stage, private literary patronage still played a significant role in financing Hindi publications. Another famous devotional classic, the collection of poetry ascribed to Surdas and known as Sūrsāgar (Ocean of Sur, *1864), was printed at the instance, and with the support, of Maharaja Mansingh of Ayodhya, whose role as a literary patron has already been mentioned. By that time the corpus of compositions attri buted to Surdas had grown into a large oeuvre of over 2000 poems (Hawley 1984:37). While parts of Sūrsāgar had earlier appeared in Rāg sägarudbhav rāg kalpadrum(1843), it was the NKP compilation, prepared by Pandit Kalicaran and Munshi Jamunaprasad, which came to be re garded as the first 'standard' edition of the collected verse of Surdas (Fig. 14).13 To make it affordable for the general reader, the typeset edi tion of 770 pages was divided up into eight individually sold parts. 14 In this format, Sūrsāgar was well received and by 1882 had gone through five editions. 
The NKP's early focus on Tulsidas and Surdas was one of the first at tempts by a commercial publisher to provide Hindi readers with the collected works of the great icons of medieval Vaishnava bhakti. The publication of the Rāmāyaṇ was followed by further works of Tulsidas, including (1) Dohāvali(*1864), (2) Hanumān bāhuk(*1868),(3) Gitāvali (*1870), (4) Kavitāvalirāmāyan (also called Kavitt rāmāyan, *1874), and (5) Vinayapatrikā (*1876) with the commentary "Rāmtattvabodhini' by Shivprasad Simha. Sūrsāgar was supplemented by some of Surdas's minor and hitherto unprinted verse collections: Cīrharan(*1868), Bāmsuri līlā (*1868) and Bisātin līlā (*1869). 
Initially the NKP's corpus of bhakti titles was rather limited in scope. Next to the aforementioned works by Tulsidas and Surdas it included only three additional titles. The first, Sukhsāgar (Ocean of Bliss, *1866), Makkhanlal's Hindi prose version of the Bhāgavatapurāņa, has already been discussed in Chapter 5. The second was Brajvilās (Enjoyment of Braj, *1866), an eighteenth-century Brajbhasha composition by the Vallabhan poet Brajvasidas (b. 1733), which was explicitly intended as a digest of the Sūrsāgar, conveying the life of Krishna 'in a single, 
books from India to reach the British Museum, 1863 seems a plausible date of publi cation. 
13 Krishnacarya lists two earlier editions of Sūrsāgar, albeit without any reference to size and content, issued from the Ilahi Press in Delhi and the Mumbai ul-ulum Press in Mathura in 1860 (Krishnacarya 1966: 145). 
14 Notably, (1) Sūrsāgar sarāvali, (2) Rāgkalpadrum nityakirtan, (3) Rāgsā garodbhav, (4) and (5) Rāgkalpadrum (Dānlilā, Anurāglilā, Rāslilā, Mānlilā), (6) Prabhuji ko mahātmya, Vinayapatrikā, (7) Mathurālilā and (8) Bhramargit. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
393 
|| सूरसागर ॥ 
, जिसमें परम भक्ता सूरदासजी ने बीसष्ण चन्द्र महाराज को 
____ होता कि हरि भक्तों के वाले योजष्ण चरिष और लीला कमो अक्षत का 
ममुद्र नाना छन्द और रागों में बर्शन किया है ॥ सय कोटे बड़े महाशय हरि भक्तों को घपलोकन के वास्त 
अयोध्यापुरी के महाराजा मानसिंह 
कायम जन प्रताण की 
अनुमति से 
मुंशी नवल किशोर ने अपने यंचालय में बहुत स्पष्ट शीसे के अचारों में 
मुशी नमुनाप्रसाद को संयुक्त करके 
पण्डित कालीचरण से अत्यन्त शुद्ध करवाक रूपवाया । 
स्थान लखनऊ 
सन् १८९४ ईसवी व सम्बत् १९२० विक्रमादित्य । 
Fig. 14: Title page of Sūrsāgar (1864) 
connected narrative rather than so many parts' (Hawley 1984: 58). With its lucid style and popular subject matter, Brajvilās already enjoyed the status of a pre-print classic when it was first issued from Lalluji Lal's Sanskrit Press in 1817. The NKP edition was one of several subsequent reprints. 15 The third work, Bhaktakalpadrum or Bhaktamāl (Garland of Devotees, *1870) by Raja Pratap Singh of Sidhua, was not an original 
15 E.g., Agra 1862; Calcutta 1863. 
394 
An Empire of Books 
Hindi text but a prose translation of a popular nineteenth-century Urdu adaptation of Nabhadas's classic hagiology Bhaktamāl. More will be said about it later. 
From around 1870 this small collection expanded rapidly and came to encompass a host of major and minor devotional works, including a steadily increasing surge of contemporary compositions. As before, col lections of Brajbhasha verse by poets both old and new remained a domi nant category on the publisher's Hindi list (see Appendix III). For some time to come the corpus of devotional literature remained clearly Vaish navite in nature, reflecting the strong ideological link between Vaishnava bhakti and what came to be identified as the core texts of Hindi literature by Harishchandra of Benares, the leading literary figure of his generation. The NKP's emphasis on the textual tradition of Vaishnava bhakti may, at a more personal level, also be seen to reflect Naval Kishore's own reli gious grounding in Vaishnavism. His ancestral home was situated near Mathura in Braj, the spiritual homeland of the bhakti sect of Vallabhacarya (1479-1531). While it would be going too far to make inferences on the publisher's sectarian affiliation, it is interesting to note that, with titles such as Sūrsagar and Brajvilās, his early selection of devotional works shows a certain predilection for poets associated with the Vallabha sampradāya. Indeed, the NKP was to assume a leading role in the disse mination of the key texts of the Vallabha sampradāva in the 1880s, when it issued a series of reprints of the sect's most important prose works. These hagiographical vārtās (sectarian accounts) had first been printed in the late 1860s at the Vyaghrapad Press at Beswan (Aligarh district), a small amateur enterprise owned by Thakur Giriprasad Varma.ló Issued in 1883–4, the NKP reprints included (1) Caurāsī (vaisnavan ki] bārttā (Account of Eighty-four Vaishnavas), the oldest and most popular work within the sect's hagiographical literature; (2) Vacanāmrt (Nectar of Speech), a text ascribed to Gokulnath which holds significance as one of the oldest extended prose texts in Brajbhasha; (3) Vallabhākhyān (Account of Vallabha), a seventeenth-century Gujarati text by Gopaldas; 
16 Varma was an enthusiastic champion of the orthodox Hindu tradition. As a British report noted: “This gentleman has established a press in his village, and busies himself with the publications of editions and Bhasha versions of Sanskrit works. His object is the revival of the old Hindoo religion in its integrity, as he is impressed with the idea of the vicisnouess [sic] and unreality of modern Hindooism, or the creed of the Purans as opposed to that of the Vedas' (PGNWP. General Dept., 19 March 1870: 42). 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
395 
and (4) Sri Govardhannāth ki prākatya vārtā (Account of the Revelation of Shri Govardhannath).17 While being NKP publications, all four texts were printed at the Mumbai ul-Ulum Press in Mathura, run by Naval Kishore's caste-fellow Kanhaiyalal Bhargava. The NKP also promoted the works of a contemporary Vallabhan poet by the name of Govardhandas Dhusar who, as his name indicates, was another caste-fellow. His com positions Dohāvali do sau bāvan kināmāvali(-1884), Brajvilās sārāvali (*1884) and Mohanmālā-caurāsi ki nāmāvali (?1884) appear to be minor reworkings of the classic vārtās, for neither they nor their author find mention in the standard reference works on Hindi literature. While the vārtās had long enjoyed canonical status within the Vallabha sam pradāya, the NKP's mass-produced reprints served to introduce them into the wider Hindi literary market. It is significant that this happened shortly after Bharatendu Harishchandra had begun his efforts to reformulate Vaishnavism and re-establish the Vallabha sampradāya in Benares. In his Uttarārdha-bhaktamāl (Later-day Bhaktamāl), a poem published in Hariscandracandrikā in 1876, Bharatendu had drawn heavily on the Caurāsi Vaisnavan kī vārtā, highlighting its importance to contemporary readers as a key text of the Vaishnava tradition. Later, in his influential essay "Vaisnavatā aur bhāratvars' (Vaishnavism and India, 1884), he propounded a historically coherent and all-inclusive Vaishnavism which he placed at the core of a new Hinduism of national dimensions. 18 The timing of the NKP's editions of major Vallabhan sect arian texts is too obvious not to suggest a connection with this ongoing discourse. 
A second sectarian trend mirrored in NKP Hindi religious and devo tional literature after 1870 was the proliferation of works originating within the Rāmrasik community. The term rasik (one who savours ras, literally "juice, essence, flavour') refers to a group of poets devoted to Ram and the twin deity Sita-Ram that emerged in the late sixteenth cen tury. Influenced by Krishnaite theology, they cultivated a devotional attitude in which they identified themselves with the sakhis or female consorts of Sita. 19 The rasiks had their roots in Rajasthan, from where they migrated to the most famous sites of Ram bhakti, the pilgrimage 
17 For the relevance and publishing history of these texts, see Tandan 1960 and Barz 1994. 
18 For a discussion of both texts, see Dalmia-Lüderitz 1992. 
19 Further details in Simha 1957; McGregor 1984: 167–71. Lutgendorf 1994a: 310-21.396 
An Empire of Books 
centre of Chitrakut in Central India and the city of Ayodhya. Here, the community flourished. The body of poetic and poetological works pro duced by these connoisseur poets generally shows a high degree of.ac complishment and poetic skill; in it, poetological and ritual concerns are deeply intertwined. Prominent works include Janaki Prasad's Rāmnivās Rāmāyan (*1889), a reworking of the Rāmāyan from a Ramrasik pers pective, and Nrtyarāghav (*1892) by Ramsakhe, a native of Jaipur who flourished in the early eighteenth century. These and several other Rām rasik works commercially produced by the NKP point to existing proces ses of canon formation within the community, while also underscoring the readiness of its leading intellectuals to engage with the new medium of print. Moreover, they suggest a strong connection between the Luck now publisher and the nearby town of Ayodhya, one of the community's main centres. Ayodhya was home to the reputed rasik theologian Yugal ananya Sharan ‘Hemlata' (1818–76), a prolific author of seventy-four works. Following Yugalananya's death, Naval Kishore acquired the manuscript of his Pārasbhāg (*1883), a reworking of al-Ghazali's Kimiyā-e saʻādat which was allegedly retrieved 'with great effort' and the help of Yugalananya's successor Janaki Var Sharan from the late scholar's private library.20 The library also seems to have yielded a rare manuscript of the earliest known Hindi commentary on Tulsidas's Rām caritmānas, composed in 1805 by the Ramanandi sadhu Mahant Ram charandas (c. 1760-1835), another key figure in Ayodhya's flourishing rasik community. Naval Kishore acquired the copyright and first published it in 1882.21 A further prominent Rāmrasik exponent on the NKP list was the Raja of Rewa, Vishvanath Singh (1789-1854), a descendant of a line of local rulers famous for their patronage of the arts. Vishvanathsingh was a prolific poet credited with thirty-eight works, and the author of an influential sectarian commentary on Kabir's Bījak. We will return to the commentaries of Ramcharandas and Vishvanathsingh later. 
Next to a host of works representative of personal devotion to Ram and Krishna, the NKP also invested in a small number of works reflect ing the heterodox sant tradition. With the publication of Jñansvaro daya (Ascent of the Sun of Knowledge, *1874) and, later, Bhaktisāgar (Ocean of Devotion, *1895), it was the first to widely publicize the prin cipal works of the eighteenth-century Rajasthani sant poet and founder of a sectarian tradition Charandas (1703-82). It was perhaps no coinci dence that Naval Kishore chose to put his teachings into print, Charandas 
20 Publisher's notice inserted in Mangaldas, Jñantarung (*1889). 21 QLP, NWP&Oudh, 2nd quarter 1883. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
397 
being a Dhusar by caste. To promote his writings meant paying tribute to an illustrious caste member and fostering the sense of a distinct literary tradition within the Dhusar-Bhargava community. Another sant poet to be published was Sundardas (1596-1689), a prominent disciple of the Rajasthani sectarian leader Dadu. The 1882 NKP edition of Sundarvilās (Pleasure of Sundar, also known as Sundarkri savaiyā) was the first instance of Sundar's principal verse collection appearing in print. In being for the most part corrupt and questionable' (Sharma vs 1993: 17), it reflected an early stage in the accomplished poet's canon ization in print..? 
Expositions and Commentaries Popularizing the classics of Hindi literature also meant expounding them. Print culture had brought with it the transition gradual from prac tices of collective oral exposition to silent individual reading, entailing the need for a new type of textual explanation. This was particularly evident in the case of religious texts, which traditionally relied on oral exposition in the form of public readings (kathā). Whereas such oral practices centred on the Brahmin priest or learned pandit as the sole exegete of the text, in a private reading situation this interpretive function had to be assumed by the text itself. What was needed were commentaries that would facilitate contemporary readers' understanding of the classics with regard to both their archaic and dialectal language and their subject matter. 
Once the NKP had published the classic works of medieval and later Hindi poets, it embarked on the second step in the popularization venture and, in the mid-1870s, launched a series of editions with commentaries. Catering for varied audiences of religious specialists on the one hand, and lay readers on the other, some of these editions included learned commentaries by scholars of authoritative standing while others gave popular expositions or paraphrases in simple Hindi prose. The firm's at tempt to appeal to scholarly and lay readers alike is evident in its substan tial contribution to the tradition of expounding the Rāmcaritmānas.23 Starting with the publication of Mānashams bhūsan (*1866), a hitherto unprinted commentary by Shukdevlal of Mainpuri, the NKP engaged in 
different intellectual, social, and geographical backgrounds. 
22 For further details on these two sant poets, see Caturvedi vs 2021: 509-11;718 24. For Sundardas, see also Thiel-Horstmann 1983: 13-18. 
23 For the textual tradition of commentaries, see Krishnacarya 1989. 
398 
An Empire of Books 
By 1873 the NKP had turned out over 50,000 copies of the Rāmāyan. The pride of the publishing house was its large-letter edition, designed specifically for juvenile and aged readers; nothing like it 'had ever been produced by any press in Hindustan'. Another edition, Rāmāyan satik, contained an introduction and commentary by Raghunath Das, one of the foremost contemporary exegetes.24 The volume introduced significant new features, such as a sixty-page glossary of difficult words, later pub lished separately as Rāmāyansabdārthkos (*1875). Changes had also been made in the textual arrangement: for the first time the different stan zas were clearly separated from each other. While the edition may not measure up to modern standards of critical editing, the great editorial effort that went into it is obvious. According to the publisher's notice, in revising the text the NKP's pandits had consulted a large number of manuscripts in order to eliminate the 'thousands of inaccuracies con tained in earlier editions.25 A second Rāmāyan saţik of 1873 contained a different glossary, as well as a section entitled 'Itihās' which provided explanations on mythology and was also published separately. Frequently reprinted, these NKP editions exemplify a general trend in the publishing history of the epic. As Lutgendorf has shown, the many line-to-line prose glosses, glossaries, and other explanatory features that came to form a standard part of Rāmcaritmānas editions after 1870 were designed to serve the needs of 'a literate but geographically and culturally hetero geneous audience which increasingly expected editions to supply them with an interpretive framework with which better to understand the epic' (Lutgendorf 1994a: 78). Naval Kishore was acutely aware of the growing demand for such interpretive tools. Therefore, he did not stop at the various Mānas editions, but, in the 1870s, invested in an entire series of modern prose expositions on Tulsidas. The ambitious project was put into the hands of Pandit Baijnath Kurmi, a Nagar Brahmin belonging to Barabanki district. The pandit was a literary connoisseur whose inter pretation of Tulsidas relied heavily on poetical and aesthetic theory.26 Published between 1878 and 1892, the NKP series came to include com mentaries on thirteen different works of Tulsidas.27 The example of Baij nath shows how widely circulated editions like those produced by Naval Kishore could greatly enhance the reputation of individual exegetes and 
24 Raghunath Das's commentary was first published from Benares in 1835. 25 Rāmāyaṇ saţik (Lucknow *1873), vijñapanpatra. 26 Lutgendorf 1994a: 158 and 1994b: 68–70. 
27 I.e.(1) Gitāvali satik, with the commentary Manidipikā;(2) Kavitāvali sarik with the commentary Ratnadīpikā; (3) Tulsi satsai satik; (4) Rāmāyan tulsikrt satīk with the commentary Rāmcaritmānas-bhūsan; (5) Vinayapatrikā satik;(6) Barvai rāmāyan 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
399 
the influence of their interpretations (Lutgendorf 1994a: 61). Baijnath's commentaries, especially his 'Rāmcaritmānas-bhūsan (*1884), were to accord him a prominent place among contemporary exegetes of Tulsi das. They also attracted the attention of the eminent British linguist G.A. Grierson, who judged them to be among the best available expositions on Tulsidas (Grierson 1889: 46–7). Baijnath subsequently assisted Grierson and the Khadga vilas Press in preparing the first 'critical edition of the Hindi epic in 1889. 
Meanwhile, following the publication of F.S. Growse's highly ac claimed English translation of the Rāmcaritmānas in 1880, the NKP made another important contribution to the exegetic history of the text when, in 1882, it issued the first printed edition of "Rāmānand Lahiri', the earliest known complete Hindi commentary. It was composed by Mahant Ramcharandas of Ayodhya around 1805. Born in a Brahmin family of Pratapgarh, Ramcharandas had renounced the world and settled in Ayo dhya, where he rose to a position of eminence as leader (mahant) of his own religious establishment. His daily public lectures (kathā) on the Mānas were famous and well attended. Resulting from them, "Rāmānand Lahiri' was committed to writing over a period of twelve years, with the assistance of a team of twelve pandits. The commentary distinguished itself in its claim to be based on an autograph manuscript by Tulsidas (Lutgendorf 1994a: 140–1). It was issued in seven volumes as Rāmāyan Tulsīdās krt satīk (*1882) in a high print run of 1200 copies, and sold at Rs 7. 'One of the most highly esteemed commentaries' (Grierson 1889: 46), it not only held importance in scholarly circles, but also appealed to a wider readership. The publisher's notice extolled the author's lucid style, advertising the commentary as 'so easily intelligible that even those of little knowledge will understand the full purport of the Rāmāyan'. The second edition of 1888 was exhausted within a year. A third edition, issued in both hardcover and paperback form, followed in 1890. If the most highly acclaimed, it did not remain the last commentary on the Mānas issued from the NKP, but was followed by Mānasdīpikā' of Ish var Mishra (21894, Fig. 15). 
In responding to a contemporary concern with textual authenticity and textual purity' (Lutgendorf 1994a:77-9), the NKP's various annotated editions and commentaries of the Rāmcaritmānas corroborate 
saţik; (7) Chandāvali rāmāyan saţik; (8) Jānakimangal saţik; (9) Chappaya rāmāyan saţik; (10) Kundaliyārāmāyan saţik; (11) Vairāgya sandipani satik; (12) Rāmājñā praśnāvali satik;(13) Hanuman bāhuk satik. Baijnath Kurmi's poetical and devotional works include Şadrtuvarnan (1887) and Srirāmnāmkalāmaņi kosmanjuşā (1894). 
400 
An Empire of Books 
तुलसीदासकृत रामायणकी 
मानसदीपिका 
मिश्रईश्वरकविकृत 
जिसको अवधसमाचार पत्रके सम्पादक श्रीयुत मुंशीनवलकिशोर (ती, आई, ई) ने सब जिज्ञासुओं के सुगमतापूर्वक बोधके निमित्त अपने अच्छे २ पण्डितों के द्वारा । __बहुतसी प्रतियों से अत्यन्त शुद्धकराया। 
दूसरीवार 
लखनऊ 
मुंशीनवलकिशोर (सी, आई,ई) के छापेखाने में छपी 
एमिल सन् १८९४ई.॥ कापीराइट महफूज है वहक नवलकिशर मेस ॥ 
Fig. 15: Title page of Manasdipika (21894) 
Lutgendorf's argument that indigenous critical engagement preceded and paralleled British Indological interest in the epic, rather than just being a reaction to it. Mass-produced editions were crucial to the indigenous debate on written sources and historic authenticity in that for the first time they made identical textual sources available to a large 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
401 
audience of scholars and laymen dispersed over different geographical regions. 
Though they held the most prominent place, the works of Tulsidas formed part only of a wider ensemble of devotional classics that were issued with commentaries, testifying to a demand for interpretation and a growing interest in questions of literary history among Hindi readers. Two titles deserve special mention: the first is the Bijak of Kabir, the first authoritative collection of the foremost among medieval North Indian sant poets. The Bijāk was first issued in 1868 from Pandit Gopinath Pathak's Benares Light Press in a lithographed edition that contained the sectarian commentary by Raja Vishvanath Singh of Rewa. Naval Kishore acquired the copyright of the text and reprinted it in 1883. The NKP typeset edition of 1200 copies much enhanced the circulation of the text, adding to the acceptance of the 'Raja of Rewa edition as a standard com mentary 
The second text was Bhaktamāl satik (* 1883), an edition of the classic hagiology by Nabhadas with the standard commentary 'Bhaktirasbodhini' by Privadas. Composed in c. 1600, Nabhadas's Bhaktamāl (Garland of Devotees) was the most widely renowned among hagiographic collections that gave an inventory of Vaishnava poet-saints and devotees. Priyadas's commentary of 1712, as William Pinch has pointed out, was almost al ways included as a running gloss in manuscript or printed editions, since it added substantial new and interesting hagiographical detail (Pinch 1999: 372).28 Why would Naval Kishore wait until 1883 to bring out a text of such standing and importance? The answer to this question may lie in the fact that he had already successfully invested in two contempo rary adaptations of Bhaktamāl. Both were extremely popular and com manded high sales: the first was an Urdu prose version entitled Bhagat māl(*1871), composed in 1854 by Tulsiram, a notable Ramanandi scho lar of Ambala, who had left his position of sarrishtedār at the Delhi Com missionary to settle in Vrindaban. Interestingly, he passed on his interest in Bhaktamāl to his nephew Sitaramsharan Bhagvan Prasad, who was to produce the most authoritative commentary of the text, Sri Bhaktamāl: Tikā, tilak aur nāmāvali sahit (Benares 1903-9), in the early twentienth century. Tulsiram's own Urdu rendering had first been printed at the Lahore Koh-e Nur Press in 1854. For the NKP edition of 1871, this first edition was revised, enlarged, and supplemented by a gloss of difficult 
28 An early edition of the Bhaktamāl with Priyadas's commentary and an anonymous commentary in modern Hindi was issued from Benares in 1866, another from Bombay in 1876. 
402 
An Empire of Books words and names in both Nagari and Urdu script. In this new format it was quickly sold out. A second edition followed in 1873. By 1880 the text had been reprinted four times, reflecting the wide interest in Vaishnava hagiology among Urdu-reading Hindus. 29 
Meanwhile, Naval Kishore had also launched Bhaktakalpadrum (Wishing Tree of Devotees, also called Bhaktamāl, *1870), a Hindi ver sion of Tulsiram's text by Raja Pratap Singh of Sidhua (North Bihar). Pratap Singh's version was originally in Brajbhasha. Prior to publication it had been revised by Pandit Kalicaran, who ended up recreating it in modern standard Hindi. Thus re-fashioned, the Hindi Bhaktakalpadrum sold as well as its Urdu counterpart and was frequently reprinted. Much later, when Grierson first introduced Bhaktamāl to an English-speaking audience in the 1909 and 1910 issues of the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, he consulted the NKP edition of Bhaktakalpadrum. He judged it ‘a useful and convenient work' which, however, had to be used with cau tion, since 'the original Persian [i.e. Urdu) had not always been read cor rectly by the author' (Grierson 1909: 608). 
7.2 Expanding the Horizons of Poetry From the mid-1870s a new trend can be perceived in the Lucknow pub lisher's list of Hindi books: in addition to devotional literature, the court poetry of the late sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries began to be promoted on a large scale. This period, classified by later literary historiography as rīti kāl or riti era (riti = method, style), distinguished itself by a proliferation of poetry that is often described by the unfortunate English term 'mannerist'. What it seeks to denote is a more 'secular-ori ented' poetry, produced in a court milieu and with the patronage of nobles or kings, which often dealt with erotic (śrngār) themes, focused on style and figures of speech and, in addition to the traditional dohā, comprised more elaborate metres of kavitta, savaiyā, etc. The rīti kāl was also a period of intense poetological reflection and formulation of poetic theory by scholastic poets, demonstrated by a substantial output of specialized treatises on poetics and rhetorics. The new interest in rīti poetry on the part of the commercial publisher indicates a broadening of literary taste among the Hindi readership. If the number of connoisseur readers with interests in secular topics was on the rise, it must be stressed again that 
29 While Tulsiram's was perhaps not the first Urdu version of Nabhadas's hagio logy, it was the only one to be widely publicized in print. Earlier Persian renderings include those by Lalla Lalji Das (c. 1771) and Lala Gumani Lal (c. 1841). 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
403 
vision between woulo 
there was no clear-cut division between the devotional and the secular, as the conventional distinction between the bhakti and rīti periods adopt ed by later Hindi literary historiography would suggest. 30 For all its con cern with rhetoric and aesthetic formalism, with wordplay and coded language, with the display of poetic virtuosity in the taxonomy of heroes and heroines (nāyak nāvikā bhed) and the minute description of their physical attributes, large parts of rīti poetry remained imbued with a spiritual message and a deeply devotional attitude. 
The NKP's shift of attention towards the riti period can be dated quite precisely to the years 1874–5, which saw the simultaneous publication of several important poetological and rhetorical works. Besides Rasrāj, a collection of some 430 verses on a sriigār topic by the seventeenth century poet Matiram Tripathi, the firm issued Kavikulkalpataru, a treatise on poetics composed in 1650 by Cintamani Tripathi; Citracandrikā, of work on rhetoric by Kashiraj of uncertain date; and Chandornav pirgal, a treatise on metrics composed by the Brajbhasha poet Bhikharidas in 1742, said to form the most extensive exposition of this subject hitherto made in the vernacular' (McGregor 1984: 189). It also published two popular riti poets who flourished in the nineteenth century, namely Gval Kavi, and Padmakar Bhatt—a poet of Banda who worked for the Rajas of Jaipur and other illustrious patrons. Gval Kavi's Yamunālahri (Wave of the Yamuna), a poem composed in 1861, was a rhetorical re working of a devotional theme; Padmakar Bhatt's Gangālahri (Wave of the Ganga) and Jagadvinod (Pleasure of the World) dealt with ras and nāvikā bhed. An edition of Bihari's celebrated Satsai (Seven Hundred Verses) followed in 1876. Why Naval Kishore delayed publication of the works of Keshavdas, the great poet of Orccha and foremost exponent of the rīti tradition, for several more years is difficult to say. Presumably he was still looking for suitable commentaries to facilitate comprehension of Keshav's technically brilliant but difficult scholastic verse. When Rasikpriyā (Companion to Love, *1880), Rāmcandrikā (Moonlight of Ram, *1882) and Kavipriyā (Companion to Rhetoric, *1886) finally came out in the 1880s, they were supplemented by the commentaries of Sardar Kavi, a prolific poet attached to the Benares court who flourished 
30 Recent scholarship has challenged the validity of the bhakti-riti dichotomy as a chronological development where a period of devotional' literature is said to have given way to a 'secular' one. Allison Busch gives an excellent discussion of the issue (Busch 2006). Instead of being used as period markers, she argues, these terms can be applied more meaningfully to specify distinct contexts of production, performance, and audience. 
404 
An Empire of Books 
in c. 1850-1880. The NKP promoted several other of Sardar Kavi's works, including his commentary on Drslikū! (*1890), a collection of enigmatic couplets ascribed to Surdas, and Sriigār sangrah (Collection of Erotic Verse, *1888), an anthology of rhetoric poetry compiled in 1848 (discussed later). 
The NKP's new focus on riti poetry was not an isolated phenomenon. Before long, Ramkrishna Varma, the proprietor of the reputed Bharat Jivan Press of Benares, issued a widely acknowledged series of fine large-letter editions of riti poets. 3! Other editions by both literary and commercial publishers followed, pointing to the place attained by rīti poets in the emerging literary canon of Hindi. Large editions of up to 2400 copies and multiple reprints of riti poetry and poetic theory further indicate a new market demand for poetry of an aesthetic rather than pure ly devotional kind. 32 By the late 1870s the expanding readership and changing literary taste had created a situation in which religious lyrics were no longer the only commercially viable poetic genre. 
Another NKP title of the 1870s is suggestive of the publisher's role in canon formation. In 1874 the NKP brought out a joint edition of Padmāvatikhand Alhākhand, two popular folk epics on the life of the great North Indian Hindu king Prithviraj Cauhan. Padmavatikhand cele brates the marriage of Prithviraj with Padmavati, while Alhākhand describes the feats of the two warrior heroes Alha and Udal. As orally transmitted folk epics, both texts existed in many different recensions, some of them showing a distinct literary influence. In their subject matter they were closely related to the famous heroic epic Prthvirāj rāsau (12th century) by the court bard Chand. That the publishing history of Padmā vatikhand Alhākhand should run parallel to that of the Prthvīrāj rāsau provides an interesting example of how Orientalist and indigenous efforts combined in elevating the epic of Prthvirāj to its present canonical status as the first substantial work of Hindi literature. The first step towards the canonization of Prthvīrāj rāsau was taken by James Tod in his Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan (1829); his appraisal of the rāsau 
31 Ramkrishna Varma (1859-1906), a Khatri of humble origin, established the Bharat Jivan Press in 1884 with a second hand-press bought from Calcutta. Patronized by Harishchandra and other local literati, he rose to become one of the leading pub lishers in Benares. Almost half of the titles published from his press were collections of Brajbhasha poems and songs (Singh 1986: 79-80; Orsini 2004: 119). 
32 The first edition of Keshav's Rāmcandrikā satik (*1882), for example, com manded a print run of 1200 copies, the third edition of Motiram's Rasrāj (1883) one of 2400 copies. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
405 
as a key text of Rajput, and by extension Hindu, valour would later assume great significance in Hindu nationalism. It is important to note that at the time there existed no printed edition of the rāsau, while manus cripts, as Garcin de Tassy tells us, were 'very rare and very costly? (HLHHI: 385). After Tod, the first to highlight the importance of the epic was F.S. Growse, who published a report and translated an excerpt of it in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal in 1868, urging for a translation of the entire text. Growse only had two manuscripts at his disposal, one from the Agra College Library, the other from the library of the Maharaja of Benares. "Copies of the poem are exceedingly scarce, and not two seem to agree', he noted (Growse 1868: 119). Applauding the plan of a translation, Garcin de Tassy expressed his philological interest in the text, extolling it as a work of inestimable value, not only for history but also for philology because of the particularities of the Hindi dia lect in which it is written' (LLH 1868: 430–1). Meanwhile, the Asiatic Society had assigned the task of preparing an edition of the complete Rāsau to John Beames. Working from different manuscripts, Growse and Beames soon became embroiled in a fierce controversy over trans lation issues in the pages of the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. Because of the dearth of manuscripts and the linguistic difficulties of the text, Growse was convinced that many years would elapse before a satisfactory edition could be prepared (Growse 1869). 
Meanwhile, the headmaster of Agra College, Keshavprasad Dvivedi, who was almost certainly aware of these efforts, prepared an edition of Padmāvatikhand Alhākhand on his own account. It was first issued in 500 copies from the local Vidyaratnakar Press in 1871. In his editorial notice Dvivedi pointed out that due to the extreme rarity of manuscript copies the text had not been printed before, and that is was only following a prolonged search that he had managed to procure a copy from Jodhpur, which he then subjected to a thorough linguistic revision. Because of the high expense and editorial labour involved in the publication, he also had the copyright registered in his name. 
Back in Calcutta, the Asiatic Society brought out the first fascicle of Beames's edition of Prthvīrāj rāsau in 1873. This presumably prompted Naval Kishore's interest in the text-as we have seen, he kept a close watch on the Society's publications. Since no manuscript of Chand's epic was available to him, he settled for Padmāvatīkhand Ālhākhand. He must have bought the copyright from Keshavprasad Dvivedi, for the 1874 NKP edition is identical to the 1871 Agra edition. What is surprising, and perhaps an indication of official patronage, is the high NKP print run406 
An Empire of Books 
of 3375 copies. Frequently reprinted, Padmāvatīkhand Alhākhand re mained the most widely consumed among early printed versions of the Prithviraj epic until 1904, when the Nagari Pracharini Sabha published its critical edition of Chand's Rāsau. 
For Naval Kishore it was only a small step from the promotion of Hindi literary classics to the classical works of Sanskrit literature. In view of the growing demand for Hindi, popularizing the Sanskrit scriptures in vernacular versions clearly seemed a good business proposition. For reasons of the inner logic of this book, the NKP's promotion of Sanskrit texts in Hindi and Urdu translation has already been outlined in Chapter 5. It is important to note that this initiative was not limited to religious literature, but formed part of a wider effort to acquaint modern readers with the Sanskrit scholastic tradition. The publisher's interest in ancient knowledge extended to the textual tradition of two venerated systems of Hindu science which continued to be of practical use in the modern colo nial world: Ayurvedic medicine and Hindu astrology. 
7.3 Commercializing Hindu Science 
Medical Tracts and Manuals 
The nascent Hindi readership not only consumed works of poetry and fiction but also a wide range of non-literary texts. A well-selling category of texts that featured continuously on the NKP's list was medical works. Naval Kishore's project of popularizing the principal works of indigenous medicine in their original and in modern translation was not limited to Unani texts in Arabic and Persian, but also included several classics of Ayurveda. The NKP produced an estimated thirty-nine Ayurvedic titles, fifteen of them in Sanskrit and twenty-four in Hindi (Siddiqi 1981: 15). Incorporating most of the standard works of ancient Hindu medicine, this body of texts attests as much to the practical needs of professionals as to a general revival of public interest in Ayurveda. At the same time, it formed part of the contestation of the hegemonic claims of Western 
David Arnold argues, represented the most practical, and therefore most contentious, area of engagement between Hindu and Western science' (Arnold 2000: 176). In the East-West encounter, the textual tra dition of Ayurveda assumed paramount importance, for it was 'central to establishing claims for the validity and rationality of Hindu science as 
a whole' (ibid.). 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
407 
The revived interest in Ayurvedic medicine was reflected in a growing variety of medical publications: next to a number of selected Ayurvedic classics in Sanskrit, the NKP list featured a substantial proportion of dual-language publications in which the Sanskrit text was supplemented by a modern commentary or translation. Over time, the firm offered more and more medicaltracts and treatises in Hindi, some original compositions, others translated from the Sanskrit or other languages. 33 This hitherto largely unacknowledged proliferation of commercially distributed medical works warrants separate study in that it documents not only the revitalization of an ancient science but also a significant shift from 'specialist' to 'public' knowledge effected by print. While continuing to serve medical practitioners as reference works in daily practice, an in creasing number of medical publications was designed for private use by laymen, assuming an important new function as household manuals. 
Since the target audience of mass-produced medical manuals was no longer the professional group of ayurvedic practitioners alone, the majo rity of NKP editions of Sanskrit medical texts came in a more popularly accessible format, that is, with a Hinditranslation or commentary. In this way specialists could consult the original, while others would profit from the translation. This is not to say that medical specialists were necessarily proficient in Sanskrit and could have done without the Hindi translation, a point to which we will return shortly. The first Hindu medical text published by Naval Kishore in 1868 was Vaidyajīvan (A Living for Physicians), an immensely popular sixteenth-century tract in 238 verses by Lolimbaraja. It included a modern Sanskrit commentary by Sukhanand nath.34 Another edition, supplemented by an abridged Hindi verse trans lation by Shankaraprasad, followed in 1870. Between 1872 and 1874, Madanpala's Nighanțu, a famous compendium of medicaments, and Amarsingh's Amarvinod, a standard classical dictionary of medical terms, drugs, and their properties, were issued simultaneously in their Sanskrit original and in editions containing a Hindi translation. Two further authoritative compendia, Sārngadhāra-samhitā (*1874) and Caraka-samhitā(*1900), were issued with Hindi commentaries. Mādhav nidānam (*1881), the earliest compendium on pathology (nidāna) by Madhava, was one of the few medical works that came out in a plain text 
version only. 
33 The best documentation of Ayurvedic works and their various published versions can be found in G.J. Meulenbeld's herculean History of Indian Medical Literature (2000). 
34 Lolimbadipikā was completed in 1863-4. 
408 
An Empire of Books 
The revival of Hindu medicine, as Arnold has argued, was also a corollary of nascent Hindu nationalism. By the 1890s public interest in ancient and modern ayurvedic science was certainly widespread enough for Naval Kishore to not only reprint extant texts, but also invest in his own translations. To this end he commissioned Pandit Ravidatt, an ayurvedic practitioner from Rohtak district, with a series of Hindi trans lations of famous works, including Nighantaratnākar (*1892),35 Susrutā samhitā (*1891), and Bhaisajya-ratnāvali (*1892). In keeping with the NKP's policy to make ayurvedic knowledge accessible to non-specialists, the editions were supplemented by commentaries and glossaries of dif ficult words. In 1894 there followed a translation by Pandit Kalicaran of Bhāvaprakāśa, a famous sixteenth-century medical encyclopaedia by Bhava Mishra of Benares. Its preface offers interesting insights into the linguistic abilities of contemporary ayurvedic practitioners. After the 
translation was much needed. While echoing colonial notions of the degeneration of indigenous medical practice, his statement also expresses a deep concern about the effects that the rapid decline of Sanskrit know ledge had among professional vaidyas: 
This precious work is in the Sanskrit language and nowadays, through the effect of time, not even the vaidyas, let alone other people, generally know Sanskrit. For this reason these people are not even able to acquire a sound knowledge of all the drugs of medical science by studying this one work. Yet, in order to live decently, they engage in treatments in full knowledge, and when the sick, tormented by their illness and without recourse, come to them for help, the vaidyas give them medicine for relief, but usually the ef fect is to the contrary. Seeing this pitiable state of affairs, by order of ... Munshi Naval Kishore, Pandit Kalicaran, ... with the assistance Of... Vajpeyi Ksamapatiji, has prepared a Hindi translation of this supreme and beneficial medical work called Bhāvaprakāśa. In preparing the Hindi version, the aforesaid gentlemen have resorted to many printed and manuscript copies of the Bhāvaprakāśa' and have also collected, as far as were available, those works cited in it as authoritative, as well as other dictionaries. They have made a great effort in eliminating textual variants, in finding out the names of drugs and in correcting the original copy. Now some gentleman may have doubts as to the purpose of this reissue, since Hindi translations of the text have already come out from Bombay and 
First published from the Nirnay Sagar Press of Bombay in 1867 (Meulenbeld 2000, IIb: 388). 
The first edition of the Sanskrit Bhāvaprakāśa dates from 1875. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
409 
other cities. The reason for this effort is that the translations printed so far are, first, very costly and, second, written in a language which is not bene ficial to the common people. Therefore, this translation has been undertaken in extremely pleasant, simple and pure Hindi (atyant manohar saral aur 
suddh bhāṣā) and printed along with the original text.37 The underlying objective of such translations—to make Ayurvedic medicine more generally accessible—can also be seen in the proliferation of new medical treatises written in Hindi, which offered a more popular' version of Ayurveda to the lay readership. The increasing demand for medical knowledge in Hindi was by no means confined to human medicine; it also extended to a field that has largely remained outside the purview of classic Ayurveda, veterinology. As Bayly notes, the treatment of the diseases of animals was a favourite topic in the emerging Hindi literature of Rajasthan (Bayly 1996a: 266). Most of these texts were a direct result of colonial efforts to introduce basic 'useful' knowledge on the treatment of cattle disease among India's rural population. For exam ple, Pasucikitsā (*1875), a work on the treatment of animals, was trans lated from an Urdu text to be used in rural primary schools in Avadh.38 
The nature and purport of this new kind of popular medical literature is best exemplified by the earliest and most successful title among NKP Hindi medical publications, a manual on health, diagnosis and treat ments entitled Amrtsāgar (Ocean of Nectar, *1864). Composed by or, more probably, at the behest of Maharaja Savai Pratap Singh of Jaipur (r. 1769–1803), Amrtsāgar was first issued in its original Marwari dialect from Agra in 1864. Naval Kishore was quick to realize its market poten tial and promptly commissioned Pandit Kalicaran with a translation of the text into standard Hindi. The twofold purpose of serving medical specialists and laymen alike was spelled out in the editor's preface, which stated that the text had been translated into the ‘kharī bhāṣā of Delhi and Agra which is known to people from every region', for the benefit of 'everybody, young and old, and especially all the ta'alluqdārs and Pandits of Avadh.'39 The latter reference was in acknowledgement of the publication's sponsor, Maharaja Mansingh of Ayodhya. The pre face also contained the conventional promise that, by studying this one text alone, the reader would acquire knowledge in all areas of diagnosis 
37 Bhāvaprakās (Lucknow 21904), bhūmikā. 
38 In 1875 Ram Narain's Hindi translation of 'Cattle Diseases' was published from Bareilly in a large edition of 4500 copies, to be circulated in the villages of Raj putana (RPIR 1875: 84). 
39 Amrtsāgar (*1864), bhūmikā. 
410 
An Empire of Books 
and treatment of illnesses. Ultimately, he would become his own doctor: Amrtságar, the translator-editor asserted, had been written in such a way that 'even someone of little intelligence can comprehend it and be a vaidya [an ayurvedic practitioner).' Amrtsāgar was a runaway success; it remained by far the most sought after title among NKP medical pub lications in Hindi. Ifits terse and matter-of-fact diagnostics were seldom bound to reassure the reader, the text was certainly commendable for its useful content and lucid, colloquial style. The following is a typical exerpt: 
Jis rogi ko rātri mem garmi aur din mem sit lage aur kanth mem kaf bole vah rogi niscaya marai aur jis rogi ki nāk kā agra bhāg sital hoy aur uske hāth pair aur hrday bhi śital hoy vah rogi bhi niscaya marai. 
The patient who feels hot at night and cold during the day and who has phlegm in his throat will certainly die; and the patient whose tip of the nose is cold and whose hands, feet and heart are also cold, will certainly die, too. 
Despite such gloomy prospects Amstsāgar sold extremely well. Its sec ond edition of 1869 already commanded an exceptionally high print run of 5500 copies, a figure usually found in textbook printing only. Priced at one rupee (reprint of 1876), the 450-page book was readily available. By 1878 Amrtsāgar had gone through four editions. Its great commercial success called for an Urdu translation which was duly prepared by the NKP translator Pandit Pyarelal and published in the same year. 
Following Amstsāgar, the NKP issued a series of Hindi medical works, including Rāmvinod (*1874) by Ramcandra, Vaidyamanotsav (*1874) by Nainsukh, Auşadhisangrah-kalpavalli (*1875) by Radha krishna, Dil lagan (*1882) by Sitaram, as well as two other works of which the publication date could not be ascertained: Rasāyan prakās, and Vaidyadarpan, a work composed in 1827 by Prannath. What all these treatises, whether versified or in prose, had in common was the lofty 
their diagnostics, and suitable forms of treatment. Medical manuals undauntedly advertised their utility for the non-specialist: self-diagnosis and self-treatment were explicitly encouraged. Widely circulated in print, they became a household commodity. As such, they not only began to contest the traditional place of the indigenous medical practitioner, but also offered a viable alternative to the challenge of colonial medicine and public health care schemes. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
411 
Astrological Manuals and Almanacs 
Astronomy was another area where colonial and indigenous systems of knowledge engaged with each other in a relationship of contestation, competition, and selective appropriation.40 The pervasiveness of Hindu astronomy and astrology (jyotiņšāstra/jyotişa) in Indian social life extended to the body politic, making the astral sciences a highly political discipline.41 More important in the present context, jyotişa had a direct bearing on individual lives in determining auspicious times for life-cycle and other rites, and in regulating day-to-day transactions in both the domestic and professional spheres. Practical needs as much as theoretical debates together created what Bayly has succinctly called 'the public sphere of the sciences of the heavens' (ibid.: 248). 
Even though some of the scholastic debates between contemporary adherents of the Ptolemaic, Copernican, Siddhantic, and Puranic systems were staged in print, there was little reflection of them in commercial print culture. 42 Commercial printing instead focused on traditional and applied Hindu astrology. A telling indication of how publishers reacted to the practical needs of both professional and amateur astrologers was the new proliferation of mass-produced tracts and manuals in the three principal categories of electional astrology (muhūrtta), horoscopy (jātaka), and predictive astrology (phalita jyotis). Print catered to the interests of a wide range of practising astronomer-astrologers, from the skilled pandit who was trained in the precise science of the Sanskrit Siddhāntas (Correct doctrines') down to the lowly fortune-teller and practicer of necromancy. Horoscope charts, tracts on palmistry, almanacs, and other ephemera became a staple of the commercial book trade. 
In the promotion of Hindu astrological texts, the preferred format was the dual-language edition, combining the Sanskrit original with a Hindi 
40 For an account of British engagement with Indian astronomical traditions, mainly during the early nineteenth century, see Bayly 1996a: 247-64. 
41 Traditionally divided into three categories: samhitā(omens), ganita (astronomy), and horā (astrology). For a detailed introduction into jyotiḥśāstra, see Pingree 1981. 
42 See, e.g., Minkowski 2001. One of the few such texts which enjoyed wide circulation was Omkar Bhatt's Bhūgolsār (also known as Jyotiscandrikā, c. 1837), a Hindi commentary on the Siddhāntaśiromani, which bore the English subtitle 'A Comparison of the Puranic and Siddhantic Systems of Astronomy with that of Copernicus'. It was adopted by the Agra School Book Society and variously reprinted (ibid.: 85). Naval Kishore reprinted it in 1882. 
412 
An Empire of Books 
commentary.43 Starting from 1874, Naval Kishore brought out a series of standard classics in this format, including (1) Brhaj-jātaka (*1879), the most authoritative textbook on jātaka; (2) its summary Laghu-jātaka (*1876) by the great sixth-century astronomer Varahamihira; (3) the same author's Brhat-samhitā (*1884); (4) Satpancasikā (*1876) by Varahamihira's son Prithuyashas;(5) Pārāsari(*1874), a work on divin ation by Parashara (c. 600/750); (6) Jātakālankār (*1879), an early seventeenth-century text by Ganesh,(7) Sighrabodh (*1874), a sixteenth century text by Kashinath Bhattacharya;(8) Muhūrttacintīmani(*1879), a text completed by Rama at Benares in 1600; (9) Sāmudrika (*1874), a work on palmistry; and (10) Lagnacandrikū (*1882), a much-used treatise on jātaka by Kashinath. -- Single-language Hindi manuals and astrological digests were also in great demand, as borne out by a surge of titles issued from the 1870s onwards.45 
Not surprisingly, the bestselling printed item in the category of jyotisa was the ubiquitous almanac (patrā; jantri), a seemingly universal feature of written culture. In the transition from manuscript to print almanacs lost none of their popularity. On the contrary, they came to constitute 'by far the most common form of printed literature throughout India' (Bayly 1996a: 263). Eighteenth-century Calcutta printers already relied on their market potential, while by the mid-nineteenth century, low-priced alma nacs featured as the single largest category of printed items in Bengali.46 Large commercial publishers like Naval Kishore prided themselves in annually producing their own 'house' almanac. An almanac could even form the basis of a future publishing house, as is illustrated by the history of the famous Nirnay Sagar Press of Bombay. As the story goes, one day in 1869, Javaji Dadaji, still a mere printer then, was approached by a reputed pandit with the request to lithograph an almanac. He convinced 
43 Titles issued only in Sanskrit include the voluminous Muhūrttaganapatih (*1875), a seventeenth-century work by Ganapati Raval; Jātakābharana (*1879), a popular early sixteenth-century work by Dhundiraja; Horāmakaranda (*1879) by Gunakar; and the commentaries Muhūrtta-cakradipikā (*1874) by Ramdayalu and Muhūrttadipikā (*1874) by Ramsevak Trivedi. 
44 The Brhatsamhita had first been published in the Bibliotheca Indica series in 1864–5. The NKP translation in 'ārya bhāsā' was prepared by Pandit Durgaprasad Sharma. 
45 Including Indrajāl, Muhūrtt cakradipikā, Jātakālamkār, Tulsi sabdārthaprakās, Daivajña-bharan, Sangrah siromani, Laghu jātak, Jātak candrikā, Ramal nauratan, and Ramalsār praśnāvali, a tract on geomancy which dealt with divination by throwing dice. 
46 Shaw 1981: 16-17; Roy 1996: 41. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
413 
the pandit that a more beautiful specimen could be produced by typesetting. A proofsheet was printed with new types especially cast for the job. The pandit was so satisfied with the results that Javaji took the decision (Hindi: nirnay) to set up his own letterpress shop in order to print the almanac (Singh 1986: 73). 
7.4 New Genres and a New Historical Perspective 
The gradual expansion and generic diversification of printed literature in Hindi is most visibly reflected in the NKP's catalogues and publication lists. Up to the early 1880s, the classification of genres in Hindi clearly followed the Sanskritic model, the standard categories being epics and Purānas, poetry, lexicography, medicine, Vedanta, astrology, etc. (Table 7.0). If this classificatory scheme favoured the notion of historical conti nuity between the classical and the modern literatures, it proved no long er adequate once new genres began to emerge in Hindi. Additional cate gories had to be introduced, which, somewhat ironically, at first bore Urdu denominations such as mutafarqāt (Miscellaneous) or qissa vaghairah ("Tales etc.'), randomly grouping various genres together that no longer fitted the Sanskrit paradigm. 
Addressing a Female Readership 
Perhaps the most salient feature in the table below is the appearance of a separate category of 'books for women' in an 1889 book list. While this acknowledgement of women as a distinct readership category is signi ficant in itself, the excitement it might generate in the modern researcher is premature, for the reference remains an isolated phenomenon. On NKP lists there was as yet little reflection of the rich body of women's advice literature produced in Hindi from around the 1870s onwards. Throughout the period 1858-95, the number of NKP Hindi books de signed specifically for a female audience barely exceeded a dozen titles. All of them were instructional works for use in primary or secondary female education. Such works generally combined moral instruction and practical advice in domestic management and household duties with some basic education in the three 'r's: reading, writing, and arithmetic. They were a direct outcome of the colonial state's engagement in female education in the wake of Charles Wood's Education Despatch of 1854, which had stressed the importance of educating Indian women and de manded that the government give its 'frank and cordial support to the 
414 
An Empire of Books 
TABLE 7.0 
Classification of Nagari Publications in NKP Book Lists 
1879 
1880 
1881 
1883 
1889 
1. itihās, purāna 
bhāsā itinas 
bhāsā irihās 
irihās 
purāna 
bhāsā purāna, 
irihās, kos 
vaidyak 
vedānta ādi kávya 
vaidvak 
vedant 
kāvva 
4. vedāns 5. kāvya 6. mūsiqi 7. qissa vaghairah 8. jyotis 9. muafargāt 10. kurub-e sanskrit 
rāg qissa vaghuirah jyotis mutafarqar 
purāna 
purāna vaidyak bhāsā vaidyak 
vedani 
vedant karya 
kāvya bhāsā 
rāg gissa vaghairah kahāni jyotis 
jyotis mutafargāt mutafargāt 
samskri 
jyotis mutafargāt 
samskrt purāna 
smrti vyākaran ityādi 
samskri ki 
pustakem 
11. samskri ma 
tarjuma-e bhashā (nagari) 
samskri bhāsā 
Tikā sahir 
tikā bhāsā 
upanişad 
dārsi 
Sarrishtā-e 
tālim ki pustaken 
nāšak 
nāšak striyom ke lie samskrt 
bātarjumā 
15. samskyt ma' 
tarjuma-e urdū 
urdi 
cause. However, with their predominantly Indian authors, compilers, and translators, textbooks also provided a site for Indian interpretations of the nature and purport of female eduction. 
Composed at the instance of the colonial authorities, the new textbooks for girl students were invariably authored by men, most often by Indian employees of the Educational Department. Next to alphabetical primers and letter-writers such as Bālābhūşan (Girl's Adornment, *1872) and 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
415 
Striyom ki hitopatrikā (Well-Wishing Letters for Women, *1873), they included a more interesting category of female readers' prescribed for secondary education. While providing some insight into the Indian discourse on female literacy and education, these texts are significant in being hybrid products in which Indian notions of womanhood, both traditional and reformist, merged with ideals of Victorian domesticity. Two such works stand out on the NKP's Hindi list: the first is Shiva Prasad's Vāmāmanranjan (Pleasure of Women, 1856), a popular text that served as the standard Hindi reader for generations of schoolgoing girls in northern India. The compilation, the first of its kind in Hindi, was undertaken at the behest of the Benares Commissioner, Henry C. Tucker. Drawing largely on Elizabeth Starling's Noble Deeds of Woman (1848), it offered a selection of brief biographies of Indian and Western exemplary women of both mythical and historical origin. Vāmāmanrañjan provides perhaps the earliest example of how, under the impact of Victorian notions of gender, textbooks were deployed in redefining Ind ian women's role in society. Shiva Prasad's attempt to reinterpret the tra ditional Indian ideal of the pativratā (virtuous and dutiful wife) involved a recasting of European women in the image of the pativratā. His Western role models, like their Indian sisters, are emblems of virtue, self-sacrifice, and service (sevā) who faithfully act out their domestic roles as devoted daughters, wives, and mothers. Yet, and this is what dis tinguishes this book from others, they are also shown to make an impact in the male-dominated public realm by displaying new qualities of cour age, intelligence, resourcefulness, and self-reliance. Such transgression of the boundaries of the domestic was invariably legitimized by sevā, in its extended and redefined meaning of service to society and to the nation. As Dalmia and others have shown, such a presentation of new role models in a traditional guise was to become a frequently employed strategy in nineteenth-century writing for women.47 In promoting a new ideal of 'enlightened domesticity' (Minault 1998b: 202) and simul taneously extending the realm of female agency into the public domain, Vāmāmanranjan accorded women a new social purpose within and be yond the home. In doing so, it prefigured later nationalist reinterpretations of women's role in society. 
Equally interesting in its hybrid character was Lakşmi-Sarasvati samvād (Dialogue Between Laksmi and Sarasvati), a female reader 
47 Dalmia 1997: 247-9. See Stark 2004a for a more detailed discussion of Vāmā manranjan.416 
An Empire of Books 
authored by the Brahmo Samaj leader and champion of Hindi in the Punjab, Babu Navincandra Roy (1838–90). Composed in 1869 and is sued from Lahore in the same year, it began to receive lasting publicity in its NKP reprint of 1881. Further editions followed in 1886 and 1906 (Stark 2000). Lakşmi-Sarasvati samvād was divided into two rather dis jointed parts, one imparting conventional moraland domestic instruction, the other 'modern' knowledge in the science of geography. Adopting the traditional form of a guru-sisya dialogue between Sarasvati, the goddess of learning, and Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, the text conveyed a strikingly progressive message: women had every right to receive the same kind of knowledge as men. In a cultural climate where female learning was still largely defined by the exigencies of domestic service ability' (Sangari 1999: 147) such a bold claim required special legitimizing strategies. Navincandra effectively underpinned his message in a pro grammatic preface in which he justified the necessity of female education on religious grounds: since learning was a means to attain higher know ledge and, ultimately, spiritual emancipation, female education could not be limited to imparting basic skills of reading and writing alone but demanded instruction of a much more pervasive kind. 
After 1869 the acknowledged and officially patronized model for much instructional writing for women was Nazir Ahmad's Urdu novel Mirāt al-'arūs (*1869).48 While Vāmāmanranjan continued to figure as its counterpart in the Hindi syllabus, several new Hindi books were written in emulation of Mirāt al-'arūs.49 Two of them were published by Naval Kishore: Stridarpan (The Mirror of Women, *1875) by Madhavprasad, an Extra Assistant Commissioner in Sultanpur District; and Nārībodh (Woman's Intelligence, *1883) by Avinashcandra Vishvas, a work first issued from Ludhiana in 1882. While expressly acknowledging Mirat al-'arūs as their model, both authors adapted their subject matter to a Hindu context and adopted a more Sanskritized style in keeping with their audience of Hindu girls and women. 
Next to colonial textbook production, there was no lack of indigenous efforts to create a body of works suitable for female readers. In the 1880s the Aligarh Bhasha Samvarddhini Sabha (Society for the Improvement Or Hindi) set out to produce its own women's advice literature. Since Naval Kishore was closely associated with the society he published some of its books. The Sabha's choice was not always endorsed by colo 
4 
. 
** Details on the novel in Naim 1984. 
de Khalsi 1990: Sangari 1999: 196–278. 
49 See Khalsi 1990; San 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
417 
nial opinion, as is illustrated by the case of Bhāryahit (*1883), a trans lation of Pye Henry Chavasse's immensely popular Victorian manual on health and hygiene, Advice to a Wife (1842).50 The British DPI dismissed it as 'worse than useless to native women'. Si Perhaps on account of this criticism, and even though Bhāryahit was well received, the Bhasha Samvarddhini Sabha soon decided to invest in a more indigenized text book. The task was assigned to Sannulal Gupta, a qānūngo of Buland shahar district, who came out with Strī subodhini (The Woman's Easy Instructor) in 1885.52 A project of encyclopaedic proportions, the volumi nous five-volume treatise not only gave guidelines for correct social and religious behaviour, but professed to cover all subjects, maintaining that knowledge of a more pervasive kind would avert women 'from fool ishness and evil thoughts'. In emulation of Chavasse, the author accorded special attention to topics like pregnancy, women's health and hygiene, medical care, and the treatment of illnesses of household members. He also took great care to adopt a lucid and colloquial style, dismissing all difficult Sanskrit and Perso-Arabic words and keeping sentences deli berately short and simple. 
Given this narrowly confined range of books written for women, did books written by women have any chance of entering the commercial market? As critics have pointed out, one reason why we know so little about how and to what extent women engaged in literary composition is that their works seldom made it into print. The reasons were many, rang ing from fear of social stigmatization to being denied access to the book trade and lack of patronage. The NKP's list only featured three (two?) works by female authors. The first, Premratna (Jewel of Love, *1875), was a collection of devotional poetry authored by Ratnakumvar Devi, the learned grandmother of Raja Shiva Prasad, who saw the work into print. The second, Satibilās (Pleasure of a Virtuous Woman, *1880), was a conventional description of the duties of a wife in Brajbhasha verse by Kumvari Viranji, 'wife of Amarsingh of Jaunpur district'. The third and by far most intriguing item was a translation of an anonymously published Urdu work entitled Qissa-e aurat mard (Story of a Woman and a Man, *1882), which professed to offer a depiction of 'the faults of women as 
50 Its full title was Advice to a Wife on the Management of her own Health and on the Treatment of Some Complaints Incidental to Pregnancy. Labour and Suckling (12th ed., 1878). 
51 RPIR 1883: 85. For a discussion of the book, see Sangari 1999: 320-8. 
02 Nutan stri subodhini, a revised and updated version of Sannulal Gupta's text edited by L.P. Bhardvaj, was published from the Tejkumar Press in 1995. 
418 
An Empire of Books 
imagined by men'. Situating itself in the tradition of popular folk nar rative, the text offered a pungent tale of male infidelity and female shrewdness; it was replete with worldly wisdom and openly challenged patriarchal norms. Since such qissas were proscribed for respectable women (Sangari 2004: 242–3), the work was not intended for a female audience, nor was it advertised as such. Indeed, it remains doubtful whether its anonymous author was 'a respectable woman from a dis tinguished Agarval family of the Jain faith' (ek agravāl sresth kul kī kulin jainmati stri), as proclaimed by the book's cover. Was it a ruse to attract a larger readership? British publication records which list one Munshi Ujagar Mall, a tahsildār of Sikandara Rao in Aligarh district, as the book's author suggest as much. 
What conclusions can be reached from looking at the small body of NKP books for women'? There is little to suggest that Naval Kishore made any special efforts to target the emerging market of female readers. In a reflection of what Kumkum Sangari has called a 'patriarchal con sensus across religious lines' (Sangari 1999: 187), on the firm's Urdu list, too, books for women were relegated to a small rubric entitled 'Female Education' (which, next to Mirāt al-'arūs, included only three other titles),54 while most conventional advice literature for Muslim women was subsumed under the category of religious works. In fact, from the commercial publisher's point of view a distinct 'female' market hardly existed. Undoubtedly, with Hindi being the language of choice in female primary education, the number of literate women was steadily growing. Yet it would seem that, before the turn of the century, the nume rical strength of the female readership in Hindi was too small, and the range of literature deemed suitable for women too restricted by patriarchal norms, for it to be commercially exploited. Appearing before the Education Commission in 1882. Shiva Prasad gave an apologetic appraisal of the vel of education enjoyed by upper-caste Hindu women, whose learning 
nied colonial stereotypes of female backwardness. While he claimed to know of 'innumerable instances of women being well versed in read ing and writing and keeping accounts in high and well-to-do families', 
As Sangari suggests, the very proscription of qissas for women functioned as an invitation to read'. Reading a qissa became a desired and often practised transgression' (2004: 243). 
Notably, Hidāyat an-nisvăn by Ali Muhammad; Qavāid an-nissāby Muhammad hiruddin Bilgrami (a Nizami Press imprint); and Qissa-e gulāb cambeli by Raja Shiva Prasad 
I have already said that Hindi reading and writing is so easy that woinen learn among themselves. Often Panditanis and Purohitanis (family priestesses or caste 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
419 
his assessment was heavily influenced by his own background in an elite Jain family with a tradition of female learning. His elitist perspective was a far cry from the continuously low female literacy rates and the dis appointing results that more than a quarter century of formal education had yielded in the NWP&Oudh. After a promising start in the period 1854–74, when the number of schoolgoing girls in the NWP had shot up from less than 400 to over 16,500, a change in official policy interrupted further progress. By the 1880s it was clear that formal education had fail ed to make an impact, with less than one per cent of girls of schoolgoing age receiving formal schooling (ECR 1883: 42; lxxv). 
Evidently, the NKP's catalogue makes for a poor source of information if one wants to learn about the reading tastes of literate women at the time. Rather than showing us what women read, its small and closely monitored selection of books for women' merely reflects prescriptive patriarchal notions of what women ought to read. The reading horizon of literate and, even more so, cultured women was of course much wider. To find out more about their diverse literary tastes one has to probe a variety of largely untapped sources—autobiographies, memoirs, letters, etc. 56 Interestingly, and ironically, when the House of Naval Kishore was first immortalized in Urdu fiction, it was through the figure of a fe male reader, Hadi Ali Rusva's celebrated courtesan of Lucknow. An ac complished representative of her trade, Umra'o Jan Ada is depicted as an avid reader of the Persian classics, among them the Danish Nama Ghyas Mansur which had just then been published by the Naval Kishore Press' (Ruswa 1993: 150). 
Unlike the metropolis with its flourishing market for women's popu lar fiction and impressive range of female professional writers, the Indian domestic market had not yet created a niche for women's leisure reading but showed a conservative insistence on didactic, religious, and edifying literature.57 The Hindi periodical press, too, remained aloof from the idea that women might read for pleasure: Harishchandra's Bālābodhini (1874-8), the first woman's journal in Hindi and still a 
IZ 
I 
priestesses) also teach when going round occasionally to pay visits'. AECR 1884: 323. 
56 See, e.g., Borthwick 1984; Karlekar 1991; Sarkar 1999. 
57 There exists a great deal of writing on Victorian professional women writers. See, e.g, R.C. Terry (Terry 1983: 68–132) on Mrs Oliphant, the 'Queen of Popular Fiction', and on Rhoda Broughton; T. Ransom (Ransom 1999) and A.R. Federico (Federico 2000) on Marie Corelli, a favourite with Indian readers. J. Sutherland analyses a sample of 312 female Victorian writers (Sutherland 1995: 151-64). 
420 
An Empire of Books 
largely male-dominated enterprise, was typical of the patronizing male discourse on women in that it imparted various kinds of moral and prac tical advice, but did not offer a single form of entertaining reading to its prospective female audience (Dalmia 2004: 404-14). It was only in the first decades of the twentieth century that a distinct periodical and fic tional literature for and by women emerged in Hindi. In the meantime, a space for female reading was being created in English by the colonial fiction industry (Joshi 2002) and, in its wake, by the new generation of Hindi fiction writers who emerged during the last decades of the century. Work on the early novel in India (Mukherjee 2002) stresses the centrality of women both as characters in and consumers of nineteenth-century novels. This is evident from the large number of narratives that had fe male names in their titles, starting with Pandit Gauridatt's Devrāni jethāni ki kahāni (The Story of Two Sisters-in-Law, 1870). Even as fic tion authors, if not always explicitly, began to address a female audience of readers and listeners, anxiety about the corrupting influence of the novel remained. 
Drama As shown in Table 7.0, drama (nātak) was another new genre that made a late appearance on the publisher's Hindi list. This is hardly surprising in light of the fact that modern Hindi drama was still in its formative phase. In a deliberate departure from older forms of the popular folk stage, Harishchandra of Benares took the lead in formulating a new aesthetics, and redefining the form, content, and ideology of what was to become a national theatre for the Hindus." He not only contributed to the development of modern Hindi drama through a host of plays and theo retical writings, but also actively participated in making the first ever staging of a Hindi play a much publicized and successful event. The performance of Jānaki mangal (Sita's Marriage), a play written by Sital Prasad Tivari of the Benares Sanskrit College, took place in the newly founded Benares Theatre in 1868, in the presence of the Maharaja of Benares. Harishchandra and some of his literary friends acted in it. Outside Benares, the growth of the new Hindi drama received little atten tion at first. Compared to the popularity in print of the svāng (sangit) and 
$8 See Orsini 2002: 260–308; Talwar 1989. 
39 As Kathryn Hansen has argued (Hansen 1989), Bharatendu's 'invention of the modern Hindi drama implied an 'articulated, intentioned rejection of popular folk stage traditions. 
60 Dalmia-Lüderitz 1992; Dalmia 1997: 277-9; 300–14; Shukla vs 2051: 248. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
421 
other forms of the folk stage (see below), the limited number and small print runs of Hindi dramas issued from the NKP suggest that modern plays were not yet commercially viable. 61 
As befitted a publisher based in Lucknow, one of the first titles to appear in the category of drama' on NKP Hindi and Urdu lists was a verse play closely associated with the navābi court culture of Avadh: Indarsabhā (Assembly of King Indar), Composed in 1853 by Amanat CAli(1816-59), a poet attached to the court of Wajid Ali Shah, Indarsabhā has generally been acknowledged as the first original Urdu drama. Assimilating different forms of Persian romance, Urdu, and Hindi poetry and song, it was popularized across India by Parsi theatre companies and enjoyed a phenomenal success. Kathryn Hansen has traced the process in which the drama moved out of its courtly milieu into the larger public domain, and shifted from stage drama into popularly printed text (and later back to the visual realm of modern cinema: Hansen 2001). Starting from 1869, the NKP circulated Indarsabhāin both Amanat's version and an equally popular reworking by Madari Lal. Before long, the two dramas were issued in a joint edition which saw numerous printings and by 1876 had also appeared in Hindi transliteration. 
Second in popularity only to Indarsabhā were Gopichand Bhartarī (*1874) and Sangit Prahlād (*1882), two frequently reprinted musical dramas by Lakshman Singh. The three titles stand somewhat apart (Indarsabhā for its overt syncretism, Gopichand Bhartari and Sangit Prahlād for their origin in and closeness to the folk stage) from the other dramas on the publisher's list, which clearly reflected the preponderance of the classic Sanskrit tradition in Hindi drama. Not surprisingly, the NKP's first publications in the dramatic genre included two different Hindi adaptations of the Sanskrit Prabodhcandrodaya nātak, an eleventh century allegorical drama by Krishna Mishra that had inspired poets throughout the ages and was still an important model for Harishchandra's early plays. The first was a popular rendering in Brajbhasha verse by the eighteenth-century Vallabhan poet Brajvasidas (*1875), the second a modern reworking in simple Khari Boli (*1883) by Atmaram, itself based on a Gurmukhi translation by Anathdas. 62 Sanskritic models con tinued to be of importance, as is attested by the simultaneous publication 
61 The svāng (lit. 'mime') was a musical form of theatre including song and dance. From the 1860s svāngs were widely circulated in print in the form of illustrated librettos known as sangit. 
62 Brajvasidas's version was based on a Persian prose rendering composed by Banvalidas 'Wali' in 1662, which was itself based on Nanddas's version of the drama. The NKP published Wali's Persian text in 1877. 
422 
An Empire of Books 
in 1891 of two modern Hindi (desbhāsā) renderings of Nāgānanda by Lala Sitaram, and Hanumān nātāk by Ramanand Caturdas. 
Forming part of the NKP's series of riti works, the editio princeps of Anand Raghunandan nātak (The Joy of Ram, *1881) by Maharaja Vishvanath Singh of Rewa (1789-1854) was an event of some conse quence for Hindi literary history. A drama in verse and prose which dealt with the traditional theme of Rama's early life, Anand Raghunandan is regarded as the first original drama in Hindi. Its mixed Brajbhasha language, which included some English phrases, suggests a late date of composition by the mid-nineteenth century (McGregor 1984: 170–1). At the time the text was consigned to print, its status as a 'modern' Hindi drama was by no means uncontested. Harishchandra, while acknow ledging Anand Raghunandan as an early specimen of nātak, found it lacking in the essentials of dramatic poetry and preferred to attribute the beginning of Hindi drama to Nahus nātāk, a play written by his father Girdhardas in 1858. 
The NKP list also reflected the two other main sources of inspiration for contemporary Hindi drama, the Shakespearian and the Bengali drama, in plays such as Rāmābhisek natak (*1877), a translation of a Bengali play by Manmohan Basu, and Bhramjālak nātak (*1882), a popular Indianized version of Shakespeare's Comedy of Errors by Ratnacand. The author, a future Allahabad High Court Judge, had com posed the play in 1868 while studying Shakespeare at Agra College. Finally, in 1891 the NKP issued its only modern Hindi drama in the form of Mayarkmañjari, a romantic play with nationalist and reformist over tones by Kishorilal Gosvami (1865–1932). Generally, however, the publisher steered clear of nationalist drama and political plays in which anti-colonial sentiment might be expressed. 
Towards a National Literature: From Anthology 
to Literary History Subsumed under the new heading of 'Miscellaneous' (mutafarqāt), lite rary anthologies were to gain central importance in the evolution of a canon of national literature in Hindi. In assembling basic biographical data about Hindi poets, anthologies paved the way for the subsequent writing of literary history. Hindi literature owes to the NKP not only the publication of Shivsingh Sengar's famous Sivsimh saroj (Lotus of Shivsingh, *1878), a work generally acknowledged as the first serious 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
423 
attempt at writing literary history in Hindi, but also an impressive variety of old and new anthologies. These compilations provided the starting point for a systematic survey of past and present Hindi authors; they were a crucial precondition for the future creation of a literary canon. 
As Peter Hohendahl has shown for early-nineteenth-century Germany, the evolution of the writing of literary history was more than just the production of a particular kind of text. *The rapid rise of literary history in the early nineteenth century becomes explicable only when we investigate its function', points out Hohendahl. ‘Beyond the purported task of describing the evolution of a national literature, its purpose was to secure literary tradition' (Hohendahl 1989: 38). In the process, the selection of important authors and the analysis of filiation assumed distinct 'strategic importance'. Notwithstanding the different political and social circumstances, his argument is fully applicable to the Indian context. The beginning of literary historiography in Hindi was marked by Garcin de Tassy's Histoire de la Littérature Hindouie et Hindoustanie (3 vols, Paris 1839-47), of which a revised and considerably augmented second edition appeared in 1870-1. The French Orientalist drew largely on Urdu tazkirahs (collective biographies) and consciously adopted their format for his own Histoire. The result was a massive ... tazkirah of sorts' (Pritchett 2003: 881) which showed a marked preponderance of Urdu and Muslim authors. It was only once revivalist and nationalist thought gave rise to a new cultural consciousness that the Hindi literati in their turn began to explore their literary heritage in a more systematic manner. By the mid-nineteenth century the effort to document the Hindi literary tradition manifested itself in an increasing number of poetical anthologies of Brajbhasha verse. Emulating both the tazkirah and Sans kritic models, these compilations combined specimens of poets' works with brief biographical accounts. The largest and most important was Rāg sāgarudbhav rāg kalpadrum (1843), prepared by Krishnadas Vyas Dev on the model of the Sanskrit Sabdakalpadrum (Grierson 1889: 109). It included specimens of the work of over 200 poets. Ras chandroday (1863) by Thakur Prasad Tripathi, Digvijaybhūşan (1869) by Gokul Prasad, and various other works followed in the 1860s. By far the most popular anthology was Sundarī tilak (1869), a collection of poems by Brajbhasha śrngār poets composed exclusively in the savaiyā-metre. Compiled by the Benares poets Mannalal Sharma 'Dvij' and Hanuman Kavi at the instance of Harishchandra, it assumed distinct relevance in the early canonization of Hindi poets. Sundarī tilak first came out in 
424 
An Empire of Books 
1869; a revised and enlarged version issued from Mannalal's Kashi Sanskrit Press followed in 1872.63 So great was its popularity that it was not only frequently reprinted but also circulated in manuscript form, pro viding an interesting instance of the continuing vitality of scribal traditions. The handwritten copies, however, were often at variance with the over 420 verses and 70 different poets included in Mannalal's edition of 1872 (Singh 1991: 13). Naval Kishore reprinted Sundari tilak in 1883 and several times after that, assuming a key role in the commercial dissemi nation of a standardized edition of the text. 
Against this backdrop, S.K. Das's assertion that, except for Urdu and Persian compilers of poetic tazkirahs Indians did not take any interest in the history of literature or biographies of writers' (Das 1991: 174), does not withstand closer examination. Admittedly, Hindi was slow to follow Bengali and other Indian languages that already boasted their first works of literary historiography. Formally, there was little development in Hindi since Kalidas's Hazārā, the first 'early modern anthology dating from the late seventeenth century. However, the compilations produced in the latter half of the nineteenth century not only introduced new contents, they also took on a whole new trajectory in increasingly functioning as a medium for nationalist endeavours to document and fix indigenous tradition and dismissing India's Muslim past--situate Hindi literature in the context of the classical Sanskrit tradition. In this they prefigured later works of literary historiography that sought to establish a literary canon for the new national language, Hindi. Antho logies, in short, provided the fundamentals and 'raw material for later canon-making efforts. 
While indigenous canonization efforts concentrated on poetry, re flecting the predominance of lyrical genres in the Hindi literary tradition, a different type of anthology emerged under the aegis of colonial edu cation. Constantly in need of 'easy' reading material, British educators turned to prose. Various officially produced Selections' contained mostly prose pieces suitable for instructional purposes, and mark a parallel development in the formation of the Hindi literary canon. The oldest such work was William Price's Hindee and Hindoostanee Selec tions (1827). Initially designed for British students of Fort William College, it became a standard work for generations of Indian students 
63 For a critical new edition of Sundari tilak, see Singh 1991. Singh gives a detail ed account of the genesis and publication history of the work, in which he convincingly shows that it was not, as often claimed, compiled by Harishchandra. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
425 
before it was supplemented by Shiva Prasad's Gutkā or Hindi Selections in 1867.64 
The transition from traditional anthology to the beginning of modern literary historiography was mirrored in the NKP's publication repertoire. In the same way that religious and sectarian self-reflexivity was en couraged through the promotion of hagiographic key texts-Bhaktamāla, Caurāsi bārtā, etc.—, the publishing house also reacted to the new historical awareness generated by and among Hindi literati. As Dalmia has pointed out, an important step in the systematic exploration of the evolution of Hindi literature was Harishchandra's essay 'Hindi kavitā (Hindi Poetry), published in Kavivacansudhā in 1872. In attempting a preliminary sketch of the evolution of Hindi poetry and drama, Harish chandra evaluated this evolution 'according to criteria which were ex tensions of the traditional' (Dalmia 1997:274–5). The NKP's promotion of anthologies is clearly linked to such efforts. 
By far the most important publication was Shivsingh Sengar's afore mentioned Sivsimh saroj (*1878), a landmark in the early formulation of literary history in Hindi. Sengar, a police inspector of Unnao district with pronounced literary interests, had already published an Urdu translation of the Sivapurāna with the NKP. In his anthology he was expressly con cerned with historic accuracy, wanting to supply 'a detailed account of the lives, date of birth, caste, residence, etc., of past and present poets together with their poetical works (Sengar[1878] 1966:[1]).65 Formally. little was new in Sivsimh saroj, which emulated Kalidas's Hazārā in that it purported to be an exquisite collection of the biographies of one thousand bhāsā poets with specimens of their poetry'. In presenting his material, Sengar had opted for an alphabetical rather than chronological order, which would have been more suitable to his historic concern. What was new, however, was his methodological approach in collecting and assessing his textual sources. Sengar was conscious of the novelty of his historicist method and eager to point out that his anthology was the 
64 For Price's work, see Dalmia 1997:274–5. Another such reader was Gadyapadya sarerah (*1889) by Ambikaprasad, an assistant inspector of schools in Oudh. 
65... ab koi granth aisā banānā cāhiye, jismem prācīn aur avārcin kaviyom ke jīvancaritra, san-samvat, jāti, nivāssthānādi kavitā ke granthom-samet vistār-pūrvak likhe hom'. 
66 In actual fact, the number of poets included in the anthology went from 998 in the first to 1003 in the seventh edition of 1926. 839 specimens of poetry were given. 
67 For a discussion of Sengar's sources, his methodology and flaws, see T.N. Dikhshit's detailed introduction to the 1966 edition (Sengar 1966: 4-40).426 
An Empire of Books 
first of its kind. Having studied numerous texts in Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, Hindi, and English, he ended up drawing on fourteen major works, of which he meticulously listed composition dates and gave a description of their content. A closer look at Sengar's sources reveals that in compiling Sivsimh saroj he had recourse to three works lately published by the NKP, notably (1) Tulsiram's Urdu version of Nabhadas's Bhaktamāl(*1871);68 (2) Kavitt ratnākar (*1876), a compilation of forty two poets by Matadin Mishra; and (3) Bhāṣākāvya-sangrah(*1875) by Maheshdatt Shukla, which contained specimens of poetry and short biographical sketches of fifty-one Hindi poets. Shukla's anthology had received an award of Rs 100 under the 1868 Allahabad Government Notification and had been adopted as a textbook in government schools.69 It provided the initial impetus for the compilation of Sivsimh saroj, for Sengar found it utterly defective. 
Included in Sengar's preface was a section entitled 'The Evolution of Hindi Poetry (Bhāṣā kāvya kā nirņay) which was of special significance to Hindi literary historiography. Sengar posited an uninterrupted poetical tradition, starting from the classical Sanskrit poets up to the modern ones, that covered all of India (Dalmia 1997: 276). The ideological and political implications of this view, if still unformulated by Sengar, were momentous: Hindi literature, as it was presented in Sivsimh saroj, was a literature of the Hindus, to the large exclusion of Muslims poets. Pro pounded in an extremely popular anthology (Sengar's work had gone through seven reprints by 1926), this reduction of Hindi literature to Hindu literature served the interests of Hindu nationalism.70 
Sivsimh saroj was to have a lasting impact on the subsequent develop ment of literary historiography in Hindi. It became the principal source for Grierson's The Modern Vernacular History of Hindustan, which accordingly showed the same preponderance of Hindu authors. The Mishra brothers drew on it in their influential four-volume anthology Misrabandhuvinod (1913 onward), while Ramchandra Shukla acknow ledged Sengar's pioneering position in Hindi literary historiography in his Hindi sāhitya kā itihās (1929), the first fully-fledged literary history of Hindi in the Hindi language (Shukla vs 2051: preface). By his time, the claim to a distinct Hindu identity of the Hindi literary heritage had become solidified. 
68 Sengar erroneously refers to Tulsiram as Tulsidas. 69 RPE Oudh, 1874: 71. 
70 Following the seventh edition of 1926 the work remained out of print for decades. It was only in 1966 that the Tejkumar Press issued a reprint, edited by Triloki Narayan Dikshit. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
427 
Second only in importance to Sivsimh saroj was the Benares poet Sardar Kavi's Srrigar sangrah (Collection of Erotic Verse), a work com piled in 1842 and first printed by Naval Kishore in 1888. It contained verses by some 125 poets dealing with rhetoric figures of speech (alam kār) and erotic themes. Grierson judged it a deservedly popular work on rhetoric' (Grierson 1889: 120) and used the printed edition as a source for his Modern Vernacular History of Hindustan. 
In their significance for Hindi literary historiography, the aforemen tioned anthologies have tended to overshadow other, more popular compilations. The NKP issued a series of works that enjoyed great suc cess in the marketplace but subsequently failed to attract the attention of scholars. Among them are the various compilations of sriigār poets by 
(*1893), and Şadrtu hazārā (*1894)—as well as the compilations of Braibhasha lyrics by Hafizullah Khan (b. 1857), a school teacher in Har doi district. Born in a family of Afghan Muslims, Hafizullah had grown into a lover and zealous collector of bhakti poetry. Published in the 1880s, his collections Şadrtu kāvya sangrah, Hazārā, Manmohini, and, particularly, Navīn sarigrah enjoyed lasting popularity—the latter title had, by 1953, gone through twenty-two editions. 
Efforts to identify and establish a canon of leading Hindi poets also extended to the contemporary period. A prominent example is Sujānsaroj (Sujan's Lotus, *1896), a late-nineteenth-century anthology which, as its title suggests, was designed as a continuation of Sivsimh saroj, of fering the reader “poetry and biographical sketches of an assembly of contemporary nineteenth-century poets'.? The collection self-consci ously positioned itself at the interface of modern literary history and the traditional anthology. Its compiler, Pandit Bakhshram Pandey 'Sujankavi', a scholastic poet of Ballia, envisaged nothing less than to supply an authoritative collection for posterity's sake. As he informed his fellow poets, his hope was that 'in the future this work will take the form of a history (yah granth itihās rūp ho) [and] that your names will all be of long standing existence'. Pandey was evidently concerned with providing a complete and exhaustive overview of contemporary poetic writing. His fifty-three sketches of poets were supplemented by a list of thirty-six further poets on whom he had not been able to procure biographical data, followed by an appeal to the said individuals to promptly forward their biographies to Naval Kishore so that the anthology could be supplemented 
71 Pandit Bakhshram Pandey authored several other works, among them Rahasya candrikā, a collection of verse on the rāsa-theme. 
428 
An Empire of Books 
by a second volume. At the linguistic level, the underlying nationalist agenda of Sujānsaroj translated into a concern with the overpowering effect of Anglicization on the idiom of educated Hindi speakers. Prior to the demise of Hindi's great icon Bharatendu, Pandey warned, it did not occur to our brothers to say practice instead of abhyās.' 
Changing Tides: The New Appetite for Fiction While the NKP's list allows us some insight into ongoing attempts at writing the literary history of Hindi and early canon formation, it pro vides little information with regard to the most conspicuous trend in late nineteenth-century Hindi literature: the rise of prose. The publishing house was surprisingly slow to react to the new demand for modern prose fiction and the contemporary audience's growing fascination with the novel. Apart from occasional titles, such as Hindi versions of Robin son Crusoe or Rajab Ali Beg's early Urdu bestseller Fasāna-e Cajā'ib, modern prose fiction, whether of Western or Indian origin, was not pro moted on a large scale until the turn of the century. Given the increased output of popular fiction during the last decades of the century and the immense popularity it came to enjoy, the publisher's delayed response to and hesitant engagement with a textual genre that had an obvious market potential calls for an explanation. Firstly, it must be borne in mind that Naval Kishore was a conservative publisher, who exercised caution with regard to new genres and did not seem overly interested in rushing into the risky field of launching new authors whose commercial value was unpredictable. Given the House's pronounced focus on religious and literary classics, discovering new literary talent was clearly not one of his top priorities. Secondly, as already outlined in Chapter 1, print culture in the second half of the nineteenth century no longer operated outside a legal framework: with the promulgation of the Indian Copyright Act of 1847 and the Press and Registration of Books Act of 1867, intel lectual copyright had, at least in theory, become an issue that no pub lisher of repute could ignore. Even if literary property and copyright were not widespread public notions yet, the law clearly stipulated that contempo rary literature, unlike older religious or poetic texts, could not be printed or reprinted without prior authorization from the author. Intimately linked to this was the third factor, namely the increased competition in the publishing trade: by the last decades of the century, Benares, Allaha bad, and the smaller country towns boasted a thriving Hindi publishing industry of their own. After 1880 the Khadgavilas Press of Bankipur (Patna) rose to prominence as the first literary publishing house in Hindi 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
429 
and started to attract many of the leading authors of the day. For writers residing in these localities there was no longer any compelling reason to turn to the Lucknow publisher. 
It is a telling fact that the NKP published only a single work of Harish chandra's prolific oeuvre, namely a collection of devotional poems and songs entitled Rāg sarigrah (* 1881). Of Harishchandra's extended lite rary coterie the only noteworthy person on the NKP list was Kishorilal Gosvami, also with a single title. Indeed, it would seem that, as far as the market for modern fiction and drama was concerned, the NKP was forc ed to concede its leading role in the Hindi book trade to those presses that were in more direct contact with the contemporary Hindi literary scene flourishing in Benares and elsewhere. Ironically, the rise of prose fic tion, soon the most ‘marketable' of literary genres, ushered in the dawn of the House of Naval Kishore as a commanding presence in Hindi pub lishing. 
7.5 Against the Divide: Patterns of Hindi 
and Urdu Publishing In recent years much debate has focused on the social and political ramifications of the language controversy between Hindi and Urdu, which emerged in the NWP&Oudh in the 1860s.72 Paul Brass in his Language, Religion and Politics in North India (1974) coined the term 'multi-symbol congruence' to describe a process characteristic of nascent nationalism, in which Hindu and Muslim political elites chose religion asa primary symbol of communal differentiation and then strove to make language and other symbols congruent. Drawing on Brass, Christopher King has portrayed the Hindi movement as a corollary of Hindu nation alism, in the course of which the traditional identification of Urdu with both Muslim and Hindu culture was transformed into a new equation identifying Urdu exclusively with Muslims and Hindi with Hindus (King 1994: 15). Given the complex social and linguistic situation created by the competition between Hindi and Urdu during the period under review, Naval Kishore's growing involvement in Hindi publishing cannot be viewed in isolation from the language debate. How did the ongoing dif ferentiation between Hindi and Urdu affect the NKP's publishing policy? Apart from the obvious commercial motives, were there ideological 
72 Several studies have analysed the controversy in the light of Hindu nationalism, Hindu-Muslim politics, and group mobilization. In addition to the early works by the German scholars Jürgen Lütt (Lütt 1970) and Kerrin Dittmer (Dittmer 1972), see, e.g., Das Gupta 1970, Brass 1974, Rahman 1996 and Dalmia 1996. 
430 
An Empire of Books 
considerations prompting Naval Kishore's entry into Hindi publishing? Did his own Hindu background influence his professional choices? It will be argued here that Naval Kishore's sustained involvement in the Hindi book trade did not have any adverse effects on the firm's operations in Urdu. The NKP remained largely aloof from ideological partisanship with either of the two languages or scripts. Instead, a clear emphasis was laid on assimilation rather than differentiation. Publishing in both languages became a way of defying the process of cultural dichotomization between Hindus and Muslims. The firm's overall policy, as reflected in many of its publishing projects, aimed at perpetuating the mixed cultural heritage and enhancing the composite element inherent in North Indian intellectual and literary traditions. 
Before turning to the patterns of Hindi and Urdu publishing at the House of Naval Kishore, it may be useful to look at the broader picture. As King's analysis of publishing patterns in the NWP&Oudh has shown, during the period 1868-1925 publications in Hindi were continuously gaining advantage over Urdu. By 1868 Hindi-language publications, in absolute numbers, already outnumbered those in Urdu (NWP). By con trast, in Avadh and its capital Lucknow the complete hegemony' of Urdu continued for much longer. Here it was not until the third decade of the twentieth century that the proportion of Hindi works finally surpassed that of Urdu (King 1994:37-45). A major drawback of King's otherwise very useful analysis is that he is interested only in the overall picture and does not attempt to relate the statistical data to the activities of official or privately owned presses in specific locations. His failure to mention, for example, that Allahabad was the seat of the government press, which continuously churned out large numbers of Hindi textbooks for use in formal education, makes his data subject to misinterpretation. Equally, no explanation is given for the high number of Hindi books produced from Lucknow: as outlined in Chapter 4, it was the result of the colla boration of the Education Department and the NKP. This alerts us to a larger methodological problem: in order to correctly assess the dynamics of the marketplace, it is crucial to distinguish between educational and non-educational titles; unfortunately, statistical sources do not always allow us to do so. In 1874, for example, book production in Hindi still showed a marked preponderance of educational over non-educational titles, whereas in Urdu non-educational works of religious or general character by far exceeded educational titles, suggesting very different market and readership configurations.73 Moreover, since the figures 
73 RPIR 1874: 23. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
431 
cited by King do not differentiate between reprints and first editions, they make it all but impossible to determine the scope of recent literary activ ity and new generic trends. Drawing on the same sources as King, Table (7.1) invariably shares some of the shortcomings of his data. Nonetheless, by focusing on the number of registered titles rather than giving absolute numbers of printed volumes, it tries to give a more accurate picture of the parallel growth of Urdu and Hindi publishing in the NWP&Oudh. 
TABLE 7.1 Publishing Patterns in the NWP&Oudh: Number of Registered Titles in Urdu and Hindi, 1868-95 
Year 
Remarks 
Urdu Titles NWP Oudh 
NWP 
Oudh 
146 
1868 1869 
107 55 
57 
? 
No books registered in Oudh during the 2nd quarter of the year 
1870 1871 1872 
81 88/*161 68 
? 
52 487*116 33 
? ? ? 
*books and pamphlets No books registered in Oudh during the 4th quarter of the year; no books 
registered from Kanpur No books registered from Kanpur No books registered from Kanpur 
108 
67 
27 
83 78 
134 84 
69 
86 
130 109 338 
132 
117 121 100 88 
237 
206 
139 
79 
incomplete registration 
380 489 
218 265 
337 
201 
1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 
227 
238 491 522 452 558 569 408 
468 262 
295 
361 213 199 
301 
208 306 
295 469 623 560 
354 354 
SOURCES: RPIR; Educational and Home Dept. Reports. 
LV 
432 
An Empire of Books 
Perhaps the most striking feature in Table 7.1 is the great fluctuation displayed by the data, which makes it extremely difficult to indicate more specific trends. Neither Urdu nor Hindi titles show regular growth rates but rather follow an up-and-down pattern. Whether this is owing to the unreliability of the data, fluctuations in the market, or to a combination of both, cannot be said. Colonial officials themselves were frequently at a loss in trying to explain these fluctuations, especially in years where incomplete registration could not be held responsible. However, what clearly emerges from the table is the continuing prevalence of Urdu over Hindi titles, even though intermittently, as for example in the year 1884, the number of Hindi titles could approach those of Urdu. 
A somewhat less problematic indicator for the increasing importance of Hindi in the public domain is the number of students learning Hindi and Urdu in NWP&Oudh government schools. As Table 7.2 reflects, by 1876 their number was almost equal. 
King cites another example documenting the relative strength of Hindi and Urdu in the NWP&Oudh in the 1870s, namely the number of non-official letters circulated through the imperial and district post offi ces. At 33 per cent, Hindi letters came fairly close to the 40 per cent of letters written in Urdu (King 1994: 46–7). To acknowledge this roughly equal share of Hindi and Urdu in education and literate practice is helpful in understanding the laws of the market, in a discourse that usually cen tres around the political and ideological implications of the language controversy. In the commercial market it was numbers of potential readers that counted. Hindi had surely become an attractive proposition. 
When the language question first gained momentum in 1868, it was 
Table 7.2 Number of Students Learning Urdu and Hindi in 
NWP&Oudh Government Schools74 
1866–7 
1871-2 
1873-4 
1876-7 
Urdu Hindi 
10,137 7,702 
25,586 18,977 
28,233 22.353 
35,674 34,232 
SOURCE: Annual Report of the Administration of Oudh. 
74 The figures given here do not differentiate between primary and secondary education and may thus obscure different patters existing at both levels, as suggested by King's more elaborate analysis (King 1994: 97-101). 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
433 
vividly discussed in Avadh Akhbār. The paper initially published articles and letters in support of either of the two languages. The issue of 2 Feb ruary 1868 carried a piece in favour of Urdu reprinted from the Aligarh Institute Gazette. The following year, in discussing the question of whether Hindi or Urdu was better suited to be the court language in Avadh, the paper adopted a more cautious stance. It argued that, “it is difficult to offer a correct opinion on the subject; but that the language which suffers no injury, and can be learned in its correct form, and in which existing evils might be remedied, should be best suited for the purpose. It is known that the Mahomedans were the cause of abolishing the use of the Hindee language, and it now becomes necessary to do what is best suited to the times.75 However, with AA being a medium of the Urdu-speaking elite, it did not take long before the paper became more outspoken in its defence of Urdu. The introduction of the Nagari script in Bihar in 1876 was decried as a 'calamity' and described as a forceful and nonsensical government measure in utter disregard of the popular usage of the people (LLH 1876: 18). While the discussion in AA offers some points of interest, it would be wrong to infer that the publishing policy of the NKP followed the same trajectory. Naval Kishore refrained from openly taking sides in the language controversy. Perhaps his only statement on the language issue can be found in an 1876 Hinditranslation of Alif Laila (Arabian Nights). In its preface he wrote: 
When we turn our attention to the Nagari language, we find that the qualities of this script are beyond description, i.e. the writing is so clear that what is being written is being read. For a long time the discussion has been going on whether the language of the government offices should be Urdu or Nagari. In the government offices in Bihar, the Central Provinces and special districts of the Deccan, the national language [desbhāsā, i.e. Hindi] and the Deva nagari script have become current. Therefore many people desire that books of all kinds should be translated into Devanagari. Works written in Hindi by ancient scholars in which there is a large admixture of Sanskrit words are available in abundance, and many of them have also been printed, but as long as books advancing all the arts and ideas are not available in Deva nagari characters, correspondence in the Nagari script will not be written well. Therefore, since there is a large admixture of Urdu in the idiom of the government offices and in colloquial speech, we thought that it would be excellent for an understanding of the current manner of speech (bolcāl) if the tales and stories were in Devanagari. An effort was made to simplify difficult words of Arabic or Persian origin which have come into Urdu, and 
75 Avadh Akhbar, 27 January 1869, SVN 1869: 64. 
434 
USE 
An Empire of Books 
ed in Hindi (desbhāsā) occasionally such Sanskrit words as are also 
have been introduced. 76 
Such a statement was clearly determined by its 
specific context of ad vertising a popular work of oriental literature amo 
ature among the target audience of Nagari readers. Even though it to some extent 
ent adopted the rhetoric of the Hindi movement in calling Hindi desbhasa 0 
or national language', in its pragmatic thrust it should not be interpreted 
d as an ideological posi tioning in favour of Hindi and against Urdu. It is 
vour of Hindi and against Urdu. It is important to understand that Naval Kishore's increasing involvement in Hin 
rin Hindi publishing was not a deliberate departure from Urdu but a reaction 
ction to the market. That it worked to the detriment of Urdu is borne out by sheer numbers. NKP figures correspond to the general trend in book publishing in the NWP&Oudh. As noted earlier, throughout the 
he 1860s Hindi books made up only a small percentage of the NKP's output. For the year 1869-70, official statistics list 9 works in Hindi/Nagari as c works.77 In the following year there was a slight prop Hindi works, with 14 Hindi and 68 Urdu titles." 
titles 78 The book publishing this point was still heavily dominated by Urdu. As Naval Kishore himself asserted. Urduis becoming more and 
m ucunem Indian language.'79 
By the mid-1870s a slow transformation of the man Hindu publications steadily gaining in importance. In 10 , 13 mm and 241 Urdu titles were issued in the NWP&Oudh, translating into a ratio of 1:1.8.80 NKP figures for non-educational Himna 
80 NKP figures for non educational Hindi and Urdu books 'printed for the public' during that year show a correspo 1:1.7. On closer analysis, however, the NKP data reveals two opposing trends: in the category of first editions. Hindi books had begun to out number those in Urdu, with 26.350 volumes in Hindi against 20,345 volumes in Urdu. These figures testify to the growing nerary activity 
sed demand for general reading matter in Hindi. Yet the im pression that Hindi might be taking the lead over Urdu is immediately corrected when one looks at second editions produced during the same year. Here an altogether different picture emerges: with 36,500 Urdu as 
76 Sahasra rajni caritra (*1876), bhūmikā. 77 OAR, 1869–70: cl-cliv. 78 OAR, 1870-1: ccxix-ccxxv. 79 RPE Oudh, 1871: 175. 80 PGNWP. General Dept., July 1876: 30. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
435 
compared to 7050 Hindi volumes, Urdu books continued largely to sur pass those in Hindi.81 
Rather than indicating a deliberate shift of allegiance from Urdu to Hindi, Naval Kishore's investment in Hindi publishing was first and foremost a commercial decision in reaction to the growth of the readership and rising market demand for Hindi reading matter. While over the years it entailed a proportional decline in the firm's production of Urdu titles, in absolute numbers Urdu always maintained a substantial lead over Hindi publications. In 1894 the NKP list featured 1007 titles in Hindi, as compared to 1441 titles in Urdu (ratio 1:1.43)(Suzuki/Tanaka 1981:18). More importantly, throughout the nineteenth century the House of Naval Kishore maintained an outward 'Urdu' identity; well into the twentienth century it continued to edit its catalogues in Urdu, with Hindi titles al ways relegated to the back pages. 
Arguably, this does not altogether preclude the existence of motives other than commercial expediency in Naval Kishore's engagement with Hindi. His interest in Hindi literary culture and tradition, if never exclus ive, was genuine and well in keeping with his larger objective to promote knowledge and enlightenment among his compatriots, both Hindu and Muslim, and instil in them a sense of pride in Indian literary traditions. Thus, from the late 1870s we find him extending his patronage to some of the newly-established Hindi associations. Apparently, Naval Kishore felt no contradiction in simultaneously patronizing Urdu-dominated societies such as the Jalsah-e Tahzib and associations that openly favoured Hindi such as the Bharat Varshiya National Association. Esta blished at Aligarh in 1878 with a view to promoting education and lite rature, the Bharat Varshiya National Association was soon to figure among the various bodies that submitted pro-Hindi memorials to the Education Commission of 1882. Interestingly, even in making a strong plea for Hindi as the 'true vernacular' of the province, the memorialists did not intend to denigrate Urdu or the Indo-Persian cultural heritage. The way in which they introduced themselves to the Commission sug gests that notions of a composite culture of learning were still prevalent: 
The Association was established here chiefly through the influence of Munshi Nawalkishore, proprietor of the Oudh Akhbar, the only daily Urdu newspaper in these provinces and it is in its contemplation, in consideration of the present state of funds at its disposal, to establish a library consisting 
81 RPIR 1876: 41-2.436 
An Empire of Books 
of books of literature, history, science, and arts in the English, Ur Sanskrit and Hindi languages, and as Aligarh, through the in exertion of our venerable countryman the Hon'ble Syed Ahi promises to be a seat of learning, such a collection of books is to confer immense benefits on the reading public, besides supplyin 
plying a crying want of a suitable place for holding meetings for educational 
ational and social purposes.82 
and arts in the English. Urdu, Persian, 
igarh, through the indefatigable he Hon'ble Syed Ahmed Khan Collection of books is calculated 
The pro-Hindi tendencies crystallized in the Bhasha Samy Sabha, a body originating in and closely interlinked with th 
vith the Bharat Varshiya National Association. Its express purpose was to enr through the encouragement of original composition and free impo 
be importation of useful matter from the ancient as well as the modern language: world. Its president, Raja Lakshman Singh, was a prominent ad of the heavily Sanskritized and pure style of Hindi.83 Since the Alla Government Notification of 1868 had failed to make an impact development of Hindi literature, the sabha instigated its own prize awarding scheme, offering up to Rs 200 for translations and original compositions ‘on useful subjects such as Indian agriculture, female edu cation, chemistry, Hindi series, &c.'84 Naval Kishore patronized society and assisted it in some of its publications. When in 1890 he com missioned Pandit Mihiracand to prepare a Hindi translation of Manu smrti, he did so for two reasons: one was to provide the Hindi reading public with an easily comprehensible version of this key text of Hindu law-previously existing translations were deemed elusive and obs tructing comprehension. The second reason, as expressly stated, was to lend support to the Bhasha Samvarddhini Sabha.85 Again, while indicating Naval Kishore's sympathies with Hindi, such patronage must not be equated with a newly acquired anti-Urdu position on the publisher's part. Rather, it was a natural extension of his multifarious activities in promot ing literature and learning. 
Unlike some of his contemporaries, Naval Kishore clearly had no interest in becoming entangled in the ideological pitfalls of the increasingly embittered controversy over Hindi and Urdu. Yet, as much as he tried to steer clear of the language debate, in the heated atmosphere of the late nineteenth century such impartiality was not always easy to maintain. The more he gained recognition as an important figure in Hindi publishing, 
82 AECR 1884: 416-17. ** For further details, see Nevill 1909: 87, and RA NWP&Oudh, 1893: 306. 84 AECR 1884: 418. 89 Manu smrti satik (*1890), vijñāpanpatra. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
437 
the more he became subject to an ideological appropriation on the part of partisans of the Hindi movement. Undeterred by his reputation as one of the foremost Urdu publishers in North India, and despite the fact that his mother tongue was undoubtedly Urdu (and a very Persianized one at that), proponents of Hinditried to claim him for their cause. This not only took the form of routine appraisals of the Lucknow publisher as a patron of Hindi literature, but, at a later stage, also involved an attempt to subsume him altogether into the Hindi fold. The most striking expression of this appropriation can be found in the preface to the NKP's Hindi translation of Kathāsaritsāgar (*1896), issued in the year following the publisher's death. It informs us that the translation was commissioned and sponsored by Munshi Naval Kishore, the foremost well-wisher of the Hindi language ... for the sake of raising the prestige of his mother tongue Hindi (apni mātrbhāṣā Hindi)' (emphasis added). 
Defying Linguistic and Cultural Dichotomization Undeterred by, but not oblivious to, the increasing polarization effected by the debate over Hindi and Urdu, Naval Kishore continued to invest in the promotion of literary and non-literary works in both languages. If an ideological trajectory is to be detected at all in a policy that was largely determined by the laws of the market, I would call it cultural assimilation through the medium of print'. This policy drew on notions of a shared literary culture and accorded importance to the Urdu language and Indo Persian literary traditions for Muslims and Hindus alike; it was in keeping with the composite nature of Naval Kishore's upbringing and reflected an intellectual climate still prevalent among large parts of the Lucknow intelligentsia. 
In the underlying project of cultural assimilation, it was paramount to counteract the ongoing communal bifurcation of Hindi and Urdu. Even as he avidly seized the possibilities opened up by the emerging market for Hindi books, Naval Kishore sought to bridge the growing linguistic and religio-cultural divide by focusing on the common cultural heritage and shared literary tastes rather than cultural differences among Hindi and Urdu readers. This was done through various categories of texts. We have already noted the publisher's efforts in promoting the classics of Sanskrit literature in Urdu and the NKP's bi- or trilingual editions of Sanskrit shastric texts, with paraphrases in Urdu and/or Hindi. A wide range of translations or transliterations from Hindi into Urdu and, to a lesser extent, from Urdu into Hindi, were deployed to the same end. 
438 
An Empire of Books 
The various Hindi-Urdu translations and transliterations generated by the publishing house over the years bear testimony to a policy that was guided by pragmatism rather than linguistic and cultural ideology. The backdrop to much translation activity was indeed a pragmatic one: in promoting Hindi religious and literary classics in Urdu versions, the NKP catered mainly, if by no means exclusively, for the three Hindu communities traditionally associated with Persian and Urdu literary cul ture, that is Kayasthas, Kashmiri Brahmins, and Khatris. Even outside these influential communities, who favoured Urdu for cultural and eco nomic reasons and did not identify with Hindi/Nagari, there was a large educated class of mostly urban Hindus who used Urdu as their language of communication and were accustomed to reading and writing in the Urdu script. It was with a view to this sizeable audience, sometimes quaintly denominated as 'Persian-reading bhaktas' on NKP title pages, that Urdu-script versions or translations of cherished devotional classics such as Brajvilās, Premsāgar, Sukhsāgar, and Bhramargit, were prepared at the press.86 As late as 1887 Naval Kishore invested in an annotated edition of Tulsidas's Ramāyān with an Urdu commentary by Munshi Svamidayal. It was issued in a voluminous 1222-page edition of 1200 copies. The continuous public demand for such texts exposes the ex clusive identification of Urdu with Muslims as an ideological construct. 
Another important aspect of the project of counteracting the religio cultural divide was the NKP's patronage of contemporary Hindu poets of Urdu, many of whom wrote on Hindu religious themes. Mention has already been made of Totaram Shayan' (d. 1880), a versatile poet emp loyed at the press who next to his poetic oeuvre contributed a number of important translations. Next to him, the NKP promoted several poets of local repute, notably two poets of Kayastha origin, Jagannath Das Sahai “Khushtar' Lakhnavi (1809–64) and Shankardayal ‘Farhat' Lakhnavi (1843-1904), and the Kashmiri Pandit Kanhaiyalal 'Ashiq' (alive in 1877). Minor though these poets may appear to be to the modern ob server, they deserve to be noticed as authors of some of the earliest mod ern Urdu versions of the Hindu epics and Purāņas, as also a host of original compositions on Hindu religious topics. Khushtar's prolific oeuvre includes one of the first widely acclaimed Rāmāyaṇs in Urdu, written in 1850 in the reign of Wajid Ali Shah. Generally known as 
86 The following publication dates are given in Urdu lists: Brajvilās (*1866); Premsāgar, trs, by Lala Svamidayal (*1872), Sukhsāgar (*1873), and Bhaunargit (*1878). The latter, a word by word transliteration of Surdas's Bhramargit, was prepared by Munshi Natholal, a Dhusar from the qasbah of Rewari. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
439 
Rāmāyan-e Khushtar (*1864, Fig. 16), it assumed a prominent place among Urdu Rāmāyaṇs and became a perennial favourite, as borne out by more than sixteen reprints (Nabhvi 1993:clv). Khushtar's compositions further include Urdu verse renderings of the celebrated tenth chapter of the Bhāgavata Purana (*1863), Kathā Satnarāyan (Story of Satnarayan, *1875), and Sudāmā carit (Story of Sudama, *1877), an extremely popu lar myth of Bhagavata Purana origin which existed in countless Hindi versions. Khushtar's younger contemporary Munshi Shankardayal "Farhat', whom Garcin de Tassy described as a 'very distinguished con temporary Urdu writer' (HLHH 1: 448), worked as a teacher at the American Mission School in Lucknow. Farhat's verse renderings of Tulsidas's Rāmāyan, known as Rāmāyan-e Farhat (*1866), and of Lalluji's Premsāgar (*1868) were issued in richly illustrated editions to wide acclaim. His prolific oeuvre further includes Urdu versions in the masnavi style of Adbhut Rāmāyan (*1870), Ganesapurāņa, Sivapurāna (*1874 [1862?]), Siva sahasra nāma (*1875), and Janaki bijay (*1874). Many of the Urdu compositions of these two poets were, in turn, reissued in Nagari versions. 
It was only in the 1880s that the first instances of a deliberate effort to produce translations of a more distinct 'Hindi' character can be wit nessed. A salient example is that of Malik Muhammad Jaysi's celebrated Avadhi romance Padmāvat (1540), a classic of Sufi poetry. Padmāvat (*1865) had for some time been circulated in an Urdu-script version, when in 1880 Lala Raghuvar Dayal was assigned the task of preparing a Hindi/Nagari version of the text. By that time the author could draw on a distinct notion of differentiated vocabularies existing for Hindi and Urdu. While opting for a fairly Sanskritized style, he found it necessary to include a colophon of current 'Urdu' synonyms for the Sanskritic Hindi vocabulary he considered difficult' (the expression used is 'gūrh', i.e. 'abstruse, hidden, secret'). This extensive colophon affords some insight into the kind of linguistic ability expected from the new Hindi readership. Interestingly, most of the Hindi words glossed appear fairly common and not at all 'gūrh' to the modern observer. At the time, however, they were considered to belong to a higher speech register, with which the common reader was yet to become familiarized. Here are some examples of the terms glossed (“Urdu' variants in brackets): kar (hāth), yaś (neknāmi), rain (rāt), drsti (nazar), śasi (cand), gagan (āsmān), mūl (jar), bhūmi (zamin), madhu (sarāb). A similar concern with general comprehensibility can be detected in an entirely different publication, Nabhadas's Bhaktamāl (*1883). As mentioned before, 
An Empire of Books 
40 
بگو تھے ایسے تم سے بردن گردن سے سب بارودکی تا برخلیل جبر ہو رہے ہیں 
من منگریو بالائے ہوادار اور اگر ہموار اور نار روز کرمان از سوی علی ندوی کی لا أجد مشر اون زبانی ایران اور زمان کے روئین تنگ نہ کرنے کی ہے طاق بازی یا برون تو م 
ان نرد که نوشین ایرنا انا زواے تم نبین کی احتاج في با مکانی واکنش را البرشور کره! وہ مسکرانے کی کیا کمان سیر وجہ کیا پریشان ہوگیا ہوکر 
مقابل مونافوج را دراور اور مین ذین | 
داد 
می 
العمل الدر اما 
والی دارد و با اوناپور پور نے اسی کو گرین با دوستانتان این اور دیگری نی انبان مفط نرم و نیسان اداری پرینت نابیطان بواس ہوا جب پاکستانی باران انکی اپنی کتاب جو تیسری بات میخونیزیا 
کتے نرم نهادگر اعوانہ واراکی و رگرت گیتادرم زمین، آمریکا صاف کوئی گنا تمدت زمان لنانی گیاندارد اگر روی برش بر ایمانین بنا در بازی ا ول توڑی بھی یا تو ہر کوئی کنارے میں ابہا شرماال 
Fig. 16: Page from Khushtar's versified Urdu Rāmāyan (1864) 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
441 
Naval Kishore had popularized the text in Tulsiram's Urdu prose version and Raja Pratap Singh's Hindi translation thereof. When the firm finally invested in the publication of the original Bhaktamāl, a text written in terse medieval Brajbhasha verse, it was supplemented with a gloss of difficult Sanskrit and Hindi words. 
Thus far we have looked at the translation and promotion of Hindi and Hindu-heritage texts in Urdu. What about the reverse process? Was it a viable commercial proposition for a publisher like Naval Kishore to invest in making texts that belonged to the Urdu literary heritage ac cessible to the new Hindi reading public? Since the number of literate Hindus who had direct access to Urdu was still considerable, the market for such translations did seem limited. In the case of classical Urdu poetry it was all but non-existent (quite unlike today's growing demand for Urdu poetry in Nagari versions). Hence, Naval Kishore focused on a corpus of popular prose tales and romances which belonged to a joint oral or semi-oral culture and were enjoyed by a wide audience of readers and listeners across communal, regional, and class barriers. That he should do so was not surprising: in a tradition reaching back to Fort William College, tales like Simhāsan battisi, Baitāl paccīsī, or Gul-e bakāvalī were circulated in both Urdu and Nagari script versions right from the time they were first seen into print. In keeping with the com paratively late development of a sizeable Hindi reading public, Urdu script versions or translations generally preceded those in Nagari. The largest number of Urdu-into-Hindi translations produced at the NKP belonged to the Persian/Urdu narrative genres of dāstān and qissa literature. The NKP's pivotal role in fixing the Urdu dāstān in print has already been outlined. Largely eclipsed by this momentous achievement are the firm's less spectacular but nonetheless significant efforts in circulating qissa and dāstān titles in Hindi. In fact, Naval Kishore was among the first to provide the Nagari readership with printed versions of a number of immensely popular texts. 
In 1871 a start was made with Mohini caritra (Fascinating History), a Hindi rendering of Rajab Ali Beg Surur's Fasāna-e Cajā'ib (The Story of Wonders), itself a latter-day tale in the qişşa tradition composed in elaborate and complex Urdu. While the translation enjoyed wide popu larity, Naval Kishore was apparently not satisfied with it, for only four years later he ordered the NKP's managing director Pandit Ramratan Vajpeyi to prepare a new version. Apūrv kathā (Extraordinary Tale) came out in 1875. Soon afterwards, Pandit Pyarelal finished his translation of the Urdu Alif Laila. Bearing the more suitable Hindi title Sahasra rajnī 
442 
An Empire of Books caritra(*1876), it appears to be the first comprehensive Hindi version of the Arabian Nights circulated in print. Previously, Hindi readers had to content themselves with Sahasra rātri samksep, an abridged translation from the Bengali by Pandit Badrilal of Benares College, which was pub lished from the Benares Medical Hall Press in 1861. In 1877 the NKP continued its series of dāstān and qissa titles with Jivanram Jat's trans lations of three works belonging to the hardy perennials of the qissa genre' (Pritchett 1985: 26): The first, a Hindi version of Mir Amman's Bāgh o bahār, was called Cahār darves (The Four Dervishes) after its Persian original but bore the nicely assimilated Hindi subtitle 'Cār yogiyom ke deśātan ki citrabicitra kahāni' (A picturesque tale of the travels of four yogis from one country to another). The second and third were Hātimtāj kā qissā by Haidar Bakhsh Haidari, and Gul o sanaubar by Nemcand. Once again, it was emphasized that the translations had been executed in ‘simple Hindi, that is in a colloquial style from which difficult words have been removed'.87 
The firm's most noted publication, however, followed in 1879 in the form of Amir Hamzā ki dāstān, the first Hindi version of the celebrated dāstān of Amir Hamza. The immense popularity of Dāstān-e Amir Hamzā prompted Naval Kishore to invest in an abridged Hindi version even before he embarked on his huge project to see the complete Urdu dāstān into print. As Pandit Kalicaran, the translator of the Hindi dāstān, explained in his preface, 'When reading the qissa of Amir Hamza most people felt that it would be of great benefit if this book were translated into Hindi (devanāgarī bhāsā)'. Hence, 'for the benefit of connoisseurs of Nagari' he had been commissioned by Naval Kishore to render the text into 'easy colloquial Hindi (bolcāl ki saral hindi bhāsā)'.88 The result was a 520-page version in which the Persian vocabulary had been replaced by suitable Sanskritisms and Persian verse forms by Indic kavitt, sorathā and chaupai metres (Pritchett 1991:23). 'With its assimi lation of a highly Islamic content into a self-consciously Sanskritized form', Pritchett notes, Amir Hamzā ki dāstān 'offers a fascinating early glimpse of the development of Hindi' (ibid.). It does not, however, as she also presumes, represent 'a radical departure' in the publisher's repertoire of Hindi books, but rather forms the culmination point in a series of translations of popular Persian/Urdu prose narratives. As has been 
87.... saralbhāsā arthāt klist sabdom ko nikālkar bolcāl ki rīti', Hātimtāj kā qissā (Lucknow 21882), bhūmikā. 
88 Amir Hamzā ki dāstān (Lucknow 21883), bhūmikā. 
Hindi Publishing in a Stronghold of Urdu 
443 
shown, these had been incorporated into the list of Hindi publications right from the early 1870s, marking the departure from a publication repertoire which at first consisted primarily of Hindu religious, poetical, astrological, and medical texts. The dāstān and qissa renderings were eagerly received by the Hindi reading public and within a short time went through second and third editions. By the mid-1870s the literary tastes of Nagari readers had broadened considerably, making the publication of Persian and Urdu prose romances in Hindi/Nagari versions a com mercially lucrative venture. 
This chapter has argued that in studying early commercial print cul ture in Hindi, our attention needs to shift from the urban centres usually associated with Hindi and its literature to a somewhat unexpected place: the city of Lucknow. It is due to the enterprising spirit and farsightedness of Munshi Naval Kishore that Lucknow, a traditional stronghold of Pers jan and Urdu print culture, deserves a prominent place on the map of nineteenth-century Hindi publishing as well. As the first large-scale commercial publisher in the history of Hindi, the House of Naval Kishore plaved a pivotal role in the diffusion of Hindi literature and the expansion of its reading and book-buying public. Supported by colonial patronage and run on sound commercial lines, it was the first to address a pros pective mass public of Nagari readers with a steadily expanding range of widely circulated and inexpensive texts, also accessible to readers of more modest means. Beyond its involvement in textbook publishing, the Lucknow publishing house came forth with an unprecedented range of influential publications—many of them originating in its Department of Composition and Translation, which contributed to the consolidation of modern standard Hindi and provided a major impulse for the spread and development of its literature. 
Moreover, through the promotion of Sanskrit classics in Hindi trans lation, the NKP joined in the grand effort to revive Hindu literary tradition and reinforce the historico-cultural nexus with the Hindu past. In some respects, Naval Kishore's efforts in preserving and promoting classical Hindi literature may even be taken to prefigure subsequent collective efforts undertaken by the Nagari Pracharini Sabha of Benares (est. 1893), the leading Hindi organization in the nineteenth century. It would be difficult, however, to read any Hindu nationalist ideology into his in volvement in Hindi and Sanskrit literature, for, at the same time, he con tinued to exercise his role as one of the foremost publishers of Urdu, Persian, and Islamic literature in northern India. The NKP's publishing policy clearly aimed at defying the ongoing dichotomization of Hindi and 
444 
An Empire of Books 
Urdu, with its multifaceted translation activities—from Sanskrit into Urdu, from Hindi into Urdu and vice versa—constituting one of the last sustained efforts in propagating the values of a shared and composite Indian culture. It is important to understand that for commercial publishers in nineteenth-century North India to bring out translations or translite rations from Hindi into Urdu and vice versa was nothing extraordinary in itself. What distinguished the House of Naval Kishore was that it pro duced an unparalleled range of translations, particularly of Hindu religious literature in Urdu, and that this translation activity continued unabated into the 1890s, that is for several decades after the Hindi-Nagari move ment first started to propagate an exclusive Hindi-Hindu identity. Against this backdrop, translation assumed a broader cultural significance: it meant counteracting dichotomization through a textual ensemble which not only bridged the linguistic divide but implied a clear statement against the narrow identification of language and script with religious community. 
With its host of inexpensive editions of religious and literary classics, popular tales, dramas and songs, medical and astrological manuals, the NKP did much to introduce the Hindi book as a household commodity in North Indian homes. The lasting impact of Naval Kishore's contribution to the popularization of Hindi, and by extension, Hindu-heritage literature, would later be attested by no less famous an observer than Munshi Premchand, who in 1928 noted that the number of important books in Hindi and Sanskrit published from this press up to now has not been attained by any other Indian press' and that NKP Hindi books 'have spread to every village and every household' (Dvivedi 1928: 1). 
