+++
title = "Conclusion"

+++
This study has been designed as a contribution to the history of the book in Hindi and Urdu. It argues that from the 1840s and 1850s 
the field of cultural production in North India underwent far reaching changes as a result of a process which has been described as the 'commercialization' of print. Based on technological advances and a variety of socio-economic and political transformations wrought by colonialism, commercialization was a major turning point, ushering in a paradigm change and a new phase in the history of print in the subcontinent. It introduced the mass-produced and inexpensive book in Hindi and Urdu and for the first time afforded north Indian literate audiences gene ral access to the products of print culture in their respective modern re gional languages. By altering the relationship between participants in literary production and transmission, commercial print culture affected literary practice and the ways in which knowledge was generated, cir culated, and preserved. A major objective of this study has been to trace the commodification of the book and the way it made its entry into the homes of an unprecedented number of ordinary people. 
Previous research on print culture has tended to concentrate on the role of Christian missionaries and the colonial state in diffusing the printed word in nineteenth-century India. By contrast, this book posits the centrality of the Indian-owned publishing house as a principal agent in the rapidly expanding market of regional-language print. The role of Indian printer-publishers in shaping Hindi and Urdu print culture has often been superficially acknowledged, but has rarely been analysed in greater depth. Through a case study of the foremost north Indian publish ing house, An Empire of Books has sought to demonstrate how much our understanding of nineteenth-century literary and intellectual culture can profit from such an investigation. 
To study the operations and activities of Indian publishers means nothing less than to restore to Indians their agency in shaping literary cul ture and diffusing knowledge in the colonial setting. By continuing to ignore their contribution, we risk perpetuating a one-sided picture that446 
An Empire of Books 
depicts literary creation and knowledge formation under colonialism as only a hegemonic project on the part of a dominant and oppressive fore ign regime. In foregrounding Indian agency, this book has striven to illu minate a process that has been called the 'indigenization of print' (Orsini 2004b). In doing so, it positions itself within an ongoing discourse that interprets the colonial encounter and the creation of knowledge in nine teenth-century India as a transactional and dialogic process' (Irschick 1994), in which Indians, despite the asymmetric power configuration in which they found themselves, assumed an active and self-assertive role in engaging with colonial knowledge in a process that involved both assi milation and contestation. 
To study the operations of a publishing house is a pertinent approach to this endeavour. An exploration of publishing practice reminds us of the materiality of the book, resituating the production of books in its social and economic contexts. Scholars from various disciplines have dealt extensively with the socio-cultural and political ramifications of the formation and rise to public importance of Hindi and Urdu and their literatures in the nineteenth century, yet, little attempt has been made to examine the material, economic, and organizational structural aspects of contemporary literary production. This study has drawn on the con ceptual frameworks of Bourdieu's field of cultural production and Hohendahl's institution of literature. As sophisticated theories of context, they each allow us to assess the cultural significance of the publishing house in its particular spatial and temporal setting and view its operations within a larger discursive formation of other sub-institutions, both British and Indian, which constituted the literary field in nineteenth century colonial India. 
Combining the functions of industrialist, literary patron, educator, and intellectual stalwart, Indian publishers operated within and also helped shape the public sphere. An investigation into their public lives provides valuable insights into the social and economic networks through which the professionals of the book trade interacted with each other and larger groups of the colonial intelligentsia. Frequently sustained by acts of philanthropy and patronage, such networks were deployed to various ends: to foster commercial interests, enhance social standing, and gather support for political aspirations. Publishers of Munshi Naval Kishore's stature and economic power rose to positions of considerable influence in the colonial public sphere. As has been shown, it was precisely the social authority and influence which the Lucknow publisher wielded in indigenous society that made him a coveted figure in British eyes. Colo nial administrators had a vested interest in co-opting Naval Kishore both 
Conclusion 
447 
as a formal collaborator in official printing ventures and as an informal informant who would act as a cultural intermediary and mediate public opinion. The honorary positions he received and the bestowal of an hono rific title upon him were less a recognition of the services he rendered to literature and learning than an effective means of tying him to British interests. 
As An Empire of Books has shown, the imperatives of profitability and increased turnover reigning in the commercial marketplace did not pre clude Indian publishers' engagement with the diffusion of specialized knowledge, scholastic texts, and high literary culture. As businessmen, commercial publishers were also cultural entrepreneurs. The advancement of academic, scientific, and general knowledge in Indian languages, the preservation of the classical literary heritage and its popularization by way of translation became equally important issues of concern for them. A print capitalist with a cultural vision and a social mission, Munshi Naval Kishore provides a salient example of how the different functions of general and scholarly publishing could be reconciled in commercial printing. In catering to the specific needs of different indi genous knowledge communities and in responding to their literary and scholastic discourses, publishing houses formed an essential link in a network of institutional spaces through which Indians created and disse minated their own knowledge. In the process, they helped popularize and instil cultural pride in indigenous literary traditions of past and present. Mass-produced standardized texts enhanced the socio-cultural identities of scholastic, sectarian, and caste communities, while also creating new interpretive communities. They enabled readers to participate in 'uni fied fields of communication' and allowed for cultural interaction on a supra-regional level. 
The Naval Kishore Press was by all means an extraordinary institution. To print and publish almost 5000 titles in various languages in a period of less than four decades remains an unparalleled achievement in the history of print in the subcontinent. Yet, as this book has argued, despite the unusual size and scope of its operations, Naval Kishore's firm is representative of the north Indian publishing scene, in that it embodied the energy and spirit of enterprise that permeated the world of print in the nineteenth century. In outlining what a single firm achieved on its own, my objective was not to insist on the quantitative impact alone, but rather to convey an impression of the dynamism and enormous potential in herent in the domestic publishing trade despite its various economic and other limitations. Providing a model to other agents in the publishing field, the success of the Naval Kishore Press rested on three cornerstones: 
448 
An Empire of Books 
colonial patronage; a publishing policy that engaged with a wide range of genres, both literary and non-literary, but had at its core the popular ization of religious, literary and educational classics in inexpensive and accessible formats; and the maintenance of a commercially run vernacular newspaper, which attracted the collaboration of some of the leading literary talent in contemporary prose and journalistic writing. 
The interaction between Indian publishing houses and the colonial state was decidedly more complex and multifaceted than the asymmetrical power configuration of colonialism might suggest at first sight. My investigation into the business relationship between the British ad ministration and the House of Naval Kishore has brought to light some of the tensions and contradictions arising from the state's perception of the domestic publishing trade as a field that had to be simultaneously encouraged and subjected to close monitoring and control. The conflicting aims of state support and state surveillance became manifest in state legislation, censorship practice, and the distribution of patronage. They were especially pronounced in the booming textbook sector, the largest and most important area of regional-language book production in the nineteenth century. Here Indian printer-publishers emerged as both col laborators and economic rivals of the colonial state. We have seen that a substantial proportion of publishing at the House of Naval Kishore was undertaken at the instigation of or in collaboration with the British. The profits made from British commissions were indeed the single most important economic factor in sustaining the operations of the firm. Col laboration in educational and official printing was intense and mutually beneficial, but nonetheless involved constant negotiation. Due to the enormous economic power he wielded, Naval Kishore was in a privileged position vis-à-vis government, a position he cleverly exploited. Even then, he was not always successful in his negotiations with the state. Small-scale publishers found it infinitely more difficult to get their share of government patronage. 
As the analysis of Naval Kishore's professional and cultural choices has shown, there was much overlap between the colonial state's and his own agendas. This often makes it difficult to determine whether particular publication initiatives were instigated by the British or by the publisher himself. However, as this book has sought to demonstrate throughout, much of the activity going on at his press and, for that matter, in Indian publishing, happened outside the purview of the colonial state and was clearly not associated with the British civilizing mission and its utilitarian 
Conclusion 
449 
program of 'useful literature'. Previous accounts of print culture that have depicted print as a tool of the hegemonic interests of the colonial State and a small indigenous elite of the bilingual upper-caste intelli gentsia have added to our understanding of the construction of textual hierarchies and the propagation of elite cultural ideology, but have failed to adequately address Indian engagement with the commercial genres. Commercial publishers catered for a reading public whose needs were not limited to education and information. Nineteenth-century readers also wanted to be diverted and entertained; they sought emotional pleas ure and spiritual consolation from their reading. Naval Kishore and his confrères responded to the tastes of the reading public by circulating folk and popular literature, song and prayer books, dramas, mythological sto ries and, increasingly, entertaining fiction (a wide range of genres that fell outside the categories of 'useful' and 'refined' literature and were therefore dismissed by most British administrator-educators and sections of the Indian elite). In constantly blurring the boundaries between elite and popular literature, commercial print culture calls for a re-evaluation of these categories. Respectable' publishers engaged with 'high' and 'low' literature and did not shy away from ministering to the popular tastes. 
Indian publishers negotiated a field that cut across caste and class dis tinctions and communal divisions. One significant conclusion that emer ges from this study of a North-Indian publishing house is that in the commercial marketplace delineations of Hindi-Urdu and Hindu-Muslim were much less pronounced and rigid than is suggested by many studies that have analysed precisely the formation of this dichotomy in the nine teenth century. As an intellectual meeting place where Hindu and Mus lim scholars and literati found themselves in close physical proximity and constant interaction, the publishing house qua institution defied such communal divides. However, the validity of this particular observation needs to be counterchecked against the policies and operations of other publishing firms. While the operations of Naval Kishore have been taken to be representative of much of the activity going on in the Hindi and Urdu print market, it would be inaccurate to posit a uniform trajectory for commercial publishing. True, commercial publishers were subject to the same laws of supply and demand and, indeed, there was much overlap in the books they produced. Yet, within this configuration, their moti vations, policies, and ensuing output showed considerable variation. A publisher with an overt Hindu nationalist outlook was bound to pursue a 
450 
An Empire of Books 
different agenda than Naval Kishore who, with his notion of a shared and composite literary culture, did not privilege Hindu over Muslim traditions in his promotion of Persian and Urdu, Sanskrit and Hindi literature. 
Reflecting the sources I drew upon, this book has offered a narrative of an Indian publisher's achievements; only rarely has it told us about his failures. In a publishing career that spanned almost four decades, there must have been many instances of misguided choices, abortive publication ventures, financial crises, unsuccessful negotiations and disputes with authors. To go on from here and direct our attention to the authors' pers pective would be a meaningful supplement and, presumably, corrective to the present study. Authors, as we know from countless examples in European book history, generally have very different stories to tell about the making of their books. Ghalib's extensive correspondence provides a glimpse into what this counternarrative might look like, hinting at publishers usurping manuscripts, at editors meddling with texts, at sloppy copyists spoiling them, and at the many vicissitudes encountered by the author in his dealings with the professionals of the book trade. 
An Empire of Books also alerts us to some of the methodological diffi culties in studying Indian print culture. Historians of the book in India continue to face formidable obstacles regarding both the paucity of source material and the difficulties in accessing it. Much documentary evidence is contained in British official records, which, though immensely rich in information, reflect a colonial preoccupation with statistical enu meration, and in a more or less overt fashion, focus on the category of ‘useful' literature. In the absence of publishers' archives, nineteenth century Indian publishers speak to us mainly through their legacy: the books they produced. These books need to be studied in a new way, both as physical objects and as 'tools for the making of context and content alike', to borrow Adrian Johns's phrase in The Nature of the Book. Print ed books, as we have seen in the preceding chapters, were collective products. With their title pages, forewords and afterwords, customary chronograms, laudatory poems, publisher's notices and advertisements inserted at the back, books reveal some of the collective effort that went into their making; they may tell us about the motivation of their authors and patrons, and sometimes even indicate their target audience. Nita Kumar's contention about research on indigenous education certainly rings true for the study of Hindi and Urdu print culture: our involvement with the extant data in South Asia is barely beginning (Kumar 2000:31). 
While this book has emphasized the vibrancy of the publishing trade in Hindi and Urdu, it finally leaves us with an unresolved question con cerning the power and authority of the printed word in a society marked 
Conclusion 
451 
by widespread illiteracy. I have argued that literacy figures are not an adequate analytical tool to estimate the impact of the printed book in nineteenth-century Indian society. A more promising approach to the complex question of the effects of print seems to be the exploration of readership and consumption practices. To study aspects of production and transmission, as this book has done, is a useful and necessary preli minary step in this project. Conversely, the study of production raises many queries that can only be answered through a study of consumption. Books were put to use in a vast range of different ways, Adrian Johns contends, their consequences being 'as dependent on the practices of the users as on any putatively objective content they may possess' (Johns 1998: 636). While quantitative indicators (the publisher's output, circu lation figures, print runs, and the frequency of reprints) have been cru cial to the present project, they ultimately did not tell us who read a given NKP book and to what effect. Equally, we may have acknowledged Naval Kishore's multifarious efforts to popularize the printed book and enlarge the audience of readers and book buyers through cheap formats, reprints, and modern translations of cherished classics; the success of such attempts to introduce qualitative changes in the readership, however, cannot be measured in terms of circulation. The history of production, it seems, must remain an incomplete narrative as long as it is not supple mented by a history of reading. If still a distant project, reconciling these two areas of inquiry will be a fruitful and highly consequential enterprise in the study of North Indian intellectual culture. It promises to provide us with a better insight into how the printed book affected not only literary and cultural practice but also peoples' lives. 
