+++
title = "Awakening"

+++
We moved past to the nest where the root of sorrow lay like a dread
beast waiting in prowl for its unprotected prey. With our prayoga-s
spent on mundane battles, we needed to lift our bow and perform
bhIma-karma-s as our henchmen having little foresight were tossing about
like a rudderless boat. Having mentally marked ourselves for the
struggle we wandered on to the beginning of the backward journey, having
neutralized after some struggle the rAkShasi-s on our path. We were
originally going to talk of the bAShakala-mantra upaniShad but in a
strange reverie slipped back to the distant time when we had the triad
of dreams. They occurred before we awoke in the cool cocoon of the
backroom where we slept.

\*First we dreamt of the death of Ludwig Boltzmann and for some reason
in our version of his death we hear him shout P\*V=N\*k\*T

\*Then we dreamt of cycling along the long road with her who is now not
around.

\*Then we dreamt of the 3 false friends walking along the road below the
viT-parvata, just a little south of the vAnara-parvata. Then we saw a
yama-vAhana charging down the slopes of the said hill at the 3 friends
on the road. They scattered to avoid the terrifying mahiSha, but it was
too late for the middle one and he made a crashing contact with the
beast. At this point we awoke from the dream. We quickly readied
ourselves and went on the road when we bumped into the tall and
scar-faced MP. See the yonder one he said. He then asked why is it that
you and the yonder one think so similarly?

At this point I realized his question, while purely instinctive, touched
upon one of the most important philosophical points that have occupied
me since the age of 10. He felt something was unusual about the
similarity- that is in his mental estimate of probability it was not a
frequent event- so he felt the need to ask. More generally I termed this
philosophical issue “convergence”. 1) I lavished much time on it because
it was a field I believed I had an edge over other philosophers. 2) It
was not a metaphysical issue 3) To me it was the path of “brahmavidyA”.
So next I shall talk of some convergences — common place as well as
esoteric.
