+++
title = "On to shrI-parvata"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/x/blogger2/6438/855/320/318420/kumAragRiha.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/x/blogger2/6438/855/1600/251284/kumAragRiha.png)

The core altars of a kumAra-gR^iha. The green elements mark the fire
altars

He sat in the place where the first of the pieces had fallen. In his
mind’s eye h remembered the tale of the great grahanatha: “tArakAsura
the accursed enemy of the gods wore a li\~Nga around his neck that
protected him from death as long as it was there. As he fought viShNu
and vIrabhadra their weapons failed on him after prolonged and fierce
duels. Finally the one born of the arrow-forest charged forth to meet
the daitya. After a prolonged duel he finally struck the daitya with his
charmed shakti, from which none escape. The shakti shattered the li\~Nga
into 5 fragments and the pierced the daitya-s broad chest slaying him.
The pieces of the li\~Nga fell on pR^ithivi and each became a
maha-li\~Nga in which The god is worshiped.”

It was near the first of
these pieces he had constructed a kumAra gR^iha. After having performed
the kha-chakra-dharaNi he offered the oblations to the bull-headed
nandikeshvara at the appropriate altar. Then he moved over to the altar
of pilipichChikA and offered seven oblations: pilipichChikA, revatI,
shakunI, ShaShThi, jAtahAriNi, mukhamaNDikA and devasenA on the
pa\~nchami day. Even as the last oblation hit the fire a terrifying
graha named pariprakAsha arose, filling the air with awe that only the
masters of the mahAmantra know. He muttered the graha-stotraM was
transported to the great mound of shrI-parvata by that awful graha. Atop
shrIparvata he remained lying at night performing the complete cycle of
the kha-chakra-dhyAna. He joined the siddhaugha.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/x/blogger2/6438/855/320/376125/nakShatra_nyAsa1.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/x/blogger2/6438/855/1600/418809/nakShatra_nyAsa1.png)[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/x/blogger2/6438/855/320/994496/nakShatra_nyAsa2.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/x/blogger2/6438/855/1600/212809/nakShatra_nyAsa2.png)  
The start- and end-point of the kha-chakra-dhyAna
