+++
title = "Making of a modern-day mantra-śāstra pamphlet"

+++
Originally, all mantra instructions were oral, keeping with the spirit
of the śruti. But over time, starting probably around the Mauryan age,
written manuals began to supplement the oral teachings. Thus, through
the ages practitioners of the mantra-lore have made pamphlets for
self-use, use by students or more general distribution. Until the
English conquest, the Hindu, despite having familiarity with the printed
mode of text dissemination, preferred the written mode. However, one of
the signs of Hindu modernity was the production of printed and
subsequently electronic texts. These mantra-manuals were originally
written entirely in Sanskrit but with the decline of the use of
ārya-speech outside the ritual, bilingual manuals started making their
appearance. What we present here is one such bilingual manual. It is
made taking advantage of TeX, the famous and innovative typesetting
system of Donald Knuth, which allows you to make nice-looking documents.
The TeX distribution used is MiKTeX2.9 and the typesetting engine is
XeLaTeX. The text is input using the TeXworks environment, which comes
with MiKTeX for editing and typesetting. The Devanagari and IAST
conversion from an ITRANS input was achieved using the Sanscript
converter (<http://www.learnsanskrit.org/tools/sanscript>). The font for
the Devanagari script is the Siddhanta font of Mihail Bayaryn. The
manual presented here is a reasonably comprehensive discourse on “[The
Sāvitrī and the upāsanā of the Deva
Savitṛ](https://app.box.com/s/t3g6ur615xk6mrno2r8lcs5m2h5am11v)” (pdf
format). It is primarily aimed at a serious student with some
familiarity with the śruti.

The source .tex file may be obtained
[here](https://app.box.com/s/60byi2plbdnbf9oao3qbe1dse11o1yqw).
