+++
title = "Homer’s illiteracy"

+++
The paleo-Abrahamistic politician and general Yosef ben Matityahu, only
second to Yeshua ben Yosef in the foundation of Western thought, in his
attack on the Greek polemicist Apion, wrote around 75 CE:

“They say that even Homer did not leave behind his poems in writing, but
that they were transmitted by memorization and put together out of the
songs, and that therefore they contain many inconsistencies.”

Indeed, the classical Greek script was of Semitic origin – a point in
line with Yosef’s basic contention that Greek culture and knowledge is
secondary and derivative vis-a-vis that of the Abrahamists. According to
him, knowledge and culture were first imparted to the Egyptians by
Abraham and in turn, the Egyptians taught the Greeks. This was to set
the undercurrent for the non-Islamic strand of the Abrahamo-Heathen
polemical interaction (sometimes disguised as scholarship) up to the
present date. While deeply influenced by this narrative, which forms the
subterranean foundation of Western thought, the history of Greek writing
has more intriguing questions than that. The very question of Greek
writing was first studied by the German philologist Friedrich Wolf: He
came to the conclusion that the Homeric epics were orally composed and
came to the conclusion that the Homeric Greeks knew no writing. He
mentions several points that are identical to the arguments made by
indologists regarding the illiteracy of the Hindus of the veda-s and the
epics:  
1\) The absence of words for books, writing, reading, and letters. 2) An
emphasis on the goddesses of memory but no deity or significance for
writing. 3) No mention of money or monuments with inscriptions.  
These arguments by Wolf dominated the field of Greek studies ever since
– of course, there is the famous issue of the Bellerophon tablet, but
it has been variously argued away or dismissed even as rukmiNI’s letter
to kR^iShNa in the Indic situation. However, it has been pointed out
that even in this case the traditional Greek word for writing (grammata)
has not been used \[Footnote 1\]. Further studies on Homeric poetry,
such as the “meter-filler motifs”, have established beyond much doubt
that they were part of an oral tradition that did not use any writing
for its composition, much like the bhArata or the rAmAyaNa. Now, given
the linguistic, structural and motif similarities between the Indo-Aryan
and Greek epics, one would easily extrapolate that the common ancestor
of the Greek and the Hindu knew no writing at all. It would imply that
since their branching off down through the Homeric period the Greeks did
not know any writing what so ever. This would indeed be the best
explanation if we did not have any other data.

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-VY-9DvJVUVk/TjpDolg_HQI/AAAAAAAACLI/YP0tSaUYY40/s640/sito_potnia.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/SuknrKdqVGxabH6QnxQIhw?feat=embedwebsite)  
sito-potnia

Here is where the decipherment of the linear B script completely changed
the picture. Since the discovery of the linear B inscriptions in Crete
at the beginning of the 1900s it was held that it encoded a non-Greek
language termed Minoan. However, in the 1950s the young amateur Ventris,
following up on Kober’s work, decoded the script as being a dialect
Greek. Further work by Chadwick established that it was indeed a likely
to be a pre-Homeric dialect of Greek with archaisms retained from the
ancestral Indo-European condition, similar to the case of the Vedic
dialects of Sanskrit. Thus, it became clear that Mycenaean Greek went
back to at least 1600 BCE; more surprisingly, it showed that even though
Homer apparently knew no writing, there was a pre-Homeric Greek whose
only record was in the form of the linear B inscriptions. Of course, an
unbiased student could raise the question that if Homeric Greek was not
written then how could we be sure that the Mycenaean Greek preceded it.
We are fairly convinced of this being the case on account of the
linguistic archaisms of the Mycenaean form of the dialect vis-a-vis the
Ionian dialect of Homer. In this regard we shall touch upon a few
points: 1) The name of the chief deity takes the form: diw-ye-us/
dative: diwe (in Knossos text); 2) the name of his wife the great
goddess appears in the form di-wi-a; 3) The mention of a goddesses of
harvest, sito-potnia: we believe she is the cognate of the vaidika
harvest goddess sItA patnI invoked in the mantra-s of vAmadeva gautama
(RV 4.57.6-7). The use of the word potnia (=Skt patnI) for a goddess
(e.g. athanA potnia in Mycenaean for Athena) is an archaic Indo-European
tradition retained in the Vedic tradition (e.g. the ritual of offerings
to the goddesses: the patnI-saMyAja and the patnI mantra-s of the
atri-s, RV maNDala 5). 4) The mention of the deity tris-heros: we
believe he was the cognate of viShNu, lost in later Greek lore (Though a
connection with trita Aptya and later Greek Triton cannot be entirely
ruled out). 4) The deity dompotis: we see him as a cognate of
vAsthoShpati. 5) The term pa-si-the-o-i taken to mean “to all gods”
comparable to vishvedevAH is seen repeatedly in Mycenaean inscriptions.
6) The word for goat: aiza (compare with Skt aja). 7) The phrase
cow-eyed or “of the form of a cow” for the goddesses appears as guowia
(compare with the RV form gomAtar for goddesses, like the wife of
rudra). Note the form guo which is close to the old Indo-European form
as opposed to the form boopis in Homeric Greek.Several of these features
suggest that Mycenaean Greek displayed features that were closer to the
ancestral Indo-European condition than even that seen in the traditions
preserved in the Ionian dialect. Nevertheless, linguists have noticed
several features that suggest that it is close to Ionian and the eastern
Greek dialects suggesting that the split between the early Greek
dialects happened before 1600 BCE. In this context one point is of
interest. We find the earliest attestation of the word “Ionian” in the
Mycenaean texts. It assumes the form: i-ya-wo-ne; which is comparable to
the form in which it is known outside of the Greek word, e.g. in the
Indo-Aryan texts as: yavana or in Semitic texts as yAvAn. This suggests
that the transmission of the term to these traditions might have been
early rather than much later as proposed at least for Indo-Aryan.

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-VXgJdJeJ4ko/Tj7bLOscjeI/AAAAAAAACLs/RdEMwMz9qhI/s400/Old_Indoeuropean.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/y5uZOUW7CKhZj5g32xkyow?feat=embedwebsite)

The other major thing that the discovery of Mycenaean did was to provide
an early written attestation for Indo-European. Three Indo-European
languages are attested in the second millennium before the common era,
interestingly, all roughly around the same time: Hittite appears in
texts in the 1600s BCE, Mycenaean appears a little thereafter between
1600-1500 BCE and Indo-Aryan appears in the Mittani texts around 1500
BCE. All these occurrences of Indo-European in written texts are also
spatially pretty close too: They all occur in an arc in the eastern half
of the Mediterranean from Greece to the Levant. Of these Hittite is the
earliest to appear with fragments occurring as loans in records of
Assyrian merchants around 1900 BCE. But Hittite is the earliest to
lineage to branch off from the remaining Indo-European branches
(following the Indo-Hittite model). So it reaching this region a little
before the rest is not in conflict with any other fact. So what this
evidence tells us is that the break up of all the major branches of IE
had happened before 1500 BCE and that some of them had by this time
completed a southward movement from their land of snow, wool, horses,
and wheels. Further, it may be noted that they are not too far away from
the likely IE homeland in the region of the steppes bounded by the
Carpathian, Caucasus and Ural mountains. So, from such a location they
moved south around the Black Sea to reach the locations seen in their
first written records. This suggests that at least as far as West Asia
and South Eastern Europe, the movements of the Greeks and Indo-Aryans
were perhaps coupled events. While it is clear that Hittite and the
associated Anatolian languages diverged before any of the rest, their
main movement into West Asia might still be coupled with that of the
Aryans. In this regard we might present some points of support: It has
been known for a while that several Indo-Aryan loans pertaining to horse
training are embedded in Hittite (e.g. pa\~nchavartana for five laps).
While the Hittite word for horse remains unknown because it is
represented by a Sumerogram whose sound value is unclear, in its sister
language Luwian we have the word a-su-wa, which is clearly a loan from
Indo-Aryan. The Luwian word for good is deciphered as vasu, which
appears to be an tad-bhava Indo-Aryan loan. Also of relevance is the
Hittite word weseyatari: to graze, and westaras: shepherd which appear
to be Indo-Iranian loans – compare with Avestan: vAstra: fodder and
vAstara: shepherd.

The decipherment of these written records illustrate the problems of
archeology without readable texts. Now Hittite, Indo-Aryan, and Greek at
their first attestation are all recorded in script systems that were
already in use for unrelated languages before their arrival. So if these
scripts systems were unreadable or yet undeciphered, like the Indus
graffiti, we would simply have no idea that the Greek and Indo-Aryan
even existed in those texts. A striking example is the word for the
horse in Hittite: We do not know what its phonetic value was because of
the use of the Sumerogram rather than a phonetic rendering. Thus, even
though we know the Hittites used the horse we do not know what they
called it (Given the Luwian a-su-wa it is quite possible that Hittites
also used an Indo-Aryan loan). This issue also comes out starkly when we
compare the situation in West Asia and Greece with the situation in the
Sintashta and Andronovo archeological cultures in which we find no
writing. While the artifacts in these cultures are suggestive of
Indo-Iranians and Greeks, we simply cannot be sure what combination of
these groups and which stage of their evolutionary history do these
archaeological cultures represent. In fact, there are reasons to suspect
that the Sinthashta and Andronovo cultures are not the beginning of the
movements of these Indo-Europeans but merely one of the later waves.

When these considerations are taken together with Homer’s illiteracy we
have some important “lessons of analogy” for the situation in India.
Consider the following:  
1\) In both India and Greece the largest bodies of their ancient texts
are products of oral tradition.  
2\) In both India and Greece the knowledge of writing was lost or
greatly declined for a considerable period after the initial appearance
of writing (Indus and Linear B graffiti) and was subsequently regained
using completely different scripts (Classical Greek alphabet and the
brAhmI script).  
3\) In both India and Greece the initial writing was highly abbreviated
(Indus) or limited in its expression of issues (Linear B). Linear B
texts are rather boring commercial and administrative fragments compared
to the later oral literature – while there are few names of deities and
sketchy mentions of ritual actions, they can hardly be compared to
Homeric material. Likewise, the surviving Indus graffiti is a little too
short to contain any intrinsically interesting texts. So the initial
writing in both places was not a substitute for their oral traditions.  
4\) In both places, the Indo-European speakers were an invasive group
coming from the steppes, but in terms of the pure archaeological record
(not textual) there was little to distinguish their settling from the
preexisting archeological cultures.  
5\) In both places, there was a loss of the initial urbanization
associated with the widespread use of writing and secondary
re-acquisition of writing happened sometime after the second
re-urbanization.

The one point that is clear from the Mycenaean evidence is that the
Greeks rather easily adapted the local tradition of writing for their
own unrelated language. This is also true of the Indo-Aryans of West
Asia. But in India the white indologists, Russian tradition of Kuz’mina
and their fellow travelers have chosen to place the Indo-Aryan invasion
well after the end of the Indus civilization or along-side the
destruction of the Indus and Bactria-Margiana civilizations (BMAC) by
the invading Indo-Aryans. Hence, they claim that the Indo-Aryans never
had the chance to acquire any writing in India until they derived the
brAhmI script from the West Semitic scripts, even as the Greeks had done
before them. The strongest arguments to support this claim for the
Aryans invading after the end of the Indus civilization are: 1) the
conjecture that the Indo-Aryan invasion of West Asia was coeval with
their invasion of India and hence, slightly before the composition of
the R^igveda. 2) The expansion of the Fedorovo sub-culture of the
Andronovo culture with the earliest evidence according to Igor Diakonoff
of fire rituals and cremations happened around 1500 BCE. So it is
consistent with the Indo-Aryans invading India and West Asia around this
time. The Indo-Aryans were unable to establish themselves for long in
West Asia because there was an already flourishing urban civilization
but in India they could impose their culture in the vacuum arising from
the vanishing of the urban Indus civilization. But the problem with
these arguments is that there is really nothing at all from India to
support this scenario. So in the absence of evidence all the other
possibilities are open. Aryan markers are rare, but found much before
1500 BCE, even in the mature Harappan phase, even as they occasionally
occur in the BMAC sites of similar antiquity: 1) The terracotta horse
from Lothal; 2) The horse skeletal fragments from Surkotada (incorrectly
disputed by supporters of white indologists like Meadow); 3) Depictions
of spoked wheels from Rakhigarhi, Banawali and Kalibangan. These suggest
that it is entirely possible that the Indo-Aryans had already reached
India during the mature Harappan phase and settled in the Indus regions.
In this regard, it might be noted that their origin in the steppes does
not mean that the Aryans and Greeks were unaware of cities and life in
settlements. The following should be noted: 1) The word for fortified
towns pura in Sanskrit, polis in Greek and pilis in Lithuanian suggest
that the old Indo-Europeans of the steppes had such structures in their
ancestral home. 2) The Arkaim fortified town and other Sintashta sites
supports the presence of such planned architectures for settlements in
the steppes (though it is not clear if Arkaim is Iranian or a remnant of
Indo-Aryans left behind closer to their homeland). These towns also had
bricks laying to rest the idea that the iShTaka of the veda (and its
avestan cognate) had to be borrowed from the BMAC or the IVC. 3) The
term fort-breaker or fort-conqueror, Skt: puraMdara and Greek
ekpoliorketes does not imply that the early Greeks and Aryans did not
have forts and only their settled rivals did. These simply indicate that
taking fortified cities was an important facet of their warfare and that
they lived in fortified towns themselves. So they might well have
occupied preexisting urban centers and really found no need to destroy
them.

So in light of the precedence from Homeric illiteracy we should not be
surprised if Indo-Aryans had indeed acquired the Indus script for
rendering their own language (though it originally encoded a different
language) and that it was lost, much as writing was lost in Greece after
the Mycenaean collapse. Now there are two other points of interest: 1)
It is believed that the events in the Mycenaean period (when writing
existed) provided the historical foundations of the Greek epics. In
support of this it is argued that the Hittite town of Wilusa corresponds
to Wilion\>Ilion, a name of Troy. The Hittite texts mention a certain
Wilusa episode involving hostility by the Ahhiyawa. This has generally
been interpreted as the invasion of Troy by the Achaeans (=Ahhiyawa). An
Ahhiyawa invader is also named as the Attarisiya which has been
interpreted as the Atreus, the clan of Agamemnon and Menelaus, leaders
of the Achaean invasion of Troy. Further, in the Odyssey there is a
mention of the attempted invasion of Egypt by the Achaeans. This
probably corresponds to the reference to the Danaans in Egyptians
records among the maritime invaders of their their land. In conclusion,
the Homeric epics which betray an absence of writing actually record
traditions from a time when writing was current. This emphasizes an
important point – the Linear B writing tradition of the Greeks was not
seen as something that replaced or even competed with the old
Indo-European epic/ritual hymn tradition – it had a totally different
role. This suggests that a similar situation might have held in India –
if there was a temporal overlap between the Indo-Aryan vedic and epic
traditions and the Indus script, the oral tradition could have
completely ignored or not intersected with the use of writing. So based
on the Homeric precedence, the apparent absence of the mention of
writing can no longer be held as a sign of real illiteracy of the
associated society. 2) One of the causes for the end of the Mycenaean
civilization is held to be the invasion of another Greek group the
Dorians. In Greek epics these invasions are believed to represent the
return of the Heracleidai, he descendants of Herakles who set out to
conquer Greece from the other rulers. From the historical viewpoint it
is interesting to note that the use of the script declined after the
Dorian invasion even though the Dorians were Greek speakers and could
have easily adapted the Linear B themselves. This also points to the
fact there could have been multiple waves of invasions of speakers of
the same or related Indo-European languages who differed in their
proclivity to adopt scripts. We suspect that similarly there were
multiple waves of Indo-European invasions into India. Most of these were
waves were Indo-Aryans or at best Iranians, though there might have
additionally even been a kentum type non-Indo-Iranian wave – sort of a
mirror image of the western branch of Indo-Aryans (Mittani superstrate)
that appeared in West Asia \[Footnote 2\]. We discern several such waves
based on Indo-Aryan literary tradition: 1) The pa\~nchajana (who may
have come in more than one wave); 2) the ikShvAku (these two are early
waves); 3) the shalva-s; 4) the pANDava-s; Thus, even in India the
different waves might have shown different levels of interest in the
written medium.

\~oOo\~\~oOo\~\~oOo\~\~oOo\~  
Footnote 1: Interestingly, when the Greeks did start writing they used
the word grammata, meaning scratchings, even as the Indians used the
word likhati – which is also derived from the root “to scratch”.

Footnote 2: Interestingly, Greek epic tradition records an Indian force
in the Trojan war. Memnon the king of the Ethiopians is said to have led
a band of Indians to aid Priam and killed the Achaean hero Antilochus,
the prince of Pylos. He and his band are said to have been finally
destroyed by Achilles. These Indians could have been the Indo-Aryans of
West Asia, though we cannot rule out a later interpolation.
Nevertheless. it is interesting to note that the Greek and Indo-Aryan
epic traditions acknowledge each others presence as minor participants
in their respective great wars.
