+++
title = "In the fog"

+++
The while we were being pierced by the various darts the dUradR^iShTi
prayoga revealed an unexpected attack on the sachiva. We awoke somewhat
shaken by the revelations. But we quickly engaged in the pratikriyA that
saved the sachiva from coming to face to face with the red-eyed buffalo.
The amAtya informed us that every thing had happened exactly as we had
seen in the dUradR^iShTi prayoga, and the conclusion changed only due to
the pratikriyA and their own repeated deployment of rudra.

With the sachiva we had proceeded to the fortress one who wanders among
the granite rocks. The amAtya wished that we meet the bearer of the two
torches. We observed that the hero was bound by the arAyI. Since we were
enormously weakened, we told the sachiva not to attack and retreat
silently. Contrary to our advice the sachiva became involved in the
battle of ohas – the out come was uncertain with respect to the sachiva
but it only weakened the hero further. We then fulfilled the amAtya’s
wishes but saw through the hollowness of the bearer of the two torches.
We returned even further weakened from the adventure.

The yogin was waiting in dhanurdAru-dvIpa. After years of struggle the
dUtI appeared before him. He did not know at first if she was a dUtI or
just a woman – after all a yogin without the j\~nAna may not know that
only through a dUtI can siddhi be attained. The dUtI sent him a signal.
Verily the signals of dUtI are as clear as the midday sun and he who
receives his dIkSha from her can be a mantra-siddha. He conjoined with
her and attained siddhi even as a mantra of uchChiShTa gaNapati bearing
fruit. The power of his yoga was complete – even though they cut him up
he was whole again.

They call that rAkShasa vjR^imbhin. He verily opens the doors for the
rest. He prevented the yAmala in the Aj\~na from placing the sAdhaka
beyond the realm of the sun, moon and fire. What is the secret to over
come that rAkShasa, like viShNu’s underground stem?
