---
title: FOUR PATHS OF YOGA

---
<div>

[←](the_birth_of_religion.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](cyclic_rest_and_change.htm)

  

## FOUR PATHS OF YOGA

(Written by the Swami during his first visit to America in answer to
questions put by a Western disciple.)

Our main problem is to be free. It is evident then that until we realise
ourselves as the Absolute, we cannot attain to deliverance. Yet there
are various ways of attaining to this realisation. These methods have
the generic name of Yoga (to join, to join ourselves to our reality).
These Yogas, though divided into various groups, can principally be
classed into four; and as each is only a method leading indirectly to
the realisation of the Absolute, they are suited to different
temperaments. Now it must be remembered that it is not that the assumed
man becomes the real man or Absolute. There is no becoming with the
Absolute. It is ever free, ever perfect; but the ignorance that has
covered Its nature for a time is to be removed. Therefore the whole
scope of all systems of Yoga (and each religion represents one) is to
clear up this ignorance and allow the Âtman to restore its own nature.
The chief helps in this liberation are Abhyâsa and Vairâgya. Vairagya is
non-attachment to life, because it is the will to enjoy that brings all
this bondage in its train; and Abhyasa is constant practice of any one
of the Yogas.

*Karma-Yoga*. Karma-Yoga is purifying the mind by means of work. Now if
any work is done, good or bad, it must produce as a result a good or bad
effect; no power can stay it, once the cause is present. Therefore good
action producing good Karma, and bad action, bad Karma, the soul will go
on in eternal bondage without ever hoping for deliverance. Now Karma
belongs only to the body or the mind, never to the Atman (Self); only it
can cast a veil before the Atman. The veil cast by bad Karma is
ignorance. Good Karma has the power to strengthen the moral powers. And
thus it creates non-attachment; it destroys the tendency towards bad
Karma and thereby purifies the mind. But if the work is done with the
intention of enjoyment, it then produces only that very enjoyment and
does not purify the mind or Chitta. Therefore all work should be done
without any desire to enjoy the fruits thereof. All fear and all desire
to enjoy here or hereafter must be banished for ever by the Karma-Yogi.
Moreover, this Karma without desire of return will destroy the
selfishness, which is the root of all bondage. The watchword of the
Karma-Yogi is "not I, but Thou", and no amount of self-sacrifice is too
much for him. But he does this without any desire to go to heaven, or
gain name or fame or any other benefit in this world. Although the
explanation and rationale of this unselfish work is only in Jnâna-Yoga,
yet the natural divinity of man makes him love all sacrifice simply for
the good of others, without any ulterior motive, whatever his creed or
opinion. Again, with many the bondage of wealth is very great; and
Karma-Yoga is absolutely necessary for them as breaking the
crystallisation that has gathered round their love of money.

Next is *Bhakti-Yoga*. Bhakti or worship or love in some form or other
is the easiest, pleasantest, and most natural way of man. The natural
state of this universe is attraction; and that is surely followed by an
ultimate disunion. Even so, love is the natural impetus of union in the
human heart; and though itself a great cause of misery, properly
directed towards the proper object, it brings deliverance. The object of
Bhakti is God. Love cannot be without a subject and an object. The
object of love again must be at first a being who can reciprocate our
love. Therefore the God of love must be in some sense a human God. He
must be a God of love. Aside from the question whether such a God exists
or not, it is a fact that to those who have love in their heart this
Absolute appears as a God of love, as personal.

The lower forms of worship, which embody the idea of God as a judge or
punisher or someone to be obeyed through fear, do not deserve to be
called love, although they are forms of worship gradually expanding into
higher forms. We pass on to the consideration of love itself. We will
illustrate love by a triangle, of which the first angle at the base is
fearlessness. So long as there is fear, it is not love. Love banishes
all fear. A mother with her baby will face a tiger to save her child.
The second angle is that love never asks, never begs. The third or the
apex is that love loves for the sake of love itself. Even the idea of
object vanishes. Love is the only form in which love is loved. This is
the highest abstraction and the same as the Absolute.

Next is *Râja-Yoga*. This Yoga fits in with every one of these Yogas. It
fits inquirers of all classes with or without any belief, and it is the
real instrument of religious inquiry. As each science has its particular
method of investigation, so is this Raja-Yoga the method of religion.
This science also is variously applied according to various
constitutions. The chief parts are the Prânâyâma, concentration, and
meditation. For those who believe in God, a symbolical name, such as Om
or other sacred words received from a Guru, will be very helpful. Om is
the greatest, meaning the Absolute. Meditating on the meaning of these
holy names while repeating them is the chief practice.

Next is *Jnâna-Yoga*. This is divided into three parts. First: hearing
the truth — that the Atman is the only reality and that everything else
is Mâyâ (relativity). Second: reasoning upon this philosophy from all
points of view. Third: giving up all further argumentation and realising
the truth. This realisation comes from (1) being certain that Brahman is
real and everything else is unreal; (2) giving up all desire for
enjoyment; (3) controlling the senses and the mind; (4) intense desire
to be free. Meditating on this reality always and reminding the soul of
its real nature are the only ways in this Yoga. It is the highest, but
most difficult. Many persons get an intellectual grasp of it, but very
few attain realisation.

</div>
