---
title: CYCLIC REST AND CHANGE

---
<div>

[←](four_paths_of_yoga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm) / [→](a_preface.htm)

  

## CYCLIC REST AND CHANGE

(Written by the Swami during his first visit to America in answer to
questions put by a Western disciple.)

This whole universe is a case of lost balance. All motion is the
struggle of the disturbed universe to regain its equilibrium, which, as
such, cannot be motion. Thus in regard to the internal world it would be
a state which is beyond thought, for thought itself is a motion. Now
when all indication is towards perfect equilibrium by expansion and the
whole universe is rushing towards it, we have no right to say that that
state can never be attained. Again it is impossible that there should be
any variety whatsoever in that state of equilibrium. It must be
homogeneous; for as long as there are even two atoms, they will attract
and repel each other and disturb the balance. Therefore this state of
equilibrium is one of unity, of rest, and of homogeneity. In the
language of the internal, this state of equilibrium is not thought, nor
body, nor anything which we call an attribute. The only thing which we
can say it will retain is what is its own nature as existence,
self-consciousness, and blissfulness.

This state in the same way cannot be two. It must only be a unit, and
all fictitious distinctions of I, thou, etc., all the different
variations must vanish, as they belong to the state of change or Mâyâ.
It may be said that this state of change has come now upon the Self,
showing that, before this, it had the state of rest and liberty; that at
present the state of differentiation is the only real state, and the
state of homogeneity is the primitive crudeness out of which this
changeful state is manufactured; and that it will be only degeneration
to go back to the state of undifferentiation. This argument would have
had some weight if it could be proved that these two states, viz
homogeneity and heterogeneity, are the only two states happening but
once through all time. What happens once must happen again and again.
Rest is followed by change — the universe. But that rest must have been
preceded by other changes, and this change will be succeeded by other
rests. It would be ridiculous to think that there was a period of rest
and then came this change which will go on for ever. Every particle in
nature shows that it is coming again and again to periodic rest and
change.

This interval between one period of rest and another is called a Kalpa.
But this Kalpic rest cannot be one of perfect homogeneity, for in that
case there would be an end to any future manifestation. Now to say that
the present state of change is one of great advance in comparison to the
preceding state of rest is simply absurd, because in that case the
coming period of rest being much more advanced in time must be much more
perfect! There is no progression or digression in nature. It is showing
again and again the same forms. In fact, the word law means this. But
there is a progression with regard to souls. That is to say, the souls
get nearer to their own natures, and in each Kalpa large numbers of them
get deliverance from being thus whirled around. It may be said, the
individual soul being a part of the universe and nature, returning again
and again, there cannot be any liberty for the soul, for in that case
the universe has to be destroyed. The answer is that the individual soul
is an assumption through Maya, and it is no more a reality than nature
itself. In reality, this individual soul is the unconditioned absolute
Brahman (the Supreme).

All that is real in nature is Brahman, only it appears to be this
variety, or nature, through the superimposition of Maya. Maya being
illusion cannot be said to be real, yet it is producing the phenomena.
If it be asked, how can Maya, herself being illusion, produce all this,
our answer is that what is produced being also ignorance, the producer
must also be that. How can ignorance be produced by knowledge? So this
Maya is acting in two ways as nescience and science (relative
knowledge); and this science after destroying nescience or ignorance is
itself also destroyed. This Maya destroys herself and what remains is
the Absolute, the Essence of existence, knowledge, and bliss. Now
whatever is reality in nature is this Absolute, and nature comes to us
in three forms, God, conscious, and unconscious, i.e. God, personal
souls, and unconscious beings. The reality of all these is the Absolute;
through Maya it is seen to be diverse. But the vision of God is the
nearest to the reality and the highest. The idea of a Personal God is
the highest idea which man can have. All the attributes attributed to
God are true in the same sense as are the attributes of nature. Yet we
must never forget that the Personal God is the very Absolute seen
through Maya.

</div>
