---
title: A PREFACE TO THE IMITATION OF CHRIST

---
<div>

[←](cyclic_rest_and_change.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Writings:
Prose](writings_prose_contents.htm)
/ [→](../writings_poems/an_interesting_correspondence.htm)

  

## A PREFACE TO THE IMITATION OF CHRIST

(Translated from an original [Bengali](b6013_preface.pdf) writing of the
Swami in 1889. The passage is the preface to his Bengali translation of
The Imitation of Christ which he contributed to a Bengali monthly. He
translated only six chapters with quotations of parallel passages from
the Hindu scriptures.)

*The Imitation of Christ* is a cherished treasure of the Christian
world. This great book was written by a Roman Catholic monk. "Written",
perhaps, is not the proper word. It would be more appropriate to say
that each letter of the book is marked deep with the heart's blood of
the great soul who had renounced all for his love of Christ. That great
soul whose words, living and burning, have cast such a spell for the
last four hundred years over the hearts of myriads of men and women;
whose influence today remains as strong as ever and is destined to
endure for all time to come; before whose genius and Sâdhanâ (spiritual
effort) hundred of crowned heads have bent down in reverence; and before
whose matchless purity the jarring sects of Christendom, whose name is
legion, have sunk their differences of centuries in common veneration to
a common principle — that great soul, strange to say, has not thought
fit to put his name to a book such as this. Yet there is nothing strange
here after all, for why should he? Is it possible for one who totally
renounced all earthly joys and despised the desire for the bauble fame
as so much dirt and filth — is it possible for such a soul to care for
that paltry thing, a mere author's name? Posterity, however, has guessed
that the author was Thomas à Kempis, a Roman Catholic monk. How far the
guess is true is known only to God. But be he who he may, that he
deserves the world's adoration is a truth that can be gainsaid by none.

We happen to be the subjects of a Christian government now. Through its
favour it has been our lot to meet Christians of so many sects, native
as well as foreign. How startling the divergence between their
profession and practice! Here stands the Christian missionary preaching:
"Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Take no thought for the
morrow" — and then busy soon after, making his pile and framing his
budget for ten years in advance! There he says that he follows him who
"hath not where to lay his head", glibly talking of the glorious
sacrifice and burning renunciation of the Master, but in practice going
about like a gay bridegroom fully enjoying all the comforts the world
can bestow! Look where we may, a true Christian nowhere do we see. The
ugly impression left on our mind by the ultra-luxurious, insolent,
despotic, barouche-and-brougham-driving Christians of the Protestant
sects will be completely removed if we but once read this great book
with the attention it deserves.

All wise men think alike. The reader, while reading this book, will hear
the echo of the Bhagavad-Gitâ over and over again. Like the
Bhagavad-Gita it says, "Give up all Dharmas and follow Me". The spirit
of humility, the panting of the distressed soul, the best expression of
Dâsya Bhakti (devotion as a servant) will be found imprinted on every
line of this great book and the reader's heart will be profoundly
stirred by the author's thoughts of burning renunciation, marvelous
surrender, and deep sense of dependence on the will of God. To those of
my countrymen, who under the influence of blind bigotry may seek to
belittle this book because it is the work of a Christian, I shall quote
only one aphorism of *Vaisheshika Darshana* and say nothing more. The
aphorism is this: आप्तोपदेशं शब्दः — which means that the teachings of
Siddha Purushas (perfected souls) have a probative force and this is
technically known as Shabda Pramâna (verbal evidence). Rishi Jaimini,
the commentator, says that such Âpta Purushas (authorities) may be born
both among the Aryans and the Mlechchhas.

If in ancient times Greek astronomers like Yavanâchârya could have been
so highly esteemed by our Aryan ancestors, then it is incredible that
this work of the lion of devotees will fail to be appreciated by my
countrymen.

Be that as it may, we shall place the Bengali translation of this book
before our readers *seriatim*. We trust that the readers of Bengal will
spend over it at least one hundredth part of the time they waste over
cart-loads of trashy novels and dramas.

I have tried to make the translation as literal as possible, but I
cannot say how far I have succeeded. The allusions to the Bible in
several passages are given in the footnotes.

</div>
