+++
title = "Raptorex!"

+++
[![raptorex](https://i2.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3517/3940224538_6af3758ff7.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3940224538/ "raptorex by somasushma, on Flickr")

Every now and then a fossil comes along to cause a veritable revolution
in understanding of an evolutionary scenario. *Raptorex* is one such and
comes in the midst of a spectacular upheaval (or as Hindus would say
praLaya) in our understanding of dinosaurs.  
Just to take in how fast things have been changing *Raptorex* may be
placed in the context of the following earlier discussions of
tyrannosaurs:  
\* [The big and small of
theropods](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/06/19/the-big-and-small-of-theropods/)  
\* [Tyrannosaurs and morphological evolution in
coelurosaurs](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/02/11/tyrannosaurs-and-morphological-evolution-in-coelurosaurs/)  
\* [The rise of
tyrannosaurs](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/02/10/the-rise-of-tyrannosaurs/)

This week Sereno et al published the first description of *Raptorex*, a
tyrannosauroid from approximately the Barremian-Aptian epochs (\~125
Mya) of the early Cretaceous. It is represented by a fairly complete
skeleton including the skull with braincase, and a good part of the
postcrania except for the posterior half of the tail. Until roughly a
decade ago our understanding of the evolution tyrannosaurs was
strikingly poor. They were seen in the late Cretaceous record of Asia
and North America, but nowhere else in the world — in these northern
continents they were the apex predators in the last phase of the age of
the dinosaurs. Their distinctive anatomy marked them all other theropods
including other related coelurosaurian lineages — a large head/torso
ratio, incisiform teeth on the premaxilla, an enhanced jaw musculature
allowing massive bite forces and most recognizably reduced forelimbs
with only two complete fingers. Both the ancestry and the emergence of
the distinct tyrannosaur form remained enigmatic for nearly a century
after their discovery. This began to change with the report by Hutt et
al of *Eotyrannus* 2001 from the early Cretaceous (Barremian) of
England. This was followed by a series of Chinese finds such as Dilong,
Guanlong, Xiongguanlong, the North American *Appalachiosaurus* and
*Stokesosaurus* and the European Aviatyrranis. Phylogenetic analysis of
these finds showed that an earlier discovered fragmentary primitive
coelurosaur, *Proceratosaurus* was probably the earliest known
tyrannosauroid from the Middle Jurassic (Bathonian epoch \~165 mya). The
description of these forms suggested that: 1) the tyrannosauroids were
basal coelurosaurs which had separated early from the maniraptoriform
lineage (with representatives such as *Archaeopteryx* appearing first in
the Tithonian age of the Jurassic 150 Mya); 2) Were relatively small
bodied forms that were under 3 meters in length; 3) Had long hands with
3 complete fingers and smaller head/torso ratios compared to the
classical cretaceous tyrannosaurids; 4) The features typical of the late
Cretaceous tyrannosaurids appeared gradually over 90 million years.
Thus, the emergence of the typically tyrannosaurid features such as the
reduction of arm size, loss of a digit, large head/torso ratio and
high-force jaws were seen as emerging with increasing body size.

Thus, a line of progression was proposed from the very primitive
*Proceratosaurus* and *Guanlong* in the middle and late Jurassic, via
slightly more derived forms like *Eotyrannus*, *Stokesosaurus* and
*Dilong* in the early Cretaceous, *Xiongguanlong* in the later part of
early Cretaceous, Appalachiosaurus in the Campanian of the late
Cretaceous and finally the giant *Tyrannosaurus* and *Tarbosaurus* in
the Maastrichtian. This model saw the classical tyrannosaurid features
occurring in the late Cretaceous only beginning with *Appalachiosaurus*.
However, there were some unresolved issues. Along with the
tyrannosaurids of the North American Maastrichtian there was the
enigmatic dinosaur Dryptosaurus that appeared to be a relatively
long-armed tyrannosauroid. This really did not fit into this model of
progressive development that was laid out above. Then there was the
highly controversial *Nanotyrannus* which was considered to be a
distinct relatively smaller relative of *Tyrannosaurus*, but most
paleontologists dismissed it as a juvenile of *Tyrannosaurus*. More
recently the renowned anatomist Witmer studied the braincase of
*Nanotyrannus* more careful and compared its skull with another
tyrannosaurid specimen “Jane” (BMRP 2002.4.1). While he is very cautious
in presenting his results at least I see them as suggesting that Bakker
was right in regarding Nanotyrannus as a distinct species from
*Tyrannosaurus*. This meant that the picture of progression from small,
long-armed forms to large, short-armed big-headed forms might hardly be
the complete picture of tyrannosaur evolution. This precisely where
*Raptorex* comes in and changes everything.

In short, though coming from approximately the same age as Dilong and
being only a little younger than *Eotyrannus*, *Raptorex* already has
all the major features of the late Cretaceous tyrannosaurids. Further,
it appears to be even more derived than *Xiongguanlong*.  
Two sets of ratios of lengths are enough to show how clearly *Raptorex*
mirrors its late Cretaceous successors:

|                   |            |          |            |                 |                 |
| ----------------- | ---------- | -------- | ---------- | --------------- | --------------- |
| Ratio             | *Guanlong* | *Dilong* | *Raptorex* | *Albertosaurus* | *Tyrannosaurus* |
| Humerus/Femur     | 63%        | 53%      | 29%        | 29%             | 29%             |
| Skull/humerus     | 1.38       | 1.7      | 3.0        | \~3.4           | 3.6             |
| \~absolute length | 3m         | 1.6m     | 2.7m       | 5.8m\*          | 12.8m           |

\*Sereno et al report AMNH 5664 as an *Albertosaurus*. Originally it was
named *Gorgosaurus sternbergii* but is now considered a juvenile
*Albertosaurus*.

This shows how already in *Raptorex*, which was small-bodied like
*Dilong* or *Eotyrannus*, the head had grown relative to the arms and
the arms had contracted relative to the legs. It has many other derived
features shared with the late Cretaceous tyrannosaurs, such as
prominently enlarged olfactory lobes in the brain, incisiform
premaxillary teeth with a sharp size distinction with respect to the
maxillary teeth, potential functional didactyly and the prominently
arctometartarsalian condition of metatarsal 3. As a result in a
phylogenetic analysis we have *Raptorex* grouping with a crown formed by
*Appalachiosaurus*+tyrannosaurids. *Xiongguanlong* appears as a sister
group to this clade and S*tokesosaurus*, *Dilong* and *Eotyrannus*
appear as basal to this clade including *Xiongguanlong*.
*Proceratosaurus* and *Guanlong* form the basalmost tyrannosauroid
lineage. Thus, rather than the steady progression that was suggested by
the discovery of *Xiongguanlong*, it appears that there was a rapid
early evolution of the “classical” tyrannosaur form. This early
radiation produced a considerable morphological diversity of
tyrannosauroids which include primitive forms such as *Dilong* and
*Eotyrannus*, slightly more derived forms probably leading to
*Xiongguanlong* and perhaps the much later *Dryptosaurus*, and finally
the highly derived “classical” tyrannosaurs like *Raptorex*. An
important point emerging from these finds is that the emergence of
morphological diversity was not linked to size and occupation of the
mega-predator guild. Instead, all the diversification happened at a much
smaller size range which was simultaneously occupied by primitive and
derived forms. Thus, the distinctive features of the classical
tyrannosaurs was not a result of growth in size but was probably related
to a distinctive hunting style that also included increased reliance on
smell and a shift to a “head-first” attack mode as against the
“grasp-and-bite” mode probably used by the more primitive forms.
Interestingly, this also shows that the small arms of the classical
tyrannosaurs were not a sign of vestigiality. Rather, they were
preserved over almost 60 million years in the same reduced but robust
didactyl state indicating that they formed a part of the specialized
predatory adaptation of the classical tyrannosaurs. While the position
of *Dryptosaurus* is unclear due to it’s highly fragmentary nature, it
is possible that the long armed version of tyrannosauroid clade also
survived alongside the short-armed version throughout their evolutionary
history.

Raptorex when viewed in light of several other recent finds also throws
some light on the rise of tyrannosaurs to the role of mega-predators.
Recently, Brusatte et al examined some previously discovered fossils
from China and showed that they represent the first confirmed Asian
carcharodontosaurid theropod. This dinosaur, *Shaochilong*, coming from
approximately the Turonian age of the late Cretaceous, shows that the
carcharodontosaurids were prevalent in even the northern continents
during the late Cretaceous (In fact after they had faded away in South
America and possibly Africa). Likewise, Hocknull et al reported another
theropod, Australovenator, from the slightly earlier Albian of Australia
that appears to be related to Shaochilong and potentially connects them
to *Megaraptor* of South America. This suggests that rather than being
endemic, the carcharodontosaurids acquired a global presence over the
Cretaceous. Their earliest representatives are seen in the form of
*Neovenator* from the Barremian of England. They are followed in the
Aptian-early Albian ages by *Acrocanthosaurus* in North America,
*Eocarcharia* in Africa, *Tyrannotitan* in South America. These are
followed in the Albian-Cenomanian by *Carcharodontosaurus* in Africa,
*Giganotosaurus* and *Mapusaurus* in South America and *Australovenator*
in Australia. In the Turonian their only currently know representative
is *Shaochilong*. Thus, for approximately 30 million years the
allosauroid lineage of the carcharodontosaurs attained global prominence
in the mega-predator guild \[Foot note 1\]. In contrast, the first
tyrannosaurs in the mega-predator niche are noticed only around 83.5 mya
in the late Campanian of Asia and North America. Hence, it is quite
likely that allosauroids and other basal tetanurans like
*Chilantaisaurus* were dominant predators through much of the Cretaceous
and only in the last 15-20 million years of the Cretaceous the
tyrannosaurs suddenly grew in size to occupy the mega-predator niche
after the extinction of the carcharodontosaurs. In the South, similarly,
following the extinction of the carcharodontosaurids, we see that
various other lineages including the possible coelurosaurs like
*Orkoratpor* and deinonychosaurs rose to compete in the mega-predator
guild along side the still surviving abelisaurs. The finding of
*Raptorex* suggests that the classical tyrannosaur form had emerged much
earlier and remained “in waiting” to enter the mega-predator guild much
later in the Cretaceous. In light of this, it is conceivable that
*Nanotyrannus* was indeed a genuine taxon that was an intermediate
between the larger and lower end tyrannosaurs.

Finally, *Raptorex* reinforces a point we had pointed out earlier —
theropods of various clades are “scale-free”. Thus, we repeatedly see
various lineages display versions spanning a wide size range. Recent
discoveries of tiny and large forms like *Hesperonychus* a tiny
dromaeosaur, *Beishanlong* a large ornithomimosaur, *Limusaurus* a small
ceratosaur and now *Raptorex* have further reinforced this observation.
Now, many of these individual lineages show specialized adaptations but
they are rather constant across the size-range they span. This shows
that the dinosaurs appear to have achieved, to a considerable extant,
decoupling of their adaptations from their body size. This “scale-free”
nature of their adaptations possibly helped them to achieve enormous
sizes when ever it was ecologically feasible. This probably contributed
to their prolonged success but probably there was something here that
led to their extinction at the K/T boundary.

Foot note 1: This raises some interesting biogeographic problems
especially given that in Brusatte et al’s analysis *Shaochilong* emerges
as a sister group of the Gondwanan carcharodontosaurids. Further,
*Acrocanthosaurus* and *Eocarcharia* have been recovered as a sister
groups in independent studies.
