+++
title = "utsavAdi"

+++
We were engaged in a conversation with ekanetra on variety of topics
ranging from the preceptorial genealogies of the medieval advaita
vedAntins to the mudgara-swinging bludgeon-men of parAkrama-bAhu in the
“siMhala-damila mahAyuddha”. When, in the middle, ST chimed in that
she was thinking of a paradox in traditional observances and wanted to
know their textual bases in Hindu tradition. She alluded to events many
solar cycles ago when we were still in our youth and filled with
ignorance but full of the neophyte’s ardor. In those past days, at this
time of the year, we both used to cut class to pursue our respective
extra-curricular pleasures even as the rest of the pashu-s labored with
their pashu-shAstra-s. While I was seeking my mukti from the pashu-pAsha
in the study of the deep rahasya-s that I hardly fully understood then,
our friend ST was seeking mokSha from the shR^i\~Nkhala-bandha in the
rAsa-krIDa. She said: “I was observing a solemn navarAtri, but all of a
sudden I was reminded of our days in the city of our youth and the krIDa
that used to be such great fun with the rest of the “gang”. But suddenly
it struck me how in my childhood the navarAtri was a solemn affair at
home. I wondered if the profligate rAsagoShThI was ever allowed in the
shAstra-s.” I did not share ST’s closeness to the “gang” for after all
like the advaitin we did not equate ahaM with the sharIra that was the
“gang”. So I could not appreciate her sentiment in this regard,
nevertheless the conversation veered to the tradition of the old Hindu
madana-mahotsava-s. There is the famous
[kAmotsava](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/09/01/the-festival-of-kama/)
that is observed on chaitra shukla pakSha, dvAdashI (chaturdashi
according to some) and this is widely referred to in saMskR^ita
literature. But I recall that the paramAra rAjan bhoja-deva mentions
several others in his tome on shR^i\~NgAra. But not having the original
text of the rAjan before me I had to rely on my memory and certain other
sources for this discussion. Hence, I must mention that many of them are
missed in this discussion (but I might update them once if I feel
inclined to look up the text again).

In the shAradi set of ratyutsava-s bhojarAja mentions:  
1\) navapatrika; 2)bhisakhAdika; 3) kandukakrIDa; 4) yakSha rAtri; 5)
kaumudI jAgara; 6)abhyuSha khAdika / ikShu-bhakShika; 7)
chandrikA-lalana; 8) haMsa-lIlAvalokana; 9) sarit-pulina-keli; 10) bali
krIDa.

Of these yakSha rAtrI is known to be over-night gaming festival that
coincides with dIpAvalI/dIpotsava. Hence, if a festival corresponds to
the navarAtrI it should be before it. In the dashakumAra charita of
daNDin, chandrasenA states the following to mitragupta and koshadAsa:  
*prAptaiveyaM bhartr^I dArika kandukAvatI kanduka krIDitena devIM
vindhyavAsinIm ArAdhayitum | anishiddha darshanA cheyam asmin
kandukotsave | saphalam astu yuShmac chakShuH AgachChataM draShTum |**  
* My king’s daughter kandukAvatI has come to worship the goddess
vindhyavAsinI. It is not forbidden to look at her during the
ball-festival. May the object of you two’s vision be attained.

Here we see a juxtaposition of the kandukotsva with the worship of
vindhyavAsinI, which might suggest that it coincided with the navarAtri.
As per the descriptions, navapatrika happens when the meadows are lush
with grass following the monsoons. On those green meadows the
participants engage in drinking and kAma keli. In the bhisakhAdika the
guys hold lotus stalks in their teeth while the girls bite them off.
Going by the time allotted to the season of autumnal festivals these two
were possibly slightly earlier in the year and therefore before
navarAtri in my opinion. The remaining utsava-s that follow dIpAvalI,
include kaumudI jAgara, which is also mentioned by vAtsyAyana as the
kaumudI mahotsava (also the name of a book of fiction by an early
authoress vijjakA), a time suitable for initiating kAmabandha-s. It
survives to this date in parts of India where flavored milk is drunk
along with revelry on terraces. The abhyuSha and ikShu eating festivals
appear to correspond to what in the drAviDa country is observed as the
kArttika festival. The abyuSha (puffed-rice balls) is still made in the
drAviDa country though the ikShu is eaten on other occasions such as
pongal. The festival chandrikA-lalana was an overnight revelry when the
moon was at its highest in the autumns. The haMsa-lIlAvalokana involved
watching migratory water birds return to their nesting grounds in
jambudvIpa, whereas the sarit-pulina-keli was revelry on the sand banks
of streams.  
In winter there were some more utsava-s like the blindman’s buff
festival and the peculiar shuka-sArikAlApa-abhyasana. In this latter
festivity young men and women tried to teach parrots and mynahs to
speak.

According to bhojadeva there was another remarkable festival in spring
that might have overlapped with the spring navarAtri or according to
others with the vaTa festival. The polymath hemAdri also notes this
festival but seems to assign a different date. This was called
pa\~nchAlAnuyAna or bhUta-mAtR^ikA or bhairavotsava. Here an image of
bhUtamAtR^ikA and in some cases bhairava was installed and worshipped.
The image was then carried forth with young women following, decked in
fine costumes. They engaged in amorous dances letting their garments
slip, wearing of ghost-masks and shmashAnAbhinaya (enactment of phantom
apparitions from the cemetery). In spring bhojadeva mentions other
utsava-s like:  
udakakShveDikA involved young men and women sprinkling each other with
colored water from pistons. This seems to have been incorporated in to
holikA in some parts of the land whereas in the mahArATTa country the
old udakakShveDikA used to survive in my days as a vulgar form on a
pa\~nchami day festival in spring.  
chutalatika involved young women approaching their male counterparts and
striking one of them with a mango twig to chose them as their jAra.  
ashoka-dohada was a bacchanalic revelry for young women in which they
ornamented their feet and embraced and kicked an ashoka tree. Then they
spat chewed betel leaves and alcoholic beverages on the tree.  
Finally there was also some ratyotsava associated with the great
indradhvaja festival according to certain traditions.
