+++
title = "turuShkANAM madhyAhna"

+++
“The Sultan has drawn near to Allah, the lord of majesty and
omnipotence, the creator of the world of dominion and sovereignty. The
Sultan who is Allah’s slave made mighty with allahic power, the Kalif,
resplendent with allahic glory, who performs the commands of the hidden
book and executes its decrees in all regions of the inhabited world, the
conqueror of the lands of the East and the West with the help of Allah
and the army of Islam, the possessor of kingdoms of the world, the
shadow of Allah over all peoples, Sultan of Sultans of the Arabs and the
Iranians, the promulgator of Sultanic Kanuns, the tenth of Osman
Kha’Khans, Sultan, son of the Sultan, Sultan Suleyman Khan the
Padishah, may the line of his Sultanate endure until the end of the line
of the ages.”

Thus runs an inscription in Suleymani masjid in Istanbul from the 1560s
of CE. Suleyman-i-kanuni had raised the Osman Turks to their greatest
glory. The Kalif of Islam led the army of Islam in jihads against the
Shias and Isaists bringing them down over and over again. He was in a
world dominated by Abrahamistic violence: The Habsburg monarch Karl
(Charles) V saw himself as the lord of the Catholics leading them in the
crusade against infidels. The tsar of Russia Ivan IV saw himself as the
lord of the orthodox church leading them in their own religious war. In
the Mohammedan world Suleyman was accompanied by Shah Ismail of Iran who
saw himself as a jihadist for the Shia cause. Further east, Padishah
Akbar saw himself as the true ghazi who was rooting out the kaffirs of
Hind. The trajectory each of these took was to set the tune of history
to this date. With the ascendancy of Akbar and Suleyman in the east and
west it was the zenith of Mohammedanism on one hand and the Turkic
military system on the other. There are striking similarities as well as
differences in their paths.

Suleyman ruled for 46 years as the head of numerous jihads all over the
Western world. Having ascertained that Iran was engaged with the
invasion of the Uzbek Khan, Suleyman launched his first great Jihad on
Hungary. He besieged and conquered the great fortress of Belgrade. He
then seized Rhodes the head quarter of the Hospitaller knights who were
waging a holy war on the Mohammedans. This was followed by the great
Jihad of Mohacs in which Louis king of Hungary was killed. Then the
Turkish army took Buda the capital of Hungary. From there Suleyman’s
army reached the walls of Vienna but retreated only due logistic
problems. This was the closest Western Europe came to being directly
attacked by the Mohammedans (before Sept 11th which of course happened
further west). The charge of the ghazis of Suleyman however left a deep
impression on the minds of the Isaists because for the first time the
Jihad had reversed the arrow of the crusades by attacking the white
Christists deep in their own lands. On the naval front an Osman admiral
Piri Reis had got to know of the Americas and wanted to launch a Jihad
there. He made some remarkable maps of the Western hemisphere and some
claim even of Antartica (but I doubt that). But the Portuguese had set
up colonies right in the Islamic territory in Hormoz and Bahrain. Piri
Reis was first asked by Suleyman to take these colonies rather than
sailing to the Americas on a jihad. He successfully seized Hormoz but
one of his ships sunk and he was left without siege material to attack
Bahrain. So he retreated to Basra after capturing another minor sea fort
of the Portuguese. In response Suleyman executed him. This
short-sightedness of the Sultan saved the Americas from having an early
Islamic invasion on top of the bloody Isaist invasions. Even as the
catholics and the orthodox Isaists were in war with the Osmans, the
rulers of France and England, especially the former formed an alliance
with the Osmans. Repeats of this turuShka-mlechChAbhisaMdhi continue to
plague the world to this date.
