+++
title = "Some (geo)political talk"

+++
A political bloviation follows: We must preface this by stating we do
not have any affiliation to the party currently ruling India or the RSS
and actually have no specific interest at all in electoral politics in
India or elsewhere. Further, we must emphasize that it is just an airing
of some thoughts and not a serious piece of writing. However, as a Hindu
we are concerned about Hindu interests. It is common, especially on
social media to whine *incessantly* over the failure of the pro-H ruling
party and its specific politicians. Of course many have said that it is
no pro-H party at all and have even extended this the RSS. Some days ago
someone even asked for definition of what H is in the first place — it
might be useful to evaluate such issues but that is not what we are
intending here. The bottom-line and realism are the most important
considerations here. Say an average individual wants to become a great
physicist or a mathematician, s/he cannot become one how much ever work
you put in: you need something innate. Likewise, a country cannot become
great just by wishing so or doing routine stuff — a lot depends on its
human capital combined to a degree with natural resources. Is human
capital unalterable? It is possible to improve it but it takes a lot of
effort over a long time — there are not shortcuts in temporal terms.
Time might not be a luxury at in ones hands, especially when you are
locked in an existential struggle with competitors and outright
genocidal enemies. In such a situation, you have to work with what you
have, and build a base on your strengths while constantly buying time
for the improvement.

In the past two months we have heard a couple of talks and read an
interview of the Indian external affairs minister S. Jaishankar which
precipitated some this. Further, we recently met with an official (not a
politician) of the bureaucratic arm Indian government who asked us
regarding a big plan they have. We sincerely reflected on the problem of
its implementation which again allowed us to zero in on an uncomfortable
issue. To start with Jaishankar, he makes some excellent points
regarding the geopolitical track record of the Indian state following
the departure of the English and its vivisection by the old enemies of
the H, the Mohammedans. He points out that the Indian geopolitical track
record has been mixed. On the positive side we have:  
1\) As the first major nation that freed itself from the vice-like grasp
of Euro-Christian tyranny the Indian struggle inspired and set in motion
that transition in other parts of the world, however imperfect the
results might have been.  
2\) The residual India managed to largely retain its integrity even
though the hostile Occident and the Mohammedans would have liked to chew
away more of it.  
3\) India managed to inflict a crushing defeat on TSP, the inheritor of
the Mogol power in India, 1972 CE under the civilian leadership of
Indira Gandhi and break it up into two separate Islamic states.  
4\) Developing an enduring relationship with a major power as fickle as
the Russians.  
5\) The nuclear weapons tests in the 1990s and braving the subsequent
response from the hostile Occident.  
6\) The fending off TSP’s ghazwat in Kargil.  
7\) The successful conclusion of the Doklam standoff with the predatory
Cīna-s.

One the negative side we have the following:  
1\) The inability to read the cīna-s and allowing the destruction of the
Tibetan nation by the rapacious Han.  
2\) The humiliating defeat at the hands of the Han in 1962 CE.  
3\) The inability to properly read TSP and handle the Rann of Kutch
fiasco without Leukospheric interference. This was followed by the
rather inept handling of the war of 1965 CE with India gaining a clear
upper hand against the TSP jihadis only in the later stages.  
4\) The failure to develop nuclear weapons effectively following the
Smiling Buddha due to the flawed policies of the svamūtrapeyin.  
5\) The failure to implement economic reform: it was one of the factors
causing India to lag behind the Cīna-s in a serious way. Here India
looked bad even with respect of the smaller Asian tigers.  
6\) Serious failures in indigenous technology development and
industrialization relative to the competitors. The failure in this
sector went hand in hand with the poor negotiation of trade agreements
with other nations, with subsequent losses to industrial development.  
7\) The general lack of clarity and realism on geopolitical issues and a
generally reactive and “lettings sort themselves” kind of attitude.

Most importantly, Jaishankar pointed out that whereas India might look
good when compared to its own past, it comes across quite poorly when
compared to competitors and other states which might have had similar
problems. For instance, if we looks at those states which are not direct
competitors: Japan suffered a humiliating defeat and occupation by the
Christian and Socialist (recall its surrender came due to being put
through Soviet Meat-grinder in Manchuria) powers in World War II.
However, it recovered remarkably, preserved its imperial Shinto
tradition against Christian imposition, and retaliated against the
Americans by damaging the American automobile industry (warfare through
other means). Then we have Korea. It suffered a vivisection like India
but South Korea has done impressively in economic and scientific terms.
Even Vietnam which had to suffer the brutality of two Christian powers
and division like India has reunified and is showing notable development
in various directions. As an example we may mention how they have
brought down India in the cashewnut business by development of
indigenous automation. In contrast, the communist government of the
state of Kerala has only placed impediments to Indian competitiveness in
effective cashewnut production. Our primary Asian competitor is China.
During the reign of Rajiv Gandhi it was at the same level of economic
and scientific development as India. Today it has conclusively left
India well behind. Thus, the Islamophilic Occident is unable to do much
when it steamrolls its conquered Mohammedan territories.

One issue in all this is human capital. It is something Indians have not
given much thought to. In many areas of modern technology and science
individuals are not fungible and there is no substitute for special
individuals both in terms of training and innate talent. Recently, there
has been much talk about how randomly chosen engineers from India fall
behind those from the Rus and China. Even in our college days it was
common for everyone to want to be an engineer; however, we could easily
see that most of them were hardly cut out for such. This trend has only
increased and the bulk-produced Indian engineer is as much an
embarrassment as the fake Indian scientist. This issue again came up in
the discussion with the Indian official. How much ever we tried to
emphasize it, it still felt like they are not getting the issue of need
for specially able and/or trained individuals to do big and complex
tasks. You cannot just throw money at mediocre graduates to do complex
jobs of the type the competitors like the Han are achieving. You need
first thing of people and their skills before the building and the
money. Many Indians talks about the failure of the education system.
Having gone through it, we can say that it is hardly something to feel
excited about; however, we think that it is not the most basic problem
confronting India. Rather the problem is one of high-end human capital
and its channelization.

While it is always a good thing to improve education, we have to be very
wary of importing models from the West, especially USA of today. First,
we know from direct observation (and the detailed report of a lady from
a BRICS country who is now a school teacher in the US) that the average
US school education is no better than what is there in India in terms of
the curriculum. In several ways it is organized more poorly — e.g. the
tempo and amount of science education in the average school (as opposed
to the special programs for highly competitive high IQ individuals). At
the college level the US simply resorts to setting up a fine filter such
that only the highest IQ passes through for most of the seats at a good
university. Of course, if high IQ individuals from other parts of the
world challenge the leukospheric dominance in certain schools they have
other subjective criteria in place to limit them. At the graduate level
this is even more acute such that the competitive professors who run
their labs like little empire builders get only the cream to join their
clashing forces. All of this is of course window-dressed to look nice
and fair. Thus, the primary function of the US university is not so much
to educate as to give a stamp of elite-membership to a high IQ
individual. But by far the most dangerous aspect of the American
universities is the culture of Social Justice (see below). Hence, India
cannot copy blindly in this regard and the government needs to be more
proactive in choosing the best individuals to think through and
formulate a program for educational reform. In the end we cannot escape
the fact that good teachers are the limiting factor with respect to
actually providing good education. We must remember that Hindus were
great knowledge-generators and teachers in the past. Hence, we need to
look at our models before blind copying.

This finally leads to a concept which we have been proposing for a while
— civilizational immunity — how immune is a civilization to bad
ideas/memes from other civilizations while being able internalize and
assimilate the good ones. To give a biological analogy: A cell wants to
take in foreign DNA via lateral transfer to gain selectively
advantageous genetic material. However, it needs to keep out deleterious
genetic material like viruses and plasmids and prevent them from gaining
a foothold in the cell. History tells us that the Indians generally have
a poor civilizational immunity and are especially susceptible to
dangerous memes from the Occident. In contrast, Japan has higher
civilizational immunity as seen in its resistance to Christian
imposition. It also seems that other East Asians like Vietnamese, Thai
and the Han also have higher levels than India. In addition to
Mohammedanism and the Jesus cult, today the most deleterious memes from
the West come in the form of the “Social Justice-Equality of outcome”
meme-complex. These diseases of the mind taking hold in India will have
a direct effect on the ability of the H to select and channel their
human capital. The effects could be seriously cripplingly if they take a
deep root as they could resonate with the already existing divides
coming from the wide gulfs between jāti-s. This complex of memes could
also cause social dysfunction by interfering with the productive
sexuality and introducing destructive tendencies to the sexually active
youth bulge of India and ruin any advantages that can be accrued from
it.

Problems with human capital show in even relatively simple things like
the svaccha-bhārata-abhiyānam: the intention is good and the sentiment
is in the right place. However, its implementation has lacunae because
of issues of human capital. It is hence important that in addition to
geopolitical realism in the realm of diplomacy and conflict, the Indian
leadership pay serious attention to selection of human capital, its
appropriate specialized training after selection, and its channelization
into national gains. This may have to go hand in hand with harsher laws
in certain directions. It has to also be somehow balanced with the gulfs
in returns between jāti-s — a very difficult thing given existing deep
problems compounded by Occidental fishing in troubled waters. The
government needs realism in this regard for the long term. What the long
term action entails and plans for how it may be executed cannot be
discussed on a public forum. Finally, one electoral defeat can set the
clock back, perhaps irretrievably. Indian electoral politics are highly
factional and asynchronous, thereby they place major road blocks to the
much needed development. This is something exploited by the enemies
while lulling the populace with “electoral entertainment”. Unlike the
Hindus, if the enemies are back in power due to the natural swings of
electoral politics, they will waste no time in destroying any remaining
scaffold that would allow H survival in the future. The Gandhi-Nehru
clique had earlier paid little attention to the fact that a sovereign
nation needs first and foremost a strong military to defend its
territory and interests. The results of this neglect were disastrous.
But their recent successors were even more pernicious in actually
batting for the enemy side. We already see the results of their
machinations in the judiciary, which has been seriously compromised and
infiltrated by the enemies of the H. Hence, we say whine as much as you
want about local issues, whose importance to H we do not deny; however,
keep the big picture and the long-term in mind. We do not have
alternatives in terms of the government and here a glass half full is
better than an empty one. Hence, rather than complaining all day on
social media the need of the day is to think of effectively pressuring
and/or working with the best one can get from electoral politics. In our
opinion all those local issues can be eventually won but the battle for
preventing death from civilizational immunodeficiency is the primary
one. If the immunity of an AIDS patient is restored he can fight all
those little diseases which would kill him without his immunity.
