+++
title = "Glorious Modern Art For An Ancient Hinduxa0Hymnal"
date = "January 16, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/01/82505707_10162815367050574_2253685686580281344_n.jpg?w=478)

Friday Evening Devi-otional (A)Art(I) Posting

This is some truly excellent art which helps to illustrate evocatively a
rather core series of principles to Shakta theology and cosmogony; which
are also extolled in the course of my favourite of the RigVedic Hymnals
– the renowned DeviSukta \[RV X 125\].

Note that it is the Hand of the Goddess which is where the Sun is in a
Solar System – the center and heart and energizer of all, source
ultimately and sustainer of all life. \[This links to the mention in the
first line of said Hymnal around supporting or holding aloft the Radiant
Deities of the Sky; and also the similar supports offered in line 2.
This, too, is likely part of what is meant by the mention in line 7
around bringing forth the Father – Tvastr (Varuna, Shiva) in this
context, Chitra of the Sky\]

Note also that the Goddess is ‘obscured’ somewhat via the black of night
and the space between worlds as Her star-lit complexion \[We would call
this “Kaal” – and indeed, Kali is regarded as existing before all,
around all, and shall exist *after* all, in just such a manner … the
blackness which precedes, enfolds, surrounds, and then persists after
the light is resting afore re-ignition\]. \[The invocation of Stars and
Starlight also recall the associations of Wealth and transcendence via
Soma to be found in line 2\] \[Interestingly, too, given the nature of
the Dark – which is not, contrary to popular belief, merely ’empty’, a
variant translation of line 4 features the reminder: “Even the
non-perceivers of you dwell near me.”; and also suggests “overpower” as
an additional sense to “pervade” when it comes to the “many areas”
wherein Devi is to be Found – just as the Night is all-encompassing and
over-powers all with Her cloak. Line 6 is also frequently translated as
having Her “pervaded” Earth and Heaven.\]

Note that the faculty of sight is represented in the Moons of the
Pupils; both recalling ChandraGhanta, but also ChandraSekhar – and
“Lewk” in PIE produces both “Light” and “Loka” , terms for the faculty
of Sight and for a Realm, Rulership.

The Griffith Translation:

1.  I TRAVEL with the Rudras and the Vasus, with the Ādityas and
    All-Gods I wander.  
    I hold aloft both Varuṇa and Mitra, Indra and Agni, and the Pair of
    Aśvins.  
    2 I cherish and sustain high-swelling Soma, and Tvaṣṭar I support,
    Pūṣan, and Bhaga.  
    I load with wealth the zealous sdcrificer who pours the juice and
    offers his oblation  
    3 I am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasures, most thoughtful,
    first of those who merit worship.  
    Thus Gods have stablished me in many places with many homes to enter
    and abide in.  
    4 Through me alone all eat the food that feeds them,—each man who
    sees, brewhes, hears the word outspoken  
    They know it not, but yet they dwell beside me. Hear, one and all,
    the truth as I declare it.  
    5 1, verily, myself announce and utter the word that Gods and men
    alike shall welcome.  
    I make the man I love exceeding mighty, make him a sage, a Ṛṣi, and
    a Brahman.  
    6 I bend the bow for Rudra that his arrow may strike and slay the
    hater of devotion.  
    I rouse and order battle for the people, and I have penetrated Earth
    and Heaven.  
    7 On the world’s summit I bring forth the Father: my home is in the
    waters, in the ocean.  
    Thence I extend o’er all existing creatures, and touch even yonder
    heaven with my forehead.  
    8 I breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest, the while I
    hold together all existence.  
    Beyond this wide earth and beyond the heavens I have become so
    mighty in my grandeur.”

A variant translation \[Rao\] of the last two lines runs thus:

“7. I bring forth the paternal (heaven – abode of the manes) upon the
crown (brows) of (this Supreme Being); my genesis is from the waters
(cosmic – the all pervading Entity); from thence, I pervade through all
beings and reach this heaven with my body.

8.  I verily myself breathe forth like the wind, issuing out form to all
    the created worlds; beyond the heaven, beyond the world (I Exist
    eternally – beyond space & time) – so vast am I in my greatness.”

Although I am also quite partial to this much more recent academic
rendition \[Janasvami\] :

“\[7\] I generate the father on the summit of this (sky). My source is
in the waters, in the inner ocean. Thence, I spead among all living
creatures, alongside the all-pervading, and with the vertex I touch that
sky.

\[8\] I only breathe forth, like the wind, while holding together all
living creatures. So great (vast) I have become possessing greatness
that I am beyond heaven and this earth.”

I have taken a rather more in-depth look at the underlying theology of
much of this in my last year’s article upon the Kushmanda NavaDurga
Aspect as part of our NavRatri series.

And while it may have been a good idea to reproduce some of that
material here, I am genuinely of the opinion that between the brief
notations I’ve provided and accompanying translations, that the image,
almost speaks for herself!

Jai Mata Di!
