+++
title = "“An Image, Frozen In Time” – What Pazyryk Scythian Tombs Can Tell Us About Our Indo-Europeanxa0Ancestors"
date = "January 19, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/01/x_c6e32f03.jpg?w=581)

This is quite simply one of the most chad-looking images I have seen; a
representation of one of the Scythian nobles buried at Pazyryk in the
Siberian East, about two and a half thousand years ago.

Now, the Pazyryk find itself is quite fascinating – in no small part
because the freezing of the site meant that various of the more
perishable soft material was uniquely well preserved. This included much
of the skin of the Scythians thusly interred, and therefore
consequentially many of their fabulous tattoos – detailed reproductions
of which can be seen cascading down this chap’s shoulders and arms.

There are various other important cultural ‘windows’ preserved in the
Pazyryk barrows as well, of course; which help to tell us not only about
the culture directly responsible for these impressive burials – but also
about who and where they were themselves in cultural contact with at
about the same time.

These include fine textiles such as Chinese silks and what’s often
regarded as some of the earliest ‘proper’ carpet still in existence
(probably from western Persia), but also Greek-origin (or at least,
influenced) masks, ‘wild silk’ products likely from India, and the list
goes on. The overarching impression is that concentrated in these
burials and therefore in the hands of the aristocracy thusly preserved
therein, was wealth and abundance drawn from literally all across
Eurasia. Fitting, given that that’s basically the area under
Indo-European in general, and in its easterly inclinations, Satem- /
Andronovo , and eventually “Scythian” transitory dominion.

As applies the elements more directly relevant to the ‘Pazyryk’
Scythians themselves, there are some artefacts which are pretty
unsurprising – like the cheese-pouch, collapsible tables (pretty handy
for a nomad), and of course, the fantastically detailed headwear \[at
least one item of which appears to have been worn by a warrior in his
final battle, given the direct correspondence between damage to it and
his evidently-fatal headwound\].

There are also other discoveries from Pazyryk, that we would perhaps not
be expecting – like the fake beards (made with real human hair).

We often have the idea of “barbarians” as being impressively bearded
specimines – indeed it is right there in the word’s “barb-” component in
our subconscious association – probably due to earlier Classical
civilization’s aesthetic conventions upon the subject \[it’s why Roman
busts are rarely depicted with significant facial hair; as with the
notable exceptions of men like Hadrian and occasional periods wherein
the ‘rough man’ look was supposed to be “in” as a sign of power and
virility (consider Commodus’ bearded depiction when LARPing as
Hercules), it just wasn’t considered the couth thing to have\] … yet not
only are the men of the Pazyryk burials clean-shaven, but we find a fake
beard amongst their remains. This may, perhaps, lie someways towards the
root of the curiously contradictory Greek accountings of the Scythians
in relation to ‘masculinity’ – as the Greeks, in contrast to the Romans,
considered a beardless man to be often almost a contradiction in terms,
and also passed on some rather odd remarks about allegedly
‘cross-dressing’ Scythian classes. It was usually assumed by later
commentators that this was the result of the Greeks being unfamiliar
with more easterly robes and likening these to female clothing ; but
perhaps it was instead because of some Scyths seeming to swap between
being fully-bearded \[thanks to the fakes\] and therefore seriously
masculine, through to clean-shaven and therefore (in the Greeks’ eyes)
rather feminine. But I digress.

One of the more unsurprising sets of elements to these tombs, was the
presence of cannabis and associated tools for its consumption. Including
a full-scale *tent*. Not for the growing of cannabis (although seeds
were found amidst the funerary goods), but rather for *inhalation*
purposes. I have often remarked that the usage of cannabis as a
mind-altering substance is up there with Milk \[specifically, the
tolerance thereof\] as a hallmark of Indo-European cultures … but it now
appears, only slightly to my surprise, that the concept of the Hot-Box
(wherein, rather than simply filling one’s lungs with the smoke, one
fills an entire space with it while physically inside) is indeed Veer-y
Indo-European as well.

But the feature of the find which keeps me coming back and firing my
imagination is actually none of these things, impressive though some of
them *seriously* are \[and in future postings, I intend to examine some
of these, especially the tattoos, in greater depth and detail\].

Instead, it’s what the Horse is wearing. He’s dressed up as something
superficially resembling a reindeer. One of several styles of
horse-headgear found at these tombs; the others including considerably
more ornate ‘Gryphonic’ motifs – speculated, in those cases, to perhaps
represent the symbolic transformation of the horses thusly buried into
Griffins who would bear their riders off into the afterlife, riding up
toward the Steppe of Stars amidst the Milky Way.

But to return to the ‘reindeer’ antlers – there are several saliencies
to potentially be explored with this. We know that the reindeer was an
important animal for various Indo-European peoples of the northerly
climes in a more mundane sense related to the products derived therefrom
(indeed, it still *is* – my Swedish forebears held some association with
them, and have passed down to us fine carving made from and
representative of just such a specimine from their herds); but we *also*
know that the stag and reindeer held significant *symbolic* importance
to the various Indo-European peoples, the Scythians in particular, as
well.

Indeed, so prominent is the ‘Golden Stag’ motif amidst Scythian and
other related archaeological finds, that we often hear of the “Golden
Stag of Eurasia” as a sort of emblem for the peoples and the lifestyle
contained therein.

But what intrigues me is not so directly its saliency within Scythian
representations, as the fairly strongly coterminous occurrences of this
and closely (visually) related animals in other, neighbouring
Indo-European mythoreligious cultural expressionism.

A modern example of which, shall be immediately familiar to you – Santa
Claus’ sleigh is pulled by *what*? The names of said steeds being, per
the German folk-memory of such things, Storm terms … Donner, Blitzen,
etc. – and perhaps recollecting the shape of forking lightning amidst
the branching curvature of the reindeer’s antlers.

Naturally, this is #NAS – as not only is Santa Clause often regarded as
a sort of dimly remembered representation of Odin, but we *also* find
mention of Odin’s Hindu occurrences (and acolytes/imitators/devotees).
Vayu(-Vata), the Wind Lord (Whose Name is almost directly coterminous
with that of Woden-dev) rides a Gazelle or an Antelope; Chandra, rides
an Antelope (or in a chariot pulled thereby); Shiva, too \[but then, I
repeat myself thrice\], has strong and recurrent Deer associations; and
there are also recurrent citations within the Hymns of the RigVeda for
the Maruts \[“Rudra’s Sons”\] riding forth on “Spotted Deer”, or
Chariots pulled by same \[particularly in immediate association with the
Maruts’ Storm-Front role, charging into combat amidst pelting rain and
hurled Thunderbolts of laughing lightning\].

\[There is a discursion here around the depiction of the Fire-Sacrifice
and certain of piety’s relevant associations in terms of a Deer or
Antelope, but we shall leave that for another time, I think\]

Now it would be tempting to simply approach all of the above via an
euhemeric point of view – I have already stated some of the reasoning
for why a reindeer may be linked to a sky-storm (and there is a
yet-further recollection of this perhaps evident in the stag at the top
of Yggdrasil in Nordic cosmology) above, and the fleet swiftness of an
antelope, a gazelle, especially with their leaping motion, makes for
obvious symbolic correlate with the speed and far-ranging-ness of the
Wind (as would, as it happens, reindeer migration, perhaps).

Put this all together, and it would be almost surprising if various
Hindu deific-representations associated with tempest and furor *were
not* to be found in the company of such creatures as Their vahanas. And
you could then just simply suggest that the Scythians with their
fake-beards and fake-antlers (gosh, perhaps the modern ‘traditions’
around Father Christmas featuring a local man (often a civic luminary or
pillar of the community) in a fake-beard and putting antlers on a dog
have been more unintentionally resonant than we know!) were engaged in a
far more religiously resonant early-example of the kind of people who
clothe their cats in pop-culture relevant onesies.

PERISH THE THOUGHT!

There are occasions wherein certain features dug up by archaeologists
can indeed be suggested to be perhaps less meaningful than we might
otherwise presume. \[There is a particular burial, to the West of
Pazyryk near the Volga, at Potapovka and from about two millennia
earlier; featuring a horse head upon a human body, which I am thinking
of directly here – it was hailed at the time of its discovery as being
likely representation of a mythic occurrence also recorded the RigVeda,
wherein the head of the sage Dadhyanc is temporarily swapped with that
of a Horse for safety during the transmission of a specific sacred
knowledge … only for it to subsequently turn out that the addition of
the horse head to proceedings was perhaps a thousand years later,
raising the possibility which has not been ruled out that what we had
initially presumed to be a resonancy of profound religious significance
… may, in point of fact, have been the post-Proto-Indo-Iranian
equivalent of “Just A Prank, B(h)r(ata/o)”\]

Yet I absolutely do not think that all of these co-occurrences of
antlered steeds for the lords of Sky and Storm are simple co-incidence.
Either in terms of the direct correspondence, as we have come to expect,
between Hindu and Germanic elements as applies the *myth*; or in terms
of the seeming mortal (in multiple senses of the word) expression of the
same principle amidst the major culture existing directly between these
Two.

Rather, what is going on here is that the Scythians have, as was their
seeming custom, preserved something veer-y ancient indeed, from far
further back in time than the 4th century B.C. datings for some of the
Pazyryk tombs would perhaps imply.

As I noted in GHOST DIVISION – indeed, as formed the central conclusion
of that piece – the reason that Odin with His Wild Hunt, as well as
various expressions of Rudra and His Son and Sons (Skanda, the Rudras,
Maruts, Vratyas, etc.) are depicted as mounted warriors, and often quite
pointedly \[pun, retrospectively intended/enabled\] as horse *archers*
and/or *lancers* (equipped with spears) … is not simply because They are
associated with the Wind and its Swiftness.

But rather, because They are also irreducibly linked to the Breath of
Life and our Quickness.

They are remembered as our Ancestors … because that is, in a general
sense, *exactly what They are*. *Thundering* Hooves (see what I did
there?), *Flashing* Spears, *Clouds* and *Rains* of Arrows (to be sure,
a somewhat later development), moving Swift as the Wind across the
Steppe – whether Pontic, Central Asian (Sintashta or otherwise), or of
Sky. Even Riding Out amidst the Stars Themselves when joined by the
greatest of the departed from our communities down to this veer-y day.

The Scythians instinctively knew this. And so, they represented their
own war-horses and metempsychotic mounts (perhaps this, too, has
‘echoes’ in Sleipnir’s being ridden down to Hel and back – a horse so
incredibly swift it can evade the permanence of the Deathly realm for
the rider thereupon) as being like what we recall in our own more
immediately well-attested mythologies as the Steeds of these Storm-Front
Sires.

The impression one must come away with upon having viewed these
magnificent and visually striking horse-adornments, is that they weren’t
simply there because they looked strange and intimidating in and of
themselves. But rather because the associations within the minds of the
Scythians themselves, and no doubt of many of their immediate prey
and/or foes, was that the charge and the *harrowing* maneuvers of the
Scythian cavalry … was a symbolic referencing – an Eternal Return-ing,
even – of that of the War-Host of the War-Lord Himself!

\[Hence, in two-and-a-half-fold measure the Zoroastrian antipathy
towards the Turanian – not simply because of many of these representing
a dire and direct existential threat to the early Zoroastrian community
in a military sense; but also because they were so closely archetypally
and visually associated with the Gods Whom the Zoroastrians were at
pains to demonize where they could not suppress. The Turanians are
recorded as having taken an *exceptionally dim view* of Zoroaster’s
religious “reforms”, and waged war upon him and his followers because of
this. The Steppe-origin Indo-(-European/-Iranian) Horse Warrior was thus
a living reminder of an ‘uncontrollable’ and ‘un-erasable’ Past (despite
their best efforts to the contrary down the centuries) – a Past which
didn’t just ‘refuse to die’, but which *also* kept killing in a quite a
literal sense, the “reformers'” efforts at rolling out a new and more
‘tidy’ (anti-)orthodoxy\]

Thus, we have heer the explanation for not only these mythic antlered
mounts of the Gods and Demigods and Heroes in Hindu scripture and other,
subsequent manifestations of Indo-European mythoreligion – that these
are Storm-Horses, Sky-Steeds, Cloud-Cavalry, and the like … but also for
the Scythian material culture practices found in the graves of Pazyryk
and other sites further afield.

We – for the most part – merely ‘remembered’ it, and occasionally rather
imperfectly, it seems ; the Scythians appear to have not only
*remembered* but actively *re-enacted*, *re-immanentized*, *re-lived*
it. Just as they did var-ious other features of earlier and archaic
Indo-European culture, free from the influences (both negative,
positive, and otherwise) of more ‘civilized’, ‘sedentary’, settings.

A remark, I am sure, of most general application.

To sum up in scope, I think –

Unless you are of a rather specific set of clades of Central Asian,
(North) Indian, or indeed certain Eastern-European heritage/lineage …
this man is not likely to be your *direct* Ancestor.

He IS, however, of a type and of a culture that was so fundamentally,
functionally close to what *were* your \[Ancestors’\] Ancestors
(assuming, of course, that you are Indo-European) – as to represent a
rather stirling window in on what they were ultimately like. \[Indeed,
if you are of a more directly Divine lineage, and/or descended from the
mightiest of archaic Heroes, what They are *still* rather often like\].

Right down to the War-Moose, the Dairy-diet, the (In-Tents) Cannabis
consumption, and the Fearsome Reputation.

Although perhaps not the fake beards. I’m still not quite sure about
that.

Anyway; From Out Of The Ice He Comes:

This Is #GangSteppe
