+++
title = "A Message Even A Persian Couldxa0Understand"
date = "January 15, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/01/82253825_10162838739350574_8447058287240675328_n.jpg?w=800)

It has been said that the language of international diplomacy is one of
subtle, implied threats delivered alongside cocktail-sticks, in foreign,
exotic locales.

This might seem an altogether modern maxim, yet as we shall soon see, it
is one that is almost equally (if not, frequently, far further)
applicable to the relations of the Ancient World.

I’ve earlier posted briefly about one such encounter – that between the
Scythian King Idanthrysus and the Persian would-be world-conqueror
Darius, wherein the latter’s charges of cowardice and demands for
surrender to the former … are met via thrillingly contemptuous reply.
The concluding line of which, to translate somewhat figuratively, is
effectively the modern “Cry Harder”; and the preceding portions note
that Idanthrysus bows to no ruler except his own ancestors, The Gods …
and that if Darius is serious in his insulting assessment of Scythian
martial valour, that he should come attempt to interfere with the
Scythians’ ancestral tombs and see what happens.

But what has caught my imagination today, is another encounter between
the same two men (and, for that matter, modes of being) which occurs
sometime after the above aforementioned. By this point in the Persians’
failing ‘Scythian Expedition’, it has become rather rapidly apparent
that they are not doing very well. Their main encounters with Scythian
soldiery take place when the raiders attack without warning, draw the
Persians’ columns off on wild goose chases, and then attack again the
Persians’ now less-defended camps … especially at meal-times and under
cover of darkness. Fatigue is setting in, and the Persians are starting
to contemplate maybe turning around and heading home. Rather than, you
know, continuing to persist in trying to “catch the Wind”, as one
properly prideful Scythian put it.

However, while it might at first seem a desirable outcome for all
parties involved that the Persians depart and the invasion be at an end
… the Scythians do not see it this way. Instead, due to a combination of
having come to view the Persians as the booty-equivalent of “Meals On
Wheels”, and no doubt also motivated by a desire to more *permanently*
end the looming threat of Persianate campaigns in their direction by
continuing to bleed Darius of manpower and foolhardy Imperial ambition …
they work to frustrate any such withdrawal from happening (including, in
another rather cool encounter, sending emissaries ahead to the hastily
constructed bridging point which had brought the Persians into Scythia
in the first place, and which was at that time manned by Ionian-Greek
subject-realm soldiery. The Scythians seek to have the Greeks abandon
their post at the bridge so as to cut off Darius’ retreat entirely, and
proclaim to the Ionians that they are now free of Persian rule, a boon
for which they should give thanks to “The Gods and the Scythians”).

This sets the scene for the main subject of this piece – wherein a
rather frustrated Darius is in receipt of a Scythian messenger …

“\[…\] hereon the Scythian princes, understanding how matters stood,
despatched a herald to the Persian camp with presents for the king:
these were, a bird, a mouse, a frog, and five arrows. The Persians asked
the bearer to tell them what these gifts might mean, but he made answer
that he had no orders except to deliver them, and return again with all
speed. If the Persians were wise, he added, they would find out the
meaning for themselves. So when they heard this, they held a council to
consider the matter.” \[Herodotus, Histories, 4:131\]

Now, there are two things to be said about this. The first is that there
are an array of theories as to just what it was which was meant via the
sending of such seemingly-strange tokens; as in, what was the message
which had actually been given. And the second, that flowing on from this
are a few interpretations as to *why* they were sent.

Darius’ own interpretation is characteristically almost cartoonishly
arrogant and presumptuous, seemingly out of touch with the reality of
the circumstances around him either through desperation or genuine
self-important/empowering delusion:

“Darius gave it as his opinion that the Scyths intended a surrender of
themselves and their country, both land and water, into his hands. This
he conceived to be the meaning of the gifts, because the mouse is an
inhabitant of the earth, and eats the same food as man, while the frog
passes his life in the water; the bird bears a great resemblance to the
horse, and the arrows might signify the surrender of all their power. ”
\[Herodotus, Histories 4:132\]

However, as is often the case with flawed rulers, he had in his
immediate circle some comparatively wiser men, capable of seeing (and,
pun perhaps intended, *reading*) the proverbial “Writing Upon The Wall”
\[bonus-points there, as the *original* Writing On The Wall refers to a
rather more successful Persian conquest’s imminency, but I digress\].

“To the explanation of Darius, Gobryas, one of the seven conspirators
against the Magus, opposed another which was as follows:- “Unless,
Persians, ye can turn into birds and fly up into the sky, or become mice
and burrow under the ground, or make yourselves frogs, and take refuge
in the fens, ye will never make escape from this land, but die pierced
by our arrows. Such were meanings which the Persians assigned to the
gifts.” \[Herodotus, Histories, 4:132\]

I tend to think that Gobryas was probably on to something, although
while it is not clear from the text whether these were *live* animals
which had been sent by the Scythians, it does also occur to me that if
they were *dead*, then this would perhaps suggest that whether the
Persians chose to hide in holes \[like the mouse\], flee off into the
marshes and attempt amphibious exit from their boiling \[like the
frog\], or even somehow become airborne \[like the bird\]\[a feat
figuratively managed, to be sure, by a successor generation of
Conquerors of the Persians under Alexander, amidst modern-day
Afghanistan, but again I digress\], that there could be no escape from
the Arrows of the Steppe-Lords.

A further interpretation is postulated by the Enlightenment-era Italian
scholar, Giambattista Vico. I may return to some of this man’s work in
another article at a later time, because there is some rather excellent
‘resonancy’ with the concepts of ‘Divine Language’ that inform quite
some of my own theological perspective, as influenced by the somewhat
earlier Vijayanagara Brahmin Vedic commentator, Sayana.

But for the moment, it is enough to note that Vico’s interpretation is
rather more ‘positive’ – as in, it is a statement about Idanthyrsus and
his people which affirms their characteristics, rather than just a ‘vae
victus’ message of death to the Persians. Although it is also that as
one of its essential elements.

He was working off a slightly different source, though, and instead
enumerates the ‘gifts’ as follows – a frog, a mouse, a bird, a
ploughshare, and a bow. To which he assigns the symbolic values
piece-by-piece with a view to building up a coherent and intelligible
message.

The Frog, Vico identifies as representing one who is autochthonous, just
as frogs were thought to spring up from the mud in summer. The Mouse,
one who makes a home of where they are born. The Bird, Vico correlates
to augury and as an indication that The Gods were upon the side of
Idanthyrsus, with none higher than the latter other than the former. The
Ploughshare, as signifying the bringing under mastery and sovereign
dominion of land via toil upon it. The Bow, as representing Idanthyrsus’
martial power, as well as his sacred responsibility to utilize said
power to defend his nation.

Or, put together, and in direct contrast to Darius’ situation (who was
and had none of these things in relation to the land he was invading –
indeed, quite the opposite) … Idanthyrsus was born a native son of
Scythia \[perhaps even springing up as a natural consequence of
necessary circumstance\], had made his home and furnished his kingdom
there, with Divine Sanction, Blessing and Providence (which would
continue with regard to his fairings against the Persians), and without
any higher power there than he other than the Gods Themselves; and that
what his people had worked to make their own, make prosperous and
bountiful, they would fight vigorously to defend against foreign
pretenses of domination.

It is quite a cool interpretation; although how realistic, I am not
sure. \[the plough may seem incongruous for a steppe-borne highly mobile
people, although despite its lack of mention in Herodotus’ own account
of this meeting in the Histories, it finds other citation in his earlier
commentary upon the supposed origin-myths of the Scythians themselves\]

Whatever the truth of the matter, there can be little doubt of the
Scythians’ overarching \[bow-power uber alles indeed\] and pointed
intent towards the Persians. If it were not apparent from the sendings
of arrows accompanied by dead animals, then the sendings of arrows
accompanied by dead Persians which followed soon made it abundantly
clear.

“Vacam Garjit Lakshanam”, indeed. Or, perhaps, “Ultima Ratio Regum”.

Now as for purpose ..

There have been a few postulations as to just why the Scythians sent a
message of this nature – especially in the ‘symbolic’ terms that they
did. It’s possible that the whole thing is an allegory, or hearsay, or
has embellished to the point of latter-day unreadability, the nature of
an actual pseudo-diplomatic encounter.

But leaving all of that aside, one theory which has been advanced is
that it represents an attempt at communication which can bypass
language-barriers. Something which would have been quite important in
the ancient world where two foreign peoples and their rulers should have
cause to interact.

I am not sure that that holds, however. Not so much because the
‘message’ of the Scythians was evidently sufficiently lacking in clarity
that the Persians could come up with two almost totally opposing
interpretations thereof it. But rather because only a few verses
beforehand in the Herodotus source, we have an account of a Scythian
messenger relaying a communication from Idanthyrsus to Darius with no
apparent difficulty. So evidently, there would be limited need for
non-linguistic communicative workarounds, or
taxidermy-and-fletchery-enabled ‘charades’.

That earlier encounter does afford another possibility. Idanthyrsus’
chill-as-the-North-Wind instruction to Darius to “cry harder” \[the more
usual translation is “Go Weep”\] which closes that message, is referred
to by Herodotus as being emblematic of the so-called Scythian mode of
speech.

This is often compared to the ‘Laconic’ remarks attributed to various
Spartans through roughly contemporaneous source-material; and certainly,
it is not hard to see how and why such a comparative linkage might be
made.

Yet it is not the terseness which stands out to me in that invective –
but rather its cutting, piercing nature as part of the message all up.
Idanthyrsus has gotten right to the heart of the Persians’ essential
weakness in these strange lands, punctured their prevarications and
their pretenses at world-conquering Imperial plenipotentiary with an
insult that is also an astute observation. \[that being that the
Persians are not winning in part because they are attempting to beg the
Scythians to fight a conventional war, which the Scythians neither have
intent of doing, nor would have been grasped by anyway due to their
fundamentally different modus vivendi; and therefore, all up, that the
Persians are now reduced to plaintive insults in a pathetic bid to force
the acknowledgement of their own ruler as supreme\].

The etymology of “Scythian” itself, comes down to us from earlier
Proto-Indo-European derived terms for “Shooting”, “Skewering”,
“Spearing”, and the like. It is not hard to see how the famed
horse-archers of the Steppe acquired such an ethnonym in the mouths of
their awe-struck adversaries, employers, and fable-writers far from the
lands in question. It carries powerful, damn near *mythic* resonancies
to it all its own. Of the figures and the features of a pre-‘civilized’
and perhaps ‘un-civilizable’ \[at least in the sense that ‘civilization’
means ‘imperial dominion’ and conquest from without\] clade who yet
still embodied the essential characteristics of the far more further
archaic Indo-Europeans of ages past; and who really could confront the
might of an alleged ‘master of the four corners of the world’ with a
sneer and a braggadocio-laden challenge. And *win*.

The “Scythian mode of speech”, then, perhaps refers to “Scythian” in
this etymological sense. What we would today call a ‘cutting remark’
(one which ‘cuts down to size’, which wounds the target … especially as
a decapitation-strike upon an overly swollen head, to reference the
concept of the Roudran Theological Argument).

In this sense, I understand the Symbolic Message of Idanthrysus to
Darius as being, perhaps a ‘conundrum’ designed to occupy the Persians’
headquaters for a time while the Scythians continued to outmaneuver them
elsewhere in the strategic sense … but more to the ‘point’, as being the
spear-head of humour. A most potent weapon, indeed.

It is saying to Darius and his men something along the lines of “You
shall die here, although this is not yet immediately apparent to you
(you have not worked out the riddle either of these symbols or the
surrounding events of your campaign, yet, have you …) …. while we watch,
from a distance, and laugh.

So *Run* – for all the good that it shall do you.”

Darius himself appears to have worked this out shortly after, during the
course of an incident wherein a Scythian army had drawn itself up in
formation afore the Persians as if to make an attack … only to then
apparently get distracted by a hare. Herodotus presents it as a genuine
occurrence which can be taken at face value … yet I see it quite
differently. There would be limited reason for a battle-line to be
thrust into disarray immediately prior to an engagement’s commencement,
especially not after something as otherwise inconsequential as a single
rabbit.

That’s not to say that Darius didn’t see what Herodotus says he saw, of
course. On the contrary, I think it makes sense that he *did*. It’s just
that the event in question, that of a group of Scythians hunting a
prey-animal with wild shouts and exhortations and no need for
densely-aligned well-drilled formations in pursuit of their frightened
quarry …

… well, I think that it was quite likely *staged*. A visual
demonstration, a twisting of the knife to the message which had been
sent the day before, of what the Scythians thought of their foe and the
likely soon-to-ensue course of events.

To quote once more from Herodotus:

“Darius, hearing the noise, inquired the cause of it, and was told that
the Scythians were all engaged in hunting a hare. On this he turned to
those with whom he was wont to converse, and said:- “These men do indeed
despise us utterly: and now I see that Gobryas was right about the
Scythian gifts. As, therefore, his opinion is now mine likewise, it is
time we form some wise plan whereby we may secure ourselves a safe
return to our homes.” “Ah! sire,” Gobryas rejoined, “I was well nigh
sure, ere I came here, that this was an impracticable race – since our
coming I am yet more convinced of it, especially now that I see them
making game of us.” \[Herodotus, Histories 4:134\]

It is a message so simple in its eloquence that even a Persian could
understand.
