+++
title = "Against Freudian Myth-Interpretations"
date = "January 13, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/01/83022680_1567246540080871_6759382366092787712_n.jpg?w=190)

Mircea Eliade on the prominence of ‘Freudian’ interpretations of
mythology:

“The interpretations of Freud are more and more successful because they
are among the myths accessible to modern man. The myth of the murdered
father, among others, reconstituted and interpreted in Totem and Taboo.
It would be impossible to ferret out a single example of slaying the
father in primitive religions or mythologies. This myth was created by
Freud. And what is more interesting: the intellectual élite accept it
(is it because they understand it? Or because it is “true” for modern
man?)”

Now, we tend to take a *fairly dim view indeed* of Freudian this that
and the other thing. Some times, a cigar is just a cigar … and sometimes
an attempt to forcibly insert a phallic metaphor into a mythoreligious
expression is just plain affrontery arguably worse than more
conventional euhemericism. This is not to say that there *aren’t* some
occasionally rather curious and even downright *lurid* sexual or
psychosexual elements in some authentic ancient scriptural and broader
mythological materials. Because of course there are.

But the sadistic glee with which some out there in the academisphere and
elsewhere seem to take in reducing just about anything, regardless of
tenability, to … pretty much exactly and simply that, I would perhaps
indulge in a bit of a ‘Freudian’ pseudonalysis by suggesting it might
have to do with some concealed or repressed circumstances of their own
rather than anything authentic nor endogenous to the myths in question.

Or, as Eliade puts it with a characteristic cutting simplicity … maybe
it’s just because it’s easier for them to understand than the truth.
