+++
title = "Divinity Is Not Axa0Democracy"
date = "January 12, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/01/0767f74b1a6acca0ce336e93c8b8ace8.jpg?w=609)

When I was younger, I thought this was pretty profound, and more than
that – not entirely far removed from How It All Works:

“The idea of Gods empowered (and possibly created) by worship naturally
has a strong attraction for modern fantasy fans: It takes the prevailing
social order of democracy and projects it into the plane of divine
metaphysics. Instead of Homeric warrior-aristocrats, Middle Eastern
despots or Chinese courtier-bureaucrats, Gods become politicians in the
sky, dependent on their base, hustling for support. This premise is
appropriate and meaningful for modern fantasy.” – Dean Shomshak

Now that I am older, and have crafted better understanding of … several
things immediately relevant to the above, I see it somewhat differently.

There is, unquestionably, an important principle which the above almost
adjacently gets right. Namely, that there is an ’empowering’
relationship between the proper worshipful conduct of human (and, for
that matter, non-human) devotees – and The Gods. We have pretty direct
scriptural support for this concept, to be found at its clearest both
within the RigVeda as well as, in the ‘inverse’ \[as in, what happens
when we *don’t*\] subsequent materials such as Devi Bhagavatam. That is
the incident featuring Durgamasur that I seem to be referencing on a
daily basis these days.

Yet this does *not* make it a situation of Divine Democracy, where power
and apotheosis is a matter merely of popular acclaim and general
good-feeling by an appropriately numerous proportion of one’s people
\[although funnily enough .. that can help in some related areas – long
.. set of stories\].

A man does not become a God simply because he has the ‘votes’ of other
men. Nor does a God (generally speaking) cease being a God, only because
He (more rarely, She) may have fallen below a certain threshold of
popular support out there in the body-politic of ordinary persons.

The idea that Gods being empowered, augmented, supported, and indeed
fought-alongside, by less divine specimines than They … that this
somehow leads axiomatically toward “Democracy” and *away* from
“warrior-aristocrats”, is a fundamental misunderstanding not only of
theology, but of historic sociology.

A Lord may be a Lord by virtue of birth, and often also via recognition
as such by *other* Lords \[which can therefore allow the elevation from
slightly humbler origins of a lower-ranked nobleman to such an august
position – which … does not always go particularly well either in
history, or in at least one of the Indo-European mythological instances
which I can think of offhand\]. And while he does not *stop* being a
noble in principle and in essence purely through being in command of a
fiefdom that, through degradation and ruin, now comprises one member
only… a Lord is going to be able to do a lot more, and especially a lot
more *indirectly* \[rather than having to personally go around and bash
heads in or help out with the local bread distribution \[this is
actually a thing in Germanic society, the baking I mean – it’s an
analogous concept, perhaps unsurprisingly, to part of how “Bhaga” works
in Sanskrit\] \] should He have the support of those below.

We can see this also with various (semi-)mythic bronze age heroes – they
may be of lordly rank and standing within their locally relevant society
… but what distinguishes them from those who are lords in terms of role
and function, is that the latter aren’t restricted through lack of
manpower and other resources to being wandering trouble-shooters \[as
in, find trouble, shoot it\] who may over the course of things develop
sufficient renown and debts of honour and fealty that they effectively
wind up with a lordly role having grown up around them in consequence.

The esssential predicate of a properly functioning Feudal model for
society is that there is a chain of responsibility, provision, and
support – going both ways, up *and* down, as it happens (albeit in
rather different substantive character dependent upon direction, due to
competencies, position, and functional role).

The general Indo-European approach to Divinity is quite closer to this
than to anything which we might term the image of “democracy”, and most
especially what is prominently bound up with such a conception in terms
of the essential form of ‘support’ and ’empowerment’ offered being a
comparatively infrequent nominal gesture – the vote – rather than this
ongoing and integral relationship. \[There’s also the point that, with
the exception of some of the more … small-scale polities, one doesn’t
tend to have virtually everybody involved having a ‘kinship’
relationship to the august figure in charge\]

Also, with some notable exceptions, we don’t tend to empower politicians
with votes \[or otherwise\] specifically because they are going to
*personally* go off and kill (demon-)dragons on our behalf, make the
crops grow on time, and intervene via both causality and ‘conspiracy’ to
deflect arrows and other lethality arrayed against us at the battle
against the tribe a few valleys over tomorrow.

Your local experience of politics may, as ever, vary.
