+++
title = "jyeShThA in shivAlaya-s"

+++
Some of the major saiddhAntika pratiShTha tantra-s give an account of
the installation of alakShmI or jyeShThA along with her daughter
rakta-jyeShThA or mAnyA and her son vR^iSha who in shaiva tradition is
bull-headed. Unfortunately, this section has not been completely
preserved in one of the most authoritative pratiShTha tantra-s of south
India, the ajita-mahAtantra. So we do not have the origin mythology for
jyeShThA unlike that provided for vinAyaka, skanda and others. From the
suprabheda, kAraNa and extant sthApaka manuals we can infer that the
mantra-s of these deities are stereotypic in the manner of other mUla
mantra-s given in the saiddhAntika sthApana vidhi-s:  
OM jyeM jyeShThAyai namaH | OM maM mAnyAyai namaH | OM vR^iM vR^iShAya
namaH |  
The gAyatrI of only jyeShThA is extant:  
OM phalapradAyai vidmahe | pApahantryai cha dhImahi | tan no jyeShThA
prachodayAt ||  
However, the sthApana procedure in the ajita declares that there were
gayatrI-s for vR^iSha and mAnyA which were supposed to be deployed in
their pa\~ncha-gavya baths. In the centre alakShmI is placed, her
daughter to her left and to her right her son. In water pots her
attendants are worshiped around her: tama, mohA, kShudhA, nidrA,
mR^ityu, mAyA, jarA and bhayA successively with sandal paste, flowers
and the like. Within an exclusive jyeShThA temple in 8 pots the deshika
should install 8 fierce shakti-s around the central triad: karAlI,
kapilAkShI, vimalA, vibhujA, bhAsvarA, vitatA, kIkasA and kadru from
east to north-east. Then images of a crow and a vessel are placed in a
large pot in the vedi for jyeShTha and her children. In a few south
Indian temples one can still see this triad, though they have been
largely forgotten amongst the lay. However, their invocation continues
in certain syncretic traditions of dhUmAvatI among the dashamahAvidyA-s.
