+++
title = "Did Wallace completely understand evolution?"

+++
At the outset I must present the disclaimer that I am no scholar of the
histories of Wallace or Darwin. What I state here is merely my
impression gleaned from readings of their own works and a subset of the
copious historical writings about them.

We were sitting and ruing our biological lotteries or what one might
call indra’s separation of good things among men. When we suddenly found
a more worthy distraction in ST and ekanetra’s colorful tale of how they
tracked down the grave of Wallace in Dorset, England – a story very
typical of their epic travelogues and their knack of accomplishing
visits to out of the way monuments in foreign lands. Wallace’s grave is
apparently a grotesque phallic structure pointing upwards a couple of
meters in height. They wondered at first if Wallace had a Freudian
obsession which was no less than that of a Minar-erecting Mohammedan
despot. However, on closer examination it turned out to be the trunk of
a long extinct Mesozoic gymnosperm, *Protocupressinoxylon purbeckensis*
– more a monument to Wallace’s life work on the evolutionary theory
than the former.

Text books typically mention Wallace in passing along with Darwin in
presenting the basic hypothesis of evolution through natural selection.
Some scholars feel he was merely a sideshow and his main role was in
prompting Darwin to publish his worker earlier. Nevertheless it is clear
from Darwin’s own work that Wallace was a major player in the
development of his own ideas. From his writings it is clear Wallace made
some prescient and original contributions to the evolutionary theory
such as the idea of the heterozygote disadvantage (often called the
Wallace effect) for which there is considerable empirical support in
modern studies. Yet, in the very same book (“Darwinism”) in which
Wallace lays out the evolutionary theory at length we also encounter
this paradoxical terminal statement:

“We thus find that the Darwinian theory, even when carried out to its
extreme logical conclusion, not only does not oppose, but lends a
decided support to, a belief in the spiritual nature of man. It shows us
how man’s body may have been developed from that of a lower animal form
under the law of natural selection; but it also teaches us that we
possess intellectual and moral faculties which could not have been so
developed, but must have had another origin; and for this origin we can
only find an adequate cause in the unseen universe of Spirit.”

Prior to this in the concluding section of this book he presents an
unusual discussion on when “powers” other than evolution by natural
selection might be involved in transformations of the organic world:  
“…but we will further point out that there are at least three stages in
the development of the organic world when some new cause or power must
necessarily have come into action.”  
According him the three points in evolution where a new cause or power
other than natural selection interceded were:  
1\) The origin of life from chemical compounds;  
2\) The origin of consciousness. He believes that consciousness is
faculty of animals – in his words a distinguishing feature between the
“animal and vegetable kingdoms”. He also feels that compared to the
1st event this is “still more marvellous, still more completely beyond
all possibility of explanation by matter, its laws and forces.”  
3\) Finally, he places the origin of human faculties as beyond the
explanative power of the standard evolutionary theory of Darwin and his.
Indeed he comments thus:  
“The third stage is, as we have seen, the existence in man of a number
of his most characteristic and noblest faculties, those which raise him
furthest above the brutes and open up possibilities of almost indefinite
advancement. These faculties could not possibly have been developed by
means of the same laws which have determined the progressive development
of the organic world in general, and also of man’s physical organism.”

He then goes on to add: “These three distinct stages of progress from
the inorganic world of matter and motion up to man, point clearly to an
unseen universe—to a world of spirit, to which the world of matter is
altogether subordinate. To this spiritual world we may refer the
marvellously complex forces which we know as gravitation, cohesion,
chemical force, radiant force, and electricity, without which the
material universe could not exist for a moment in its present form, and
perhaps not at all, since without these forces, and perhaps others which
may be termed atomic, it is doubtful whether matter itself could have
any existence. And still more surely can we refer to it those
progressive manifestations of Life in the vegetable, the animal, and
man—which we may classify as unconscious, conscious, and intellectual
life,—and which probably depend upon different degrees of spiritual
influx.”

Thus we observe that Wallace, whom we know as the founder of the modern
evolutionary theory, held a rather peculiar view. It is peculiar in two
ways: 1) He feels that a distinct “world of spirit” has somehow
interceded in the “world of matter” to generate certain things he is
unable to explain based on his/Darwin’s theory. 2) He consigns physical
forces which are a part of matter to this spirit world along with those
more miraculous powers which he feels are necessary to generate life in
the first place and then take it up to acquire human intellectual
capabilities. Is he misunderstanding physics here or does he imply
something else more subtle? These concluding statements in his famous
book on evolution raise the big question of did Wallace completely
understand the evolutionary theory. Beyond this it raises some
tantalizing questions about socio-cultural and innate biological biases
on philosophies and also very nature of human conceptual constructs.

To attempt to get to the bottom of Wallace’s three “mental blocks” (i.e.
the events in evolution where he needs to invoke the spirit world to
intercede) let us consider first the priors that could bias ones
understanding of evolution and then those three evolutionary questions
themselves from a scientific angle. Some Wallace scholars have pointed
out that Wallace was a fan of séances and engaged in spiritualist
practices typical of Victorian Englishmen. Then they go on to attribute
his invocations of spirit to these activities. However, we simply feel
that both were manifestations of the same underlying mental constructs
or “cognitive minima” in his mind. At least three distinct but not
mutually exclusive biases can be seen to operate on people when it comes
to scientific understanding, particularly in comprehending evolution:  
1\) Firstly, the pretamata had a deep influence on western thinkers –
sometimes overt and sometimes covert. We can cite the case of Teilhard
de Chardin as an example of overt influence – even though he studied
biology and geology at great length (and was condemned by the
kIlita-pretAlAya-s for this) his evolutionary thinking was seriously
clouded by his deep faith in a single god. In contrast, the great
evolutionist Dobzhansky was able to separate his deep attachment to the
pretamata from his seminal work on the evolutionary theory. Yet, he is
reputed to have stated that his god’s mode of creation was evolution. We
are also told by his student that apparent he saw a special meaning in
the emergence of man whom he saw as self-aware and possibly eventually
transcending biological evolution. More generally belief-based rejection
of evolution is a rather common tendency – I have seen it abundantly in
the west as well as among Hindus of various shades. Among Hindus this
particular rabid amongst western converts to the gauDIya vaiShNava mata.
I suspect that such tendencies in several neo-vedAntin-s appear to arise
from internalization of Abrahamistic constructs from the west. A version
of this is also seen particularly often among modern Hindus who believe
in the “Out of India model” for the origin of Indo-Aryans and is
accompanied by rejection of evolutionary principles in the context of
linguistics and human biology. In the case of Wallace all the evidence
suggests that he had largely rid himself of the pretamata and was not
seriously influenced by its doctrines.

2\) The cognitive local minima and or tendency to fixate on certain
patterns at the expense of others. This is possibly the biggest
roadblock to understanding evolutionary models. It is frequently seen in
the case of the general population and extends to some educated thinkers
as well. One common tendency is to fixate on the emergence of complex
forms from simpler ones, with *Homo sapiens* (and in more extreme cases
the white Western European man) being seen as the culmination of this
process of complexification. Herbert Spencer, a notable English thinker
(who even coined the sUtra: “Survival of the fittest”) is a striking
example of this. He held the view that throughout the universe there is
directional evolution of simple homogenous structures into highly
differentiated, heterogeneous structures of greater complexity which
also show a tendency of greater integration of their differentiated
elements. By definition in evolutionary processes complex structures
will necessarily emerge from simpler ones and rather naturally over time
complexity would increase. But this pattern is also accompanied by
breakdown of complexity and simplification. In some cases
complexification and simplification occur in the same evolutionary
process at the simultaneously – in the evolution of the mammal-line we
find that the mandible “simplifies” while the ear grows in structural
complexity if measured in terms of number of components. So Spencer’s
view of complexification as an innate drive in the universe came from an
incomplete description of the evolutionary phenomena, evidently a
cognitive local minimum focusing just one of the many vectors actually
acting in the evolutionary process. Reading Wallace’s wonderment at the
development of mathematical ability in humans or his statements on the
“progressive manifestations” of life we do suspect he was comparably
entrapped in such a cognitive minimum as Spencer. Similar
susceptibilities are encountered in certain modern Hindu thinkers, e.g.
Aurobindo. However, the older forms of Hindu thought are less prone to
this kind of thinking. Given Spencer’s influence on several recent Hindu
thinkers like Shyamji Krishnavarma, VVS Aiyar, Savarkar, Vivekananda and
Agarkar (Tilak too had a positive view on several of Spencer’s ideas) we
wonder if some his ideas on the innate drive for complexity or
progressive advancement took root among Hindu thinkers.

3\) Finally we come to issue of the knowledge gap. In the day of Wallace
very little was known about biochemistry and genetics. Thus, the
theoretical foundations to build biology from underlying axioms were
lacking – biological thinking lacked both necessary the constraints as
well as the source data that we have today. Hence, it is not surprising
that certain problems appeared outside the scope of the evolutionary
theory for Wallace. Together factors 2 and 3 might have also contributed
considerably to the delayed origin of memetics. Dawkins states that he
invented the term meme. Nevertheless, it should be noted that Semon, a
German Lamarckian thinker, used the term mneme well before Dawkins in
the early 1900s in a rather similar context. However, like Spencer’s
constructs of social evolution, Semon used mnemes as a Lamarckian rather
than a Darwinian construct, unlike Dawkins. This tendency towards
Lamarckism for explaining behavioral and consequently social evolution
can be attributed in good measure to the underdeveloped science of their
times as well as being entrapped in local cognitive minima, which
prevented a more complete description of the process.

In face of these difficulties in apprehending the nature of evolutionary
processes we cannot but marvel at Darwin’s clarity in trying to explain
biology comprehensively under an evolutionary framework (Including the
sexual selection hypothesis which successfully explained several aspects
that were recalcitrant to conventional natural selection models).

Finally we come to a current day look at Wallace’s problems themselves.
Since this so close to home I will deliberately not wade into them in a
professional sense. That will have wait until we compile our own
saMhitA. Here we shall restrict ourselves to a layman’s examination of
them – more a discourse of putraka-s than one of deshika-s.

3\) The origin of the “characteristic and noblest faculties” of Homo
sapiens: This is probably the easiest to account for with our current
understanding of evolution. Firstly, the study African apes and the
orangutan, those closest cousins of ours, has shown that all our
faculties can be largely traced back to their antecedents already
present in the common ancestor the great apes. Someone remarked to me
once that everything in Homo is more complex than that its equivalent in
the ape. This is a typical example of the cognitive selectiveness to
recognize some patterns a special while ignoring others: while we may
have gained some heft in the brain, we lost the bone in the li\~Nga (the
baculum). This was precisely the style of the typological argument of
the anti-Darwinian anatomist Owen, who placed Homo in a separate
“sub-class” of mammals. Further, studies on birds and cetaceans have
shown that equivalents of some those human faculties of Wallace are much
more widely distributed (emerging through convergence in part) and the
rest are merely exaggerated versions of the abilities already present in
an incipient form in the nearest sister clades of humans. So Homo is
much the same pashu as any other – in what way is the ability to speak
more unique than the ability to see infrared radiation.

Now let us look at Wallace’s specific examples of such faculties.
Wallace felt that mathematical ability does not confer a specific
selective advantage: “It is evident that in the struggles of savage man
with the elements and with wild beasts, or of tribe with tribe, this
faculty can have had no influence. It had nothing to do with the early
migrations of man, or with the conquest and extermination of weaker by
more powerful peoples. The Greeks did not successfully resist the
Persian invaders by any aid from their few mathematicians, but by
military training, patriotism, and self-sacrifice. The barbarous
conquerors of the East, Timurlane and Gengkhis Khan, did not owe their
success to any superiority of intellect or of mathematical faculty in
themselves or their followers. Even if the great conquests of the Romans
were, in part, due to their systematic military organisation, and to
their skill in making roads and encampments, which may, perhaps, be
imputed to some exercise of the mathematical faculty, that did not
prevent them from being conquered in turn by barbarians, in whom it was
almost entirely absent.” This conclusion of Wallace is a consequence of
the limited knowledge of his time. Since then, in part starting with
Galton, a half cousin of Darwin, we have been able to develop measures
for intelligence. Even if somewhat imperfect, these measures capture a
core essence of mathematical intelligence and have been able to show a
major role for genetics in it (the high heritability of IQ and g). This
suggests that the rise of mathematical abilities must basically be
explained within the rubric of the same evolutionary changes that have
affected these genes (including their regulatory elements). Clues in
this direction come from the observation that at high end of
mathematical ability there is an over-representation of males. Now
psychological tests show quite robustly that males have greater faculty
for performing mental 3D rotations. This suggests that the initial
foundations of mathematical ability might have a link to mental 3D
visualization that had definite selective advantage in tool-making and
organized hunting. Secondly, Wallace’s argument that the mathematical
abilities had no great role in the ancient civilized societies is an
improper framing of the problem. Indeed, the emergence of large scale
agrarian economies and urbanization led to population increases – a
clear increase in average individual fitness relative to the
hunter-gather condition. Now these types of economies clearly selected
for increased g. Hence, while abstract mathematics might not have been
selected, certainly the mental substrate for it, i.e. higher g, was
strongly selected with the emergence of civilizations. Likewise, music,
the other example of Wallace, can be seen as a by product of selective
advantages related to selection for improved vocal communication and
language (after all remember that even old Indo-European was a tonal
language). Issues we still do not know or fully understand include the
entire repertory of genes that have undergone changes in course of the
rise of increased intelligence and how the products of these genes
fashion the pathways for intelligence. Yet, more than a century after
Wallace confusion remains in the minds of many. A notable example of
this was the claim made by the psychologist Spelke against her colleague
Pinker that there are no inter-sexual differences in mathematical
abilities at the high end. This is a good example of how personal
politics (among other beliefs and descriptive limitations, like those
shown by Wallace) can cloud the understanding of even this relatively
simple problem. Thus, the third of Wallace’s problems, while no longer a
hard one, still has relevant biological interest after all these years.

1\) Next in the order of difficulty is the first of the Wallacian
problems: the origin of life. Since his days we have made remarkable
progress in understanding the biochemistry of life and we today know the
main molecules and their structures. These discoveries have take that
mystery out of the chemical composition of life and show that some of
the basic properties of life are consequences of the structures of the
molecules like nucleic acids, proteins and others. We hence grasp the
building blocks all the way from metal ions, water, carbon dioxide,
phosphates, ammonia and methane to the amino acids, sugars and bases and
can have an approximate road map of how these can lead to life. Further,
the molecules of life are like great telescope that allow us to look
back in time and reconstruct the earliest stages of life. This tells us
that some form of natural selection was active right from the
differentiation of the first autopoietic systems (to use a term of the
Chilean philosophers Varela and Maturana) from the precursor chemicals.
Thus, in large part the emergence of life is within the explanative
sphere of natural selection. Yet, there is one point that several
biologists have a poor understanding of, which our increasing knowledge
over the years has taught us: life is very special. All life on earth
has only one origin, and life does not form repeatedly on earth and
there is no evidence that life formed repeatedly on earth even in a
former period. So the conditions under which life comes into being are
indeed extremely uncommon and nothing like what we have on earth today
or even for a long time in the past. There are also reasons to believe
that life was seeded on earth from outer space. Given this and the
special nature of life it is quite possible that in galaxies like ours
there could be large swaths of monophyly of life over space. Thus, while
we have banished the spirit world from this problem entirely, we can now
see an even more exciting and absolutely baffling problem i.e. the
special regions, time periods and conditions in the galaxy (and the
universe at large) which act as the cocoons for the emergence of life.

2\) This leaves us with the second of the Wallacian problems that of the
origin of consciousness. This problem has certainly been the hardest of
all. To give Wallace due credit, he at least recognized the main issue
of this problem, i.e. the first person experience. However, he believes
that this is something limited to animals and absent in the “vegetable
kingdom”. At least he does better than the modern evolutionary
philosopher Dennett who denies it entirely. Even otherwise deep thinkers
like the neurobiologist VS Ramachandran feel that consciousness may be a
uniquely human “faculty”. It is in regard to this domain that the modern
biologists show at most confusion because they often tend to stumble at
the description of the problem itself. Hence, only after a proper
description is achieved can we even come to the biological facets of it.
We wonder if there could be some link between this problem and one
above, especially in the sense of autopoiesis. In conclusion, we would
just urge thinkers to attempt the thought experiment of how this problem
would have developed if vasiShTha and yAj\~navalkya had a long-line of
discerning naturalist successors who built on the foundations of their
[saMkhya evolutionary
theory](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/05/02/empedocles-and-vasishtha-agrigentum-and-mithila/).
