---
title: HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF INDIA

---
<div>

[←](../notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures/narada-bhakti-sutras.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Writings: Prose and
Poems](writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_story_of_boy_gopala.htm)

  

## HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF INDIA

OM TAT SAT

*Om Namo Bhagavate Râmakrishnâya*

नासतः सत् जायते — Existence cannot be produced by non-existence.

Non-existence can never be the cause of what exists. Something cannot
come out of nothing. That the law of causation is omnipotent and knows
no time or place when it did not exist is a doctrine as old as the Aryan
race, sung by its ancient poet-seers, formulated by its philosophers,
and made the corner-stone upon which the Hindu man even of today builds
his whole scheme of life.

There was an inquisitiveness in the race to start with, which very soon
developed into bold analysis, and though, in the first attempt, the work
turned out might be like the attempts with shaky hands of the future
master-sculptor, it very soon gave way to strict science, bold attempts,
and startling results.

Its boldness made these men search every brick of their sacrificial
altars; scan, cement, and pulverise every word of their scriptures;
arrange, re-arrange, doubt, deny, or explain the ceremonies. It turned
their gods inside out, and assigned only a secondary place to their
omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent Creator of the universe, their
ancestral Father-in-heaven; or threw Him altogether overboard as
useless, and started a world-religion without Him with even now the
largest following of any religion. It evolved the science of geometry
from the arrangements of bricks to build various altars, and startled
the world with astronomical knowledge that arose from the attempts
accurately to time their worship and oblations. It made their
contribution to the science of mathematics the largest of any race,
ancient or modern, and to their knowledge of chemistry, of metallic
compounds in medicine, their scale of musical notes, their invention of
the bow-instruments — (all) of great service in the building of modern
European civilisation. It led them to invent the science of building up
the child-mind through shining fables, of which every child in every
civilised country learns in a nursery or a school and carries an impress
through life.

Behind and before this analytical keenness, covering it as in a velvet
sheath, was the other great mental peculiarity of the race — poetic
insight. Its religion, its philosophy, its history, its ethics, its
politics were all inlaid in a flower-bed of poetic imagery — the miracle
of language which was called Sanskrit or "perfected", lending itself to
expressing and manipulating them better than any other tongue. The aid
of melodious numbers was invoked even to express the hard facts of
mathematics.

This analytical power and the boldness of poetical visions which urged
it onward are the two great internal causes in the make-up of the Hindu
race. They together formed, as it were, the keynote to the national
character. This combination is what is always making the race press
onwards beyond the senses — the secret of those speculations which are
like the steel blades the artisans used to manufacture — cutting through
bars of iron, yet pliable enough to be easily bent into a circle.

They wrought poetry in silver and gold; the symphony of jewels, the maze
of marble wonders, the music of colours, the fine fabrics which belong
more to the fairyland of dreams than to the real — have back of them
thousands of years of working of this national trait.

Arts and sciences, even the realities of domestic life, are covered with
a mass of poetical conceptions, which are pressed forward till the
sensuous touches the supersensuous and the real gets the rose-hue of the
unreal.

The earliest glimpses we have of this race show it already in the
possession of this characteristic, as an instrument of some use in its
hands. Many forms of religion and society must have been left behind in
the onward march, before we find the race as depicted in the scriptures,
the Vedas.

An organised pantheon, elaborate ceremonials, divisions of society into
hereditary classes necessitated by a variety of occupations, a great
many necessaries and a good many luxuries of life are already there.

Most modern scholars are agreed that surroundings as to climate and
conditions, purely Indian, were not yet working on the race.

Onwards through several centuries, we come to a multitude surrounded by
the snows of Himalayas on the north and the heat of the south — vast
plains, interminable forests, through which mighty rivers roll their
tides. We catch a glimpse of different races — Dravidians, Tartars, and
Aboriginals pouring in their quota of blood, of speech, of manners and
religions. And at last a great nation emerges to our view — still
keeping the type of the Aryan — stronger, broader, and more organised by
the assimilation. We find the central assimilative core giving its type
and character to the whole mass, clinging on with great pride to its
name of "Aryan", and, though willing to give other races the benefits of
its civilisation, it was by no means willing to admit them within the
"Aryan" pale.

The Indian climate again gave a higher direction to the genius of the
race. In a land where nature was propitious and yielded easy victories,
the national mind started to grapple with and conquer the higher
problems of life in the field of thought. Naturally the thinker, the
priest, became the highest class in the Indian society, and not the man
of the sword. The priests again, even at that dawn of history, put most
of their energy in elaborating rituals; and when the nation began to
find the load of ceremonies and lifeless rituals too heavy — came the
first philosophical speculations, and the royal race was the first to
break through the maze of killing rituals.

On the one hand, the majority of the priests impelled by economical
considerations were bound to defend that form of religion which made
their existence a necessity of society and assigned them the highest
place in the scale of caste; on the other hand, the king-caste, whose
strong right hand guarded and guided the nation and who now found itself
as leading in the higher thoughts also, were loath to give up the first
place to men who only knew how to conduct a ceremonial. There were then
others, recruited from both the priests and king-castes, who ridiculed
equally the ritualists and philosophers, declared spiritualism as fraud
and priestcraft, and upheld the attainment of material comforts as the
highest goal of life. The people, tired of ceremonials and wondering at
the philosophers, joined in masses the materialists. This was the
beginning of that caste question and that triangular fight in India
between ceremonials, philosophy, and materialism which has come down
unsolved to our own days.

The first solution of the difficulty attempted was by applying the
eclecticism which from the earliest days had taught the people to see in
differences the same truth in various garbs. The great leader of this
school, Krishna — himself of royal race — and his sermon, the Gitâ, have
after various vicissitudes, brought about by the upheavals of the Jains,
the Buddhists, and other sects, fairly established themselves as the
"Prophet" of India and the truest philosophy of life. Though the tension
was toned down for the time, it did not satisfy the social wants which
were among the causes — the claim of the king-race to stand first in the
scale of caste and the popular intolerance of priestly privilege.
Krishna had opened the gates of spiritual knowledge and attainment to
all irrespective of sex or caste, but he left undisturbed the same
problem on the social side. This again has come down to our own days, in
spite of the gigantic struggle of the Buddhists, Vaishnavas, etc. to
attain social equality for all.

Modern India admits spiritual equality of all souls — but strictly keeps
the social difference.

Thus we find the struggle renewed all along the line in the seventh
century before the Christian era and finally in the sixth, overwhelming
the ancient order of things under Shâkya Muni, the Buddha. In their
reaction against the privileged priesthood, Buddhists swept off almost
every bit of the old ritual of the Vedas, subordinated the gods of the
Vedas to the position of servants to their own human saints, and
declared the "Creator and Supreme Ruler" as an invention of priestcraft
and superstition.

But the aim of Buddhism was reform of the Vedic religion by standing
against ceremonials requiring offerings of animals, against hereditary
caste and exclusive priesthood, and against belief in permanent souls.
It never attempted to destroy that religion, or overturn the social
order. It introduced a vigorous method by organising a class of
Sannyâsins into a strong monastic brotherhood, and the Brahmavâdinis
into a body of nuns — by introducing images of saints in the place of
altar-fires.

It is probable that the reformers had for centuries the majority of the
Indian people with them. The older forces were never entirely pacified,
but they underwent a good deal of modification during the centuries of
Buddhistic supremacy.

In ancient India the centres of national life were always the
intellectual and spiritual and not political. Of old, as now, political
and social power has been always subordinated to spiritual and
intellectual. The outburst of national life was round colleges of sages
and spiritual teachers. We thus find the Samitis of the Panchâlas, of
the Kâshyas (of Varanasi), the Maithilas standing out as great centres
of spiritual culture and philosophy, even in the Upanishads. Again these
centres in turn became the focus of political ambition of the various
divisions of the Aryans.

The great epic Mahâbhârata tells us of the war of the Kurus and
Panchalas for supremacy over the nation, in which they destroyed each
other. The spiritual supremacy veered round and centred in the East
among the Magadhas and Maithilas, and after the Kuru-Panchala war a sort
of supremacy was obtained by the kings of Magadha.

The Buddhist reformation and its chief field of activity were also in
the same eastern region; and when the Maurya kings, forced possibly by
the bar sinister on their escutcheon, patronised and led the new
movement, the new priest power joined hands with the political power of
the empire of Pataliputra. The popularity of Buddhism and its fresh
vigour made the Maurya kings the greatest emperors that India ever had.
The power of the Maurya sovereigns made Buddhism that world-wide
religion that we see even today.

The exclusiveness of the old form of Vedic religions debarred it from
taking ready help from outside. At the same time it kept it pure and
free from many debasing elements which Buddhism in its propagandist zeal
was forced to assimilate.

This extreme adaptability in the long run made Indian Buddhism lose
almost all its individuality, and extreme desire to be of the people
made it unfit to cope with the intellectual forces of the mother
religion in a few centuries. The Vedic party in the meanwhile got rid of
a good deal of its most objectionable features, as animal sacrifice, and
took lessons from the rival daughter in the judicious use of images,
temple processions, and other impressive performances, and stood ready
to take within her fold the whole empire of Indian Buddhism, already
tottering to its fall.

And the crash came with the Scythian invasions and the total destruction
of the empire of Pataliputra.

The invaders, already incensed at the invasion of their central Asiatic
home by the preachers of Buddhism, found in the sun-worship of the
Brahmins a great sympathy with their own solar religion — and when the
Brahminist party were ready to adapt and spiritualise many of the
customs of the new-comers, the invaders threw themselves heart and soul
into the Brahminic cause.

Then there is a veil of darkness and shifting shadows; there are tumults
of war, rumours of massacres; and the next scene rises upon a new phase
of things.

The empire of Magadha was gone. Most of northern India was under the
rule of petty chiefs always at war with one another. Buddhism was almost
extinct except in some eastern and Himalayan provinces and in the
extreme south and the nation after centuries of struggle against the
power of a hereditary priesthood awoke to find itself in the clutches of
a double priesthood of hereditary Brahmins and exclusive monks of the
new regime, with all the powers of the Buddhistic organisation and
without their sympathy for the people.

A renascent India, bought by the velour and blood of the heroic Rajputs,
defined by the merciless intellect of a Brahmin from the same historical
thought-centre of Mithila, led by a new philosophical impulse organised
by Shankara and his bands of Sannyasins, and beautified by the arts and
literature of the courts of Mâlavâ — arose on the ruins of the old.

The task before it was profound, problems vaster than any their
ancestors had ever faced. A comparatively small and compact race of the
same blood and speech and the same social and religious aspiration,
trying to save its unity by unscalable walls around itself, grew huge by
multiplication and addition during the Buddhistic supremacy; and (it)
was divided by race, colour, speech, spiritual instinct, and social
ambitions into hopelessly jarring factions. And this had to be unified
and welded into one gigantic nation. This task Buddhism had also come to
solve, and had taken it up when the proportions were not so vast.

So long it was a question of Aryanising the other types that were
pressing for admission and thus, out of different elements, making a
huge Aryan body. In spite of concessions and compromises, Buddhism was
eminently successful and remained the national religion of India. But
the time came when the allurements of sensual forms of worship,
indiscriminately taken in along with various low races, were too
dangerous for the central Aryan core, and a longer contact would
certainly have destroyed the civilisation of the Aryans. Then came a
natural reaction for self-preservation, and Buddhism and separate sect
ceased to live in most parts of its land of birth.

The reaction-movement, led in close succession by Kumârila in the north,
and Shankara and Râmânuja in the south, has become the last embodiment
of that vast accumulation of sects and doctrines and rituals called
Hinduism. For the last thousand years or more, its great task has been
assimilation, with now and then an outburst of reformation. This
reaction first wanted to revive the rituals of the Vedas — failing
which, it made the Upanishads or the philosophic portions of the Vedas
its basis. It brought Vyasa's system of Mimâmsâ philosophy and Krishna's
sermon, the Gita, to the forefront; and all succeeding movements have
followed the same. The movement of Shankara forced its way through its
high intellectuality; but it could be of little service to the masses,
because of its adherence to strict caste-laws, very small scope for
ordinary emotion, and making Sanskrit the only vehicle of communication.
Ramanuja on the other hand, with a most practical philosophy, a great
appeal to the emotions, an entire denial of birthrights before spiritual
attainments, and appeals through the popular tongue completely succeeded
in bringing the masses back to the Vedic religion.

The northern reaction of ritualism was followed by the fitful glory of
the Malava empire. With the destruction of that in a short time,
northern India went to sleep as it were, for a long period, to be rudely
awakened by the thundering onrush of Mohammedan cavalry across the
passes of Afghanistan. In the south, however, the spiritual upheaval of
Shankara and Ramanuja was followed by the usual Indian sequence of
united races and powerful empires. It was the home of refuge of Indian
religion and civilisation, when northern India from sea to sea lay bound
at the feet of Central Asiatic conquerors. The Mohammedan tried for
centuries to subjugate the south, but can scarcely be said to have got
even a strong foothold; and when the strong and united empire of the
Moguls was very near completing its conquest, the hills and plateaus of
the south poured in their bands of fighting peasant horsemen, determined
to die for the religion which Râmdâs preached and Tukâ sang; and in a
short time the gigantic empire of the Moguls was only a name.

The movements in northern India during the Mohammedan period are
characterised by their uniform attempt to hold the masses back from
joining the religion of the conquerors — which brought in its train
social and spiritual equality for all.

The friars of the orders founded by Râmânanda, Kabir, Dâdu, Chaitanya,
or Nânak were all agreed in preaching the equality of man, however
differing from each other in philosophy. Their energy was for the most
part spent in checking the rapid conquest of Islam among the masses, and
they had very little left to give birth to new thoughts and aspirations.
Though evidently successful in their purpose of keeping the masses
within the fold of the old religion, and tempering the fanaticism of the
Mohammedans, they were mere apologists, struggling to obtain permission
to live.

One great prophet, however, arose in the north, Govind Singh, the last
Guru of the Sikhs, with creative genius; and the result of his spiritual
work was followed by the well-known political organisation of the Sikhs.
We have seen throughout the history of India, a spiritual upheaval is
almost always succeeded by a political unity extending over more or less
area of the continent, which in its turn helps to strengthen the
spiritual aspiration that brings it to being. But the spiritual
aspiration that preceded the rise of the Mahratta or the Sikh empire was
entirely reactionary. We seek in vain to find in the court of Poona or
Lahore even a ray of reflection of that intellectual glory which
surrounded the courts of the Muguls, much less the brilliance of Malava
or Vidyânagara. It was intellectually the darkest period of Indian
history; and both these meteoric empires, representing the upheaval of
mass-fanaticism and hating culture with all their hearts, lost all their
motive power as soon as they had succeeded in destroying the rule of the
hated Mohammedans.

Then there came again a period of confusion. Friends and foes, the Mogul
empire and its destroyers, and the till then peaceful foreign traders,
French and English, all joined in a mêlée of fight. For more than half a
century there was nothing but war and pillage and destruction. And when
the smoke and dust cleared, England was stalking victorious over the
rest. There has been half a century of peace and law and order under the
sway of Britain. Time alone will prove if it is the order of progress or
not.

There have been a few religious movements amongst the Indian people
during the British rule, following the same line that was taken up by
northern Indian sects during the sway of the empire of Delhi. They are
the voices of the dead or the dying — the feeble tones of a terrorised
people, pleading for permission to live. They are ever eager to adjust
their spiritual or social surroundings according to the tastes of the
conquerors — if they are only left the right to live, especially the
sects under the English domination, in which social differences with the
conquering race are more glaring than the spiritual. The Hindu sects of
the century seem to have set one ideal of truth before them — the
approval of their English masters. No wonder that these sects have
mushroom lives to live. The vast body of the Indian people religiously
hold aloof from them, and the only popular recognition they get is the
jubilation of the people when they die.

But possibly, for some time yet, it cannot be otherwise.

</div>
