---
title: HINDUISM AND SHRI RAMAKRISHNA

---
<div>

[←](on_the_seas_bosom.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Writings: Prose and
Poems](writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_bengali_language.htm)

  

## HINDUISM AND SHRI RAMAKRISHNA

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6003_hindu_religion.pdf)* )

By the word "Shastras" the Vedas without beginning or end are meant. In
matters of religious duty the Vedas are the only capable authority.

The Puranas and other religious scriptures are all denoted by the word
"Smriti". And their authority goes so far as they follow the Vedas and
do not contradict them.

Truth is of two kinds: (1) that which is cognisable by the five ordinary
senses of man, and by reasonings based thereon; (2) that which is
cognisable by the subtle, supersensuous power of Yoga.

Knowledge acquired by the first means is called science; and knowledge
acquired by the second is called the Vedas.

The whole body of supersensuous truths, having no beginning or end, and
called by the name of the Vedas, is ever-existent. The Creator Himself
is creating, preserving, and destroying the universe with the help of
these truths.

The person in whom this supersensuous power is manifested is called a
Rishi, and the supersensuous truths which he realises by this power are
called the Vedas.

This Rishihood, this power of supersensuous perception of the Vedas, is
real religion. And so long as this does not develop in the life of an
initiate, so long is religion a mere empty word to him, and it is to be
understood that he has not taken yet the first step in religion.

The authority of the Vedas extends to all ages, climes and persons; that
is to say, their application is not confined to any particular place,
time, and persons.

The Vedas are the only exponent of the universal religion.

Although the supersensuous vision of truths is to be met with in some
measure in our Puranas and Itihasas and in the religious scriptures of
other races, still the fourfold scripture known among the Aryan race as
the Vedas being the first, the most complete, and the most undistorted
collection of spiritual truths, deserve to occupy the highest place
among all scriptures, command the respect of all nations of the earth,
and furnish the rationale of all their respective scriptures.

With regard to the whole Vedic collection of truths discovered by the
Aryan race, this also has to be understood that those portions alone
which do not refer to purely secular matters and which do not merely
record tradition or history, or merely provide incentives to duty, form
the Vedas in the real sense.

The Vedas are divided into two portions, the Jnâna-kânda
(knowledge-portion) and the Karma-kânda (ritual-portion). The ceremonies
and the fruits of the Karma-kanda are confined within the limits of the
world of Mâyâ, and therefore they have been undergoing and will undergo
transformation according to the law of change which operates through
time, space, and personality.

Social laws and customs likewise, being based on this Karma-kanda, have
been changing and will continue to change hereafter. Minor social usages
also will be recognised and accepted when they are compatible with the
spirit of the true scriptures and the conduct and example of holy sages.
But blind allegiance only to usages such as are repugnant to the spirit
of the Shastras and the conduct of holy sages has been one of the main
causes of the downfall of the Aryan race.

It is the Jnana-kanda or the Vedanta only that has for all time
commanded recognition for leading men across Maya and bestowing
salvation on them through the practice of Yoga, Bhakti, Jnana, or
selfless work; and as its validity and authority remain unaffected by
any limitations of time, place or persons, it is the only exponent of
the universal and eternal religion for all mankind.

The Samhitas of Manu and other sages, following the lines laid down in
the Karma-kanda, have mainly ordained rules of conduct conducive to
social welfare, according to the exigencies of time, place, and persons.
The Puranas etc. have taken up the truths imbedded in the Vedanta and
have explained them in detail in the course of describing the exalted
life and deeds of Avataras and others. They have each emphasised,
besides, some out of the infinite aspects of the Divine Lord to teach
men about them.

But when by the process of time, fallen from the true ideals and rules
of conduct and devoid of the spirit of renunciation, addicted only to
blind usages, and degraded in intellect, the descendants of the Aryans
failed to appreciate even the spirit of these Puranas etc. which taught
men of ordinary intelligence the abstruse truths of the Vedanta in
concrete form and diffuse language and appeared antagonistic to one
another on the surface, because of each inculcating with special
emphasis only particular aspects of the spiritual ideal —

And when, as a consequence, they reduced India, the fair land of
religion, to a scene of almost infernal confusion by breaking up
piecemeal the one Eternal Religion of the Vedas (Sanâtana Dharma), the
grand synthesis of all the aspects of the spiritual ideal, into
conflicting sects and by seeking to sacrifice one another in the flames
of sectarian hatred and intolerance —

Then it was that Shri Bhagavan Ramakrishna incarnated himself in India,
to demonstrate what the true religion of the Aryan race is; to show
where amidst all its many divisions and offshoots, scattered over the
land in the course of its immemorial history, lies the true unity of the
Hindu religion, which by its overwhelming number of sects discordant to
superficial view, quarrelling constantly with each other and abounding
in customs divergent in every way, has constituted itself a misleading
enigma for our countrymen and the butt of contempt for foreigners; and
above all, to hold up before men, for their lasting welfare, as a living
embodiment of the Sanatana Dharma, his own wonderful life into which he
infused the universal spirit and character of this Dharma, so long cast
into oblivion by the process of time.

In order to show how the Vedic truths — eternally existent as the
instrument with the Creator in His work of creation, preservation, and
dissolution — reveal themselves spontaneously in the minds of the Rishis
purified from all impressions of worldly attachment, and because such
verification and confirmation of the scriptural truths will help the
revival, reinstatement, and spread of religion — the Lord, though the
very embodiment of the Vedas, in this His new incarnation has thoroughly
discarded all external forms of learning.

That the Lord incarnates again and again in human form for the
protection of the Vedas or the true religion, and of Brahminhood or the
ministry of that religion — is a doctrine well established in the
Puranas etc.

The waters of a river falling in a cataract acquire greater velocity,
the rising wave after a hollow swells higher; so after every spell of
decline, the Aryan society recovering from all the evils by the merciful
dispensation of Providence has risen the more glorious and powerful —
such is the testimony of history.

After rising from every fall, our revived society is expressing more and
more its innate eternal perfection, and so also the omnipresent Lord in
each successive incarnation is manifesting Himself more and more.

Again and again has our country fallen into a swoon, as it were, and
again and again has India's Lord, by the manifestation of Himself,
revivified her.

But greater than the present deep dismal night, now almost over, no pall
of darkness had ever before enveloped this holy land of ours. And
compared with the depth of this fall, all previous falls appear like
little hoof-marks.

Therefore, before the effulgence of this new awakening' the glory of all
past revivals in her history will pale like stars before the rising sun;
and compared with this mighty manifestation of renewed strength, all the
many past epochs of such restoration will be as child's play.

The various constituent ideals of the Religion Eternal, during its
present state of decline, have been lying scattered here and there for
want of competent men to realise them — some being preserved partially
among small sects and some completely lost.

But strong in the strength of this new spiritual renaissance, men, after
reorganising these scattered and disconnected spiritual ideals, will be
able to comprehend and practice them in their own lives and also to
recover from oblivion those that are lost. And as the sure pledge of
this glorious future, the all-merciful Lord has manifested in the
present age, as stated above, an incarnation which in point of
completeness in revelation, its synthetic harmonising of all ideals, and
its promoting of every sphere of spiritual culture, surpasses the
manifestations of all past ages.

So at the very dawn of this momentous epoch, the reconciliation of all
aspects and ideals of religious thought and worship is being proclaimed;
this boundless, all embracing idea had been lying inherent, but so long
concealed, in the Religion Eternal and its scriptures, and now
rediscovered, it is being declared to humanity in a trumpet voice.

This epochal new dispensation is the harbinger of great good to the
whole world, specially to India; and the inspirer of this dispensation,
Shri Bhagavan Ramakrishna, is the reformed and remodelled manifestation
of all the past great epoch-makers in religion. O man, have faith in
this, and lay to heart.

The dead never return; the past night does not reappear; a spent-up
tidal wave does not rise anew; neither does man inhabit the same body
over again. So from the worship of the dead past, O man, we invite you
to the worship of the living present; from the regretful brooding over
bygones, we invite you to the activities of the present; from the waste
of energy in retracing lost and demolished pathways, we call you back to
broad new-laid highways lying very near. He that is wise, let him
understand.

Of that power, which at the very first impulse has roused distant echoes
from all the four quarters of the globe, conceive in your mind the
manifestation in its fullness; and discarding all idle misgivings,
weaknesses, and the jealousies characteristic of enslaved peoples, come
and help in the turning of this mighty wheel of new dispensation!

With the conviction firmly rooted in your heart that you are the
servants of the Lord, His children, helpers in the fulfilment of His
purpose, enter the arena of work.

</div>
