---
title: SHIVA'S DEMON

---
<div>

[←](matter_for_serious_thought.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Writings: Prose and
Poems](writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm)
/ [→](../epistles_second_series/001_sir.htm)

  

## SHIVA'S DEMON

(This incomplete story was found among Swamiji's papers after he had
passed away. It is printed as the last article in the
[Bengali](6042_shivas_demon.pdf) book *Bhâbbâr Kathâ*.)

Baron K— lived in a district of Germany. Born in all aristocratic
family, he inherited high rank, honour and wealth even in early youth;
besides, he was highly cultured and endowed with many accomplishments. A
good many charming, affluent, and young women of rank craved for his
love. And which father or mother does not wish for a son-in-law of such
parts, culture, handsomeness, social position, lineage, and youthful
age? An aristocratic beauty had attracted Baron K— also, but the
marriage was still far off. In spite of all rank and wealth, Baron K—
had none to call his own, except a sister who was exquisitely beautiful
and educated. The Baron had taken a vow that he would marry only after
his sister had chosen her fiancé and the marriage celebrated with due
éclat and rich dowries from him. She had been the apple of her parents'
eyes. Baron K— did not want to enjoy a married life, before her wedding.
Besides, the custom in this Western country is that the son does not
live in his father's or in any relative's family after marriage; the
couple live separately. It may be possible for the husband to live with
his wife in his father-in-law's house but a wife will never live in her
father-in-law's. So K— postponed his marriage till his sister's.

\*    \*    \*

For some months K— had no news of his sister. Foregoing the life of
ease, comfort, and happiness in a palace served by a big retinue, and
snatching herself from the affection of her only brother, she had
absconded. All search had been in vain. That brought K— untold sorrow.
He had no more any relish for the pleasures of life; he was ever unhappy
and dejected. His relatives now gave up all hope of the sister's return,
and tried to make the Baron cheerful. They were very anxious about him,
and his fiancee was ever full of apprehension.

\*    \*    \*

It was the time of the Paris Exhibition. The *élite* of all countries
assembled there. The art-treasures, and artistic products were brought
to Paris from all quarters. Baron K—'s relatives advised him to go to
Paris where his despondent heart would regain its normal health and
buoyancy, once it was in contact with that active, invigorating current
of joy. The Baron bowed down to their wishes and started for Paris with
his friends.

</div>
