---
title: WORK WITHOUT MOTIVE

---
<div>

[←](work_is_worship.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](sadhanas_or_preparations_for_higher_life.htm)

  

## WORK WITHOUT MOTIVE

At the forty-second meeting of the Ramakrishna Mission held at the
premises No. 57 Râmkânta Bose Street, Baghbazar, Calcutta, on the 20th
March, 1898, Swami Vivekananda gave an address on "Work without Motive",
and spoke to the following effect:

When the Gita was first preached, there was then going on a great
controversy between two sects. One party considered the Vedic Yajnas and
animal sacrifices and such like Karmas to constitute the whole of
religion. The other preached that the killing of numberless horses and
cattle cannot be called religion. The people belonging to the latter
party were mostly Sannyâsins and followers of Jnâna. They believed that
the giving up of all work and the gaining of the knowledge of the Self
was the only path to Moksha By the preaching of His great doctrine of
work without motive, the Author of the Gita set at rest the disputes of
these two antagonistic sects.

Many are of opinion that the Gita was not written at the time of the
Mahâbhârata, but was subsequently added to it. This is not correct. The
special teachings of the Gita are to be found in every part of the
Mahabharata, and if the Gita is to be expunged, as forming no part of
it, every other portion of it which embodies the same teachings should
be similarly treated.

Now, what is the meaning of working without motive? Nowadays many
understand it in the sense that one is to work in such a way that
neither pleasure nor pain touches his mind. If this be its real meaning,
then the animals might be said to work without motive. Some animals
devour their own offspring, and they do not feel any pangs at all in
doing so. Robbers ruin other people by robbing them of their
possessions; but if they feel quite callous to pleasure or pain, then
they also would be working without motive. If the meaning of it be such,
then one who has a stony heart, the worst of criminals, might be
considered to be working without motive. The walls have no feelings of
pleasure or pain, neither has a stone, and it cannot be said that they
are working without motive. In the above sense the doctrine is a potent
instrument in the hands of the wicked. They would go on doing wicked
deeds, and would pronounce themselves as working without a motive. If
such be the significance of working without a motive, then a fearful
doctrine has been put forth by the preaching of the Gita. Certainly this
is not the meaning. Furthermore, if we look into the lives of those who
were connected with the preaching of the Gita, we should find them
living quite a different life. Arjuna killed Bhishma and Drona in
battle, but withal, he sacrificed all his self-interest and desires and
his lower self millions of times.

Gita teaches Karma-Yoga. We should work through Yoga (concentration). In
such concentration in action (Karma-Yoga), there is no consciousness of
the lower ego present. The consciousness that I am doing this and that
is never present when one works through Yoga. The Western people do not
understand this. They say that if there be no consciousness of ego, if
this ego is gone, how then can a man work? But when one works with
concentration, losing all consciousness of oneself the work that is done
will be infinitely better, and this every one may have experienced in
his own life. We perform many works subconsciously, such as the
digestion of food etc., many others consciously, and others again by
becoming immersed in Samâdhi as it were, when there is no consciousness
of the smaller ego. If the painter, losing the consciousness of his ego,
becomes completely immersed in his painting, he will be able to produce
masterpieces. The good cook concentrates his whole self on the
food-material he handles; he loses all other consciousness for the time
being. But they are only able to do perfectly a single work in this way,
to which they are habituated. The Gita teaches that all works should be
done thus. He who is one with the Lord through Yoga performs all his
works by becoming immersed in concentration, and does not seek any
personal benefit. Such a performance of work brings only good to the
world, no evil can come out of it. Those who work thus never do anything
for themselves.

The result of every work is mixed with good and evil. There is no good
work that has not a touch of evil in it. Like smoke round the fire, some
evil always clings to work. We should engage in such works as bring the
largest amount of good and the smallest measure of evil. Arjuna killed
Bhishma and Drona; if this had not been done Duryodhana could not have
been conquered, the force of evil would have triumphed over the force of
good, and thus a great calamity would have fallen on the country. The
government of the country would have been usurped by a body of proud
unrighteous kings, to the great misfortune of the people. Similarly,
Shri Krishna killed Kamsa, Jarâsandha, and others who were tyrants, but
not a single one of his deeds was done for himself. Every one of them
was for the good of others. We are reading the Gita by candle-light, but
numbers of insects are being burnt to death. Thus it is seen that some
evil clings to work. Those who work without any consciousness of their
lower ego are not affected with evil, for they work for the good of the
world. To work without motive, to work unattached, brings the highest
bliss and freedom. This secret of Karma-Yoga is taught by the Lord Shri
Krishna in the Gita.

</div>
