---
title: SADHANAS OR PREPARATIONS FOR HIGHER LIFE

---
<div>

[←](work_without_motive.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_cosmos_and_the_self.htm)

  

## SADHANAS OR PREPARATIONS FOR HIGHER LIFE

If atavism gains, you go down; if evolution gains, you go on. Therefore,
we must not allow atavism to take place. Here, in my own body, is the
first work of the study. We are too busy trying to mend the ways of our
neighbours, that is the difficulty. We must begin with our own bodies.
The heart, the liver, etc., are all atavistic; bring them back into
consciousness, control them, so that they will obey your commands and
act up to your wishes. There was a time when we had control of the
liver; we could shake the whole skin, as can the cow. I have seen many
people bring the control back by sheer hard practice. Once an impress is
made, it is there. Bring back all the submerged activities — the vast
ocean of action. This is the first part of the great study, and it is
absolutely necessary for our social well-being. On the other hand, only
the consciousness need not be studied all the time.

Then there is the other part of study, not so necessary in our social
life, which tends to liberation. Its direct action is to free the soul,
to take the torch into the gloom, to clean out what is behind, to shake
it up or even defy it, and to make us march onward piercing the gloom.
That is the goal — the superconscious. Then when that state is reached,
this very man becomes divine, becomes free. And to the mind thus trained
to transcend all, gradually this universe will begin to give up its
secrets; the book of nature will be read chapter after chapter, till the
goal is attained, and we pass from this valley of life and death to that
One, where death and life do not exist, and we know the Real and become
the Real.

The first thing necessary is a quiet and peaceable life. If I have to go
about the world the whole day to make a living, it is hard for me to
attain to anything very high in this life. Perhaps in another life I
shall be born under more propitious circumstances. But if I am earnest
enough, these very circumstances will change even in this birth. Was
there anything you did not get which you really wanted? It could not be.
For it is the want that creates the body. It is the light that has bored
the holes, as it were, in your head, called the eyes. If the light had
not existed, you would have had no eyes. It is sound that had made the
ears. The object of perception existed first, before you made the organ.
In a few hundred thousand years or earlier, we may have other organs to
perceive electricity and other things. There is no desire for a peaceful
mind. Desire will not come unless there is something outside to fulfil
it. The outside something just bores a hole in the body, as it were, and
tries to get into the mind. So, when the desire will arise to have a
peaceful, quiet life, that *shall come* where everything shall be
propitious for the development of the mind — you may take that as my
experience. It may come after thousands of lives, but it must come. Hold
on to that, the desire. You cannot have the strong desire if its object
was not outside for you already. Of course you must understand, there is
a difference between desire and desire. The master said, "My child, if
you desire after God, God shall come to you." The disciple did not
understand his master fully. One day both went to bathe in a river, and
the master said, "Plunge in", and the boy did so. In a moment the master
was upon him, holding him down. He would not let the boy come up. When
the boy struggled and was exhausted, he let him go. "Yes, my child, how
did you feel there;" "Oh, the desire for a breath of air!" "Do you have
that kind of desire for God?" "No, sir." "Have that kind of desire for
God and you shall have God."

That, without which we cannot live, must come to us. If it did not come
to us, life could not go on.

If you want to be a Yogi, you must be free and place yourself in
circumstances where you are alone and free from all anxiety. He who
desires for a comfortable and nice life and at the same time wants to
realise the Self is like the fool who, wanting to cross the river,
caught hold of a crocodile mistaking it for a log of wood. "Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you." Unto him everything who does not care for
anything. Fortune is like a flirt; she cares not for him who wants her,
but she is at the feet of him who does not care for her. Money comes and
showers itself upon one who does not care for it; so does fame come in
abundance until it is a trouble and a burden. They always come to the
Master. The slave never gets anything. The Master is he who can live in
spite of them, whose life does not depend upon the little, foolish
things of the world. Live for an ideal, and that one ideal alone. Let it
be so great, so strong, that there may be nothing else left in the mind;
no place for anything else, no time for anything else.

How some people give all their energies, time, brain, body, and
everything, to become rich! They have no time for breakfast! Early in
the morning they are out and at work! They die in the attempt — ninety
per cent of them — and the rest when they make money, cannot enjoy it.
That is grand! I do not say it is bad to try to be rich. It is
marvellous, wonderful. Why, what does it show? It shows that one can
have the same amount of energy and struggle for freedom as one has for
money. We know we have to give up money and all other things when we
die, and yet, see the amount of energy we can put forth for them. But
we, the same human beings, should we not put forth a thousandfold more
strength and energy to acquire that which never fades, but which remains
to us for ever? For this is the one great friend, our own good deeds,
our own spiritual excellence, that follows us beyond the grave.
Everything else is left behind here with the body.

That is the one great first step — the real desire for the ideal.
Everything comes easy after that. That the Indian mind found out; there,
in India, men go to any length to find truth. But here, in the West, the
difficulty is that everything is made so easy. It is not truth, but
development, that is the great aim. The struggle is the great lesson.
Mind you, the great benefit in this life is struggle. It is through that
we pass. If there is any road to Heaven, it is through Hell. Through
Hell to Heaven is always the way. When the soul has wrestled with
circumstance and has met death, a thousand times death on the way, but
nothing daunted has struggled forward again and again and yet again —
then the soul comes out as a giant and laughs at the ideal he has been
struggling for, because he finds how much greater is he than the ideal.
I am the end, my own Self, and nothing else, for what is there to
compare to me own Self? Can a bag of gold be the ideal of my Soul?
Certainly not! My Soul is the highest ideal that I can have. Realising
my own real nature is the one goal of my life.

There is nothing that is absolutely evil. The devil has a place here as
well as God, else he would not be here. Just as I told you, it is
through Hell that we pass to Heaven. Our mistakes have places here. Go
on! Do not look back if you think you have done something that is not
right. Now, do you believe you could be what you are today, had you not
made those mistakes before? Bless your mistakes, then. They have been
angels unawares. Blessed be torture! Blessed be happiness! Do not care
what be your lot. Hold on to the ideal. March on! Do not look back upon
little mistakes and things. In this battlefield of ours, the dust of
mistakes must be raised. Those who are so thin-skinned that they cannot
bear the dust, let them get out of the ranks.

So, then, this tremendous determination to struggle a hundredfold more
determination than that which you put forth to gain anything which
belongs to this life, is the first great preparation.

And then along with it, there must be meditation Meditation is the one
thing. Meditate! The greatest thing is meditation. It is the nearest
approach to spiritual life — the mind meditating. It is the one moment
in our daily life that we are not at all material — the Soul thinking of
Itself, free from all matter — this marvellous touch of the Soul!

The body is our enemy, and yet is our friend. Which of you can bear the
sight of misery? And which of you cannot do so when you see it only as a
painting? Because it is unreal, we do not identify ourselves with it,
eve know it is only a painting; it cannot bless us, it cannot hurt us.
The most terrible misery painted upon a piece of canvas, we may even
enjoy; we praise the technique of the artist, we wonder at his
marvellous genius, even though the scene he paints is most horrible.
That is the secret; that non-attachment. Be the Witness.

No breathing, no physical training of Yoga, nothing is of any use until
you reach to the idea, "I am the Witness." Say, when the tyrant hand is
on your neck, "I am the Witness! I am the Witness!" Say, "I am the
Spirit! Nothing external can touch me." When evil thoughts arise, repeat
that, give that sledge-hammer blow on their heads, "I am the Spirit! I
am the Witness, the Ever-Blessed! I have no reason to do, no reason to
suffer, I have finished with everything, I am the Witness. I am in my
picture gallery — this universe is my museum, I am looking at these
successive paintings. They are all beautiful. Whether good or evil. I
see the marvellous skill, but it is all one. Infinite flames of the
Great Painter!" Really speaking, there is naught — neither volition, nor
desire. He is all. He — She — the Mother, is playing, and we are like
dolls, Her helpers in this play. Here, She puts one now in the garb of a
beggar, another moment in the garb of a king, the next moment in the
garb of a saint, and again in the garb of a devil. We are putting on
different garbs to help the Mother Spirit in Her play.

When the baby is at play, she will not come even if called by her
mother. But when she finishes her play, she will rush to her mother, and
will have no play. So there come moments in our life, when we feel our
play is finished, and we want to rush to the Mother. Then all our toil
here will be of no value; men, women, and children — wealth, name, and
fame, joys and glories of life — punishments and successes — will be no
more, and the whole life will seem like a show. We shall see only the
infinite rhythm going on, endless and purposeless, going we do not know
where. Only this much shall we say; our play is done.

</div>
