---
title: THE SANNYASIN AND THE HOUSEHOLDER

---
<div>

[←](the_sannyasin.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_evils_of_adhikarivada.htm)

  

## THE SANNYASIN AND THE HOUSEHOLDER

The men of the world should have no voice in the affairs of the
Sannyâsins. The Sannyasin should have nothing to do with the rich, his
duty is with the poor. He should treat the poor with loving care and
serve them joyfully with all his might. To pay respects to the rich and
hang on them for support has been the bane of all the Sannyasin
communities of our country. A true Sannyasin should scrupulously avoid
that. Such conduct becomes a public woman rather than one who professes
to have renounced the world. How should a man immersed in Kâma-Kânchana
(lust and greed) become a devotee of one whose central ideal is the
renunciation of Kama-Kanchana? Shri Ramakrishna wept and prayed to the
Divine Mother to send him such a one to talk with as would not have in
him the slightest tinge of Kama-Kanchana; for he would say, "My lips
burn when I talk with the worldly-minded." He also used to say that he
could not even bear the touch of the worldly-minded and the impure. That
King of Sannyasins (Shri Ramakrishna) can never be preached by men of
the world. The latter can never be perfectly sincere; for he cannot but
have some selfish motives to serve. If Bhagavân (God) incarnates Himself
as a householder, I can never believe Him to be sincere. When a
householder takes the position of the leader of a religious sect, he
begins to serve his own interests in the name of principle, hiding the
former in the garb of the latter, and the result is the sect becomes
rotten to the core. All religious movements headed by householders have
shared the same fate. Without renunciation religion can never stand.

Here Swamiji was asked — What are we Sannyasins to understand by
renunciation of Kanchana (wealth)? He answered as follows:

With a view to certain ends we have to adopt certain means. These means
vary according to the conditions of time, place, individual, etc.; but
the end always remains unaltered. In the case of the Sannyasin, the end
is the liberation of the Self and doing good to humanity — "आत्मनो
मोक्षार्थं जगद्धिताय च"; and of the ways to attain it, the renunciation
of Kama-Kanchana is the most important. Remember, renunciation consists
in the total absence of all selfish motives and not in mere abstinence
from external contact, such as avoiding to touch one's money kept with
another at the same time enjoying all its benefits. Would that be
renunciation? For accomplishing the two above-mentioned ends, the
begging excursion would be a great help to a Sannyasin at a time when
the householders strictly obeyed the injunctions of Manu and other
law-givers, by setting apart every day a portion of their meal for
ascetic guests. Nowadays things have changed considerably, especially,
as in Bengal, where no Mâdhukari[1](#fn1) system prevails. Here it would
be mere waste of energy to try to live on Madhukari, and you would
profit nothing by it. The injunction of Bhikshâ (begging) is a means to
serve the above two ends, which will not be served by that way now. It
does not, therefore, go against the principle of renunciation under such
circumstances if a Sannyasin provides for mere necessaries of life and
devotes all his energy to the accomplishment of his ends for which he
took Sannyasa. Attaching too much importance ignorantly to the means
brings confusion. The end should never be lost sight of.

1.  [^](#txt1)Literally, 'bee-like'. The system of begging one's food
    piecemeal from several houses, so as not to tax the householder, as
    a bee gathers honey from different flowers.

</div>
