---
title: ON BHAKTI-YOGA

---
<div>

[←](the_evils_of_adhikarivada.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](ishvara_and_brahman.htm)

  

## ON BHAKTI-YOGA

The dualist thinks you cannot be moral unless you have a God with a rod
in His hand, ready to punish you. How is that? Suppose a horse had to
give us a lecture on morality, one of those very wretched cab-horses who
move only with the whip, to which he has become accustomed. He begins to
speak about human beings and says that they must be very immoral. Why?
"Because I know they are not whipped regularly." The fear of the whip
only makes one more immoral.

You all say there is a God and that He is an omnipresent Being. Close
your eyes and think what He is. What do you find? Either you are
thinking, in bringing the idea of omnipresence in your mind, of the sea,
or the blue sky, or an expanse of meadow, or such things as you have
seen in your life. If that is so, you do not mean anything by
omnipresent God; it has no meaning at all to you. So with every other
attribute of God. What idea have we of omnipotence or omniscience? We
have none. Religion is realising, and I shall call you a worshipper of
God when you have become able to realise the Idea. Before that it is the
spelling of words and no more. It is this power of realisation that
makes religion; no amount of doctrines or philosophies, or ethical
books, that you may have stuffed into your brain, will matter much —
only what you *are* and what you have *realised*.

The Personal God is the same Absolute looked at through the haze of
Mâyâ. When we approach Him with the five senses, we can see Him only as
the Personal God. The idea is that the Self cannot be objectified. How
can the Knower know Itself ? But It can cast a shadow, as it were, if
that can be called objectification. So the highest form of that shadow,
that attempt at objectifying Itself, is the Personal God. The Self is
the eternal subject, and we are struggling all the time to objectify
that Self. And out of that struggle has come this phenomenal universe
and what we call matter, and so on. But these are very weak attempts,
and the highest objectification of the Self possible to us is the
Personal God. This objectification is an attempt to reveal our own
nature. According to the Sânkhya, nature is showing all these
experiences to the soul, and when it has got real experience it will
know its own nature. According to the Advaita Vedantist, the soul is
struggling to reveal itself. After long struggle, it finds that the
subject must always remain the subject; and then begins non-attachment,
and it becomes free.

When a man has reached that perfect state, he is of the same nature as
the Personal God. "I and my Father are one." He knows that he is one
with Brahman, the Absolute, and projects himself as the Personal God
does. He plays — as even the mightiest of kings may sometimes play with
dolls.

Some imaginations help to break the bondage of the rest. The whole
universe is imagination, but one set of imaginations will cure another
set. Those that tell us that there is sin and sorrow and death in the
world are terrible. But the other set — thou art holy, there is God,
there is no pain — these are good, and help to break the bondage of the
others. The highest imagination that can break all the links of the
chain is that of the Personal God.

To go and say, "Lord, take care of this thing and give me that; Lord, I
give you my little prayer and you give me this thing of daily necessity;
Lord, cure my headache", and all that — these are not Bhakti. They are
the lowest states of religion. They are the lowest form of Karma. If a
man uses all his mental energy in seeking to satisfy his body and its
wants, show me the difference between him and an animal. Bhakti is a
higher thing higher than even desiring heaven. The idea of heaven is of
a place of intensified enjoyment. How can that be God?

Only the fools rush after sense-enjoyments. It is easy to live in the
senses. It is easier to run in the old groove, eating and drinking; but
what these modern philosophers want to tell you is to take these
comfortable ideas and put the stamp of religion on them. Such a doctrine
is dangerous. Death lies in the senses. Life on the plane of the Spirit
is the only life, life on any other plane is mere death; the whole of
this life can be only described as a gymnasium. We must go beyond it to
enjoy real life.

As long as *touch-me-not-ism* is your creed and the kitchen-pot your
deity, you cannot rise spiritually. All the petty differences between
religion and religion are mere word-struggles, nonsense. Everyone
thinks, "This is my original idea", and wants to have things his own
way. That is how struggles come.

In criticising another, we always foolishly take one especially
brilliant point as the whole of our life and compare that with the dark
ones in the life of another. Thus we make mistakes in judging
individuals.

Through fanaticism and bigotry a religion can be propagated very
quickly, no doubt, but the preaching of that religion is firm-based on
solid ground, which gives everyone liberty to his opinions and thus
uplifts him to a higher path, though this process is slow

First deluge the land (India) with spiritual ideas, then other ideas
will follow The gift of spirituality and spiritual knowledge is the
highest, for it saves from many and many a birth; the next gift is
secular knowledge, as it opens the eyes of human beings towards that
spiritual knowledge; the next is the saving of life; and the fourth is
the gift of food.

Even if the body goes in practicing Sâdhanâs (austerities for
realisation), let it go; what of that? Realisation will come in the
fullness of time, by living constantly in the company of Sâdhus (holy
men). A time comes when one understands that to serve a man even by
preparing a Chhilam (earthen pipe) of tobacco is far greater than
millions of meditations. He who can properly prepare a Chhilam of
tobacco can also properly meditate.

Gods are nothing but highly developed dead men. We can get help from
them.

Anyone and everyone cannot be an Âchârya (teacher of mankind); but many
may become Mukta (liberated). The whole world seems like a dream to the
liberated, but the Acharya has to take up his stand between the two
states. He must have the knowledge that the world is true, or else why
should he teach? Again, if he has not realised the world as a dream,
then he is no better than an ordinary man, and what could he teach? The
Guru has to bear the disciple's burden of sin; and that is the reason
why diseases and other ailments appear even in the bodies of powerful
Acharyas. But if he be imperfect, they attack his mind also, and he
falls. So it is a difficult thing to be an Acharya.

It is easier to become a Jivanmukta (free in this very life) than to be
an Acharya. For the former knows the world as a dream and has no concern
with it; but an Acharya knows it as a dream and yet has to remain in it
and work. It is not possible for everyone to be an Acharya. He is an
Acharya through whom the divine power acts. The body in which one
becomes an Acharya is very different from that of any other man. There
is a science for keeping that body in a perfect state. His is the most
delicate organism, very susceptible, capable of feeling intense joy and
intense suffering. He is abnormal.

In every sphere of life we find that it is the person within that
triumphs, and that personality is the secret of all success.

Nowhere is seen such sublime unfoldment of feeling as in Bhagavân Shri
Krishna Chaitanya, the Prophet of Nadia.

Shri Ramakrishna is a force. You should not think that his doctrine is
this or that. But he is a power, living even now in his disciples and
working in the world. I saw him growing in his ideas. He is still
growing. Shri Ramakrishna was both a Jivanmukta and an Acharya.

</div>
