---
title: BUDDHISM AND VEDANTA

---
<div>

[←](evolution.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](on_the_vedanta_philosophy.htm)

  

## BUDDHISM AND VEDANTA

The Vedanta philosophy is the foundation of Buddhism and everything else
in India; but what we call the Advaita philosophy of the modern school
has a great many conclusions of the Buddhists. Of course, the Hindus
will not admit that — that is the orthodox Hindus, because to them the
Buddhists are heretics. But there is a conscious attempt to stretch out
the whole doctrine to include the heretics also.

The Vedanta has no quarrel with Buddhism. The idea of the Vedanta is to
harmonise all. With the Northern Buddhists we have no quarrel at all.
But the Burmese and Siamese and all the Southern Buddhists say that
there is a phenomenal world, and ask what right we have to create a
noumenal world behind this. The answer of the Vedanta is that this is a
false statement. The Vedanta never contended that there was a noumenal
and a phenomenal world. There is one. Seen through the senses it is
phenomenal, but it is really the noumenal all the time. The man who sees
the rope does not see the snake. It is either the rope or the snake, but
never the two. So the Buddhistic statement of our position, that we
believe there are two worlds, is entirely false. They have the right to
say it is the phenomenal if they like, but no right to contend that
other men have not the right to say it is the noumenal.

Buddhism does not want to have anything except phenomena. In phenomena
alone is desire. It is desire that is creating all this. Modern
Vedantists do not hold this at all. We say there is something which has
become the will. Will is a manufactured something, a compound, not a
"simple". There cannot be any will without an external object. We see
that the very position that will created this universe is impossible.
How could it? Have you ever known will without external stimulus? Desire
cannot arise without stimulus, or in modern philosophic language, of
nerve stimulus. Will is a sort of reaction of the brain, what the
Sânkhya philosophers call Buddhi. This reaction must be preceded by
action, and action presupposes an external universe. When there is no
external universe, naturally there will be no will; and yet, according
to your theory, it is will that created the universe. Who creates the
will? Will is coexistent with the universe. Will is one phenomenon
caused by the same impulse which created the universe. But philosophy
must not stop there. Will is entirely personal; therefore we cannot go
with Schopenhauer at all. Will is a compound — a mixture of the internal
and the external. Suppose a man were born without any senses, he would
have no will at all. Will requires something from outside, and the brain
will get some energy from inside; therefore will is a compound, as much
a compound as the wall or anything else. We do not agree with the
will-theory of these German philosophers at all. Will itself is
phenomenal and cannot be the Absolute. It is one of the many
projections. There is something which is not will, but is manifesting
itself as will. That I can understand. But that will is manifesting
itself as everything else, I do not understand, seeing that we cannot
have any conception of will, as separate from the universe. When that
something which is freedom becomes will, it is caused by time, space,
and causation. Take Kant's analysis. Will is within time, space, and
causation. Then how can it be the Absolute? One cannot will without
willing in time.

If we can stop all thought, then we know that we are beyond thought. We
come to this by negation. When every phenomenon has been negatived,
whatever remains, that is It. That cannot be expressed, cannot be
manifested, because the manifestation will be, again, will.

</div>
