---
title: THE GOAL AND METHODS OF REALISATION

---
<div>

[←](law_and_freedom.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Notes from Lectures and
Discourses](notes_from_lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm)
/ [→](world-wide_unity.htm)

  

## THE GOAL AND METHODS OF REALISATION

The greatest misfortune to befall the world would be if all mankind were
to recognise and accept but one religion, one universal form of worship,
one standard of morality. This would be the death-blow to all religious
and spiritual progress. Instead of trying to hasten this disastrous
event by inducing persons, through good or evil methods, to conform to
our own highest ideal of truth, we ought rather to endeavour to remove
all obstacles which prevent men from developing in accordance with their
own highest ideals, and thus make their attempt vain to establish one
universal religion.

The ultimate goal of all mankind, the aim and end of all religions, is
but one — re-union with God, or, what amounts to the same, with the
divinity which is every man's true nature. But while the aim is one, the
method of attaining may vary with the different temperaments of men.

Both the goal and the methods employed for reaching it are called Yoga,
a word derived from the same Sanskrit root as the English "yoke",
meaning "to join", to join us to our reality, God. There are various
such Yogas, or methods of union — but the chief ones are — Karma-Yoga,
Bhakti-Yoga, Râja-Yoga, and Jnâna-Yoga.

Every man must develop according to his own nature. As every science has
its methods, so has every religion. The methods of attaining the end of
religion are called Yoga by us, and the different forms of Yoga that we
teach, are adapted to the different natures and temperaments of men. We
classify them in the following way, under four heads:

\(1\) Karma-Yoga — The manner in which a man realises his own divinity
through works and duty.

\(2\) Bhakti-Yoga — The realisation of the divinity through devotion to,
and love of, a Personal God.

\(3\) Raja-Yoga — The realisation of the divinity through the control of
mind.

\(4\) Jnana-Yoga — The realisation of a man's own divinity through
knowledge.

These are all different roads leading to the same centre — God. Indeed,
the varieties of religious belief are an advantage, since all faiths are
good, so far as they encourage man to lead a religious life. The more
sects there are, the more opportunities there are for making successful
appeals to the divine instinct in all men.

</div>
