+++
title = "The urban maNDala"

+++
**Views on Indian urbanization**  
While bhArata has had a long history of urbanization, there is a certain
view that we have absolutely no memory of the first such event. As per
this view the first urbanization is a purely archaeological phenomenon –
it occurred in North-Western India along the regions watered by the
Indus – the famous IVC. This period of urbanization is believed to have
been followed by a period of disintegration during which cities grew
disorganized and were eventually abandoned for rural settlements. This
is supposed to have been complete by around 1200-1100 BCE. Several
vociferous white indologists and their admirers hold the view this
period following the disintegration of urban centers was the “Vedic
night” during which the technologically backward Indo-Aryans settled the
Indian subcontinent (they would invariably use the despicable term
“South Asia” as though it had an innocent geographical meaning) which
had been shorn of its cities and composed the RV. A couple of centuries
later the iron-age is supposed to have dawned in India followed by the
composition of the YV and later Vedic texts. The Vedic nomads are
believed to have kept the subcontinent in a technologically limited,
rural condition (e.g. these indologists claim that the Indo-Aryans
possessed the most rudimentary methods of pot-making and the flimsiest
of dwellings) until eventually influences from the Middle East drifted
in to seed a second urbanization closer to the time of the tathAgata and
the nagna. These indologists believe that upaniShad-s like the ChAndogya
were composed in these newly urbanizing centers in eastern India. Now
the popular Indian counter-point has been that the SSVC cities were
actually occupied by the Vedic people, who according to them were urban
autochthons of India. Both these models have glaring problems many of
which we have discussed before on these pages. More recently, Danino and
the late Balasubramanian provided strong evidence that the metrology of
the SSVC was congruent to the subsequent Hindu metrology. Their work
indicates that these units of length, weight and volume that were in use
in the SSVC were also reported as being in use by kauTilya in the
mauryan era that was well into the second phase of urbanization.
Further, these length measures continued to be used in urban
architecture well into the Mohammedan occupation of the subcontinent
(e.g. in Saracenic tombs like the Taj Mahal). This observation was
interesting in many ways because it implied that even though the urban
society of the SSVC had collapsed, its measures survived in Indo-Aryan
tradition for a long time. This work of Danino and Balasubramanian,
among others, is for the first time a reasonably convincing connection
between classical textual evidence and archaeology has been established.
Yet, in our opinion one of the big under-explored issues has been the
textual analysis of the urbanization of India. This is a vast area of
research needing enormous energy and we are not attempting to achieve
all of that in this epistle. What we wish to do here is merely touch
upon some key points of textual continuity and to see if it might throw
any light at all on the relative dates of the extant textual memories of
the urbanization process in India.

**The reacquisition of the Hindu knowledge on town planning**  
There is a vast body of literature on town planning and urban
architecture in the Hindu world. Tradition attributes the origin of this
literature to the guild of architects who call themselves the
vishvakarman-s after their claim of descent from the deva tvaShTar (the
architect of the gods) \[Footnote 1\]. Similar literature is also
extensively found in the tantra-s of saiddhAntika shaiva-s and the
pA\~ncharAtrika vaiShNava-s. The best known of the vishvakarman texts is
the mAnasAra that is composed in a rather vulgar register of Sanskrit.
The renewal of interest in the mAnasAra came due to a remarkable man Ram
Raj, whose well-known history I feel an urge to retell. Ram Raj was a
kShatriya of the clan of the brave rAmarAya of Aravidu, whose family
lived in the late 1700s near Kumbhaghona in Tanjavur, very close the
hamlet of my ancestors. As a youth he was of scholarly disposition and
studied from his family texts as well as from whichever learned
brAhmaNa-s he could meet. He picked knowledge on a wide range of topics
including astronomy, mathematics and Sanskrit literature and he also
acquired some knowledge of the language of the rising mlechCha-s of the
time. Due to poverty visiting him from the loss of his property in the
Carnatic wars he took a post as a lowly infantry man in the English
army. The English quickly recognized that he could speak their language
and had the brain. So they appointed him, still in his late teens, to a
clerical post in the army. Seeing that his intellectual capacity was far
more than that of a clerk the English officials promoted him to a
lecturer in their Madras fort’s college to teach astronomy and
mathematics. Subsequently, the commandant of the fort Captain Harkins
recommended him to be appointed as a senior judge of the Bangalore
court. He died a few years later at the age of 40. From around the age
of 20 Ram Raj began collecting, editing and studying manuscripts of the
mAnasAra. He observed that though the learned brAhmaNa-s could help him
with navigating the language of the text they had the slightest memory
of the actual architectural practices embodied in it. On the other side
the illiterate artisans who preserved hereditary techniques had no
knowledge about the textual authorities of their work. He finally wrote
an essay on Hindu architecture and town planning, replete with
reconstructive illustrations, based on his studies of the mAnasAra and
in a sense dredged up this long sunken knowledge. Thus, Ram Raj had
brought back to the general consciousness the textual precedents of town
planning, which at that point was apparently lost even among the
surviving vishvakarman-s of the age.

Nearly 80 years after the death of Ram Raj a new study of the mAnasAra
was initiated by PK Acharya who spent the reminder of his life compiling
a massive 7 volume study of the mAnasAra, which includes a critical
edition, English translation, glossary of technical terms, diagrams of
all structures as specified in the text, and a comparative study of
Hindu architecture as found in the text and in practice across greater
India. This monumental work of PK Acharya cost him his eyesight and
health, but it offered before the Hindus a foundation to understand the
urban philosophy of their ancestors. Since the mAnasAra’s edition by PK
Acharya, a number of other texts have been edited and studied to a
certain degree. Hence, some of his conclusions have become dubious or
need major modification. Nevertheless, his study remains indispensable
as a starting point and the descriptive aspects of it are still
remarkably relevant.

**Different flavors of architectural texts and their historical
practice: the Tantric age**  
The architectural texts can be categorized in two major groups:  
\-The “smArta texts”  
These texts are defined by their general acceptance of the authority of
the veda and a tendency to be unbiased in terms of the deities who
occupy temples in the central zones of a town. In the classical phase
the main deities they paid attention to were both viShNu, shiva, sUrya,
and forms of the trans-functional shakti, but they also might provide
some details pertaining to gaNesha, skanda and specific devI-s like the
sapta-/aShTa- mAtR^ika-s. Sometimes, they also gave the essential
details for establishing temples for jaina-s and bauddha-s. They also
tend to respect the role for the smArta brAhmaNa as the primary
ritualist in the vAstu and sthApana rites and a non-sectarian
vishvakarman as the primary architect. The mAnasAra is one of the
best-known and probably the most detailed text of this type. However,
such material was composed over several centuries, either as standalone
texts, like the mAnasAra, or as parts of more encyclopedic works. One of
the early specimens of such a work, embedded within a more encyclopedic
work, is found in the second section of the arthashAstra of kauTilya of
the maurya period, where we already notice the elements of vAstu-vidyA
that were to be seen in the later architectural texts. A point to note
is that chANakya in the arthashAstra specifies a more diversified set of
temples, beyond those of just the primary sectarian deities, in the city
center:

aparAjitA .apratihata jayanta vaijayanta koShThAn shiva vaishravaNa
ashvi shrI madirA gRhANi cha pura madhye kArayet || AS2.4.17  
I would interpret aparAjitA as durgA/the transfunctional goddess,
apratihata (could be indra or viShNu), jayanta as skanda, vaijayanta
(could be mostly indra but could also be viShNu) whose temples were for
the granaries or the treasuries. Alternatively (more tenuously),
aparAjita, apratihata, jayanta and vaijayanta could be the names of the
four kaumAra deities, i.e. kumAra and his three emanations. Of the rest
whose temples were in the middle of the city shiva, vaishravaNa, the
ashvin-s and shrI seem obvious. The wine-goddess madirA could be a
manifestation of the trans-functional goddess, who by that period was
already receiving alcoholic offerings. This appears to be the more
ancient condition, which was standardized to the classical Pauranic
pattern of deities by the time of the mAnasAra. More perfunctory
treatments of the smArta type are also seen in the purANa-s like the
agnipurANa and the bR^ihatsaMhitA of varahAmihira from the gupta age.
Later works of this type are the samarA\~NgaNa-sUtradhAra of the
bhojadeva paramAra (who was a saiddhAntika shaiva himself) and the
material embedded in the mAnasollAsa of someshvara-deva chAlukya. Both
these royal works, like that of chANakya and the mAnasAra have a
considerable focus on royal issues, whereas the Pauranic and the bR^ihat
saMhitA have much less or none of this.

\-The tAntrika texts  
These texts are squarely associated with the respective mantramArga
streams to which they belong. Hence, the majority of them are
pA\~ncharAtrika vaiShNava or saiddhAntika shaiva. There is a smaller set
which might also be called shAkta or nAstika. The core of these texts is
primarily concerned with the details of designing temples for their
chief sectarian deities and those for their parivAra-s. They accord a
central position for the tantra-s of their respective systems in the
vAstu and sthApana rituals, though they might not dismiss the veda-s.
The primary officiant in these texts is a brAhmaNa deshika, learned in
the mantra-shAstra of the given sect, rather than a smArta brAhmaNa.
However, they also those took up the task, just like the smArta texts,
of installing temples of the primary deities of the other sects. Thus, a
shaiva and, in some cases, even a pA\~ncharAtrika deshika might see
himself as a sarvAdhikAri and a svayamAchArya who would install not just
their own shaiva or vaiShNava temples respectively but also those of
other sects, including those of the nAstika-s, like bauddha-s. Beyond
this all the major tAntrika streams also contain significant texts that
are devoted to more “secular” issues such as town planning, hydraulic
works and fort construction just as the smArta works. The early shaiva
works in this category are the maya-saMgraha, pi\~NgalAmata, devyAmata
and nandikeshvaramata. On the pA\~ncharAtrika side we find the
encyclopedic pAdma saMhitA and the aniruddha saMhitA providing details
regarding planning or rural and urban settlements in many ways similar
to the parallel sections in the devyAmata of the shaiva world. In the
case of the shAkta realm we have the Southern yAmala tantra-s which are
related to rural and to some extant urban design. These texts also
specialize in settlements and shrines established by shUdra ritualists.
Another peculiar text of this class that could also be considered shAkta
is the sAmrAjyalakShmI pIThika. While somewhat later than the former
texts, its focus is mainly royal, with considerable attention to design
and provisioning of fortifications, and appears to have had currency
both in South India and the Himalayan region. Like many other facets of
Astika knowledge, the vAstu-shAstra was also internalized by the
tAntrika nAstika-s. An example of this type of text is the vAstu-vidyA
of ma\~njushrI.

Starting with the gupta period there was a great efflorescence in temple
building across the Indian subcontinent. The ripples of this traveled
beyond into Shrilanka and the Hindu states that were being founded and
expanded in the Far East. This resulted in both sectarian maThAdipati-s
(starting with the pAshupata shaiva-s all over the country, vaikhAnasa-s
in South India and pA\~ncharAtrika-s within the gupta realm and the
peri-gupta regimes \[both temporally and geographically\] in the Andhra
country) and kings constructing new temples. The unification under the
gupta-s and the vAkATaka-s provided new impetus for many of the temples
to become pan-Indian pilgrimage centers (e.g. the jyotirli\~Nga shrines
and the temples arising in the great tIrtha-s) and in some cases the
temples became the nuclei of new towns. Given that the vAstu-systems of
both the tAntrika and smArta types give prominence to the temple in the
center of the village or town, the new villages and towns built by these
rulers were associated with temple building activity. The gupta era also
saw a considerable rise in the popularity of the “Pauranic” system,
thereby providing new niches for the sectarian ritualists of shiva,
viShNu, kumAra and the trans-functional shakti in the newly emerging
temples. In addition, it coupled the rural and urban design principles
with that of the temple itself, and these materials were incorporated as
a unit into the emerging pratiShTha tantra-s of the various sects.

Following the decline of the gupta-s, the building of new temples,
villages and towns by the local rulers only increased further. As we
have discussed before, this period marked the height of the “Tantric
states” across greater India – as a result the leading deshika-s of the
shaiva and vaiShNava sects had, in certain cases, much greater
trans-regional influence then their royal patrons themselves and were
now custodians of the trans-regional pilgrimage networks. As result the
planning of new villages and towns under the models provided by the
sectarian pratiShTha tantra-s became the norm. Thus, a millennium after
the supposed start of the second urbanization of India we see a major
phase of urban development with the dominant directing force being the
pratiShTha tantra-s, rather than the smArta texts. Support for this
readily emerges from architectural, textual and epigraphical evidence.
For example, the pA\~nchArAtrika model deployed extensively in course of
the rise of the great Kashmirian rulers: The greatest of their
conquerors, latitAdiya, the suppressor of the duShTa-s like the
turuShka-s, bhauTTa-s and chIna-s, built the city of parihAsapura around
the temple of viShNu, parihAsa-keshava, with the electrum image, and
also another town darpitapura with centered on a viShNu temple. His
successor jayApIDa built the new city of jayapura centered on the viShNu
temples of chaturAtma-keshava and ananta-shayana.Outside the
subcontinent the pA\~ncharAtrika model was operational in the design of
the great Khmer capital of Angkor with its central temple of viShNu. The
shaiva-s, both of the mantra-mArga and those of the pAshupata lineages
(e.g. the kAlAmukha-s), were even more active in development of temples,
settlements and irrigation works.

Inscriptions describe shaiva Acharya-s setting up the towns of
mattamayUra (either near Gwalior or Ujjain by purandara), golagI (in
Madhya Pradesh near Chattisgarh by prabhAva-shiva deshika) and shivAvati
near koTivarSha (near modern Bangarh by indra-shiva deshika, the chief
tAntrika guru of va\~Nga in the late 900s) \[Footnote 2\] centered on
towering temples of shiva. Another famous example which illustrates the
pan-Indian influence of the great saiddhAntika tAntrika-s is given by
the malkApuraM inscription pertaining to the illustrious tAntrika
vishveshvara-shaMbhu. He was from the rAdha province of Bengal and is
said to have been both a vaidika and tAntrika scholar, who was an
adviser and mantra-vAdin to the kings of choLa, kAkatIya, paramAra and
kalachuri dynasties. At the behest of the kAkatIya queen, in the Andhra
country he set up a village named vishveshvara-golagI after the famed
golagI in the kalachuri country. He unified it with some neighboring
settlements around velangpuNDi to develop it into a town. Here he
settled 60 brAhmaNa families from the Tamil country and made them in
charge of the upkeep of the land. He also divided surrounding land for
to obtain revenues to fund a maternity clinic, an assembly hall and a
school to teach shaiva tantras, the veda-s, nyAya and kAvya. Another
hospital with a doctor and an accountant to manage revenues were also
appointed by him. For the central temple of vishveshvara he appointed a
musician from Kashmir who along with 14 female singers and dancers
conducted the theater. He also brought people of the various service
castes such as metal workers, mason, wood-workers, an architect,
barbers, potters and sundry artists. There are several such examples of
shaiva tAntrika-s setting up villages and towns around temples but I
chose this one because in it exemplifies several important activities of
these AchArya-s: 1) their pan-Indian scope of action. 2) Their role in
trans-regional unification by bringing in one place people from
different parts of the subcontinent depending on their talents. 3) The
creation of relatively self-sufficient systems (i.e. independent of the
central rulers) to direct agrarian productivity towards urbanization. 4)
Creation of employment opportunities across a wide range of
capabilities.

Now, most of the classical historical studies have to a great extent
ignored the role of the tAntrika Acharya-s maintaining a trans-regional
system across the subcontinent and throughout greater India all the way
to the island of Sumatra, even as various kShatriya-s (honorary or
genuine) jousted for supremacy across this varied geographical canvas.
Others who mildly recognized this fact saw it as development specific to
the shaiva sect, quite disconnected from the rest of Indic tradition.
Still others saw it as part of a radical doctrinal radical shift from
the earlier doctrinal landscape dominated by the mImAmsaka-s and
sAmkhya-s along with their nAstika rivals. Yet, despite the differences
in the sectarian deities of the tantra-s, and local architectural styles
there was a remarkable continuity in terms of rural and urban
development all the way from the arthashAstra to the sthApana texts of
the vaiShNava-s and shaiva-s. Behind the doctrinal differences the basic
organizational principles in a Hindu construction, be it a town of a
shaiva guru or that of a mauryan governor, remained rather intact over
at least 1800 years. This is abundantly evident from the underlying
homology seen in the sthApana material of the vaiShNava and shaiva
tantra-s and further with the smArta material from the mAnasAra to the
arthashAstra. At the heart of this homology lies a maNDala that says
something of the very origins of this urban tradition.

**From house to village to town – the seating of the gods on the demon**

kim api kila bhUtam abhavad rundhAnaM rodasI sharIreNa|  
tad amara-gaNena sahasA vinigR^ihya adhomukhaM nyastam | |  
yatra ca yena gR^ihItaM vibudhena adhiShThitaH sa tatraiva |  
tad amara-mayaM vidhAtA vAstu-naraM kalpayAm Asa || bR^ihatsaMhitA
52.2-3 (chapter 53 in South Indian vulgate)  
Thus the bR^ihat-saMhitA provides us with a curious origin mythology for
the vAstu- maNDala: “It has been said that once upon a time a gigantic
being arose who concealed the hemispheres of heaven with his body. The
gods forcibly seized him flattened him face down \[into the ground\].
Now the gods reside in which ever part of his body they seized (while
flattening him). Thus, the being was declared by vidhAtR^i (understood
as prajApati/brahmA) as vAstupuruSha comprised of deva-s corresponding
to each part of his body.”

This vastupuruSha is represented by a maNDala, the vAstu-maNDala and it
lies at the heart of all Hindu constructions. The concept of the
vAstu-maNDala is typically seen as something pertaining to the
construction of a house. That is precisely how varAhamihira introduces
it in the bR^ihatsaMhitA. However, in reality it went beyond that to
encompass any type of construction. Indeed, as varAhamihira clarifies
the Hindu constructions had a recursive framework of the vAstu-maNDala
with its resident deva-s:  
gR^iha nagara grAmeShu ca sarvatra evaM pratiShThitA devAH |  
teShu ca yatha anurUpaM varNA viprAdayo vAsyAH || bR^ihatsaMhitA 52.67
(53.69 in S- vulgate)  
As enumerated \[in the section on houses\] the deva-s occupy their
positions all over \[i.e. as per the vAstu-maNDala\] not only in houses
but also in villages and towns. According to this \[arrangement of
deva-s\] the 4 castes starting from brAhmaNa-s will live in the places
appropriate to them. Thus, the concept of the vAstu-maNDala repeated
itself at different scales from a house, to a village to a town. An
important point implicit in this regard is that the Hindu texts saw the
town as a scale up of a village which in turn was derive from the house.
Thus, it preserves within it the centrality of villages and the idea of
them expanding upwards. This vastu-maNDala along with its recurrence at
all scales is a conserved feature persists across the entire range of
textual sources relating to rural and urban planning be they of the
smArta or the tAntrika type. The implicit indications of it are already
seen in the arthashAstra and persist through the pratiShTha tantra-s,
suggesting that this feature was inherited from the common ancestor of
all extant Hindu works on this matter. This further goes to suggest that
the vAstu-maNDala was clearly linked to the emergence of the classical
phase of planned Hindu settlements, which lasted until is submergence
under the Mohammedan onslaught (though it is making a “new age” revival
in modern bhArata). On these grounds it is rather obvious that the
vAstu-maNDala was present in a recognizable form since the beginning of
the so called second urbanization of India that is recognized on
archeological grounds. However, a more difficult question is whether it
had any connection to the first urbanization (i.e. the SSVC), especially
in light of the proposed metrological continuity between the
arthashAstra and the SSVC measures. To get some feel for the origin and
evolution of the vAstu-maNDala we must now turn to its features and
utilization.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/lh4.ggpht.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/TEN7OdS3vjI/AAAAAAAAB2w/iCiCvhF5sc0/s400/maNDalas.png)](http://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/UwoCiYlBd8wpkfgol04z6w?feat=embedwebsite)

Above are some reconstructed versions of the ancestral vAstu-maNDala-s.
They are a system of grids and guides of increasing density that are
deployed for different types of constructions and installations with the
largest of them being used in houses, cities and towns. Certain key
features are immediately apparent: 1) The deities which a consistently
assigned to the cells are in large-part those who were predominant in
the vaidika period. Even though the same system is used in various
sectarian tantra-s they continue to use the same Vedic pantheon in the
vAstu-maNDala. In fact certain powerful deities of the Tantro-Pauranic
system are conspicuous by their absence. 2) In the corpus of the
vAstu-puruSha the system recaptitulates the macranthropic motif that is
prevalent in the veda, e.g. the puruSha. It is also reminiscent of the
concept of placing the deva-s in different parts of the body which is
prominent in vaidika thought. E.g. the sUkta in the taittirIya brAhmaNa
3.10.8.4-10 (agnir me vAchi shritaH …). 3) The placement of deva-s in
various cardinal directions and inter-directions is a very frequently
encountered concept in the veda – e.g. the sUkta in TB 3.11.5.1-3 or the
sUkta 19.18 in the AV-vulgate. These vaidika mantra-s suggest the
objective of covering the body or the directions with the deva-s as an
act of protection. Likewise, we had earlier argued that the word maNDala
is an internal development in Old Indo-Aryan from an Indo-Iranian root
“mand” to cover or over-lay through the phenomenon of cerebralization.
Thus, we see that term maNDala is likely to have been derived from this
action of covering the ground or diagram or the direction (i.e. a space)
with deva-s. It is important to stress that vAstu-maNDala-s deities are
of the vaidika stratum, many of whom (e.g. pUShaN, vivasvAn, mitra,
aryaman) had faded into oblivion by the classical Pauranic age. The
maNDala still remembers some old associations, like that been mitra,
varuNa (twinned in the maNDala-s) and aryaman (symmetric with them).
Further, we find that deities place in a give directions, while roughly
comparable to that of the classical period are not identical to the
standard dikpAla set (e.g. sUrya in the east as against indra, soma in
the north as against kubera). Thus, these vAstu-maNDala-s were in place
before the emergence of the classical dikpAla system used in all
tAntrika maNDala-s. The presence of yama in the south is first seen only
in the yajurveda (e.g. in the formula: ye devA dakShiNasado yama netra
rakShohaNas-tenaH pAntu teno.avantu tebhyo namastebhyas-svAhA |)
Further, the larger of these maNDala-s have prajApati (or brahmA) as the
deity in the center. This ascendance of prajApati is a feature of the
vaidika stratum, starting with the late brAhmaNa period. While he is
largely absent in the archaic sUkta-s and yajuSh-es, he is the most
important or central deity of the late brAhmaNa texts. Together, these
features suggest that vAstu-maNDala-s as they survive are most likely to
be a direct inheritance of the late Vedic period, overlapping with the
period composition of the brAhmaNa texts. This makes them the most
archaic of the surviving Hindu maNDala-s. Thus like most features of the
tantra, even the tAntrika maNDala-s are most likely an internal
development with the Indo-Aryan thought from such precursors in the
vaidika layers. In fact I would go as far as stating that the myth cited
by varAhamihira on the vAstu-puruSha is likely to have been derived from
a much earlier brAhmaNa-like passage.

The late brAhmaNa period can be dated approximately from the statement
in the kaushItaki brAhmaNa that the summer solstice was roughly between
magha and tishya. This would conservatively give us period between
1500-1200 BCE. This places us in the range of the earliest layers of the
archaeological town of kAmpilya, the pa\~nchAla capital. The
Italian-backed work down in kAmpilya suggests that there were multiple
layers of urbanizations here. Early settlements were supposed to go back
to the period of 1200 BC. This was followed by a town from the period of
the classical second urbanization and finally a layer closer to the
kushAna-gupta period. Given the evidence that vAstu-maNDala was likely
to have been there well before the second urbanization, I would not be
surprised if it was already in action even in the earlier archaeological
layer seen in this site.The reason I point to kAmpilya is because
several workers like Bisht, the Italian team and Danino have suggested
that the town from the second urbanization at kAmpilya has features that
resemble the much earlier Dholavira town from the height of the SSVC
(\~2600 BCE). Danino also suggests that certain ratios in Dholavira are
consistent with those used in the mAnasAra. Based on this, he, like some
other workers, suggests that there was continuity between the two
urbanizations and that the later architectural traditions like that of
the mAnasAra bore undercurrents of the original SSVC urbanization. Now
on philological grounds we can argue that the vAstumaNDala grids that
guided rural and urban planning are likely to be older than second
urbanization and at least coeval with some of the settlements that
preceded the second urbanization in sites like kAmpilya. This brings up
the question what about the link of the vAstu-maNDala to the SSVC.
Firstly, the structure of the vAstu-maNDala makes it clear that it was
entirely of Indo-Aryan provenance and does not show any sign of
non-Aryan influence. So if the SSVC was non-Aryan it was clearly not
derived from it but inherited from earlier Aryan precursors. Secondly,
on philological grounds it appears less likely that the full-blown
vAstu-maNDala was as early as the early Indus cities that appear to be
coeval with an earlier layer of vaidika composition, namely the
“kR^ittikA period”. Thus, one could always argue that the invading
Indo-Aryans adopted metrological conventions from the declining Indus
cities as they invaded and incorporated it into their own framework of
vAstu-mANDala. However, given that features beyond just the units (e.g.
numbers and proportions, like 108 and the increment by 1/4th in the
mAnasAra and Dholavira) appear to be congruent between the SSVC and the
Indo-Aryan models, it is not impossible that the Indo-Aryans entered
India much earlier during or before the height of the SSVC. In that case
these features could all be of Aryan origin and the vAstu-maNDala could
merely be based on even earlier lost precursors from the earlier strata
of Aryan thought.

Footnote 1: Curiously, this claim mirrors that of the scribal guild, the
kAyastha-s, who arrogate an origin for themselves from chitragupta, the
scribe of yama.

Footnote 2: What happened to these great shaiva centers whose maTha-s
are supposed to have been described as being large constructions covered
with gold? It is clear that they were annihilated by the Meccan demons
Qutb-ud-din Aibak, Shams-ud-din Iltutmish and Alla-ad-din Khalji. The
learned English scholar Sanderson identified the location of the famed
golagI as the modern Gurgi near Rewa. He is likely to be correct in this
regard because in 1931 the archaeologist Banerji who discovered the IVC
uncovered a sprawling shaiva ruins in Gurgi which are like to be remnant
of the golagI maTha. These ruins were subsequently largely ignored –
after all they are Hindu ruins and not some adorable Saracenic
structure.
