+++
title = "The shR^i~NgAra katha of kumAra from the islander’s narrative"

+++
In later northern Indian tradition a euphemistic transformation was
imposed on kumAra – from a deity capable of erotic flourishes he was
transmogrified into an eternal bachelor who shunned women. Behind this
façade was a persistent tradition in parts of upper India that the sight
of kumAra could be extremely dangerous to women. So much so that the
women from my clan were on more than one occasion admonished from
entering kumArAlaya-s in mahArAShTra, not realizing that we belong to an
entirely different strand of tradition. In the south the tradition of
kumAra remains largely unadulterated by this euphemism that seized
certain parts of upper India and contributed to the general decline of
the worship of kumAra. The south presents the peculiar myth of vaLLi
which is the major erotic exploit of kumAra. In all its existing forms
the myth is a relatively late one, but it probably inherits elements
from a much earlier myth (including tantalizing hints offered by the
mantra-s used in the celebrated skanda-yAga of atharvanic tradition).
The islanders of shrI lankA preserved two kaumAra cycles: 1) kanda
uppata and 2) kanda sura varunA. In the second of these they narrate the
exploit of valli. While the exclusionist zeal of the sthaviravAdin
nAstika-s has attempted to the purge the history of kumAra from the
Lankan mind his cult is still active in Kataragama. The submerged Lankan
tradition has it that an early king of Lanka dutugemunu worshiped kumAra
at this place to seek his aid in the war against the Tamil king eLara
who had earlier smashed the Lankans in war and conquered their capital.
Aided by kumAra dutugemunu is believed to have killed eLara and led the
islanders to victory against the Tamils, upon which he erected a shrine
for kumAra. The erotic exploit of kumAra in acquiring his consort vaLLi
goes thus:  
viShNu had a daughter. The brAhmaNa shivamuni was performing tapasya in
the dense forests of Lanka when an uncontrollable erotic sensation arose
in him. He saw a doe making its way in this state of shR^i\~NgAra. The
force of his tapasya left him and impregnated the doe. Into that embryo
descended the goddess, the daughter of viShNu. The doe gave birth to her
in a depression made by the hunter-gatherers to dig out sugar vaLLi
tubers (colloquially called yams). Seeing a girl with fine bangles
rather than a fawn, the doe abandoned her and ran away. The chief of the
Vedda hunters known as naMbi adopted her as his daughter, naming her
vaLLi after the sweet tuber. When she reached puberty, he gave her a
sling and asked her to guard their plants from animals. Shouting and
hurling stones all day long she did her job. The brAhmaNa nArada saw her
there. As he was making his way he ran into kumAra and described to him
at length her great tresses of black hair, shining face, well-formed
breasts and other aspects of her beauty. kumAra was deeply moved by what
he heard and was seized with a deep longing for vaLLi. He conjured up
her images and turned them around in his mind over and over again. He
made a decision to woo her and transformed himself into a hunter. His
great bow, acquired from his father rudra, which had laid low asura
heroes, now became the primitive bow of hunter with a cat gut string.
His powerful shakti became a hunter’s pike and wearing animal hides he
arrived in the Lankan rain forests. There he beheld the daughter of
viShNu and remained stunned by deep passion unable to take his eyes of
her frame. He boldly advanced to her and said: “It appears that brahmA
has not given these hunters even a modicum of sense that they waste you
in guarding their plants all day. What is you name; what is the name of
your settlement, at least tell me the way to your settlement.” Just then
naMbi and band of his hunters arrived to give vaLLi her lunch of yams,
mangoes, honey and milk of a gaur. At that instant kumAra transformed
himself into a tree. The hunters asked her why she looked so surprised.
Then they looked at the new tree and asked how it had come about and if
should they uproot it. She quickly answered that the she was surprised
because of the extraordinary appearance of a new tree. Then naMbi said
it was alright and that the tree had come to give her some company on
her lonely watch. Once the hunters left, kumAra re-manifested himself
and said: “Why waste time watching over these plants; come with me to
the heaven of the deva-s where even the apsarA-s would worship you. How
can anyone guy who has seen you leave without embracing you and enjoying
the conjunction with you?”

However, vaLLi resisted: “My fathers agents are always around they might
see us together and doubts would raised about my character as I am
reported as having liaisons with an unknown male. It is better you go
away – it would also not look good if you, the son of rudra and the
leader of the deva hosts, is seen flirting with a huntress.”

Then skanda decided to adopt a different ploy. The next day even as
nambi and his hunters arrived to give vaLLI her lunch an old and worn
out ascetic arrived and asked the hunters the way to a tIrtha in their
forest where he sought to bathe to attain puNya. The hunter said it was
not far away and also asked him to keep an eye on vaLLi and report to
him if something untoward was observed with regard to her. He agreed and
went to have a bath and drink the water from the tIrtha. Having done so
he returned to vaLLi and asked her to unite with him in kAma. She said:
“Are you mad? The hunters will come and cut you pieces.” He appeared
to walk away from her as though dejected. Shortly, an elephant in musth
came charging at her and she ran in terror towards the ascetic begging
him: “I will do what ever you want if you save me”. Assuming his usual
form kumAra lifted her off her feet and bore her into the forest. It is
believed that the elephant was vighna himself who had come to help his
brother. Then in the forest vaLLi and kumAra engaged in kAma and finally
parted in the evening, when he said to her that he would be back. The
hunters noticed that from the next day on vaLLi’s demeanor had changed –
she seemed lost in deep thought with little interest in anything else.
Even as their plants bore fruit and they readied to harvest them they
arranges for a festival. But vaLLi remained brooding away from the rest
of the tribe. Her mother felt something was amiss and called on the
diviners to see what was wrong. They declared that she had been seized
by the shUra sprite from the mountains and that she was wilting under
that possession. They suggested that a skanda dancer be called to act
out a frenzied spear dance. Accordingly, the next night the skanda dance
was arranged with a dancer calling upon the deva to possess him. He
danced and danced in untiring frenzy whirling his spear and jumping up
and down non-stop. The tribesmen realized that he had been seized by
skanda and asked him if he could cure vaLLi of the shUra sprite. He
laughed uncontrollably and said it was not the shUra sprite but the
caprine sprite (a memory of the nejameSha graha) that seized vaLLi. He
asked them to make an image of kumAra and place it next to vaLLi’s hut
and that she would be cured. They did so right away. At the middle of
the night he emerged from the idol and bore vaLLi away to the forest
where they spent their time in blissful dalliance. The next morning they
saw vaLLi missing. Her friend reported that she had seen her eloping
with a handsome man with a bow and a spear. The hunters followed their
trail and found them dallying in a grove. They surrounded the grove and
aimed their poisoned arrows at him. But he lazily shot back – his fiery
darts not only split all their arrows but also pierced the attackers
killing them instantaneously. vaLLi mourned the death of her tribe, when
nArada asked kumAra to restore their lives. He did so and gave them a
vision conjoined with his consort on the eminence of Kataragama.

Even today he continues to be worshipped in Lanka which may have been
transmitted very early on from the mainland because in the festival
celebrating of the wooing of vaLLi a Lankan ritualist called a kapurALa
rather than a shaiva ritualist from the drAviDa country is directly
involved. The great shrine of viShNu at Devinuvara was also another
temple where the Lankans endogenously worshipped the old gods. However
after was bombarded by the Portuguese terrorists a few hundred years ago
the sthaviravAdin saMgha let it remain un-restored so that there is no
revival of Hindu elements amongst the siMhala masses.
