+++
title = "Defending the identity of yoga, Kumarila style( with homage to Ganganath Jhaxa0)"
date = "2017-04-27"

+++
Edit(22/5/2021):The author does not believe in this thing anymore,the
statement is to be taken as its face value and it is to be learned from
someone who is actually a sAdhaka of that mArga.

iti dattātreyayogaśāstre –

brāhmaṇaḥ śramaṇo’ vapy bauddho vāpy ārhato’thavā\|kapāliko vā cārvākaḥ
śraddhayā sahitaḥ sudhiḥ\|\|yogābhyāsarato nityaṃ
sarvasiddhimavāpnuyāt\|

(Whether a Brahmin,an ascetic,a Jain or a Buddhist or a Kapālika or a
Cārvāka materialist,the wise man who is endowed with faith and
constantly devoted to the practice of yoga will obtain complete success)

“The statement that a brāhmaṇa, kapālika, bauddha and jaina can achieve
success by yoga is to be understood thus. Surely, we cannot interpret
kapālika, bauddhādi terms as referring to those who practice the tenets
of that school in that entirety. For yoga emphasizes self-restraint and
bhūtadayā in one’s acts and the kapālika, if he continues to practice
the kapālika dharma fully, he will contravene these precepts of yoga and
will not achieve success. Hence, it refers only to practices which are
not in contradiction with the precepts of yoga and the dharma of the
veda since the sūtrakāra of the yoga siddhānta (pātañjali) accepts veda
as pramāṇa. Or, some understand that verse in this manner too, which is
not really different from the previous meaning. The śramana and jaina;
what they seek to achieve by torturing their bodies, the freedom from
karma, they can achieve by practicing yoga. The kapālika, without
resorting to any of the fierce acts prescribed for him, can attain union
with rudra by practice of this yoga. The brāhmaṇa, unable to exhaust the
repository of the vedas, by means of yoga with hiraṇyagarbha, attains
the fruit of realizing the whole veda without doing all the karma in the
Veda. This is what is meant by success. To each, his desired fruit is
granted. In this way, there will be no contradiction. If it be argued
that a kristu-panthin can practice yoga as he too wishes to attain Union
with that deva, we reject it. A kristu-vādin cannot practice yoga as the
devata he worships does not tolerate his pronouncing the names of other
devas,let alone revering them. His mata is fundamentally a mata of dveṣa
not kṛpā, let alone prema(even if it masquerades and sells itself as one
such mata), as demonstrated by the vaiśya-cūḍāmaṇi and his beloved
disciple, and the warnings of hypocrisy in the next verses apply to them
in the context of our times[most
appropriately](https://christiancult.files.wordpress.com/2017/02/catholic-ashrams-sannyasins-or-swindlers.pdf).The
acceptance of pātañjali as ācārya, shraddhā in om(praṇava) as sacred
sound, faith in the śruti and hiraṇyagarbha are all precluded for him.
Hence, for him, there is no success in this path. If it be argued that
the bauddha too rejects the veda, we reply that the bauddhas either have
to accept that the Veda has limited application (they already do that to
some extent in the Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa in their vulgar Sanskrit “eṣa
mantro mahābrahmā bodhisattvena … ābhicārukeṣu sarveṣu athavo\* ceda
paṭhyate ।”),and the pāñcarātrins and śaivas do not reject the Veda but
merely state that their own śāstras are viśeṣa, or they have to renounce
bauddham and accept the veda wholeheartedly. Thus, this argument too is
rejected. Our original interpretation stands. What we said for the
kristu-panthin, the same for the mahāmāda-panthin.”

If it be the second alternative, it is to be understood that the terms,
‘brāhmaṇa, bauddha, kapālika, etc’ in the shloka merely point to the
status of the person at the time he is about to take up yoga. In the
cases of bauddhakapālikādi, there is a renunciation of their formerly
held beliefs. The bauddha, if he previously rejected the pramāṇatvam of
the veda or ascribed sinful motives to the Veda, stops doing that when
he takes up yoga. The kapālika gives up the idea that union with rudra
is achieved by doing censureable acts. Hence, the śloka, of the second
alternative is adopted, would mean that all persons, regardless of what
doctrine they previously followed, would attain success when they take
up yoga and act in accordance with the rules therein.

(Slightly modified with credits to
[@Ghorangirasa](https://twitter.com/Ghorangirasa).)
