---
title: HINTS ON PRACTICAL SPIRITUALITY

---
<div>

[←](the_powers_of_the_mind.htm) [Home](../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](volume_2_contents.htm) / [→](bhakti_or_devotion.htm)

  

## HINTS ON PRACTICAL SPIRITUALITY

(*Delivered at the Home of Truth, Los Angeles, California*)

This morning I shall try to present to you some ideas about breathing
and other exercises. We have been discussing theories so long that now
it will be well to have a little of the practical. A great many books
have been written in India upon this subject. Just as your people are
practical in many things, so it seems our people are practical in this
line. Five persons in this country will join their heads together and
say, "We will have a joint-stock company", and in five hours it is done;
in India they could not do it in fifty years; they are so unpractical in
matters like this. But, mark you, if a man starts a system of
philosophy, however wild its theory may be, it will have followers. For
instance, a sect is started to teach that if a man stands on one leg for
twelve years, day and night, he will get salvation — there will be
hundreds ready to stand on one leg. All the suffering will be quietly
borne. There are people who keep their arms upraised for years to gain
religious merit. I have seen hundreds of them. And, mind you, they are
not always ignorant fools, but are men who will astonish you with the
depth and breadth of their intellect. So, you see, the word practical is
also relative.

We are always making this mistake in judging others; we are always
inclined to think that our little mental universe is all that is; our
ethics, our morality, our sense of duty, our sense of utility, are the
only things that are worth having. The other day when I was going to
Europe, I was passing through Marseilles, where a bull-fight was being
held. All the Englishmen in the steamer were mad with excitement,
abusing and criticising the whole thing as cruel. When I reached
England, I heard of a party of prize-fighters who had been to Paris, and
were kicked out unceremoniously by the French, who thought
prize-fighting very brutal. When I hear these things in various
countries, I begin to understand the marvellous saying of Christ: "Judge
not that ye be not judged." The more we learn, the more he find out how
ignorant we are, how multiform and multi-sided is this mind of man. When
I was a boy, I used to criticise the ascetic practices of my countrymen;
great preachers in our own land have criticised them; the greatest man
that was ever born, Buddha himself, criticised them. But all the same,
as I am growing older, I feel that I have no right to judge. Sometimes I
wish that, in spite of all their incongruities, I had one fragment of
their power to do and suffer. Often I think that my judgment and my
criticism do not proceed from any dislike of torture, but from sheer
cowardice — because I cannot do it — I dare not do it.

Then, you see that strength, power, and courage are things which are
very peculiar. We generally say, "A courageous man, a brave man, a
daring man", but we must bear in mind that that courage or bravery or
any other trait does not always characterise the man. The same man who
would rush to the mouth of a cannon shrinks from the knife of the
surgeon; and another man who never dares to face a gun will calmly bear
a severe surgical operation, if need be. Now, in judging others you must
always define your terms of courage or greatness. The man whom I am
criticising as not good may be wonderfully so in some points in which I
am not.

Take another example. You often note, when people are discussing as to
what man and woman can do, always the same mistake is made. They think
they show man at his best because he can fight, for instance, and
undergo tremendous physical exertion; and this is pitted against the
physical weakness and the non-combating quality of woman. This is
unjust. Woman is as courageous as man. Each is equally good in his or
her way. What man can bring up a child with such patience, endurance,
and love as the woman can? The one has developed the power of doing; the
other, the power of suffering. If woman cannot act, neither can man
suffer. The whole universe is one of perfect balance. I do not know, but
some day we may wake up and find that the mere worm has something which
balances our manhood. The most wicked person may have some good
qualities that I entirely lack. I see that every day of my life. Look at
the savage! I wish I had such a splendid physique. He eats, he drinks,
to his heart's content, without knowing perhaps what sickness is, while
I am suffering every minute. How many times would I have been glad to
have changed my brain for his body! The whole universe is only a wave
and a hollow; there can be no wave without a hollow. Balance everywhere.
You have one thing great, your neighbour has another thing great. When
you are judging man and woman, judge them by the standard of their
respective greatness. One cannot be in other's shoes. The one has no
right to say that the other is wicked. It is the same old superstition
that says, "If this is done, the world will go to ruin." But in spite of
this the world has not yet come to ruin. It was said in this country
that if the Negroes were freed, the country would go to ruin — but did
it? It was also said that if the masses were educated, the world would
come to ruin — but it was only made better. Several years ago a book
came out depicting the worst thing that could happen to England. The
writer showed that as workmen's wages were rising, English commerce was
declining. A cry was raised that the workmen in England were exorbitant
in their demands, and that the Germans worked for less wages. A
commission was sent over to Germany to investigate this and it reported
that the German labourers received higher wages. Why was it so? Because
of the education of the masses. Then how about the world going to ruin
if the masses are educated? In India, especially, we meet with old
fogies all over the land. They want to keep everything secret from the
masses. These people come to the very satisfying conclusion that they
are the *crême de la crême* of this universe. They believed they cannot
be hurt by these dangerous experiments. It is only the masses that can
be hurt by them!

Now, coming back to the practical. The subject of the practical
application of psychology has been taken up in India from very early
times. About fourteen hundred years before Christ, there flourished in
India a great philosopher, Patanjali by name. He collected all the
facts, evidences, and researches in psychology and took advantage of all
the experiences accumulated in the past. Remember, this world is very
old; it was not created only two or three thousand years ago. It is
taught here in the West that society began eighteen hundred years ago,
with the New Testament. Before that there was no society. That may be
true with regard to the West, but it is not true as regards the whole
world. Often, while I was lecturing in London, a very intellectual and
intelligent friend of mine would argue with me, and one day after using
all his weapons against me, he suddenly exclaimed, "But why did not your
Rishis come to England to teach us?" I replied, "Because there was no
England to come to. Would they preach to the forests?"

"Fifty years ago," said Ingersoll to me, "you would have been hanged in
this country if you had come to preach. You would have been burnt alive
or you would have been stoned out of the villages."

So there is nothing unreasonable in the supposition that civilisation
existed fourteen hundred years before Christ. It is not yet settled
whether civilisation has always come from the lower to the higher. The
same arguments and proofs that have been brought forward to prove this
proposition can also be used to demonstrate that the savage is only a
degraded civilised man. The people of China, for instance, can never
believe that civilisation sprang from a savage state, because the
contrary is within their experience. But when you talk of the
civilisation of America, what you mean is the perpetuity and the growth
of your own race.

It is very easy to believe that the Hindus, who have been declining for
seven hundred years, were highly civilised in the past. We cannot prove
that it is not so.

There is not one single instance of any civilisation being spontaneous.
There was not a race in the world which became civilised unless another
civilised race came and mingled with that race. The origin of
civilisation must have belonged, so to say, to one or two races who went
abroad, spread their ideas, and intermingled with other races and thus
civilisation spread.

For practical purposes, let us talk in the language of modern science.
But I must ask you to bear in mind that, as there is religious
superstition, so also there is a superstition in the matter of science.
There are priests who take up religious work as their speciality; so
also there are priests of physical law, scientists. As soon as a great
scientist's name, like Darwin or Huxley, is cited, we follow blindly. It
is the fashion of the day. Ninety-nine per cent of what we call
scientific knowledge is mere theories. And many of them are no better
than the old superstitions of ghosts with many heads and hands, but with
this difference that the latter differentiated man a little from stocks
and stones. True science asks us to be cautious. Just as we should be
careful with the priests, so we should be with the scientists. Begin
with disbelief. Analyse, test, prove everything, and then take it. Some
of the most current beliefs of modern science have not been proved. Even
in such a science as mathematics, the vast majority of its theories are
only working hypotheses. With the advent of greater knowledge they will
be thrown away.

In 1400 B.C. a great sage made an attempt to arrange, analyse, and
generalise upon certain psychological facts. He was followed by many
others who took up parts of what he had discovered and made a special
study of them. The Hindus alone of all ancient races took up the study
of this branch of knowledge in right earnest. I am teaching you now
about it, but how many of you will practice it? How many days, how many
months will it be before you give it up? You are impractical on this
subject. In India, they will persevere for ages and ages. You will be
astonished to hear that they have no churches, no Common Prayers, or
anything of the kind; but they, every day, still practice the breathings
and try to concentrate the mind; and that is the chief part of their
devotion. These are the main points. Every Hindu must do these. It is
the religion of the country. Only, each one may have a special method —
a special form of breathing, a special form of concentration, and what
is one's special method, even one's wife need not know; the father need
not know the son's. But they all have to do these. And there is nothing
occult about these things. The word "occult" has no bearing on them.
Near the Gangâ thousands and thousands of people may be seen daily
sitting on its banks breathing and concentrating with closed eyes. There
may be two reasons that make certain practices impracticable for the
generality of mankind. One is, the teachers hold that the ordinary
people are not fit for them. There may be some truth in this, but it is
due more to pride. The second is the fear of persecution. A man, for
instance, would not like to practice breathing publicly in this country,
because he would be thought so queer; it is not the fashion here. On the
other hand, in India, if a man prayed, "Give us this day our daily
bread", people would laugh at him. Nothing could be more foolish to the
Hindu mind than to say, "Our Father which art in Heaven." The Hindu,
when he worships, thinks that God is within himself.

According to the Yogis, there are three principal nerve currents: one
they call the Idâ, the other the Pingalâ, and the middle one the
Sushumnâ, and all these are inside the spinal column. The Ida and the
Pingala, the left and the right, are clusters of nerves, while the
middle one, the Sushumna, is hollow and is not a cluster of nerves. This
Sushumna is closed, and for the ordinary man is of no use, for he works
through the Ida and the Pingala only. Currents are continually going
down and coming up through these nerves, carrying orders all over the
body through other nerves running to the different organs of the body.

It is the regulation and the bringing into rhythm of the Ida and Pingala
that is the great object of breathing. But that itself is nothing — it
is only so much air taken into the lungs; except for purifying the
blood, it is of no more use. There is nothing occult in the air that we
take in with our breath and assimilate to purify the blood; the action
is merely a motion. This motion can be reduced to the unit movement we
call Prâna; and everywhere, all movements are the various manifestations
of this Prana. This Prana is electricity, it is magnetism; it is thrown
out by the brain as thought. Everything is Prana; it is moving the sun,
the moon, and the stars.

We say, whatever is in this universe has been projected by the vibration
of the Prana. The highest result of vibration is thought. If there be
any higher, we cannot conceive of it. The nerves, Ida and Pingala, work
through the Prana. It is the Prana that is moving every part of the
body, becoming the different forces. Give up that old idea that God is
something that produces the effect and sits on a throne dispensing
justice. In working we become exhausted because we use up so much Prana.

The breathing exercises, called Prânâyâma, bring about regulation of the
breathing, rhythmic action of the Prana. When the Prana is working
rhythmically, everything works properly. When the Yogis get control over
their own bodies, if there is any disease in any part, they know that
the Prana is not rhythmic there and they direct the Prana to the
affected part until the rhythm is re-established.

Just as you can control the Prana in your own body, so, if you are
powerful enough, you can control, even from here another man's Prana in
India. It is all one. There is no break; unity is the law. Physically,
psychically, mentally, morally, metaphysically, it is all one. Life is
only a vibration. That which vibrates this ocean of ether, vibrates you.
Just as in a lake, various strata of ice of various degrees of solidity
are formed, or as in an ocean of vapour there are various degrees of
density, so is this universe an ocean of matter. This is an ocean of
ether in which we find the sun, moon, stars, and ourselves — in
different states of solidity; but the continuity is not broken; it is
the same throughout.

Now, when we study metaphysics, we come to know the world is one, not
that the spiritual, the material, the mental, and the world of energies
are separate. It is all one, but seen from different planes of vision.
When you think of yourself as a body, you forget that you are a mind,
and when you think of yourself as a mind, you will forget the body.
There is only one thing, that you are; you can see it either as matter
or body — or you can see it as mind or spirit. Birth, life, and death
are but old superstitions. None was ever born, none will ever die; one
changes one's position — that is all. I am sorry to see in the West how
much they make of death; always trying to catch a little life. "Give us
life after death! Give us life!" They are so happy if anybody tells them
that they are going to live afterwards! How can I ever doubt such a
thing! How can I imagine that I am dead! Try to think of yourself as
dead, and you will see that you are present to see your own dead body.
Life is such a wonderful reality that you cannot for a moment forget it.
You may as well doubt that you exist. This is the first fact of
consciousness — I am. Who can imagine a state of things which never
existed? It is the most self-evident of all truths. So, the idea of
immortality is inherent in man. How can one discuss a subject that is
unimaginable? Why should we want to discuss the *pros* and *cons* of a
subject that is self-evident?

The whole universe, therefore, is a unit, from whatever standpoint you
view it. Just now, to us, this universe is a unit of Prana and Âkâsha,
force and matter. And mind you, like all other basic principles, this is
also self-contradictory. For what is force? — that which moves matter.
And what is matter? — that which is moved by force. It is a seesaw! Some
of the fundamentals of our reasoning are most curious, in spite of our
boast of science and knowledge. "It is a headache without a head", as
the Sanskrit proverb says. This state of things has been called Maya. It
has neither existence nor non-existence. You cannot call it existence,
because that only exists which is beyond time and space, which is
self-existence. Yet this world satisfies to a certain degree our idea of
existence. Therefore it has an apparent existence.

But there is the real existence in and through everything; and that
reality, as it were, is caught in the meshes of time, space, and
causation. There is the real man, the infinite, the beginningless, the
endless, the ever-blessed, the ever-free. He has been caught in the
meshes of time, space, and causation. So has everything in this world.
The reality of everything is the same infinite. This is not idealism; it
is not that the world does not exist. It has a relative existence, and
fulfils all its requirements. But it has no independent existence. It
exists because of the Absolute Reality beyond time, space, and
causation.

I have made long digressions. Now, let us return to our main subject.

All the automatic movements and all the conscious movements are the
working of Prana through the nerves. Now, you see, it will be a very
good thing to have control over the unconscious actions.

On some other occasions, I told you the definition of God and man. Man
is an infinite circle whose circumference is nowhere, but the centre is
located in one spot; and God is an infinite circle whose circumference
is nowhere, but whose centre is everywhere. He works through all hands,
sees through all eyes, walks on all feet, breathes through all bodies,
lives in all life, speaks through every mouth, and thinks through every
brain. Man can become like God and acquire control over the whole
universe if he multiplies infinitely his centre of self-consciousness.
Consciousness, therefore, is the chief thing to understand. Let us say
that here is an infinite line amid darkness. We do not see the line, but
on it there is one luminous point which moves on. As it moves along the
line, it lights up its different parts in succession, and all that is
left behind becomes dark again. Our consciousness; may well be likened
to this luminous point. Its past experiences have been replaced by the
present, or have become subconscious. We are not aware of their presence
in us; but there they are, unconsciously influencing our body and mind.
Every movement that is now being made without the help of consciousness
was previously conscious. Sufficient impetus has been given to it to
work of itself.

The great error in all ethical systems, without exception, has been the
failure of teaching the means by which man could refrain from doing
evil. All the systems of ethics teach, "Do not steal!" Very good; but
why does a man steal? Because all stealing, robbing, and other evil
actions, as a rule, have become automatic. The systematic robber, thief,
liar, unjust man and woman, are all these in spite of themselves! It is
really a tremendous psychological problem. We should look upon man in
the most charitable light. It is not so easy to be good. What are you
but mere machines until you are free? Should you be proud because you
are good? Certainly not. You are good because you cannot help it.
Another is bad because he cannot help it. If you were in his position,
who knows what you would have been? The woman in the street, or the
thief in the jail, is the Christ that is being sacrificed that you may
be a good man. Such is the law of balance. All the thieves and the
murderers, all the unjust, the weakest, the wickedest, the devils, they
all are my Christ! I owe a worship to the God Christ and to the demon
Christ! That is my doctrine, I cannot help it. My salutation goes to the
feet of the good, the saintly, and to the feet of the wicked and the
devilish! They are all my teachers, all are my spiritual fathers, all
are my Saviours. I may curse one and yet benefit by his failings; I may
bless another and benefit by his good deeds. This is as true as that I
stand here. I have to sneer at the woman walking in the street, because
society wants it! She, my Saviour, she, whose street-walking is the
cause of the chastity of other women! Think of that. Think, men and
women, of this question in your mind. It is a truth — a bare, bold
truth! As I see more of the world, see more of men and women, this
conviction grows stronger. Whom shall I blame? Whom shall I praise? Both
sides of the shield must be seen.

The task before us is vast; and first and foremost, we must seek to
control the vast mass of sunken thoughts which have become automatic
with us. The evil deed is, no doubt, on the conscious plane; but the
cause which produced the evil deed was far beyond in the realms of the
unconscious, unseen, and therefore more potent.

Practical psychology directs first of all its energies in controlling
the unconscious, and we know that we can do it. Why? Because we know the
cause of the unconscious is the conscious; the unconscious thoughts are
the submerged millions of our old conscious thoughts, old conscious
actions become petrified — we do not look at them, do not know them,
have forgotten them. But mind you, if the power of evil is in the
unconscious, so also is the power of good. We have many things stored in
us as in a pocket. We have forgotten them, do not even think of them,
and there are many of them, rotting, becoming positively dangerous; they
come forth, the unconscious causes which kill humanity. True psychology
would, therefore, try to bring them under the control of the conscious.
The great task is to revive the whole man, as it were, in order to make
him the complete master of himself. Even what we call the automatic
action of the organs within our bodies, such as the liver etc., can be
made to obey our commands.

This is the first part of the study, the control of the unconscious. The
next is to go beyond the conscious. Just as unconscious work is beneath
consciousness, so there is another work which is above consciousness.
When this superconscious state is reached, man becomes free and divine;
death becomes immortality, weakness becomes infinite power, and iron
bondage becomes liberty. That is the goal, the infinite realm of the
superconscious.

So, therefore, we see now that there must be a twofold work. First, by
the proper working of the Ida and the Pingala, which are the two
existing ordinary currents, to control the subconscious action; and
secondly, to go beyond even consciousness.

The books say that he alone is the Yogi who, after long practice in
self-concentration, has attained to this truth. The Sushumna now opens
and a current which never before entered into this new passage will find
its way into it, and gradually ascend to (what we call in figurative
language) the different lotus centres, till at last it reaches the
brain. Then the Yogi becomes conscious of what he really is, God
Himself.

Everyone without exception, everyone of us, can attain to this
culmination of Yoga. But it is a terrible task. If a person wants to
attain to this truth, he will have to do something more than to listen
to lectures and take a few breathing exercises. Everything lies in the
preparation. How long does it take to strike a light? Only a second; but
how long it takes to make the candle! How long does it take to eat a
dinner? Perhaps half an hour. But hours to prepare the food! We want to
strike the light in a second, but we forget that the making of the
candle is the chief thing.

But though it is so hard to reach the goal, yet even our smallest
attempts are not in vain. We know that nothing is lost. In the Gita,
Arjuna asks Krishna, "Those who fail in attaining perfection in Yoga in
this life, are they destroyed like the clouds of summer?" Krishna
replies, "Nothing, my friend, is lost in this world. Whatever one does,
that remains as one's own, and if the fruition of Yoga does not come in
this life, one takes it up again in the next birth." Otherwise, how do
you explain the marvellous childhood of Jesus, Buddha, Shankara?

Breathing, posturing, etc. are no doubt helps in Yoga; but they are
merely physical. The great preparations are mental. The first thing
necessary is a quiet and peaceable life.

If you want to be a Yogi, you must be free, and place yourself in
circumstances where you are alone and free from all anxiety. He who
desires a comfortable and nice life and at the same time wants to
realise the Self is like the fool who, wanting to cross the river,
caught hold of a crocodile, mistaking it for a log of wood
(*Vivekachudâmani*, 84.). "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and
everything shall be added unto you." This is the one great duty, this is
renunciation. Live for an ideal, and leave no place in the mind for
anything else. Let us put forth all our energies to acquire that, which
never fails — our spiritual perfection. If we have true yearning for
realisation, we must struggle, and through struggle growth will come. We
shall make mistakes, but they may be angels unawares.

The greatest help to spiritual life is meditation (Dhyâna). In
meditation we divest ourselves of all material conditions and feel our
divine nature. We do not depend upon any external help in meditation.
The touch of the soul can paint the brightest colour even in the
dingiest places; it can cast a fragrance over the vilest thing; it can
make the wicked divine — and all enmity, all selfishness is effaced. The
less the thought of the body, the better. For it is the body that drags
us down. It is attachment, identification, which makes us miserable.
That is the secret: To think that I am the spirit and not the body, and
that the whole of this universe with all its relations, with all its
good and all its evil, is but as a series of paintings — scenes on a
canvas — of which I am the witness.

</div>
