---
title: BHAKTI OR DEVOTION

---
<div>

[←](hints_on_practical_spirituality.htm) [Home](../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](volume_2_contents.htm)
/ [→](jnana-yoga/the_necessity_of_religion.htm)

  

## BHAKTI OR DEVOTION

The idea of a Personal God has obtained in almost every religion, except
a very few. With the exception of the Buddhist and the Jain, perhaps all
the religions of the world have the idea of a Personal God, and with it
comes the idea of devotion and worship. The Buddhists and the Jains,
although they have no Personal God, worship the founders of their
religions in precisely the same way as others worship a Personal God.
This idea of devotion and worship to some higher being who can reflect
back the love to man is universal. In various religions this love and
devotion is manifested in various degrees, at different stages. The
lowest stage is that of ritualism, when abstract ideas are almost
impossible, and are dragged down to the lowest plane, and made concrete.
Forms come into play, and, along with them, various symbols. Throughout
the history of the world, we find that man is trying to grasp the
abstract through thought-forms, or symbols. All the external
manifestations of religion — bells, music, rituals, books, and images —
come under that head. Anything that appeals to the senses, anything that
helps man to form a concrete image of the abstract, is taken hold of,
and worshipped.

From time to time, there have been reformers in every religion who have
stood against all symbols and rituals. But vain has been their
opposition, for so long as man will remain as he is, the vast majority
will always want something concrete to hold on to, something around
which, as it were, to place their ideas, something which will be the
centre of all the thought-forms in their minds. The great attempts of
the Mohammedans and of the Protestants have been directed to this one
end, of doing away with all rituals, and yet we find that even with
them, rituals have crept in. They cannot be kept out; after long
struggle, the masses simply change one symbol for another. The
Mohammedan, who thinks that every ritual, every form, image, or
ceremony, used by a non-Mohammedan is sinful, does not think so when he
comes to his own shrine, the Caaba. Every religious Mohammedan wherever
he prays, must imagine that he is standing before the Caaba. When he
makes a pilgrimage there, he must kiss the black stone in the wall of
the shrine. All the kisses that have been imprinted on that stone, by
millions and millions of pilgrims, will stand up as witnesses for the
benefit of the faithful on the last day of judgment. Then, there is the
well of Zimzim. Mohammedans believe that whoever draws a little water
out of that well will have his sins pardoned, and he will, after the day
of resurrection, have a fresh body, and live for ever. In others, we
find that the symbology comes in the form of buildings. Protestants hold
that churches are more sacred than other places. The church, as it is,
stands for a symbol. Or there is the Book. The idea of the Book to them,
is much holier than any other symbol.

It is vain to preach against the use of symbols, and why should we
preach against them? There is no reason why man should not use symbols.
They have them in order to represent the ideas signified behind them.
This universe is a symbol, in and through which we are trying to grasp
the thing signified, which is beyond and behind. The spirit is the goal,
and not matter. Forms, images, bells, candles, books, churches, temples,
and all holy symbols are very good, very helpful to the growing plant of
spirituality, but thus far and no farther. In the test majority of
cases, we find that the plant does not grow. It is very good to be born
in a church, but it is very bad to die in a church. It is very good to
be born within the limits of certain forms that help the little plant of
spirituality, but if a man dies within the bounds of these forms, it
shows that he has not grown, that there has been no development of the
soul.

If, therefore, any one says that symbols, rituals, and forms are to be
kept for ever, he is wrong; but if he says, that these symbols and
rituals are a help to the growth of the soul, in its low and undeveloped
state, he is right. But, you must not mistake this development of the
soul as meaning anything intellectual. A man can be of gigantic
intellect, yet spiritually he may be a baby. You can verify it this
moment. All of you have been taught to believe in an Omnipresent God.
Try to think of it. How few of you can have any idea of what
omnipresence means! If you struggle hard, you will get something like
the idea of the ocean, or of the sky, or of a vast stretch of green
earth, or of a desert. All these are material images, and so long as you
cannot conceive of the abstract *as* abstract, of the ideal *as* the
ideal, you will have to resort to these forms, these material images. It
does not make much difference whether these images are inside or outside
the mind. We are all born idolaters, and idolatry is good, because it is
in the nature of man. Who can get beyond it? Only the perfect man, the
God-man. The rest are all idolaters. So long as we see this universe
before us, with its forms and shapes, we are all idolaters. This is a
gigantic symbol we are worshipping. He who says he is the body is a born
idolater. We are spirit, spirit that has no form or shape, spirit that
is infinite, and not matter. Therefore, anyone who cannot grasp the
abstract, who cannot think of himself as he is, except in and through
matter, as the body, is an idolater. And yet how people fight among
themselves, calling one another idolaters! In other words, each says,
his idol is right, and the others' are wrong.

Therefore, we should get rid of these childish notions. We should get
beyond the prattle of men who think that religion is merely a mass of
frothy words, that it is only a system of doctrines; to whom religion is
only a little intellectual assent or dissent; to whom religion is
believing in certain words which their own priests tell them; to whom
religion is something which their forefathers believed; to whom religion
is a certain form of ideas and superstitions to which they cling because
they are their national superstitions. We should get beyond all these
and look at humanity as one vast organism, slowly coming towards light —
a wonderful plant, slowly unfolding itself to that wonderful truth which
is called God — and the first gyrations, the first motions, towards this
are always through matter and through ritual.

In the heart of all these ritualisms, there stands one idea prominent
above all the rest — the worship of a name. Those of you who have
studied the older forms of Christianity, those of you who have studied
the other religions of the world, perhaps have marked that there is this
idea with them all, the worship of a name. A name is said to be very
sacred. In the Bible we read that the holy name of God was considered
sacred beyond compare, holy beyond everything. It was the holiest of all
names, and it was thought that this very Word was God. This is quite
true. What is this universe but name and form? Can you think without
words? Word and thought are inseparable. Try if any one of you can
separate them. Whenever you think, you are doing so through word forms.
The one brings the other; thought brings the word, and the word brings
the thought. Thus the whole universe is, as it were, the external symbol
of God, and behind that stands His grand name. Each particular body is a
form, and behind that particular body is its name. As soon as you think
of our friend So-and-so, there comes the idea of his body, and as soon
as you think of your friend's body, you get the idea of his name. This
is in the constitution of man. That is to say, psychologically, in the
mind-stuff of man, there cannot come the idea of name without the idea
of form, and there cannot come the idea of form without the idea of
name. They are inseparable; they are the external and the internal sides
of the same wave. As such, names have been exalted and worshipped all
over the world — consciously or unconsciously, man found the glory of
names.

Again, we find that in many different religions, holy personages have
been worshipped. They worship Krishna, they worship Buddha, they worship
Jesus, and so forth. Then, there is the worship of saints; hundreds of
them have been worshipped all over the world, and why not? The vibration
of light is everywhere. The owl sees it in the dark. That shows it is
there, though man cannot see it. To man, that vibration is only visible
in the lamp, in the sun, in the moon, etc. God is omnipresent, He is
manifesting Himself in every being; but for men, He is only visible,
recognisable, in man. When His light, His presence, His spirit, shines
through the human face, then and then alone, can man understand Him.
Thus, man has been worshipping God through men all the time, and must do
so as long as he is a man. He may cry against it, struggle against it,
but as soon as he attempts to realise God, he will find the
constitutional necessity of thinking of God as a man.

So we find that in almost every religion these are the three primary
things which we have in the worship of God — forms or symbols, names,
God-men. All religions have these, but you find that they want to fight
with each other. One says, "My name is the only name; my form is the
only form; and my God-men are the only God-men in the world; yours are
simply myths." In modern times, Christian clergymen have become a little
kinder, and they allow that in the older religions, the different forms
of worship were foreshadowings of Christianity, which of course, they
consider, is the only true form. God tested Himself in older times,
tested His powers by getting these things into shape which culminated in
Christianity. This, at least, is a great advance. Fifty years ago they
would not have said even that; nothing was true except their own
religion. This idea is not limited to any religion, nation, or class of
persons; people are always thinking that the only right thing to be done
by others is what they themselves are doing. And it is here that the
study of different religions helps us. It shows us that the same
thoughts that we have been calling ours, and ours alone, were present
hundreds of years ago in others, and sometimes even in a better form of
expression than our own.

These are the external forms of devotion, through which man has to pass;
but if he is sincere, if he really wants to reach the truth, he goes
higher than these, to a plane where forms are as nothing. Temples or
churches, books or forms, are simply the kindergarten of religion, to
make the spiritual child strong enough to take higher steps; and these
first steps are necessary if he wants religion. With the thirst, the
longing for God, comes real devotion, real Bhakti. Who has the longing?
That is the question. Religion is not in doctrines, in dogmas, nor in
intellectual argumentation; it is being and becoming, it is realisation.
We hear so many talking about God and the soul, and all the mysteries of
the universe, but if you take them one by one, and ask them, "Have you
realised God? Have you seen your Soul?" — how many can say they have?
And yet they are all fighting with one another! At one time, in India,
representatives of different sects met together and began to dispute.
One said that the only God was Shiva; another said, the only God was
Vishnu, and so on; and there was no end to their discussion. A sage was
passing that way, and was invited by the disputants to decide the
matter. He first asked the man who was claiming Shiva as the greatest
God, "Have you seen Shiva? Are you acquainted with Him? If not, how do
you know He is the greatest God?" Then turning to the worshipper of
Vishnu, he asked, "Have you seen Vishnu?" And after asking this question
to all of them, he found out that not one of them knew anything of God.
That was why they were disputing so much, for had they really known,
they would not have argued. When a jar is being filled with water, it
makes a noise, but when it is full, there is no noise. So, the very fact
of these disputations and fighting among sects shows that they do not
know anything about religion. Religion to them is a mere mass of frothy
words, to be written in books. Each one hurries to write a big book, to
make it as massive as possible, stealing his materials from every book
he can lay his hands upon, and never acknowledging his indebtedness.
Then he launches this book upon the world, adding to the disturbance
that is already existing there.

The vast majority of men are atheists. I am glad that, in modern times,
another class of atheists has come into existence in the Western world —
I mean the materialists. They are sincere atheists. They are better than
the religious atheists, who are insincere, who fight and talk about
religion, and yet do not want it, never try to realise it, never try to
understand it. Remember the words of Christ: "Ask, and it shall be given
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you."
These words are literally true, not figures or fiction. They were the
outflow of the heart's blood of one of the greatest sons of God who have
ever come to this world of ours; words which came as the fruit of
realisation, from a man who had felt and realised God himself; who had
spoken with God, lived with God, a hundred times more intensely than you
or I see this building. Who wants God? That is the question. Do you
think that all this mass of people in the world want God, and cannot get
Him? That cannot be. What want is there without its object outside? Man
wants to breathe, and there is air for him to breathe. Man wants to eat,
and there is food to eat. What creates these desires? The existence of
external things. It was the light that made the eyes; it was the sound
that made the ears. So every desire in human beings has been created by
something which already existed outside. This desire for perfection, for
reaching the goal and getting beyond nature, how can it be there, until
something has created it and drilled it into the soul of man, and makes
it live there? He, therefore, in whom this desire is awakened, will
reach the goal. We want everything but God. This is not religion that
you see all around you. My lady has furniture in her parlour, from all
over the world, and now it is the fashion to have something Japanese; so
she buys a vase and puts it in her room. Such is religion with the vast
majority; they have all sorts of things for enjoyment, and unless they
add a little flavour of religion, life is not all right, because society
would criticise them. Society expects it; so they must have some
religion. This is the present state of religion in the world.

A disciple went to his master and said to him, "Sir, I want religion."
The master looked at the young man, and did not speak, but only smiled.
The young man came every day, and insisted that he wanted religion. But
the old man knew better than the young man. One day, when it was very
hot, he asked the young man to go to the river with him and take a
plunge. The young man plunged in, and the old man followed him and held
the young man down under the water by force. After the young man had
struggled for a while, he let him go and asked him what he wanted most
while he was under the water. "A breath of air", the disciple answered.
"Do you want God in that way? If you do, you will get Him in a moment,"
said the master. Until you have that thirst, that desire, you cannot get
religion, however you may struggle with your intellect, or your books,
or your forms. Until that thirst is awakened in you, you are no better
than any atheist; only the atheist is sincere, and you are not.

A great sage used to say, "Suppose there is a thief in a room, and
somehow he comes to know that there is a vast mass of gold in the next
room, and that there is only a thin partition between the two rooms.
What would be the condition of that thief? He would be sleepless, he
would not be able to eat or do anything. His whole mind would be on
getting that gold. Do you mean to say that, if all these people really
believed that the Mine of Happiness, of Blessedness, of Glory were here,
they would act as they do in the world, without trying to get God?" As
soon as a man begins to believe there is a God, he becomes mad with
longing to get to Him. Others may go their way, but as soon as a man is
sure that there is a much higher life than that which he is leading
here, as soon as he feels sure that the senses are not all, that this
limited, material body is as nothing compared with the immortal,
eternal, undying bliss of the Self, he becomes mad until he finds out
this bliss for himself. And this madness, this thirst, this mania, is
what is called the "awakening" to religion, and when that has come, a
man is beginning to be religious. But it takes a long time. All these
forms and ceremonies, these prayers and pilgrimages, these books, bells,
candles, and priests, are the preparations; they take off the impurities
from the soul. And when the soul has become pure, it naturally wants to
get to the mine of all purity, God Himself. Just as a piece of iron,
which had been covered with the dust of centuries, might be lying near a
magnet all the time, and yet not be attracted by it, but as soon as the
dust is cleared away, the iron is drawn by the magnet; so, when the
human soul, covered with the dust of ages, impurities, wickednesses, and
sins, after many births, becomes purified enough by these forms and
ceremonies, by doing good to others, loving other beings, its natural
spiritual attraction comes, it wakes up and struggles towards God.

Yet, all these forms and symbols are simply the beginning, not true love
of God. Love we hear spoken of everywhere. Everyone says, "Love God."
Men do not know what it into love; if they did, they would not talk so
glibly about it. Every man says he can love, and then, in no time, finds
out that there is no love in his nature. Every woman says she can love
and soon finds out that she cannot. The world is full of the talk of
love, but it is hard to love. Where is love? How do you know that there
is love? The first test of love is that it knows no bargaining. So long
as you see a man love another only to get something from him, you know
that that is not love; it is shopkeeping. Wherever there is any question
of buying and selling, it is not love. So, when a man prays to God,
"Give me this, and give me that", it is not love. How can it be? I offer
you a prayer, and you give me something in return; that is what it is,
mere shopkeeping.

A certain great king went to hunt in a forest, and there he happened to
meet a sage. He had a little conversation with him and became so pleased
with him that he asked him to accept a present from him. "No," said the
sage, "I am perfectly satisfied with my condition; these trees give me
enough fruit to eat; these beautiful pure streams supply me with all the
water I want; I sleep in these caves. What do I care for your presents,
though you be an emperor?" The emperor said, "Just to purify me, to
gratify me, come with me into the city and take some present." At last
the sage consented to go with the emperor, and he was taken into the
emperor's palace, where there were gold, jewellery, marble, and most
wonderful things. Wealth and power were manifest everywhere. The emperor
asked the sage to wait a minute, while he repeated his prayer, and he
went into a corner and began to pray, "Lord, give me more wealth, more
children, more territory." In the meanwhile, the sage got up and began
to walk away. The emperor saw him going and went after him. "Stay, Sir,
you did not take my present and are going away." The sage turned to him
and said, "Beggar, I do not beg of beggars. What can you give? You have
been begging yourself all the time." That is not the language of love.
What is the difference between love and shopkeeping, if you ask God to
give you this, and give you that? The first test of love is that it
knows no bargaining. Love is always the giver, and never the taker. Says
the child of God, "If God wants, I give Him my everything, but I do not
want anything of Him. I want nothing in this universe. I love Him,
because I want to love Him, and I ask no favour in return. Who cares
whether God is almighty or not? I do not want any power from Him nor any
manifestation of His power. Sufficient for me that He is the God of
love. I ask no more question."

The second test is that love knows no fear. So long as man thinks of God
as a Being sitting above the clouds, with rewards in one hand and
punishments in the other, there can be no love. Can you frighten one
into love? Does the lamb love the lion? The mouse, the cat? The slave,
the master? Slaves sometimes simulate love, but is it love? Where do you
ever see love in fear? It is always a sham. With love never comes the
idea of fear. Think of a young mother in the street: if a dog barks at
her, she flees into the nearest house. The next day she is in the street
with her child, and suppose a lion rushes upon the child, where will be
her position? Just at the mouth of the lion, protecting her child. Love
conquered all her fear. So also in the love of God. Who cares whether
God is a rewarder or a punisher? That is not the thought of a lover.
Think of a judge when he comes home, what does his wife see in him? Not
a judge, or a rewarder or punisher, but her husband, her love. What do
his children see in him? Their loving father, not the punisher or
rewarder. So the children of God never see in Him a punisher or a
rewarder. It is only people who have never tasted of love that fear and
quake. Cast off all fear — though these horrible ideas of God as a
punisher or rewarder may have their use in savage minds. Some men, even
the most intellectual, are spiritual savages, and these ideas may help
them. But to men who are spiritual, men who are approaching religion, in
whom spiritual insight is awakened, such ideas are simply childish,
simply foolish. Such men reject all ideas of fear.

The third is a still higher test. Love is always the highest ideal. When
one has passed through the first two stages, when one has thrown off all
shopkeeping, and cast off all fear, one then begins to realise that love
is always the highest ideal. How many times in this world we see a
beautiful woman loving an ugly man? How many times we see a handsome man
loving an ugly woman! What is the attraction? Lookers-on only see the
ugly man or the ugly woman, but not so the lover; to the lover the
beloved is the most beautiful being that ever existed. How is it? The
woman who loves the ugly man takes, as it were, the ideal of beauty
which is in her own mind, and projects it on this ugly man; and what she
worships and loves is not the ugly man, but her own ideal. That man is,
as it were, only the suggestion, and upon that suggestion she throws her
own ideal, and covers it; and it becomes her object of worship. Now,
this applies in every case where we love. Many of us have very ordinary
looking brothers or sisters; yet the very idea of their being brothers
or sisters makes them beautiful to us.

The philosophy in the background is that each one projects his own ideal
and worships that. This external world is only the world of suggestion.
All that we see, we project out of our own minds. A grain of sand gets
washed into the shell of an oyster and irritates it. The irritation
produces a secretion in the oyster, which covers the grain of sand and
the beautiful pearl is the result. Similarly, external things furnish us
with suggestions, over which we project our own ideals and make our
objects. The wicked see this world as a perfect hell, and the good as a
perfect heaven. Lovers see this world as full of love, and haters as
full of hatred; fighters see nothing but strife, and the peaceful
nothing but peace. The perfect man sees nothing but God. So we always
worship our highest ideal, and when we have reached the point, when we
love the ideal as the ideal, all arguments and doubts vanish for ever.
Who cares whether God can be demonstrated or not? The ideal can never
go, because it is a part of my own nature. I shall only question the
ideal when I question my own existence, and as I cannot question the
one, I cannot question the other. Who cares whether God can be almighty
and all-merciful at the same time or not ? Who cares whether He is the
rewarder of mankind, whether He looks at us with the eyes of a tyrant or
with the eyes of a beneficent monarch?

The lover has passed beyond all these things, beyond rewards and
punishments, beyond fears and doubts, beyond scientific or any other
demonstration. Sufficient unto him is the ideal of love, and is it not
self-evident that this universe is but a manifestation of this love?
What is it that makes atoms unite with atoms, molecules with molecules,
and causes planets to fly towards each other? What is it that attracts
man to man, man to woman, woman to man, and animals to animals, drawing
the whole universe, as it were, towards one centre? It is what is called
love. Its manifestation is from the lowest atom to the highest being:
omnipotent, all-pervading, is this love. What manifests itself as
attraction in the sentient and the insentient, in the particular and in
the universal, is the love of God. It is the one motive power that is in
the universe. Under the impetus of that love, Christ gives his life for
humanity, Buddha even for an animal, the mother for the child, the
husband for the wife. It is under the impetus of the same love that men
are ready to give up their lives for their country, and strange to say,
under the impetus of the same love, the thief steals, the murderer
murders. Even in these cases, the spirit is the same, but the
manifestation is different. This is the one motive power in the
universe. The thief has love for gold; the love is there, but it is
misdirected. So, in all crimes, as well as in all virtuous actions,
behind stands that eternal love. Suppose a man writes a cheque for a
thousand dollars for the poor of New York, and at the same time, in the
same room, another man forges the name of a friend. The light by which
both of them write is the same, but each one will be responsible for the
use he makes of it. It is not the light that is to be praised or blamed.
Unattached, yet shining in everything, is love, the motive power of the
universe, without which the universe would fall to pieces in a moment,
and this love is God.

"None, O beloved, loves the husband for the husband's sake, but for the
Self that is in the husband; none, O beloved, ever loves the wife for
the wife's sake, but for the Self that is in the wife. None ever loves
anything else, except for the Self." Even this selfishness, which is so
much condemned, is but a manifestation of the same love. Stand aside
from this play, do not mix in it, but see this wonderful panorama, this
grand drama, played scene after scene, and hear this wonderful harmony;
all are the manifestation of the same love. Even in selfishness, that
self will multiply, grow and grow. That one self, the one man, will
become two selves when he gets married; several, when he gets children;
and thus he grows until he feels the whole world as his Self, the whole
universe as his Self. He expands into one mass of universal love,
infinite love — the love that is God.

Thus we come to what is called supreme Bhakti, supreme devotion, in
which forms and symbols fall off. One who has reached that cannot belong
to any sect, for all sects are in him. To what shall he belong? For all
churches and temples are in him. Where is the church big enough for him?
Such a man cannot bind himself down to certain limited forms. Where is
the limit for unlimited love, with which he has become one? In all
religions which take up this ideal of love, we find the struggle to
express it. Although we understand what this love means and see that
everything in this world of affections and attractions is a
manifestation of that Infinite Love, the expression of which has been
attempted by sages and saints of different nations, yet we find them
using all the powers of language, transfiguring even the most carnal
expression into the divine.

Thus sang the royal Hebrew sage, thus sang they of India. "O beloved,
one kiss of Thy lips! Kissed by Thee, one's thirst for Thee increaseth
for ever! All sorrows cease, one forgets the past, present, and future,
and only thinks of Thee alone." That is the madness of the lover, when
all desires have vanished. "Who cares for salvation? Who cares to be
saved? Who cares to be perfect even? Who cares for freedom?" — says the
lover. "I do not want wealth, nor even health; I do not want beauty, I
do not want intellect: let me be born again and again, amid all the
evils that are in the world; I will not complain, but let me love Thee,
and that for love's sake."

That is the madness of love which finds expression in these songs. The
highest, most expressive, strongest, and most attractive human love is
that between man and woman, and, therefore, that language was used in
expressing the deepest devotion. The madness of this human love was the
faintest echo of the mad love of the saints. The true lovers of God want
to become mad, inebriated with the love of God, to become
"God-intoxicated men". They want to drink of the cup of love which has
been prepared by the saints and sages of every religion, who have poured
their heart's blood into it, and in which have been concentrated all the
hopes of those who have loved God without seeking reward, who wanted
love for itself only. The reward of love is love, and what a reward it
is! It is the only thing that takes off all sorrows, the only cup, by
the drinking of which this disease of the world vanishes. Man becomes
divinely mad and forgets that he is man.

Lastly, we find that all these various systems, in the end, converge to
that one point, that perfect union. We always begin as dualists. God is
a separate Being, and I am a separate being. Love comes between, and man
begins to approach God, and God, as it were, begins to approach man. Man
takes up all the various relationships of life, as father, mother,
friend, or lover; and the last point is reached when he becomes one with
the object of worship. "I am you, and you are I; and worshipping you, I
worship myself; and in worshipping myself, I worship you." There we find
the highest culmination of that with which man begins. At the beginning
it was love for the self, but the claims of the little self made love
selfish; at the end came the full blaze of light, when that self had
become the Infinite. That God who at first was a Being somewhere, became
resolved, as it were, into Infinite Love. Man himself was also
transformed. He was approaching God, he was throwing off all vain
desires, of which he was full before. With desires vanished selfishness,
and, at the apex, he found that Love, Lover, and Beloved were One.

</div>
