+++
title = "War in the Konkan"

+++
Very little has been recorded of the valiant freedom struggle in the
Konkan in the horror years of Indian history. The Konkans on the west
coast of India had long been the bastion of the Indic civilization that
withstood external attacks due to the protective influence of the
Western Ghats. The first major wave of Islamic onslaughts on the region
was initiated by Alla-ad-din Khalji when he dispatched his ace commander
Maliq Kaffr to wage Jihad on the ancient dynasty of the Kadambas, who
were the principal rulers of the Konkans. In 1312, the Army of Islam
entered the Konkan with a large cavalry force and devastated
Gopakapattana the capital of the Kadambas. The routed Kadambas fled
inwards to Chandrapura, an ancient city of great significance in the
shaiva tAntrika tradition, with their surviving army and defended the
land against the Islamic assault from this fortified stronghold. In the
1320s, in course of his invasion of South India Mohammad-ibn-Tughlaq
made a lateral thrust into the Konkan, after his assault on the Kondana
fort, Pune, to fructify the aborted Jihad of his predecessor. With over
80,000 horsemen he invaded Chandrapura, overwhelmed the Kadamba defenses
and destroyed the city. However, as Tughlaq got engaged in other battles
and started making preparations for his disastrous invasion of the
Mongol empire via Tibet, the Kadamba chief Bhima Bhupala initiated the
war of liberation in the Konkan in 1327. After a several encounters with
the Islamic garrisons the Kadamba chiefs destroyed them completely,
liberating much of Konkan region. Soon after that the large-scale Hindu
revival began in South India under the Harihara and Bukka, and in 1347
the remaining territory of the Konkan in the province of Malerajya was
liberated by the assault of Harihara.  
However, the Islamic Jihad was renewed as Alla-ad-din Bahmani declared
himself Sultan in Gulbarga and initiated an invasion of the Konkan under
his friend Maliq Saif-ad-din Ghori (“nicknamed the Sword of Islam”), one
of the surviving descendents of the terrible Shamsbanid Turk from
Ghazna, Shihab-ad-din Ghori, the killer of Prithiviraja Chahamana. The
Turkic cavalry ravaged the Palasige province and annexed it to the
Bahmanid empire, with Ghori being appointed as the viceroy in 1357. He
began systematic forced conversions of Hindus and destruction of their
shrines. In 1365, Muhammad Bahmani the successor of Alla-ad-din Bahmani
launched a large scale invasion of the Konkans to wrest it completely
from Vijayanagara and the Hindu chiefs. The Kadambas were completely
broken in this attack and they had to bury their family idol of
Saptakoteshvara to prevent it from being destroyed by the Moslems; the
survivors scattered over Maharashtra and survive as the Kadam clan of
Marathas. The Hindus were savagely persecuted by the Turkic hordes under
this sultan as well as his successor Sultan Mujahiddin Fath Khan. As the
Hindus called for help, Bukka Raya began operations in Goa in 1377 but
died shortly thereafter before bringing it to a successful completion.
In 1378 Mujahiddin perished and Vira Harihara Raya, the son of Bukka,
sent his great Brahmin general Madhava (also a scholar of the
upaniShad-s and the shaivAgama-s) to liberate the Konkans. After two
years of intense fighting, he drove the Moslem garrison out of Goa and
reinstalled the idol of Saptakoteshvara. Then he moved northwards and
captured Chandrapura bringing much of the Konkans under Vijayanagaran
control. Madhava’s rule of Konkan is supposed to have restored peace and
prosperity in the land and the Konkans thrived due the maritime trade
conducted by the Vijayanagarans. Madhava was succeeded by a series of
Vodeyar and Nakaya viceroys of the Vijayanagarans who consolidated Hindu
rule for around 95 years. In 1395 the Ghorids holed up in the fortress
of Rangini made one last attempt to restore Islamic rule. But the Hindu
general Bayachanna Vodeyar marched on them, besieged the fort and cutoff
the supply routes from Bijapur to the Moslem garrison. The Ghorids tried
to make a sally down-hill but they were mowed down by the Hindu archers
lying in wait on the forested sides of their path. With that the power
of the Ghorid Turks in India was ended once and for all.

Subsequently, the region was divided amongst multiple Hindu viceroys.
The surviving Kalyani Chalukyans were appointed to control the northern
Konkans in Samgameshvar, while the Maharattas were posted around
Vishalgad and also in the interior south in Bankapur from where they
controlled Goa. The Hindu chiefs realized that controlling the Konkan
was important to prevent the Moslem tyrants of Bijapur from gaining
supplies from Arabia and the Turkic world via the sea route. Most
importantly, the good warhorse that was scarce in the Deccan and
artillery, which held the key in the struggle with Vijayanagara could be
alternatively obtained by the sea route. The chiefs of Samgameshvar and
Vishalgad held this frontier for the Hindus. They attacked the Turkish
fleets with their own fleets and captured their horses and repulsed them
from Indian coast. They used Vishalgad as a robustly fortified backend
for their operations against the Bahmanid Moslems pressing on them from
the East via the land route. Bankapur served as the nexus with the
Vijayanagaran heartland. They also captured Haj-goers and held them as
ransom to hold off Bahmanid attacks on the Konkan from land and Turkic
attacks from sea. In 1455 the Bahmanid army attacked Konkan but a united
counter attack by the Vodeyar, Chalukyans and Maharatta chiefs,
strengthened by the Vijayanagaran auxiliaries resulted in a crushing
defeat of the Army of Islam at Wai and they dismally retreated from the
region.

In 1453, Khwaja Mahmud Gawan, a Turko-Mongol merchant and renowned
Islamist from Iraq, arrived in Bidar. His Islamic scholarship and
knowledge of the Sharia’t was unparalleled amongst the Moslems of India
and he was soon appointed as the prime minister of the Bahmanid empire
and went about the task of enforcing correct Islamic practice by
inviting Mullahs from the West and Central Asia. In the mean time, would
be conqueror of Constantinople, the Ottoman sultan Mehmed II came to
power in Turkey and tried to assassinate his brother Yusuf Adil Khan who
was also contending for the throne. However, Yusuf escaped by ship and
came to Bidar, where Mahmud Gawan picked him up as his assistant. In
1469, Mahmud Gawan with over 200,000 troops Bahmanid troops, in three
divisions under himself, and the Turks, Yusuf Adil Khan and Kush Khadaam
initiated a terrible Jihad on the Konkan. With the Moslems sweeping
through the land the Maharatta warrior Appaji decided to draw the
Moslems to the difficult terrain of Vishalgad and hold out there till
the monsoon arrived. The Turks being poor fighters under rainy
conditions, with their horses suffering from the humidity, retreated and
were put to sword by the Hindu troops. However, Mahmud Gavan being a
resolute campaigner got the aid of two traitorous Maharatta brothers,
Karan Singh and Bhim Singh to aid him in the war. The Turks advanced
again, and Appaji decided to hold them up using the same tactic of
defending from the well-fortified Vishalgad. However, Karan Singh and
Bhim Singh were breeders of the Varanus lizard which they used in
climbing forts. Accordingly Karan and Bhim decided to help the Moslems
in taking the fort, in return for the province of Wai. Karan and Bhim
sent out several lizards to scale the precipice on which the fort was
located with ropes tied to them. With the aid of these ropes they
climbed the fort and sent down rope ladders for more men to follow them.
Then they cut their way to the main fort gate and opened it. In the
process Karan Singh was killed by the Hindu defenders but the Moslems
managed to get in and massacred Appaji and his men. With the fall of
Vishalgad, Mahmud Gavan attacked the Chalukyan army by surprise at
Samgameshvar. Unprepared and surrounded by a large Moslem force, the
Chalukyans were exterminated by the Moslem army and their entire kingdom
was thoroughly plundered. With that ended the last flash of this great
Hindu dynasty which had seen the likes of Pulakeshin (though the
descendants of another line were to continue as the Aravidus). The
Virupaksha Raya of Vijayanagar was in his declining years and failed to
gather sufficient reinforcements to battle the massive Moslem horde. For
his traitorous activities, the Hindu Bhim Singh, was conferred the title
Raja Ghorpade Bahadur (Dakkani word for the Varanus lizard) by the
Sultan at the behest of Gavan.

Mahmud Gavan then sent a horde under Yusuf Adil Khan, to ravage Bankapur
and Belgaum along with Sultan Mahmud Bahmani. In 1472, the Belgaum fort
came under the combined attack of Gavan and Adil Khan in the battle that
followed the Maharatta chief Kanoji, the brother of Appaji, resisted
strongly but perished in an attempt to stave off the numerical superior
Islamic army. In the subsequent years, the bloody power struggle amongst
the Moslems in Bidar resulted in the beheading of Mahmud Gavan by his
own peers in 1481. Taking advantage of this, Virupaksha Raya in his last
years tried to liberate the Konkans via Goa, but the loss of Belgaum
greatly handicapped the Hindus. The Moslem army quickly regrouped under
the Ottoman Turk, Yusuf Adil Khan, at Belgaum and set out to invade Goa
in late 1482 with 100,000 horsemen. He was joined by the Hindu traitor
Bhim Singh Ghorpade, who was looking for lucrative plunder. At first the
Vijayanagaran army seemed to hold the upper hand and the Moslems were
retreating under a string damaging attacks. But Adil Khan sent the
treacherous Ghorpade to destroy key leaders of the Vijayanagaran army.
With this the Hindus fell into disarray and were broken and dispersed by
Adil Khan. Yusuf Adil Khan placed Kush Khadaam as the governor of Goa
and subsequently went on to become the independent Sultan of Bijapur.
Thus, the Konkans passed out of the Hindu hands into the grim shadows of
Islamic rule.
