+++
title = "The Great Circle"

+++
Berossus, the priest of Marduk of the great god of the Babylonians
declared in the 3rd century BC that 432000 solar years was the time that
had elapsed from the origin of divine kingship to the end of the world.
He believed that when 432000 years elapsed from the begining of divine
kingship, the planets would conjunct in Capricorn and mark the begining
of a world destroying fire. Many western scholars have assumed that this
number entered India and was taken up by the paurANic bards for
describing the mahAyuga. The period of the mahAyuga comprising of
kR^ita, treta, dvapara and kali is 4320000 (10\*432000), with each of
the 4 yugas respectively having 4, 3, 2 and 1 units of 432000 solar
years.  
  
The number 432000 is not restricted to the purANas as the mAdhyandina
shatapatha brAhmaNa mentions it as the mystic number of the aksharas in
the veda. It also mentions 10800 (432000/40) as the number of the bricks
in the grand platform of the soma sacrifice or the number of mantras in
the R^igveda. The brAhmaNa also mentions the number of stars in dyaus to
be 25\*432000. The number was also known to the Greeks, as Ptolemy
mentions the number 432000 as the totality of the great circle on which
he calculated his musical frequencies. Finally it appears much farther
afield in the Germanic world in the tale of the end of the world in the
Ragnarok. In the final battle between the fiery demons of Surt and the
gods lead by Odin, 800 warriors are said to have issued forth from the
540 gates of Odinâ€™s palace. Again, the same number (540\*800=432000) is
seen in the context of the fiery end of the world. The distribution of
this motif, like the macranthropic motif suggests that this number
emerged in the Indo-European world and was adopted by the Babylonians
relatively late rather than what is perceived by the western scholars.

This number obviously comes from the precessional year or the time taken
for one cycle of precession to complete= 25920 years. 60 degrees of this
precessional circle is covered in 4320 years (\*100 gives the mahAyuga
of the hindus). Thus the combination of decimal and hexagismal measure
is seen only in the Indo-European world while the Mesopotamians are
purely hexagismal (As seen in dIrghatamas hymn). Importantly the
brAhmaNa mentions that the sacrificial platform for the great soma
sacrifices (mahAyagnyas) has 10800 lokampR^iNa bricks surrounded by 360
stones symbolizing this link between the solar year and the precessional
year.
