+++
title = "Khusroo waxing eloquent"

+++
The excerpt from Amir Khusroo’s florid prose of the savage attack on the
Hindus by Maliq Kafr, the general of Alla-ad-din Khalji
(Tarikh-i-Allai). Facts that are denied by many Indians themselves

The tongue of the sword of the Khalifat of the era, which is the tongue
of the flame of Islam, has imparted light to the entire pagan darkness
of Hindustan by the illumination of its guidance. On one side an iron
wall of royal swords has been raised before the Kafirs of Mongolia, the
Magog-like Tatars, so that all of the Mongolian tribe, deserted by
Allah, drew their feet within their skirts amongst the hills of Ghazni,
and even their advance-arrows had not strength enough to reach into Sind
which was conquered by the sword of Islam. On the other side so, much
dust arose from the battered temple of Somnath that even the sea was not
able to settle it. On the right hand and on the left hand the army of
Islam has conquered Hindustan from sea to sea, and several capitals of
the rulers of the Hindus, in which the worship of the fire and their
devilish gods and had prevailed since the time of the Jinns, have all
been demolished. All these impurities of infidelity have been cleansed
by the Sultan Alla-ad-din’s destruction of idols and temples, beginning
with his first Jihad against Devgir (Devagiri in Maharashtra). Now the
flames of the light of the Shariat and the righteous Fatwa illuminate
all these unholy Hindu lands, and places for the callers to Namaz occupy
the high places and the and Namaz is read in mosques. Allah be praised\!

Maliq Kafr heard that in Brahmastpuri (Near Rameshwaram) there was a
golden idol, round which many elephants were stabled. The Maliq started
on a night expedition against this place, and in the morning seized no
less than two hundred and fifty elephants. He then determined on razing
the beautiful temple to the ground. That temple was beauteous as the
Paradise of Shaddad, the golden temple of Ram (Rameshwaram) where the
hellish Hindus worshiped their gods. The roof was covered with rubies
and emeralds,-in short, it was the holy place of the Hindus. The Maliq
dug up the temple from its foundations without leaving anything, and
made the heads of the Brahmans and other idol worshiper dance from their
necks and fall to the ground at their feet. And blood of Hindus flowed
in torrents. The stone idols called Ling Mahadeo, which had been a long
time established at that place. They were copulating sex organs
worshiped by the Kafir Hindus. Up to this time, the kick of the horse of
Islam had not yet broken them. The Musalmans destroyed all the lings,
and idols of Deo Narain (viShNu), and the other gods. Had these idols
been able to move they would have jumped to the fort of Lanka. Had those
sex organs had legs they would have run at fright of the Moslems. There
was much fierce fighting with the Hindu Nayakas defending the land who
were finally butchered. Much gold and valuable jewels fell into the
hands of the Musalmans, who returned to the royal canopy, after
executing their project of the holy Jihad on the 13th of Zi-l ka’da, 710
H. (April, 1311 A.D.). They destroyed all the temples at Birdhul (Near
Madhurai), and plundered the public treasury.
