+++
title = "The rape of arajA"

+++
In the vamshAvalis of the founding fathers of my many branched clan
there are many tales of confrontation with the rAjanyas. While the
conflict between kArtavIryArjuna and rAma is well known, the much
earlier showdown in the early career of ushanA kAvya is hardly well
known. The king daNDa of the line of the ikshvAkus was a powerful king
who ruled over the Aryan realms based in his capital, madhumanta. He was
a contemporary of the great luminary of the bhArgavas, ushanA kAvya, the
descendent of bhR^igu. kAvya’s first daughter was the very beautiful
arajA. In the intoxicating month of Chaitra, the king daNDa paid a visit
to the Ashrama of the bhArgavas. There he saw arajA ranging the forest
with carefree abandon. Her sight greatly aroused the king daNDa and with
palpitating heart he ran to her. He asked her ” O beauty with wonderous
hips, breasts and face, who are you? I am afflicted severely by kAma’s
darts and desire you desperately.” She courteously replied: “I am arajA
bhArgavi, the daughter of the mighty atharvan, ushanA kAvya. Do not make
the mistake of trying to force your self on a girl of the atharvan
lineage. If you come on me against my wishes, remember that frightful
consequences would envelop you without much doubt. The fury of the
bhArgava can be immense.” Holding his hands in a namaskar over his head,
daNDa said: “Oh arajA of beautiful breasts and loins I am just unable to
control myself; my breathing is being arrested in excitement. Please
come to me, I just need you.” arajA said: “king your uncontrollable
passion cannot be vented, I have already warned of the consequences.”
danDa said: “I am a mighty kshatriya and my sons and army stands behind
me, what can your father, a mere R^ishi do to me.” So saying rushed
forward at and arajA pinning her down and disrobing , raped her. Having
enjoyed himself thoroughly in the process he returned to madhumanta.

arajA crying and shaking in fright and dishonor waited for her father to
return. Hungry after a long journey the great physician returned home
and saw his daughter in a pitiable state, stained with smears of semen.
Having figured out what had happened, without pausing to eat he prepared
for a deadly Atharvanic rite. He prepared samids of the kaNTaka and
kaTuKa wood five finger lengths in size and dipped them in castor oil.
He then cast these in to the gArhapatya fire with the formula beginning
thus:

“1) Ours is what is conquered, ours what has shot up, ours the law, ours
the brilliancy, ours the brahman, ours the skies, ours progeny, ours
heroes. From that we exclude him yonder: daNDa of the ikshvAku lineage,
son of the kosalya, who is yonder; let him not be released from the
fatal fetter of the atharvans. Of him I take away the splendor, the
brilliancy, breath and life; now I place him in the lap of perdition.

2\) Having pierced him thrice and thrice over, and having crushed his
head and having pierced his heart thrice over I place on the lap of
perdition.

3\) I invoke the praiSha of the devas against him, his sons and his
supporters. I place him on the tusks of the god vaishvAnara. To that
vaishvAnara Hail. Oh my great god indra, you who had borne my
grandmother aid, when she borne away by the rakshas, shower the rain of
burning particles for a 100 yojanas all around. To that indra Hail ”

The great indra, who succours his praisers, duely sent down that hail of
fiery particles on the kingdom of daNDa for seven continuous days. daNDa
who was making merry in his park found his skin burnt away in this
blazing shower; his palace, his chariots, and sons and henchmen were all
buried in the smouldering ruins known as the vailasthAna.
