---
title: FREEDOM

---
<div>

[←](non-attachment.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Karma-Yoga](karma-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](the_ideal.htm)

  

CHAPTER VII

## FREEDOM

In addition to meaning work, we have stated that psychologically the
word Karma also implies causation. Any work, any action, any thought
that produces an effect is called a Karma. Thus the law of Karma means
the law of causation, of inevitable cause and sequence. Wheresoever
there is a cause, there an effect must be produced; this necessity
cannot be resisted, and this law of Karma, according to our philosophy,
is true throughout the whole universe. Whatever we see, or feel, or do,
whatever action there is anywhere in the universe, while being the
effect of past work on the one hand, becomes, on the other, a cause in
its turn, and produces its own effect. It is necessary, together with
this, to consider what is meant by the word "law". By law is meant the
tendency of a series to repeat itself. When we see one event followed by
another, or sometimes happening simultaneously with another, we expect
this sequence or co-existence to recur. Our old logicians and
philosophers of the Nyâyâ school call this law by the name of Vyâpti.
According to them, all our ideas of law are due to association. A series
of phenomena becomes associated with things in our mind in a sort of
invariable order, so that whatever we perceive at any time is
immediately referred to other facts in the mind. Any one idea or,
according to our psychology, any one wave that is produced in the
mind-stuff, Chitta, must always give rise to many similar waves. This is
the psychological idea of association, and causation is only an aspect
of this grand pervasive principle of association. This pervasiveness of
association is what is, in Sanskrit, called Vyâpti. In the external
world the idea of law is the same as in the internal — the expectation
that a particular phenomenon will be followed by another, and that the
series will repeat itself. Really speaking, therefore, law does not
exist in nature. Practically it is an error to say that gravitation
exists in the earth, or that there is any law existing objectively
anywhere in nature. Law is the method, the manner in which our mind
grasps a series of phenomena; it is all in the mind. Certain phenomena,
happening one after another or together, and followed by the conviction
of the regularity of their recurrence — thus enabling our minds to grasp
the method of the whole series — constitute what we call law.

The next question for consideration is what we mean by law being
universal. Our universe is that portion of existence which is
characterized by what the Sanskrit psychologists call
Desha-kâla-nimitta, or what is known to European psychology as space,
time, and causation. This universe is only a part of infinite existence,
thrown into a peculiar mould, composed of space, time, and causation. It
necessarily follows that law is possible only within this conditioned
universe; beyond it there cannot be any law. When we speak of the
universe, we only mean that portion of existence which is limited by our
mind — the universe of the senses, which we can see, feel, touch, hear,
think of, imagine. This alone is under law; but beyond it existence
cannot be subject to law, because causation does not extend beyond the
world of our minds. Anything beyond the range of our mind and our senses
is not bound by the law of causation, as there is no mental association
of things in the region beyond the senses, and no causation without
association of ideas. It is only when "being'' or existence gets moulded
into name and form that it obeys the law of causation, and is said to be
under law; because all law has its essence in causation. Therefore we
see at once that there cannot be any such thing as free will; the very
words are a contradiction, because will is what we know, and everything
that we know is within our universe, and everything within our universe
is moulded by the conditions of space, time, and causation. Everything
that we know, or can possibly know, must be subject to causation, and
that which obeys the law of causation cannot be free. It is acted upon
by other agents, and becomes a cause in its turn. But that which has
become converted into the will, which was not the will before, but
which, when it fell into this mould of space, time, and causation,
became converted into the human will, is free; and when this will gets
out of this mould of space, time, and causation, it will be free again.
From freedom it comes, and becomes moulded into this bondage, and it
gets out and goes back to freedom again.

The question has been raised as to from whom this universe comes, in
whom it rests, and to whom it goes; and the answer has been given that
from freedom it comes, in bondage it rests, and goes back into that
freedom again. So, when we speak of man as no other than that infinite
being which is manifesting itself, we mean that only one very small part
thereof is man; this body and this mind which we see are only one part
of the whole, only one spot of the infinite being. This whole universe
is only one speck of the infinite being; and all our laws, our bondages,
our joys and our sorrows, our happinesses and our expectations, are only
within this small universe; all our progression and digression are
within its small compass. So you see how childish it is to expect a
continuation of this universe — the creation of our minds — and to
expect to go to heaven, which after all must mean only a repetition of
this world that we know. You see at once that it is an impossible and
childish desire to make the whole of infinite existence conform to the
limited and conditioned existence which we know. When a man says that he
will have again and again this same thing which he is hating now, or, as
I sometimes put it, when he asks for a *comfortable* religion, you may
know that he has become so degenerate that he cannot think of anything
higher than what he is now; he is just his little present surroundings
and nothing more. He has forgotten his infinite nature, and his whole
idea is confined to these little joys, and sorrows, and heart-jealousies
of the moment. He thinks that this finite thing is the infinite; and not
only so, he will not let this foolishness go. He clings on desperately
unto Trishnâ, and the thirst after life, what the Buddhists call Tanhâ
and Tissâ. There may be millions of kinds of happiness, and beings, and
laws, and progress, and causation, all acting outside the little
universe that we know; and, after all, the whole of this comprises but
one section of our infinite nature.

To acquire freedom we have to get beyond the limitations of this
universe; it cannot be found here. Perfect equilibrium, or what the
Christians call the peace that passeth all understanding, cannot be had
in this universe, nor in heaven, nor in any place where our mind and
thoughts can go, where the senses can feel, or which the imagination can
conceive. No such place can give us that freedom, because all such
places would be within our universe, and it is limited by space, time,
and causation. There may be places that are more ethereal than this
earth of ours, where enjoyments may be keener, but even those places
must be in the universe and, therefore, in bondage to law; so we have to
go beyond, and real religion begins where this little universe ends.
These little joys, and sorrows, and knowledge of things end there, and
the reality begins. Until we give up the thirst after life, the strong
attachment to this our transient conditioned existence we have no hope
of catching even a glimpse of that infinite freedom beyond. It stands to
reason then that there is only one way to attain to that freedom which
is the goal of all the noblest aspirations of mankind, and that is by
giving up this little life, giving up this little universe, giving up
this earth, giving up heaven, giving up the body, giving up the mind,
giving up everything that is limited and conditioned. If we give up our
attachment to this little universe of the senses or of the mind, we
shall be free immediately. The only way to come out of bondage is to go
beyond the limitations of law, to go beyond causation.

But it is a most difficult thing to give up the clinging to this
universe; few ever attain to that. There are two ways to do that
mentioned in our books. One is called the "Neti, Neti" (not this, not
this), the other is called "Iti" (this); the former is the negative, and
the latter is the positive way. The negative way is the most difficult.
It is only possible to the men of the very highest, exceptional minds
and gigantic wills who simply stand up and say, "No, I will not have
this," and the mind and body obey their will, and they come out
successful. But such people are very rare. The vast majority of mankind
choose the positive way, the way through the world, making use of all
the bondages themselves to break those very bondages. This is also a
kind of giving up; only it is done slowly and gradually, by knowing
things, enjoying things and thus obtaining experience, and knowing the
nature of things until the mind lets them all go at last and becomes
unattached. The former way of obtaining non-attachment is by reasoning,
and the latter way is through work and experience. The first is the path
of Jnâna-Yoga, and is characterized by the refusal to do any work; the
second is that of Karma-Yoga, in which there is no cessation from work.
Every one must work in the universe. Only those who are perfectly
satisfied with the Self, whose desires do not go beyond the Self, whose
mind never strays out of the Self, to whom the Self is all in all, only
those do not work. The rest must work. A current rushing down of its own
nature falls into a hollow and makes a whirlpool, and, after running a
little in that whirlpool, it emerges again in the form of the free
current to go on unchecked. Each human life is like that current. It
gets into the whirl, gets involved in this world of space, time, and
causation, whirls round a little, crying out, "my father, my brother, my
name, my fame", and so on, and at last emerges out of it and regains its
original freedom. The whole universe is doing that. Whether we know it
or not, whether we are conscious or unconscious of it, we are all
working to get out of the dream of the world. Man's experience in the
world is to enable him to get out of its whirlpool.

What is Karma-Yoga? The knowledge of the secret of work. We see that the
whole universe is working. For what? For salvation, for liberty; from
the atom to the highest being, working for the one end, liberty for the
mind, for the body, for the spirit. All things are always trying to get
freedom, flying away from bondage. The sun, the moon, the earth, the
planets, all are trying to fly away from bondage. The centrifugal and
the centripetal forces of nature are indeed typical of our universe.
Instead of being knocked about in this universe, and after long delay
and thrashing, getting to know things as they are, we learn from
Karma-Yoga the secret of work, the method of work, the organising power
of work. A vast mass of energy may be spent in vain if we do not know
how to utilise it. Karma-Yoga makes a science of work; you learn by it
how best to utilise all the workings of this world. Work is inevitable,
it must be so; but we should work to the highest purpose. Karma-Yoga
makes us admit that this world is a world of five minutes, that it is a
something we have to pass through; and that freedom is not here, but is
only to be found beyond. To find the way out of the bondages of the
world we have to go through it slowly and surely. There may be those
exceptional persons about whom I just spoke, those who can stand aside
and give up the world, as a snake casts off its skin and stands aside
and looks at it. There are no doubt these exceptional beings; but the
rest of mankind have to go slowly through the world of work. Karma-Yoga
shows the process, the secret, and the method of doing it to the best
advantage.

What does it say? "Work incessantly, but give up all attachment to
work." Do not identify yourself with anything. Hold your mind free. All
this that you see, the pains and the miseries, are but the necessary
conditions of this world; poverty and wealth and happiness are but
momentary; they do not belong to our real nature at all. Our nature is
far beyond misery and happiness, beyond every object of the senses,
beyond the imagination; and yet we must go on working all the time.
"Misery comes through attachment, not through work." As soon as we
identify ourselves with the work we do, we feel miserable; but if we do
not identify ourselves with it, we do not feel that misery. If a
beautiful picture belonging to another is burnt, a man does not
generally become miserable; but when his own picture is burnt, how
miserable he feels! Why? Both were beautiful pictures, perhaps copies of
the same original; but in one case very much more misery is felt than in
the other. It is because in one case he identifies himself with the
picture, and not in the other. This "I and mine" causes the whole
misery. With the sense of possession comes selfishness, and selfishness
brings on misery. Every act of selfishness or thought of selfishness
makes us attached to something, and immediately we are made slaves. Each
wave in the Chitta that says "I and mine" immediately puts a chain round
us and makes us slaves; and the more we say "I and mine", the more
slavery grows, the more misery increases. Therefore Karma-Yoga tells us
to enjoy the beauty of all the pictures in the world, but not to
identify ourselves with any of them. Never say "mine". Whenever we say a
thing is "mine", misery will immediately come. Do not even say "my
child" in your mind. Possess the child, but do not say "mine". If you
do, then will come the misery. Do not say “my house," do not say "my
body". The whole difficulty is there. The body is neither yours, nor
mine, nor anybody's. These bodies are coming and going by the laws of
nature, but we are free, standing as witness. This body is no more free
than a picture or a wall. Why should we be attached so much to a body?
If somebody paints a picture, he does it and passes on. Do not project
that tentacle of selfishness, "I must possess it". As soon as that is
projected, misery will begin.

So Karma-Yoga says, first destroy the tendency to project this tentacle
of selfishness, and when you have the power of checking it, hold it in
and do not allow the mind to get into the ways of selfishness. Then you
may go out into the world and work as much as you can. Mix everywhere,
go where you please; you will never be contaminated with evil. There is
the lotus leaf in the water; the water cannot touch and adhere to it; so
will you be in the world. This is called "Vairâgya", dispassion or
non-attachment. I believe I have told you that without non-attachment
there cannot be any kind of Yoga. Non-attachment is the basis of all the
Yogas. The man who gives up living in houses, wearing fine clothes, and
eating good food, and goes into the desert, may be a most attached
person. His only possession, his own body, may become everything to him;
and as he lives he will be simply struggling for the sake of his body.
Non-attachment does not mean anything that we may do in relation to our
external body, it is all in the mind. The binding link of "I and mine"
is in the mind. If we have not this link with the body and with the
things of the senses, we are non-attached, wherever and whatever we may
be. A man may be on a throne and perfectly non-attached; another man may
be in rags and still very much attached. First, we have to attain this
state of non-attachment and then to work incessantly. Karma-Yoga gives
us the method that will help us in giving up all attachment, though it
is indeed very hard.

Here are the two ways of giving up all attachment. The one is for those
who do not believe in God, or in any outside help. They are left to
their own devices; they have simply to work with their own will, with
the powers of their mind and discrimination, saying, "I must be
non-attached". For those who believe in God there is another way, which
is much less difficult. They give up the fruits of work unto the Lord;
they work and are never attached to the results. Whatever they see,
feel, hear, or do, is for Him. For whatever good work we may do, let us
not claim any praise or benefit. It is the Lord’s; give up the fruits
unto Him. Let us stand aside and think that we are only servants obeying
the Lord, our Master, and that every impulse for action comes from Him
every moment. Whatever thou worshippest, whatever thou perceivest,
whatever thou doest, give up all unto Him and be at rest. Let us be at
peace, perfect peace, with ourselves, and give up our whole body and
mind and everything as an eternal sacrifice unto the Lord. Instead of
the sacrifice of pouring oblations into the fire, perform this one great
sacrifice day and night — the sacrifice of your little self. "In search
of wealth in this world, Thou art the only wealth I have found; I
sacrifice myself unto Thee. In search of some one to be loved, Thou art
the only one beloved I have found; I sacrifice myself unto Thee." Let us
repeat this day and night, and say, "Nothing for me; no matter whether
the thing is good, bad, or indifferent; I do not care for it; I
sacrifice all unto Thee." Day and night let us renounce our seeming self
until it becomes a habit with us to do so, until it gets into the blood,
the nerves, and the brain, and the whole body is every moment obedient
to this idea of self-renunciation. Go then into the midst of the
battlefield, with the roaring cannon and the din of war, and you will
find yourself to be free and at peace.

Karma-Yoga teaches us that the ordinary idea of duty is on the lower
plane; nevertheless, all of us have to do our duty. Yet we may see that
this peculiar sense of duty is very often a great cause of misery. Duty
becomes a disease with us; it drags us ever forward. It catches hold of
us and makes our whole life miserable. It is the bane of human life.
This duty, this idea of duty is the midday summer sun which scorches the
innermost soul of mankind. Look at those poor slaves to duty! Duty
leaves them no time to say prayers, no time to bathe. Duty is ever on
them. They go out and work. Duty is on them! They come home and think of
the work for the next day. Duty is on them! It is living a slave's life,
at last dropping down in the street and dying in harness, like a horse.
This is duty as it is understood. The only true duty is to be unattached
and to work as free beings, to give up all work unto God. All our duties
are His. Blessed are we that we are ordered out here. We serve our time;
whether we do it ill or well, who knows? If we do it well, we do not get
the fruits. If we do it ill, neither do we get the care. Be at rest, be
free, and work. This kind of freedom is a very hard thing to attain. How
easy it is to interpret slavery as duty — the morbid attachment of flesh
for flesh as duty! Men go out into the world and struggle and fight for
money or for any other thing to which they get attached. Ask them why
they do it. They say, "It is a duty”. It is the absurd greed for gold
and gain, and they try to cover it with a few flowers.

What is duty after all? It is really the impulsion of the flesh, of our
attachment; and when an attachment has become established, we call it
duty. For instance, in countries where there is no marriage, there is no
duty between husband and wife; when marriage comes, husband and wife
live together on account of attachment; and that kind of living together
becomes settled after generations; and when it becomes so settled, it
becomes a duty. It is, so to say, a sort of chronic disease. When it is
acute, we call it disease; when it is chronic, we call it nature. It is
a disease. So when attachment becomes chronic, we baptise it with the
high sounding name of duty. We strew flowers upon it, trumpets sound for
it, sacred texts are said over it, and then the whole world fights, and
men earnestly rob each other for this duty's sake. Duty is good to the
extent that it checks brutality. To the lowest kinds of men, who cannot
have any other ideal, it is of some good; but those who want to be
Karma-Yogis must throw this idea of duty overboard. There is no duty for
you and me. Whatever you have to give to the world, do give by all
means, but not as a duty. Do not take any thought of that. Be not
compelled. Why should you be compelled? *Everything that you do under
compulsion goes to build up attachment.* Why should you have any duty?
Resign everything unto God. In this tremendous fiery furnace where the
fire of duty scorches everybody, drink this cup of nectar and be happy.
We are all simply working out His will, and have nothing to do with
rewards and punishments. If you want the reward, you must also have the
punishment; the only way to get out of the punishment is to give up the
reward. The only way of getting out of misery is by giving up the idea
of happiness, because these two are linked to each other. On one side
there is happiness, on the other there is misery. On one side there is
life, on the other there is death. The only way to get beyond death is
to give up the love of life. Life and death are the same thing, looked
at from different points. So the idea of happiness without misery, or of
life without death, is very good for school-boys and children; but the
thinker sees that it is all a contradiction in terms and gives up both.
Seek no praise, no reward, for anything you do. No sooner do we perform
a good action than we begin to desire credit for it. No sooner do we
give money to some charity than we want to see our names blazoned in the
papers. Misery must come as the result of such desires. The greatest men
in the world have passed away unknown. The Buddhas and the Christs that
we know are but second-rate heroes in comparison with the greatest men
of whom the world knows nothing. Hundreds of these unknown heroes have
lived in every country working silently. Silently they live and silently
they pass away; and in time their thoughts find expression in Buddhas or
Christs, and it is these latter that become known to us. The highest men
do not seek to get any name or fame from their knowledge. They leave
their ideas to the world; they put forth no claims for themselves and
establish no schools or systems in their name. Their whole nature
shrinks from such a thing. They are the pure Sâttvikas, who can never
make any stir, but only melt down in love. I have seen one such Yogi who
lives in a cave in India. He is one of the most wonderful men I have
ever seen. He has so completely lost the sense of his own individuality
that we may say that the man in him is completely gone, leaving behind
only the all comprehending sense of the divine. If an animal bites one
of his arms, he is ready to give it his other arm also, and say that it
is the Lord's will. Everything that comes to him is from the Lord. He
does not show himself to men, and yet he is a magazine of love and of
true and sweet ideas.

Next in order come the men with more Rajas, or activity, combative
natures, who take up the ideas of the perfect ones and preach them to
the world. The highest kind of men silently collect true and noble
ideas, and others — the Buddhas and Christs — go from place to place
preaching them and working for them. In the life of Gautama Buddha we
notice him constantly saying that he is the twenty-fifth Buddha. The
twenty-four before him are unknown to history, although the Buddha known
to history must have built upon foundations laid by them. The highest
men are calm, silent, and unknown. They are the men who really know the
power of thought; they are sure that, even if they go into a cave and
close the door and simply think five true thoughts and then pass away,
these five thoughts of theirs will live through eternity. Indeed such
thoughts will penetrate through the mountains, cross the oceans, and
travel through the world. They will enter deep into human hearts and
brains and raise up men and women who will give them practical
expression in the workings of human life. These Sattvika men are too
near the Lord to be active and to fight, to be working, struggling,
preaching and doing good, as they say, here on earth to humanity. The
active workers, however good, have still a little remnant of ignorance
left in them. When our nature has yet some impurities left in it, then
alone can we work. It is in the nature of work to be impelled ordinarily
by motive and by attachment. In the presence of an ever active
Providence who notes even the sparrow's fall, how can man attach any
importance to his own work? Will it not be a blasphemy to do so when we
know that He is taking care of the minutest things in the world? We have
only to stand in awe and reverence before Him saying, "Thy will be
done". The highest men cannot work, for in them there is no attachment.
Those whose whole soul is gone into the Self, those whose desires are
confined in the Self, who have become ever associated with the Self, for
them there is no work. Such are indeed the highest of mankind; but apart
from them every one else has to work. In so working we should never
think that we can help on even the least thing in this universe. We
cannot. We only help ourselves in this gymnasium of the world. This is
the proper attitude of work. If we work in this way, if we always
remember that our present opportunity to work thus is a privilege which
has been given to us, we shall never be attached to anything. Millions
like you and me think that we are great people in the world; but we all
die, and in five minutes the world forgets us. But the life of God is
infinite. "Who can live a moment, breathe a moment, if this all-powerful
One does not will it?" He is the ever active Providence. All power is
His and within His command. Through His command the winds blow, the sun
shines, the earth lives, and death stalks upon the earth. He is the all
in all; He is all and in all. We can only worship Him. Give up all
fruits of work; do good for its own sake; then alone will come perfect
non-attachment. The bonds of the heart will thus break, and we shall
reap perfect freedom. This freedom is indeed the goal of Karma-Yoga.

</div>
