+++
title = "On Kavīndrācārya"
date = "2017-01-28"

+++
ACP=[@ArmchairPseph](https://twitter.com/ArmchairPseph)

ACP: He was a close associate of Dara Shikoh

Me: I’m reading the kavIndrasucipatra,an index of books of his library.

ACP:And a festschrift with verses from all Sanskrit intellectuals of the
day was written in his honour,and he negotiated with Shah Jahan on
behalf of Hs. There were a lot of mentions of him in the book. Can’t
recall offhand/search easily since I read the book in print + will have
to pick it up again from the library

ACP: From my notes from the book(author(of this post’s) note:Both of us
strongly disagree with the book’s thesis)(Can’t recall offhand/search
easily since I read the book in print + will have to pick it up again
from the library)

ACP: On Kavīndra’s interactions with the Mughals as a Sanskrit
intellectual see Pollock, “Death of Sanskrit,” 407-8 and as a Hindi
intellectual see Busch, “Hidden in Plain View,” 289-92.

ACP: My notes from the book further continue:

Under Shah Jahan the Brahmanical profile at the Mughal court became more
pronounced with the entry of Kavīndrācārya Sarasvatī and Jagannātha
Paṇḍitarāja. These two intellectuals interacted with the Mughals in
different ways that demonstrate continuities with earlier Mughal
patronage of Sanskrit literati but also important changes in
cross-cultural relations. Kavīndra initially approached Shah Jahan in
order to negotiate the relinquishment of taxes on certain Brahmanical
pilgrimage sites, most notably Varanasi and Prayag. The exact chronology
of what occurred is murky because no direct narrative accounts of
Kavīndra’s time at Shah Jahan’s court are known in either Sanskrit or
Persian. However, information gleaned from Sanskrit and Hindi verses
praising Kavīndra attests that he spent time in Mughal company teaching
Sanskrit texts to both Shah Jahan and Dara Shikuh. Among other works, he
instructed them in Śaṅkara’s Bhāṣya.87 Kavīndra also persuaded Shah
Jahan to rescind a pilgrimage tax, much to the joy of the Brahmanical
community

He was the one who taught Dara Shikoh the Yoga Vashishta? Don’t
remember, you will find it in my collected DMs in the devayasna drafts

Moreover, in the 1640s-50s Kavīndra moved outside of the central royal
court and joined the retinue of a Mughal noble, Danishmand Khan, and
later of the French traveler, Francois Bernier.93 For reasons we do not
yet fully understand, Sanskrit intellectuals shifted away from the
central imperial context during Shah Jahan’s reign and found new homes
in regional and subimperial courts.94 Additionally, Kavīndra’s
association with Europeans reflects wider changes in the cultural
landscape of early modern India.

Me:

> Kavīndra initially approached Shah Jahan in order to negotiate the
> relinquishment of taxes on certain Brahmanical pilgrimage sites, most
> notably Varanasi and Prayag

> Kavīndra also persuaded Shah Jahan to rescind a pilgrimage tax, much
> to the joy of the Brahmanical community

Yes,that much I too gathered

ACP: Kavindra also served the Mughals as a poet and musician and was
paid by them (which was controversial among v1s in his time)

Aurangzeb appears to have halted Shah Jahan’s stipend to Kavīndra,
which prompted him to seek out Danishmand Khan’s assistance

Shah Jahan named Kavīndra sarvavidyānidhāna (Treasure House of All
Knowledge) in recognition of his extensive learning.

Me: Anything about the loss of his library?

ACP: Don’t remember,perhaps there was.

The conversation ends here. Also,if anyone is interested in the
kavIndrasucipatra,an index of books in his library, a link of it on
archive.org exists
[here](https://archive.org/details/kavindracaryasuc00kaviuoft).

