---
title: 'RAJA YOGA

  THIRD LESSON'

---
<div>

[←](raja-yoga_ii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Six Lessons on
Raja-Yoga](six_lessons_on_raja-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](raja-yoga_iv.htm)

  

## RAJA YOGA THIRD LESSON

(These lessons are composed of notes of class talks given by Swami
Vivekananda to an intimate audience in the house of Mrs. Sara C. Bull, a
devoted American disciple, and were preserved by her and finally printed
in 1913 for private circulation — *Ed*.)

Kundalini: Realise the soul not as matter, but as it is. We are thinking
of the soul as body, but we must separate it from sense and thought.
Then alone can we know we are immortal. Change implies the duality of
cause and effect, and all that changes must be mortal. This proves that
the body cannot be immortal, nor can the mind, because both are
constantly changing. Only the unchangeable can be immortal, because
there is nothing to act upon it.

We do not become it, we are it; but we have to clear away the veil of
ignorance that hides the truth from us. The body is objectified thought.
The "sun" and "moon" currents bring energy to all parts of the body. The
surplus energy is stored at certain points (plexuses) along the spinal
column commonly known as nerve centres.

These currents are not to be found in dead bodies and can only be traced
in a healthy organism.

The Yogi has an advantage; for he is able not only to feel them, but
actually to see them. They are luminous in his life, and so are the
great nerve centres.

There is conscious as well as unconscious action. The Yogis possess a
third kind, the superconscious, which in all countries and in all ages
has been the source of all religious knowledge. The superconscious state
makes no mistakes, but whereas the action of the instinct would be
purely mechanical, the former is beyond consciousness.

It has been called inspiration, but the Yogi says, "This faculty is in
every human being, and eventually all will enjoy it."

We must give a new direction to the "sun" and "moon" currents and open
for them a new passage through the centre of the spinal cord. When we
succeed in bringing the currents through this passage called "Sushumnâ",
up to the brain, we are for the time being separated entirely from the
body.

The nerve centre at the base of the spine near the sacrum is most
important. It is the seat of the generative substance of the sexual
energy and is symbolised by the Yogi as a triangle containing a tiny
serpent coiled up in it. This sleeping serpent is called Kundalini, and
to raise this Kundalini is the whole object of Raja-Yoga.

The great sexual force, raised from animal action and sent upward to the
great dynamo of the human system, the brain, and there stored up,
becomes Ojas or spiritual force. All good thought, all prayer, resolves
a part of that animal energy into Ojas and helps to give us spiritual
power. This Ojas is the real man and in human beings alone is it
possible for this storage of Ojas to be accomplished. One in whom the
whole animal sex force has been transformed into Ojas is a god. He
speaks with power, and his words regenerate the world.

The Yogi pictures this serpent as being slowly lifted from stage to
stage until the highest, the pineal gland, is reached. No man or woman
can be really spiritual until the sexual energy, the highest power
possessed by man, has been converted into Ojas.

No force can be created; it can only be directed. Therefore we must
learn to control the grand powers that are already in our hands and by
will power make them spiritual instead of merely animal. Thus it is
clearly seen that chastity is the corner-stone of all morality and of
all religion. In Raja-Yoga especially, absolute chastity in thought,
word, and deed is a *sine qua non*. The same laws apply to the married
and the single. If one wastes the most potent forces of one's being, one
cannot become spiritual.

All history teaches us that the great seers of all ages were either
monks and ascetics or those who had given up married life; only the pure
in life can see God.

Just before making the Prânâyâma, endeavour to visualise the triangle.
Close your eyes and picture it vividly in your imagination. See it
surrounded by flames and with the serpent coiled in the middle. When you
can clearly see the Kundalini, place it in imagination at the base of
the spine, and when restraining the breath in Kumbhaka, throw it
forcibly down on the head of the serpent to awaken it. The more powerful
the imagination, the more quickly will the real result be attained and
the Kundalini be awakened. Until it does, imagine it does: try to feel
the currents and try to force them through the Sushumna. This hastens
their action.

</div>
