---
title: 'RAJA YOGA

  FOURTH LESSON'

---
<div>

[←](raja-yoga_iii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Six Lessons on
Raja-Yoga](six_lessons_on_raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](raja-yoga_v.htm)

  

## RAJA YOGA FOURTH LESSON

(These lessons are composed of notes of class talks given by Swami
Vivekananda to an intimate audience in the house of Mrs. Sara C. Bull, a
devoted American disciple, and were preserved by her and finally printed
in 1913 for private circulation — *Ed*.)

Before we can control the mind we must study it. We have to seize this
unstable mind and drag it from its wanderings and fix it on one idea.
Over and over again this must be done. By power of will we must get hold
of the mind and make it stop and reflect upon the glory of God.

The easiest way to get hold of the mind is to sit quiet and let it drift
where it will for a while. Hold fast to the idea, "I am the witness
watching my mind drifting. The mind is not I." Then see it think as if
it were a thing entirely apart from yourself. Identify yourself with
God, never with matter or with the mind.

Picture the mind as a calm lake stretched before you and the thoughts
that come and go as bubbles rising and breaking on its surface. Make no
effort to control the thoughts, but watch them and follow them in
imagination as they float away. This will gradually lessen the circles.
For the mind ranges over wide circles of thought and those circles widen
out into ever-increasing circles, as in a pond when we throw a stone
into it. We want to reverse the process and starting with a huge circle
make it narrower until at last we can fix the mind on one point and make
it stay there. Hold to the idea, "I am not the mind, I see that I am
thinking, I am watching my mind act", and each day the identification of
yourself with thought and feeling will grow less, until at last you can
entirely separate yourself from the mind and actually know it to be
apart from yourself.

When this is done, the mind is your servant to control as you will. The
first stage of being a Yogi is to go beyond the senses. When the mind is
conquered, he has reached the highest stage.

Live alone as much as possible. The seat should be of comfortable
height; put first a grass mat, then a skin (fur), next a silken cover.
It is better that the seat has no back and it must stand firm.

Thoughts being pictures, we should not create them. We have to exclude
all thought from the mind and make it a blank; as fast as a thought
comes we have to banish it. To be able to accomplish this, we must
transcend matter and go beyond our body. The whole life of man is really
an effort to do this.

Each soul has its own meaning: In our nature these two things are
connected.

The highest ideal we have is God. Meditate on Him. We cannot know the
Knower, but we are He.

Seeing evil, we are creating it. What we are, we see outside, for the
world is our mirror. This little body is a little mirror we have
created, but the whole universe is our body. We must think this all the
time; then we shall know that we cannot die or hurt another, because he
is our own. We are birthless and deathless and we ought only to love.

"This whole universe is my body; all health, all happiness is mine,
because all is in the universe." Say, "I am the universe." We finally
learn that all action is from us to the mirror.

Although we appear as little waves, the whole sea is at our back, and we
are one with it. No wave can exist of itself.

Imagination properly employed is our greatest friend; it goes beyond
reason and is the only light that takes us everywhere.

Inspiration is from within and we have to inspire ourselves by our own
higher faculties.

</div>
