---
title: 'RAJA YOGA

  FIFTH LESSON'

---
<div>

[←](raja-yoga_iv.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
8](../../volume_8_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](../lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) / [Six Lessons on
Raja-Yoga](six_lessons_on_raja-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](raja-yoga_vi.htm)

  

## RAJA YOGA FIFTH LESSON

(These lessons are composed of notes of class talks given by Swami
Vivekananda to an intimate audience in the house of Mrs. Sara C. Bull, a
devoted American disciple, and were preserved by her and finally printed
in 1913 for private circulation — *Ed*.)

Pratyâhâra and Dhâranâ: Krishna says, "All who seek me by whatever means
will reach me", "All must reach me." Pratyahara is a gathering toward,
an attempt to get hold of the mind and focus it on the desired object.
The first step is to let the mind drift; watch it; see what it thinks;
be only the witness. Mind is not soul or spirit. It is only matter in a
finer form, and we own it and can learn to manipulate it through the
nerve energies.

The body is the objective view of what we call mind (subjective). We,
the Self, are beyond both body and mind; we are "Atman", the eternal,
unchangeable witness. The body is crystallised thought.

When the breath is flowing through the left nostril, it is the time for
rest; when through the right, for work; and when through both, the time
to meditate. When we are calm and breathing equally through both
nostrils, we are in the right condition for quiet meditation. It is no
use trying to concentrate at first. Control of thought will come of
itself.

After sufficient practice of closing the nostrils with the thumb and
forefinger, we shall be able to do it by the power of will, through
thought alone.

Prânâyâma is now to be slightly changed. If the student has the name of
his "Ishta" (Chosen Ideal), he should use that instead of "Om" during
inhalation and exhalation, and use the word "Hum" (pronounced Hoom)
during Kumbhaka.

Throw the restrained breath forcibly down on the head of the Kundalini
at each repetition of the word Hum and imagine that this awakens her.
Identify yourself only with God. After a while thoughts will announce
their coming, and we shall learn the way they begin and be aware of what
we are going to think, just as on this plane we can look out and see a
person coming. This stage is reached when we have learnt to separate
ourselves from our minds and see ourselves as one and thought as
something apart. Do not let the thoughts grasp you; stand aside, and
they will die away.

Follow these holy thoughts; go with them; and when they melt away, you
will find the feet of the Omnipotent God. This is the superconscious
state; when the idea melts, follow it and melt with it.

Haloes are symbols of inner light and can be seen by the Yogi. Sometimes
we may see a face as if surrounded by flames and in them read the
character and judge without erring. We may have our Ishta come to us as
a vision, and this symbol will be the one upon which we can rest easily
and fully concentrate our minds.

We can imagine through all the senses, but we do so mostly through the
eyes. Even imagination is half material. In other words, we cannot think
without a phantasm. But since animals appear to think, yet have no
words, it is probable that there is no inseparable connection between
thought and images.

Try to keep up the imagination in Yoga, being careful to keep it pure
and holy. We all have our peculiarities in the way of imaginative power;
follow the way most natural to you; it will be the easiest.

We are the results of all reincarnations through Karma: "One lamp
lighted from another", says the Buddhist — different lamps, but the same
light.

Be cheerful, be brave, bathe daily, have patience, purity, and
perseverance, then you will become a Yogi in truth. Never try to hurry,
and if the higher powers come, remember that they are but side-paths. Do
not let them tempt you from the main road; put them aside and hold fast
to your only true aim-God. Seek only the Eternal, finding which we are
at rest for ever; having the all, nothing is left to strive for, and we
are for ever in free and perfect existence — Existence absolute,
Knowledge absolute, Bliss absolute.

</div>
