+++
title = "Make Afghanistan Gandharaxa0Again"
date = "September 5, 2018"

+++
![21316344_10159305205565574_7262262851035620660_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/09/21316344_10159305205565574_7262262851035620660_o.jpg?w=676)

I have been told I bear a certain resemblance to this chap.

Sculpted head of a Brahmin of the area now known as Afghanistan, dating
from the 3rd-4th century A.D.

It may seem somewhat curious to us now – when Afghanistan is mostly
known to us as the area upon this Earth where “empires go to die”;
chiefly (although not exclusively) inhabited by various groups of
Islamic folk of often Central Asian or Persian heritage … but once upon
a time, the lands of Afghanistan were very different, indeed.

As far back as the archaic mists which shroud the origins of the
RigVeda, we have scriptural attestations for these areas being inhabited
by Indo-Aryan peoples \[the Gandharas, in particular, who may have leant
their name to modern Khandahar\], practicing a religion and speaking a
language broadly interoperable with the Vedic and Sanskrit traditions
that would provide the foundations for modern Hinduism.

But the past is always in motion – and in stark contrast to
Afghanistan’s reputation today as the sort of place one goes and then …
doesn’t come back out of; in ancient times, the place was something of a
cross-roads for various routes of trade, pilgrimage, and imperialistic
expansion. The area thus wound up under the dominion of several
successive empires – some foreign in origin, such as Persia or that of
Alexander the Great; and some rather more ‘home-grown’ … or at least
‘hybridistic’ like the Greco-Bactrians or the Kushan.

This did not simply lead to an array of interesting genetic ‘inputs’
into the area, but also quite a significant scope for artistic, other
cultural, and even religious influence turning up from those who found
themselves there.

The history of Afghanistan, then, prior to Islam turning up a little
more than a thousand years ago, is one of the complex interleavings of
peoples, customs, and faiths from across the spectrum of the more
eastern Indo-European Peoples – everyone from Greeks and even Romans to
the west out to the mysterious Yuezhi and Tocharians in the north, as
well as the Iranians and more closely aligned Vedic peoples who were
their immediate neighbours to either side.

It should thus come as no surprise to find adherents of the Vedic
religion so prominently represented in the extant remnants of culture
left behind by these peoples; although it must also be said that other
religions, too, were also similarly prominent – with Afghanistan having
a notable period as a center of Buddhist learning and culture (hence the
existence of the ‘Bamiyan Buddhas’ and the like); but also providing a
most intriguing still-living relic in the form of the most ancient
religion of the Kalash People \[an Indo-European folk who speak a
\*third\* and arguably \*more archaic\* form of Indo-Iranian than that
which provides the basis for Sanskrit and Avestan\] \[one of the areas
these folk and their cousins inhabit being known as ‘Kafiristan’, or
‘Land of the Infidels’ due to their stubborn hold-out against conversion
to Islam for almost a millennium – an ongoing struggle for many Kalash
that has understandably only intensified thanks to the ongoing
deterioration of stability in the area subsequent to ‘various forces’
pushing the Soviets out in the late 1980s\] .

At some point, I may write up a more detailed history of both religious
and material/human culture change in these places over the millennia –
but suffice to say, that at the time this fine work of sculpture was
likely produced, Buddhism and various Iranian heresies were on the
relative wane, and Hinduism – the faith closest to what had once been
near-universal in these lands, albeit subject to many centuries of
‘development’ – had once again started to move back in in triumph; as we
can tell from an array of indicators ranging from coinage featuring
Deities that are most readily familiar to us, through to the ruling
names of kings, the records of both these states and their surrounding
neighbours, and of course the sculptuary and other artefacts which have
been unearthed to attest to their passing.

It is a sad thing that some more recent folk of Afghanistan have seen
fit to attempt to ransack, despoil, and outright destroy the
yet-remaining evidence as to their heritage. I understand the obvious
appeal of obviation of that which challenges the universalism and
suzerainty of one’s own preferred beliefs, on grounds that the past is
apparently to be considered both ‘still living’ and an ‘active threat’.
But it seems curious indeed to me that anybody truly assured of their
own values and righteousness would find themselves feeling so ‘actively
imperiled’ by a bit of statuary. Unless, of course, the creeds in
question are weak enough that the merest gaze upon a past perhaps
different to the narratives which these iconoclasts have sought to
deploy is enough to render them flimsy enough to blow away in the
Kandharian wind.

In any case, I know I am not the only one to look upon faces such as
these, ,and read of the languages, culture, and customary faith of the
people who bore them and carved them, and see something that pulls at
the heart with the warming familiarity that one accords to cousins or
even closer kin.

One day, perhaps, we may
indeed[#MakeAfghanistanGandharaAgain](https://www.facebook.com/hashtag/makeafghanistangandharaagain?source=feed_text&__xts__%5B0%5D=68.ARAfhTh1q696UI5vMFJu7EiMeklCGOOCBhynjvvfTc_wCvwvXA7OoiEJ16vtZvorKhAS5fFo7ZdM5SL_XlnT-HojXqm6wy_A5WxUENlip-W6cIBEVt1X-mXAqxq0ti9MooorJuNBx5Sfr_TBpcB52ROkvxjN9dwsi2N1e5DC0CrO6LgvAvQELgc&__tn__=%2ANK-RH-R)

