+++
title = "Pitru Paksha – The Fortnight of thexa0Ancestors"
date = "September 26, 2018"

+++
![pitru_dosha](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/09/pitru_dosha.jpg?w=676)

Today marks the commencement of Pitru Paksha – the Fortnight of the
Ancestors.

This is an ancient Hindu custom whose core elements will be immediately
familiar to you. Partially due to the existence of somewhat comparable
observances in Western European cultures such as the Celts and the
Romans (such as the strikingly similar annual ‘Parentalia’ period of
ancient Roman religion, or Samhain) – but also because, in a very real
sense, the intrinsic logic of offering respect to one’s ancestors, and
connecting with one’s heritage is (or at least \*should\* be) obvious to
all.

To explain in a bit more detail what is going on here, as well as to
properly situate the reader in the Indo-European world-view … we must
first elucidate what is meant by the Pitris; for it does not simply
refer to a “forebear” in the sense that a materialist man might casually
talk about a great aunt he’s never met, or some minor skerrick of
European royalty that his DNA-test has suggested he may be distantly
related to.

Rather, for us, the term’s meaning is much more (perhaps ironically)
\*alive\*.

If we were to attempt to render it \*directly\* into English,
“Forefathers” would be a pretty apt encapsulation. Not only due to the
far more emotively and reverentially connotated weighting of the phrase
– but also because both “fore” and “father” are very closely
etymologically related (as is “Parent” for that matter, (and “first”,
“Prince”) … as well as, interestingly enough, “Priest” – via a series of
terms that mean “elder’ such as “Presbyter”)” to Pitr. You’ve probably
heard the Latinate equivalent that helps to illustrate this – “Pater”.
And, if you’ve been following this page and/or taking an active interest
in Matters Indo-European … you will \*certainly\* have heard of Dyaus
Pitar. Although perhaps through a cognate name – such as “Jupiter”.

In fact, this handily helps to illustrate the spectrum of beings a
‘Pitr’ can refer to. As not only are we potentially meaning our
\*direct\* forebears – our Parents, and Grandparents, and even
Great-Grandparents (the Pitru Paksha rituals, in many parts of India,
explicitly are dedicated to the preceding three generations); but also
the far-distant ‘progenitors’ of our ancestral line (who are regarded,
in many Hindu traditions, as having an almost divine status well above
that of simple contributors of genetic material in the long-ago … not
least because They may operate with the Gods, and even make the
transition between Universes following the end of each Cycle of
Creation, dependent upon the myth. As a point of interest, mirroring
very closely the Nordic tradition’s regard for Ancestors becoming Alfar
– and potentially ‘surviving’ Ragnarok). And even, for that matter,
certain of The Gods Themselves! (This, too, is a remarkably common
feature of Indo-European mythology – the position of the Indo-European
Peoples as ((Great-…)Grand-)Children of the Gods)

As applies Pitru Paksha, however, there is an additional “shade” of
meaning.

During this period in particular, it refers to the spirits of our
departed ancestors – the idea being that for the present Lunar Month in
our calendar, the bounds between Worlds are rendered more ephemeral,
meaning that these Ancestors are able to arrive among us rather than
remaining in Pitru Loka (the ‘world of the Ancestors’ – “Loka” obviously
being rather cognate with “Location” although “Plane \[of Existence’\]
perhaps encapsulates the meaning more easily than “World” for a modern
audience).

This is particularly so during the ‘dark’ fortnight (running from the
current Full Moon through to the Dark Moon in half a lunar month’s
time); wherein the Ancestors are as guests in our houses , and are to be
properly treated and honoured as such.

This naturally helps to explain two of the most important observances in
Pitru Paksha – the rituals of Shraddha and Tarpana, wherein the Pitrs
are offered food and water. After all, They \*have\* come a long way to
be back with us 😀 \[It’s probably worth noting at this point that Hindu
rituals in the home carried out by a Purohit will often also open in a
rather similar manner – that of welcoming the Gods into the home as
honoured guests and offering Them sustenance , and even enquiry about
how the journey went) . If these rites are being officiated by a Priest,
then it is customary to treat the Priest also as one’s Pitr.

Another justification advanced for these practices , is that they are
the dutiful reciprocation to one’s Pitrs (particularly one’s own parents
and grandparents, potentially also great grandparents) for that which
they have given you in earlier life – hence a symbolic and metaphysical
‘balance’ of providing them with food, love, honouring and other forms
of nourishment when they come back into this world, just as they did for
you from your birth.

This is rendered especially necessary by the somewhat desolate nature of
Pitru Loka in some tellings; partially because it is supposed to be
something of a ‘transitory’ plane ‘between’ things. Which, of course,
necessitates further the provision of sustenance to aid and avail one’s
Pitrs upon their ongoing journey.

A tale told about the character of Karna, from the Mahabharat,
illustrates this, and also provides one explanation for Pitru Paksha as
a whole. According to this tradition, upon Karna’s death and ascension
to the afterlife, he found himself asking of the relevant God whose
domain it was for food … and being presented, in response, with gold.
Karna was surprised by this, and pointed out that he couldn’t eat gold,
and asked why it was being offered to him; to which he was told that
while he had indeed been conspicuously generous in life in his
\*monetary\* offerings to Temple and the Gods and such … he had never
made offerings of food. He was therefore ‘reaping as he had sown’ – as
he could only be given in the afterlife what either he himself or his
descendents had given.

A slight variation upon this has the explanation as being that Karna had
never offered food and water to his Pitrs while he was alive … which,
while it may sound egregious, unforgivable, and abominable now, was
arguably in fact the result of the circumstances of his birth and
abandonment by his mother – meaning he had never known his Pitrs in the
first place to be able to make the appropriate offerings.

To make matters worse, due to the death of all of Karna’s sons in the
Mahabharat War, there were therefore now no longer any descendents who
might ‘fill the void’ and provide for him from the world of the living.

Karna therefore beseeches the God in question – often identified as Lord
Yama (which would potentially make Karna His half-brother), although I
have also seen it stated as Lord Indra – to be allowed to return to
Earth to attempt to make things right.

Depending on which version of the story one reads, this either entails
Karna using the two weeks he is given here on Earth to perform the rites
for his Pitrs (and therefore also himself) that he should have been
doing the last time he was here; or alternatively it involves him
spending the time feeding the poor and engaged in other acts of piety.
In another (potentially somewhat darker) telling, it is said that upon
his (temporary) return from the dead, the king frantically attempts to
popularize the concept of providing food and water to the shades of
one’s ancestors in order to avert others from experiencing the same
deleterious circumstances which he had after death.

However it played out, it should come as no surprise to find that these
fourteen days are often regarded as being the same point of the year as
Pitru Paksha. Although as a brief note of hope, Lord Yama in His Mercy
is stated in some sources to have decreed that on Mahalaya Amavasa (the
last day, where there is no moon), the offerings will benefit \*all\*
departed souls; thus in part avoiding the problem encountered by Karna –
provided, of course, that offerings continue to be made in the first
place!

There are other reasons for our observances during Pitru Paksha, of
course – one of which is to attempt to ‘set right’ or at least
ameliorate for them some of the mistakes and other transgressions which
may have been committed by our Ancestors in life, and whose ‘echoes’ may
yet still be haunting their living descendents. And another of which is
to attempt to propitiate our Ancestors so they may assist us going
forward in life.

Whatever the reasoning, it is not hard to see the virtue in these
practices from a ‘metaphysical’ standpoint. However, what might perhaps
go unnoticed by the casual observer are the more ‘temporal’ positives
which result from it here on Earth, for us still-living, and our
children.

By marking the occasion, and learning the names and some details of the
lives of our forebears (as is necessary for the proper performance of
the rites) – perhaps ‘meeting’ them, as an act of memory, so to speak;
irrespective of whether you believe you’re also ‘meeting’ them in a more
metaphysical sense at your door today as ‘Guests’ as well – we help our
Heritage to stay alive. And remain in contact with our own pasts. Just
as, in a most pleasing symmetry, our Ancestors remain ‘in contact’ with
their – with our – futures.

After all, if you do not know where you have come from, how can you know
where you are and where you are going? If you do not know who and what
your Ancestors were (and are) – how can you know , even if ‘just’ in a
foundational sense … who and what \*you\* are?

You would, in a very real – and to my mind, at least, a very sad – sense
be “rootless”.

So with all of that in mind, while Pitru Paksha is often regarded as
something of a ‘shadowed’ time (with various explanations for the more
‘constrained’ conduct we may engage in ranging from a desire to avoid
upsetting the Ancestors, who may ‘feel left out’ , through to the more
generalized notions of the cosmological conditions prevalent at this
time entailing potentially baleful energies) … I prefer to regard it as
a “noble” one.

After all, what can be more integral a consideration, in these atomized
latter-days, than the re-connection with one’s heritage?  
What practice, what ‘operationalizing’ of that Heritage can be more
vital – more necessary in this age – than piety?  
And what form of Piety is greater than the protection, veneration, and
support of one’s Parents?

(For those unaware, this last is a restatement of a fundamental
principle of both Hindu theology and Hindu ethics – as illustrated
succinctly by the race of Lord Skanda and Lord Ganesha to circuit the
world, won by the latter through running around Their Parents, and
explained by Ganesha as being the correct action as to Him, His Parents
\*are\* His World).

Pitru Paksha takes this concept further.

The great English writer, Chesterton, had this to say about the workings
of ‘Tradition’ in the context of a democracy:

“Tradition means giving votes to the most obscure of all classes, our
ancestors. It is the democracy of the dead. Tradition refuses to submit
to the small and arrogant oligarchy of those who merely happen to be
walking about. All democrats object to men being disqualified by the
accident of birth; tradition objects to their being disqualified by the
accident of death.”

Clearly, it is a maxim most worthy of a far broader attention and
applicational ambit than merely that of psephological politics. I cite
it here with exactly that spirit – suggesting that as applies our
Families, those ‘nearest and dearest’ to us … we ought not disqualify
from our positive regard, our greeting, and our remembrance , various
members of our families and forebears simply due to the potentially
rather temporary (from a number of perspectives) inconvenience of their
being dead and us alive.

And in any case, it is a most timely reminder that we, too, shall one
day die. (To reference the ancient maxim – “As we were, you are; As we
are, you shall be!”)

And whether or not you happen to believe that your circumstances
post-mortem may be ‘materially’ altered by the deeds of those you’ve
left behind and introduced here on Earth … the fact remains that we can
certainly see the desirability, the ‘vitality’ of and inherent in those
who come after us continuing to keep our ways, our names, our values,
our stories, our deeds “alive” long after our deaths.

Odin said in the course of the Havamal (appropriately enough, in the
Gestathattr – the section dealing with Guests), that while “cattle die,
kinsmen die”, the reader himself will die (and, I note – although this
is unsaid in the verse – even Odin Himself will \*also\* die, at least
temporarily) – that He also knows at least one thing that will \*not\*
die : the “fair fame” of the “great dead” man who’s earned it.

In train with this, one thing that should not – \*must not\* – die, is
the proper and appropriate … the propitiate veneration of our Ancestors,
our Pitrs, our (very grand, indeed) Parents.

So this Pitru Paksha … don’t simply press “F” to ‘pay respects’.

