+++
title = "“Cyclone Mahavatya Rudra”xa0Jai"
date = "September 12, 2018"

+++
![21432989_10159329062090574_7699275241183585476_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/09/21432989_10159329062090574_7699275241183585476_n.jpg?w=676)  
I’ve seen a bit of chatter on here about the naming conventions for
cyclones/hurricanes in the US/Caribbean – and, in particular, how these
may possibly be both sexist AND ineffectual, on grounds that the average
American apparently finds storms with female names less threatening
\[thus leading to reduced readiness, and often a higher death toll for
“female” storms\].

Well, I’ve got a simple solution. Bring some Indo-European into it.
Startnaming your absolutely immense impending cyclonic \[etc.\] events
after the old Indo-European Storm Deities \[or, potentially, some of
Their adversaries of an arguably similar function – it’s one way by
which we got the modern word “Typhoon”, after all\].

The advantage of this is that not only do the very words themselves
carry, on an instinctual level, the sort of sense of impending terror
and destruction which one presumably WANTS to get across when naming a
potential natural disaster … but in the Trailer-Park States wherein
Southern Deep Fried Christianity leads to a basal loathing of
Non-Judeo-Christian religions … thus leading to them often quite
literally thinking of our Gods as ‘Demons’ \*anyway\* \[seriously – see
some of the reactions to the time the US Congress was opened with a
Hindu prayer\] … there’s therefore probably a greater chance that an
array of these folks will WANT to get out of the path of the storm
instead of sticking it out in the ‘crumple-zone’.

I mean, think about it. “Hurricane Irma is coming” just sounds like a
slightly elderly Aunt is dropping in to pay a visit.

“CYCLONE MAHAVATYA RUDRA, THE ROARING ONE, IS BEARING DOWN UPON US IN
ALL \*HIS\* AWE-FUL MIGHT, PRECEDED BY THE ARMY OF MARUTS AND
ACCOMPANIED BY THE TWIN WOLVES OF SARVA & BHAVA” … well, I know I’m a
bit biased about this, for obvious reasons, but I think that sounds at
least a \*little\* bit more intimidating, no?

\[Author’s Note: this piece was written about a year ago; it has been
republished here because it seemed like a good idea at the time\]

