---
title: THE MESSAGE OF DIVINE WISDOM

---
<div>

[←](six_sanskrit_mottoes.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Writings: Prose and
Poems](writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_belur_math_an_appeal.htm)

  

## THE MESSAGE OF DIVINE WISDOM

\[The following three chapters were discovered among Swami Vivekananda's
papers. He evidently intended to write a book and jotted down some
points for the work.\]

[I BONDAGE](the_message_of_divine_wisdom.htm#i)  [II THE
LAW](the_message_of_divine_wisdom.htm#ii)  
[III THE ABSOLUTE AND THE ATTAINMENT OF
FREEDOM](the_message_of_divine_wisdom.htm#iii)

I

BONDAGE

1\. Desire is infinite, its fulfilment limited. Desire is unlimited in
everyone; the power of fulfilment varies. Thus some are more successful
than others in life.

2\. This limitation is the bondage we are struggling against all our
lives.

3\. We desire only the pleasurable, not the painful.

4\. The objects of desire are all complex — pleasure-giving and
pain-bringing mixed up.

5\. We do not or cannot see the painful parts in objects, we are charmed
with only the pleasurable portion; and, thus grasping the pleasurable,
we unwittingly draw in the painful.

6\. At times we vainly hope that in our case only the pleasurable will
come, leaving the painful aside, which never happens.

7\. Our desires also are constantly changing — what we would prize today
we would reject tomorrow. The pleasure of the present will be the pain
of the future, the loved hated, and so on.

8\. We vainly hope that in the future life we shall be able to gather in
only the pleasurable, to the exclusion of the painful.

9\. The future is only the extension of the present. Such a thing cannot
be!

10\. Whosoever seeks pleasure in objects will get it, but he must take
the pain with it.

11\. All objective pleasure in the long run must bring pain, because of
the fact of change or death.

12\. Death is the goal of all objects, change is the nature of all
objective things.

13\. As desire increases, so increases the power of pleasure, so the
power of pain.

14\. The finer the organism, the higher the culture — the greater is the
power to enjoy pleasure and the sharper are the pangs of pain.

15\. Mental pleasures are greatly superior to physical joys. Mental
pains are more poignant than physical tortures.

16\. The power of thought, of looking far away into the future, and the
power of memory, of recalling the past to the present, make us live in
heaven; they make us live in hell also.

17\. The man who can collect the largest amount of pleasurable objects
around him is as a rule too unimaginative to enjoy them. The man of
great imagination is thwarted by the intensity of his feeling of loss,
or fear of loss, or perception of defects.

18\. We are struggling hard to conquer pain, succeeding in the attempt,
and yet creating new pains at the same time.

19\. We achieve success, and we are overthrown by failure; we pursue
pleasure and we are pursued by pain.

20\. We say we do, we are made to do. We say we work, we are made to
labour. We say we live, we are made to die every moment. We are in the
crowd, we cannot stop, must go on — it deserves no cheering. Had it not
been so, no amount of cheering would make us undertake all this pain and
misery for a grain of pleasure — which, alas, in most cases is only a
hope!

21\. Our pessimism is a dread reality, our optimism is a faint cheering,
making the best of a bad job.

II

THE LAW

1\. The law is never separate from the phenomena, the principle from the
person.

2\. The law is the method of action or poise of every single phenomenon
within its scope.

3\. We get our knowledge of law from the massing and welding of changes
that occur. We never see law beyond these changes. The idea of law as
something separate from phenomena is a mental abstraction, a convenient
use of words and nothing more. Law is a part of every change within its
range, a manner which resides in the things governed by the law. The
power resides in the things, is a part of our idea of that thing — its
action upon something else is in a certain manner — this is our law.

4\. Law is in the actual state of things — it is in how they act towards
each other, and not in how they should. It might have been better if
fire did not burn or water wet; but that they do — this is the law; and
if it is a true law, a fire that does not burn or water that does not
wet is neither fire nor water.

5\. Spiritual laws, ethical laws, social laws, national laws — are laws
if they are parts of existing spiritual and human units and the
unfailing experience of the action of every unit said to be bound by
such laws.

6\. We, by turn, are made by law and make it. A generalization of what
man does invariably in certain circumstances is a law with regard to man
in that particular aspect. It is the invariable, universal human action
that is law for man — and which no individual can escape — and yet the
summation of the action of each individual is the universal Law. The sum
total, or the universal, or the infinite is fashioning the individual,
while the individual is keeping by its action the Law alive. Law in this
sense is another name for the universal. The universal is dependent upon
the individual, the individual dependent upon the universal. It is an
infinite made up of finite parts, an infinite of number, though
involving the difficulty of assuming an infinity summed up of finites —
yet for all practical purposes, it is a fact before us. And as the law,
or whole, or the infinite cannot be destroyed — and the destruction of a
part of an infinite is an impossibility, as we cannot either add
anything to or subtract anything from the infinite — each part persists
for ever.

7\. Laws regarding the materials of which the body of man is composed
have been found out, and also the persistence of these materials through
time has been shown. The elements which composed the body of a man a
hundred thousand years ago have been proved to be still existing in some
place or other. The thoughts which have been projected also are living
in other minds.

8\. But the difficulty is to find a law about the man beyond the body.

9\. The spiritual and ethical laws are not the method of action of every
human being. The systems of ethics of morality, even of national laws,
are honoured more in the breach than in the observance. If they were
laws how could they be broken?

10\. No man is able to go against the laws of nature. How is it that we
always complain of his breaking the moral laws, national laws?

11\. The national laws at best are the embodied will of a majority of
the nation — always a state of things wished for, not actually existing.

12\. The ideal law may be that no man should covet the belongings of
others, but the actual law is that a very large number do.

13\. Thus the word law used in regard to laws of nature has a very
different interpretation when applied to ethics and human actions
generally.

14\. Analysing the ethical laws of the world and comparing them with the
actual state of things, two laws stand out supreme. The one, that of
repelling everything from us — separating ourselves from everyone —
which leads to self-aggrandisement even at the cost of everyone else's
happiness. The other, that of self-sacrifice — of taking no thought of
ourselves — only of others. Both spring from the search for happiness —
one, of finding happiness in injuring others and the ability of feeling
that happiness only in our own senses. The other, of finding happiness
in doing good to others — the ability of feeling happy, as it were,
through the senses of others The great and good of the world are those
who have the latter power predominating. Yet both these are working side
by side conjointly; in almost everyone they are found in mixture, one or
the other predominating. The thief steals, perhaps, for someone he
loves.

III

THE ABSOLUTE AND THE ATTAINMENT OF FREEDOM

1\. Om Tat Sat — that Being — Knowing — Bliss.

\(a\) The only real Existence, which alone is — everything else exists
inasmuch as it reflects that real Existence.

\(b\) It is the only Knower — the only Self-luminous — the Light of
consciousness. Everything else shines by light borrowed from It.
Everything else knows inasmuch as it reflects Its knowing.

\(c\) It is the only Blessedness — as in It there is no want. It
comprehends all — is the essence of all.

It is Sat-Chit-Ânanda.

\(d\) It has no parts, no attributes, neither pleasure nor pain, nor is
it matter nor mind. It is the Supreme, Infinite, Impersonal Self in
everything, the Infinite Ego of the Universe.

\(e\) It is the Reality in me, in thee, and in everything — therefore,

*"That thou art"* — Tattvamasi.

2\. The same Impersonal is conceived by the mind as the Creator, the
Ruler, and the Dissolver of this universe, its material as well as its
efficient cause, the Supreme Ruler — the Living, the Loving, the
Beautiful, in the highest sense.

\(a\) The Absolute Being is manifested in Its highest in Isvara, or the
Supreme Ruler, as the highest and omnipotent Life or Energy.

\(b\) The Absolute Knowledge is manifesting Itself in Its highest as
Infinite Love, in the Supreme Lord.

\(c\) The Absolute Bliss is manifested as the Infinite Beautiful, in the
Supreme Lord. He is the greatest attraction of the soul.

Satyam-Shivam-Sundaram.

The Absolute or Brahman, the Sat-Chit-Ananda, is Impersonal and the real
Infinite

Every existence from the highest to the lowest, all manifest according
to their degree as — energy (in the higher life), attraction (in the
higher love), and struggle for equilibrium (in the higher happiness).
This highest Energy-Love-Beauty is a person, an individual, the Infinite
Mother of this universe — the God of gods — the Lord of lords,
omnipresent yet separate from the universe — the Soul of souls, yet
separate from every soul — the Mother of this universe, because She has
produced it — its Ruler, because She guides it with the greatest love
and in the long run brings everything back to Herself. Through Her
command the sun and moon shine, the clouds rain, and death stalks upon
the earth.

She is the power of all causation. She energises every cause
unmistakably to produce the effect. Her will is the only law, and as She
cannot make a mistake, nature's laws — Her will — can never be changed.
She is the life of the Law of Karma or causation. She is the fructifier
of every action. Under Her guidance we are manufacturing our lives
through our deeds or Karma.

Freedom is the motive of the universe, freedom its goal. The laws of
nature are the methods through which we are struggling to reach that
freedom, under the guidance of Mother. This universal struggle for
freedom attains its highest expression in man in the conscious desire to
be free.

This freedom is attained by the threefold means of — work, worship, and
knowledge.

\(a\) Work — constant, unceasing effort to help others and love others.

\(b\) Worship — consists in prayer, praise, and meditation.

\(c\) Knowledge — that follows meditation.

</div>
