---
title: THE ADVAITA ASHRAMA, HIMALAYAS

---
<div>

[←](the_belur_math_an_appeal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Writings: Prose and
Poems](writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_ramakrishna_home_of_service_varanasi.htm)

  

## THE ADVAITA ASHRAMA, HIMALAYAS

(These lines were sent in a
[letter](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/134_s.htm), March, 1899, by
Swamiji, for embodying in the prospectus of the Advaita Ashrama,
Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas.)

In Whom is the Universe, Who is in the Universe, Who is the Universe; in
Whom is the Soul, Who is in the Soul, Who is the Soul of Man; knowing
Him — and therefore the Universe — as our Self, alone extinguishes all
fear, brings an end to misery and leads to Infinite Freedom. Wherever
there has been expansion in love or progress in well-being, of
individuals or numbers, it has been through the perception, realisation,
and the practicalisation of the Eternal Truth — THE ONENESS OF ALL
BEINGS. "Dependence is misery. Independence is happiness." The Advaita
is the only system which gives unto man complete possession of himself,
takes off all dependence and its associated superstitions, thus making
us brave to suffer, brave to do, and in the long run attain to Absolute
Freedom.

Hitherto it has not been possible to preach this Noble Truth entirely
free from the settings of dualistic weakness; this alone, we are
convinced, explains why it has not been more operative and useful to
mankind at large.

To give this ONE TRUTH a freer and fuller scope in elevating the lives
of individuals and leavening the mass of mankind, we start this Advaita
Ashrama on the Himalayan heights, the land of its first expiration.

Here it is hoped to keep Advaita free from all superstitions and
weakening contaminations. Here will be taught and practiced nothing but
the Doctrine of Unity, pure and simple; and though in entire sympathy
with all other systems, this Ashrama is dedicated to Advaita and Advaita
alone.

</div>
