---
title: THE EAST AND THE WEST

---
<div>

[←](to_the_fourth_of_july.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Writings: Prose and
Poems](writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm)
/ [→](../../volume_6/lectures_and_discourses/the_methods_and_purpose_of_religion.htm)

  

## THE EAST AND THE WEST

(*Translated from Bengali*)

I.              [INTRODUCTION](the_east_and_the_west.htm#i)
([*Bengali*](6115_east_and_west_I.pdf))

II.            [CUSTOMS: EASTERN AND
WESTERN](the_east_and_the_west.htm#ii)
([*Bengali*](6115_east_and_west_II.pdf))

III.           [FOOD AND COOKING](the_east_and_the_west.htm#iii)
([*Bengali*](6115_east_and_west_III.pdf))

IV.           [CIVILISATION IN DRESS](the_east_and_the_west.htm#iv)
([*Bengali*](6115_east_and_west_IV.pdf))

V.            [ETIQUETTE AND MANNERS](the_east_and_the_west.htm#v)
([*Bengali*](6115_east_and_west_V.pdf))

VI.           [FRANCE — PARIS](the_east_and_the_west.htm#vi)
([*Bengali*](6115_east_and_west_VI.pdf))

VII.         [PROGRESS OF CIVILISATION](the_east_and_the_west.htm#vii)
([*Bengali*](6115_east_and_west_VII.pdf))

I. INTRODUCTION

Vast and deep rivers — swelling and impetuous — charming
pleasure-gardens by the river banks, putting to shame the celestial
Nandana-Kânana; amidst these pleasure-gardens rise, towering to the sky,
beautiful marble palaces, decorated with the most exquisite workmanship
of fine art; on the sides, in front, and behind, clusters of huts, with
crumbling mud-walls and dilapidated roofs, the bamboos of which, forming
their skeletons, as it were, are exposed to view; moving about here and
there emaciated figures of young and old in tattered rags, whose faces
bear deep-cut lines of the despair and poverty of hundreds of years;
cows, bullocks, buffaloes everywhere — ay, the same melancholy look in
their eyes, the same feeble physique; on the wayside refuse and dirt:
This is our present-day India!

Worn-out huts by the very side of palaces, piles of refuse in the near
proximity of temples, the Sannyâsin clad with only a little loin-cloth,
walking by the gorgeously dressed, the pitiful gaze of lustreless eyes
of the hunger-stricken at the well-fed and the amply-provided: This is
our native land!

Devastation by violent plague and cholera; malaria eating into the very
vitals of the nation; starvation and semi-starvation as second nature;
death-like famine often dancing its tragic dance; the Kurukshetra
(battlefield) of malady and misery, the huge cremation ground, strewn
with the dead bones of lost hope, activity, joy, and courage; and in the
midst of that, sitting in august silence, the Yogi, absorbed in deep
communion with the Spirit, with no other goal in life than Moksha: This
is what meets the eye of the European traveller in India.

A conglomeration of three hundred million souls, resembling men only in
appearance, crushed out of life by being downtrodden by their own people
and foreign nations, by people professing their own religion and by
others of foreign faiths; patient in labour and suffering and devoid of
initiative like the slave; without any hope, without any past, without
any future; desirous only of maintaining the present life anyhow,
however precarious; of malicious nature befitting a slave, to whom the
prosperity of their fellow-men is unbearable; bereft of Shraddhâ, like
one with whom all hope is dead, faithless; whose weapon of defence is
base trickery, treachery, and slyness like that of a fox; the embodiment
of selfishness; licking the dust of the feet of the strong, withal
dealing a death-blow to those who are comparatively weak; full of ugly,
diabolical superstitions which come naturally to those who are weak and
hopeless of the future; without any standard of morality as their
backbone; three hundred millions of souls such as these are swarming on
the body of India like so many worms on a rotten, stinking carcass: This
is the picture concerning us, which naturally presents itself to the
English official!

Maddened with the wine of newly acquired powers; devoid of
discrimination between right and wrong; fierce like wild beasts,
henpecked, lustful; drenched in liquor, having no idea of chastity or
purity, nor of cleanly ways and habits; believing in matter only, with a
civilisation resting on matter and its various applications; addicted to
the aggrandisement of self by exploiting others' countries, others'
wealth, by force, trick, and treachery; having no faith in the life
hereafter, whose Âtman (Self) is the body, whose whole life is only in
the senses and creature comforts: Thus, to the Indian, the Westerner is
the veriest demon (Asura).

These are the views of observers on both sides — views born of mutual
indiscrimination and superficial knowledge or ignorance. The foreigners,
the Europeans, come to India, live in palatial buildings in the
perfectly clean and healthy quarters of our towns and compare our
"native" quarters with their neat and beautifully laid-out cities at
home; the Indians with whom they come in contact are only of one class —
those who hold some sort of employment under them. And, indeed, distress
and poverty are nowhere else to be met with as in India; besides that,
there is no gainsaying that dirt and filth are everywhere. To the
European mind, it is inconceivable that anything good can possibly be
amidst such dirt, such slavery, and such degradation.

We, on the other hand, see that the Europeans eat without discrimination
whatever they get, have no idea of cleanliness as we have, do not
observe caste distinctions, freely mix with women, drink wine, and
shamelessly dance at a ball, men and women held in each other's arms:
and we ask ourselves in amazement, what good can there be in such a
nation?

Both these views are derived from without, and do not look within and
below the surface. We do not allow foreigners to mix in our society, and
we call them Mlechchhas; they also in their turn hate us as slaves and
call us "niggers". In both of these views there must be some truth,
though neither of the parties has seen the real thing behind the other.

With every man, there is an idea; the external man is only the outward
manifestation, the mere language of this idea within. Likewise, every
nation has a corresponding national idea. This idea is working for the
world and is necessary for its preservation. The day when the necessity
of an idea as an element for the preservation of the world is over, that
very day the receptacle of that idea, whether it be an individual or a
nation, will meet destruction. The reason that we Indians are still
living, in spite of so much misery, distress, poverty, and oppression
from within and without is that we have a national idea, which is yet
necessary for the preservation of the world. The Europeans too have a
national idea of their own, without which the world will not go on;
therefore they are so strong. Does a man live a moment, if he loses all
his strength? A nation is the sum total of so many individual men; will
a nation live if it has utterly lost all its strength and activity? Why
did not this Hindu race die out, in the face of so many troubles and
tumults of a thousand years? If our customs and manners are so very bad,
how is it that we have not been effaced from the face of the earth by
this time? Have the various foreign conquerors spared any pains to crush
us out? Why, then, were not the Hindus blotted out of existence, as
happened with men in other countries which are uncivilised? Why was not
India depopulated and turned into a wilderness? Why, then foreigners
would have lost no time to come and settle in India, and till her
fertile lands in the same way as they did and are still doing in
America, Australia, and Africa! Well, then, my foreigner, you are not so
strong as you think yourself to be; it is a vain imagination. First
understand that India has strength as well, has a substantial reality of
her own yet. Furthermore, understand that India is still living, because
she has her own quota yet to give to the general store of the world's
civilisation. And you too understand this full well, I mean those of our
countrymen who have become thoroughly Europeanised both in external
habits and in ways of thought and ideas, and who are continually crying
their eyes out and praying to the European to save them — "We are
degraded, we have come down to the level of brutes; O ye European
people, you are our saviours, have pity on us and raise us from this
fallen state!" And you too understand this, who are singing *Te Deums*
and raising a hue and cry that Jesus is come to India, and are seeing
the fulfilment of the divine decree in the fullness of time. Oh, dear!
No! neither Jesus is come nor Jehovah; nor will they come; they are now
busy in saving their own hearths and homes and have no time to come to
our country. Here is the selfsame Old Shiva seated as before, the bloody
Mother Kâli worshipped with the selfsame paraphernalia, the pastoral
Shepherd of Love, Shri Krishna, playing on His flute. Once this Old
Shiva, riding on His bull and laboring on His Damaru travelled from
India, on the one side, to Sumatra, Borneo, Celebes, Australia, as far
as the shores of America, and on the other side, this Old Shiva battened
His bull in Tibet, China, Japan, and as far up as Siberia, and is still
doing the same. The Mother Kali is still exacting Her worship even in
China and Japan: it is She whom the Christians metamorphosed into the
Virgin Mary, and worship as the mother of Jesus the Christ. Behold the
Himalayas! There to the north is Kailâs, the main abode of the Old
Shiva. That throne the ten-headed, twenty-armed, mighty Ravana could not
shake — now for the missionaries to attempt the task? — Bless my soul!
Here in India will ever be the Old Shiva laboring on his Damaru, the
Mother Kali worshipped with animal sacrifice, and the lovable Shri
Krishna playing on His flute. Firm as the Himalayas they are; and no
attempts of anyone, Christian or other missionaries, will ever be able
to remove them. If you cannot bear them — avaunt! For a handful of you,
shall a whole nation be wearied out of all patience and bored to death?
Why don't you make your way somewhere else where you may find fields to
graze upon freely — the wide world is open to you! But no, that they
won't do. Where is that strength to do it? They would eat the salt of
that Old Shiva and play Him false, slander Him, and sing the glory of a
foreign Saviour — dear me! To such of our countrymen who go whimpering
before foreigners — "We are very low, we are mean, we are degraded,
everything we have is diabolical" — to them we say: "Yes, that may be
the truth, forsooth, because you profess to be truthful and we have no
reason to disbelieve you; but why do you include the whole nation in
that *We*? Pray, sirs, what sort of good manner is that?"

First, we have to understand that there are not any good qualities which
are the privileged monopoly of one nation only. Of course, as with
individuals, so with nations, there may be a prevalence of certain good
qualities, more or less in one nation than in another.

With us, the prominent idea is Mukti; with the Westerners, it is Dharma.
What we desire is Mukti; what they want is Dharma. Here the word
"Dharma" is used in the sense of the Mimâmsakas. What is Dharma? Dharma
is that which makes man seek for happiness in this world or the next.
Dharma is established on work, Dharma is impelling man day and night to
run after and work for happiness.

What is Mukti? That which teaches that even the happiness of this life
is slavery, and the same is the happiness of the life to come, because
neither this world nor the next is beyond the laws of nature; only, the
slavery of this world is to that of the next as an iron chain is to a
golden one. Again, happiness, wherever it may be, being within the laws
of nature, is subject to death and will not last *ad infinitum*.
Therefore man must aspire to become Mukta, he must go beyond the bondage
of the body; slavery will not do. This Mokshapath is only in India and
nowhere else. Hence is true the oft-repeated saying that Mukta souls are
only in India and in no other country. But it is equally true that in
future they will be in other countries as well; that is well and good,
and a thing of great pleasure to us. There was a time in India when
Dharma was compatible with Mukti. There were worshippers of Dharma, such
as Yudhishthira, Arjuna, Duryodhana, Bhishma, and Karna, side by side
with the aspirants of Mukti, such as Vyâsa, Shuka, and Janaka. On the
advent of Buddhism, Dharma was entirely neglected, and the path of
Moksha alone became predominant. Hence, we read in the Agni Purâna, in
the language of similes, that the demon Gayâsura — that is, Buddha
(Swamiji afterwards changed this view with reference to Buddha, as is
evident from the [letter dated Varanasi, the 9th February,
1902,](../epistles_first_series/114_swarup.htm) in this volume.) — tried
to destroy the world by showing the path of Moksha to all; and therefore
the Devas held a council and by stratagem set him at rest for ever.
However, the central fact is that the fall of our country, of which we
hear so much spoken, is due to the utter want of this Dharma. If the
whole nation practices and follows the path of Moksha, that is well and
good; but is that possible? Without enjoyment, renunciation can never
come; first enjoy and then you can renounce. Otherwise, if the whole
nation, all of a sudden, takes up Sannyâsa, it does not gain what it
desires, but it loses what it had into the bargain — the bird in the
hand is fled, nor is that in the bush caught. When, in the heyday of
Buddhistic supremacy, thousands of Sannyâsins lived in every monastery,
then it was that the country was just on the verge of its ruin! The
Bauddhas, the Christians, the Mussulmans, and the Jains prescribe, in
their folly, the same law and the same rule for all. That is a great
mistake; education, habits, customs, laws, and rules should be different
for different men and nations, in conformity with their difference of
temperament. What will it avail, if one tries to make them all uniform
by compulsion? The Bauddhas declared, "Nothing is more desirable in life
than Moksha; whoever you are, come one and all to take it." I ask, "Is
that ever possible?" "You are a householder, you must not concern
yourself much with things of that sort: you do your Svadharma (natural
duty)" — thus say the Hindu scriptures. Exactly so! He who cannot leap
one foot, is going to jump across the ocean to Lankâ in one bound! Is it
reason? You cannot feed your own family or dole out food to two of your
fellow-men, you cannot do even an ordinary piece of work for the common
good, in harmony with others — and you are running after Mukti! The
Hindu scriptures say, "No doubt, Moksha is far superior to Dharma; but
Dharma should be finished first of all". The Bauddhas were confounded
just there and brought about all sorts of mischief. Non-injury is right;
"Resist not evil" is a great thing — these are indeed grand principles;
but the scriptures say, "Thou art a householder; if anyone smites thee
on thy cheek, and thou dost not return him an eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth, thou wilt verily be a sinner." Manu says, "When one has
come to kill you, there is no sin in killing him, even though he be a
Brâhmin" (Manu, VIII. 350). This is very true, and this is a thing which
should not be forgotten. Heroes only enjoy the world. Show your heroism;
apply, according to circumstances, the fourfold political maxims of
conciliation, bribery, sowing dissensions, and open war, to win over
your adversary and enjoy the world — then you will be Dhârmika
(righteous). Otherwise, you live a disgraceful life if you pocket your
insults when you are kicked and trodden down by anyone who takes it into
his head to do so; your life is a veritable hell here, and so is the
life hereafter. This is what the Shastras say. Do your Svadharma — this
is truth, the truth of truths. This is my advice to you, my beloved
co-religionists. Of course, do not do any wrong, do not injure or
tyrannise over anyone, but try to do good to others as much as you can.
But passively to submit to wrong done by others is a sin — with the
householder. He must try to pay them back in their own coin then and
there. The householder must earn money with great effort and enthusiasm,
and by that must support and bring comforts to his own family and to
others, and perform good works as far as possible. If you cannot do
that, how do you profess to be a man? You are not a householder even —
what to talk of Moksha for you!!

We have said before that Dharma is based on work. The nature of the
Dharmika is constant performance of action with efficiency. Why, even
the opinion of some Mimamsakas is that those parts of the Vedas which do
not enjoin work are not, properly speaking, Vedas at all. One of the
aphorisms of Jaimini runs "आम्नायस्य क्रियार्थत्वादानर्थक्यमतदर्थानाम् —
The purpose of the Vedas being work, those parts of the Vedas that do
not deal with work miss the mark."

"By constant repetition of the syllable Om and by meditating on its
meaning, everything can be obtained"; "All sins are washed away by
uttering the name of the Lord"; "He gets all, who resigns himself to the
Will of God" — yes, these words of the Shastras and the sages are, no
doubt, true. But, do you see, thousands of us are, for our whole life,
meditating on Om, are getting ecstatic in devotion in the name of the
Lord, and are crying, "Thy Will be done, I am fully resigned to Thee! "
— and what are they actually getting in return? Absolutely nothing! How
do you account for this? The reason lies here, and it must be fully
understood. Whose meditation is real and effective? Who can really
resign himself to the Will of God? Who can utter with power
irresistible, like that of a thunderbolt, the name of the Lord? It is he
who has earned Chitta-shuddhi, that is, whose mind has been purified by
work, or in other words, he who is the Dharmika.

Every individual is a centre for the manifestation of a certain force.
This force has been stored up as the resultant of our previous works,
and each one of us is born with this force at his back. So long as this
force has not worked itself out, who can possibly remain quiet and give
up work? Until then, he will have to enjoy or suffer according to the
fruition of his good or bad work and will be irresistibly impelled to do
work. Since enjoyment and work cannot be given up till then, is it not
better to do good rather than bad works — to enjoy happiness rather than
suffer misery? Shri Râmprasâd (A Bengali saint, devotee of Kâli, and an
inspired poet who composed songs in praise of the Deity, expressing the
highest truths of religion in the simplest words.) used to say, "They
speak of two works, 'good' and 'bad'; of them, it is better to do the
good."

Now what is that good which is to be pursued? The good for him who
desires Moksha is one, and the good for him who wants Dharma is another.
This is the great truth which the Lord Shri Krishna, the revealer of the
Gita, has tried therein to explain, and upon this great truth is
established the Varnâshrama (Four castes and four stages of life.)
system and the doctrine of Svadharma etc. of the Hindu religion.

अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूतानां मैत्रः करुण एव च ।  
निर्ममो निरहंकारः समदुःखसुखः क्षमी ॥

— "He who has no enemy, and is friendly and compassionate towards all,
who is free from the feelings of 'me and mine', even-minded in pain and
pleasure, and forbearing" — these and other epithets of like nature are
for him whose one goal in life is Moksha. (Gita, XII. 13.)

क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ नैतत्त्वय्युपपद्यते ।  
क्षुद्रं हृदयदौर्बल्यं त्यक्त्वोत्तिष्ठ परन्तप ॥

— "Yield not to unmanliness, O son of Prithâ! Ill cloth it befit thee.
Cast off this mean faint-heartedness and arise. O scorcher of thine
enemies." (Gita, II. 3.)

तस्मात्त्वमुत्तिष्ठ यशो लभस्व जित्वा शत्रून् भुङ्क्ष्व राज्यं समृद्धम्
।  
मयैवैते निहताः पूर्वमेव निमित्तमात्रं भव सव्यसाचिन् ॥

— "Therefore do thou arise and acquire fame. After conquering thy
enemies, enjoy unrivalled dominion; verily, by Myself have they been
already slain; be thou merely the instrument, O Savyasâchin (Arjuna)."
(Gita, XI. 33.)

In these and similar passages in the Gita the Lord is showing the way to
Dharma. Of course, work is always mixed with good and evil, and to work,
one has to incur sin, more or less. But what of that? Let it be so. Is
not something better than nothing? Is not insufficient food better than
going without any? Is not doing work, though mixed with good and evil,
better than doing nothing and passing an idle and inactive life, and
being like stones? The cow never tells a lie, and the stone never
steals, but, nevertheless, the cow remains a cow and the stone a stone.
Man steals and man tells lies, and again it is man that becomes a god.
With the prevalence of the Sâttvika essence, man becomes inactive and
rests always in a state of deep Dhyâna or contemplation; with the
prevalence of the Rajas, he does bad as well as good works; and with the
prevalence of the Tamas again, he becomes inactive and inert. Now, tell
me, looking from outside, how are we to understand, whether you are in a
state wherein the Sattva or the Tamas prevails? Whether we are in the
state of Sattvika calmness, beyond all pleasure and pain, and past all
work and activity, or whether we are in the lowest Tâmasika state,
lifeless, passive, dull as dead matter, and doing no work, because there
is no power in us to do it, and are, thus, silently and by degrees,
getting rotten and corrupted within — I seriously ask you this question
and demand an answer. Ask your own mind, and you shall know what the
reality is. But, what need to wait for the answer? The tree is known by
its fruit. The Sattva prevailing, the man is inactive, he is calm, to be
sure; but that inactivity is the outcome of the centralization of great
powers, that calmness is the mother of tremendous energy. That highly
Sattivka man, that great soul, has no longer to work as we do with hands
and feet — by his mere willing only, all his works are immediately
accomplished to perfection. That man of predominating Sattva is the
Brahmin, the worshipped of all. Has he to go about from door to door,
begging others to worship him? The Almighty Mother of the universe
writes with Her own hand, in golden letters on his forehead, "Worship ye
all, this great one, this son of Mine", and the world reads and listens
to it and humbly bows down its head before him in obedience. That man is
really —

अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूतानां मैत्रः करुण एव च ।  
निर्ममो निरहंकारः समदुःखसुखः क्षमी ॥

— "He who has no enemy, and is friendly and compassionate towards all,
who is free from the feelings of 'me and mine', even-minded in pain and
pleasure, and forbearing." (Gita, XII. 13.) And mark you, those things
which you see in pusillanimous, effeminate folk who speak in a nasal
tone chewing every syllable, whose voice is as thin as of one who has
been starving for a week, who are like a tattered wet rag, who never
protest or are moved even if kicked by anybody — those are the signs of
the lowest Tamas, those are the signs of death, not of Sattva — all
corruption and stench. It is because Arjuna was going to fall into the
ranks of these men that the Lord is explaining matters to him so
elaborately in the Gita. Is that not the fact? Listen to the very first
words that came out of the mouth of the Lord, "क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ
नैतत्त्वय्युपपद्यते — Yield not to unmanliness, O Pârtha! Ill, doth it
befit thee!" and then later, "तस्मात्त्वमुत्तिष्ठ यशो लभस्व — Therefore
do thou arise and acquire fame." Coming under the influence of the
Jains, Buddhas, and others, we have joined the lines of those Tamasika
people. During these last thousand years, the whole country is filling
the air with the name of the Lord and is sending its prayers to Him; and
the Lord is never lending His ears to them. And why should He? When even
man never hears the cries of the fool, do you think God will? Now the
only way out is to listen to the words of the Lord in the Gita,
"क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ — Yield not to unmanliness, O Partha!"
"तस्मात्त्वमुत्तिष्ठ यशो लभस्व — Therefore do thou arise and acquire
fame."

Now let us go on with our subject-matter — the East and the West. First
see the irony of it. Jesus Christ, the God of the Europeans, has taught:
Have no enemy, bless them that curse you; whosoever shall smite thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also; stop all your work and be
ready for the next world; the end of the world is near at hand. And our
Lord in the Gita is saying: Always work with great enthusiasm, destroy
your enemies and enjoy the world. But, after all, it turned out to be
exactly the reverse of what Christ or Krishna implied. The Europeans
never took the words of Jesus Christ seriously. Always of active habits,
being possessed of a tremendous Râjasika nature, they are gathering with
great enterprise and youthful ardour the comforts and luxuries of the
different countries of the world and enjoying them to their hearts'
content. And we are sitting in a corner, with our bag and baggage,
pondering on death day and night, and singing, नलिनीदलगतजलमतितरलं
तद्वज्जीवितमतिशयचपलम् — Very tremulous and unsteady is the water on the
lotus-leaf; so is the life of man frail and transient" — with the result
that it is making our blood run cold and our flesh creep with the fear
of Yama, the god of death; and Yama, too, alas, has taken us at our
word, as it were — plague and all sorts of maladies have entered into
our country! Who are following the teachings of the Gita? — the
Europeans. And who are acting according to the will of Jesus Christ?
—The descendants of Shri Krishna! This must be well understood. The
Vedas were the first to find and proclaim the way to Moksha, and from
that one source, the Vedas, was taken whatever any great Teacher, say,
Buddha or Christ, afterwards taught. Now, they were Sannyasins, and
therefore they "had no enemy and were friendly and compassionate towards
all". That was well and good for them. But why this attempt to compel
the whole world to follow the same path to Moksha? "Can beauty be
manufactured by rubbing and scrubbing? Can anybody's love be won by
threats or force?" What does Buddha or Christ prescribe for the man who
neither wants Moksha nor is fit to receive it? — Nothing! Either you
must have Moksha or you are doomed to destruction — these are the only
two ways held forth by them, and there is no middle course. You are tied
hand and foot in the matter of trying for anything other than Moksha.
There is no way shown how you may enjoy the world a little for a time;
not only all openings to that are hermetically sealed to you, but, in
addition, there are obstructions put at every step. It is only the Vedic
religion which considers ways and means and lays down rules for the
fourfold attainment of man, comprising Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha.
Buddha ruined us, and so did Christ ruin Greece and Rome! Then, in due
course of time, fortunately, the Europeans became Protestants, shook off
the teachings of Christ as represented by Papal authority, and heaved a
sigh of relief. In India, Kumârila again brought into currency the
Karma-Mârga, the way of Karma only, and Shankara and Râmânuja firmly
re-established the Eternal Vedic religion, harmonising and balancing in
due proportions Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha. Thus the nation was
brought to the way of regaining its lost life; but India has three
hundred million souls to wake, and hence the delay. To revive three
hundred millions — can it be done in a day?

The aims of the Buddhistic and the Vedic religions are the same, but the
means adopted by the Buddhistic are not right. If the Buddhistic means
were correct, then why have we been thus hopelessly lost and ruined? It
will not do to say that the efflux of time has naturally wrought this.
Can time work, transgressing the laws of cause and effect?

Therefore, though the aims are the same, the Bauddhas for want of right
means have degraded India. Perhaps my Bauddha brothers will be offended
at this remark, and fret and fume; but there's no help for it; the truth
ought to be told, and I do not care for the result. The right and
correct means is that of the Vedas — the Jâti Dharma, that is, the
Dharma enjoined according to the different castes — the Svadharma, that
is, one's own Dharma, or set of duties prescribed for man according to
his capacity and position — which is the very basis of Vedic religion
and Vedic society. Again, perhaps, I am offending many of my friends,
who are saying, I suppose, that I am flattering my own countrymen. Here
let me ask them once for all: What do I gain by such flattery? Do they
support me with any money or means? On the contrary, they try their best
to get possession of money which I secure by begging from outside of
India for feeding the famine-stricken and the helpless; and if they do
not get it, they abuse and slander! Such then, O my educated countrymen,
are the people of my country. I know them too well to expect anything
from them by flattery. I know they have to be treated like the insane;
and anyone who administers medicine to a madman must be ready to be
rewarded with kicks and bites; but he is the true friend who forces the
medicine down the throats of such and bears with them in patience.

Now, this Jati Dharma, this Svadharma, is the path of welfare of all
societies in every land, the ladder to ultimate freedom. With the decay
of this Jati Dharma, this Svadharma, has come the downfall of our land.
But the Jati Dharma or Svadharma as commonly understood at present by
the higher castes is rather a new evil, which has to be guarded against.
They think they know everything of Jati Dharma, but really they know
nothing of it. Regarding their own village customs as the eternal
customs laid down by the Vedas, and appropriating to themselves all
privileges, they are going to their doom! I am not talking of caste as
determined by qualitative distinction, but of the hereditary caste
system. I admit that the qualitative caste system is the primary one;
but the pity is qualities yield to birth in two or three generations.
Thus the vital point of our national life has been touched; otherwise,
why should we sink to this degraded state? Read in the Gita, संकरस्य च
कर्ता स्यामुपहन्यामिमाः प्रजाः — I should then be the cause of the
admixture of races, and I should thus ruin these beings." How came this
terrible Varna-Sâmkarya — this confounding mixture of all castes — and
disappearance of all qualitative distinctions? Why has the white
complexion of our forefathers now become black? Why did the Sattvaguna
give place to the prevailing Tamas with a sprinkling, as it were, of
Rajas in it? That is a long story to tell, and I reserve my answer for
some future occasion. For the present, try to understand this, that if
the Jati Dharma be rightly and truly preserved, the nation shall never
fall. If this is true, then what was it that brought our downfall? That
we have fallen is the sure sign that the basis of the Jati Dharma has
been tampered with. Therefore, what you call the Jati Dharma is quite
contrary to what we have in fact. First, read your own Shastras through
and through, and you will easily see that what the Shastras define as
caste-Dharma, has disappeared almost everywhere from the land. Now try
to bring back the true Jati Dharma, and then it will be a real and sure
boon to the country. What I have learnt and understood, I am telling you
plainly. I have not been imported from some foreign land to come and
save you, that I should countenance all your foolish customs and give
scientific explanations for them; it does not cost our foreign friends
anything, they can well afford to do so. You cheer them up and heap
applause upon them, and that is the acme of their ambition. But if dirt
and dust be flung at your faces, it falls on mine too! Don't you see
that?

I have said elsewhere that every nation has a national purpose of its
own. Either in obedience to the Law of nature, or by virtue of the
superior genius of the great ones, the social manners and customs of
every nation are being moulded into shape, so as to bring that purpose
to fruition. In the life of every nation, besides that purpose and those
manners and customs that are essentially necessary to effect that
purpose, all others are superfluous. It does not matter much whether
those superfluous customs and manners grow or disappear; but a nation is
sure to die when the main purpose of its life is hurt.

When we were children, we heard the story of a certain ogress who had
her soul living in a small bird, and unless the bird was killed, the
ogress would never die. The life of a nation is also like that. Again
another thing you will observe, that a nation will never greatly grudge
if it be deprived of these rights which have not much to do with its
national purpose, nay, even if all of such are wrested from it; but when
the slightest blow is given to that purpose on which rests its national
life, that moment it reacts with tremendous power.

Take for instance the case of the three living nations, of whose history
you know more or less, viz. the French, the English, and the Hindu.
Political independence is the backbone of the French character. French
subjects bear calmly all oppressions. Burden them with heavy taxes, they
will not raise the least voice against them; compel the whole nation to
join the army, they never complain; but the instant anyone meddles with
that political independence, the whole nation will rise as one man and
madly react. No one man shall be allowed to usurp authority over us;
whether learned or ignorant, rich or poor, of noble birth or of the
lower classes, we have equal share in the Government of our country, and
in the independent control of our society — this is the root-principle
of the French character. He must suffer Who will try to interfere with
this freedom.

In the English character, the "give and take" policy, the business
principle of the trader, is principally inherent. To the English, just
and equitable distribution of wealth is of essential interest. The
Englishman humbly submits to the king and to the privileges of the
nobility; only if he has to pay a farthing from his pocket, he must
demand an account of it. There is the king; that is all right; he is
ready to obey and honour him; but if the king wants money, the
Englishman says: All right, but first let me understand why it is
needed, what good it will bring; next, I must have my say in the matter
of how it is to be spent, and then I shall part with it. The king, once
trying to exact money from the English people by force, brought about a
great revolution. They killed the king.

The Hindu says that political and social independence are well and good,
but the real thing is spiritual independence — Mukti. This is our
national purpose; whether you take the Vaidika, the Jaina, or the
Bauddha, the Advaita, the Vishishtâdvaita, or the Dvaita — there, they
are all of one mind. Leave that point untouched and do whatever you
like, the Hindu is quite unconcerned and keeps silence; but if you run
foul of him there, beware, you court your ruin. Rob him of everything he
has, kick him, call him a "nigger" or any such name, he does not care
much; only keep that one gate of religion free and unmolested. Look
here, how in the modern period the Pathan dynasties were coming and
going, but could nor get a firm hold of their Indian Empire, because
they were all along attacking the Hindu's religion. And see, how firmly
based, how tremendously strong was the Mogul Empire. Why? Because the
Moguls left that point untouched. In fact, Hindus were the real prop of
the Mogul Empire; do you not know that Jahangir, Shahjahan, and Dara
Shikoh were all born of Hindu mothers? Now then observe — as soon as the
ill-fated Aurangzeb again touched that point, the vast Mogul Empire
vanished in an instant like a dream. Why is it that the English throne
is so firmly established in India? Because it never touches the religion
of the land in any way. The sapient Christian missionaries tried to
tamper a little with this point, and the result was the Mutiny of 1857.
So long as the English understand this thoroughly and act accordingly,
their throne in India will remain unsullied and unshaken. The wise and
far-seeing among the English also comprehend this and admit it — read
Lord Roberts's *Forty-one Years in India*. (*Vide* 30th and 31st
Chapters.)

Now you understand clearly where the soul of this ogress is — it is in
religion. Because no one was able to destroy that, therefore the Hindu
nation is still living, having survived so many troubles and
tribulations. Well, One Indian scholar asks, "what is the use of keeping
the soul of the nation in religion? Why not keep it in social or
political independence, as is the case with other nations?" It is very
easy to talk like that. If it be granted, for the sake of argument, that
religion and spiritual independence, and soul, God, and Mukti are all
false, even then see how the matter stands. As the same fire is
manifesting itself in different forms, so the same one great Force is
manifesting itself as political independence with the French, as
mercantile genius and expansion of the sphere of equity with the
English, and as the desire for Mukti or spiritual independence with the
Hindu. Be it noted that by the impelling of this great Force, has been
moulded the French and the English character, through several centuries
of vicissitudes of fortune; and also by the inspiration of that great
Force, with the rolling of thousands of centuries, has been the present
evolution of the Hindu national character. I ask in all seriousness —
which is easier, to give up our national character evolved out of
thousands of centuries, or your grafted foreign character of a few
hundred years? Why do not the English forget their warlike habits and
give up fighting and bloodshed, and sit calm and quiet concentrating
their whole energy on making religion the sole aim of their life?

The fact is, that the river has come down a thousand miles from its
source in the mountains; does it, or can it go back to its source? If it
ever tries to trace back its course, it will simply dry up by being
dissipated in all directions. Anyhow the river is sure to fall into the
ocean, sooner or later, either by passing through open and beautiful
plaints or struggling through grimy soil. If our national life of these
ten thousand years has been a mistake, then there is no help for it; and
if we try now to form a new character, the inevitable result will be
that we shall die.

But, excuse me if I say that it is sheer ignorance and want of proper
understanding to think like that, namely, that our national ideal has
been a mistake. First go to other countries and study carefully their
manners and conditions with your own eyes — not with others' — and
reflect on them with a thoughtful brain, if you have it: then read your
own scriptures, your ancient literature travel throughout India, and
mark the people of her different parts and their ways and habits with
the wide-awake eye of an intelligent and keen observer — not with a
fool's eye — and you will see as clear as noonday that the nation is
still living intact and its life is surely pulsating. You will find
there also that, hidden under the ashes of apparent death, the fire of
our national life is yet smouldering and that the life of this nation is
religion, its language religion, and its idea religion; and your
politics, society, municipality, plague-prevention work, and
famine-relief work — all these things will be done as they have been
done all along here, viz. only through religion; otherwise all your
frantic yelling and bewailing will end in nothing, my friend!

Besides, in every country, the means is the same after all, that is,
whatever only a handful of powerful men dictate becomes the *fait
accompli*; the rest of the men only follow like a flock of sheep, that's
all. I have seen your Parliament, your Senate, your vote, majority,
ballot; it is the same thing everywhere, my friend. The powerful men in
every country are moving society whatever way they like, and the rest
are only like a flock of sheep. Now the question is this, who are these
men of power in India? — they who are giants in religion. It is they who
lead our society; and it is they again who change our social laws and
usages when necessity demands: and we listen to them silently anti do
what they command. The only difference with ours is, that we have not
that superfluous fuss and bustle of the majority, the vote, ballot, and
similar concomitant tugs-of-war as in other countries. That is all.

Of course we do not get that education which the common people in the
West do, by the system of vote and ballot etc., but, on the other hand,
we have not also amongst us that class of people who, in the name of
politics, rob others and fatten themselves by sucking the very
life-blood of the masses in all European countries. If you ever saw, my
friend that shocking sight behind the scene of acting of these
politicians — that revelry of bribery, that robbery in broad daylight,
that dance of the Devil in man, which are practiced on such occasions —
you would be hopeless about man! "Milk goes abegging from door to door,
while the grog-shop is crowded; the chaste woman seldom gets the
wherewithal to hide her modesty, while the woman of the town flutters
about in all her jewelry!" They that have money have kept the government
of the land under their thumb, are robbing the people and sending them
as soldiers to fight and be slain on foreign shores, so that, in case of
victory; their coffers may be full of gold bought by the blood of the
subject-people on the field of battle. And the subject-people? Well,
theirs is only to shed their blood. This is politics! Don't be startled,
my friend; don't be lost in its mazes.

First of all, try to understand this: Does man make laws, or do laws
make man? Does man make money, or does money make man? Does man make
name and fame, or name and fame make man?

Be a man first, my friend, and you will see how all those things and the
rest will follow of themselves after you. Give up that hateful malice,
that dog-like bickering and barking at one another, and take your stand
on goal purpose, right means, righteous courage, and be brave When you
are born a man, leave some indelible mark behind you. "When you first
came to this world, O Tulsi (A poet and a devotee — the author of the
*Ramcharitmanasa*. Here the poet is addressing himself.), the world
rejoiced and you cried; now live your life in doing such acts that when
you will leave this world, the world will cry for you and you will leave
it laughing." If you can do that, then you are a man; otherwise, what
good are you?

Next, you must understand this, my friend, that we have many things to
learn from other nations. The man who says he has nothing more to learn
is already at his last grasp. The nation that says it knows everything
is on the very brink of destruction! "As long as I live, so long do I
learn." But one point to note here is that when we take anything from
others, we must mould it after our own way. We shall add to our stock
what others have to teach, but we must always be careful to keep intact
what is essentially our own. For instance, Suppose I want to have my
dinner cooked in the European fashion. When taking food, the Europeans
sit on chairs, and we are accustomed to squat on the floor. To imitate
the Europeans, if I order my dinner to be served, on a table and have to
sit on a chair more than an hour, my feet will be in a fair way of going
to Yama's door, as they say, and I shall writhe in torture; what do you
say to that? So I must squat on the floor in my own style, while having
their dishes. Similarly, whenever we learn anything from others, we must
mould it after our own fashion, always preserving in full our
characteristic nationality. Let me ask, "Does man wear clothes or do
clothes make the man?" The man of genius in any, dress commands respect;
but nobody cares for fools like me, though carrying, like the
washerman's ass, a load of clothes on my back.

II. CUSTOMS: EASTERN AND WESTERN

The foregoing, by way of an introduction, has come to be rather long;
but after all this talk it will be easier for us to compare the two
nations. They are good, and we are also good. "You can neither praise
the one nor blame the other; both the scales are equal." Of course,
there are gradations and varieties of good, this is all.

According to us, there are three things in the makeup of man. There is
the body, there is the mind, and there is the soul. First let us
consider the body, which is the most external thing about man.

First, see how various are the differences with respect to the body. How
many varieties of nose, face, hair, height, complexion, breadth, etc.,
there are!

The modern ethnologists hold that variety of complexion is due to
intermixture of blood. Though the hot or cold climate of the place to a
certain extent affects the complexion, no doubt, yet the main cause of
its change is heredity. Even in the coldest parts of the world, people
with dark complexions are seen, and again in the hottest countries white
men are seen to live. The complexion of the aboriginal tribes of Canada,
in America, and of the Eskimos of the Northern Polar regions, is not
white. While islands, such as Borneo, Celebes, etc., situated in the
equatorial regions are peopled by white aborigines.

According to the Hindu Shastras, the three Hindu castes, Brahmana,
Kshatriya, and Vaishya, and the several nations outside India, to wit,
Cheen, Hun, Darad, Pahlava, Yavana, and Khâsh are all Aryas. This Cheen
of our Shastras is not the modern Chinaman. Besides, in those days, the
Chinamen did not call themselves Cheen at all. There was a distinct,
powerful nation, called Cheen, living in the north-eastern parts of
Kashmir, and the Darads lived where are now seen the hill-tribes between
India and Afghanistan. Some remnants of the ancient Cheen are yet to be
found in very small numbers, and Daradisthan is yet in existence. In the
*Râjatarangini*, the history of Kashmir, references are often made to
the supremacy of the powerful Darad-Raj. An ancient tribe of Huns
reigned for a long period in the north-western parts of India. The
Tibetans now call themselves Hun, but this Hun is perhaps "Hune". The
fact is, that the Huns referred to in Manu are not the modern Tibetans,
but it is quite probable that the modern Tibetans are the product of a
mixture of the ancient Aryan Huns and some other Mogul tribes that came
to Tibet from Central Asia. According to Prjevalski and the Duc d'
Orleans, the Russian and French travellers, there are still found in
some parts of Tibet tribes with faces and eyes of the Aryan type.
"Yavana" was the name given to the Greeks. There has been much dispute
about the origin of this name. Some say that the name Yavana was first
used to designate a tribe of Greeks inhabiting the place called "Ionia",
and hence, in the Pâli writs of the Emperor Asoka, the Greeks are named
"Yonas", and afterwards from this "Yona" the Sanskrit word Yavana, was
derived. Again, according to some of our Indian antiquarians, the word
Yavana does not stand for the Greeks. But all these views are wrong. The
original word is Yavana itself; for not only the Hindus but the ancient
Egyptians and the Babylonians as well called the Greeks by that name. By
the word Pahlava is meant the ancient Parsees, speaking the Pahlavi
tongue. Even now, Khash denotes the semi-civilised Aryan tribes living
in mountainous regions and in the Himalayas, and the word is still used
in this sense. In that sense, the present Europeans are the descendants
of the Khash; in other words, those Aryan tribes that were uncivilised
in ancient days are all Khash.

In the opinion of modern savants, the Aryans had reddish-white
complexion, black or red hair, straight noses, well-drawn eyes, etc.;
and the formation of the skull varied a little according to the colour
of the hair. Where the complexion is dark, there the change has come to
pass owing to the mixture of the pure Aryan blood with black races. They
hold that there are still some tribes to the west of the Himalayan
borders who are of pure Aryan blood, and that the rest are all of mixed
blood; otherwise, how could they be dark? But the European Pundits ought
to know by this time that, in the southern parts of India, many children
are born with red hair, which after two or three years changes into
black, and that in the Himalayas many have red hair and blue or grey
eyes.

Let the Pundits fight among themselves; it is the Hindus who have all
along called themselves Aryas. Whether of pure or mixed blood, the
Hindus are Aryas; there it rests. If the Europeans do not like us,
Aryas, because we are dark, let them take another name for themselves —
what is that to us?

Whether black or white, it does not matter; but of all the nations of
the world, the Hindus are the handsomest and finest in feature. I am not
bragging nor saying anything in exaggeration because they belong to my
own nationality, but this fact is known all over the world. Where else
can one find a higher percentage of fine-featured men and women than in
India? Besides, it has to be taken into consideration how much more is
required in our country to make us look handsome than in other
countries, because our bodies are so much more exposed. In other
countries, the attempt is always to make ugly persons appear beautiful
under cover of elaborate dresses and clothes.

Of course, in point of health, the Westerners are far superior to us. In
the West, men of forty years and women of fifty years are still young.
This is, no doubt, because they take good food, dress well and live in a
good climate, and above all, the secret is that they do not marry at an
early age. Ask those few strong tribes among ourselves and see what
their marriageable age is. Ask the hill tribes, such as, the Goorkhas,
the Punjabis, the Jats, and the Afridis, what their marriageable age is.
Then read your own Shastras — thirty is the age fixed for the Brahmana,
twenty-five for the Kshatriya, and twenty for the Vaishya. In point of
longevity and physical and mental strength, there is a great difference
between the Westerners and ourselves. As soon as we attain to forty, our
hope and physical and mental strength are on the decline. While, at that
age, full of youthful vigour and hope, they have only made a start.

We are vegetarians — most of our diseases are of the stomach; our old
men and women generally die of stomach complaints. They of the West take
meat — most of their diseases are of the heart; their old men and women
generally die of heart or lung diseases. A learned doctor of the West
observes that the people who have chronic stomach complaints generally
tend to a melancholy and renouncing nature, and the people suffering
from complaints of the heart and the upper parts of the body have always
hope and faith to the last; the cholera patient is from the very
beginning afraid of death, while the consumptive patient hopes to the
last moment that he will recover. "Is it owing to this," my doctor
friend may with good reasoning ask, "that the Indians always talk and
think of death and renunciation?" As yet I have not been able to find a
satisfactory answer to this; but the question seems to have an air of
truth about it, and demands serious consideration.

In our country, people suffer little from diseases of the teeth and
hair; in the West, few people have natural, healthy teeth, and baldness
is met with everywhere. Our women bore their noses and ears for wearing
ornaments; in the West, among the higher classes, the women do not do
those things much, nowadays; but by squeezing the waist, making the
spine crooked, and thus displacing the liver and spleen and disfiguring
the form, they suffer the torment of death to make themselves shapely in
appearance and added to that is the burden of dress, over which they
have to show their features to the best advantage. Their Western dress
is, however, more suited for work. With the exception of the dress worn
in society by the ladies of the wealthy classes, the dress of the women
in general is ugly. The Sâri of our women, and the Chogâ, Châpkan, and
turban of our men defy comparison as regards beauty in dress. The tight
dresses cannot approach in beauty the loose ones that fall in natural
folds. But all our dresses being flowing, and in folds, are not suited
for doing work; in doing work, they are spoiled and done for. There is
such a thing as fashion in the West. Their fashion is in dress, ours in
ornaments, though nowadays it is entering a little into clothes also.
Paris is the centre of fashion for ladies' dress and London for men's.
The actresses of Paris often set the fashions. What new fashion of dress
a distinguished actress of the time would wear, the fashionable world
would greedily imitate. The big firms of dressmakers set the fashions
nowadays. We can form no idea of the millions of pounds that are spent
every year in the making of dress in the West. The dress-making business
has become a regular science. What colour of dress will suit with the
complexion of the girl and the colour of her hair, what special feature
of her body should be disguised, and what displayed to the best
advantage — these and many other like important points, the dressmakers
have seriously to consider. Again, the dress that ladies of very high
position wear, others have to wear also, otherwise they lose their
caste! This is FASHION.

Then again, this fashion is changing every day, so to say; it is sure to
change four times with the four seasons of the year, and, besides, many
other times as well. The rich people have their dresses made after the
latest fashion by expert firms; those who belong to the middle classes
have them often done at home by women-tailors, or do them themselves. If
the new fashion approaches very near to their last one, then they just
change or adjust their clothes accordingly; otherwise, they buy new
ones. The wealthy classes give away their dresses which have gone out of
fashion to their dependents and servants. The ladies' maids and valets
sell them, and those are exported to the various colonies established by
the Europeans in Africa, Asia, and Australia, and there they are used
again. The dresses of those who are immensely rich are all ordered from
Paris; the less wealthy have them copied in their own country by their
own dressmakers. But the ladies' hats must be of French make. As a
matter of fact, the dress of the English and the German women is not
good; they do not generally follow the Paris fashions — except, of
course, a few of the rich and the higher classes. So, the women of other
countries indulge in jokes at their expense. But men in England mostly
dress very well. The American men and women, without distinction, wear
very fashionable dress. Though the American Government imposes heavy
duties on all dresses imported from London or Paris, to keep out foreign
goods from the country — yet, all the same, the women order their dress
from Paris, and men, from London. Thousands of men and women are
employed in daily introducing into the market woollen and silk fabrics
of various kinds and colours, and thousands, again, are manufacturing
all sorts of dresses out of them. Unless the dress is exactly up to
date, ladies and gentlemen cannot walk in the street without being
remarked upon by the fashionable. Though we have not all this
botheration of the fashion in dress in our country, we have, instead, a
fashion in ornaments, to a certain extent. The merchants dealing in
silk, woollen, and other materials in the West have their watchful eyes
always fixed on the way the fashion changes, and what sort of things
people have begun to like; or they hit upon a new fashion, out of their
own brain, and try to draw the attention of the people thereto. When
once a merchant succeeds in gaining the eyes of the people to the
fashion brought into the market by him, he is a made man for life. At
the time of the Emperor Napoleon III of France, his wife, the Empress
Eugenie, was the universally recognised avatar of fashion of the West.
The shawl, of Kashmir were her special favourites, and therefore shawls
worth millions of rupees used to be exported every year, in her time,
from Kashmir to Europe. With the fall of Napoleon III, the fashion has
changed, and Kashmir shawls no longer sell. And as for the merchants of
our country, they always walk in the old rut. They could not opportunely
hit upon any new style to catch the fancy of the West under the altered
circumstances, and so the market was lost to them. Kashmir received a
severe shock and her big and rich merchants all of a sudden failed.

This world, if you have the eyes to see, is yours — if not, it is mine;
do you think that anyone waits for another? The Westerners are devising
new means and methods to attract the luxuries and the comforts of
different parts of the world. They watch the situation with ten eyes and
work with two hundred hands, as it were; while we will never do what the
authors of Shastras have not written in books, and thus we are moving in
the same old groove, and there is no attempt to seek anything original
and new; and the capacity to do that is lost to us now. The whole nation
is rending the skies with the cry for food and dying of starvation.
Whose fault is it? Ours! What means are we taking in hand to find a way
out of the pitiable situation? Zero! Only making great noise by our big
and empty talk! That is all that we are doing. Why not come put of your
narrow comer and see, with your eyes open, how the world is moving
onwards? Then the mind will open and the power of thinking and of timely
action will come of itself. You certainly know the story of the Devas
and the Asuras. The Devas have faith in their soul, in God, and in the
after-life, while the Asuras give importance to this life, and devote
themselves to enjoying this world and trying to have bodily comforts in
every possible way. We do not mean to discuss here whether the Devas are
better than the Asuras, or the Asuras than the Devas, but, reading their
descriptions in the Purânas, the Asuras seem to be, truth to tell, more
like MEN, and far more manly than the Devas; the Devas are inferior,
without doubt, to the Asuras, in many respects. Now, to understand the
East and the West, we cannot do better than interpret the Hindus as the
sons of the Devas and the Westerners as the sons of the Asuras.

First, let us see about their respective ideas of cleanliness of the
body. Purity means cleanliness of mind and body; the latter is effected
by the use of water etc. No nation in the world is as cleanly in the
body as the Hindu, who uses water very freely. Taking a plunge bath is
wellnigh scarce in other nations, with a few exceptions. The English
have introduced it into their country after coming in contact with
India. Even now, ask those of our students who have resided in England
for education, and they will tell you how insufficient the arrangements
for bathing are there. When the Westerners bathe — and that is once a
week — they change their inner clothing. Of course, nowadays, among
those who have means, many bathe daily and among Americans the number is
larger; the Germans once in a week, the French and others very rarely!
Spain and Italy are warm countries, but there it is still less! Imagine
their eating of garlic in abundance, profuse perspiration day and night,
and yet no bath! Ghosts must surely run away from them, what to say of
men! What is meant by bath in the West? Why, the washing of face, head,
and hands, i.e. only those parts which are exposed. A millionaire friend
of mine once invited me to come over to Paris: Paris, which is the
capital of modern civilisation — Paris, the heaven of luxury, fashion,
and merriment on earth — the centre of arts and sciences. My friend
accommodated me in a huge palatial hotel, where arrangements for meals
were in a right royal style, but, for bath — well, no name of it. Two
days I suffered silently — till at last I could bear it no longer, and
had to address my friend thus: "Dear brother, let this royal luxury be
with you and yours! I am panting to get out of this situation. Such hot
weather, and no facility of bathing; if it continues like this, I shall
be in imminent danger of turning mad like a rabid dog." Hearing this, my
friend became very sorry for me and annoyed with the hotel authorities,
and said: "I won't let you stay here any more, let us go and find out a
better place". Twelve of the chief hotels were seen, but no place for
bathing was there in any of them. There are independent bathing-houses,
where one can go and have a bath for four or five rupees. Good heavens!
That very afternoon I read in a paper that an old lady entered into the
bath-tub and died then and there! Whatever the doctors may say, I am
inclined to think that perhaps that was the first occasion in her life
to come into contact with so much water, and the frame collapsed by the
sudden shock! This is no exaggeration. Then, the Russians and some
others are awfully unclean in that line. Starting from Tibet, it is
about the same all over those regions. In every boarding house in
America, of course, there is a bath-room, and an arrangement of
pipe-water.

See, however, the difference here. Why do we Hindus bathe? Because of
the fear of incurring sin. The Westerners wash their hands and face for
cleanliness' sake. Bathing with us means pouring water over the body,
though the oil and the dirt may stick on and show themselves. Again, our
Southern Indian brothers decorate themselves with such long and wide
caste-marks that it requires, perchance the use of a pumice-stone to rub
them off. Our bath, on the other hand, is an easy matter — to have a
plunge in, anywhere; but not so, in the West. There they have to put off
a load of clothes, and how many buttons and hooks and eyes are there! We
do not feel any delicacy to show our body; to them it is awful, but
among men, say, between father and son, there is no impropriety; only
before women you have to cover yourself cap-a-pie.

This custom of external cleanliness, like all other customs, sometimes
turns out to be, in the long run, rather a tyranny or the very reverse
of Âchâra (cleanliness). The European says that all bodily matters have
to be attended to in private. Well and good. "It is vulgar to spit
before other people. To rinse your mouth before others is disgraceful."
So, for fear of censure, they do not wash their mouth after meals, and
the result is that the teeth gradually decay. Here is non-observance of 
cleanliness for fear of society or civilisation. With us, it is the
other extreme — to rinse and wash the mouth before all men, or sitting
in the street, making a noise as if you were sick — this is rather
tyranny. Those things should, no doubt, be done privately and silently,
but not to do them for fear of society is also equally wrong.

Again, society patiently bears and accommodates itself to those customs
which are unavoidable in particular climates. In a warm country like
ours, we drink glass after glass of water; now, how can we help
eructating; but in the West, that habit is very ungentlemanly. But
there, if you blow the nose and use your pocket handkerchief at the time
of eating — that is not objectionable, but with us, it is disgusting. In
a cold country like theirs, one cannot avoid doing it now and then.

We Hindus hold dirt in abomination very much, but, all the same, we are,
in point of fact, frequently dirty ourselves. Dirt is so repugnant to us
that if we touch it we bathe; and so to keep ourselves away from it, we
leave a heap of it to rot near the house — the only thing to be careful
about is not to touch it; but, on the other hand, do we ever think that
we are living virtually in hell? To avoid one uncleanliness, we court
another and a greater uncleanliness; to escape from one evil, we follow
on the heels of another and a greater evil. He who keeps dirt heaped in
his house is a sinner, no doubt about that. And for his retribution he
has not to wait for the next life; it recoils on his head betimes — in
this very life.

The grace of both Lakshmi (goddess of fortune) and Sarasvati (goddess of
learning) now shines on the peoples of the Western countries. They do
not stop at the mere acquisition of the objects of enjoyment, but in all
their actions they seek for a sort of beauty and grace. In eating and
drinking, in their homes and surroundings, in everything, they want to
see an all-round elegance. We also had that trait once — when there was
wealth and prosperity in the land. We have now too much poverty, but, to
make matters worse, we are courting our ruin in two ways — namely, we
are throwing away what we have as our own, and labouring in vain to make
others' ideals and habits ours. Those national virtues that we had are
gradually disappearing, and we are not acquiring any of the Western ones
either? In sitting, walking, talking, etc., there was in the olden days
a traditional, specific trait of our own; that is now gone, and withal
we have not the ability to take in the Western modes of etiquette. Those
ancient religious rites, practices, studies, etc., that were left to us,
you are consigning to the tide-waters to be swept away — and yet
something new and suitable to the exigencies of the time, to make up for
them, is not striking its roots and becoming stable with us. In
oscillating between these two lines, all our present distress lies. The
Bengal that is to be has not as yet got a stable footing. It is our arts
that have fared the worst of all. In the days gone by, our old women
used to paint the floors, doors, and walls of their houses with a paste
of rice-powder, drawing various beautiful figures; they used to cut
plantain leaves in an artistic manner, to serve the food on; they used
to lavish their art in nicely arranging the different comestibles on the
plates. Those arts, in these days, have gradually disappeared or are
doing so.

Of course new things have to be learnt, have to be introduced and worked
out; but is that to be done by sweeping away all that is old, just
because it is old? What new things have you learnt? Not any — save and
except a jumble of words! What really useful science or art have you
acquired? Go, and see, even now in the distant villages, the old
woodwork and brickwork. The carpenters of your towns cannot even turn
out a decent pair of doors. Whether they are made for a hut or a mansion
is hard to make out! They are only good at buying foreign tools, as if
that is all of carpentry! Alas! That state of things has come upon all
matters in our country. What we possessed as our own is all passing
away, and yet, all that we have learnt from foreigners is the art of
speechifying. Merely reading and talking! The Bengalis, and the Irish in
Europe, are races cast in the same mould — only talking and talking, and
bandying words. These two nations are adepts in making grandiloquent
speeches. They are nowhere, when a jot of real practical work is
required — over and above that, they are barking at each other and
fighting among themselves all the days of their life!

In the West, they have a habit of keeping everything about themselves
neat and clean, and even the poorest have an eye towards it. And this
regard for cleanliness has to be observed; for, unless the people have
clean suits of clothes, none will employ them in their service. Their
servants, maids, cooks, etc., are all dressed in spotlessly clean
clothes. Their houses are kept trim and tidy by being daily brushed,
washed and dusted. A part of good breeding consists in not throwing
things about, but keeping them in their proper places. Their kitchens
look clean and bright — vegetable peelings and such other refuse are
placed, for the time being in a separate receptacle, and taken, later
on, by a scavenger to a distance and thrown away in a proper place set
apart for the purpose. They do not throw such things about in their
yards or on the roads.

The houses and other buildings of those who are wealthy are really a
sight worth seeing — these are, night and day, a marvel of orderliness
and cleanliness! Over and above that, they are in the habit of
collecting art treasures from various countries, and adorning their
rooms with them. As regards ourselves, we need not, of course, at any
rate for the present, go in for collecting works of art as they do; but
should we, or should we not, at least preserve those which we possess
from going to ruin? It will take up a long time yet to become as good
and efficient as they are in the arts of painting and sculpture. We were
never very skilful in those two departments of art. By imitating the
Europeans we at the utmost can only produce one or two Ravi Varmas among
us! But far better than such artists are our Patuas (painter) who do the
Châlchitras (Arch shaper frames over the images of deities, with
Paurânika pictures.) of our goddesses, in Bengal. They display in their
work at least a boldness in the brilliancy of their colours. The
paintings of Ravi Varma and others make one hide one's face from shame!
Far better are those gilded pictures of Jaipur and the Chalchitra of the
goddess Durgâ that we have had from old times. I shall reserve my
reflections on the European arts of sculpture and painting for some
future occasion. That is too vast a subject to enter upon here.

III. FOOD AND COOKING

Now hear something about the Western art of cooking. There is greater
purity observed in our cooking than in any other country; on the other
hand, we have not that perfect regularity, method and cleanliness of the
English table. Every day our cook first bathes and changes his clothes
before entering the kitchen; he neatly cleanses all the utensils and the
hearth with water and earth, and if he chances to touch his face, nose,
or any part of his body, he washes his hands before he touches again any
food. The Western cook scarcely bathes; moreover, he tastes with a spoon
the cooking he is engaged in, and does not think much of redipping the
spoon into the pot. Taking out his handkerchief he blows his nose
vigorously, and again with the same hand he, perchance, kneads the
dough. He never thinks of washing his hands when he comes from outside,
and begins his cooking at once. But all the same, he has snow-white
clothes and cap. Maybe, he is dancing on the dough — why, because he may
knead it thoroughly well with the whole pressure of his body, no matter
if the sweat of his brow gets mixed with it! (Fortunately nowadays,
machines are widely used for the task.) After all this sacrilege, when
the bread is finished, it is placed on a porcelain dish covered with a
snow-white napkin and is carried by the servant dressed in a spotless
suit of clothes with white gloves on; then it is laid upon the table
spread over with a clean table-cloth. Mark here, the gloves — lest the
man touches anything with his bare fingers!

Observe ours on the other hand. Our Brahmin cook has first purified
himself with a bath, and then cooked the dinner in thoroughly cleansed
utensils, but he serves it to you on a plate on the bare floor which has
been pasted over with earth and cow-dung; and his cloth, albeit daily
washed, is so dirty that it looks as if it were never washed. And if the
plantain-leaf, which sometimes serves the purpose of a plate, is torn,
there is a good chance of the soup getting mixed up with the moist floor
and cow-dung paste and giving rise to a wonderful taste!

After taking a nice bath we put on a dirty-looking cloth, almost sticky
with oil; and in the West, they put on a perfectly clean suit on a dirty
body, without having had a proper bath. Now, this is to be understood
thoroughly — for here is the point of essential difference between the
Orient and the Occident. That inward vision of the Hindu and the outward
vision of the West, are manifest in all their respective manners and
customs. The Hindu always looks inside, and the Westerner outside. The
Hindu keeps diamonds wrapped in a rag, as it were; the Westerner
preserves a lump of earth in a golden casket! The Hindu bathes to keep
his body clean, he does not care how dirty his cloth may be; the
Westerner takes care to wear clean clothes — what matters it if dirt
remains on his body! The Hindu keeps neat and clean the rooms, doors,
floors, and everything inside his house; what matters it if a heap of
dirt and refuse lies outside his entrance door! The Westerner looks to
covering his floors with bright and beautiful carpets, the dirt and dust
under them is all right if concealed from view! The Hindu lets his
drains run open over the road, the bad smell does not count much! The
drains in the West are underground — the hotbed of typhoid fever! The
Hindu cleanses the inside, the Westerner cleanses the outside.

What is wanted is a clean body with clean clothes. Rinsing the mouth,
cleansing the teeth and all that must be done — but in private. The
dwelling-houses must be kept clean, as well as the streets and
thoroughfares and all outlying places. The cook must keep his clothes
clean as well as his body. Moreover, the meals must be par taken of in
spotless cups and plates, sitting in a neat and tidy place. Achara or
observance of the established rules of conduct in life is the first step
to religion, and of that again, cleanliness of body and mind,
cleanliness in everything, is the most important factor. Will one devoid
of Achara ever attain to religion? Don't you see before your very eyes
the miseries of those who are devoid of Achara? Should we not, thus
paying dearly for it, learn the lesson? Cholera, malaria, and plague
have made their permanent home in India, and are carrying away their
victims by millions. Whose fault is it? Ours, to be sure. We are sadly
devoid of Achara!

All our different sects of Hinduism admit the truth of the celebrated
saying of the Shruti, (Chhândogya Upanishad, VII. xxvi. 2.)  "आहारशुद्धौ
सत्त्वशुद्धिः सत्त्वशुद्धौ ध्रुवा स्मृतिः — When the food is pure, then
the inner-sense gets purified; on the purification of the innersense,
memory (of the soul's perfection) becomes steady." Only, according to
Shankarâchârya, the word Ahâra means the sense-perceptions, and Râmânuja
takes the word to mean food. But what is the solution? All sects agree
that both are necessary, and both ought to be taken into account.
Without pure food, how can the Indriyas (organs) perform their
respective functions properly? Everyone knows by experience that impure
food weakens the power of receptivity of the Indriyas or makes them act
in opposition to the will. It is a well-known fact that indigestion
distorts the vision of things and makes one thing appeal as another, and
that want of food makes the eyesight and other powers of the senses dim
and weak. Similarly, it is often seen that some particular kind of food
brings on some particular state of the body and the mind. This principle
is at the root of those many rules which are so strictly enjoined in
Hindu society — that we should take this sort and avoid that sort of
food — though in many cases, forgetting their essential substance, the
kernel, we are now busy only with quarrelling about the shell and
keeping watch and ward over it.

Râmânujâchârya asks us to avoid three sorts at defects which, according
to him, make food impure. The first defect is that of the Jâti, i.e. the
very nature or the species to which the food belongs, as onion, garlic,
and so on. These have an exciting tendency and, when taken, produce
restlessness of the mind, or in other words perturb the intellect. The
next is that of Âshraya, i.e. the nature of the person from whom the
food comes. The food coming from a wicked person will make one impure
and think wicked thoughts, while the food coming from a good man will
elevate one's thoughts. Then the other is Nimitta-dosha, i.e. impurity
in food due to such agents in it as dirt and dust, worms or hair; taking
such food also makes the mind impure. Of these three defects, anyone can
eschew the Jati and the Nimitta, but it is not easy for all to avoid the
Ashraya. It is only to avoid this Ashraya-dosha, that we have so much of
"Don't-touchism" amongst us nowadays. "Don't touch me! " "Don't touch
me!"

But in most cases, the cart is put before the horse; and the real
meaning of the principle being misunderstood, it becomes in time a queer
and hideous superstition. In these cases, the Acharas of the great
Âchâryas, the teachers of mankind, should be followed instead of the
Lokâchâras. i.e. the customs followed by the people in general. One
ought to read the lives of such great Masters as Shri Chaitanya Deva and
other similarly great religious teachers and see how they behaved
themselves with their fellow-men in this respect. As regards the
Jati-dosha in food, no other country in the world furnishes a better
field for its observation than India. The Indians, of all nations, take
the purest of foods and, all over the world, there is no other country
where the purity as regards the Jati is so well observed as in India. We
had better attend to the Nimitta-dosha a little more now in India, as it
is becoming a source of serious evil with us. It has become too common
with us to buy food from the sweets-vendor's shop in the bazaar, and you
can judge for yourselves how impure these confections are from the point
of view of the Nimitta-dosha; for, being kept exposed, the dirt and dust
of the roads as well as dead insects adhere to them, and how stale and
polluted they must sometimes be. All this dyspepsia that you notice in
every home and the prevalence of diabetes from which the townspeople
suffer so much nowadays are due to the taking of impure food from the
bazaars; and that the village-people are not as a rule so subject to
these complaints is principally due to the fact that they have not these
bazaars near them, where they can buy at their will such poisonous food
as Loochi, Kachoori, etc. I shall dwell on this in detail later on.

This is, in short, the old general rule about food. But there were, and
still are, many differences of opinion about it. Again, as in the old,
so in the present day, there is a great controversy whether it is good
or bad to take animal food or live only on a vegetable diet, whether we
are benefited or otherwise by taking meat. Besides, the question whether
it is right or wrong to kill animals has always been a matter of great
dispute. One party says that to take away life is a sin, and on no
account should it be done. The other party replies: "A fig for your
opinion! It is simply impossible to live without killing." The Shastras
also differ, and rather confuse one, on this point. In one place the
Shastra dictates, "Kill animals in Yajnas", and again, in another place
it says, "Never take away life". The Hindus hold that it is a sin to
kill animals except in sacrifices, but one can with impunity enjoy the
pleasure of eating meat after the animal is sacrificed in a Yajna.
Indeed, there are certain rules prescribed for the householder in which
he is required to kill animals on occasions, such as Shraddha and so on;
and if he omits to kill animals at those times, he is condemned as a
sinner. Manu says that if those that are invited to Shraddha and certain
other ceremonies do not partake of the animal food offered there, they
take birth in an animal body in their next.

On the other hand, the Jains, the Buddhists, and the Vaishnavas protest,
saying, "We do not believe in the dictates of such Hindu Shastras; on no
account should the taking away of life be tolerated." Asoka, the
Buddhist emperor, we read, punished those who would perform Yajnas or
offer meat to the invited at any ceremony. The position in which the
modern Vaishnavas find themselves is rather one of difficulty. Instances
are found in the Râmâyana[1](#fn1) and the Mahâbhârata[2](#fn2) of the
drinking of wine and the taking of meat by Rama and Krishna, whom they
worship as God. Sita Devi vows meat, rice, and a thousand jars of wine
to the river-goddess, Gangâ! (Yamuna).[3](#fn3) 

In the West, the contention is whether animal food is injurious to
health or not, whether it is more strengthening than vegetable diet or
not, and so on. One party says that those that take animal food suffer
from all sorts of bodily complaints. The other contradicts this and
says, "That is all fiction. If that were true, then the Hindus would
have been the healthiest race, and the powerful nations, such as the
English, the Americans, and others, whose principal food is meat, would
have succumbed to all sorts of maladies and ceased to exist by this
time." One says that the flesh of the goat makes the intellect like that
of the goat, the flesh of the swine like that of the swine, and fish
like that of the fish. The other declares that it can as well be argued
then that the potato makes a potato-like brain, that vegetables make a
vegetable-like brain — resembling dull and dead matter. Is it not better
to have the intelligence of a living animal than to have the brain dull
and inert like dead matter? One party says that those things which are
in the chemical composition of animal food are also equally present in
the vegetables. The other ridicules it and exclaims. "Why, they are in
the air too. Go then and live on air only". One argues that the
vegetarians are very painstaking and can go through hard and
long-sustained labour. The other says, "If that were true, then the
vegetarian nations would occupy the foremost rank, which is not the
case, the strongest and foremost nations being always those that take
animal food." Those who advocate animal food contend: "Look at the
Hindus and the Chinamen, how poor they are. They do not take meat, but
live somehow on the scanty diet of rice and all sorts of vegetables.
Look at their miserable condition. And the Japanese were also in the
same plight, but since they commenced taking meat, they turned over a
new leaf. In the Indian regiments there are about a lac and a half of
native sepoys; see how many of them are vegetarians. The best parts of
them, such as the Sikhs and the Goorkhas, are never vegetarians". One
party says, "Indigestion is due to animal food". The other says, "That
is all stuff and nonsense. It is mostly the vegetarians who suffer from
stomach complaints." Again, "It may be the vegetable food acts as an
effective purgative to the system. But is that any reason that you
should induce the whole world to take it?"

Whatever one or the other may say, the real fact, however, is that the
nations who take the animal food are always, as a rule, notably brave,
heroic and thoughtful. The nations who take animal food also assert that
in those days when the smoke from Yajnas used to rise in the Indian sky
and the Hindus used to take the meat of animals sacrificed, then only
great religious geniuses and intellectual giants were born among them;
but since the drifting of the Hindus into the Bâbâji's vegetarianism,
not one great, original man arose midst them. Taking this view into
account, the meat-eaters in our country are afraid to give up their
habitual diet. The Ârya Samâjists are divided amongst themselves on this
point, and a controversy is raging within their fold — one party holding
that animal food is absolutely necessary, and the opposite party
denouncing it as extremely wrong and unjust.

In this way, discussions of a conflicting character, giving rise to
mutual abuses, quarrels, and fights, are going on. After carefully
scrutinising all sides of the question and setting aside all fanaticism
that is rampant on this delicate question of food, I must say that my
conviction tends to confirm this view — that the Hindus are, after all
right; I mean that injunction of the Hindu Shastras which lays down the
rule that food, like many other things, must be different according to
the difference of birth and profession; this is the sound conclusion.
But the Hindus of the present day will neither follow their Shastras nor
listen to what their great Acharyas taught.

To eat meat is surely barbarous and vegetable food is certainly purer —
who can deny that? For him surely is a strict vegetarian diet whose one
end is to lead solely a spiritual life. But he who has to steer the boat
of his life with strenuous labour through the constant life-and-death
struggles and the competition of this world must of necessity take meat.
So long as there will be in human society such a thing as the triumph of
the strong over the weak, animal food is required; otherwise, the weak
will naturally be crushed under the feet of the strong. It will not do
to quote solitary instances of the good effect of vegetable food on some
particular person or persons: compare one nation with another and then
draw conclusions.

The vegetarians, again, are also divided amongst themselves. Some say
that rice, potatoes, wheat, barley, maize, and other starchy foods are
of no use; these have been produced by man, and are the source of all
maladies. Starchy food which generates sugar in the system is most
injurious to health. Even horses and cows become sickly and diseased if
kept within doors and fed on wheat and rice; but they get well again if
allowed to graze freely on the tender and growing herbage in the
meadows. There is very little starchy substance in grass and nuts and
other green edible herbs. The orang-outang eats grass and nuts and does
not usually eat potato and wheat, but if he ever does so, he eats them
before they are ripe, i.e. when there is not much starch in them. Others
say that taking roast meat and plenty of fruit and milk is best suited
to the attainment longevity. More especially, they who take much fruit
regularly, do not so soon lose their youth, as the acid of fruit
dissolves the foul crust formed on the bones which is mainly the cause
of bringing on old age.

All these contentions have no end; they are going on unceasingly. Now
the judicious view admitted by all in regard to this vexed question is,
to take such food as is substantial and nutritious and at the same time,
easily digested. The food should be such as contains the greatest
nutriment in the smallest compass, and be at the same time quickly
assimilable; otherwise, it has necessarily to be taken in large
quantity, and consequently the whole day is required only to digest it.
If all the energy is spent only in digesting food, what will there be
left to do other works?

All fried things are really poisonous. The sweets-vendor's shop is
Death's door. In hot countries, the less oil and clarified butter (ghee)
taken the better. Butter is more easily digested than ghee. There is
very little substance in snow-white flour; whole-wheat flour is good as
food. For Bengal, the style and preparation of food that are still in
vogue in our distant villages are commendable. What ancient Bengali poet
do you find singing the praise of Loochi and Kachoori? These Loochis and
Kachooris have been introduced into Bengal from the North-Western
Provinces; but even there, people take them only occasionally. I have
never seen even there anyone who lives mainly on things fried in ghee,
day after day. The Chaube wrestlers of Mathura are, no doubt, fond of
Loochis and sweetmeats; but in a few years Chaubeji's power of digestion
is ruined, and he has to drug himself with appetising preparations
called Churans.

The poor die of starvation because they can get nothing to eat, and the
rich die of starvation because what they take is not food. Any and every
stuff eaten is not food; that is real food which, when eaten, is well
assimilated. It is better to fast rather than stuff oneself with
anything and everything. In the delicacies of the sweetmeat shops there
is hardly anything nourishing; on the other hand, there is — poison! Of
old, people used to take those injurious things only occasionally; but
now, the townspeople, especially those who come from villages to live in
towns, are the greatest sinners in this respect, as they take them every
day. What wonder is there that they die prematurely of dyspepsia! If you
are hungry, throw away all sweets and things fried in ghee into the
ditch, and buy a pice worth of Moorhi (popped rice) — that will be
cheaper and more nutritious food. It is sufficient food to have rice,
Dâl (lentils), whole-wheat Châpâtis (unfermented bread), fish,
vegetables, and milk. But Dal has to be taken as the Southern Indians
take it, that is, the soup of it only; the rest of the preparation give
to the cattle. He may take meat who can afford it, but not making it too
rich with heating spices, as the North-Western people do. The spices are
no food at all; to take them in abundance is only due to a bad habit.
Dal is a very substantial food but hard to digest. Pea-soup prepared of
tender peas is easily digested and pleasant to the taste. In Paris this
pea-soup is a favourite dish. First, boil the peas well, then make a
paste of them and mix them with water. Now strain the soup through a
wire-strainer, like that in which milk is strained and all the outer
skin will be separated. Then add some spices, such as turmeric, black
pepper, etc., according to taste, and broil it with a little ghee in the
pan — and you get a pleasant and wholesome Dal. The meat-eaters can make
it delicious by cooking it with the head of a goat or fish.

That we have so many cases of diabetes in India is chiefly due to
indigestion; of course there are solitary instances in which excessive
brain work is the cause, but with the majority it is indigestion.
Pot-belly is the foremost sign of indigestion. Does eating mean stuffing
oneself? That much which on can assimilate is proper food for one.
Growing thin or fat is equally due to indigestion. Do not give yourself
up as lost because some symptoms of diabetes are noticeable in you;
those are nothing in our country anti should not be taken seriously into
account. Only, pay more attention to your diet so that you may avoid
indigestion. Be in the open air as much as possible, and take good long
walks and work hard. The muscles of the leg should be as hard as iron.
If you are in service, take leave when possible and make a pilgrimage to
the Badarikâshrama in the Himalayas. If the journey is accomplished on
foot through the ascent and descent of two hundred miles in the hills,
you will see that this ghost of diabetes will depart from you. Do not
let the doctors come near you; most of them will harm you more than do
any good; and so far as possible, never take medicines, which in most
cases kill the patient sooner than the illness itself. If you can, walk
all the way from town to your native village every year during the Puja
vacation. To be rich in our country has come to be synonymous with being
the embodiment of laziness and dependence. One who has to walk being
supported by another, or one who has to be fed by another, is doomed to
be miserable — is a veritable in valid. He who eats cautiously only the
finer coating of the Loochi, for fear that the whole will not agree with
him, is already dead in life. Is he a man or a worm who cannot walk
twenty miles at a stretch. Who can save one who invites illness and
premature death of his own will?

And as for fermented bread, it is also poison; do not touch it at all!
Flour mixed with yeast becomes injurious. Never take any fermented
thing; in this respect the prohibition in our Shastras of partaking of
any such article of food is a fact of great importance. Any sweet thing
which has turned sour is called in the Shastras "Shukta", and that is
prohibited to be taken, excepting curd, which is good and beneficial. If
you have to take bread, toast it well over the fire.

Impure water and impure food are the cause of all maladies. In America,
nowadays, it has become a craze to purify the drinking water. The filter
has had its day and is now discredited, because it only strains the
water through, while all the finer germs of diseases such as cholera,
plague, remain intact in it; moreover, the filter itself gradually
becomes the hotbed of these germs. When the filter was first introduced
in Calcutta, for five years, it is said there was no outbreak of
cholera; since then it has become as bad as ever, for the reason that
the huge filter itself has now come to be the vehicle of cholera germs.
Of all kinds, the simple method that we have of placing three earthen
jars one over another on a three-footed bamboo frame, is the best; but
every second or third day the sand and charcoal should be changed, or
used again after heating them. The method of straining water through a
cloth containing a lump of alum in it, that we find in vogue in the
villages along the banks of the Ganga in the vicinity of Calcutta, is
the best of all. The particles of alum taking with them all earth and
impurities and the disease germs, gradually settle at the bottom of the
deep jar as sediment; this simple system brings into disrepute pipewater
and excels all your foreign filters. Moreover, if the water is boiled it
becomes perfectly safe. Boil the water when the impurities are settled
down by the alum, and then drink it, and throw away filters and such
other things into the ditch. Now in America, the drinking water is first
turned into vapour by means of huge machines; then the vapour is cooled
down into water again, and through another machine pure air is pressed
into it to substitute that air which goes out during the process of
vaporization. This water is very pure and is used in every home.

In our country, he who has some means, feeds his children with all sorts
of sweets and ghee-fried things, because, perchance, it is a shame —
just think what the people will say! — to let them have only rice and
Chapatis! What can you expect children fed like that to be but
disproportionate in figure, lazy, worthless idiots, with no backbone of
their own? The English people, who are so strong a race, who work so
hard day and night, and whose native place is a cold country — even they
hold in dread the very name of sweetmeats and food fried in butter! And
we, who live in the zone of fire, as it were, who do not like to move
from one place to another — what do we eat? — Loochis, Kachooris,
sweets, and other things, all fried in ghee or oil! Formerly, our
village zemindars in Bengal would think nothing of walking twenty or
thirty miles, and would eat twice-twenty Koi-fish, bones and all — and
they lived to a hundred years. Now their sons and grandsons come to
Calcutta and put on airs, wear spectacles, eat the sweets from the
bazaars, hire a carriage to go from one street to another, and then
complain of diabetes — and their life is cut short; this is the result
of their being "civilised, Calcutta-ised" people. And doctors and
Vaidyas hasten their ruin too. They are all-knowing, they think they can
cure anything with medicine. If there is a little flatulence,
immediately some medicine is prescribed. Alas, it never enters into the
heads of these Vaidyas to advise them to keep away from medicine, and go
and have a good walk of four or five miles, or so.

I am seeing many countries, and many ways and preparations of food; but
none of them approaches the admirable cooking of our various dishes of
Bengal, and it is not too much to say that one should like to take
rebirth for the sake of again enjoying their excellence. It is a great
pity that one does not appreciate the value of teeth when one has them!
Why should we imitate the West as regards food — and how many can afford
to do so? The food which is suitable in our part of the country is pure
Bengali food, cheap, wholesome, and nourishing, like that of the people
of Eastern Bengal. Imitate their food as much as you can; the more you
lean westwards to copy the modes of food, the worse you are, and the
more uncivilized you become. You are Calcutta-ites, civilised, forsooth!
Carried away by the charm of that destructive net which is of your own
creation, the bazaar sweets, Bankura has consigned its popped-rice to
the river Damodar, its Kalâi Dâl has been cast into the ditch, and Dacca
and Vikrampur have thrown to the dogs their old dishes — or in other
words, they have become "civilised"! You have gone to rack and ruin, and
are leading others in the same path, toll townspeople, and you pride
yourselves on your being "civilized"! And these provincial people are so
foolish that they will eat all the refuse of Calcutta and suffer from
dyspepsia and dysentery, but will not admit that it is not suiting them,
and will defend themselves by saying that the air of Calcutta is damp
and "saline"! They must by all means be townspeople in every respect!

So far, in brief, about the merits of food and other customs. Now I
shall say something in the matter of what the Westerners generally eat,
and how by degrees it has changed.

The food of the poor in all countries is some species of corn; herbs,
vegetables, and fish and meat fall within the category of luxuries and
are used in the shape of *chutney*. The crop which grows in abundance
and is the chief produce of a country is the staple food of its poorer
classes; as in Bengal, Orissa, Madras, and the Malabar coasts, the prime
food is rice, pulse, and vegetables, and sometimes, fish and meat are
used for *chutney* only. The food of the well-to-do class in other parts
of India is Chapatis (unfermented bread) of wheat, and rice, of the
people in general, mainly Chapatis of Bazrâ, Marhuâ, Janâr, Jhingorâ,
and other corns.

All over India, herbs, vegetables, pulse, fish, and meat are used only
to make tasteful the Roti (unfermented bread), or the rice, as the case
may be, and hence they are called in Sanskrit, "Vyanjana", i.e. that
which seasons food. In the Punjab, Rajputana, and the Deccan, though the
rich people and the princes take many kinds of meat every day, yet with
them even, the principal food is Roti or rice. He who takes daily one
pound of meat, surely takes two pounds of Chapatis along with it.

Similarly in the West, the chief foods of the people in poor countries,
and especially of the poor class in the rich parts, are bread and
potatoes; meat is rarely taken, and, if taken, is considered as a
*chutney*. In Spain, Portugal, Italy, and in other comparatively warm
countries, grapes grow profusely, and the wine made of grapes is very
cheap. These wines are not intoxicating (i.e.. unless one drinks a great
quantity, one will not get intoxicated) and are very nutritious. The
poor of those countries, therefore, use grape juice as a nourishment
instead of fish and meat. But in the northern parts of Europe, such as
Russia, Sweden, and Norway, bread made of rye, potatoes, and a little
dried fish form the food of the poor classes.

The food of the wealthy classes of Europe, and of all the classes of
America is quite different, that is to say, their chief food is fish and
meat, and bread, rice, and other things are taken as *chutney*. In
America, bread is taken very little. When fish is served, it is served
by itself, or when meat is served, it is served by itself and is often
taken without bread or rice. Therefore the plate has to be changed
frequently; if there are ten sorts of food, the plate has to be changed
as many times. If we were to take our food in this way, we should have
to serve like this — suppose the Shukta (bitter curry) is first brought,
and, changing that plate, Dal is served on another; in the same way the
soup arrives; and again a little rice by itself, or a few Loochis, and
so on. One benefit of this way of serving is that a little only of many
varieties is taken, and it saves one from eating too much of anything.
The French take coffee, and one or two slices of bread and butter in the
morning, fish and meat, etc., in a moderate way about midday, and the
principal meal comes at night. With the Italians and Spaniards, the
custom is the same as that of the French. The Germans eat a good deal,
five or six times a day, with more or less meat every time; the English,
three times, the breakfast being rather small, but tea or coffee
between; and the Americans also three times, but the meal is rather
large every time, with plenty of meat. In all these countries, the
principal meal is, however, dinner; the rich have French cooks and have
food cooked after the French fashion. To begin with, a little salted
fish or roe, or some sort of *chutney* or vegetable — this is by way of
stimulating the appetite; soup follows; then, according to the present
day fashion, fruit; next comes fish; then a meat-curry; after which a
joint of roast meat, and with it some vegetables; afterwards game birds,
or venison, etc., then sweets, and finally, delicious ice-cream. At the
table of the rich, the wine is changed every time the dish changes — and
hock, claret, and iced champagne are served with the different courses.
The spoon and knife and fork are also changed each time with the plate.
After dinner — coffee without milk and liqueurs in very tiny glasses are
brought in, and smoking comes last. The greater the variety of wines
served with the various dishes, the greater will the host be regarded as
a rich and wealthy man of fashion. As much money is spent over there in
giving a dinner as would ruin a moderately rich man of our country.

Sitting cross-legged on a wooden seat on the ground, with a similar one
to lean his back against, the Arya used to take his food on a single
metal plate, placed on a slightly-raised wooden stool. The same custom
is still in rogue in the Punjab, Rajputana, Mahârâshtra, and Gujarat.
The people of Bengal, Orissa, Telinga, and Malabar, etc., do not use
wooden stools to put the plates on, but take their food on a plate or a
plantain-leaf placed on the ground. Even the Maharaja of Mysore does the
same. The Mussulmans sit on a large, white sheet, when taking their
food. The Burmese and the Japanese place their plates on the ground and
sit supporting themselves on their knees and feet only, and not flat on
their haunches like the Indians. The Chinamen sit on chairs, with their
dishes placed on a table, and use spoons and wooden chop-sticks in
taking their food. In the olden times, the Romans and Greeks had a table
before them and, reclining on a couch, used to eat their food with their
fingers. The Europeans also, sitting on chairs, used to take their food
with their fingers from the table; now they have spoons and forks. The
Chinese mode of eating is really an exercise requiring skill. As our Pân
(betel)-vendors make, by dexterity of hand, two separate pieces of thin
iron-sheets work like scissors in the trimming of Pan leaves, so the
Chinese manipulate two sticks between two fingers and the palm of the
right hand, in such a way as to make them act like tongs to carry the
vegetables up to their mouths. Again, putting the two together, and
holding a bowl of rice near the mouth, they push the rice in with the
help of those sticks formed like a little shovel.

The primitive ancestors of every nation used to eat, it is said,
whatever they could get. When they killed a big animal, they would make
it last for a month and would not reject it even after it got rotten.
Then gradually they became civilised and learnt cultivation. Formerly,
they could not get their food every day by hunting and would, like the
wild animals, gorge themselves one day and then starve four or five days
in the week. Later they escaped that, for they could get their food
every day by cultivation; but it remained a standing custom to take with
food something like rotten meat or other things of the old days.
Primarily, rotten meat was an indispensable article of food; now that or
something else in its place became, like the sauce, a favourite relish.
The Eskimos live in the snowy regions, where no kind of corn can be
produced; their daily food is fish and flesh. Once in a way when they
lose their appetite, they take just a piece of rotten flesh to recover
their lost appetite. Even now, Europeans do not immediately cook wild
birds, game, and venison, while fresh, but they keep them hanging till
they begin to smell a little. In Calcutta the rotten meat of a deer is
sold out as soon as brought to the market, and people prefer some fish
when slightly rotten. In some parts of Europe, the cheese which smells a
little is regarded as very tasty. Even the vegetarians like to have a
little onion and garlic; the Southern Indian Brahmin must have them in
his cooking. But the Hindu Shastras prohibited that too, making it a sin
to take onions, garlic, domestic fowl, and pork to one caste (the
Brahmin); they that would take them would lose their caste. So the
orthodox Hindus gave up onions and garlic, and substituted in their
place asafoetida, a thing which is more strikingly offensive in smell
than either of the other two! The orthodox Brahmins of the Himalayas
similarly took to a kind of dried grass smelling just like garlic! And
what harm in that? The scriptures do not say anything against taking
these things!

Every religion contains some rules regarding the taking of certain
foods, and the avoiding of others; only Christianity is an exception.
The Jains and the Bauddhas will by no means take fish or meat. The
Jains, again, will not even eat potatoes, radishes, or other vegetable
roots, which grow underground, lest in digging them up worms are killed.
They will not eat at night lest some insect get into their mouths in the
dark. The Jews do not eat fish that have no scales, do not eat pork, nor
the animals that are not cloven-hoofed and do not ruminate. Again, if
milk or any preparation of milk be brought into the kitchen where fish
or flesh is being cooked, the Jews will throw away everything cooked
there. For this reason, the orthodox Jews do not eat the food cooked by
other nations. Like the Hindus, too, they do not take flesh which is
simply slaughtered and not offered to God. In Bengal and the Punjab,
another name of flesh that is offered to the Goddess is Mahâprasâda,
lit., the "great offering". The Jews do not eat flesh, unless it is
Mahaprasada, i.e. unless it is properly offered to God. Hence, they,
like the Hindus, are not permitted to buy flesh at any and every shop.
The Mussulmans obey many rules similar to the Jews, but do not, like
them, go to extremes; they do not take milk and fish or flesh at the
same meal, but do not consider it so much harmful if they are in the
same kitchen or if one touches another. There is much similarity
respecting food between the Hindus and the Jews. The Jews, however, do
not take wild boar, which the Hindus do. In the Punjab, on account of
the deadly animosity between the Hindus and the Mussulmans, the former
do what the latter will not, and the wild boar has come to be one of the
very essential articles of food with the Hindus there. With the Rajputs,
hunting the wild boar and partaking of its flesh is rather an act of
Dharma. The taking of the flesh of even the domesticated pig prey ails
to a great extent in the Deccan among all castes except the Brahmins.
The Hindus eat the wild fowl (cock or hen), but not domesticated fowls.

The people of India from Bengal to Nepal and in the Himalayas as far as
the borders of Kashmir, follow the same usages regarding food. In these
parts, the customs of Manu are in force to a large extent even up to
this day. But they obtain more especially in the parts from Kumaon to
Kashmir than in Bengal, Bihar, Allahabad, or Nepal. For example, the
Bengalis do not eat fowl or fowl's eggs, but they eat duck's eggs; so do
the Nepalese; but from Kumaon upwards, even that is not allowed. The
Kashmiris eat with pleasure eggs of the wild duck, but not of the
domesticated bird. Of the people of India, beginning from Allahabad,
excepting in the Himalayas, they who take the flesh of goat take fowl as
well.

All these rules and prohibitions with respect to food are for the most
part meant, no doubt, in the interests of good health; of course, in
each and every instance, it is difficult accurately to determine which
particular food is conducive to health and which is not. Again, swine
and fowls eat anything and everything and are very unclean; so they are
forbidden. No one sees what the wild animals eat in the forest; so they
are not disallowed. Besides, the wild animals are healthier and less
sickly than the domesticated ones. Milk is very difficult of digestion,
especially when one is suffering from acidity, and cases have happened
when even by gulping down a glass of milk in haste, life has been
jeopardised. Milk should be taken as a child does from its mother's
breast; if it is sucked or sipped by degrees, it is easily digestible,
otherwise not. Being itself hard of digestion, it becomes the more so
when taken with flesh; so the Jews are prohibited from taking flesh and
milk at the same meal.

The foolish and ignorant mother who forces her baby to swallow too much
milk beats her breast in despair within a few months, on seeing that
there is little hope of her darling's life! The modern medical
authorities prescribe only a pint of milk even for an adult, and that is
to be taken as slowly as possible; and for babies a "feeding-bottle" is
the best means. Our mothers are too busy with household duties, so the
maid-servant puts the crying baby in her lap and not unfrequently holds
it down with her knee, and by means of a spoon makes it gulp down as
much milk as she can. And the result is that generally it is afflicted
with liver complaint and seldom grows up — that milk proves to be its
doom; only those that have sufficient vitality to survive this sort of
dangerous feeding attain a strong and healthy manhood. And think of our
old-fashioned confinement rooms, of the hot fomentations given to the
baby, and treatments of like nature. It was indeed a wonder and must
have been a matter of special divine grace that the mother and the baby
survived these severe trials and could become strong and healthy!

IV. CIVILISATION IN DRESS

In every country the respectability of a person is determined, to a
certain extent, by the nature of the dress he wears. As our village-folk
in Bengal say in their patois, "How can a gentleman be distinguished
from one of low birth unless his income is known?" And not only income,
"Unless it is seen how one dresses oneself, how can it be known if one
is a gentleman?" This is the same all over the world, more or less. In
Bengal, no gentleman can walk in the streets with only a loincloth on;
while in other parts of India, no one goes out of doors but with a
turban on his head. In the West, the French have all along taken the
lead in everything — their food and their dress are imitated by others.
Even now, though different parts of Europe have got different modes of
clothes and dress of their own, yet when one earns a good deal of money
and becomes a "gentleman", he straightway rejects his former native
dress and substitutes the French mode in its place. The Dutch farmer
whose native dress somewhat resembles the *paijâmâs* of the Kabulis, the
Greek clothed in full skirts, the Russ dressed somewhat after the
Tibetan fashion — as soon as they become "genteel", they wear French
coats and pantaloons. Needless to speak of women — no sooner do they get
rich than they must by any means have their dresses made in Paris.
America, England, France, and Germany are now the rich countries in the
West, and the dress of the people of these countries, one and all, is
made after the French fashion, which is slowly and surely making its way
into every part of Europe. The whole of Europe seems to be an imitation
of France. However, men's clothes are better made nowadays in London
than Paris, so men have them "London-made", and women in the Parisian
style. Those who are very rich have their dresses sent from those two
places. America enforces an exorbitant tax upon the importation of
foreign dresses; notwithstanding that, the American women must have them
from Paris and London. This, only the Americans can afford to do, for
America is now the chief home of Kubera, the god of wealth.

The ancient Aryans used to put on the Dhoti and Châdar (Dhoti is a piece
of cloth about four or five yards long, worn by the Indians round the
loins instead of breeches, and Chadar is a piece of cloth three yards
long, used as a loose upper garment.). The Kshatriyas used to wear
trousers and long coats when fighting. At other times they would use
only the Dhoti and Chadar; and they wore the turban. The same custom is
still in vogue, except in Bengal, among the people in all parts of
India; they are not so particular about the dress for the rest of the
body, but they must have a turban for the head. In former times, the
same was also the custom for both the man and the women. In the
sculptured figures of the Buddhistic period, the men and the women are
seen to wear only a piece of Kaupin. Even Lord Buddha's father, though a
king, is seen in some sculptures, sitting on a throne, dressed in the
same way; so also the mother, only has, in addition, ornaments on her
feet and arms; but they all have turbans! The Buddhist Emperor,
Dharmâshoka, is seen sitting on a drum-shaped seat with only a Dhoti on,
and a Chadar round his neck, and looking at damsels performing a dance
before him; the dancing girls are very little clothed, having only short
pieces of loose material hanging from the waist; but the glory is — that
the turban is there, and it makes the principal feature of their dress.
The high officials of the State who attended the royal court, are,
however, dressed in excellent trousers and Chogas, or long coats. When
the King Nala, was disguised as a charioteer in to service of the King
Rituparna, he drove the chariot at such a tremendous speed that the
Chadar of the king Rituparna was blown away to such a distance that it
could not be recovered; and as he had set out to marry, or join a
Svayamvara, he had to do so, perchance, without a Chadar. The Dhoti and
the Chadar are the time-honored dress of the Aryans. Hence, at the time
of the performance of any religious ceremony, the rule among the Hindus
even now is to put on the Dhoti and Chadar only.

The dress of the ancient Greeks and Romans was Dhoti and Chadar — one
broad piece of cloth and another smaller one made in the form of the
toga, from which the word Choga is derived. Sometimes they used also a
shirt, and at the time of fighting, trousers and coats. The dress of the
women was a long and sufficiently broad, square-shaped garment, similar
to that formed by sewing two sheets lengthwise, which they slipped over
the head and tied round, once under the breast and again round the
waist. Then they fastened the upper parts which were open, over both the
arms by means of large pins, in much the same way as the hill tribes of
the northern Himalayas still wear their blankets. There was a Chadar
over this long garment. This dress was very simple and elegant.

From the very old days, only the Iranians used shaped dresses. Perhaps
they learnt it from the Chinese. The Chinese were the primeval teachers
of civilisation in dress and other things pertaining to various comforts
and luxuries. From time immemorial, the Chinese took their meals at a
table, sitting on chairs, with many elaborate auxiliaries, and wore
shaped dresses of many varieties — coat, cap, trousers, and so on.

On conquering Iran, Alexander gave up the old Greek Dhoti and Chadar and
began using trousers. At this, his Greek soldiers became so disaffected
towards him that they were on the point of mutiny. But Alexander was not
the man to yield, and by the sheer force of his authority he introduced
trousers and coats as a fashion in dress.

In a hot climate, the necessity of clothes is not so much felt. A mere
Kaupin is enough for the purpose of decency; other clothes serve more as
embellishments. In cold countries, as a matter of unavoidable necessity,
the people, when uncivilised, clothe themselves with the skins of
animals, and when they gradually become civilised, they learn the use of
blankets, and by degrees, shaped dresses, such as pantaloons, coats, and
so on. Of course it is impossible in cold countries to display the
beauty of ornaments, which have to be worn on the bare body, for if they
did so they would suffer severely from cold. So the fondness for
ornaments is transfered to, and is satisfied by, the niceties of dress.
As in India the fashions in ornaments change very often, so in the West
the fashions in dress change every moment.

In cold countries, therefore, it is the rule that one should not appear
before others without covering oneself from head to foot. In London, a
gentleman or a lady cannot go out without conforming himself or herself
exactly to what society demands. In the West, it is immodest for a woman
to show her feet in society, but at a dance it is not improper to expose
the face, shoulders, and upper part of the body to view. In our country,
on the other hand, for a woman to show her face is a great shame, (hence
that rigorous drawing of the veil), but not so the feet. Again, in
Rajputana and the Himalayas they cover the whole body except the waist!

In the West, actresses and dancing-girls are very thinly covered, to
attract men. Their dancing often means exposing their limbs in
harmonious movements accompanied by music. In our country, the women of
gentle birth are not so particular in covering themselves thoroughly,
but the dancing-girls are entirely covered. In the West, women are
always completely clothed in the daytime; so attraction is greater in
their being thinly covered. Our women remain in the house most of the
time, and much dressing themselves is unusual; so with us, attraction is
greater in their fully covering themselves. In Malabar, men and women
have only a piece of cloth round their loins. With the Bengalis it is
about the same, and before men, the women scrupulously draw their veils,
and cover their bodies.

In all countries except China, I notice many queer and mysterious ideas
of propriety — in some matters they are carried too far, in others
again, what strikes one as being very incorrect is not felt to be so at
all.

The Chinese of both sexes are always fully covered from head to foot.
The Chinese are the disciples of Confucius, are the disciples of Buddha,
and their morality is quite strict and refined. Obscene language,
obscene books or pictures, any conduct the least obscene — and the
offender is punished then and there. The Christian missionaries
translated the Bible into the Chinese tongue. Now, in the Bible there
are some passages so obscene as to put to shame some of the Purânas of
the Hindus. Reading those indecorous passages, the Chinamen were so
exasperated against Christianity that they made a point of never
allowing the Bible to be circulated in their country. Over and above
that, missionary women wearing evening dress and mixing freely with men
invited the Chinese to their parties. The simpleminded Chinese were
disgusted, and raised a cry, saying: Oh, horror! This religion is come
to us to ruin our young boys, by giving them this Bible to read, and
making them fall an easy prey to the charms of these half clothed wily
women! This is why the Chinese are so very indignant with the
Christians. Otherwise, the Chinese are very tolerant towards other
religions. I hear that the missionaries have now printed an edition,
leaving out the objectionable parts; but this step has made the Chinese
more suspicious than before.

V. ETIQUETTE AND MANNERS

Again, in the West, ideas of decency and etiquette vary in accordance
with the different countries. With the English and Americans they are of
one type, is with the French of another, with the Germans again
different. The Russians and the Tibetans have much in common; and the
Turks have their own quite distinct customs, and so on.

In Europe and America, the people are extremely particular in observing
privacy, much more than we are. We are vegetarians, and so eat a
quantity of vegetables etc., and living in a hot country we frequently
drink one or two glasses of water at a time. The peasant of the Upper
Provinces eats two pounds of powdered barley, and then sets to drawing
and drinking water from the shell every now and again, as he feels so
thirsty. In summer we keep open places in our house for distributing
water to the thirsty, through a hollowed bamboo stem. These ways make
the people not so very particular about privacy; they cannot help it.
Compare cowsheds and horses' stables with lions' and tigers' cages.
Compare the dog with the goat. The food of the Westerners is chiefly
meat, and in cold countries they hardly drink any water. Gentlemen take
a little wine in small glasses. The French detest water; only Americans
drink it in great quantities, for their country is very warm in summer.
New York is even hotter than Calcutta. The Germans drink a good deal of
beer, but not with their meals.

In cold countries, men are always susceptible to catching cold, so they
cannot help sneezing; in warm countries people have to drink much water
at meals, consequently we cannot help eructating. Now note the
etiquette: if you do that in a Western society, your sin is
unpardonable; but if you bring out your pocket handkerchief and blow
your nose vigorously, it will see nothing objectionable in that. With
us, the host will not feel satisfied, so to say, unless he sees you
doing the former, as that is taken as a sign of a full meal; but what
would you think of doing the latter when having a meal in the company of
others?

In England and America, no mention of indigestion or any stomach
complaints, you may be suffering from, should be made before women; it
is a different matter, of course, if your friend is an old woman, or if
she is quite well known to you. They are not so sensitive about these
things in France. The Germans are even less particular.

English and American men are very guarded in their conversation before
women; you cannot even speak of a "leg". The French, like us, are very
free in conversation; the Germans and the Russians will use vulgar terms
in the presence of anybody.

But conversations on being in love are freely carried on between mother
and son, between brothers and sisters, and between them and their
fathers. The father asks the daughter many questions about her lover
(the future bridegroom) and cuts all sorts of jokes about her
engagement. On such occasions, the French maiden modestly laughs down
her head, the English maiden is bashful, and the American maiden gives
him sharp replies to his face. Kissing and even embrace are not so very
objectionable; these things can be talked of in society. But in our
country, no talk, nor even all indirect hint of love affairs, is
permissible before superior relations.

The Westerners are now rich people. Unless one's dress is very clean and
in conformity with strict etiquette, one will not be considered a
gentleman and cannot mix in society. A gentleman must change his collar
and shirt twice or thrice every day; the poor people, of course, cannot
do this. On the outer garment there must not be stains or even a crease.
However much you may suffer from heat, you must go out with gloves for
fear of getting your hands dirty in the streets, and to shake hands with
a lady with hands that are not clean is very ungentlemanlike. In polite
society, if the act of spitting or rinsing the mouth or picking the
teeth be ever indulged in — the offender will be marked as a Chandâla, a
man of low caste, and shunned!

The Dharma of the Westerners is worship of Shakti — the Creative Power
regarded as the Female Principle. It is with them somewhat like the
Vâmâchâri's worship of woman. As the Tântrika says. "On the left side
the women . . . on the right, the cup full of wine; in short, warm meat
with ingredients . . . the Tantrika religion is very mysterious,
inscrutable even to the Yogis." It is this worship of Shakti that is
openly and universally practised. The idea of motherhood, i.e. the
relation of a son to his mother, is also noticed in great measure.
Protestantism as a force is not very significant in Europe, where the
religion is, in fact, Roman Catholic. In the religion, Jehovah, Jesus,
and the Trinity are secondary; there, the worship is for the Mother —
She, the Mother, with the Child Jesus in her arms. The emperor cries
"Mother", the field-marshal cries "Mother", the soldier with the flag in
his hand cries "Mother", the seaman at the helm cries "Mother", the
fisherman in his rags cries ''Mother'', the beggar in the street cries
"Mother"! A million voices in a million ways, from a million places —
from the palace, from the cottage, from the church, cry "Mother'',
"Mother", "Mother"! Everywhere is the cry "Ave Maria"; day and night,
"Ave Maria", "Ave Maria"!

Next is the worship of the woman. This worship of Shakti is not lust,
but is that Shakti-Pujâ, that worship of the Kumâri (virgin) and the
Sadhavâ (the married woman whose husband is living), which is done in
Varanasi, Kalighat, and other holy places. It is the worship of the
Shakti, not in mere thought, not in imagination, but in actual, visible
form. Our Shakti-worship is only in the holy places, and at certain
times only is it performed; but theirs is in every place and always, for
days, weeks, months, and years. Foremost is the woman's state, foremost
is her dress, her seat, her food, her wants, and her comforts; the first
honours in all respects are accorded to her. Not to speak of the
noble-born, not to speak of the young and the fair, it is the worship of
any and every woman, be she an acquaintance or a stranger. This
Shakti-worship the Moors, the mixed Arab race, Mohammedan in religion,
first introduced into Europe when they conquered Spain and ruled her for
eight centuries. It was the Moors who first sowed in Europe the seeds of
Western civilisation and Shakti-worship. In course of time, the Moors
forgot this Shakti-Worship and fell from their position of strength,
culture and glory, to live scattered and unrecognised in an unnoticed
corner of Africa, and their power and civilisation passed over to
Europe. The Mother, leaving the Moors, smiled Her loving blessings on
the Christians and illumined their homes.

VI. FRANCE — PARIS

What is this Europe? Why are the black, the bronze, the yellow, the red
inhabitants of Asia, Africa, and America bent low at the feet of the
Europeans? Why are they the sole rulers in this Kali-Yuga? To understand
this Europe one has to understand her through France, the fountain-head
of everything that is highest in the West. The supreme power that rules
the world is Europe, and of this Europe the great centre is Paris. Paris
is the centre of Western civilization. Here, in Paris, matures and
ripens every idea of Western ethics, manners and customs, light or
darkness, good or evil. This Paris is like a vast ocean, in which there
is many a precious gem, coral, and pearl, and in which, again, there are
sharks and other rapacious sea-animals as well. Of Europe, the central
field of work, the Karmakshetra, is France. A picturesque country,
neither very cold nor very warm, very fertile, weather neither
excessively wet nor extremely dry, sky clear, sun sweet, elms and oaks
in abundance, grass-lands charming, hills and rivers small, springs
delightful. Excepting some parts of China, no other country in the world
have I seen that is so beautiful as France. That play of beauty in water
and fascination in land, that madness in the air, that ecstasy in the
sky! Nature so lovely — the men so fond of beauty! The rich and the
poor, the young and the old, keep their houses, their rooms, the
streets, the fields, the gardens, the walks, so artistically neat and
clean — the whole country looks like a picture. Such love of nature and
art have I seen nowhere else, except in Japan. The palatial structures,
the gardens resembling Indra's paradise, the groves, even the farmer's
fields — everywhere and in everything there is an attempt at beauty, an
attempt at art, remarkable and effected with success, too.

From ancient times, France has been the scene of conflict among the
Gauls, the Romans, the Franks, and other nations. After the destruction
of the Roman Empire, the Franks obtained absolute dominion over Europe.
Their King, Charlemagne, forced Christianity into Europe, by the power
of the sword. Europe was made known in Asia by these Franks. Hence we
still call the Europeans Franki, Feringi, Planki or Filinga, and so on.

Ancient Greece, the fountain-head of Western civilisation, sank into
oblivion from the pinnacle of her glory, the vast empire of Rome was
broken into pieces by the dashing waves of the barbarian invaders — the
light of Europe went out; it was at this time that another barbarous
race rose out of obscurity in Asia — the Arabs. With extraordinary
rapidity, that Arab tide began to spread over the different parts of the
world. Powerful Persia had to kiss the ground before the Arabs and adopt
the Mohammedan religion, with the result that the Mussulman religion
took quite a new shape; the religion of the Arabs and the civilisation
of Persia became intermingled.

With the sword of the Arabs, the Persian civilisation began to
disseminate in all directions. That Persian civilisation had been
borrowed from ancient Greece and India. From the East and from the West,
the waves of Mussulman invaders dashed violently on Europe and along
them also, the light of wisdom and civilisation began dispersing the
darkness of blind and barbarous Europe. The wisdom, learning, and arts
of ancient Greece entered into Italy, overpowered the barbarians, and
with their quickening impulse, life began to pulsate in the dead body of
the world-capital of Rome. The pulsation of this new life took a strong
and formidable shape in the city of Florence — old Italy began showing
signs of new life. This is called Renaissance, the new birth. But this
new birth was for Italy only a rebirth; while for the rest of Europe, it
was the first birth. Europe was born in the sixteenth century A.D. i.e.
about the time when Akbar, Jehangir, Shahjahan, and other Moghul
Emperors firmly established their mighty empire in India.

Italy was an old nation. At the call of the Renaissance, she woke up and
gave her response, but only to turn over on her side in bed, as it were,
and fall fast asleep again. For various reasons, India also stirred up a
little at this time. For three ruling generations from Akbar, learning,
wisdom, and arts came to be much esteemed in India. But India was also a
very old nation; and for some reason or other, she also did the same as
Italy and slept on again.

In Europe, the tide of revival in Italy struck the powerful, young and
new nation, the Franks. The torrent of civilisation, flowing from all
quarters to Florence and there uniting, assumed a new form; but Italy
had not the power within herself to hold that stupendous mass of fresh
energy. The revival would have, as in India, ended there, had it not
been for the good fortune of Europe that the new nation of the Franks
gladly took up that energy, and they in vigour of their youthful blood
boldly floated their national ship on the tide; and the current of that
progress gradually gathered in volume and strength — from one it swelled
into a thousand courses. The other nations of Europe greedily took the
water of that tide into their own countries by cutting new channels, and
increased its volume and speed by pouring their own lifeblood into it.
That tidal wave broke, in the fullness of time, on the shores of India.
It reached as far as the coast of Japan, and she became revitalised by
bathing in its water. Japan is the new nation of Asia.

Paris is the fountain-head of European civilisation, as Gomukhi is of
the Ganga. This huge metropolis is a vision of heaven on earth, the city
of constant rejoicing. Such luxury, such enjoyments, such mirthfulness
are neither in London nor in Berlin nor anywhere else. True, there is
wealth in London and in New York, in Berlin there is learning and
wisdom; but nowhere is that French soil, and above all, nowhere is that
genius of the French man. Let there be wealth in plenty, let there be
learning and wisdom, let there be beauty of nature also, elsewhere — but
where is the MAN? This remarkable French character is the incarnation of
the ancient Greek, as it were, that had died to be born again — always
joyful, always full of enthusiasm, very light and silly, yet again
exceedingly grave, prompt, and resolute to do every work, and again
despondent at the least resistance. But that despondency is only for a
moment with the Frenchman, his face soon after glowing again with fresh
hope and trust.

The Paris University is the model of European universities. All the
Academies of Science that are in the world are imitations of the French
Academy. Paris is the first teacher of the founding of colonial empires.
The terms used in military art in all languages are still mostly French.
The style and diction of French writings are copied in all the European
languages. Of science, philosophy, and art, this Paris is the mine.
Everywhere, in every respect, there is imitation of the French. As if
the French were the townspeople, and the other nations only villagers
compared with them! What the French initiate, the Germans, the English,
and other nations imitate, may be fifty or twenty-five years later,
whether it be in learning, or in art, or in social matters. This French
civilisation reached Scotland, and when the Scottish king became the
king of England, it awoke and roused England; it was during the reign of
the Stuart Dynasty of Scotland that the Royal Society and other
institutions were established in England.

Again, France is the home of liberty. From here, the city of Paris,
travelled with tremendous energy the power of the People, and shook the
very foundations of Europe. From that time the face of Europe has
completely changed and a new Europe has collie into existence.
"*Liberté, Equalité, Fraternité*" is no more heard in France; she is now
pursuing other ideas and other purposes, while the spirit of the French
Revolution is still working among the other nations of Europe.

One distinguished scientist of England told me the other day that Paris
was the centre of the world, and that the more a nation would succeed in
establishing its connection with the city of Paris, the more would that
nation's progress in national life be achieved. Though such assertion is
a partial exaggeration of fact, yet it is certainly true that if anyone
has to give to the world any new idea, this Paris is *the* place for its
dissemination. If one can gain the approbation of the citizens of Paris,
that voice the whole of Europe is sure to echo back. The sculptor, the
painter the musician the dancer, or any artist, if he can first obtain
celebrate in Paris, acquires very easily the esteem and eulogy of other
countries.

We hear only of the darker side of this Paris in our country — that it
is a horrible place, a hell on earth. Some of the English hold this
view; and the wealthy people of other countries, in whose eyes no other
enjoyment is possible in life except the gratification of the senses,
naturally see Paris as the home of immorality and enjoyments.

But it is the same in all big cities of the West, such as London,
Berlin, Vienna, New York. The only difference is: in other countries the
means of enjoyment are commonplace and vulgar, but the very dirt of
civilised Paris is coated over with gold leaf. To compare the refined
enjoyments of Paris with the barbarity, in this respect, of other cities
is to compare the wild boar's wallowing in the mire with the peacock's
dance spreading out its feathers like a fan.

What nation in the world has not the longing to enjoy and live a life of
pleasure? Otherwise, why should those who get rich hasten to Paris of
all places? Why do kings and emperors, assuming other names come to
Paris and live incognito and feel themselves happy by bathing in this
whirlpool of sense-enjoyment? The longing is in all countries, and no
pains are spared to satisfy it; the only difference is: the French have
perfected it as a science, they know how to enjoy, they have risen to
the highest rung of the ladder of enjoyment.

Even then, most of the vulgar dances and amusements are for the
foreigner; the French people are very cautious, they never waste money
for nothing. All those luxuries, those expensive hotels and cafés, at
which the cost of a dinner is enough to ruin one, are for the rich
foolish foreigner. The French are highly refined, profuse in etiquette,
polished and suave in their manners, clever in drawing money from one's
pocket; and when they do, they laugh in their sleeve.

Besides, there is another thing to note. Society, as it is among the
Americans, Germans, and the English, is open to all nations; so the
foreigner can quickly see the ins and outs of it. After an acquaintance
of a few days, the American will invite one to live in his house for a
while; the Germans also do the same; and the English do so after a
longer acquaintance. But it is very different with the French; a
Frenchman will never invite one to live with his family unless he is
very intimately acquainted with him. But when a foreigner gets such all
opportunity and has occasion and time enough to see and know the family,
he forms quite a different opinion from what he generally hears. Is it
not equally foolish of foreigners to venture an opinion on our national
character, as they do, by seeing only the low quarters of Calcutta? So
with Paris. The unmarried women in France are as well guarded as in our
country, they cannot even mix flatly in society; only after marriage can
they do so in company with their husbands. Like us, their negotiations
for marriage are carried on by their parents. Being a jolly people, none
of their big social functions will be complete without professional 
dancers, as with us performances of  dancing-girls are given on the
occasions of marriage and Puja. Living in a dark foggy country, the
English are gloomy, make long faces and remark that such dances at one's
home are very improper, but at a theatre they are all right.  It should
lie noted here that their dances may appear improper to our eyes, but
not so with them, they being accustomed to them. The girl may, at a
dance, appear in a dress showing the to neck and shoulders, and that is
not taken as improper; and the English and Americans would not object to
attending such dances, but on going hone, might not refrain from
condemning the French customs!

Again, the idea is the same everywhere regarding the chastity; of women,
whose deviation from it is fraught with danger, but in the case of men
it does not matter so much. The Frenchman is, no doubt, a little freer
in this respect, and like the rich men of other countries cares not for
criticism. Generally speaking, in Europe, the majority of men do not
regard a little lax conduct as so very bad, and in the West, the same is
the case with bachelors. The parents of young students consider it
rather a drawback if the latter fight shy of women, lest they become
effeminate. The one excellence which a man must have, in the West, is
courage. Their word "virtue" and our word "Viratva" (heroism) are one
and the same. Look to the derivation of the word "virtue" and see what
they call goodness in man. For women, they hold chastity as the most
important virtue, no doubt. One man marrying more than one wife is not
so injurious to society as a woman having more than one husband at the
same time, for the latter leads to the gradual decay of the race.
Therefore, in all countries good care is taken to preserve the chastity
of women. Behind this attempt of every society to preserve the chastity
of women is seen the hand of nature. The tendency of nature is to
multiply the population, and the chastity of women helps that tendency.
Therefore, in being more anxious about the purity of women than of men,
every society is only assisting nature in the fulfilment of her purpose.

The object of my speaking of these things is to impress upon you the
fact that the life of each nation has a moral purpose of its own, and
the manners and customs of a nation must be judged from the standpoint
of that purpose. The Westerners should be seen through their eyes; to
see them through our eyes, and for them to see us with theirs — both
these are mistakes. The purpose of our life is quite the opposite of
theirs. The Sanskrit name for a student, Brahmachârin, is synonymous
with the Sanskrit word Kâmajit. (One who has full control over his
passions.) Our goal of life is Moksha; how can that be ever attained
without Brahmacharya or absolute continence? Hence it is imposed upon
our boys and youth as an indispensable condition during their
studentship. The purpose of life in the West is Bhoga, enjoyment; hence
much attention to strict Brahmacharya is not so indispensably necessary
with them as it is with us.

Now, to return to Paris. There is no city in the world that can compare
with modern Paris. Formerly it was quite different from what it is now —
it was somewhat like the Bengali quarters of Varanasi, with zigzag lanes
and streets, two houses joined together by an arch over the lane here
and there, wells by the side of walls, and so on. In the last Exhibition
they showed a model of old Paris, but that Paris has completely
disappeared by gradual changes; the warfare and revolutions through
which the city has passed have, each time, caused ravages in one part or
another, razing every thing to the ground, and again, new Paris has
risen in its place, cleaner and more extensive.

Modern Paris is, to a great extent, the creation of Napoleon III. He
completed that material transformation of the city which had already
been begun at the fall of the ancient monarchy. The student of the
history of France need not be reminded how its people were oppressed by
the absolute monarchs of France prior to the French Revolution. Napoleon
III caused himself to be proclaimed Emperor by sheer force of arms,
wading through blood. Since the first French Revolution, the French
people were always fickle and thus a source of alarm to the Empire.
Hence the Emperor, in order to keep his subjects contented and to please
the ever-unstable masses of Paris by giving them work, went on
continually making new and magnificent public roads and embankments and
building gateways, theatres, and many other architectural structures,
leaving the monuments of old Paris as before. Not only was the city
traversed in all directions by new thoroughfares, straight and wide,
with sumptuous houses raised or restored, but a line of fortification
was built doubling the area of the city. Thus arose the boulevards, and
the fine quarters of d'Antin and other neighbourhoods; and the avenue of
the Champs Elysées, which is unique in the world was reconstructed. This
avenue is so broad that down the middle and on both sides of it run
gardens all along, and in one place it has taken a circular shape which
comprises the city front, toward the West, called Place de la Concorde.
Round this Place de la Concorde are statues in the form of women
representing the eight chief towns of France. One of these statues
represents the district of Strasburg. This district was wrested from the
hands of the French by the Germans after the battle of 1870. The pain of
this loss the French have not yet been able to get over, and that statue
is still covered with flowers and garlands offered in memory of its dead
spirit, as it were. As men place garlands over the tombs of their dead
relations, so garlands are placed on that statue, at one time or
another.

It seems to me that the Chandni Chauk of Delhi might have been at one
time somewhat like this Place de la Concorde. Here and there columns of
victory, triumphal arches and sculptural art in the form of huge statues
of man and women, lions, etc., adorn the square.

A very big triumphal column in imitation of Trajan's Column, made of
gun-metal (procured by melting 1,200 guns), is erected in Place Vendome
in memory of the great hero, Napoleon I; on the sides are engraved the
victories of his reign, and on the top is the figure of Napoleon
Bonaparte. In the Place de la Bastille stands the Column of July (in
memory of the Revolution of July 1789) on the side of the old fortress,
"The Bastille", afterwards used as a State prison. Here were imprisoned
those who incurred the king's displeasure. In those old days, without
any trial or anything of the kind, the king would issue a warrant
bearing the royal seal, called "*Lettre de Cachet*". Then, without any
inquiry as to what good acts the victim had done for his country, or
whether he was really guilty or not, without even any question as to
what he actually did to incur the king's wrath, he would be at once
thrown into the Bastille. If the fair favourites of the kings were
displeased with anyone, they could obtain by request a "*Lettre de
Cachet*" from the king against that man, and the poor man would at once
be sent to the Bastille. Of the unfortunate who were imprisoned there,
very few ever came out. When, afterwards, the whole country rose as one
man in revolt against such oppression and tyranny and raised the cry of
"Individual liberty, All are equal, No one is high or low", the people
of Paris in their mad excitement attacked the king and queen. The very
first thing the mob did was to pull down the Bastille, the symbol of
extreme tyranny of man over man, and passed the night in dancing,
singing, and feasting on the spot. The king tried to escape, but the
people managed to catch him, and hearing that the father-in-law of the
king, the Emperor of Austria, was sending soldiers to aid his
son-in-law, became blind with rage and killed the king and the queen.
The whole French nation became mad in the name of liberty and equality —
France became a republic — they killed all the nobility whom they could
get hold of, and many of the nobility gave up their titles and rank and
made common cause with the subject people. Not only so, they called all
the nations of the world to rise — "Awake, kill the kings who are all
tyrants, let all be free and have equal rights." Then all the kings of
Europe began to tremble in fear lest this fire might spread into their
countries, lest it might burn their thrones; and hence, determined to
put it down, they attacked France from all directions. On the other
side, the leaders of the French Republic proclaimed, "Our native land is
in peril, come one and all", and the proclamation soon spread like the
flames of a conflagration throughout the length and breadth of France.
The young, the old, the men, the women, the rich, the poor, the high,
the low, singing their martial song, *La Marseillaise*, the inspiring
national song of France, came out — crowds of the poor French people, in
rags, barefooted, in that severe cold, and half-starved — came out with
guns on their shoulders — परित्राणाय ... विनाशाय च दुष्कृताम् for the
destruction of the wicked and the salvation of their homes — and boldly
faced the vast united force of Europe. The whole of Europe could not
stand the onrush of that French army. At the head and front of the
French army, stood a hero at the movement of whose finger the whole
world trembled. He was Napoleon. With the edge of the sword and at the
point of the bayonet, he thrust "Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity" into
the very bone and marrow of Europe — and thus the victory of the
tri-coloured *Cocarde* was achieved. Later, Napoleon became the Emperor
of France and successfully accomplished the consolidation of the French
Empire.

Subsequently, not being favoured with an heir to the throne, he divorced
the partner of his life in weal and woe, the guiding angel of his good
fortune, the Empress Josephine, and married the daughter of the Emperor
of Austria. But the wheel of his luck turned with his desertion of
Josephine, his army died in the snow and ice during his expedition
against Russia. Europe, getting this opportunity, forced him to abdicate
his throne, sent him as an exile to an island, and put on the throne one
of the old royal dynasty. The wounded lion escaped from the island and
presented himself again in France; the whole of France welcomed him and
rallied under his banner, and the reigning king fled. But this luck was
broken once for all, and it never returned. Again the whole of Europe
united against him and defeated him at the battle of Waterloo. Napoleon
boarded an English man-of-war and surrendered himself; the English
exiled him and kept him as a lifelong prisoner in the distant island of
St. Helena. Again a member of the old royal family of France was
reinstated as king. Later on, the French people became restless under
the old monarchy, rose in rebellion, drove away the king and his family
and re-established the Republic In the course of time a nephew of the
great Napoleon became a favourite with the people, and by means of
intrigues he proclaimed himself Emperor. He was Napoleon III. For some
time his reign was very powerful; but being defeated in conflict with
the Germans he lost his throne, and France became once more a republic;
and since then down to the present day she has continued to be
republican.

VII. PROGRESS OF CIVILISATION

The theory of evolution, which is the foundation of almost all the
Indian schools of thought, has now made its way into the physical
science of Europe. It has been held by the religions of all other
countries except India that the universe in its entirety is composed of
parts distinctly separate from each other. God, nature, man — each
stands by itself, isolated from one another; likewise, beasts, birds,
insects, trees, the earth, stones, metals, etc., are all distinct from
one another; God created them separate from the beginning.

Knowledge is to find unity in the midst of diversity — to establish
unity among things which appear to us to be different from one another.
That particular relation by which man finds this sameness is called Law.
This is what is known as Natural Law.

I have said before that our education, intelligence, and thought are all
spiritual, all find expression in religion. In the West, their
manifestation is in the external — in the physical and social planes.
Thinkers in ancient India gradually came to understand that that idea of
separateness was erroneous, that there was a connection among all those
distinct objects — there was a unity which pervaded the whole universe —
trees, shrubs, animals, men, Devas, even God Himself; the Advaitin
reaching the climax in this line of thought declared all to be but the
manifestations of the One. In reality, the metaphysical and the physical
universe are one, and the name of this One is Brahman; and the
perception of separateness is an error — they called it Mâyâ, Avidyâ or
nescience. This is the end of knowledge.

If this matter is not comprehended at the present day by anyone outside
India — for India we leave out of consideration — how is one to be
regarded as a Pandit? However, most of the erudite men in the West are
coming to understand this, in their own way — through physical science.
But how that One has become the many — neither do we understand, nor do
they. We, too, have offered the solution of this question by saying that
it is beyond our understanding, which is limited. They, too, have done
the same. But the variations that the One has undergone, the different
sorts of species and individuality It is assuming — that can be
understood, and the enquiry into this is called Science.

So almost all are now evolutionists in the West. As small animals
through gradual steps change into bigger ones, and big animals sometimes
deteriorate and become smaller and weaker, and in the course of time die
out — so also, man is not born into a civilised state all on a sudden;
in these days an assertion to the contrary is no longer believed in by
anybody among the thoughtful in the West, especially because the
evidence that their ancestors were in a savage state only a few
centuries ago, and from that state such a great transformation has taken
place in so short a time. So they say that all men must have gradually
evolved, and are gradually evolving from the uncivilised state.

Primitive men used to mange their work with implements of wood and
stone; they wore skins and leaves, and lived in mountain-caves or in
huts thatched with leaves made somewhat after the fashion of birds'
nests, and thus somehow passed their days. Evidence in proof of this is
being obtained in all countries by excavating the earth, and also in
some few places, men at that same primitive stage are still living.
Gradually men learnt to use metal — soft metals such as tin and copper —
and found out how to make tools and weapons by fusing them. The ancient
Greeks, the Babylonians, and the Egyptians did not know the use of iron
for a long time — even when they became comparatively civilised and
wrote books and used gold and silver. At that time, the Mexicans, the
Peruvians, the Mayas, and other races among the aborigines of the New
World were comparatively civilised and used to build large temples; the
use of gold and silver was quite common amongst them (in fact the greed
for their gold and silver led the Spaniards to destroy them). But they
managed to make all these things, toiling very hard with flint
instruments — they did not know iron even by name.

In the primitive stage, man used to kill wild animals and fish by means
of bows and arrows, or by the use of a net, and live upon them.
Gradually, he learnt to till the ground and tend the cattle. Taming wild
animals, he made them work for him or reared them for his own eating
when necessary; the cow, horse, hog, elephant, camel, goat, sheep,
fowls, birds, and other animals became domesticated; of all these, the
dog is the first friend of man.

So, in course of time, the tilling of the soil came into existence. The
fruits, roots, herbs, vegetables, and the various cereals eaten by man
are quite different now from what they were when they grew in a wild
state. Through human exertion and cultivation wild fruits gained in size
and acquired toothsomeness, and wild grass was transformed into
delicious rice. Constant changes are going on, no doubt, in nature, by
its own processes. Few species of trees and plants, birds and beasts are
being always created in nature through changes, brought about by time,
environment and other causes. Thus before the creation of man, nature
was changing the trees, plants, and other animals by slow and gentle
degrees, but when man came on the scene, he began to effect changes with
rapid strides. He continually transported the native fauna and flora of
one country to another, and by crossing them various new species of
plants and animals were brought into existence.

In the primitive stage there was no marriage, but gradually matrimonial
relations sprang up. At first, the matrimonial relation depended,
amongst all communities, on the mother. There was not much fixity about
the father, the children were named after the mother: all the wealth was
in the hands of the women, for they were to bring up the children. In
the course of time, wealth, the women included, passed into the hands of
the male members. The male said, "All this wealth and grain are mine; I
have grown these in the fields or got them by plunder and other means;
and if anyone dispute my claims and want to have a share of them, I will
fight him." In the same way he said, "All these women are exclusively
mine; if anyone encroach upon my right in them, I will fight him." Thus
there originated the modern marriage system. Women became as much the
property of man as his slaves and chattels. The ancient marriage custom
was that the males of one tribe married the women of another; and even
then the women were snatched away by force. In course of time, this
business of taking away the bride by violence dropped away, and marriage
was contracted with the mutual consent of both parties. But every custom
leaves a faint trace of itself behind, and even now we find in every
country a mock attack is made on such occasions upon the bridegroom. In
Bengal and Europe, handfuls of rice are thrown at the bridegroom, and in
Northern India the bride's women friends abuse the bridegroom's party
calling them names, anti so on.

Society began to be formed and it varied according to different
countries. Those who lived on the sea-shore mostly earned their
livelihood by fishing in the sea, those on the plains by agriculture.
The mountaineers kept large flocks of sheep, and the dwellers in the
desert tended goats and camels. Others lived in the forests and
maintained themselves by hunting. The dwellers on the plain learnt
agriculture; their struggle for existence became less keen; they had
time for thought and culture, and thus became more and more civilised.
But with the advance of civilisation their bodies grew weaker and
weaker. The difference in physique between those who always lived in the
open air and whose principal article of food was animal diet, and others
who dwelt in houses and lived mostly on grains and vegetables, became
greater and greater. The hunter, the shepherd, the fisherman turned
robbers or pirates whenever food became scarce and plundered the
dwellers in the plains. These, in their turn, united themselves in bands
of large numbers for the common interest of self-preservation; and thus
little kingdoms began to be formed.

The Devas lived on grains and vegetables, were civilised, dwelt in
villages, towns, and gardens, and wore woven clothing. The Asuras (The
terms "Devas" and "Asuras" are used here in the sense in which they
occur in the Gitâ (XVI), i.e. races in which the Daivi (divine) or the
Âsuri (non-divine) traits preponderate.) dwelt in the hills and
mountains, deserts or on the sea-shores, lived on wild animals, and the
roots and fruits of the forests, and on what cereals they could get from
the Devas in exchange for these or for their cows and sheep, and wore
the hides of wild animals. The Devas were weak in body and could not
endure hardships; the Asuras, on the other hand, were hardy with
frequent fasting and were quite capable of suffering all sorts of
hardships.

Whenever food was scarce among the Asuras, they set out from their hills
and sea-shores to plunder towns and villages. At times they attacked the
Devas for wealth and grains and whenever the Devas failed to unite
themselves in large numbers against them, they were sure to die at the
hands of the Asuras. But the Devas being stronger in intelligence,
commenced inventing, all sorts of machines for warfare. The Brahmâstra,
Garudâstra Vaishnavâstra, Shaivâstra — all these weapons of miraculous
power belonged to the Devas. The Asuras fought with ordinary weapons,
but they were enormously strong. They defeated the Devas repeatedly, but
they never cared to become civilised, or learn agriculture, or cultivate
their intellect. If the victorious Asuras tried to reign over the
vanquished Devas in Svarga, they were sure to be outwitted by the Devas'
superior intellect and skill, and, before long, turned into their
slaves. At other times, the Asuras returned to their own places after
plundering. The Devas, whenever they were united, forced them to retire,
mark you, either into the hills or forests, or to the sea-shore.
Gradually each party gained in numbers and became stronger and stronger;
millions of Devas were united, and so were millions of Asuras. Violent
conflicts and fighting went on, and along with them, the intermingling
of these two forces.

From the fusion of these different types and races our modern societies,
manners, and customs began to be evolved. New ideas sprang up and new
sciences began to be cultivated. One class of men went on manufacturing
articles of utility and comfort, either by manual or intellectual
labour. A second class took upon themselves the charge of protecting
them, and all proceeded to exchange these things. And it so happened
that a band of fellows who were very clever undertook to take these
things from one place to another and on the plea of remuneration for
this, appropriated the major portion of their profit as their due. One
tilled the ground, a second guarded the produce from being robbed, a
third took it to another place and a fourth bought it. The cultivator
got almost nothing; he who guarded the produce took away as much of it
as he could by force; the merchant who brought it to the market took the
lion's share; and the buyer had to pay out of all proportion for the
things, and smarted under the burden! The protector came to be known as
the king; he who took the commodities from one place to another was the
merchant. These two did not produce anything — but still snatched away
the best part of things and made themselves fat by virtually reaping
most of the fruits of the cultivator's toil and labour. The poor fellows
who produced all these things had often to go without his meals and cry
to God for help!

Now, with the march of events, all these matters' grew more and more
involved, knots upon knots multiplied, and out of this tangled network
has evolved our modern complex society. But the marks of a bygone:
character persist and do not die out completely. Those who in their
former births tended sheep or lived by fishing or the like take to
habits of piracy, robbery, and similar occupations in their civilised
incarnation also. With no forests to hunt in, no hills or mountains in
the neighbourhood on which to tend the flocks — by the accident of birth
in a civilised society, he cannot get enough opportunity for either
hunting, fishing, or grazing, cattle — he is obliged therefore to rob or
steal, impelled by his own nature; what else can he do? And the worthy
daughters of those far-famed ladies (Ahalyâ, Târâ, Mandodari, Kunti, and
Draupadi.) of the Paurânika age, whose names we are to repeat every
morning — they can no longer marry more than one husband at a time, even
if they want to, and so they turn unchaste. In these and other ways, men
of different types and dispositions, civilised and savage, born with the
nature of the Devas and the Asuras have become fused together and form
modern society. And that is why we see, in every society, God plating in
these various forms — the Sâdhu Nârâyana, the robber Narayana, and so
on. Again, the character of any particular society came to be determined
as Daivi (divine) or Âsuri (non-divine) quality, in proportion as one or
the other of these two different types of persons preponderated within
it.

The whole of the Asian civilization was first evolved on the plains near
large rivers and on fertile soils — on the banks of the Ganga, the
Yangtse-Kiang, and the Euphrates. The original foundation of all these
civilisations is agriculture, and in all of there the Daivi nature
predominates. Most of the European civilization, on the other hand,
originated either in hilly countries or on the sea coasts — piracy and
robbery form the basis of this civilisation; there the Asuri nature is
preponderant.

So far as can be inferred in modern times, Central Asia and the deserts
of Arabia seem to have been the home of the Asuras. Issuing from their
fastnesses, these shepherds and hunters, the descendants of the Asuras,
being united in hordes after hordes, chased the civilized Devas and
scattered them all over the world.

Of course there was a primitive race of aborigines in the continent of
Europe. They lived in mountain-caves, and the more intelligent among
them erected platforms by planting sticks in the comparatively shallow
parts of the water and built houses thereon. They used arrows,
spearheads, knives, and axes, all made of flint, and managed every kind
of work with them.

Gradually the current of the Asian races began to break forth upon
Europe, and as its effects, some parts became comparatively civilised;
the language of a certain people in Russia resembles the languages of
Southern India.

But for the most part these barbarians remained as barbarous as ever,
till a civilised race from Asia Minor conquered the adjacent parts of
Europe and founded a high order of new civilization: to us they are
known as Yavanas, to the Europeans as Greeks.

Afterwards, in Italy, a barbarous tribe known as the Romans conquered
the civilised Etruscans, assimilated their culture and learning, and
established a civilization of their own on the ruins of that of the
conquered race. Gradually, the Romans carried their victorious arms in
all directions; all the barbarous tribes in the southwest of Europe came
under the suzerainty of Rome; only the barbarians of the forests living
in the northern regions retained independence. In the efflux of time,
however, the Romans became enervated by being slaves to wealth and
luxury, and at that time Asia again let loose her armies of Asuras on
Europe. Driven from their homes by the onslaught of these Asuras, the
barbarians of Northern Europe fell upon the Roman Empire, and Rome was
destroyed. Encountered by the force of this Asian invasion, a new race
sprang up through the fusion of the European barbarians with the
remnants of the Romans and Greeks. At that time, the Jews being
conquered and driven away from their homes by the Romans, scattered
themselves throughout Europe, and with them their new religion,
Christianity, also spread all over Europe. All these different races and
their creeds and ideas, all these different hordes of Asuras, heated by
the fire of constant struggle and warfare, began to melt and fuse in
Mahâmâyâ's crucible; and from that fusion the modern European race has
sprung up.

Thus a barbarous, very barbarous European race came into existence, with
all shades of complexion from the swarthy colour of the Hindus to the
milk-white colour of the North, with black, brown, red, or white hair,
black, grey, or blue eyes, resembling the fine features of face, the
nose and eyes of the Hindus, or the flat faces of the Chinese. For some
time they continued to tight among themselves; those of the north
leading the life of pirates harassed and killed the comparatively
civilised races. In the meantime, however, the two heads of the
Christian Churches, the Pope (in French and Italian, *Pape* (pronounced
as *Pâp*)) of Italy and the Patriarch of Constantinople, insinuating
themselves, began to exercise their authority over these brutal
barbarian hordes, over their kings, queens, and peoples.

On the other side, again Mohammedanism arose in the deserts of Arabia.
The wild Arabs, inspired by the teachings of a great sage, bore down
upon the earth with all irresistible force and vigour. That torrent,
carrying everything before it, entered Europe from both the East and the
West, and along with this tide the learning and culture of India and
ancient Greece were carried into Europe.

A tribe of Asuras from Central Asia known as the Seljuk Tartars,
accepted Mohammedanism and conquered Asia Minor and other countries of
Asia. The various attempts of the Arabs to conquer India proved
unsuccessful. The wave of Mohammedan conquest, which had swallowed the
whole earth, had to fall back before India. They attacked Sindh once,
but could not told it: and they did not make any other attempt after
that.

But a few centuries afterwards, when the Turks and other Tartar races
were converted from Buddhism to  Mohammedanism — at that time they
conquered the Hindus, Persians, and Arabs, and brought all of them alike
under their subjection. Of all the Mohammedan conquerors of India, none
was an Arab or a Persian; they were all Turks and Tartars. In Rajputana,
all the Mohammedan invaders were called Turks, and that is a true and
historical fact. The Chârans of Rajputana sang "*turuganko bodhi jor* —
The Turks are very powerful" — and that was true. From Kutubuddin down
to the Mogul Emperors — all of them are Tartars. They are the same race
to which the Tibetans belong; only they have become Mohammedans and
changed their flat round faces by intermarrying with the Hindus and
Persians. They are the same ancient races of Asuras. Even today they are
reigning on the thrones of Kabul, Persia, Arabia, and Constantinople,
and the Gândhâris (natives of Kandahar) and Persians are still the
slaves of the Turks. The vast Empire of China, too, is lying at the feet
of the Manchurian Tartars; only these Manchus have not given up their
religion, have not become Mohammedans, they are disciples of the Grand
Lama. These Asuras never care for learning and cultivation of the
intellect; the only thing they understand is fighting. Very little of
the warlike spirit is possible without a mixture of that blood; and it
is that Tartar blood which is seen in the vigorous, martial spirit of
Northern Europe, especially in the Russians, who have three-fourths of
Tartar blood in their veins. The fight between the Devas and the Asuras
will continue yet for a long time to come. The Devas marry the Asura
girls and the Asuras snatch away Deva brides — it is this that leads to
the formation of powerful mongrel races.

The Tartars seized and occupied the throne of the Arabian Caliph, took
possession of Jerusalem, the great Christian place of pilgrimage, and
other plates, would not allow pilgrims to visit the holy sepulchre, and
killed many Christians. The heads of the Christian Churches grew mad
with rage and roused their barbarian disciples throughout Europe, who in
their turn inflamed the kings and their subjects alike. Hordes of
European barbarians rushed towards Asia Minor to deliver Jerusalem from
the hands of the infidels. A good portion of them cut one another's
throats, others died of disease, while the rest were killed by the
Mohammedans. However, the blood was up of the wild barbarians, and no
sooner had the Mohammedans killed them  than they arrived in fresh
numbers — with that clogged obstinacy of a wild savage. They thought
nothing even of plundering their own men, and making meals of
Mohammedans when they found nothing better. It is well known that the
English king Richard had a liking for Mohammedan flesh.

Here the result was the same, as usually happens in a war between
barbarians and civilised men. Jerusalem and other places could not be
conquered. But Europe began to be civilised. The English, French,
German, and other savage nations who dressed themselves in hides and ate
raw flesh, came in contact with Asian civilisation. An order of
Christian soldiers of Italy and other countries, corresponding to our
Nâgâs, began to learn philosophy; and one of their sects, the Knights
Templars, became confirmed Advaita Vedantists, and ended by holding
Christianity up to ridicule. Moreover, as they had amassed enormous
riches, the kings of Europe, at the orders of the Pope, and under the
pretext of saving religion, robbed and exterminated them.

On the other side, a tribe of Mohammedans, called the Moors, established
a civilised kingdom in Spain, cultivated various branches of knowledge,
and founded the first university in Europe. Students flocked from all
parts, from Italy, France, and even from far-off England. The sons of
royal families came to learn manners, etiquette civilisation, and the
art of war. Houses, temples, edifices, and other architectural buildings
began to be built after a new style.

But the whole of Europe was gradually transformed into a vast military
camp — and this is even now the case. When the Mohammedans conquered any
kingdom, their king kept a large part for himself, and the rest he
distributed among his generals. These men did not pay any rent but had
to supply the king with a certain number of soldiers in time of need.
Thus the trouble of keeping a standing army always ready was avoided,
and a powerful army was created which served only in time of war. This
same idea still exists to a certain extent in Rajputana, and it was
brought into the West by the Mohammedans. The Europeans took this system
from the Mohammedans. But whereas with the Mohammedans there were the
king and his groups of feudatory chiefs and their armies, and the rest —
the body of the people — were ordinary subjects who were left unmolested
in time of war — in Europe, on the other hand, the king and his groups
of feudatory chiefs were on one side, and they turned all the subject
people into their slaves. Everyone had to live under the shelter of a
military feudatory chief, as his man, and then only was he allowed to
live; he had to be always ready to fight at any time, at the word of
command.

What is the meaning of the "Progress of Civilisation" which the
Europeans boast so much about? The meaning of it is the successful
accomplishment of the desired object by the justification of wrong
means, i.e. by making the end justify the means. It makes acts of theft,
falsehood, and hanging appear proper under certain circumstances; it
vindicates Stanley's whipping of the hungry Mohammedan guards who
accompanied him, for stealing a few mouthfuls of bread; it guides and
justifies the well-known European ethics which says, "Get out from this
place, I want to come in and possess it", the truth of which is borne
out by the evidence of history, that where-ever the Europeans have gone,
there has followed the extinction of the aboriginal races. In London,
this "progress of civilisation" regards unfaithfulness in conjugal life,
and, in Paris, the running away of a man, leaving his wife and children
helpless and committing suicide as a mistake and not a crime.

Now compare the first three centuries of the quick spread of the
civilisation of Islam with the corresponding period of Christianity.
Christianity, during its first three centuries, was not even successful
ill making itself known to the world; and since the day when the sword
of Constantine made a place for it in his kingdom, what support has
Christianity ever lent to the spread of civilisation, either spiritual
or secular? What reward did the Christian religion offer to that
European Pandit who sought to prove for the first time that the Earth is
a revolving planet? What scientist has ever been hailed with approval
and enthusiasm by the Christian Church? Can the literature of the
Christian flock consistently meet the requirements of legal
jurisprudence, civil or criminal, or of arts and trade policies? Even
now the "Church" does not sanction the diffusion of profane literature.
Is it possible, still, for a man who has penetrated deep into modern
learning and science to be an absolutely sincere Christian? In the New
Testament there is no covert or overt praise of any arts and sciences.
But there is scarcely any science or branch of art that is not
sanctioned and held up for encouragement, directly or indirectly, in the
Koran, or in the many passages of the Hadis, the traditional sayings of
Mohammed. The greatest thinkers of Europe — Voltaire, Darwin, Büchner,
Flammarion, Victor Hugo, anti a host of others like them — are in the
present times denounced by Christianity and are victims of the
vituperative tongues of its orthodox community. On the other hand, Islam
regards such people to be believers in the existence of God, but only
wanting in faith in the Prophet. Let there be a searching investigation
into the respective merits of the two religions as regards their
helpfulness, or the throwing of obstacles in the path of progress, and
it will be seen that wherever Islam has gone, there it has preserved the
aboriginal inhabitants — there those races still exist, their language
and their nationality abide even to the present day.

Where can Christianity show such an achievement? Where are, today, the
Arabs of Spain, and the aboriginal races of America? What treatment are
the Christians according to the European Jews? With the single exception
of charitable organisations no other line of work in Europe is in
harmony with the teachings of the Gospel. Whatever heights of progress
Europe has attained, every one of them has been gained by its revolt
against Christianity — by its rising against the gospel. If Christianity
had its old paramount sway in Europe today, it would have lighted the
fire of the Inquisition against such modern scientists as Pasteur and
Koch, and burnt Darwin and others of his school at the stake. In modern
Europe Christianity and civilisation are two different things.
Civilisation has now girded up her loins to destroy her old enemy,
Christianity, to overthrow the clergy, and to wring educational and
charitable institutions from their hands. But for the ignorance-ridden
rustic masses, Christianity would never have been able for a moment to
support its present despised existence, and would have been pulled out
by its roots; for the urban poor are, even now, enemies of the Christian
Church! Now compare this with Islam. In the Mohammedan countries, all
the ordinances are firmly established upon the Islamic religion, and its
own preachers are greatly venerated by all the officials of the State,
and teachers of other religions also are respected.

The European civilisation may be likened to a piece of cloth, of which
these are the materials: its loom is a vast temperate hilly country on
the sea-shore; its cotton, a strong warlike mongrel race formed by the
intermixture of various races; its warp is warfare in defence of one's
self and one's religion. The one who wields the sword is great, and the
one who cannot, gives up his independence and lines under the protection
of some warrior's sword. Its woof is commerce. The means to this
civilisation is the sword; its auxiliary — courage and strength; its aim
enjoyment here and thereafter.

And how is it with us?  The Aryans are lovers of peace, cultivators of
the soil, and are quite happy and contented if they can only rear their
families undisturbed. In such a life they have ample leisure, and
therefore greater opportunity of being thoughtful and civilised. Our
King Janaka tilled the soil with his own hands, and he was also the
greatest of the knowers of Truth, of his time. With us, Rishis, Munis,
and Yogis have been born from the very beginning; they have known from
the first that the world is a chimera. Plunder and fight as you may, the
enjoyment that you are seeking is only in peace; and peace, in the
renunciation of physical pleasures. Enjoyment lies not in physical
development, but in the culture of the mind and the intellect.

It was the knowers who reclaimed the jungles for cultivation. Then, over
that cleared plot of land was built the Vedic altar; in that pure sky of
Bhârata, up rose the sacred smoke of Yajnas; in that air breathing
peace, the Vedic Mantras echoed and re-echoed — and cattle and other
beasts grazed without any fear of danger. The place of the sword was
assigned at the feet of learning and Dharma. Its only work was to
protect Dharma and save the lives of men and cattle The hero was the
protector of the weak in danger — the Kshatriya. Ruling over the plough
and the sword was Dharma, the protector of all. He is the King of kings;
he is ever-awake even while the world sleeps. Everyone was free under
the protection of Dharma.

And what your European Pundits say about the Aryan's swooping down from
some foreign land, snatching away the lands of the aborigines and
settling in India by exterminating them, is all pure nonsense, foolish
talk! Strange, that our Indian scholars, too, say amen to them; and all
these monstrous lies are being taught to our boys! This is very bad
indeed.

I am an ignoramus myself; I do not pretend to any scholarship; but with
the little that I understand, I strongly protested against these ideas
at the Paris Congress. I have been talking with the Indian and European
savants on the subject, and hope to raise many objections to this theory
in detail, when time permits. And this I say to you — to our Pundits —
also, "You are learned men, hunt up your old books and scriptures,
please, and draw your own conclusions."

Whenever the Europeans find an opportunity, they exterminate the
aborigines and settle down in ease and comfort on their lands; and
therefore they think the Aryans must have done the same! The Westerners
would be considered wretched vagabonds if they lived in their native
homes depending wholly on their own internal resources, and so they have
to run wildly about the world seeking how they can feed upon the fat of
the land of others by spoliation and slaughter; and therefore they
conclude the Aryans must have done the same! But where is your proof?
Guess-work? Then keep your fanciful guesses to yourselves!

In what Veda, in what Sukta, do you find that the Aryans came into India
from a foreign country? Where do you get the idea that they slaughtered
the wild aborigines? What do you gain by talking such nonsense? Vain has
been your study of the Râmâyana; why manufacture a big fine story out of
it?

Well, what is the Ramayana? The conquest of the savage aborigines of
Southern India by the Aryans! Indeed! Râmachandra is a civilised Aryan
king, and with whom is he fighting? With King Râvana of Lankâ. Just read
the Ramayana, and you will find that Ravana was rather more and not less
civilised than Ramachandra. The civilisation of Lanka was rather higher,
and surely not lower, than that of Ayodhyâ. And then, when were these
Vânaras (monkeys) and other Southern Indians conquered? They were all,
on the other hand, Ramachandra's friends and allies. Say which kingdoms
of Vâli and Guhaka were annexed by Ramachandra?

It was quiet possible, however, that in a few places there were
occasional fights between the Aryans and the aborigines; quite possible,
that one or two cunning Munis pretended to meditate with closed eyes
before their sacrificial fires in the jungles of the Râkshasas, waiting,
however, all the time to see when the Rakshasas would throw stones and
pieces of bone at them. No sooner had this been done than they would go
whining to the kings. The mail clad kings armed with swords and weapons
of steel would come on fiery steeds. But how long could the aborigines
fight with their sticks and stones? So they were killed or chased away,
and the kings returned to their capital. Well, all this may have been,
hut how does this prove that their lands were taken away by the Aryans?
Where in the Ramayana do you find that?

The loom of the fabric of Aryan civilisation is a vast, warm, level
country, interspersed with broad, navigable rivers. The cotton of this
cloth is composed of highly civilised, semi-civilised, and barbarian
tribes, mostly Aryan. Its warp is Varnâshramâchâra, (The old Aryan
institution of the four castes and stages of life. The former comprise
the Brâhmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra, and the latter,
Brahmacharya (student life), Gârhasthya (house-holder's life),
Vânaprastha (hermit life), and Sannyâsa (life of renunciation).) and its
woof, the conquest of strife and competition in nature.

And may I ask you, Europeans, what country you have ever raised to
better conditions? Wherever you have found weaker races, you have
exterminated them by the roots, as it were. You have settled on their
lands, and they are gone for ever. What is the history of your America,
your Australia, and New Zealand, your Pacific islands and South Africa?
Where are those aboriginal races there today? They are all exterminated,
you have killed them outright, as if they were wild beasts. It is only
where you have not the power to do so, and there only, that other
nations are still alive.

But India has never done that. The Aryans were kind and generous; and in
their hearts which were large and unbounded as the ocean, and in their
brains, gifted with superhuman genius, all these ephemeral and
apparently pleasant but virtually beastly processes never found a place.
And I ask you, fools of my own country, would there have been this
institution of Varnashrama if the Aryans had exterminated the aborigines
in order to settle on their lands?

The object of the peoples of Europe is to exterminate all in order to
live themselves. The aim of the Aryans is to raise all up to their own
level, nay, even to a higher level than themselves. The means of
European civilisation is the sword; of the Aryans, the division into
different Varnas. This system of division into different Varnas is the
stepping-stone to civilisation, making one rise higher and higher in
proportion to one's learning and culture. In Europe, it is everywhere
victory to the strong and death to the weak. In the land of Bhârata,
every social rule is for the protection of the weak.

1.  [^](#txt1)सीतामादाय बाहुभ्यां मधुमैरेयकं शुचि ।  
    पाययामास काकुत्स्थः शचीमिन्द्रो यथामृतम् ॥  
    मांसानि च सुमृष्टानि विविधानि फलानि च ।  
    रामस्याभ्यवहारार्थं किंकरास्तूर्णमाहरन् ॥  
    — "Embracing Sitâ with both his arms, Kâkutstha (Râma) made her
    drink pure Maireya wine, even as Indra makes Shachi partake of
    nectar. Servants quickly served flesh-meat variously dressed, and
    fruits of various kinds for the use of Rama."  (Ramayana -
    Uttarakanda 42.18-20)
2.  [^](#txt2)उभौ मध्वासवक्षिप्तावुभौ चन्दनरूषितौ ।  
    स्रग्विनौ वरवस्त्रौ तौ दिव्याभरणभूषितौ ॥  
      "(I saw) both of them (Krishna and Arjuna) drunk with Madhvâsava
    (sweet spirituous liquor made from honey), both adorned with sandal
    paste, garlanded, and wearing costly garments and beautiful
    ornaments."   (Mahabharata - Udyoga, LVIII. 5)
3.  [^](#txt3)सुराघटसहस्रेण मांसभूतौदनेन च ।  
    यक्ष्ये त्वां प्रीयतां देवि पुरीं पुनरुपागता॥  
      "Be merciful to us, O goddess, and I shall, on my return home,
    worship thee with a thousand jars of arrack (spirituous liquor) and
    rice well-dressed with flesh-meat."  (Ramayana - Ayodhyakanda
    55.19-20)

</div>
