+++
title = "The early mysticete whale Janjucetus"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/janjucetus.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/janjucetus.jpg)[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/dakosaurus.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/dakosaurus.jpg)

Janjucetus and Dakosuchus

All extant whales belong to two major radiations: 1) the odontoceti
which includes the marine dolphins (including killer whales), the river
dolphins (might not be monophyletic), porpoises, beaked whales, narwhals
and sperm whales 2) Baleen whales. The former group contains the toothed
whales which appear to have undergone dramatic increase in brain size a
biphasic pattern, firstly after they split off from the ancestral
archaeocete whales and secondly in the dolphin lineage emerged around 15
million years ago. They are also marked by the presence of echo-location
and sonar senses. The latter group are marked by they peculiar filter
feeding apparatus composed of sheets of baleen. These two groups appear
to represent a crown group that branched of from earlier radiations of
basal whales that had their own distinctive adaptations such as the
“[protocetid](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/12/wonder-of-whippos-i.html)s”,
the ambulocetids, and the enigmatic remingtonocetids.

The origin of the baleen whales is poorly understood, although forms
like Chonecetus and Aetiocetus suggested that there was phase when the
whales both had teeth and baleen and subsequently only the forms with
baleen but not teeth appear to have survived. The discovery of
Janjucetus from the Oligocene of Australia and its description by
Fitzgerald, throws light on the remarkable radiation of the mysticetes
by the middle of the Oligocene epoch (approximately between 29-23 Myrs
BP). The phylogenetic analysis of the well preserved cranial material of
Janjucetus suggests its mysticete position, including two key
synapomorphies — 1) a laterally directed zygomatic process of the
maxilla with a steep anterior face separating it from the rostral
portiion of the maxilla 2) wide bulbous basioccipital crests. The
phylogenetic analysis suggests that it is one of the basal mysticetes.
The tree has the form (Janjucetus (Mammalodon (Tooth+baleen lineages,
baleen only lineages))). Both Janjucetus and Mammalodon did not have
baleen by all indications, and appear to be toothed forms. This suggests
that the baleen emerged only after the separation of the mysticetes from
the rest of the whales and that the first branches of the mysticete
clade where not filter-feeders.

The anatomy of the skull of Janjucetus is rather remarkable. In profile
it generally resembles those of Hydrurga (the leopard seal), pliosaurs
like Rhomaleosaurus and Liopleurodon and the early Cretaceous crocodile
Dakosaurus. The strong caniniform anterior dentition are strongly
suggestive that Janjucetus of it being a similar predator that handled
large prey. The beds in which it was found have a diverse assemblage of
sharks suggesting that these might have constituted a major part of its
diet. Examination of mid-Oligocene time slice shows that the mysticetes
had already radiated into the four distinctive morphotypes- a
macrophagous predator- Janjucetus, Aetiocetus and Chonecetus with
incipient filter-feeding apparatus, Eomysticetus with well-developed
filter-feeding, and Mammalodon a non-filter feeder with other wise
unclear feeding preferences. Further there is also the enigmatic
Llanocetus whose exact adaptations remain unknown.

One see relatively large orbit size in the early members of mysticete in
the form of a decreasing series: Janjucetus-\> Mammalodon-\>
Chonecetus-\>  Aetiocetus, suggesting that like the extinct diving
marine reptiles such as the ichythyosaurs they relied primarily on
eyesight for their prey location. With the emerge of an entirely
filter-feeding life style the eyes grew much smaller, correlated with
the lack of active prey capture. The odontocetes despite being active
predators lack large orbits, but right from inception have
echolocation/ultra-sound capabilities, which probably made up for eye
sight. The only exception is Odobenocetops, an extinct South American
odontocete that appears to have converged to a walrus-like morphology
and lost its echolocation abilities. This suggests that echolocation was
absent in the mysticetes and was an innovation of the odontocetes.

After the explosive radiation by the mid-Oligocene only the purely
baleen lineages seem to have made it past this epoch. One wonders if the
rise of highly successful predatory shark-toothed dolphins like
Waipatia, Squalodon and later Phoberodon had any role in blocking off
the ecological niches for the non-filter feeding mysticetes. But then we
also have the leopard seals still occupy such niches.
