+++
title = "Islamic potentates"

+++
By its very existance Islam is a threat to non-Moslems — this is the
concept of Dar-ul-Harb and Jihad. Islam can by its very existence be a
de facto death sentence for kaffirs like Hindus and is aggressive even
towards its fellow Abrahamisms. Given the recent developments it is
necessary to consider the threat potential of various Islamic potentates
of the world. After all they see a common thread unifying them (note the
OIC) that transcends racial and linguistic divisions. They are ordered
below in descending order of threat potential. We may have missed some
due to our poor knowledge about them.

Pakistan: Pakistan is undoubtedly the most dangerous Islamic country in
the world. It is nuclear-armed, a darling of the only super-power that
further shores its military might, viewed by the Leukosphere as a
legitimate state rather than a terrorist state that it really is, and
most importantly is ignored as a threat by most other countries.
Greatest danger for Hindus.

Saudi Arabia: One of the most hellish nations on the face of the earth.
Its main threat stems from the fact that it houses the symbols of Islam
that continue to remain an odious sign of Arab imperialism. It is also
armed dangerously by the US, and uses its main power, oil wealth, to
fund most Jihads the world over. It combines with Pakistant to keep the
engine of Islam running.

Iran: May enter the nuclear club, and is a longstanding civilizational
power, which has now been hijacked by Islam. Its Mullocracy has shown
itself a major support of Shi’ite Jihads the world over. Not a major
danger for Hindus.

Indonesia: A nation hijacked by Islam, has enormous potential in the
form of its population to create a major domain for the Jihad in the
East. It threatens to destroy Hindu Bali and as the Hindu influence of
the past erodes, it threatens to morph into a future nest of Islamic
terror.

Bangladesh: A hell-hole, which is rapidly developing to become the next
Taliban-like state. Its enormous poor population has the potential to
supply Islam its foot soldiers for the Jihad and a new home for Al Qaeda
like organizations. An enormous threat to Hindus.

Egypt: With the end of Hosni Mubarak, it is quite possible that the
seething masses of Egypt stage an Islamic revolution centered on one of
the root sources of Islamic indoctrination — the university in Cairo.

Indian Moslems: While not owing a separate country as yet, they
constitute an significant state within the Hindu state. More intelligent
than the Arabs and numerous as ants they constitute an enormous threat
to the Hindus and the world as they continue shake off their Hindu
influences and aggressively Islamize.

Malaysia: Population power, provides a vast scope for Jihad in the East.

Iraq: After the US has screwed Iraq up, it is a good place for Moslem
terrorists to reorganize

Turkey: For now Turkey is a delicate balance and we have no clear
estimates when Islam might over throw the secular rulers. But the
balance might shift and provide foot soldiers for Islamic struggles in
the Middle East and invading Europe.

Afghanistan: Stoked by Pakistan it will soon return to being a center of
constant low level conflict with West and also a training ground for
anti-Hindu ghazis.

UAE: Has oil money to stoke Jihads, despite small size.

Then we have the tail made up of the Hezbollah and Syria, who are
significant from the Jewish stand point, the central Asian Stans, Libya,
Algeria, Yemen, Chechnya, Moslems in China and assorted African Islamic
and semi-Islamic states.

Historically speaking, after the spectacular initially expansion the
Arabs became a spent force by 1100 CE. The Hu-le-gu’s invasion of Arabia
put an end to their pretensions for good. By 1400-1500 CE the Islam
acquired several relatively long-lasting major power centers mainly
fueled by the Turkic or Turko-Mongolic genius. These were: 1) the
Kilafat empire of Osman (Ottoman) Turks who were acknowledged as the
Kalifs of Islam and had decisively settled the historic crusades by
taking their arms deep into Europe under their greatest sultans, Salim
the Grim and Suleyman the Law-giver. Modern Turkey is a castrated
survivor state of this historical Islamic empire. 2) Mogol empire of
India was of Turko-Mongol origin. They displaced the older Turkic
Sultanates of India like the Delhi Sultanate and the Bahmanid Sultanate
of South India and after Alla-ud-din Khalji established the next major
unified Islamic power of India. Pakistan, Bangladesh and the Indian
Moslem State within State are surviving fragments of the Mogol empire.
3) The Safavid Iran and their successor states. Modern Iran is a
successor of this historical Islamic power that now has largely retained
its core territory. These three were clearly the greatest Islamic powers
of the world in their heydays. Now their successors will make an attempt
to relive their lost glory. Then there was the central Asian Uzbek
Khanate and other successor states of Islamized Mongolic Khanates and
Sultanates of the Timurids from which the Mogols were derived. At times
they were enormously powerful states though their power fluctuated over
time.

The British destroyed the Turkic power of the Osmans. The Hindus denuded
the Mogol empire to the point of death, but they were deprived of the
chance to deliver the coup de grace by the British. Iran was curbed by
the British, Americans and Russians. The Russians subjugated the Central
Asian Islamic powers.
