+++
title = "The deva revanta: Mythology, iconography, history and ritualism"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/revanta.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/revanta.jpg)

Like kArttikeya, revanta, a once popular deity, has faded from the Hindu
mind, with decline of Indic civilization. However, in the south his
successor ectype shAstR^i is still worshiped in the folk religion.  We
have long wanted collate a file on this deva and revive his rites as we
are amongst the few still adhering to his worship. We have been made
aware of some other works on him but we have not read those.  

## Mythology  
The purANas narrate the core myth of the origin of the god revanta
thus:  

vivasvAn was given sanj\~nA as his wife by tvasTA vishvakarman. vivasvan
begot the twins yama and yamI, and manu vaivasvata through her. However,
sanj\~nA was unable to endure the excessive fiery lustre of vivasvAn and
decided to leave him and go to the regions of the uttara kuru. She
created a replica of herself in the form ChAyA and placed her with
vivasvAn before retiring in the form of a mare. vivasvAn took ChAyA too
be sanj\~nA and begot on ChAyA, the inauspicious shanaishchara, the
daughter tapatI and manu sAvarNI. One day ChAyA got into a conflict with
the death-like yama vaivasvata as she mis-treated her foster son. Thus
vivasvAn realized that ChAyA was not sanj\~nA and through his
dUradR^iShTi located her in the uttara kuru regions as a mare. So he
assumed the form of a stallion and reached there. 

They copulated first
via their nostrils, spawning the ashvins and then internally spawning
revanta. He was born with a sword and bow, riding a horse and bearing a
quiver full of arrows. vivasvAn said to revanta that he shall be the
lord of the guhyaka tribe of yakShas and yakShiNI-s. He mentioned that
at the time of forest fires and volcanic eruptions, and when dasyus and
mlechChas devastate the land the mortal need to invoke revanta to obtain
relief.

Versions of this tale are narrated in the viShNu (VP 3.2) and mArkaNDeya
(MkP 78) purANa-s. The matsya (MP 11.2) and agni (AP 272.3; 273 in MBLD
edition) purANa-s narrates a variant in which vivasvAn has a separate
wife rAj\~nI through whom he fathers revanta. The devi bhAgavataM
mentions revanta as riding on uchChaishravas to visit viShNu, when
lakShmI gets fascinated by the horse and fails to pay attention to
viShNu. As a result he cursed lakShmI to became a mare and generates the
haihaya dynasty in this account (DB 6.17-18).

## Iconography and history  
varAhamihira states that idols of revanta should be shown on horseback
with attendents hunting and sporting. This depiction of revanta is seen
throughout the early medieval period throughout Greater India from
Afghanistan (as reported by Priyatosh Banerjee) to the Vanga country.
Typically he is shown with hunting attendants and is invariably
accompanied by a dog. As with sUrya he is also shown with high-legged
shoes and usually wields a sword and bow. revanta in his classical form
appears to be attested (prior to 1100 of the CE)  only in the zone from
the northwest to the east. His southern most spread in the classical
form is seen Orissa. 

However, there are indicators that revanta once had
a pan-Indian presence in some form comparable to the late
vedic/”itihasic” deities such as kArttikeya, the pA\~ncharatric tetrad
and the rapidly evolving vinAyaka. revanta’s iconography is strikingly
similar to that of the deity popular in mahAraShTra, karnATaka and
Andhra known as **khaNDoba** or **mallaNNa**. He is depicted as riding a horse
with a a dog accompanying him and holding a sword. Further, khaNDoba is
known as a manifestation of **mArtaNDa-bhairava** and an explicit connection
with the solar cult through this link is seen in some khaNDoba temples
of Maharashtra where he is shown with a solar emblem. Thus, it is likely
that revanta evolved into the local khaNDoba cult after the 12th century
CE in middle India. In this process khaNDoba derivative appears to
have lost connection with the classical revanta. 

A parallel variant appears to have reached the deep south early in the form of the
comparable equestrian deity shAstR^i also known as Arya (tamiL:
chAttAn/ayyanAr). In this case he has been made the son of rudra and
mohinI but there is a faint memory of his original roots in the form of
a poorly known parallel tradition that sees him as a son of sUrya. In
addition the mantra-shAstra pertaining to shAstR^i remembers the link by
naming the R^iShi of the shAstR^i mUlamantra as revanta (at tradition
still known in his famous shrine at the shabari hill). In addition the
companions of shAstR^i, like the
[karappu-chuvami-s](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/06/16/shasta-in-the-dravida-country/ "shAstA in the drAviDa country")
appear to be parallels of the equestrian companions with whom the
classical revanta is often depicted.  In the north and west he has a
prominent presence in Rajasthan and Gujarat which also correspond with
the western zone of the [old saura
sect](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/11/21/saura-mata/). A
major temple to revanta was built by kalachuri ratnadeva-II in Madhya
Pradesh, but appears to have been destroyed now. Given this and the
similarities in depiction of sUrya and revanta, it is possible that the
shAkhadvIpi brahmins had an initial role in spread of the revanta
worship. The epithet revant and its Avestan cognate raevant have been
widely used for Vedic and Avestan deities including mitra in both the
texts (see below). Given this it is possible that the name itself could
have even emerged in the para-avestan Iranian Hindus.

## Worship of revanta  
There are several other references to worship of revanta in the purANas
and associated texts.  

- The agni purANa (AP 116.22) in describing the oblations to be made
during the pilgrimage to the holy spot of gayA mentions that offering of
rice balls to the 12 Aditya-s, agni, indra and revanta free on from the
hold of disease and one attains heavenly pleasures. The garuDa purANa
(GP 1.86.23 ) gives a homologous description of the rite at gayA, but in
this the offerings to revanta are made to obtain good horses.  
- The agni purANa states that making a gift of a horse consecrated to
revanta decorated with gold removes the fear of death (AP 211.28).  
- In the grand paurANika coronation of a king (typically used for
honorary kShatriya-s), where the entire Hindu pantheon is invoked to
imbue the rAjan with power, revanta is invoked along with kumAra,
vinAyaka, vIrabhadra and nandI in one series of incantations (AP
219.18)  
- The ashvAyurveda of shAlihotra states that periodically in the Ashvina
month on the full-moon day the ashvashAnti rite for horses should be
done. Amongst deities worshipped are revanta, for whom a lotus and
pitcher with water are placed on the altar and 100 oblations with
sesame, rice, ghee and white mustard are made (shAlihotrIya ashvashAntiH
verse 6). A homolgous rite is mentioned in dhanvantari’s hayAyurveda
(verse 6) which states that oblations should be made for the safety of
horses to revanta and tonic be prepared during the rite of the sarala,
nimba, guggulu, sarShapa, tila, vachA and hi\~ngu extracts ground into
butter. The Kashmirian nIlamata purANa (NMP 394) also mentions that the
owners of horses should make oblations to revanta.

## mantra prayogas  
The worship of revanta deploys the tantric mantras and tantricized
R^igvedic formulae. First one meditates on revanta riding a horse with a
sword and bow and an excellent quiver. He is accompanied by his dog and
his horse borne pArShadas.

The one utters his gAyatrI:  
oM ashvaprIyAya vidmahe sUryaputrAya dhimahI | tanno khaDgiH prachodayAt
||

Then one utters his names offering flowers:  

1\) oM revantAya namaH 2) oM vaivasvatAya namaH 3) oM saMj\~nAputrAya 4)
oM ashvapriyAya namaH 4) oM ashvavAhanAya namaH 5) oM ashvapataye namaH
6) ashvavidyAdhiShThAya namaH 7) oM shreShThAya namaH 8) oM nisha\~Ngine
namaH 9) oM dhanur-hastAya namaH 10) oM charma-dhR^ite namaH 11) oM
suvarNa- bANa- tuNa- samanvitAya namaH 12) oM ugra-tejasAya namaH 13)
surya-retasoddhbhavAya namaH 14) oM mR^igavyAdhAya namaH 15) oM
dasyu-taskara-mlechChAdi-upadrava- nAshakAya namaH 16) oM yauvanAya
namaH 17) oM ashva-pAlAya namaH 18) guhyakAnAM-patye namaH 19) oM
AraNyachAriNe namaH 20) oM suvarNa-kavachine namaH 21) yamAnujAya namaH

Then one performs tarpaNaM-s or oblations with the mahAmantra of
revanta:  
rAM rIM ruM tAnAshiraM puroLAsham | rUM reM raiM indremaM somaM shrINIhi
| roM rauM raM revantaM hi tvA shR^iNomi | raM svAhA revantaM pujAyAmI
tarpayAmI namaH ||

One shall than install the yantra of revanta by invoking his parivAra of
eight shakti-s:  
OM rAM dIptAyai namaH | OM rIM sUkShmAyai namaH | OM ruM jayAyai namaH |
OM rUM bhadrAM namaH | OM reM vibhUtyai namaH | OM raiM vimalAyai namaH
| OM roM amoghAyai namaH | OM rauM vidyutAyai namaH |

Then one shall meditate upon the syllable raM at the center of the
yantra. Then tantric mahAmantra of revanta shall emanate from that:

rAM rIM ruM rUM reM raiM roM rauM raM asidharAya iShudhanvine huM phaT
svAhA ||

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/revanta.1.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/revanta.1.jpg)
