+++
title = "kaTuka"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rzam7FySfNI/AAAAAAAAAQM/9DOBg4S29Pw/s320/kaTuka_shoot.png)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rzam7FySfNI/AAAAAAAAAQM/9DOBg4S29Pw/s1600-h/kaTuka_shoot.png)[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rzam9FySfOI/AAAAAAAAAQU/Fl2EbuS3sag/s320/kaTuka_root.png)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rzam9FySfOI/AAAAAAAAAQU/Fl2EbuS3sag/s1600-h/kaTuka_root.png)

We were drawn to compose an epistle on the kaTuka herb (genus
Picrorhiza) on account of what we learned during our studies in the
atharvan tradition. Extant tantric tradition records a rite directed
towards a deity known as the Asuri durgA . It is mentioned in it is
common form in the mantra-mahodadhi of mahidhara. The formula given here
is of the form:  
oM kaTuke kaTukapattre subhage Asuri rakte raktavAsase atharvaNasya
duhite aghore aghorakarmakArike amukasya gatiM daha daha upaviShTasya
gudam daha daha suptasya mano daha daha prabuddhasya hR^idayaM daha daha
hana hana pacha pacha tAvad daha tAvat pacha yAvan me vasham Anayasi
svAhA ||

The plant mentioned by mahidhara as being used for the oblation in this
rite is the AsurI plant, with the whole herb including roots, stem,
leaves, flowers and fruits being ground into a meal and used as a
oblation.

Its roots go back to atharvan tradition, where a rite known as the AsurI
rite is practiced. It occurs in two variants which are respectively
attributed to the [shaunaka and paippalAda
schools](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/08/some-notes-on-evolution-of-mantra.html).
These variants are respectively found in parishiShTa 35 (AsurI kalpa)
and the paippalAda A\~Ngirasa ShaTkarma kalpa respectively. As we have
[discussed
before](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/08/some-notes-on-evolution-of-mantra.html)
these mantra-s associated with the atharvan tradition are potential
precursors of the later tantric mantra shAstra. This supported by the
presence of a third stand alone text termed the AsurI kalpa which
contains both the atharvanic as well as a “tantric” form of the mantra.
This tantric form also used by practicing atharvans is specified as: OM
klIM hrIM shrIM kshauM kshauM shrIM hrIM klIM OM kaTupattre subhage
AsurI raktavAsase .atharvaNasya duhite ghore .aghore svAhA OM klIM hrIM
shrIM kshauM kshauM shrIM hrIM klIM Om |

There are two features that suggest a close link between the AsurI rite
to the older vedic aspect of the atharva tradition: 1) The use of
specific plant that is very typical of various atharvanic deployments
and 2) The use of the term atharvanasya duhite. This connection
supported by the atharvan tradition which mentions two oShadhi-s AsurI
and kaTuka: the former is mentioned in sUkta-s of both AV-S and AV-P,
whereas the latter is mentioned only in the AV-P in sUkta 7.19.3 on
medicinal herbs.

In contrast to the version of the rite from the mantra-mahodaddhi ,
atharvan tradition records that in the proper atharvan form not just the
AsurI plant but also several other plants are also deployed. Three of
this are directly mentioned in the mantra itself : kaTuka, AsurI and
subhaga, which is a synonym of priya\~Ngu. Several others too are
deployed as per tradition. I was initially interested in possibility of
one or more of these having some psychoactive properties as suggested by
the effect on the targeted woman mentioned in the AsurI kalpa: Sexual
arousal, “burning” of the mind and heart. However, given the “positive”
deployments of the plants of the AsurI rite I broadened the study to
include other pharmacological properties. kaTuka amongst these seem to
have been biochemical explored to a certain degree, so I considered it
in greater detail. In course of this, I became aware of an independent
work on it by a Dutch scholar HS Smit. Combining his studies with mine
inspired this whole piece.

Both charaka and sushruta mention kaTuka as an important oShadhi
required for the preparation of many of the drugs in their saMhita-s. In
particular charaka recommends it in preparations against helminths and
skin infecting agents, whereas sushruta recommends it against wound
infection, skin infection and dental sinuses. This is in line with the
ancient mention of it in the AV-P 7.19.3 where kaTuka is said to block
the body-harming ArAti-s. While HS Smit observed that kaTuka does not
play major role in modern anti-arthritis treatments, the classical Hindu
medical text, the dhanvantri nighaNThu describes kaTuka as AmaghnI i.e a
treatment for AmavAta — arthritis. The ancient and medieval Hindu
medical theorists had studied arthritis in considerable detail and
realized that one of the elements of its pathology was the substance
they termed Ama, which corresponds to protein or urate deposits in
modern parlance. Thus, the recognition of kaTuka as AmaghnI by the DN
suggests that medieval Hindu physicians had already discovered its
potential in Arthritis treatment. This appears to be related to the
earlier inclusion of kaTuka in preparations against rakta-vAta in
sushruta’s saMhitA — raktavAta being a precursor to AmavAta in Hindu
descriptions of the pathology of arthritis.

So are any of these effects of kaTuka for real? Several groups have
invested effort in studying the role of kaTuka and extract compounds
from them. At least some of these modern experiments seem to support the
Hindu theories regarding kaTuka:  
1\) Smit’s experiments on rodent models showed that di-ethylether kaTuka
extracts potently inhibited the complement pathway, had
anti-inflammatory effects and delayed onset of auto-immune arthritis,
though it was not useful once arthritis was already established.  
2\) Experiments also showed that it inhibited lymphocyte
proliferation.  
3\) Just published experiments by Maheshwari’s group, again in rodent
models, showed that kaTuka extracts favor epithelialization and
angiogenesis during wound healing.

The results 1 & 2 support the Hindu theory of it is use in inflammatory
disease and as a protective against arthritis. Result 3 again supports
the Hindu claim of its use in conditions like wound-healing and skin
infections. Several interesting compounds are found in this plant like
cucurbitacins, iridoid glucosides and phenolic derivatives like
apocyanin, but the specific pharmacology of few of these are properly
known. An iridoid glucoside aucubin might give rise to potent protein
cross-linkers and has been implicated to have an immuno-modulatory role.

Thus, it is possible that the venerated kaTuka, like gulgulu and
haridra, was a notable discovery of the bhR^igu-a\~Ngiras of yore.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rz6SWlIKzII/AAAAAAAAAQk/y3DKs5ahoQs/s320/kaTuka_cucurbitin.gif)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rz6SWlIKzII/AAAAAAAAAQk/y3DKs5ahoQs/s1600-h/kaTuka_cucurbitin.gif)[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rz6SV1IKzHI/AAAAAAAAAQc/bEKeWbNCxEc/s320/kaTuka_aucubin.gif)](http://bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rz6SV1IKzHI/AAAAAAAAAQc/bEKeWbNCxEc/s1600-h/kaTuka_aucubin.gif)

Left (a kaTuka cucurbitacin); right aucubin (a kaTuka iridoid glucoside)
