+++
title = "The third hero and khANDavans clash"

+++
There was nothing new in the hostile intention of the evil-minded
khANDavan-s. Jealous of the great power of the 3rd vIra they wanted to
ambush him too. We were not very keen about this happening, because we
precisely knew what the outcome would be and it did transpire. The 3rd
vIra was attacked around noon by the khANDavan-s. But he was protected
by his large senA with several fierce bowmen ready to rain arrows. He
drew the khANDavans into an ambush and attacked them. They suffered
heavy losses. His vIra-s also dispatched two agents of the late Fourier
to the council hall of chitragupta. But then as we expected the
khANDavans smarting from the arrows they received turned to attack us.
Jx seeing that the khANDavans might attack wisely retreated, saving his
mantra-bala to fight another day. He too repulsed an agent of Fourier
with his yoga. We were duly attacked by the khANDavans. But we stood
like mahAvratins or kapAlavratins unmoved by the blaze around us. After
raging for a while  
the khANDavan-s turned and made another attempt at the 3rd vIra, but
shaken again by his large senA, they retreated. From there they sent a
fierce kukkura-mAraNa prayoga at us using a bhairava mantra. But we had
performed the yAga to the dhUrta. At mid-night the khANDavan prayoga
reached- it had 3 khANDas: the durNama, a terrible piShAcha and a vile
mohini. The durNama first hit us but we took steps to maneuver past it.
Then the terrible, exceedingly black pishAcha reached us in the black of
the night. We clearly saw it: To our own amazement, it hovered around us
roaring and barking with its fangs bared but failed to pierce that
brahma-varma. It was so close yet unable to strike us, blocked by the
invisible skanda gahvara: OM shrIM e i u na shrIM rIM kumArAya namaH |
Failing utterly, the pishAcha fled as though it was struck by a shakti
of hemashUla.

We then showed the vajra mudra thinking of the slayer of mahiSha and
tAraka :  
Om || uta svAnAso divi Shantv-agnes-tigmAyudhA rakShase hantavA u ||
hrAm ||  
made chid asya pra rujanti bhAmA na varante paribAdho adevIH || \~NaM

Oh thundering son of agni who rushes at the adevIH hurling terrible
weapons, like the rampant agni utterly destroying the proud lords of the
forest, slay our foes. By that fury the mohini was extirpated.

While this attack was a sudden as that deployed on us when
nIla-lohita-mekalA of pretty smiles saved us, the kumAra mantra-s placed
us in a much better situation than what we were in then.
