+++
title = "Headed to kurukShetra ?"

+++
We made arrangements for our rendezvous with ST and ekanetra. Both
passed to us the information regarding the laukIka bhrAtR^ivya-s ranged
against us. Knowing that deploying the frontier troops were critical for
future survival we consulted regarding how the corps should be
positioned. We realized that it was important that they be widely
distributed to counter different points of attacks by the bhrAtR^ivya-s.
We decided to position the frontier command under the illustrious
warrior pUrva-mAruti. Below pUrva mAruti we placed jAyadrathi, as
suggested by ST, to ride out with a commando force against
jIva-sUtra-aparNaka. We also placed under the aforesaid warrior a force
under pa\~ncha-nadi, who would also strengthen our yoddha dhUmra-tvacha.
We also sent another force under druhyuka of krimi-kShetra. We also
mobilized our kAsyastha warrior against bahu-mUShaka. But who knows the
best laid human plans can fail with duShTa-bhrAtR^ivya-s like dakShiNa.
ST cryptically said with khANDavans around kurukShestra is not far away.

We had planned a move to meet with the senA to build reinforcements. The
news of the utter failure of their powerful mantra prayoga-s due to the
power of kumAra had reached the khANDavan-s. Their spies also got the
news of our intended joining with the senA. This immensely alarmed them
and they decided to go for a direct strike. Gathering their troops they
attacked twice before we could join with the seNA. They also cut off our
communication line with our senA.We were hit by several sharp shara-s
from them, but evaded their ambushes and reached the senA. In the mean
time our spaSha-s reported tremendous activity on their side : 1) They
discovered the breach in the kosha front and decided to mass their
forces their.  
2\) They decided to deploy a mantra prayoga on the muni, while seeking
to destroy their rest of us by pumping troops through breach.  
3\) They tried to send troops to separate us from the senA during a
future conflict when the bhrAtR^ivya-s might attack.  
4\) They might try to rob the other kosha and tie us down with an
attacking kR^ityA.  
Mn’s amAtya also obtained similar intelligence regarding \#1 and
communicated it to us. Jx obtained intelligence likewise regarding \#4
but felt they were a held back by our mantra prayoga.  
The khANDavan-s sent another prayoga at us today but only caused us
minor harm due to the subrahmaNya yAga. However, this promised to be a
much more ferocious and merciless battle than that of the autumn of 2004
when we fatefully entered the khANDavan conflict — but those who live
like kShatriya-s should be ready for a terrible death on the battle
field.  
[Think back
\!](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/11/further-proceedings-on-battle-front.html)

Jx was himself shaken by his attacker, but the third hero saved him. We
now realized how he was in a different league. Just an year back the
third hero was reeling under the “flight of the crane” which he came
face to face with when we went to that distant shrine: the wall of
bagalAmukhI, they said. But all prayoga-s sent at him were blown to
smithereens like has never happened before.

Our amAtya deployed karNa-pishAchi and got precise intelligence about
the khANDavan strike and deployed the shiva mantra
