+++
title = "Any reason to be excited by the happenings in TSP"

+++
Many bhAratas have expressed excitement over the events in the terrorist
Islamic state to their northwest. What does the events there mean and
can we make use of it? Unfortunately, India being a misguided soft state
may not necessarily make good use of it. We should keep in mind that the
terrorist Islamic state like the oil rich Arabic hellhole further west
is one of the chosen whores of chAchA shAm. It via the assistance of
this cantankerous, street-brawling Islamic lover of his does chAchA shAm
keep India in check, get access to the blustery China, and manage to
play the Great Game part-II in Central Asia. Uncle shAm has helped the
terrorist state acquire nuclear weapons, he has given him a large amount
of cash and weapons to use against the Hindus and seize their holy land
of Kashmir along with the shAradA pIThaM, while winking slyly all the
while. It is clear the that the “face” of the Neo-cons in the backyard,
Mr. Dick Cheney has a deep personal connection with the tin-pot dictator
Mushy and Uncle shAm continues to support the terrorist state with aid,
despite all the protestations against Mushy'\[s. So what ever is
happening is not without Uncle’s acceptance even if he would preferred
that things had gone differently.

In face of this two issues are troublesome: 1) Why did Mushy withdraw
troops from the border with bhArata and move them elsewhere ? Is he
playing his usual double game of attempting to please Uncle shAm, while
actually laying a trap for India or Uncle shAm himself? I fear we should
watch this carefully and not fall into trap of the Ghazis. 2) What if a
part of the TSPian elite flees to the desh? Our philo-Islamic secular
elite could invite them with open arms like the American political
establishment and there by get in a terrible Trojan horse to harm the
land of the Hindus.
