+++
title = "ON TECHNO-THEOLOGY PARTxa0ONE"
date = "April 20, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/511505885a434c28edd0718b489e5821.jpg?w=741)

Something I have been working a bit upon over the last few months, are
questions of how technological advancement are to be squared with
Indo-European mytho-religion. Or, as Tristan occasionally
semi-derisively terms it – my “Techno-Theology”.

It may seem a bit of a peculiar thing to get hung up about. After all,
technological advancement has been an immanent feature of pretty much
every Indo-European culture – and tangibly reflected in their religious
canons – pretty much as far back as we are able to talk about either
concept with any reliability.

A great example comes to us in the form of the weapon of the
Striker/Thunderer deific complex – initially portrayed as a sturdy and
redoubtable knotted bough of Oak (as wielded by Herakles), or refined
somewhat via the addition of a sharpened head of hardened material to
become an Axe (such as a weapon of Perun; or, with a hammer-head rather
than an axe, the Mjolnir justly famed of Thor). These are primitive, yet
effective weapons – especially in the hands of a being of mighty
strength.

More advanced depictions reflect the material culture of those doing the
depicting – and so we see the Vajra of Indra (and certain other Gods)
acquiring a more defined shape and form as time goes on, that comes to
resemble a Mace more than a simple Club. Indeed, you go further down
this trajectory, and we see some quite obscure symbolic developments
such as the Khatvanga \[‘Skull-Staff’\] as Vajra occurring \[some of
which may have resulted from the depicters being less concerned or even,
in the manner of Medieval monks, less directly familiar, with the
functionality of the device in question as ‘weapon’ rather than symbolic
‘staff of office’ or other form of cudgel-‘escutcheon’\]. But more upon
the Vajra in a moment.

Returning to the Classical mythology, we see further such developments
occurring. The Weapon of the Striker/Thunderer moves with the times –
becoming the Harpe wielded by Perseus (in whose name you can see the
‘Per-‘ kernel, pertaining to Proto-Indo-European ‘Striking’), a curious
sort of curved or even double-pointed early Sword. Subsequent
developments in art and artistry have the Harpe becoming a more
conventionally recognizable Sword of a later age; and in the hands of
Kronos / Saturn , is also represented as a Sickle (another curved
blade), or even a Scythe (although I believe there is something slightly
different also going on here – but more upon that, perhaps, some other
time).

Now, some might suggest that these are all different weapons wielded by
different Gods – and, to a point, they are not incorrect … if we are
looking at these things from the
interior-to-any-given-mythological-canon perspective. And yet, as soon
as we take the step back that enables us to consider all of these from
the broader Indo-European mythoreligious perspective, it becomes quite
readily apparent that in all cases, these are instances of the same
deific complex and attendant weapon(ry) being expressed, recalled, and
where necessary, reworked, in line with the developments of the local
Indo-European population.

In each case, we have a Striker/Thunderer … or as applies the
Greco-Roman Pantheons, a situation of a Striker/Thunderer expression
having been ‘merged’ with a Sky Father one, as well as several
co-occurring Striker/Thunderers (which, to be fair and sure, is not
exactly an abnormal situation. Vedic scripture has Indra and Hanuman
co-existing and even co-occurring for ritualine purposes; and there are
further figures in later Puranic scripture who also fit the typology
down to the parentage/incarnate essence thereof).

And in each case, we have a Striking weapon wielded by same. One which
may have a more purely percussive \[there’s that ‘Per’ again\] mechanism
of action, such as a club or a mace or a hammer; or which may also cut
where it projects force, as with an axe or a sword. And which are often
wielded, in their defining combat, against some sort of demonic-dragon
or otherwise serpentine entity.

Yet at the same time, the fact that our representations, our
understandings in surface-veneer terms of these Weapons … the fact that
these evolve and change and develop down the ages, poses an interesting
question for us. Namely, to what extent the Weapon itself actually
changed (or, for that matter, Its Wielder(s)), versus it merely being a
matter of the representation changing and the actual element being
represented remaining constant.

The answer, perhaps surprisingly, is that it’s potentially likely to be
Both.

Insofar as it is beyond question that human depictions of the weaponry
in question have shifted to keep things in-line with what seemed
familiar, practicable, but above all *symbolically resonant* for the
Indo-European mytho-culture in question … yet we *also* have various
in-mythology accountings of the Weapon of the Striker/Thunderer being
worked upon, derived, improved, augmented, even re-forged or
re-attained. Occasionally with subtle yet important shifts in what it is
that is ‘represented’ by the Weapon in question alongside this as its
intrinsic, immanent part.

Except that is the vitally important element. The core essence of what
is represented by the Weapon; and how this, unlike its exterior
representations, or some of the more peripheral elements to its meaning
and role and symbolism, this does NOT change.

There is a rather grand bit in the recent Marvel movie “Thor: Ragnarok”
which elucidates a strongly resonant principle for this. It is the part
towards the end of the movie wherein Odin is reminding Thor that He is
not merely the “God of Hammers” – but, implicitly, that the Hammer
represents what He *is* God of.

Thunder.

And while I do not mean to ascribe serious theological aptness nor
accuracy to the plot progressions of a comic-book film (not least
because, as we know, the divine portfolio of Thor extends quite some
ways beyond ‘Thunder’; with the Sky Father *also* having purview over
that particular and most impressive of atmospheric phenomenon); it is a
succinct illustration of what I am getting at here.

Mjolnir is a Hammer, the Vajra is often depicted as a Gada
\[‘Club’/’Mace’\], the adamantium Harpe is a sort of sword. And yet each
of these is also something much more – it is Thunder (with Supreme
Hardness, durability) … in fact, it is even more than that again, it is
the Irresistible Force, and there is quite some Hindu theology upon this
matter as applies the manner in which this is understood and thence
expressed. The Weapon in question is no more a Hammer (or Mace, Harpe,
etc.), than the Thor on-screen was a mere God of Hammers. The Hammer
just happens to be the (scripturally attested, mind) shape that goes
with the essence as we perceive it – and as is useful at the time. \[It
is also rather apparent that in various cases, our Ancestors weren’t
quite sure *what* they were looking at in terms of exterior format, and
so simply went with whatever description seemed closest to them at the
time; thus explaining why some of the archaic scriptural accounts of
some of these devices are so various or so peculiar in their specificity
and threadbareness of detailed description – because the Idea could be
more important than the simple signifer which bore it\]

Which brings me to my next point. The technological progression of
‘exterior’ representation, but also too of ‘essence’ – and how we ought
regard and respond to these in light of what I have just said.

It is my position that just as technological progression can be evinced
to have occurred amidst ancient Indo-European mytho-religious
depictions, while keeping the fundamental core ‘essence’ of these things
largely the same … so, too, should technological progression in
representation in representations amidst the detritus of the Modern Age
be possible – *provided it keeps the fundamental ‘essence’ the same*.
\[Whether it is plausible for this to be done tastefully or usefully,
without effectively turning into an uber-euhemeric race-to-the-bottom of
Clarke’s Third Law that de-sacralizes the mythology and religion in its
thrice-besmirching process … is perhaps another matter. This is yet
another reason Why We Have A Priest Caste.\]

Which raises some rather interesting questions, as it happens, about
some of the occasional Hindu art I have posted wherein the Deity in
question is wielding a modern fire-arm … as you could quite viably
attempt to argue that bullets from a gun have much more in common with
arrows or other piercing armaments of the archaic age, than they do with
the smashing-bludgeoning force-projection of the club, hammer, or axe
(even when said hammer might have been flung from a distance – the range
matters less than the form of the application of the force, what it
represents). Which is presumably not so much of an obstacle for a
rocket-propelled grenade launcher … but I digress, and should probably
get back on track before I start speculating upon how closely
coterminous or otherwise, ‘bunker buster’ and ‘Smasher of the Enclosure’
may perhaps be.

The final point I shall make in this area, is to note that in an array
of Indo-European mythoreligious canons – the more ‘modern’ forms and
formulations of both Weapon and Wielder do not completely displace their
archaic antecedents. Yet rather co-exist, occasionally separated out
somewhat into their own somewhat coterminous mythological expressions.
Hence why Herakles with His Branch-Club and Perseus with His Sword, are
both to be found in the legendarium of the ancient Greeks.

Which, of course, invites the question as to *why* this might have
occurred. After all, with the possible exception of the Nokia 3310
(itself a damn near indestructible *brick* of a phone that is still
in-use today, twenty years after its initial release), we only rarely
see elder and less advanced technology pointedly, prominently kept in
service and in the popular imagination alongside its replacements.
Muskets are incredibly rare upon the modern battlefield … although
Swords shall never truly go out of style. And not only because they
don’t require reloading and never jam.

It is my belief that part of the reason that the ‘older forms’ of some
of these Weapons of the Striker/Thunderer (and, for that matter, various
other Indo-European Deific expressions) remain in ‘active use’, is
precisely because they ‘resonate’ more deeply and seem somehow
subconsciously more ‘true’ to the minds and mytho-perceptions of those
doing the depicting and understanding, indeed the re-immanentization and
re-currence of the mythology as well.

Perhaps it is because they have been with us for longer; perhaps it is
because they are somewhat simpler. Likely, it is significantly because
they are on some level ‘cooler’ \[and ‘Rule of Cool’ has ever been an
appreciable tenet of Indo-European mytho-theology – particularly when
the Deity in question may find something to be so\]. And probably it has
much to do with how these more ‘primal’ expressions feel more ‘immanent’
to us than the cold, artificial renderings of the modern age. A
master-crafted individually artificed firearm relative to a 3d-printed
mass-production throwaway, would be one way to view this.

As would how much more effective, indeed narratively *impactful* Jack
Churchill advancing from a beach equipped with his famous longbow and
and broadsword combination was in comparison to the more conventionally
armed soldiers by his side. That is to say – as we progress further from
these ancient and archaic origin-points, so too do their tangible
reminders, the active expressions of same, become increasingly more
salient for us somehow. Perhaps due to their relative rarity, perhaps as
they remind us more and more of what we had once and now have largely
lost.

However, the area wherein there must be some serious caution is not in
the sphere of external representations – or, at least, does not have its
prime weight there, even though it is also expressed therein.

Rather, it is concerning the elements of Essence that lie at the
conceptual Heart of whatever it is that we are seeking to talk about
under the light of ‘technological progression’. And that doesn’t just
mean iconographic or other artistic representations of weaponry. It
means the applications and facilitations of our Rites and Rituals –
things that are, themselves, at the fundamental core of there even
*being* an Indo-European mytho-religion out there amidst the Peoples.
