+++
title = "Rumours Of Their Death Have Been Greatlyxa0Exaggerated"
date = "April 3, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/hj-ha-20150824-002-02-finish-2-1.jpg?w=1024)

\[Author’s Note: This brief piece was initially penned in 2019. It is
presented here without alteration; although we have expanded upon
various points in articles written subsequent. The core point
nevertheless remains a vitally important one. We occasionally get so
caught up in localized historical developments which impact upon our own
segment of the Indo-European-isphere, that we start projecting these
upwards and outwards into the realms of the Divine as if they had at
least as much force upon the Empire of Eternity ‘midst the Heavens as
they’ve had for some humans down here – or even more so. This isn’t even
especially developed anthropocentrism, let alone good theology. And
leads to the sort of bizarre contention Graves makes – that the
Christianization of the Roman Empire somehow obviated the Indo-European
Gods all up.\]

Man, I just came across this bit from Robert Graves’ “Greek Gods And
Heroes” about ‘The Death of the Olympian Gods’:

“As soon as the Emperor Julian of Constantinople, the last of the Roman
emperors to worship the Olympians, had been killed fighting the Persians
in A.D. 363, Zeus was told by the Three Fates that his reign had ended –
he and his friends must leave Olympus.

Zeus angrily destroyed the palace with a thunderbolt, and they all went
off to live among humble country people, hoping for better times. But
Christian missionaries chased them out with the sign of the Cross, and
turned their temples into churches, which they divided among the leading
saints.”

And it’s … breathtaking in its arrogance.

Now, we shall leave aside the fact that this isn’t really how
Christianity wound up ‘building over the top of’ the Roman religion and
state that had come before. \[If you’re interested in that, three of the
main examples I often draw upon in my writings, are a) the direct
incorporation of pre-Christian Indo-European deities in as Saints – St.
Brigid, for example; b) the co-option of mythological & cosmological
principles from Indo-European religion – like even the very *word*
“Hell”, as well as so very much of its associated imagery and
mythoreligious function; c) the ‘material culture’ elements, one Roman
deific statue in particular, still prayed to \[although under the
‘assumed guise’ of a saint, in the case of the rather impressive
sculpture I am thinking of most directly\] by modern Christian
worshippers, occasionally even whilst invoking “Deus Pater” 😛 \]

We shall *also* only briefly touch upon the manifest fact that the
‘Western’ Indo-European religions *kept going* for *quite some time*
after A.D. 363 (indeed, in the Baltic in particular, actual ‘pagan’
public religion was still going until just over a thousand years later
in 1387, 1413, or even later still depending upon how we are choosing to
measure such things).

Because my first reaction – my insta-reaction (and therein, in these,
often lies the most powerful form of truth) – was to look upon this
absurd and outlandish statement, and just go “… somebody clearly forgot
to tell Indra & Shiva, then!”

For that is *precisely* at the heart of these matters.

Indo-European religion, for us, is not – is as commonly misrepresented –
a case of each particular Indo-European people having its own exclusive
pantheon, that just happens to *look like* the Gods of the Next Valley
Over.

But rather, a very real case of the very real beings – Beings – with a
core, defining cast(e) of charactyrs and observable characterizations,
revealing Themselves in occasionally slightly different ways to the
related groups of Their constituent-descendent peoples.

So why was my auto(soma)matic insta-reaction to the idea of Zeus
destroying a Heavenly Citadel atop a Cosmic Mountain, in reaction to the
defeat and death of some Roman emperor, to react with a disbelieving,
indeed sneering eye-brow raise and squint of eye and noting the clearly
continuous, still very much *vital* health of the Hindu pantheon and
associated religion?

Because notwithstanding the fact that the Greeks (and thence , following
after them in imitation, the Romans) managed to ‘misremember’ key
elements of the Indo-European religious structure in part due to
‘syncretization’ with non-IE religions to the south-east \[i.e.
Mesopotamian, Semitic, Egyptian, etc.\] , thus affixing to the ‘Storm
Lord’ archetypal figure a name that is functionally renderable as ‘Sky
Father’ \[straight-up what ‘Zeus Pitar’ would translate as – you see now
also why I was amused by the “Deus Pater” of the Catholic liturgy\]
\[cross-comparable illustrations of what I’m getting at with These two
archetypal figures and Their *proper* relationship … would be Thor &
Odin, Hanuman & Shiva, respectively … or, funnily enough, *also*
preserved within the area \[not *quite* ‘Under the Aegis’ – that’s a
different deity 😛 \] of Greek mythology, Hercules & Zeus … it’s
complicated that last one, and i’m still writing / researching the
article upon same!\] –  
  
even despite the similarly localized efforts of the Zoroastrians, in
Iran, more than a millennium and a half before, The Gods yet remain in
Heaven. Or, as we have occasionally been known to say in a somewhat pulp
accent .. “Gott In Himachal Pradesh!”

So why on *Earth*, on Bhu-Mata, would some Roman Emperor’s thread being
cut precipitate some form of Gotterdammerung throughout the Cosmos
entire and writ large.

The simple answer is – it wouldn’t, it couldn’t, and it shouldn’t.

But with a typical Western arrogance, some just naively presume that
“The World” apparently only spans the borders of the Later Roman Empire,
and perhaps a bit more expansively \[if they’re feeling generous\],
‘Christendom’.

In the lands East of the Indus, the same Gods are still there. Just as
They’ve been, for perhaps almost four thousand years now continuously.
(and funnily enough, subsequently extending all the way to Bali, amidst
the world’s most populous Muslim country\]

(Malignant) Rumours Of Their Deaths Have Been Greatly Exaggerated.
