+++
title = "ON TECHNO-THEOLOGY PARTxa0TWO"
date = "April 21, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/dqlsx1ux4aat9_x-1.jpg?w=720)

Now here, too, we are dealing with spheres wherein change has already,
or must inevitably occur.

As applies the former, we can point quite directly to the Shatapatha
Brahmana literature dealing with the Vedic metaphysics of sacrifice –
and the allowable shift and progression which has taken place from
various forms of live-animal offering, through to vegetarian
preparations. It is interesting to note that these are at pains to
emphasize that the ‘essence’ of the offering has significantly remained
unchanged; although I would add to that by observing that there are
indeed some perhaps peripheral differences of ‘essence’ between
slaughtering an animal and offering desserts or fruits that should be
acknowledged.

And as applies the latter, in those revivalist areas wherein the
authentic and archaic religious rite has not been passed down to us,
then any endeavour at reconstruction is quite logically running upon
exactly this: getting the ‘spirit’, the ‘essence’, the ‘point’ and the
‘purpose’ and as much of the relevant metaphysics of the rite right ,
while acknowledging that the fulsome exterior ‘forms’ and their
attendant metaphysical imputations, are by force of necessity, having to
shift so that we may perform *something* instead of nothing at all.

It is a fraught business, and personally I am glad that over here in the
Hindu-sphere, we do not have this problem. We have many the ancient
rites passed down unbroken and understood, for some three and a half,
four thousand years now. We do not need to engage in full-scale
metaphysical archaeology as some other Indo-European religious efforts
do even to have more than the most basic ‘performative’ core.

However, that does not mean that ‘innovation’ does not occur for us. At
the lower end of the spectrum, I have occasionally been amused to see
Cadbury chocolate bars offered along with fruits to the Murtis at Mandir
… or, perhaps more fittingly, Lewis Rd Creamery chocolate milk turn up
proximate to the ShivLing (for our international readership, this is a
New Zealand brand of chocolate milk that .. is apparently so good that
when it was released here, supermarkets were posting security guards at
the milk-fridges due to fights breaking out over it in the aisles).

More interestingly, there have also been various services offered by
proper Pandits in India for the Hindu Diaspora,wherein a Puja
\[‘ritual’/’prayer’\] is carried out via Skype – the logic being that as
much of what ‘entangles’ the recipient of the rite therein, is a
combination of what is said by both Priest and supplicant, as well as
certain physical gestures, and of course, the Intent and Understanding
of the Practitioner … a video-call provides a decent conduit across
physical space to enable even people located on opposite sides of the
planet to participate in the same ritual occurrence.

My position on that is that while I can see how the ‘Essence’ is
significantly maintained (and there are some other theological precepts
that may make it all rather more viable than it might otherwise perhaps
seem) even through the significant updating in ‘form’ and
‘functionality’ which integrating a webcam into proceedings obviously
entails … I am nevertheless of the opinion that a Puja carried out via
such means is a substitute rather than a true equivalent to the
authentic and proper experience.

The ‘core’ essence may have remained the same, yet some of those
peripherals have unquestionably altered somewhat, and in a manner that I
do not think it prudent to entirely discount.

But one area wherein the updating of ‘forms’ and the continuation of
‘essence’ applies to both Weapons and Rites (weapons, it must be said,
of a somewhat different sort), is in the Hindu practice of Astra Puja –
‘Weapons Worship’/Blessing.

The Blessing of Weapons (or, for that matter other tools of one’s
profession) is hardly unique to Hinduism, even in this Modern Age.
Clerics of the Russian Orthodox Church carry out such benedictions upon
the rifles and bombs of that country’s military with regularity –
although there has been recent discussion around the Priesthood
potentially refraining from blessing nuclear weapons in future.

It would also not surprise me to find that Germanic revivalists might
mark a service weapon with a Tiwaz rune.

We often speak, somewhat memetically, of “Bronze Age Solutions For
Modern Problems” – which is another way of saying the application of
ancient ‘essence’ to modern circumstances. Yet as the ‘expression’ of
that ‘essence’ has had to alter somewhat – shifting from swords raised
in defence of the Motherland, to assault rifles wielded for same – it
could fairly be suggested that the application of a Puja such as this to
a modern machine gun represents a ‘Bronze-ifying’ (certainly, an older
Indo-European-izing) of a Modern problem-solving tool.

A “Bronze Age Augmentation” for a modern solution to an age-old problem.

Yet with the enduring ‘essence(s)’ of Piety and of Martial Vigour which
is both intrinsic and immanent to (Proto-Indo-European) ‘Men’.

There is much more that can and should be said upon pretty much all of
the above.

But continuing with my apparent theme of unorthodox sources of edifying
orthodoxy, there are a words of a certain recent US President which I
have found perhaps surprisingly apt for the situation:

“Our challenges may be new. The instruments with which we meet them may
be new. But those values upon which our success depends \[…\] these
things are old. These things are true. They have been the quiet force of
progress throughout our history. What is demanded then is a return to
these truths.”
