+++
title = "Ghora – Gorgos – Yggr – The Terrifying Face ofxa0Thunder"
date = "April 23, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/46089b46192e9aef532131bd56a1fc28.jpg?w=1024)

Ghora – Gorgos – Yggr

Three names, Three faces, Three qualities .. That are actually one and
the same. The Terrifying Face of the Sky Father; in Sanskrit, Ancient
Greek, and Old Norse respectively.

But what do they mean in each of their original contexts? And how can we
tell that these are, indeed, the same.

We shall start with Ghora. ‘Terrifying’, fierce, violent; and a
well-known epithet and theonym of Rudra – the Roaring/Howling of the
Storm Wind. It should probably not be confused with “Gora”, modern Hindi
for ‘white person’; nor with “Gaura”, Sanskrit for ‘brilliant’,
‘beautiful’, ‘white’.

Given the qualities ascribed to Rudra, it is not hard to see how this
terminology has been earned by Him. Indeed, in the context of the
Shatapatha Brahmana explication of the SataRudriya \[‘Satisfaction of
Rudra’, to somewhat figuratively translate\] rite, we are told in no
uncertain terms that this God (as The Manyu) is One Who Terrifies even
the rest of the Pantheon, so mighty is He in His Wrath!

A pattern which is further evinced in later Vedic developments, such as
the sending of VeeraBhadra to the Sacrifice of Daksha – wherein, along
with RudraKali, this Emanation of Shiva subjugates a would-be
world-emperor and fights off any and all of the Gods arrayed against
Him; as well as the Bhairava emanation, Whose Name literally means
“Terror”.

However, it is also vitally important to note that this Terrifying Face
and Conduct is not the only manner in which Rudra is regarded, even in
the archaic RigVedic canon. He is also hailed as AGhora –
Non-Terrifying; and is frequently praised in Vedic hymnals as a positive
figure, auspicious (‘Shiva’), a bestower of boons, a protector and an
inspirer of men. A duality that is encapsulated also in the modern
English term ‘Terrific’.

The Proto-Indo-European root for this Sanskrit “Ghora” is ‘Ghowros’ –
which effectively means “To Be Angry \[Looking\]”; although it is my
belief \[as influenced in part by the advocacy of my colleague, Oli
Havranek\] that there is a deliberate ‘resonance’ between both this term
and its application, with Proto-Indo-European ‘Gerh’ – which refers to
the making of a loud, harsh noise. Such as the *Crackling* \[same root\]
of Thunder, the Roar, the Growl \[again, same root\]. In Sanskrit, we
would term this ‘Garjati’ or ‘Garjana’ – and it turns up in one of my
favourite Vedic theological concepts: Vacam Garjit Lakshanam – Thunder
with the Characteristics of Divine Speech. \[It also forms the etymology
for various terms for the Crow and Raven – perhaps partially informing
the strong and recurrent associations of Corvidae with the Sky Father,
particularly as the Lord of the (Glorious/Ancestral) Dead\]

This suggests that in its primal sense, the confluence of the quality of
Terror with the characteristic of the Roar – and both affixed to the
Divine Personage of the Sky Father (for such, Rudra truly is) – refers
to the sound and fury of the onrushing storm front. The Face of the
Heavenly Father when Angered, accompanied by the quite literally
Thunderous Roar of oncoming death and devastation against which none may
truly stand.

In Ancient Greek, we find mention of the Gorgoneion – the War-Face held
by both Zeus and Athena. Despite the shifts which occurred within the
Classical mythology (wherein the character of the Sky Father was ‘split’
thrice twice – both inter- as well as intra- generationally, and in the
case of Zeus, then shifted further via re-alignment with the
Striker/Thunderer figure), ‘Zeus Pater’ directly means ‘Sky Father’; and
retains various of the characteristics and the qualities of the core
Indo-European deific figure.

However, when we come to the Gorgoneion, this retaining of core features
is done somewhat literally ‘at arm’s length’. That is to say, whereas
the ‘terrifying visage’ of the Sky Father, or the furious form of the
Mountain Queen is Their Own … in the case of Athena in particular, the
Gorgon-face is a severed head – that of a vanquished foe held aloft.
Which, to be sure, is not an entirely un-expected iconographic feature
of many a war-like deity. Kali Herself is well-renowned for bearing just
such a grisly trophy; as does, in somewhat modified saliency,
KaalBhairavJi \[‘Terrifying Black Time Death’\], one of several Shaivite
Warrior-Destroyer emanations of His Divine Wrath.

I have previously argued that what has happened here is quite simple.
That the mythology around the Striker/Thunderer \[‘Per-‘\] slaying a
serpentine adversary has become somewhat merged with a pre-existing
iconographic and functional association of the Sky Father and Mountain
Queen Indo-European deifics. Or, to phrase it more clearly – Perseus
carving off the head of the serpentine adversary, the Medusa, and then
this head winding up wielded or rendered a shield-symbol for Athena and
Zeus … is a later innovation, a ‘just so’ story forged to explicate how
and why these deities held (literally) some of Their qualities and
attributes.

We can tell this, in part, via the manner in which the Gorgoneion is
presented in various archaeological findings – as being a *male* face,
bearded and all, in an array of them. Yet we can also tell this, far
better, via the linguistic associations and etymology of the “Medusa”
term that describes the identity of the actual head herself. It may
surprise many (who have not already looked into it, say by reading my
previous works upon the subject), to hear that the ‘Medo’ from whence
‘Medusa’ derives is a much more positive, powerful term. It pertains to
‘protection’, ‘rulership’ – functions quite closely aligned with both of
the Indo-European deifics I have aforementioned, not with some cursed
creature that is slain as an adversary by a questing hero (unless, one
supposes, it is the vanquishing of a threat and bringing home the
evidence of your success in this regard, which renders one fit to rule;
although I do not consider that to be a solid explanation for what has
gone on here, as there is no similar understanding for the quality of
‘Ghora’ in the Vedic comparative. The Sky Father, there, is Terrifying
in and of Himself – and rules a-priori to the ‘proving’ of these
qualities via the dispatching of a mortal foe. Although, as we can tell
from the mythology around Bhairava decapitating the would-be usurper
Brahma, rulership and sovereignty is a tree that must be stabilized by
cutting down those who would otherwise destabilize it).

The Proto-Indo-European term from which ‘Medo’ derives is further
intriguing – PIE ‘Med’, which also includes giving counsel and healing
within its ambit. As detailed in the relevant portions of the third
MythoLinguistics of War article, what we see Athena (Herself a ‘Roarer’
by both theonymic and theological/mythonarrative attestation) in
particular carrying out is the ‘advising’ of certain figures – and Zeus,
as well, is in possession of the ‘Royal Metis’. Meanwhile, as we
explored in “Beating Disease Over The Head With The Serpent-Staff Of The
Storm Wind – Rudra, Odin, Shiva, Hermes, Mercury, Maruts As Healers”,
there has ever been a prominent portfolio area of Rudra the Terrifying
as a Healer, a remover of disease \[it is important to remember that for
Their People, a more Kindly face may also to be found when in need\].

I believe that this is no coincidence, and that what we see here is the
Proto-Indo-European constellation of associations for ‘Med’ – wisdom,
rulership, and healing – reflected also in the portfolio areas and
functions of the later expressions of these underlying Indo-European
deific complexes. Or, to make the linkage more explicit – the figure(s)
bearing the Gorgoneion, Who are ‘Ghora’, and also ‘Roaring’ with the
Voice of Thunder … are Rulers, Wise, and powerful in other areas
pertaining to herbs and preparations and healing charms. Further support
for this can be evinced by the derivations of the Proto-Indo-European
‘Meh’ – which refers to the ‘measuring’ of things, as well as the
enforcement of regularity and rule upon them, giving us the
aforementioned ‘Metis’ … and in Sanskrit, wherein ‘Mimite’ and ‘Mimati’
are closely aligned; the former referring to ‘measuring’, and the latter
to ‘roaring’ (with another related ‘mimati’ referring to ‘movement’,
perhaps in the sense of ‘traversing’; and a further ‘Meh’ derived
Sanskrit term, ‘Mah’, relating to time and the Moon).

The ‘Medusa’ / ‘Gorgoneion’ symbolism, therefore, rather than merely
being that of a terrifying enemy – a demonstration of power held aloft
by those more powerful than the terror itself (although this is also
preserved in some interpretations of the ‘KaalBhairav’ encountered above
– ‘One Whom Even Death Is Afraid Of’) – is better understood as being
emblematic *of* the Royal quality itself. Something which we can easily
demonstrate via the Gorgoneion’s presence not only upon the shields of
certain warriors whether mortal or Divine – but also the incredible
frequency with which we find Greek coinage bearing the ensign. Even
today, we still speak of our coins as ‘Crowns’, ‘Sovereigns’, and they
tend to bear the signifer of the regime and the rulership that has
rendered them legal, regal tender.

So, having demonstrated that the qualities associated with the Roaring,
Terrifying Deity – whether, as it happens, the Sky Father or Mountain
Queen – are also those of Rulership, and that these are ‘encoded’ within
the relevant linguistics, the relevant theonyms and other such terms for
Their qualities, role, and functions … the question naturally turns to
how we might apply this understanding to another, hugely significant
expression of the Sky Father deific complex.

Yggr. Ygg. Hrjóðr. Odin. The Terrifying. The Roarer.

Now it is, of course, necessary to note that just as with the Greek
derivation, various elements of the Indo-European deific complex of
which Odin is the Nordic expression and understanding … have shifted
somewhat down the ages, and perhaps also in response to the changed
‘needs’ of the Nordic bearers of that culture. My personal explication
for the reasoning of such alterations has tended away from the euhemeric
in such cases as no clear mortal mistake can be inferred (such as the
aforementioned Greek ‘Mess-O-Potamia’ influence-scenario), and toward a
suspicion of Divine intent in guiding at least some of this. So the fact
that the Nordic understanding might be regarded as different to the
Vedic upon some points does not render either ‘inauthentic’ nor
‘inaccurate’ – rather, it means that these are appropriate for their
peoples’ position within the overarching Divine Plan. At least some of
the time, at any rate.

In particular, the ‘rulership’ role of the Sky Father is significantly
altered for Odin – and we find a figure Who, whilst in possession of a
Throne, and dispensing Guidance, Counsel, Advice, and Divine Justice At
The Point Of A Spear(-Tongue), is not strictly, explicitly, regarded as
“King”. The more technically correct interpretation of His Role is
perhaps along the lines of one Chief amidst several – an integral part
of the Divine power-structure, but not its Over-King. But that is a
point of theo-political explication for another time.

In any case, vital elements of our Roarer-Ruler Petrifying-Protector
(Counsel-Consul?) typology are still very much in evidence for Him. And
that has important implications for our understanding not only of “Yggr”
– but also of “Yggdrasil”. The World-Tree Axis-Mundi structure of Nordic
cosmology.

Now conventionally, Yggdrasil is interpreted to mean the Steed of Ygg,
and more figuratively, to a ‘Gallows’ in reference to the manner in
which Odin’s Hanging thereupon provided a route to wisdom. I do not
think that this is inaccurate, necessarily. Only that it is only a part
of the story. As we have seen above, it is easily possible for single
terms or phrases within our ancient mytho-linguistic terms, to bear
multiple and simultaneously intended meanings. Almost as if they were ..
designed that way, by minds far sharper than most moderns could hope to
be, their secrets lost or otherwise obscured by the sorts of
interpretation which insist that our ancestors were as simplistic in
their thought and elocution as we inveterably often are today.

The etymology of ‘Yggr’ itself has not been satisfactorily
reconstructed. I have seen, as well as personally parsed, a number of
possibilities – a number of which link back to the aforementioned
underpinnings of ‘Ghora’, ‘Garjana’, ‘Gorgos’ and ‘Crow’ briefly
outlined above. But we shall not get into that vexed matter here. It is
enough for us to know that “Yggr” refers to Odin, and refers also more
specifically to the Terrifying Visage of Him. All the rest, quite
literally, it would appear, hangs thereupon.

For what is ‘Drasil’? In one sense, it means a ‘Steed’. And that
certainly informs a personal interpretation of the concept of
‘Yggdrasil’ which occurred to me some Moons ago, after the coterminity
of the World-Tree with the World-Mountain was joined by the uncovering
of references to the Arms of Frigg as being Branches \[‘Badmr’\]. Not
for nothing is Odin ‘Faðmbyggvir Friggjar’. But that, too, we shall save
the more complex explication upon for another time.

What intrigues me is that ‘Drasil’ is a markedly less common and more
figurative term for a Horse than various other options available in the
Old Norse poetic lexicon. It connotes something quite specific. The act
of ‘dragging’, the sense of ‘dependence’ – something contingent upon,
supported or set into motion via another.

Why does this matter? Because it implicitly tells us something about the
nature of the Axis Mundi of the Indo-Europeans. Not that Terror Maketh
The World(s) Go Round, necessarily. But rather, that there is a strong
relationship between the Sky Father – the Terrifying One – and the
unfurling rest of the Universe about and hanging down From (or, perhaps,
‘like’ – with deference to both the ‘Gallows’ interpretation and a
certain line of the DeviSukta) Him. Or you could reason it the other way
– that of the supportive structure of the Axis Mundi holding Him Aloft.
Given what we know about both the Deifics associated with the Axis
Mundi, as well as more especially the manner in which the Axis Mundi is
an expression of Cosmic Order (‘Orlog’ – Supernal Law; ‘Rta’ in the
sense of Brahman-as-Order emanating into the Universe), the latter
interpretation makes a noteworthy degree of sense.

This set of prospective associations is strengthened when we consider
the underlying etymology of ‘Drasil’ – Proto-Indo-European ‘Dher’.

Which gives us such gloriously resonant terms as ‘Throne’ in English, as
well as ‘Firm’ and ‘Firmament’ which come to us from a Latin derivation
referring to ‘strengthening’ and ‘support’ (the idea being that the
‘Firmament’ in a cosmological sense, is the structure that supports the
world and holds fast the Stars in the Sky, which it also forms, as a
Vault of the Heavens – great place for some Wealth, Pluto, isn’t it). So
it is not hard to see how the ‘Steed’ of the Sky Father (Yggr) is also
the Throne thereof. Which leads, itself, to the interesting metaphysical
question of whether a Throne is a Throne, rather than merely a seriously
ornate chair (or cage), because it has a King sitting in it (i.e. the
Throne is dependent upon the King, ontologically speaking) … or whether
a Throne is somewhat (no pun intended) ‘free-standing’, and has a power
its own that the King is supported by (i.e. the King is at least
partially contingent, dependent, upon the Throne and its control). The
answer is not an easy one, and is somewhat beyond the scope of this
already almost-too all-encompassing article.

Yet where this becomes relevant is when we consider possibly the most
famous metaphysically resonant derivation of ‘Dher’ of all – Sanskrit
‘Dharma’. Which I have often translated as ‘Duty’ – as that is what is
dependent upon one, and what we are all dependent upon. But which would
probably more directly be rendered as ‘That Which Is Held’ \[in the
sense that a truth is held to be self-evident – that is to say, it has a
‘law’ function as well\], but also ‘That Which Holds’ \[both in general,
it ‘holds firm’ ; but also more specifically – it holds *us*\]. In a
cosmological sense, I have explained the concept of Dharma as an
in-universe expression of Rta \[‘Law/Order’ Above The Universe\] – that
is therefore contingent upon it. That ‘hangs’ from it. And, in so doing,
provides supporting structure for our world. In multiple, overlapping
senses of the term. (At this point, I must acknowledge a Mr J. Jones for
observing coterminity between ‘Dharma’ and ‘Drasil’ in etymology and
thence more direct cosmological import, some weeks previously)

So, in the manner that Varuna is rendered in the RigVeda a Sky Father of
High Heaven, ruling therefrom and ‘stablishing His Law (as an
in-universe emanator thereof), so too could we perhaps view Yggdrasil as
encoding a similar concept. An Axis Mundi that flows from, is contingent
in a certain sense upon, the regal position and prominence of the Sky
Father. The Terrifying Roarer. Or we could remember that one is right
not because one is mighty, but mighty because one is right – and portend
that what is suggested by the terminology of Yggdrasil, is that the Sky
Father Rules as a Duty and an Expression … supported, in other words …
of the Divine Order.

Which therefore illustrates why ‘Ragnarok’ \[the ‘Ragna-‘ referring to a
Regime, a Rulership; and the ‘rok’ or ‘rokkr’ to an ending or dimming\]
is correlate with the significant damage to Yggdrasil. The Rulership of
the DevaRajya is, in effect, tangibly expressed thereby. And tangibly
imperiled on an ongoing basis by the demonic gnawers thereupon.

There are further possible interpretations, including that if one
possible etymology or figurative connexion of ‘Yggr’ is correct,
‘Yggdrasil’ may have some resonancy with the concept of the ‘Steed of
Thunder’ – which might fit with some of my earlier postulations around
the symbolism of the (1-4) Stag(s) near the top of the Tree, and the
latent Lightning of the Stag’s Horns; may have some further utility as
applies the notion of a (meta-)physical form that is a solidified
expression of the ‘cracking’ (or ‘roaring’) noise at the start of the
universe in various cosmogonical accounts. This would accord in a
broader sense (Old Norse resonancy-pun perhaps somewhat intended), with
the concept of Divine Speech \[and in particular some instances of
‘Vacam Garjit Lakshanam’ – Thunder with the Characteristics of Divine
Speech, not easily understood by mortal men\] as the Words and
externalizing ‘Forms’ of Creation. That Sound is the fabric as well as
the resonancy thereupon, of the Universe Itself.

In any case, those are avenues of interrogation for another time. What
is enough for now, is to be cognizant of the elements of the typology
which we have thusly established above. That Roaring and Divine Terror
are closely correlate, both also with Rulership – and all of these with
Thunder. That these qualities co-occur in particular in various
Indo-European mythoreligious complexes’ understandings of the Sky
Father, and Mountain Queen; and that they are traceable via etymological
as well as mythological correlates. Thus further, with various of the
other constellation of associations of these terms, helping to
demonstrate the singular identities of These Gods – Our Gods – even
despite Their hailing occurring in a diverse array of (related)
languages spread across thousands of years and thousands of kilometres.

Glorious revelations!

There are but three more things I shall say, upon the Growling Grey of
the Terrifying Sky, in order to more eloquently express portions of the
‘essence’ of that which has been extolled above. And perhaps fortunately
for the long-suffering reader, chiefly by quoting two better authors –
messers Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett, and Terry Pratchett:

“There are some dogs which, when you meet them, remind you that, despite
thousands of years of man-made evolution, every dog is still only two
meals away from being a wolf. These dogs advance deliberately,
purposefully, the wilderness made flesh, their teeth yellow, their
breath a-stink, while in the distance their owners witter, “He’s an old
soppy really, just poke him if he’s a nuisance,” and in the green of
their eyes the red campfires of the Pleistocene gleam and flicker . .
.  
This dog would make even a dog like that slink nonchalantly behind the
sofa and pretend to be extremely preoccupied with its rubber bone.  
It was already growling, and the growl was a low, rumbling snarl of
spring-coiled menace, the sort of growl that starts in the back of one
throat and ends up in someone else’s.”

“The prayers of most religions generally praise and thank the gods
involved, either out of general piety or in the hope that he or she will
take the hint and start acting responsibly.”  
“William found that he now thought of prayer as a sophisticated way of
pleading with thunderstorms.”

These Deities Are Terrific!

They Beget Terror!
