---
title: SAYINGS AND UTTERANCES

---
<div>

[Home](../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) /
[Volume 9](volume_9_contents.htm) /

[←](excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/concluding_words.htm)

## SAYINGS AND UTTERANCES

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

In this section, only Swami Vivekananda's direct words have been placed
within quotation marks. References have been identified by the following
abbreviations:

*ND*                   Burke, Marie Louise. *Swami Vivekananda in the
West: New Discoveries*. 6 vols. Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1983-87.

*CWSN*             Nivedita, Sister. *The Complete Works of Sister
Nivedita*. Vol. 1. Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1982.

*LSN*                 Nivedita, Sister. *Letters of Sister Nivedita*. 2
vols. Compiled and edited by Sankari Prasad Basu. Calcutta: Nababharat
Publishers, 1982.

*VIN*                  Basu, Sankari Prasad and Ghosh, Sunil Bihari,
eds. *Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers:* 1893-1902. Calcutta:
Dineshchandra Basu, Basu Bhattacharya and Co., 1969.

*1.         From Mrs. Prince Woods's description of Swami Vivekananda's
departure from the Woods's residence in Salem, Massachusetts, in August
1893. Swami Vivekananda gave his staff, his most precious possession, to
Dr. Woods, who was at that time a young medical student, and his trunk
and his blanket to Mrs. Kate T. Woods, saying:*

"Only my most precious possessions should I give to my friends who have
made me at home in this great country." (*ND* 1: 42)

*2.         On the back of Swami Vivekananda's transcription from Louis
Rousselet's book* India and Its Native Princes — Travels in Central
India and in the Presidencies of Bombay and Bengal, *dated February 11,
1894:*

"I say there is but one remedy for one too anxious for the future — to
go down on his knees." (*ND* 1: 225)

*3.         An extract from a prayer Swami Vivekananda delivered at the
Chicago World's Parliament of Religions:*

"Thou art He that beareth the burdens of the universe; help me to bear
the little burden of this life." (*ND* 2: 32)

*4.         An extract from another prayer offered by Swami Vivekananda
at the Chicago World's Parliament of Religions:*

"At the head of all these laws, in and through every particle of matter
and force, stands One through whose command the wind blows, the fire
burns, the clouds rain, and death stalks upon the earth. And what is His
nature? He is everywhere the pure and formless One, the Almighty and the
All Merciful. Thou art our Father. Thou art our beloved Friend." (*ND*
2: 33)

*5.         From Mary T. Wright's journal entry dated Saturday, May 12,
1894:*

The widows of high caste in India do not marry, he said; only the widows
of low caste may marry, may eat, drink, dance, have as many husbands as
they choose, divorce them all, in short enjoy all the benefits of the
highest society in this country. . . .

"When *we* are fanatical", he said, "we torture ourselves, we throw
ourselves under huge cars, we cut our throats, we lie on spiked beds;
but when *you* are fanatical you cut other people's throats, you torture
them by fire and put *them* on spiked beds! You take very good care of
your own skins!" (*ND* 2: 58-59)

*6.         An 1894 extract from the Greenacre Voice, quoting one of the
Swami's teachings delivered at Greenacre, Maine:*

"You and I and everything in the universe are that Absolute, not parts,
but the whole. You are the whole of that Absolute." (*ND* 2: 150)

*7.         In a March 5, 1899 letter from Sister Nivedita to Miss
Josephine MacLeod:*

"I am at heart a mystic, Margot, all this reasoning is only apparent — I
am really always on the lookout for signs and things — and so I never
bother about the fate of my initiations. If they want to be Sannyâsins
badly enough I feel that the rest is not my business. Of course it has
its bad side. I have to pay dearly for my blunder sometimes — but it has
one advantage. It has kept me still a Sannyasin through all this — and
that is my ambition, to die a real Sannyasin as Ramakrishna Paramahamsa
actually was — free from lust — and desire of wealth, and thirst for
fame. That thirst for fame is the worst of all filth." (*ND* 3: 128-29)

*8.         From John Henry Wright's March 27, 1896 letter to Mary
Tappan Wright, in which Swami Vivekananda stated that England is just
like India with its castes:*

"I had to have separate classes for the two castes. For the high caste
people — Lady This and Lady That, Honourable This and Honourable That —
I had classes in the morning; for the low caste people, who came
pell-mell, I had classes in the evening." (*ND* 4: 73)

*9.         While Swami Vivekananda was offering flowers at the feet of
the Virgin Mary in a small chapel in Switzerland in the summer of 1896,
he said:*

"For she also is the Mother." (*ND* 4: 276)

*10.       From Mr. J. J. Goodwin's October 23, 1896 letter to Mrs. Ole
Bull, quoting Swami Vivekananda's conversation at Greycoat Gardens in
London*

"It is very good to have a high ideal, but don't make it too high. A
high ideal raises mankind, but an impossible ideal lowers them from the
very impossibility of the case." (*ND* 4: 385)

*11.       A November 20, 1896 entry from Swami Abhedananda's diary,
quoting Swami Vivekananda's observation of the English people:*

"You can't make friends here without knowing their customs, behaviour,
politics. You have to know the manners of the rich, the cultured and the
poor." (*ND* 4: 478)

*12.       In Mr. J. J. Goodwin's November 11, 1896 letter to Mrs. Ole
Bull, quoting Swami Vivekananda's unpublished statement toward the end
of "Practical Vedanta — IV":*

"A Jiva can never attain absolutely to Brahman until the whole of Mâyâ
disappears. While there is still a Jiva left in Maya, there can be no
soul absolutely free. . . . Vedantists are divided on this point." (*ND*
4: 481)

*13.       From Swami Saradananda's letter to a brother-disciple,
concerning Swami Vivekananda's last days:*

Sometimes he would say, "Death has come to my bedside; I have been
through enough of work and play; let the world realize what contribution
I have made; it will take quite a long time to understand that". (*ND*
4: 521)

*14.       In an October 13, 1898 letter to Mrs. Ashton Jonson, written
from Kashmir, Sister Nivedita described Swami Vivekananda's spiritual
mood:*

To him at this moment "doing good" seems horrible. "Only the Mother does
anything. Patriotism is a mistake. Everything is a mistake. It is all
Mother. . . . *All* men are good. Only we cannot *reach* all. . . . I am
never going to teach any more. Who am I that I should teach anyone? . .
. Swamiji is dead and gone." (*ND* 5: 3-4)

*15.       From Mr. Sachindranath Basu's letter recounting Swami
Vivekananda's closing remarks in his talk to swamis and novices
assembled at Belur Math, June 19, 1899:*

"My sons, all of you be men. This is what I want! If you are even a
little successful, I shall feel my life has been meaningful." (*ND* 5:
17)

*16.       During an evening talk with Swami Saradananda in the spring
of 1899:*

"Men should be taught to be practical, physically strong. A dozen such
lions will conquer the world, not millions of sheep. Men should not be
taught to imitate a personal ideal, however great." (*ND* 5: 17)

*17.       From Mrs. Mary C. Funke's reminiscences of her August 1899
voyage to America with Swamis Vivekananda and Turiyananda:*

"And if all this Maya is so beautiful, think of the wondrous beauty of
the Reality behind it!" (*ND* 5: 76)

"Why recite poetry when there \[pointing to sea and sky\] is the very
essence of poetry?" (Ibid.)

*18.       In Miss Josephine MacLeod's September 3, 1899 letter to Mrs.
Ole Bull:*

"In one's greatest hour of need one stands alone." (*ND* 5: 122)

*19.       From Sister Nivedita's October 27, 1899 diary entry at
Ridgely Manor, in which Swami Vivekananda expressed his concern for Olea
Bull Vaughn:*

"Nightmares always begin pleasantly — only at the worst point \[the\]
dream is broken — so death breaks \[the\] dream of life. Love death."
(*ND* 5: 138)

*20.       In a December 1899 letter from Miss Josephine MacLeod to
Sister Nivedita:*

"All the ideas the Californians have of me emanated from Chicago." (*ND*
5: 179)

*21.       From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences which quoted Swami
Vivekananda as telling Mr. Baumgardt:*

"I can talk on the same subject, but it will not be the same lecture."
(*ND* 5: 230)

*22.       Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences relating Swami
Vivekananda's response to her sight-seeing attempts:*

"Do not show me sights. I have seen the Himalayas! I would not go ten
steps to see sights; but I would go a thousand miles to see a \[great\]
human being!" (*ND* 5: 244)

*23.       From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences relating Swami
Vivekananda's interest in the problem of child training:*

He did not believe in punishment. It had never helped him, he said, and
added, "I would never do anything to make a child afraid". (*ND* 5: 253)

*24.       Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's record of Swami Vivekananda's
explanation of God to seventeen-year-old Ralph Wyckoff:*

"Can you see your own eyes? God is like that. He is as close as your own
eyes. He is your own, even though you can't see Him." (*ND* 5: 254)

*25.       Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences regarding Swami
Vivekananda's opinion of the low-caste English soldiers who occupied
India:*

"If anyone should despoil the Englishman's home, the Englishman would
kill him, and rightly so. But the Hindu just sits and whines!

"Do you think that a handful of Englishmen could rule India if we had a
militant spirit? I teach meat-eating throughout the length and breadth
of India in the hope that we can build a militant spirit!" (*ND* 5: 256)

*26.       Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences of a picnic in
Pasadena, California when a Christian Science woman suggested to Swami
Vivekananda that one should teach people to be good:*

"Why should I desire to be 'good'? All this is His handiwork \[waving
his hand to indicate the trees and the countryside\]. Shall I apologize
for His handiwork? If you want to reform John Doe, go and live with him;
don't try to reform him. If you have any of the Divine Fire, he will
catch it." (*ND* 5: 257)

*27.       From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences:*

"When once you consider an action, do not let anything dissuade you.
Consult your heart, not others, and then follow its dictates." (*ND* 5:
311)

*28.       From Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes taken during a March 1900
lecture in Oakland, California:*

"Never loved a husband the wife for the wife's sake, or the wife the
husband for the husband's sake. It is God in the wife the husband loves,
and God in the husband the wife loves. (Cf. *Brihadâranyaka Upanishad*
II.4.5.) It is God in everyone that draws us to that one in love. \[It
is\] God in everything, in everybody that makes us love. God is the only
love. . . . In everyone is God, the Atman; all else is but dream, an
illusion." (*ND* 5: 362)

*29.       From Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes taken during a March 1900
lecture in Oakland, California:*

Oh, if you only knew yourselves! You are souls; you are gods. If ever I
feel \[that I am\] blaspheming, it is when I call you man." (*ND* 5:
362)

*30.       An excerpt from Mr. Thomas J. Allan's reminiscences of Swami
Vivekananda's March 1900 San Francisco lecture series on India:*

"Send us mechanics to teach us how to use our hands, and we will send
you missionaries to teach you spirituality." (*ND* 5: 365)

*31.       Mrs. Edith Allan's reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda's
philosophical observations while cooking at the Turk Street flat:*

"'The Lord dwells in the hearts of all beings, O Arjuna, by His illusive
power causing all beings to revolve as though mounted on a potter's
wheel.' \[Bhagavad-Gitâ XVIII.61\] This has all happened before, like
the throw of a dice, so it is in life; the wheel goes on and the same
combination comes up; that pitcher and glass have stood there before,
so, too, that onion and potato. What can we do, Madam, He has us on the
wheel of life." (*ND* 6: 17)

*32.       From Mrs. Edith Allan's reminiscences of an after-lunch
conversation:*

"The Master said he would come again in about two hundred years — and I
will come with him. When a Master comes, he brings his own people."
(*ND* 6: 17)

*33.       Mrs. Edith Allan's reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda's
"kitchen" counsel while he was staying in San Francisco, California, in
1900:*

"If I consider myself greater than the ant that crawls on the ground I
am ignorant." (*ND* 6: 19)

"Madam, be broad—minded; always see two ways. When I am on the heights I
say, 'Shivoham, Shivoham: I am He, I am He!' and when I have the
stomachache I say, 'Mother have mercy on me!'" (Ibid.)

"Learn to be the witness. If two dogs are fighting on the street and I
go out there, I get mixed up in the fight; but if I stay quietly in my
room, I witness the fight from the window. So learn to be the witness."
(Ibid.)

*34.       From Mr. Thomas J. Allan's reminiscences of a private talk
with Swami Vivekananda in San Francisco, California, 1900:*

"We do not progress from error to truth, but from truth to truth. Thus
we must see that none can be blamed for what they are doing, because
they are, at this time, doing the best they can. If a child has an open
razor, don't try to take it from him, but give him a red apple or a
brilliant toy, and he will drop the razor. But he who puts his hand in
the fire will be burned; we learn only from experience." (*ND* 6: 42)

*35.       From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences of a walk home
with Swami Vivekananda after one of his lectures in San Francisco in
1900:*

"You have heard that Christ said, 'My words are spirit and they are
life'. So are my words spirit and life; they will burn their way into
your brain and you will never get away from them!" (*ND* 6: 57-58)

*36.       From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences in San Francisco,
1900 — referring to Swami Vivekananda's great heart:*

"I may have to be born again because I have fallen in love with man."
(*ND* 6: 79)

*37.       From Mrs. George Roorbach's reminiscences of Swami
Vivekananda at Camp Taylor, California, in May 1900:*

"In my first speech in this country, in Chicago, I addressed that
audience as 'Sisters and Brothers of America', and you know that they
all rose to their feet. You may wonder what made them do this, you may
wonder if I had some strange power. Let me tell you that I did have a
power and this is it — never once in my life did I allow myself to have
even one sexual thought. I trained my mind, my thinking, and the powers
that man usually uses along that line I put into a higher channel, and
it developed a force so strong that nothing could resist it." (*ND* 6:
155)

*38.       In a conversation with Swami Turiyananda, which probably took
place in New York:*

"The call has come from Above: 'Come away, just come away — no need of
troubling your head to teach others'. It is now the will of the Grand
Old Lady (The “Grand Old Lady” was a figure in a children’s game, whose
touch put one outside the game.) that the play should be over." (*ND* 6:
373)

*39.       In a July 1902 Prabuddha Bharata eulogy, "a Western disciple"
wrote:*

The Swami had but scant sympathy with iconoclasts, for as he wisely
remarked, "The true philosopher strives to destroy nothing, but to help
all". (*VIN*: 638)

*40.       Sister Nivedita's reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda in an
October 9, 1899 letter to Miss Josephine MacLeod:*

He has turned back on so much — "Let your life in the world be nothing
but a thinking to yourself". (*LSN* I: 213)

*41.       Swami Vivekananda's luncheon remarks to Mrs. Ole Bull,
recorded by Sister Nivedita in an October 18, 1899 letter to Miss
Josephine MacLeod:*

"You see, there is one thing called love, and there is another thing
called union. And union is greater than love.

"I do not *love* religion. I have become identified with it. It is my
life. So no man loves that thing in which his life has been spent, in
which he really has accomplished something. That which we love is not
yet ourself. Your husband did not love music for which he had always
stood. He loved engineering in which as yet he knew comparatively
little. This is the difference between Bhakti and Jnana; and this is why
Jnana is greater than Bhakti." (*LSN* I: 216)

*42.       Swami Vivekananda's remarks on his spiritual ministry,
recorded in Sister Nivedita's October 15, 1904 letter to Miss Josephine
MacLeod:*

"Only when they go away will they know how much they have received."
(*LSN* II: 686)

*43.       Sister Nivedita's reminiscences in a November 5, 1904 letter
to Alberta Sturges (Lady Sandwich) of Swami Vivekananda's talk on
renunciation while he was staying at Ridgely Manor:*

"In India we never say that you should renounce a higher thing for a
lower. It is better to be absorbed in music or in literature than in
comfort or pleasure, and we *never* say otherwise." (*LSN* II: 690)

*44.       In Sister Nivedita's November 19, 1909 letter to Miss
Josephine MacLeod:*

"The fire burns if we plunge our hand in — whether we feel it or not —
so it is with him who speaks the name of God." (*LSN* II: 1030)

*45.       Swami Vivekananda's reminiscences of Shri Ramakrishna,
recorded in Sister Nivedita's July 6, 1910 letter to Dr. T. K. Cheyne:*

"He could not imagine himself the *teacher* of anyone. He was like a man
playing with balls of many colours, and leaving it to others to select
which they would for themselves." (*LSN* II: 1110)

*46.       Sister Nivedita's reminiscences of a conversation with Swami
Vivekananda at Ridgely Manor, recorded in an 1899 letter written from
Ridgely Manor to Miss Josephine MacLeod:*

I have never heard the Prophet talk so much of Shri Ramakrishna. He told
us what I had heard before of \[his master's\] infallible judgement of
men. . . .

"And so", Swami said, "you see my devotion is the dog's devotion. I have
been wrong so often and he has always been right, and now I trust his
judgement blindly". And then he told us how he would hypnotize anyone
who came to him and in two minutes know all about him, and Swami said
that from this he had learnt to count our consciousness as a very small
thing. (*LSN* II: 1263)

*47.       From Sister Nivedita's January 27, 1900 letter to Sister
Christine:*

Swami said today that he is beginning to see the needs of humanity in
quite a different light — that he is already sure of the principle that
is to help, but is spending hours every day in trying to solve the
methods. That what he had known hitherto is for men living in a cave —
alone, undisturbed — but now he will give "humanity something that will
make for strength in the stress of daily life". (*LSN* II: 1264)

*48.       In a July 7, 1902 letter to Sister Christine, Sister Nivedita
recorded one of Swami Vivekananda's remarks made while giving a class to
the monks at Belur Math on July 4, 1902:*

"Do not copy me. Kick out the man who imitates." (*LSN* II: 1270)

*49.       The Swami's comment after he made a statement concerning the
ideal of the freedom of the soul, which brought it into apparent
conflict with the Western conception of the service of humanity as the
goal of the individual:*

"You will say that this does not benefit society. But before this
objection can be admitted you will first have to prove that the
maintenance of society is an object in itself." (*CWSN* 1: 19)

*50.       Sister Nivedita wrote:*

He touched on the question of his own position as a wandering teacher
and expressed the Indian diffidence with regard to religious
organization or, as someone expresses it, "with regard to a faith that
ends in a church". "We believe", he said, "that organization always
breeds new evils".

He prophesied that certain religious developments then much in vogue in
the West would speedily die, owing to love of money. And he declared
that "Man proceeds from truth to truth, and not from error to truth".
(*CWSN* 1: 19-20)

*51.* "The universe is like a cobweb and minds are the spiders; for mind
is one as well as many." (*CWSN* 1: 21)

*52.*       "Let none regret that they were difficult to convince! I
fought my Master for six years with the result that I know every inch of
the way! Every inch of the way!" (*CWSN* 1: 22)

*53.       Swami Vivekananda was elucidating to what heights of
selflessness the path of love leads and how it draws out the very best
faculties of the soul:*

"Suppose there were a baby in the path of the tiger! Where would your
place be then? At his mouth — any one of you — I am sure of it." (*CWSN*
1: 24)

*54.*       "*That* by which all this is pervaded, know *That* to be the
Lord Himself!" (*CWSN* 1: 27)

*55.       Concerning Swami Vivekananda's attitude toward religion:*

Religion was a matter of the growth of the individual, "a question
always of being and becoming". (*CWSN* 1: 28)

*56.*       "Forgive when you also can bring legions of angels to an
easy victory." While victory was still doubtful, however, only a coward
to his thinking would turn the other cheek. (*CWSN* 1: 28-29)

*57.*       "Of course I would commit a crime and go to hell forever if
by that I could really help a human being!" (*CWSN* 1: 34)

*58.       To a small group, including Sister Nivedita, after a
lecture:*

"I have a superstition — it is nothing, you know, but a personal
superstition! — that the same soul who came once as Buddha came
afterwards as Christ." (*CWSN* 1: 35)

*59.       After Swami Vivekananda was told of Sister Nivedita's
willingness to serve India:*

"For my own part I will be incarnated two hundred times, if that is
necessary, to do this work amongst my people that I have undertaken."
(*CWSN* 1: 36)

*60.       Sister Nivedita's memory of an incident:*

He was riding on one occasion with the Raja of Khetri, when he saw that
his arm was bleeding profusely and found that the wound had been caused
by a thorny branch which he had held aside for himself to pass. When the
Swami expostulated, the Rajput laughed the matter aside. "Are we not
always the defenders of the faith, Swamiji?" he said.

"And then", said the Swami, telling the story, "I was just going to tell
him that they ought not to show such honour to the Sannyasin, when
suddenly I thought that perhaps they were right after all. Who knows?
Maybe I too am caught in the glare of this flashlight of your modern
civilization, which is only for a moment".

" — I have become entangled", he said simply to one who protested that
to his mind the wandering Sâdhu of earlier years, who had scattered his
knowledge and changed his name as he went, had been greater than the
abbot of Belur, burdened with much work and many cares. "I have become
entangled." (*CWSN* 1: 43)

*61.       Sister Nivedita wrote:*

One day he was talking in the West of Mirâ Bâi — that saint who once
upon a time was Queen of Chitore — and of the freedom her husband had
offered her if only she would remain within the royal seclusion. But she
could not be bound. "But why should she not?" someone asked in
astonishment. "Why should she?" he retorted. "Was she living down here
*in this mire*?" (*CWSN* 1: 44)

*62.       As years went by, the Swami dared less and less to make
determinate plans or dogmatize about the unknown:*

"After all, what do we know? Mother uses it all. But we are only
fumbling about." (*CWSN* 1: 44)

*63.       Quoting Swami Vivekananda, Sister Nivedita remembered:*

Love was not love, it was insisted, unless it was "without a reason" or
without a "motive" . . . . (*CWSN* 1: 52)

*64.       About Swami Vivekananda, Sister Nivedita wrote:*

When asked by some of his own people what he considered, after seeing
them in their own country, to be the greatest achievement of the
English, he answered "that they had known how to combine obedience with
self-respect". (*CWSN* 1: 54)

*65.       Swami Sadananda reported that early in the morning, while it
was still dark, Swami Vivekananda would rise and call the others,
singing:*

"Awake! Awake! all ye who would drink of the divine nectar!" (*CWSN* 1:
56)

*66.       Sister Nivedita remembered:*

At this time \[during the Swami's itinerant days, near Almora\] he
passed some months in a cave overhanging a mountain village. Only twice
have I known him to allude to this experience. Once he said, "Nothing in
my whole life ever so filled me with the sense of work to be done. It
was as if I were *thrown out* from that life in caves to wander to and
fro in the plains below". And again he said to someone, "It is not the
form of his life that makes a Sadhu. For it is possible to sit in a cave
and have one's whole mind filled with the question of how many pieces of
bread will be brought to one for supper!" (*CWSN* 1: 61)

*67.       About his own poem "Kali the Mother":*

"Scattering plagues and sorrows", he quoted from his own verses,

Dancing mad with joy,  
Come, Mother, come!  
For terror is Thy name!  
Death — is in Thy breath.  
And every shaking step  
Destroys a world for e'er.

"It all came true, every word of it", he interrupted himself to say.

Who dares misery love.  
Dance in Destruction's dance,  
And hug the form of death, . . .

"To him the Mother does indeed come. I have proved it. For I have hugged
the form of Death!" (*CWSN* 1: 98-99)

*68.       Sister Nivedita, referring to her plans for a girls' school:*

Only in one respect was he \[Swami Vivekananda\] inflexible. The work
for the education of Indian women, to which he would give his name,
might be as sectarian as I chose to make it. "You wish through a sect to
rise beyond all sects." (*CWSN* 1: 102)

*69.       Commenting on Sister Nivedita's visit to Gopaler-Ma's
dwelling — a small cell:*

"Ah! this is the old India that you have seen, the India of prayers and
tears, of vigils and fasts, that is passing away, never to return!"
(*CWSN* 1: 109)

*70.       About the aims of the Ramakrishna Order:*

The same purpose spoke again in his definition of the aims of the Order
of Ramakrishna — "to effect an exchange of the highest ideals of the
East and the West and to realize these in practice" . . . . (*CWSN* 1:
113)

*71.       After teaching Sister Nivedita the worship of Shiva, Swami
Vivekananda then culminated it in an offering of flowers at the feet of
the Buddha. He said, as if addressing each soul that would ever come to
him for guidance:*

"Go thou and follow Him, who was born and gave His life for others *five
hundred times* before He attained the vision of the Buddha!" (*CWSN* 1:
114)

*72.       Upon returning from a pilgrimage in Kashmir:*

"These gods are not merely symbols! They are the forms that the Bhaktas
have seen!" (*CWSN* 1: 120)

*73.       Sister Nivedita's reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda's words
heard long before:*

"The Impersonal God seen through the mists of sense is personal."
(*CWSN* 1: 120)

*74.       Swami Vivekananda's comment when he was reminded of the
rareness of criminality in India:*

"Would God it were otherwise in my land, for this is verily the
virtuousness of death!" (*CWSN* 1: 123)

*75.       Swami Vivekananda said:*

"The whole of life is only a swan song! Never forget those lines: 

The lion, when stricken to the heart,  
gives out his mightiest roar.  
When smitten on the head, the cobra lifts its hood.  
And the majesty of the soul comes forth,  
only when a man is wounded to his depths."

(*CWSN* 1: 124)

*76.       After hearing of the death of Shri Durga Charan Nag (Nag
Mahashay):*

"\[He\] was one of the greatest of the works of Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa." (*CWSN* 1: 129)

*77.       About Shri Ramakrishna's transformative power, Swami
Vivekananda said:*

"Was it a joke that Ramakrishna Paramahamsa should touch a life? Of
course he made new men and new women of those who came to him, even in
these fleeting contacts!" (*CWSN* 1: 130)

*78.       While speaking on the true spirit of a Sannyasin, Swami
Vivekananda said:*

"I saw many great men in Hrishikesh. One case that I remember was that
of a man who seemed to be mad. He was coming nude down the street, with
boys pursuing and throwing stones at him. The whole man was bubbling
over with laughter while blood was streaming down his face and neck. I
took him and bathed the wound, putting ashes on it to stop the bleeding.
And all the time with peals of laughter he told me of the fun the boys
and he had been having, throwing the stones. 'So the Father plays', he
said.

"Many of these men hide, in order to guard themselves against intrusion.
People are a trouble to them. One had human bones strewn about his cave
and gave it out that he lived on corpses. Another threw stones. And so
on. . . .

"Sometimes the thing comes upon them in a flash. There was a boy, for
instance, who used to come to read the Upanishads with Abhedananda. One
day he turned and said, 'Sir, is all this really true?'

"'Oh yes!' said Abhedananda, 'It may be difficult to realize, but it is
certainly true'.

"And next day, that boy was a silent Sannyasin, nude, on his way to
Kedarnath!

"What happened to him? you ask. He became silent!

"But the Sannyasin needs no longer to worship or to go on pilgrimage or
perform austerities. What then is the motive of all this going from
pilgrimage to pilgrimage, shrine to shrine, and austerity to austerity?
He is acquiring merit and giving it to the world!" (*CWSN* 1: 133)

*79.       Referring to the story of Shibi Rana:*

"Ah yes! These are the stories that are deep in our nation's heart!
Never forget that the Sannyasin takes two vows: one to realize the truth
and one to help the world — and that the most stringent of stringent
requirements is that he should renounce any thought of heaven!" (*CWSN*
1: 134)

*80.       To Sister Nivedita:*

"The Gitâ says that there are three kinds of charity: the Tâmasic, the
Râjasic and the Sâttvic. Tamasic charity is performed on an impulse. It
is always making mistakes. The doer thinks of nothing but his own
impulse to be kind. Rajasic charity is what a man does for his own
glory. And Sattvic charity is that which is given to the right person,
in the right way, and at the proper time. . . .

"When it comes to the Sattvic, I think more and more of a certain great
Western woman in whom I have seen that quiet giving, always to the right
person in the right way, at the right time, and never making a mistake.

"For my own part, I have been learning that even charity can go too far.
. . .

"As I grow older I find that I look more and more for greatness in
*little* things. I want to know what a great man eats and wears, and how
he speaks to his servants. I want to find a Sir Philip Sidney (Sir
Philip Sidney (1554-1586): English poet, soldier and politician.)
greatness! Few men would remember the thirst of others, even in the
moment of death.

"But anyone will be great in a great position! Even the coward will grow
brave in the glare of the footlights. The world looks on. Whose heart
will not throb? Whose pulse will not quicken till he can do his best?

"More and more the true greatness seems to me that of the worm doing its
duty silently, steadily, from moment to moment and from hour to hour."
(*CWSN* 1: 137)

*81.       Referring to the great individual — the divine incarnation,
the Guru, and the Rishi:*

"You do not yet understand India! We Indians are man — worshippers,
after all! Our God is man!" (*CWSN* 1: 144)

*82.       On another occasion, Swami Vivekananda used the word
"man-worshippers" in an entirely different sense:*

"This idea of man—worship exists in nucleus in India, but it has never
been expanded. You must develop it. Make poetry, make art, of it.
Establish the worship of the feet of beggars as you had it in Mediaeval
Europe. Make man-worshippers." (*CWSN* 1: 144-45)

*83.       To Sister Nivedita:*

"There is a peculiar sect of Mohammedans who are reported to be so
fanatical that they take each newborn babe and expose it, saying, 'If
God made thee, perish! If Ali made thee, live!' Now this, which they say
to the child, I say, but in the opposite sense, to you tonight: 'Go
forth into the world and there, if I made you, be destroyed! If Mother
made you, live'!" (*CWSN* 1: 151)

*84.       Long after Southern magnates in America had apologized to
Vivekananda when they learned that he had been mistaken for a Negro and
was thus refused admission into hotels, the Swami remarked to himself:*

"What! rise at the expense of another! I didn't come to earth for that!
. . . If I am grateful to my white-skinned Aryan ancestor, I am far more
so to my yellow-skinned Mongolian ancestor and, most so of all, to the
black-skinned Negritoid!" (*CWSN* 1: 153)

*85.       Commenting on the dungeon-cages of mediaeval prisoners on
Mont-Saint-Michel:*

"What a wonderful place for meditation!" (*CWSN* 1: 154)

"Oh, I know I have wandered over the whole earth, but in India I have
looked for nothing save the cave in which to meditate!" (Ibid.)

*86.       Though he considered offspring of the Roman Empire to be
brutal and the Japanese notion of marriage a horror, Swami Vivekananda
nevertheless summed up the constructive ideals, never the defects, of a
community:*

"For patriotism, the Japanese! For purity, the Hindu! And for manliness,
the European! There is no other in the world who understands, as does
the Englishman, what should be the glory of a man!" (*CWSN* 1: 160)

*87.       Swami Vivekananda said of himself before he left for America
in 1893:*

"I go forth to preach a religion of which Buddhism is nothing but a
rebel child and Christianity, with all her pretensions, only a distant
echo!" (*CWSN* 1: 161)

*88.       Describing the night Buddha left his wife to renounce the
world, Swami Vivekananda said:*

"What was the problem that vexed him? Why! It was she whom he was about
to sacrifice for the world! That was the struggle! He cared nothing for
himself!" (*CWSN* 1: 172)

*89.       After describing Buddha's touching farewell to his wife, the
Swami said:*

"Have you never thought of the hearts of the heroes? How they were
great, great, great — and soft as butter?" (*CWSN* 1: 172)

*90.       Swami Vivekananda's description of Buddha's death and its
similarity with that of Shri Ramakrishna's:*

He told how the blanket had been spread for him beneath the tree and how
the Blessed One had lain down, "resting on his right side like a lion"
to die, when suddenly there came to him one who ran for instruction. The
disciples would have treated the man as an intruder, maintaining peace
at any cost about their Master's death-bed, but the Blessed One
overheard, and saying, "No, no! He who was sent (Lit., “the Tathâgata”.
“A word”, explained Swami Vivekananda, “which is very like your
‘Messiah’”.) is ever ready", he raised himself on his elbow and taught.
This happened four times and then, and then only, Buddha held himself
free to die. "But first he spoke to reprove Ananda for weeping. The
Buddha was not a person but a realization, and to that any one of them
might attain. And with his last breath he forbade them to worship any."

The immortal story went on to its end. But to one who listened, the most
significant moment had been that in which the teller paused — at his own
words "raised himself on his elbow and taught" — and said, in brief
parenthesis, "*I* saw this, you know, in the case of Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa". And there rose before the mind the story of one, destined
to learn from that teacher, who had travelled a hundred miles, and
arrived at Cossipore only when he lay dying. Here also the disciples
would have refused admission, but Shri Ramakrishna intervened, insisting
on receiving the new-comer, and teaching him. (*CWSN* 1: 175-176)

*91.       Commenting on the historic and philosophic significance of
Buddhistic doctrine:*

"Form, feeling, sensation, motion and knowledge are the five categories
in perpetual flux and fusion. And in these lies Maya. Of any one wave
nothing can be predicated, for it is not. It but was and is gone. *Know,
O Man, thou art the sea!* Ah, this was Kapila's philosophy, but his
great disciple \[Buddha\] brought the heart to make it live!" (*CWSN* 1:
176)

*92.       Concerning the Buddhist First Council and the dispute as to
its President:*

"Can you *imagine* what their strength was? One said it should be
Ananda, because he had loved Him most. But someone else stepped forward
and said no! for Ananda had been guilty of weeping at the death-bed. And
so he was passed over!" (*CWSN* 1: 177)

*93.       Considering reincarnation a "scientific speculation" rather
than an article of faith:*

"Why, one life in the body is like a million years of confinement, and
they want to wake up the memory of many lives! Sufficient unto the day
is the evil thereof! . . . Yes! Buddhism must be right! Reincarnation is
only a mirage! But this vision is to be reached by the path of Advaita
alone!" (*CWSN* 1: 180-81)

*94.*       "Had I lived in Palestine, in the days of Jesus of Nazareth,
I would have washed his feet, not with my tears, but with my heart's
blood!" (*CWSN* 1: 189)

95.       "For the Advaitin, therefore, the *only* motive is love. . . .
It is the Saviour who should go on his way rejoicing, not the saved!"
(*CWSN* 1: 197-98)

*96.       On the necessity of restraint in a disciple's life:*

"Struggle to realize yourself without a trace of emotion! . . . Watch
the fall of the leaves, but gather the sentiment of the sight from
within at some later time!" (*CWSN* 1: 207)

"Mind! No loaves and fishes! No glamour of the world! All this must be
cut short. It must be rooted out. It is sentimentality—the overflow of
the senses. It comes to you in colour, sight, sound, and associations.
Cut it off. Learn to hate it. It is utter poison!" (Ibid., 207-208)

*97.       On the value of types:*

"Two diffferent races mix and fuse, and out of them rises one strong
distinct type. A strong and distinct type is always the physical basis
of the horizon. It is all very well to talk of universalism, but the
world will not be ready for that for millions of years!

"Remember! if you want to know what a ship is like, the ship has to be
specified as it is — its length, breadth, shape, and material. And to
understand a nation, we must do the same. India *is* idolatrous. You
must help her *as she is*. Those who have left her can do nothing for
her!" (CWSN 1: 209)

*98.       Describing the Indian ideal of Brahmacharya in the student's
life, Swami Vivekananda said:*

"Brahmacharya should be like a burning fire within the veins!" (*CWSN*
1: 216)

*99.       Concerning marriage by arrangement instead of choice, Swami
Vivekananda said:*

"There is such pain in this country! Such pain! Some, of course, there
must always have been. But now the sight of Europeans with their
different customs has increased it. Society knows that there is another
way!

\[To a European\] "We have exalted motherhood and you, wifehood; and I
think both might gain by some interchange.

"In India the wife must not dream of loving even a son as she loves her
husband. She must be Sati. But the husband ought not to love his wife as
he does his mother. Hence a reciprocated affection is not thought so
high as one unreturned. It is 'shopkeeping'. The joy of the contact of
husband and wife is not admitted in India. This we have to borrow from
the West. Our ideal needs to be refreshed by yours. And you, in turn,
need something of our devotion to motherhood." (*CWSN* 1: 221-22)

*100.     Speaking to a disciple with great compassion:*

"You need not mind if these shadows of home and marriage cross your mind
sometimes. Even to me, they come now and again!" (*CWSN* 1: 222)

*101.     On hearing of the intense loneliness of a friend:*

"Every worker feels like that at times!" (*CWSN* 1: 222)

*102.     Concerning the Hindu and Buddhist monastic and non-monastic
ideals:*

"The glory of Hinduism lies in the fact that while it has defined
ideals, it has never dared to say that any one of these alone was the
one true way. In this it differs from Buddhism, which exalts monasticism
above all others as the path that must be taken by all souls to reach
perfection. The story given in the Mahâbhârata of the young saint who
was made to seek enlightenment, first from a married woman and then from
a butcher, is sufficient to show this. 'By doing my duty', said each one
of these when asked, 'by doing my duty in my own station, have I
attained this knowledge'. There is no career then which might not be the
path to God. The question of attainment depends only, in the last
resort, on the thirst of the soul." (*CWSN* 1: 223)

*103.     With reference to the idea that the lover always sees the
ideal in the beloved, Swami Vivekananda responded to a girl's newly
avowed love:*

"Cling to this vision! As long as you can both see the ideal in one
another, your worship and happiness will grow more instead of less."
(*CWSN* 1: 224)

*104.*     "The highest truth is always the simplest." (*CWSN* 1: 226)

*105.     Swami Vivekananda's remarks on American séances:*

"Always the greatest fraud by the simplest means." (*CWSN* 1: 233)

*106.     On Western and Eastern views of a person as a body or a soul:*

"Western languages declare that man is a body and has a soul; Eastern
languages declare that he is a soul and has a body." (*CWSN* 1: 236-37)

*107.     Concerning Swami Vivekananda's reverence for his Guru:*

"I can criticize even an Avatâra \[divine incarnation\] without the
slightest diminution of my love for him! But I know quite well that most
people are not so; and for them it is safest to protect their own
Bhakti!" (*CWSN* 1: 252)

"Mine is the devotion of the dog! I don't want to know why! I am
contented simply to follow!" (Ibid., 252-53)

*108.*     "Ramakrishna Paramahamsa used to begin every day by walking
about in his room for a couple of hours, saying 'Satchidânanda!' or
'Shivoham!' or some other holy word." (*CWSN* 1: 255)

*109.     A few months before his passing away, Swami Vivekananda said:*

"How often does a man ruin his disciples by remaining always with them!
When men are once trained, it is essential that their leader leaves
them; for without his absence they cannot develop themselves!" (*CWSN*
1: 260)

*110.     A few days before his passing away, the Swami said:*

"I am making ready for death. A great Tapasyâ and meditation has come
upon me, and I am making ready for death." (CWSN 1: 261-62)

*111.     In Kashmir after an illness, Swami Vivekananda said as he
lifted a couple of pebbles:*

"Whenever death approaches me, all weakness vanishes. I have neither
fear, nor doubt, nor thought of the external. I simply busy myself
making ready to die. I am as hard as *that* \[the pebbles struck one
another in his hand\] — for I *have* touched the feet of God!" (*CWSN*
1: 262)

[→](newspaper_reports/part_i_american_newspaper_reports/american_newspaper_contents.htm)

</div>
