---
title: INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND WESTERN SOCIETY

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](07_the_indian_mirror_jun_29_1895.htm)

## INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND WESTERN SOCIETY

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, pp. 85-86.)

\[*The Indian Mirror*, December 1, 1895\]

At the weekly meeting of the Balloon Society, an address on "Man and
Society in the Light of Vedanta"[1](#fn1) was given by Swami
Vivekananda. The Swami who wore the red robe of his sect, spoke with
great fluency and in perfect English for more than an hour without the
help of a single note. He said that religion was the most wonderful
factor in the social organism. If knowledge was the highest gain that
science could give, what could be greater than the knowledge of God, of
the soul, of man's own nature which was given by the study of religion?
It was not only impossible that there should be one religion for the
whole world, but it would be dangerous. If the whole of religious
thought was at the same level, it would be the death of religious
thought; variety was its life. There were four types of religion — (1)
the worker, (2) the emotional, (3) the mystical, and (4) the
philosophical. Each man unfortunately became so wedded to his own type
that he had no eyes to see what existed in the world. He struggled to
make others of the same type. That religion would be perfect which gave
scope to all the different characters. The Vedantic religion took in
all, and each could choose in what his nature required. A discussion
followed.

[→](09_the_indian_mirror_mar_25_1896.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)According to Swami Vivekananda, the topic was "Indian
    Philosophy and Western Society", of which there is no verbatim
    transcript available. Vide New Discoveries, Vol. 3, p. 262.
