---
title: SWAMI VIVEKANANDA IN AMERICA

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](08_the_indian_mirror_dec_1_1895.htm)

## SWAMI VIVEKANANDA IN AMERICA

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, pp. 89-90.)

\[*The Indian Mirror* (from the *New York Herald*),

March 25, 1896\]

Many well-known persons are seeking to follow the teaching of Swami
Vivekananda's Philosophy.

. . . . . .

A Lecture by the Swami

Swami Vivekananda sat in the centre, clad in an ochre coloured robe. The
Hindu had his audience divided on either side of him and there was
between fifty and a hundred persons present. The class was in
Karma-Yoga, which has been described as the realisation of one's self as
God through works and duty.

Its theme was: —

"That which ye sow ye reap", whether of good or evil.

Following the lecture or instruction the Swami held an informal
reception, and the magnetism of the man was shown by the eager manner in
which those who had been listening to him hastened to shake hands or
begged for the favour of an introduction. But concerning himself the
Swami will not say more than is absolutely necessary. Contrary to the
claim made by some of his pupils he declares that he has come to this
country alone and not so officially representing any order of Hindu
monks. He belongs to the Sanyasis he will say; and is hence free to
travel without losing his caste. When it is pointed out to him that
Hinduism is not a proselytising religion, he says he has a message to
the West as Buddha had a message to the East. (*Vide [Complete
Works](../../../volume_5/questions_and_answers/selections_from_the_math_diary.htm)*
, V: 314.) When questioned concerning the Hindu religion, and asked
whether he intends to introduce its practices and ritual into \[t\]his
country, he declares that he is preaching simply philosophy.

[→](10_the_indian_mirror_jun_19_1896.htm)

</div>
