---
title: '"THE IDEAL OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION"'

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](12_the_indian_mirror_sep_22_1896.htm)

## "THE IDEAL OF UNIVERSAL RELIGION"

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, pp. 331-33.)

\[*The Journal of the Maha-Bodhi Society*, November 1896\]

We have been presented with a copy of a booklet entitled the "Ideal of
Universal Religion", published by the Brahmavadin Publishing Company,
Madras. It is a lecture by Swami Vivekananda, delivered in America. The
lecture is highly interesting and instructive. It is an attempt at a
reconciliation between the diversity of religions. We hail the booklet
as the symptom of the times, for it is evident for obvious reasons that
men are beginning to awaken to the importance of this problem of
religious harmony. Recently, in these countries leaders of different
religious sects have attempted in their own way to reconcile this
religious diversity, and have failed; they have aspired to defend their
dogmas on the ground of distorted views of sectarianism. Swami
Vivekananda has propounded a philosophical and at the same time a most
practical solution of this problem of religious harmony. According to
him, Vedanta is the bond between the ever conflicting religious
differences. In the internal world, like the external world, there is
also the centripetal and centrifugal action. We repel something, we
attract something. Today we are attracted by some, to-morrow we are
repelled by some. The same law cannot be applied at all times and in all
cases. "Religion is the highest place of human thought and life, and
herein the workings of these two forces have been most marked." At the
outset, it apparently appears that there cannot reign unbroken harmony
in this plane of mighty struggle. In every religion there are three
parts, namely, philosophy, mythology and rituals. Every recognised
religion \[has\] all these three things. But there can be no universal
philosophy, mythology and rituals for the whole world. Where then the
universal ity? How is it possible then to have a universal form of
religion? "We all hear," says Swami Vivekananda,

about universal brotherhood, and how societies stand up practically to
preach this, Universal brotherhood, that is, we shout like drunken men
we are all equal, therefore, let us make a sect. As soon as you make a
sect you protest against equality, and thus it is no more. (Cf. the
American lecture, delivered January 12, 1896 (*[Complete
Works](../../../volume_2/practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures/the_ideal_of_a_universal_religion.htm#v9_indnews1)*
, II: 379-80).)

Mahomedans talk of universal brotherhood, but what comes out of them in
reality? Nobody who is not a Mahomedan will be admitted into the
brotherhood, he will have his throat cut. We think we cannot do better
than quote his own words, wherein he with his wonderful lucidity and
depth of views and in a remarkably catholic mind propounds forcibly the
philosophy of the universal religion \[*Vide [Complete
Works](../../../volume_2/practical_vedanta_and_other_lectures/the_ideal_of_a_universal_religion.htm)*
, II: 375-96\]. . . .

In society there are various natures of men. Some are active working
men, there is the emotional man, then there is the mystic man and lastly
there is the philosopher. Vivekananda strikes the key note of his whole
philosophy when he declares that the attempt to help mankind to become
beautifully balanced in all these four directions, is his ideal of
religion and this religion is called in India, Yoga. The worker is
called the Karma-yogin; who seeks union through love is called
Bhakti-yogin; he who seeks through mysticism is called Raja-yogin; and
he who seeks it through philosophy is called Jnan\[a\]-yogin. The
religion which has a place for men of all these natures and a religion
which satisf\[ies\] the thirst of men of different inclination, may be
the universal religion, and that religion is Vedanta. Most cordially we
recommend this admirable little book to our readers. For it contains
some clear and definite expressions of views on the most vital problem
that is engaging the serious attention of theologians. The price of the
book is As. 3, and may be had at the Brahmavadin Office, Triplicane,
Madras.

[→](14_the_indian_mirror_dec_16_1896.htm)

</div>
