---
title: THE BANQUET FOR RANJIT SINJHI

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](13_maha-bodhi_society_nov_1896.htm)

## THE BANQUET FOR RANJIT SINJHI

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 4, pp. 479-80.)

\[*The Indian Mirror*, December 16, 1896\]

On the 21st of this month \[November\], the Cambridge "Indian Majlis"
gave a complimentary dinner at the University Arms Hotel \[in
Cambridge\] to Prince Ranjit-sinhji and Mr. Atul Chandra Chatterjee. Mr.
Hafiz G. Sarwir of St. John's College, took the chair. There were about
fifty Indians present and a few Englishmen. . . .

Swami Vivekananda rose next to respond \[to the toast of India\] amidst
loud and deafening cheers. (There is no verbatim transcript available.
Cf. the following January 8, 1897 Indian newspaper report, ["The Majlis
in Cambridge"](15_the_amrita_bazar_patrika_jan_8_1897.htm) .) The Swami
began by saying that he did not know exactly why he should be chosen to
respond to the toast unless it be for the reason that he in physical
bulk bore a striking resemblance to the national animal of India
(laughter). He desired to congratulate the guest of the evening and he
took the statement which the Chairman had made that Mr. Chatterjee was
going to correct the mistake of past historians of India, to be
literally true. For out of the past the future must come and he knew no
greater and more permanent foundation for the future than a true
knowledge of what had preceded before. The present is the effect of the
infinity of causes which represent the past. They had many things to
learn from the Europeans but their past, the glory of India which had
passed away, should constitute even a still greater source of
inspiration and instruction. Things rise and things decay, there is rise
and fall everywhere in the world. . . . \[*Vide* the block quotation
under ["The Majlis In
Cambridge"](15_the_amrita_bazar_patrika_jan_8_1897.htm) for the
remaining text of this report.\]

[→](15_the_amrita_bazar_patrika_jan_8_1897.htm)

</div>
