---
title: THE MAJLIS IN CAMBRIDGE

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](14_the_indian_mirror_dec_16_1896.htm)

## THE MAJLIS IN CAMBRIDGE

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, pp. 310-11.)

\[*The Amrita Bazar Patrika*, January 8, 1897\]

. . . The gathering was a unique one, for the Indians met together to
talk (in the Majlis they all talk), about the successes of Ranjit
Sing\[h\] and Atul Chandra Chatterjee. It is a pity the name of
Professor Bose was not associated with the above two; and we think,
Swami Vivekananda, who was present on the occasion, also deserved a
recognition. We shall, however, not commit the mistake of omitting the
last two in noticing to show what the Indians have been able to achieve
in the West.

What the Swamiji did was to remove the impression from the minds of the
Americans that the Indians were barbarians, superstitious in their
beliefs, and addicted to monstrous cruelties. The advent of the Swamiji
in the West has done this service, that it has created an impression in
many quarters that the Indians are not an inferior race as Sir Charles
Elliot called them, and that they can, in such subjects as religion and
philosophy say things which are not known even to the West. The advent
of the Swamiji in the West has undoubtedly enhanced the character of the
Indians in the West. . . .

Said Swami Vivekananda:—

And though India is fallen to-day she will assuredly rise again. There
was a time when India produced great philosophers and still greater
prophets and preachers. The memory of those days ought to fill them with
hope and confidence. This was not the first time in the history of India
that they were so low. Periods of depression and degradation had
occurred before this but India had always triumphed in the long run and
so would she once again in the future. (At this time, there is no
complete verbatim transcript available. Cf. the preceding December 16,
1896 Indian newspaper report , ["The Banquet to Ranjit
Sinhji"](14_the_indian_mirror_dec_16_1896.htm), p.541.)

. . . . . .

[→](16_the_amrita_bazar_patrika_jan_20_1897.htm)

</div>
