---
title: VIVEKANANDA IN THE WEST

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [Indian Newspaper
Reports](indian_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](15_the_amrita_bazar_patrika_jan_8_1897.htm)

## VIVEKANANDA IN THE WEST

(*Vivekananda in Indian Newspapers*, p. 312.)

\[*The Amrita Bazar Patrika*, January 20, 1897\]

Swami Vivekananda has received the ovation of a conquering hero,
returning home. The last we heard of him in England was when he got a
farewell address from his English disciples, who expressed their undying
love for India. . . .

No one has any accurate knowledge of what Swami Vivekananda was doing in
the West. We hear that he has made some impression in America and also
in England. . . .

The Swami is, however, well aware of the nature of the mission before
him. He says that Vedantism teaches the truth, which is that man is a
divine being and that the highest and the lowest are the manifestations
of the same Lord. He does not, however, admit that knowledge alone is
sufficient for the salvation of man. Says he:—

But his knowledge ought not to be a theory, but life. Religion is a
realization, not talk, not doctrines, nor theories, however beautiful
all these may be. Religion is being and becoming, not hearing or
acknowledging. It is not an intellectual assent; but one's whole nature
becoming changed into it. Such is religion. By an intellectual assent we
can come to a hundred sort of foolish things, and change the next day,
but this being and becoming is what is religion.

In the above noble sentiments, the Swami shews \[shows\] that he
understands the situation pretty well. That which produces the rebirth
of a man is religion. Under the influence of religion a man becomes a
quite different being from what he was before. Unless that is the result
of his religion, his religion is a myth.

. . . . . .

[→](17_the_indian_mirror_feb_24_1898.htm)

</div>
