+++
title = "The Divine Wrath Of Devi Dhari And The Salvation Of Shaivite Kedarnath [Incredible Indo-European Holy Sites Series Part IIxa0]"
date = "September 18, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/119523560_10164155918095574_776359637755077337_o.jpg?w=1024)

Jai Mata Di !

Facing of the Dhari Devi (Kali) murti \[‘Living Image’\] in Uttarakhand.
Now, the Temple there is … interesting, because of what happened there
in 2013. That year, Her Shrine was due to be relocated in order to make
way for a hydroelectric dam – following a Supreme Court decision which
overruled both locals and (federal) Ministry of Environment and Forests
opposition to the scheme.

Except only a few short hours after the Murti had been cut from Her base
so as to begin the relocation … the Skies opened and a torrential rain
began – causing massive floods which flattened at least two towns, and
severely damaged others, killing hundreds (3,886 people were reported
missing in the immediate aftermath).

Plans were rapidly made to put the Murti *back* in as close to Her
original situation as possible.

Now, it may be simple and compelling to presume that what had happened
here was a case of a Wrathful Goddess being rather annoyed, and then
choosing to visit Destruction from the Heavens, The Waters, down upon
those who had failed or worse, outright insulted Her.

But I am not quite sure that that is the (full) story. You see, for some
years prior to this – greedy local corporations had conspicuously
attempted to undermine the protections upon the environment which were
supposed to maintain the integrity of as much of the course of the river
as possible. They wanted to mine for minerals, or they wanted to build
this aforementioned hydroelectric dam.

And so, they deforested and carved up the banks; and it is even alleged
that the eventual build-up of water and silt which began flooding the
Temple in the first place may have been a deliberate act by the
corporation in question, designed to compel a speedy relocation of the
Murti.

Deforested and otherwise weakened hillsides along a river’s catchment
are notoriously poor for absorbing rainfall – water just goes straight
down them, often taking appreciable chunks of hillside with it in
landslides, which then further raise the river levels and add
destructive force.

This meant that what *could* have been a much *smaller* event in 2013 …
instead became far greater in its impact – thanks to a set of deliberate
(if negligent/foolhardy) decisions by various people to actively and
rather literally undermine the natural environment of the Goddess’
Realm.

As is so often the case – wise Environmentalism and devotional Piety are
truly the same cause here. Both were overruled or even merely outright
ignored – and death was the ultimate outcome.

Still, there is one further point of curious – downright *weird* in the
old Germanic sense, we might say – resonancy to the story.

The neighbouring town of Kedarnath is famous for its incredibly
important Shaivite temple – one of the 12 (or 13, if you count the one
in Australia) Jyotirlingams \[‘Pillars of Starlight’\]. During the
disaster on the night that the Dhari Devi Murti was moved – the town of
Kedarnath was amongst the worst hit, being devastated by both flood and
landslide \[something remarkably similar in outcome to a previous
attempt made by a local king in 1882 to do much the same thing …\]

The Kedarnath Jyotirlingam shrine, however … was not.

Indeed, even despite all around it being hugely damaged

A massive stone which had come off a mountain further up the river was
propelled by the flood-waters to plant itself immediately behind the
Temple, directly in the floodwaters’ path. Under normal circumstances –
not that there was anything particularly normal about that night – we
should probably have anticipated the huge rock careening into the Temple
like a wrecking-ball. Except it didn’t.

As I say – it planted itself in such a position that the floods’ major
flows were dispersed *around* the Temple, as were the boulders that came
along with them down the sides of the valley. And through a combination
of the Temple’s sturdy, redoubtable construction and this mysterious
rock … the Temple itself was so untouched that even though water levels
rose inside there also – the offering of Bel leaves (Belpatra) atop the
ShivLing (Shaivite Altar-stone) inside was undisturbed ; with many of
the survivors in Kedarnath being those who had taken refuge there in the
Temple.

To sum it up, then – the massive disaster which accompanied the
attempted removal of the Dhari Devi Murti nearby in Uttarakhand , was
accompanied by an incredibly fortuitous (‘Shiva’, indeed, via another
translation) occurrence which saw His Holy Site protected from the
devastation, along with those who had sought to take refuge directly
with Him.

The overarching series of events was a tragedy – and I mean that also in
the classically Greek sense , insofar as it was caused by hubris and
mortal folly, leading to a severely sad outcome.

Whether we wish to say that said hubris and folly was the attempt to
move the Murti in order to make way for the dam and other such
developments – or whether we instead wish to pursue the more …
materialist explanation hinging around the ignoring of the environmental
caveats in a way that destabilized the river and its catchment –

It is difficult to read of these events, and the miraculous potency
inherent in their occurrence. Some would say it is ‘Nature’, others
would say it is ‘Divine’. Many of the latter would not see the
difference.

I am one of them.

जय माता दी  
ॐ नमः शिवाय

Look after Nature, Nature shall look after you.  
Disrespect The Gods – and the Opposite shall be true.
