+++
title = "On The Preservation Of Faith In The Indo-European Periphery – And Its Corrosion In The Indo-Europeanxa0Core"
date = "September 1, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/118570834_10164084388550574_1904840063898725154_n.jpg?w=860)

\[Author’s Note: This was initially intended as a brief introduction to
a piece on the Slavic figure of Svarog as a Sky Father expression –
however, it has grown somewhat, and contains an important, freestanding
point. So here it is on its own\]

The Indo-European world can probably be divided up into those mythic
cultures and perspectives which are at the ‘core’, and those upon the
‘periphery’. The ‘core’ ones do not necessarily mean those that really
were at the ‘core’ of this or that epoch of the ancient world – but
rather, those that are more dominant in our mind’s eye, and which have
subconsciously influenced how we think things ‘should’ be. The
‘periphery’ ones, equally, were often those that were actually
incredibly important at the time – yet through some ineluctable
combination of our modern lack of awareness of them, or simply the lack
of transmission of their influence on down to us through lacking a
written culture, they are only thought of rather ‘dimly’ by comparison,
if at all.

The Greco-Roman ‘Classical’ cultures are ‘Core’ to many of us (despite
being quite literally on the ‘periphery’ abutting the Middle East etc.
and being influenced by same) – and others, such as the Scythians, were
‘periphery’ even two and a half thousand years ago when they ranged
across an incredibly vast span from the Proto-Indo-European Urheimat
through to Central Asia. The Nordic/Germanic cultures are something a
little different in this regard, as they were unquestionably
‘peripheral’ throughout most of recorded history – at least, to those
people(s) doing the recording – yet due to the sustained dominance of
the descendants of Germanic peoples in the modern mythological sphere,
the modern pop-cultural sphere , we now think of their beliefs as quite
‘Core’. So ‘Core’ in fact, that we make motion pictures out of their
myths (allegedly), which are viewed on a global scale.

Now, I say all of this in order to introduce our topic in this piece –
which is an understanding out there on the ‘Periphery’, amidst the
Slavs, which nevertheless manages to preserve in quite surprising
fidelity something which had fallen from prevalent recollection in
various of the more ‘Core’ Indo-European cultures. A pattern which I
think is actually remarkably prevalent in these regards. Perhaps due to
the ‘conservatism’ of some of these peoples – which they could feel more
comfortable in due to their greater remoteness from this or that other
more ‘civilized’ influence and its accompanying ‘reformations’ of
belief. But more upon that, perhaps, some other time.

The mythic understanding in question concerns a curious figure – the
Slavic deity Svarog – as an emblematic instance of the Sky Father as
‘Solar Smith’, or perhaps more aptly, as the frequently fire-facilitated
fabricator of the Universe and its cosmological crafting therein.

This is something which I believe was quite likely part of the original
‘archaic’ Indo-European mythology – yet which found itself somewhat
de-emphasized in various of the descendant-cultures thereof with the
passing of the ages. Although even where this occurred (and it was by no
means universal), the ‘residual’ traces to show where the narrative and
its associations \*had\* been nevertheless remained.

Comparative examples for this trend in motion may be found with the
original Indo-European Solar Goddess(es), as I’ve been discussing in the
ongoing “Radiant Queen of the Heavens” series – where even despite the
gender-association switching of Sun and Moon to Male and Female
respectively in the Classical pantheons (i.e. the ‘Core’ – especially in
the way in which it’s informed just about everybody in the West’s
mythperception ever since), the ‘residual’ traces for Solar Goddess
elements still remain in various theonyms (such as ‘Diana’, ‘Juno’) and
even the Deities Themselves upon occasion (for example, Helen still
being worshipped as a Goddess amongst the Spartans). Whereas meanwhile,
out upon the ‘Periphery’ of the Scythians, or the Nordic/Germanic
peoples, the Solar Goddess was still very much in evidence.

A similar pattern may be evinced when considering the strong alignment
of the Sky Father and ‘Wind Wanderer’ deific expressions (that is to
say, these two actually being the \*same deity\*) – an understanding
\*preserved\* upon the ‘Periphery’ of the Nordic/Germanic peoples (as
well as in the Vedic religion – a ‘periphery’ of a different sort,
perhaps), yet obscurated by the ‘Core’. Although again – never totally.
Zeus, along with Hermes, goes wandering in disguise in order to test the
commitment to Xenia of various people, for instance. Although again –
more upon this some other time.

All of this forms part of my underlying suite of considerations for
declaring that ‘Barbarian’ cultures, in the Indo-European-sphere can
quite often seem to be much more ‘healthy’ than their more ‘civilized’
cousins. It is not a universal rule, to be sure, and the risk run with
the ‘Barbarian’ clades is that much knowledge can be lost or changed
significantly via oral transmission shifting in time of crisis (c.f the
sad example of what has happened to the folk-ways of the Nuristani &
Kalash religions following the forced Islamization of many of their
kinsfolk and the driving into exile of the latter more than a hundred
years ago – there were noted ‘changes’ in some of what they were said to
believe in the seven decades or so between anthropological visits). But
out there on the ‘periphery’, many of the pressures so commonly found
amidst the ‘civilized’ ‘core’ which lead to the old ways and the archaic
traditions being declared ‘unfashionable’ and ‘modernized’, ‘innovated’
upon or just frankly disregarded … are less pressing in the extreme.
