+++
title = "On Svarog As Sky Father – The Indo-European Sky Father As Song-Smith Of Thexa0Cosmos"
date = "September 4, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/svarog_by_renokid_d9pmfkv-pre.jpg?w=740)

In many ways, the enigmatic figure of Svarog is emblematic of both the
difficulties that we face when reconstructing Indo-European mythology …
and also the marvelous enduring features that make it so easy – if you
know where and how to look.

I say “difficulties”, because Svarog is a seriously
under-directly-attested figure, even by the already rather fragmentary
standards of the Slavic mythology. There is basically a single direct
reference to Him – and it is contained in a compilation of earlier
material which has gone through several layers of ‘indirect’
transmission from its original, primary culture perspective. More
specifically, it is a fragment of the work of a 6th century Byzantine
Greek that has been translated into Slavic terms, that is speaking about
a mythic history of Egypt under the rule of Greek Gods. And which may be
fairly scrutinized further for Christian influence, as well as the
possibility for some sort of general syncretic mish-mash or erratic
mythunderstanding occurring at various points between the
Byzantine-Greek original text and the far later Slavic presentation
thereof.

It would be easy to take one look at this, and conclude that the entire
thing should just be ignored as profoundly ‘unsafe’. Yet that would – to
my mind at any rate – be both unwise and patently unnecessary. For it is
not like this figure of “Svarog” is some sort of invention of whole
cloth by an anonymous Slavic interpolator. We have various toponyms and
other such residual materials to suggest rather strongly that this was a
figure of some prominence and prevalency. We also have the demonstrable
fact that this deity was considered both relevant and familiar enough
that when he was seeking to explain or make more immediately ‘relevant’
the mythological faces of some far-flung foreign land of Classical
antiquity – our Slavic correspondent felt that his audience would
understand and grasp Whom he was talking about. And not feel that the
representation of this deity in the terms presented in the Hypatian
Codex was incongruent with their own understandings of Him.

It is, after a sort, an Interpretatio Romana situation – but in reverse.
A Classical figure being rendered for a non-Classical audience, rather
than the other way around. And, as I have long maintained, even despite
the obvious shortcomings of the Interpretatio Romanoin some areas,
there is often essential truth to be found therein, as well.

In short, it is unlikely that the way Svarog is spoken about in the
Hypatian Codex is prima facie ‘inauthentic’ – although it is
demonstrable that what is said of Hephaestus, to whom Svarog is compared
in the course of that work – is not in strong accordance with the
high-Classical Greek conception of the figure.

Now the reason we can determine that there is serious probative value to
the presentation of Svarog in this context is thanks to the
Indo-European comparative mythology. We can see how the features of the
Deity align with what we should be expecting for a God in that role. And
therefore, how what would otherwise be disregardable as ‘confusion’ or
‘contamination’ via that aforementioned chain of transmission … are
instead signs of the fundamental integrity of that which we have been
presented with here.

The representation of Svarog in this manner is also useful going the
other way – as it enables us to see, in concentrated and clear format,
certain features of the relevant Sky Father deific that have become
‘dispersed’ or even rendered outright ‘residual’ in certain other more
prominent Indo-European mythological canons.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/76974188_2493279227580150_8162394125514047488_n.jpg?w=590)

But what actually are these features? What is it that is said of Svarog
?

Well, here is what the version of the Primary Chronicle as presented in
the Hypatian Codex says (I’ve somewhat abridged this for length):

“At the beginning Mestrom of the family of Ham began to rule, then
Jeremiah and after him Feosta\[Hephaestus\], who was also called Svarog
by the Egyptians. At the time of this Feosta’s rule in Egypt, there fell
tongs from heaven and he began to forge weapons for before that time
people fought with rods and stones. This same Feosta proclaimed a law
that women could marry only one man and should fast and order that those
who commit adultery should be executed. For this reason he was called
God Svarog. \[…\] and whoever should break this law, he had to be thrown
into the fiery oven. For this reason he became called Svarog and was
honored by the Egyptians. And thereafter there reigned his Son, who was
called the “Sun” \[Helios\]; he was also called Dadzbog… The ruler Sun,
who was the son of Svarog and was also called Dadzbog, was a strong man
\[…\]”

Now, as you can see, there are quite clearly Biblical elements,
syncretic pseudo-history elements, and an array of other materials all
jumbled together here. And it is important to note that the specifically
Slavic elements – which help to show what the Slavs actually felt
relevant to *them* – are the latter incorporations. There are no
mentions of the Indo-European elements to that above passage in other,
,more ‘conservative’ iterations of the Primary Chronicle. The ‘pagan’
characteristics, therefore, may perhaps be considered as the ‘bridging’
brought in to make this portion of the text meaningful for the Slavic
audience. It is, you might say, something of a ‘self-insert’ – in
somewhat the same manner as Snorri Sturluson’s projection of Nordic
mythology into the Trojan War. And, in just the same manner as
Sturluson’s effort, we have great and transcendental matters reduced
down, euhemerized also, to more ‘mundane’ and ‘human’ level terms.

So what are the salient characteristics of which we can find in that
above passage? Well, first and foremost, we have this Svarog as a
*ruler*. We also have the linkage to ‘Feosta’ – Hephaestus. And the
bestowing of both Law, and the ‘actionable’ cultural elements that make
a form of civilization possible (the Smith’s Tongs), the latter of which
is directly Heaven-sent. Further, we have this Svarog depicted as the
Father of the (subsequent?) Sun-Tsar – Dazhbog.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/d43f799bfc718bd0c267a1c4aa35b11f.jpg?w=1024)

So what does all of this align with? Well, for a start, not really
Hephaestus – at least as the Classical perspective had come to regard
Him in the popular perception. The Smith element is consistent, as is
the association with Fire, and given the situation of Hephaestus with
regard to Aphrodite and Ares – I suppose one could say that there is
also the opposition to adultery \[indeed, in one version of the Primary
Chronicle, Dazhbog’s prosecution of a woman caught violating His
Father’s edict against adultery is explicitly linked to Helios informing
Hephaestus of Aphrodite’s illicit liason with Ares in Homer\]. Yet
Hephaestus is not really a ruler, nor does Hephaestus father Helios, nor
is He a prominent Lawgiver.An argument could also, perhaps, be mounted
for Hephaestus as begetting a royal line in the form of the Athenian
Erechtheus, although there is no trace of that myth to be found here.

However, there *are* relevant elements to be found in the Orphic Hymn to
Hephaestus – including a Solar linkage, a reference to the ‘rage’ of
Flame (perhaps important given an occasional etymology of Svarog we
shall discuss later) and fire’s consuming nature (which may link back to
the oven of Svarog in the Hypatian Codex account), and a seeming
progenitorial role for man along with the perhaps surprising “The
dwellings of all belong to you, all cities, all peoples”. It could also
be fairly argued, I think, that the role of Hephaestus in that hymnal in
relation to the ‘Cosmos’ – a term which simultaneously means both
‘Order’ and ‘World’ in Ancient Greek – may be reflective of a
‘Lawbringing’ (that is to say, Cosmos-forging via the application of Law
and Its production) role.

This does need to be contextualized, however. The Orphic canon is a
broad beast – with some parts that are demonstrably carrying forward
quite ancient concepts, and others that are seemingly the result of more
recent Near Eastern syncretic contact. My personal suspicion is that the
Hephaestus hymnal, despite appearances, is more toward the former end of
the spectrum – and is speaking to a deity that accords quite
significantly with certain Vedic elements which record the archaic
Indo-European tradition of the Sky Father as Solar Shaper,
Master(Craftsman) of the Universe. But more upon that below.

In terms of the Greek Indo-European mythology, there is one further
point which must be made – and that concerns the parentage of Helios.
This is a term explicitly utilized to identify Dazhbog, and helps to
inform the strongly, indeed quite literally ‘Solar’ characterization of
this far-better attested Slavic deity. As aforementioned, Hephaestus is
not the Father of the Sun in the main Greek mythology – although He
*does* provide important support and direction for the Sun in the
latter’s role, by forging a marvellous golden ship upon which the Sun
sails the solar sky. This therefore has Hephaestus helping to affix the
rather foundational Order of the Sun’s procession through the heavens,
the one that in a very real sense makes many other laws, let alone life
itself and civilization, possible here on earth. It also accords with
the role played by Lord Varuna, another such stern imposer of Law and
moral propriety, wherein Varuna (hailed as the Sovereign of the Sea –
the Sea and Sky being somewhat coterminous in Indo-European cosmology,
hence the aforementioned Solar Ship) carves the channel for Surya (the
Sun) to follow – a channel that also appears to flow with the heavenly
water per RV VII 87 1.

The *proper* parentage of Helios within the Greek mythology, meanwhile,
is as Son (Sun?) of Hyperion (‘The High One’) and Theia Euryphaessa
(‘The Wide-Shining Goddess’) – which, in the course of the Radiant Queen
of the Heavens series, I have demonstrated to be the Sky Father and His
Wife. An interpretation reinforced by the Vedic view of Surya as the Son
of Dyaus Pitar – the Sky Father \[c.f RV X 37 1 – also the occasional
references for the Sun as the Eye of the Sky Father (something occurrent
across many Indo-European cultures – viz. Helios as the Eye of Zeus,
Surya as Eye of Varuna, etc.), and this Eye as the Son of same, as in
the Vishvakarman hymnal, RV X 82 1\].

All of which brings us to the Vedic typology to which we might sensibly
compare Svarog – not only mythically, but linguistically, potentially,
as well.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/unnamed-5.jpg?w=252)

In terms of the linguistics, the parallels are so obvious as to hardly
even require translation. “Svarog” can be read as the Slavic equivalent
term to “Svaraj”, “Svarga”, or “Swaraj”. To break these down into their
constituent components and thereby explicate their meaning – ‘Svar’
(स्वर्) is for us an explicitly ‘Solar’ term. It is derived from the
same ultimate root as modern English ‘Sun’, ‘Solar’ (or, for that
matter, Sanskrit ‘Surya’ and even Ancient Greek ‘Helios’ via the S=>H
soundshift), and in much the same manner as the ‘double-duty’ performed
by ‘Dyu’ style terms, can refer not only to the Sun *itself*, but also
to the more generalized Shining Celestial Sphere. Intriguingly, for our
purposes, it is also a Shaivite theonym. Meanwhile, and rather
uncoincidentally, the nearly identical (indeed, in some cases, actually
identical) formulation ‘Svara’ (स्वर) refers to ‘Music’, ‘Voice’, the
active expression of a sound via singing – and we shall see why that is
*directly* relevant in due course.

Now, it might seem rather curious given that Svarog is the *Father* of
Dazhbog – the Father of the Sun – to suggest that a term *for* the Sun
or the Solar Radiance may have some bearing upon Him. And yet, it is
quite directly relevant. For you see, even leaving aside the
understanding of ‘Svar’ as referring to the Solar Energy in a symbolic
sense (which is, of course, also in part what is meant by the ‘Dyaus’ of
‘Dyaus Pitar’ – the Father of the Bright/Daylight Sky), the curious fact
of Indo-European cosmology and theology as illustrated in the Vedas … is
that we do not simply have *one* Sun. Instead, the Sun is regarded as
symbolic for a number of deities (several of Whom are literally called
‘Sun’ – e.g. Surya, the female Surya, and Dyaus Pitar referred to as
Surya), contingent upon what is relevant at the time. It might perhaps
be more apt to think of the Solar Energy as seen (or, more directly,
‘reflected’ – viz. Nordic ‘Sol’, as I considered in the ‘Radiant Queen
of the Heavens’ series) in the Solar Disc as being ‘under the command’
of various Deities at the relevant and appointed times, but chiefly
associated with *the* Sun God. Something which we also see, after a
sort, in that aformentioned Orphic hymnal to Hephaestus – wherein
Hephaestus’ radiance is regarded as having expression *through* the Sun,
despite the Greeks also having a well-attested Helios as *the* Sun God.

So therefore, per the relevant Vedic theology upon the subject, just as
we have the Sky Father hailed as both Solar and occasionally as *the*
Sun \[‘Surya’\] nevertheless also fathering Surya \[RV X 37 1, etc.\] –
it is no contradiction for Svarog as ‘Sun’ to father Dazhbog the
Sun-Tsar. ‘Sun-Tsar’, as it happens, being an interesting potential
manner to translate the aformentioned ‘Svaraj’ – ‘Svar Raj’. Which,
perhaps, makes sense – as Dazhbog is depicted in the obviously
euhemerized Hypatian Codex account as being a Prince of the Royal Line
reigning after Svarog. So the Kingly Title should, of course, be passed
on hereditarily in this schema. Even if, in the Divine Realm, such
succession rarely seems necessary (with the exception of Greek mythology
for obvious patricidal reasons) and instead we find a Heaven which bears
*many* Rajas simultaneously under the great Samraj – ‘Samraj’ meaning
‘Emperor’ or ‘Over-King’, and being an epithet and customary title of
Varuna (once again, the Sky Father and a Solar aspected Deity, sacrally
powerful – and a Shaper of the Cosmos).

However, other derivations or cognate/parallel Vedic understandings for
‘Svarog’ are possible. ‘Svarga’ refers directly to the (high) Heavenly
Realm (interestingly, etymologically it would be the ‘Place of the
Sun’), and it is certainly possible that in much the same manner as
‘Dyu’ does the aforementioned ‘double duty’ for both Heavenly Realm and
the Ruler therein, thereof, therefrom – that the term for Heaven might
also refer to the Heavenly Father. This was a not infrequent custom in
feudal systems, as it happens – of referring to the rulers of particular
domains simply by their domain-name.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/dwdmqcex4aaipqz.jpg?w=720)

‘Swaraj’ or ‘Svaraj’, meanwhile, takes things in a somewhat different
(although fundamentally correlate) direction – ‘Swa’ as in ‘Self’, ‘Raj’
as in ‘Rule’. ‘Swaraj’, therefore, is ‘Self-Rule’, ‘Sovereign(ty)’. And
it is not at all hard to see how Svarog as Sky Father would be the
Self-Ruling One – the One Above Whom There Is None, the Divine
Sovereign. Although it is also perhaps pertinent to mention the *other*
sense of Svaraj – Self-Rule as in Rulership of the Self. Being the
complete master over one’s own power and potency, the more Fully
Enlightened Being. And from whence, mastery over all else, all others,
can most truly flow. If we were running some sort of ‘monist’ cosmology
(which we are not – although it can be fairly argued that this turns up
in various later Indo-European theologies), then the ‘Self-Rule’ in
question would hold that as the Divine Being is the Universe, the
Self-Rule is sovereignty over the Self … that is to say, the Universe.
This does have *some* bearing upon how we might interpret some later
Sanskrit texts, as well as some Classical Greek/Latin ones – but I am
not prepared to speculate as to whether it has any meaningful bearing
upon the Slavic situation. It is not impossible, given the references to
the nominally pagan Slavs actually being ardent believers in a single
God – although it is also potential to interpret those mentions as being
misunderstandings, or insistent attempts to present the Slavs as
‘civilized’ in Christian terms (c.f how the Hindus of Indonesia are
regarded as ‘Monotheists’ by that state’s government for various
domestic politics reasons), or otherwise propagandize.

Interestingly, for our purposes, there is rather direct mention in the
Yajurveda \[YV TS V 5 4 \] of the concept of ‘Svaraj’ in relation to
Varuna – Agni. This is phrased in terms of a cosmogony re-enactment –
wherein the laying of bricks to form the Vedic Fire Altar is held to be
symbolically resonant with the acts of Creating the Universe. One of the
spheres created is Viraj – the ‘Radiance’, ‘Forth-Shining’ … a term of
fantastic complexity in its Vedic applications which we shall not
explicate in detail here. Suffice to say that the Viraj (also understood
as the Celestial Goddess, dependent upon context – although this is not
axiomatic given ‘Vir’, ‘Veer’ as ‘masculine’) is here meant as a ‘second
phase of’, an ‘expression of’ a vital, central principle \[hence
‘radiance’ – as the ‘active expression’ of the core element being
radiated\]. And connotes the Atmospheric layer … “beyond which lies the
Svaraj”, to quote the hymnal in question. More intriguingly still,
‘Viraj’ is also a term for a Kshatriya ruler of radiant splendour. A
‘prince’ we might say, as it is a lesser (though still quite literally
high and mighty) title than the Svaraj. And with the implicit sense of
‘Vir’ (‘heroic’, ‘mighty’, ‘man’) and ‘Raj’ (‘ruler’). What is Dazhbog
described as, again? The Sun-Ruler, the “Strong Man”. A ‘radiance’ or a
‘descended/second expression’ of the same principle as Svarog, we might
perhaps suggest – reigning ‘below’ Him rather than ‘after Him’. Dazhbog
beneath Svarog – Viraj beneath Svaraj. The ‘Visible Sun’ beneath the
Sun’s Higher Ultimate Source – depicted as the Sky Father in union with
the Waters that are the liminal sphere upon the edge of reality itself.

Speaking of which, the relevant Yajurveda Hymnal directly regards the
Sky Father deific in question as being Agni (in this case, the ‘Solar
Agni’ – the Fire of the High Heaven(s). Descending also down here onto
Earth to bring Law’s Holy Illumination to us). Hailed in both this and
the surrounding direct-continuation Hymns as being Vishvakarman, Rudra,
Varuna, etc. These assignations of theonyms are not random. They are all
conceptually linked. As I have repeatedly demonstrated witin the course
of my earlier work, these are *all* faces of the Vedic Sky Father. And,
importantly for our purposes, this ‘Fire’ and ‘Forging’ (that is to say,
Agni & Vishvakarman) facing is *directly* relevant for how Svarog is
depicted within the relevant Hypatian Codex excerpt. It all lines up!

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/mikhail-chvalun-svarog-full.jpg?w=1024)

Of further interest for our purposes is what is contained in the
preceding Yajurveda Hymnal (YV TS V 5 3) – wherein it is this set of
actions which the hymns in question are there for, the construction of a
Vedic fire-altar, that enable victory of Law over the forces of Chaos in
a war against demons. The implicit message is quite clear – that the
human havans we even today carry out are ‘eternal returns’ in the
Eliadian sense, Mythic Recurrences, that help to re-immanentize that
enduring victory of Law (Rta, Orlog, Dikaiosune) over Chaos via their
ongoing conduct. Why do I mention this? In part it is because if we cast
our mind back to the Hypatian Codex presentation of Svarog – we find
Svarog as the Bringer of Law. And we *also* find this Law girded via a
‘fiery oven’, with a ‘consuming fire’ housed therein. It is not hard to
see the plausible connexion between a Vedic Fire Altar made of bricks
and housing the Consuming Flame that is Agni, that Upholds the Law via
His Feeding … and Svarog’s Fiery Oven which Upholds the Law – admittedly
via the feeding to it of those who would transgress against same.

This ‘Altar’ concept is also relevant for another reason, as discussed
in my earlier article – “The Cyclopes And The Ribhus Elves – Solar
Smiths of the Sky Father”. Namely, because there appears to be a
standard ‘association’ of archaic Smith God figures with just such an
Altar’s construction. It is something we see with the Hesiodic ‘Ouranian
Cyclopes’ – and it is something we see more especially when we are
speaking of the Vedic Ribhus trio. With the latter, in particular, being
relevant here as They are depicted as carrying out Priestly roles in so
doing. And how do we find Vishvakarman hailed in RV X 81 1? As the
“Hotar-priest, the Rsi, our Father, offering up all things existing” –
indeed, even further, some lines later as the “Lord of \[Divine\]
Speech”, “Vac Pati”.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/deem.jpg?w=1024)

Why does this matter? Because what we are seeing is a figure that is
‘turned into’ a Smith by various Indo-European cultures, and
understandably so – He, after all, does ‘forge’ Laws and the Realm of
which we inhabit. Yet which in essence is something far grander. A
figure Who does not require those symbolic forge-tongs or ringing hammer
to beat the shape of the universe to His Will. For He merely has to
Speak, to Sing, to turn His Thoughts into being. Remember that which I
had said about Sanskrit ‘Svar’ having the meaning of a musical
expression? That is how it is most directly relevant. A “Song-Smith”, a
“Solar-Smith” – a “Shaper” via far more sublime and far more subtle or
sonorous mechanisms than those regarded as commensurate with the role of
a village blacksmith. Yet which is capable of reigning down in thunder
and working with, indeed *embodying outright* the most mightily
all-consuming and all-warming fires of creation – a process which can be
carried out with all the tranquil fury of the storm.

The Slavic reconstructed etymology for Svarog of greatest interest to us
– Svar ,svarъ – is quite literally resounding in this sense. It turns
into, to be sure, terms for ‘strife’ and quarreling – yet its original,
archaic Proto-Indo-European sense, ‘Swer’, is quite different. There, it
is more akin to our modern English “Swear” – and includes this notion,
to ‘speak resoundingly’ \[for example, by ‘swearing an oath’, making a
forceful, vigorous declaration\] within its ambit. In Sanskrit, this
produces ‘Svarati’ (स्वरति ) – which entirely unsurprisingly,
incorporates this aforementioned sense of ‘Singing’, of ‘Prayer’. This
utilization of a term to mean the emanating of forceful sound, sound
with *power* to it, should be expected. Even beyond the ‘true’ sense of
the Empowered Speech of the Sky Father, or the Sonorous Songs of the
Imperial Priest, we have the more mundane echo of the ringing
hammer-upon-anvil of the Smith. The fairly consistent arrival at a
meaning of ‘Strife’ for ‘Svar’ in later Slavic languages is also rather
consistent – with the character of Odin in the Nordic conception of
things, Who most certainly does incite exactly this as part of forging
furtherance to His Design.

Meanwhile, it has been suggested that this Slavic ‘Svar’ also
incorporates terms of a Solar relevance – a Solar radiance, in fact. And
while it would certainly make an eloquent *figurative* sense for the
Sun’s heat and light to be referred to as ‘speaking forcefully’ –
especially in terms of the sweat-inducing nature of toil under just such
a ‘hot’ or an ‘angry’ (svarъ , again) Sun \[c.f the double meaning for
‘Tapas’ in Sanskrit as heat/light but also hard-work conduct\], I am not
so sure how much credence I would place in this in a direct sense. The
Solar Character of Svarog is quite clearly there, and I suspect that
further inquiry into the field of archaic Slavic linguistics would
adduce a linguistic linkage for this without having to run the parallel
Sanskrit etc. upon it, but I am a theologian not a linguist – so I shall
defer to those who are the latter upon the matter.

Certainly, there are an array of slightly differently formulated terms
that may be relevant – Proto-Slavic ‘Variti’, for instance, which refers
to the application of heat to something in the process of creating a
finished product. In modern Czech it is “Svarit”, and refers to the act
of Welding. In this, it would reflect Proto-Slavicsъvariti – a term
directly for the the production of metalwork in a forge.

In addition to these aforementioned probative possibilities around
‘creation’, Vitaly Melnikov has alerted me to another one of a somewhat
different kind: Svarog as ‘Sva+Rozh/Rod”. Sva, as in Sanskrit, meaning
‘Self’ , and ‘Rozh/Rod’ relating to Proto-Slavic ‘Rozhati/Roditi’ ,
which means ‘to give birth’. ‘Svarog’, therefore, would be the
‘Self-Created’, the ‘Self-Born’. Something that accords most strongly
with the Vedic understanding of Vishvakarman, the ‘Heavenly Architect’.
Particularly when hailed in relation to Hiranyagarbha – the Golden Egg
\[c.f RV X 121 1 etc. – although my own interpretation of Hiranyagarbha
is somewhat different and based upon other Vedic sources; I have
considered this in, for instance, the 2019 Ma as Kushmanda Navratri
tribute article\] . It is not at all coincidental that we so frequently
hear mention of just such a ‘Golden Egg’ containing the Supreme Deity in
Slavic creation myths. And I have often thought of this Hiranyagarbha as
having some direct relevancy to the Sun – as this, after all, is a Solar
Sphere that is the ultimate source of all of our life and existence here
upon this Earth of ours.

So which of these linguistic possibilities is it, you might be tempted
to ask? The answer is quite simple: “Yes”. As in – it is *all* of these.
For *all* of them are relevant to our emergent picture of Svarog. They
*all* have strong accordance and concordance with what we *should*
expect of just such a Sky Father as Shaper of the Cosmos figure.

And this renders it all the more remarkable, considering that our only
real attestation for the figure is a single text in various
permutations, wherein the major details have been melded somewhat into a
pseudo-Biblical, pseudo-Greek, pseudo-Egyptian, pseudo-history
mish-mash. Some things, it would seem, still shine through resoundingly
regardless of the inclement weather of their erstwhile obscuration.

However, one important question remains. If Svarog is so ‘self-evident’
in this regard, then where are the *direct* correspondences in the other
Indo-European mythologies? Why is it that this notion of the Sky Father
as ‘Smith’ or as ‘Shaper’ is so rarely encountered elsewhere?

Well, one possibility is that there is a grain of truth to the
frequently encountered theorizing that the mentioning of Hephaestus has
seriously ‘coloured’ if not outright ‘distorted’ the view of the
‘authentic’ Svarog in the minds of us later readers. This is not
impossible, to be sure – but I believe that, as I had explained earlier,
it is not the case of the mentioning of Svarog in the context of
Hephaestus that has introduced the core concept nor characteristics of
Svarog. Rather, it is that these are already intrinsic and immanent to
Him, and have become ‘collapsed’ down to ‘just’ forging and fabrication
via metalwork rather than fire-working in a pious, prayerful context (as
with the Vedic Fire Altar) or Singing/Speaking the Universe into being
and shape. You certainly *can* run this relevant Indo-European deific as
a Smith – and we see some mention of that in the presentation of Tvastr
(Vishvakarman) in Hindu mythology. It is just that this is but one
portion of the spectrum of possible expression thereto. And all of these
things are, ultimately, symbols for truths that are incredibly difficult
for us to express in immediately human-relevant terms.

As applies Hephaestus in particular, I somewhat suspect that in just the
same manner as the ‘Three-Three Split’ I have often written about
previously (wherein the Greeks, potentially under Mess-O-Potamian
influence, inter many alia, ‘split’ their Sky Father figure into three
‘generations’ (Ouranos, Kronos, Zeus), and also into three Brothers
(Zeus, Hades, Poseidon)), it is possible that Hephaestus *might*
represent another ‘split’ – parceling off a portion of these elements
relevant to Him in a single deific. But this is not Hephaestus’ article,
so we shall not get into depth nor detail around the potential
mythological resonancy supports for such a notion.

Meanwhile, as I have said above, amidst the oldest Indo-European mythic
and scriptural canon available to us – that of the Vedas – there is,
indeed, just such a Sky Father as Shaper understanding. It is just that,
as with many things in The Vedas, it is somewhat ‘diffuse’, ‘spread
out’. Requiring of wandering through an array of hymnals and theonyms to
really show how it all cohesively fits together. As is the nature of our
canon. And even where the ‘Smith’ point is most directly relevant, it is
nevertheless also couched amidst other understandings, as is completely
appropriate. It does not “stand out” as bluntly or as blatantly-directly
as does Svarog being written of possessing heavenly forge-tongs.

In the Nordic/Germanic, however, no such ‘Smith’ figure presents
Himself. And there are a few reasons for that, as I considered in
previous works such as “The Cyclopes And The Ribhus Elves – Solar Smiths
of the Sky Father”. Instead, though, we DO have a Lord of the Divine
Speech \[Vac Pati – and note that ‘Pati’ can also mean ‘Husband’, viz
Brihaspati, otherwise known as Galdrfodr\] Who engages in rather vital
acts of reshaping the Cosmos.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/2fda8ce792b450597319a49ec0c05e9f.jpg?w=960)

Per the Gylfaginning – “And Hárr answered: “The sons of Borr slew Ymir
the giant \[…\]They tookYmir and bore him into the middle of the
Yawning Void, and made of him the earth: of his blood the sea and the
waters; the land was made of his flesh, and the crags of his bones;
gravel and stones they fashioned from his teeth and his grinders and
from those bones that were broken.” And Jafnhárr said: “Of the blood,
which ran and welled forth freely out of his wounds, they made the sea,
when they had formed and made firm the earth together, and laid the sea
in a ring round. about her; and it may well seem a hard thing to most
men to cross over it.” Then said Thridi: “They took his skull also, and
made of it the heaven, and set it up over the earth with four corners;
and under each corner they set a dwarf: the names of these are East,
West, North, and South. Then they took the glowing embers and sparks
that burst forth and had been cast out of Múspellheim, and set them in
the midst of the Yawning Void, in the heaven, both above and below, to
illumine heaven and earth. They assigned places to all fires: to some in
heaven, some wandered free under the heavens; nevertheless, to these
also they gave a place, and shaped them courses. \[…\]Then said
Gangleri: These are great tidings which I now hear; that is a wondrous
great piece of craftsmanship, and cunningly made. How was the earth
contrived?” And Hárr answered: “She is ring-shaped without, and round
abouther without lieth the deep sea; and along the strand of that sea
they gave lands to the races of giants for habitation. But on the inner
earth they made a citadel round about the world against the hostility of
the giants, and for their citadel they raised up the brows of Ymir the
giant, and called that place Midgard. They took also his brain and cast
it in the air, and made from it the clouds”.

As we can quite clearly see, Odin and company engage in a rather
strife-involving ‘shaping of the Cosmos’.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/b9f654220203d9561c1808d446ca7025.jpg?w=454)

And, for further interest, the next portion of the Gylfaginning deals
with the Creation of Man. Something that, in other and rather earlier
Germanic perspective, is instead regarded as the act of Tuisto as Divine
Father to Mannus. As I have demonstrated in the course of the Sons of
the Sun series, the underlying Indo-European typology of which this
speaks has the Sky Father as the original progenitor of Man (a sense
preserved in the Ask and Embla anthropogenesis myth amongst the Norse
via the role of Odin in same). Tuisto, therefore, should be a Solar
figure. A ‘Solar Smith’? Perhaps not so directly (woodcarving is not
smithing, either, if we are being specific). Yet Tuisto quite plausibly
links to Tvastr – and Tvastr, as we have seen elsewhere, has just such a
role within the Vedic mythology, aligned with/as Vishvakarman. Perhaps
the Luwian ‘Tiwaz’ (not to be confused with the Nordic/Germanic Tiwaz)
Who is known to them as ‘Father Sun’ is also relevant here. But again –
another matter for another time.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/ml_4.jpg?w=600)

The point is – even though it seems quite clear that the Nordic/Germanic
position on Smithing means that it had fallen from the conceptual
lexicon to easily describe via shorthand the ‘Shaping’ activities of the
Sky Father and associated Aesir … the *underlying* activities, the
essences of these, are nevertheless still to be found within the Nordic
canon and corpus. And, if I might say, arguably in more ‘pure’
expression in some particulars – arcening back towards the ‘Priestly’
understanding also found in the Vedas and somewhat residually in certain
Greek texts. Wherein it is the Song, the Speech, and the Slaying that
make the Universe – and Us within it – both what, and who, we are
today.

So, in sum, Svarog is a fantastically intriguing figure. Not merely
because it requires all of this comparative Indo-European mythology,
theology, and linguistics in order to actually extract something
‘meaningful’, something ‘true’ from a seriously degraded single-mention
of many centuries ago. But because what we *can* see, even in something
that is otherwise regardable as ‘mangled’ nearly to the point of
non-recognition … is something which at once conforms and confirms with
our Indo-European understanding of the Mythic Divine.

Whether we mean ‘Svar’ as in ‘Resounding’, or we mean ‘Svar’ as in
‘Brightly Shining’ – in Svarog, it would appear, the Truth radiates out
even from behind the euhemeric dark-age cloud.

Hail to the World-Maker.  
Jai Vishvakarman.
