+++
title = "THE WAGES OF SIN – NEMESIS Coin from the reign of Marcus Aurelius – Arte-Factsxa0#8"
date = "September 13, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/119284511_706668173278843_7617694385755790913_n.png?w=564)

Every so often, I see a coin of the Ancient World – and something about
it resonates with me strongly. They may or may not be the most aesthetic
or best-preserved numismatic … but it always turns out that there’s
something powerful to them which is worth sharing to a broader audience.

This particular drachma proved to be no exception. I’d been on the hunt
for glorious Gryphon art from the Indo-Iranian sphere (that is to say,
our longstanding friends, the Scythians) – and there it was.

Initially, I merely thought it a slightly peculiar – yet ultimately
understandable – place to find a Gryphon. The Griffin is, after all, the
well-renowned ‘Guardian of the Gold’ in the Greek conception of the far
edges of the world – and we can clearly see upon this magnificent
example, even following the wearing down of time, the ‘Grupos’, the
‘Curved Beak’ which informs the Gryphon’s dominant feature in the
Classical verse upon the subject.

To quote Aeschylus in Prometheus Bound – “Be on thy guard against the
Gryphons, the keen-mouthed unbarking hounds of Zeus, and the one-eyed
Arimaspian host, who dwell around the stream flowing-with-gold, the
ferry of Plouton.” Some translations instead render the relevant portion
as “Beware of the sharp-beaked hounds of Zeus that do not bark, the
Grypes”.

Yet there is more going on with this iconography upon this coin than we
might otherwise presume – for if you look closely, this is a *female*
Gryphon. And at the base, ‘neath Her Mighty Paw – we have the Wheel (of
Justice).

Ladies and gentlemen, this is no mere heraldic Gryphon … ’tis Nemesis in
Gryphon form !

Now if you are slightly puzzled by this, allow me to explain.

We often find mention for particular Gods appearing in certain forms and
shapes – sometimes these are anthropomorphic, other times these are
other sorts of creatures entirely. If the latter, then it is often a
sort of shape which has some iconographic saliency in the surrounding
conceptry of the Deity, Their myths and cultic practice. Hence why it’s
regarded as a prominent Form of the Deity in the first place.

And often we find that there is some metaphoric meaning as well to the
reasoning for the shape – the Keen Eyesight and Lofty Heavenly Dominion
of the Eagle as ‘King of the Skies’, for instance, helping to explain
the Indo-European Sky Father so frequently being found identified with
the Eagle or appearing in Eagle form.

In this particular instance, there is a recurrent feature of particular
Greek Goddesses having Gryphons represented iconographically with Them.
Hera and Athena both have Gryphons mentioned in relation to the
incredibly elaborate artistry of sacred artefacts to Them. Nemesis, too,
is hailed as having a Gryphon for Her Vahana (‘Vehicle’/’Mount’) – or as
having an entire team of Gryphons pulling Her Chariot.

We also see, further to the East across both Steppe and Spires of
Mountains, the Hindu Shaivite understanding of the Gryphonic Ashu Garuda
– the Swift Raptor – as a Form or Emissary or perhaps Emanation of
Shiva. The Indo-European Sky Father’s most prominent modern
Deific-Expression being He Who Wields The (Three)Spear.

The general symbolism of the Gryphon is that it is both the Sentinel of
the Sky Father’s Realm, and the Guardian of the Gods’ dominion.

It brings together the elements of the Eagle and of the Lion which
renders it the King of Beasts of both Air and Land. Its rule – the
symbolism thereof, at any rate – can extend *anywhere*. With the
eyesight to immediately espy any transgressors, and both beak and
leonine qualities to rend to shreds those who would offend against the
Divine Order.

Rather like Nemesis, in fact – Who can go anywhere, is *always*
listening and watching \[indeed, there’s a recurrent trend in Greek
verse of having somebody do something egregiously and deliberately
improper, followed by the narrator observing that Nemesis takes note of
the now-doomed character’s words … \] , and has the ultimate regal power
in the universe – that of the Cosmic, Divine Law – to enforce with.

It therefore makes eminent sense for Nemesis to be depicted in such a
manner – and, indeed, even were it not for the surrounding iconographic
and mythic saliency of the subject, we have a number of further sculpted
representations of the Nemesis-Gryphon to help to inform our reading of
this excellent coin.

A rendering which, even though it has become considerably worn down via
the passage of time , nevertheless retains an eminent power and majesty
to it. Just as we should expect .

Truly, this is a ‘Crown’ (in the old sense of a Coin being worth
something, in part, due to the stamp of the Sovereign and Law thereupon)
.
