+++
title = "Shiva Is Not Indra – A Response To A Grave Mythunderstanding"
date = "September 24, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/bczlv63caaevwyu.jpg?w=1024)

It has come to my attention that there is a curious misbelief out there
– that Shiva is somehow Indra. As in, the post-Vedic Deity Shiva is a
‘continuation’ of the Vedic Indra under a somewhat different name.

I thought that this was merely a matter of some people being a bit
misinformed – yet as it turns out there is some academic support for
this view. Although given the ‘support’ in question comes from Professor
Wendy Doniger – a figure who is regarded as ‘controversial’ at best in
Hindu circles – that hardly commends the thought as valid.

Indeed, it often can seem that there is a certain sort of academic – as
with a certain sort of armchair commentator – who will often wilfully
push what should otherwise rightfully be relegated to ‘fringe theories’,
because it is an easy way to ‘stand out’.

But this is not about that. This is about a critical appraisal and
response to the claims that Indra is somehow Shiva.

So what is the evidence cited in favour of such a proposition ?

Well, Doniger’s approach – which appears to inform a fair few of the
people pushing this perspective – has actually been somewhat
misrepresented. It is still wrong, and we shall get to how that is in a
moment, but the perils of Wikipedia mean that people have taken at face
value the line upon the relevant page: “According to Wendy Doniger, the
Puranic Shiva is a continuation of the Vedic Indra”, and presumed that
this is accurate. Both in terms of the theology, and in terms of its
presentation of Doniger’s own views.

As applies the latter, Doniger’s actual perspective is rather more
nuanced – in “Siva: The Erotic Ascetic”, she goes through a number of
Vedic Gods, and effectively tries to make the argumend that the
post-Vedic figure of Shiva is ‘drawing from’ each of these as something
of a syncretic God.

Of course, Doniger has a bit of a mono-myopia (that is to say, she is
perhaps ironically – given the subject-matter – rather one-eyed), and
insists upon reading the entire thing through a ‘Freudian’ lense as
repetitive layers of sexual metaphor. Which is not to say that there is
no sexual metaphor to be found in the Vedas or in later Hindu texts –
only that it is a rather limited mind and limited grasp which insists on
reducing seemingly everything down thereto.

So, for Doniger, Rudra is regarded as a God of Death (accurate –
although incomplete), and therefore celibate and anti-procreative. Thus
requiring Shiva to have sourced His Fatherly and romantically engaged
elements from somewhere else, some other Vedic era God. She chooses
(inter alia) Indra. And whilst it is unquestionably true that Indra is
heavily amorous (in the manner, perhaps, resemblant of the Greek Zeus …
but also the Greco-Roman Hercules) ; Doniger is, in effect,
manufacturing an artificial opening to forcibly jam her pet theory
into.

Rudra has long had an association with Life, and its bestowal. A
capacity given as inheritance to His Two Sons – The Asvin
Hero-Horse-Healer Twins. And which we might also find recalled when
considering Rudra-Shiva as Soma, Soumya. Certainly, it may also be seen
in the association of Rudra as the “Rain-Pourer” \[RV VI 66 3\].

Rudra also has a most eloquent Wife, indeed – Vak; occasionally
described in terms of a Cow. Prisni, the Mother of the Maruts to Rudra,
is a name meaning (inter alia) exactly that.

All of these things are exactly what we should expect, given that Rudra
is Dyaus Pitar \[a fact attested in multiple Vedic statements upon the
matter\] – the Indo-European Sky Father. And a Father is a Father
precisely because He bestows (half of) Life.

So, as you can see, Doniger’s theorizing falls over at the first hurdle.
She has set up a straw-man by claiming that the Vedic Rudra lacks
certain characteristics, in order to require these to be ‘provided’ to
the post-Vedic Shiva via assimilation from some other Vedically
prominent Deity. And in order to do that, she has omitted quite a swathe
of Vedic evidence upon the matter, the Indo-European comparative
mythology, and the clear theological understanding which unites both.

But in fairness to Doniger, it is not only the ‘fertility’ or
‘life-bestowing’ portfolio area which she draws upon in service of her
argument.

She also cites the Maruts – suggesting that the Maruts may “at first
belong to Rudra, but they and their acts are so Indra-like that they
come to be regarded as the brothers or companions of Indra. Thus,
historically, Indra may be said to have ‘adopted’ the Maruts.”

Except here’s the thing. The Maruts, as we have seen, are Rudra’s Sons
by Prisni. This is directly and repeatedly stated in the Vedic canon.
Rudra is Dyaus Pitar. Dyaus Pitar is the Father of Indra. A situation
mirrored more generally via the comparative Indo-European typology –
wherein the Sky Father is the Father of the Striker/Thunderer \[consider
Odin & Thor, Zeus & Herakles, etc.\].

So of *course* we are going to expect the Maruts to be regarded as
somewhat ‘fraternal’, ‘brotherly’ to Indra – for that is quite literally
the case. It does not mean that Indra has “adopted” the Maruts for Him
to be hailed as foremost amongst Them. Especially given the Puranic-era
mythology which Doniger quotes immediately after this peculiar
contention, which directly undermines her point by citing Shiva as
Father of the Maruts – and Shiva as Rudra in relation to this.

She then proceeds to attempt to establish that the multi-eyed
characteristic of Shiva and the multi-“eyed” characteristic of Indra as
, again , being coterminous. And, perhaps more to the point, as having
erotic impetus. Which, in the case of Indra, is certainly apt – the tale
is well known of the sage Gautama cursing Indra to sprout a thousand
“eye-shaped” parts of the female anatomy all over His body. A sort of
contra-passo / ironic punishment for His attempting to seduce the Sage’s
wife, causing the ‘outer shape’ of Indra to mirror what was dominating
His mind. And which is symbolically referenced as applies the account of
Indra relative to the Celestial Nymph Tilottama – wherein these turn
into genuine ‘eyes’ due to Indra’s lustful gazing towards Tilottama.

Or, per another recounting, the yonis turn to eyes following Indra’s
repenting of His sinful disposition in this regard, performing
appropriate penance, and correspondingly being granted the boon of this
transposition. Which matters, because this *does* speak to a potential
linkage of Indra and Shiva – albeit not at all in the manner that
Doniger seems to think it does.

You see, the Indo-European Sky Father is well-known to be All-Seeing.
Whether with the One All-Seeing Eye (often identified with the Sun), or
the Thousand Eyes (Spies) in the Sky as well as Elsewhere (I have
tentatively suggested the Stars in the former regard ; Birds often in
the latter ; and Sunbeams in both). It is one useful rubric with which
to assess whether a particular figure is linked back to this underlying
God.

There is good reason for this, and at some point I intend to write more
upon this subject directly – but for now it is enough to note that it is
a characteristic of the ideal king, the ideal ruler. Seeing all, knowing
all, which goes on within His Kingdom.

Now as applies Indra … it is my personal interpretation of affairs that
Indra is a Prince Who has some ‘growing up to do’ afore being ready to
Rule. Oddly enough, the character arc of the comic-book derived Thor in
the first few Marvel movies upon the subject is quite a good
illustration of this concept.

Indra being cursed with an ironic and mocking echo of what is required
of a ruler , one thousand ‘eye-shaped’ yonis rather than one thousand
genuine eyes , is a statement that Indra has a character flaw which He
must overcome. The transmutation of these to Eyes following His
Penitence, is a sign that He has indeed made meaningful progress toward
this goal. And thus, in His Own Way, is becoming more akin to His Divine
Father: The Emperor of the Worlds.

I am unaware of where Doniger is getting the notion of Indra as
“Three-Eyed”; it is not impossible that it is some obscure Hindu belief,
but it is the first I had heard of it. When the motif occurs in
sculpture (as distinct from scripture) – it is meant as an illustrative
shorthand for the ‘thousand-eyed’ characteristic of Shiva due to the
difficulty and unaesthetic nature of attempting to represent all of
these upon Him; and is pointedly rendered *horizontally* rather than
vertically so as to avoid confusion with the *actual* Third Eye of
Shiva. And, in any case, I am not sure how the (Destructive) Eye of
Shiva would represent a coterminity with Indra, if Doniger is insistent
upon the notion of Indra as ‘creative’ force.

The next portion of Doniger’s argument consists of a rather peculiar
insistence that, in essence, because both Indra and Shiva are married,
because both Indra and Shiva have sex, and because both Indra and Shiva
kill people … that these are therefore the same deity. Most of these
paragraphs consist of Doniger rattling off mythology around Indra, and
then claiming whatever characteristic illustrated in the myth in
question is one ‘inherited’ by Shiva. Occasionally a rather loose
figurative relation to the Shaivite mythology may be attempted.

To put it bluntly, it does not make for very compelling reading. And
Heaven Help Us (quite literally) if the only way one winds up with a
romantic relationship is by virtue of being Indra !

Now, to go further with this debunking – it is necessary to note that
what is said on Wikipedia of Doniger’s argument … doesn’t quite line up
with what is actually in her book that is supposedly being cited from.
It is possible that the elements in question I could not find there were
in a subsequent edition, or that the Wikipedia editor in question was
somewhat wilfully over-reading. It does not matter. What DOES matter is
that people keep citing these things as having shaped and informed their
own (mis)belief upon the matter – and that just simply will not do. So
therefore, in a spirit of completeness, here’s what Wiki says:

“Doniger gives several reasons for her hypothesis. Both are associated
with mountains, rivers, male fertility, fierceness, fearlessness,
warfare, the transgression of established mores, the Aum sound, the
Supreme Self.”

As I say, I am unsure quite what the detail is to most of these
references … because they are not actually in Doniger’s cited work
referenced. But it occurs that the notion of “fierceness, fearlessness,
warfare” making Indra out to be Shiva is … peculiar, in the extreme.
These are characteristics of a combative martial deity, certainly. It is
just that few Indo-European Pantheonic expressions possess but a single
one of these. Indeed, usually *many* if not *most* of the Gods of a
given Indo-European people are thought of in something approaching such
terms. One may as well utilize these to attempt to argue that Athena is
Ares or Apollo. Or that Thor is Odin. You get the idea.

Although I say “something approaching such terms” – as the
“fearlessness” angle is not strictly apt for Indra in Vedic
characterization – hence, for instance, the occasion wherein He bargains
with Vayu so that the latter may go forth in order to check whether
Vritra is truly dead.

It is difficult to comment in depth nor detail about the “mountains,
rivers” alleged association, without actually knowing what is meant by
this. If I were to put words into Doniger and/or this Wiki editor’s
mouth, I would presume that it is the association of Indra with a figure
by the name of Parvat \[‘Mountain’ (male)\] – a male adventuring
companion, perhaps comparable in some ways to those Hymnals wherein
Indra and Brihaspati (Shiva) working together slay some epic monster.
This is not the Parvati \[‘Mountain’ (female)\] that Shiva is married
to; nor is it the Mountains where Shiva is often to be found. The
Riverine association is even broader in what it does not distinctly
describe – as many Vedic Gods have some degree of river linkage, all
depending upon the particular form and context of the individual
reference for what is actually meant by this.

As for “the Aum sound, the Supreme Self” – this is perhaps somewhat
valid, as a statement of Hindu theology … insofar as, again, you can
somewhat legitimately regard most Hindu Gods as having these
associations. It is literally part of our theology as soon as the
monistic conception is heavily introduced. It does not demarkate an
especial coterminity of Indra and Shiva. It also does not take into
consideration the further theological concerns around particular Deities
as being ‘closer’ to the ‘supreme’ – or, we might say, with deference to
the excellent observation of Sayana , a particular Deity being the
*in-universe* expression of the Supreme. An attribute not exactly held
by others – whether by difference of kind, or merely by difference of
extent/degree.

Wiki goes on to add: “In the Rig Veda the term śiva is used to refer to
Indra. \[…\] Indra, like Shiva, is likened to a bull \[…\] In the Rig
Veda, Rudra is the father of the Maruts, but he is never associated with
their warlike exploits as is Indra.” And adds a footnote around a
perceived “lack of warlike conduct” for Shiva.

All of which is wrong by implication and interpretation – or, in the
case of a “lack of warlike conduct” for Shiva, just direct and flat-out
wrong.

As applies the term of ‘Siva’ being utilized for Indra … this is not
entirely unexpected. ‘Shiva’ is both a theonym, as well as a more
general adjective. It is possible for Indra to be referred to as having
an ‘auspicious’ or ‘positive’ facing – without this making Indra the
‘core’ of modern-day Shiva. One may as well assert that because both
Saraswati and Indra are hailed as Vritrahan – Slayer of Vritra – that
this makes Saraswati and Indra the same God. It just simply does not
work that way. Figures can bear similar epithets, similar qualities –
without being the same.

A caveat which presumably also applies to the “Bull” referencing.
Wherein while it IS true that we have good grounds to utilize ‘Bull’
symbolism in both intra- and inter- Indo-European pantheonic analysis …
to state that just because there is a “Bull” symbol or expression linked
to both makes Them the same God would imply that the symbolic
connotations of the Bull must be unique and distinct and uniquely tied
to only a single Deity (per pantheon, presumably). That the Son of the
Sky Father cannot inherit any of these. And that, for instance, NandiJi
might also be one or both figures via virtue of being a Bull.

The Warlike Conduct qualification, as I have stated, is patently in
error. In the course of the MythoLinguistics of War series, I have
repeatedly illustrated this – BhutAtman as Shiva literally meaning
“War”, for example; or The Manyu as the mightiest of the Hindu War Gods
– a form of Rudra-Shiva (occurring in both the Vedic and the Puranic
layers of scripture), acting as the empowering champion of The Gods in a
war against the Daityas. Who could forget, as well, VeeraBhadra, an
emanation-emissary of Shiva and accompanied by RudraKali, leading the
war-hosts of Maruts and other Servants of Shiva against the rest of the
Pantheon assembled for the Horse-Sacrifice of Daksha.

There is a reason that the modern-day Nepali Army have the Trishula as
their emblem. And every year upon MahaShivRatri parade as the Bhole Ki
Baraat – the armed procession, the warrior retinue of Shiva.

And speaking of the Trishula – there is one further aspect requiring our
address. For this, too, is occasionally cited (somehow) as evidence of
some fundamental coterminity of Indra and Shiva. On grounds that both
the Trishula and the Vajra are what we might term ‘regal’ emblems, regal
devices. This is not wrong … but what is wrong is to insist that Indra
bears the device that is the Trishula – even though, strictly speaking,
the Trishula also is symbolically equivalent in the hands of Mahadev or
Mahadevi , to the Vajra.

Confused? So are many people, evidently. Allow me to exclaim.

The Trishula is an example of what we would call the World-spear –
cognate with Odin’s Gungnir , etc. ; although is also charged with the
same potency as the Vajra, and is functionally rather equivalent.

That potency, that energy, is the ‘force of cosmic law’. The metaphysics
of this expression hinge around Sayana’s excellent identification of
Brahman-As-Rta (‘Cosmic Law as The Absolute’); which thus helps to
explicate the ‘gatekeeper’ role played by Saraswati Vak in the bestowing
of the Vajra unto Indra. She isresponsible for the ‘preparation’ or
‘unlocking’ of this weapon from ‘The Waters’ – i.e. the ‘outer sphere’
of the universe beyond which is where the Vajra comes from, and where
Brahman-as-Absolute-Law is. This is where Devi is from, utterly
uncoincidentally.

The Vajra wielded by Indra is a percussive weapon – a mace or club ,
like Thor’s Mjolnir … because that is the form of the energy when
wielded by the Striker/Thunderer Indo-European deific \[think Herakles
with His Club , for example\]. There IS RigVedic attestation for Rudra
wielding (a) Vajra – although whilst the Jamison/Brereton translation
renders this rather unresonantly as ‘mace’ – the Griffith translation is
superior in its decision to hail it for what it actually, truly is.
Thunder. A quality – weaponized or otherwise – that we should, of
course, expect to find in connexion with the Indo-European Sky Father.
For what would Jupiter be in our popular imagination sans His
Thunderbolt.

In any case, as I considered in rather greater depth in “DE-MIST-IFYING
PARJANYA – DISTANCING PERKWUNOS” – it is true that the Striker/Thunderer
and the Sky Father *both* make use of Thunder weaponry. Which does NOT
make these the same Deity. It simply expresses that there is a Thunder
characteristic to the expression of Both’s rage and power. Just as the
bearing by Devi of a Vajra , or indeed another Vajra-equivalent device
such as the Trishula Itself or the Khatvanga occasionally depicted
borne by Kali , does not render these Goddess-forms as Indra. Or, in the
realms of the Greek Mythology, Athena’s wielding of the Thunderbolt
\[specifically, the direct equivalent of the Thunderbolt utilized by
Zeus – it is interesting to note that She is also hailed as wearing the
Gorgoneion and Aegis also borne by Zeus\] does not somehow make Athena
to be Hercules – even despite both being present at and playing integral
role in the Hydra-Slaying.

The World-Spear is quite literally that. It is the Axis Mundi in
weaponized form – and is piercing in its character. The Per-cussive
weapon of the Striker/Thunderer manifests differently. Both are, after a
form, charged with a similar energy, from the same ultimate (and that is
*exactly* the right word) source.

Although speaking of Vajras … there is one way that the assertion of
Indra and Shiva equivalency is almost … accidentally semi-correct.

Namely, the figure of Bajrangi – that is to say, Lord Hanuman.  
Hanuman is Son of Shiva (Vayu) , and is also regarded as an Avatar of
Him .  
And, as we know from a certain RigVedic Hymnal upon the subject , the
Monkey God and Indra are one and the same. As if the name and parentage
and other such features were not direct clue enough already.

However, that is not at all the sort of coterminity being pushed by the
proponents of Indra as Shiva . Indeed, it is quite the opposite in some
ways – as it recognizes that Hanuman is a descendant of Shiva. Perhaps
implicitly referencing (in somewhat truncated format) the Patrilineal
Reincarnation concept so familiar to us from the Nordic
mytho-metaphysics.

In any case, I am not quite sure why this suggestion of “Indra as Shiva”
keeps being made. There is no good evidence for it. There is quite a lot
of evidence pointedly *against* it. The major place people seem to be
getting it from (Wikipedia) is not actually presenting a viable argument
for it – it is not even representing the source-material it is drawing
from to try and make such a claim accurately. And said source material –
at least as applies Doniger’s “contribution” is … worrisome in the
extreme.

In order to actually try and believe, much less openly advocate, for
Indra as Shiva – you need to blatantly ignore a rather appreciably
substantial array of the actual and direct Vedic and later Hindu
theology upon the matter , as well as the broader Indo-European
comparative analysis and modelling which confirms the accuracy of the
Vedic model.

Which should prove no trouble for these sorts of people. They would much
rather, it seems, bask in the false-radiance of the notoriety of making
‘controversial’ claims and presenting things that needlessly upend
orthodoxy so as to be ‘in on the secret’, rather than exploring our
mythology – our religion(s) with accuracy.

I WOULD say that “they can safely be ignored” by the pious in
consequence – except that is not really true. The number of people in or
adjacent to religious circles, who are making well-meaning enquiries and
propositions of this nature demonstrates that there is some degree of
influence for these voracious voice-holes upon people undertaking
genuine and good-faith (in aspiration) efforts within the religious
sphere.

They are less “Edgy” than they are “Ergi”; and fundamentally,
foundationally “Egregious” all the way down.

And therefore, responding to their calumny is required – so that others
are not lead astray in consequence.

Hail To The Sky Father – And Also To His Son.

Bajrang Bali Ki Jaye !

ॐ नमः शिवाय
