+++
title = "“I Bend the Bow for Rudra that His Arrow May Strike and Slay the Hater of Devotion” – On Ugra Manyu And Perhaps Angraxa0Mainyu"
date = "September 11, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/c77aefadb80f01cf57208a7f538c6b80.jpg?w=506)

\[Author’s Note: This continues our excerpts series from #MahaShivRatri
And The Mytholinguistics Of War – The Mind, The Mania, The Manyu. In
this extract, we take a look at what’s probably one of the *least*
surprising potential Zoroastrian literal-demonizations of a Vedic Deity
– the War God charged with the protection of piety against ‘the hater of
devotion’, Who just so happens to have a *remarkably* similar name and
other associations to the demon the Zoroastrians regarded with greatest
fear.\]

However, to but briefly speak of those who may, perhaps, have found
themselves on the*other end*of the Wrathful Protector of Devotion’s
militant attentions … it has long been readily apparent to linguists and
mythographers that there has been some form of cross-cultural schism
between the two key Indo-Iranian religious spheres which have survived
relatively intact for us down to this day – those being the Zoroastrians
on the one hand, and the Hindus on the other; with the latter, in my
considered opinion representing the ‘continuation’ of much of what was
represented in the pre-Zoroastrian Indo-Iranian mythoreligious orthodoxy
…. and the Zoroastrians, by contrast, occurring as a deliberate
subversive ‘reform’ effort which sought to break away, and seemingly
downright*invert*key element of that aforementioned and afore-existing
dominant sphere of belief.

Academics have gone back and forth over the years as to how salient this
or that causative factor is likely to have been in all of this – with
some attempting to explain the entire thing away as almost a
(pseudo-linguistic) coincidence in a bid to downplay the potential for
‘Nationalistic’ readings of ancient history; however regardless of
whether one falls into that camp, or whether one views the scriptural
and linguistic evidence together as supporting the concept of an
attempted religious usurpation/insurrection occurring … it cannot be
ignored that this aforementioned ‘mytholinguistic’ suite of evidence
recalls a trenchant animosity from the Zoroastrian-Persianate grouping
against the Indo-Aryan religion and the language which resultingly,
inextricably bears it. I have considered this in more expansive detail
in several of my previous works \[for instance, the relatively recent
“Aesir-Vanir, Asura-Deva, but also A’Sura, Daeva”\], and so shall not
reiterate that material here, except to note that as briefly explored in
my article on the Scythian burial at Pazyryk – that the Zoroastrians
appear to have reserved some of their greatest dread and would-be
vilification for Shiva-Rudra, and the accompanying #GangSteppe spear/bow
armed wind-rider Harrying, Harrowing deific complex.

Suffice to say, that in addition to the relatively well-known “Deva –
Daeva” correspondence-but-also-contratemps \[wherein the term for “God”
(Shining One) found right the way across the Indo-European World – in
Nordic as ‘-Tyr’, in Latin as ‘Deus’, etc. … has somehow become one for
‘False God’, ‘Demon’, in the liturgical languages of the Zoroastrians\],
we also have the perhaps rather amusing further correspondence:

To quote myself on the subject:

“In Sanskrit, one of the words for ‘Army’ is ‘Sena’ – सेना. Now, the
cognate terms for this in Avestan and Old Persian, are ‘Haena’ and 𐏃𐎡𐎴𐎠
\[‘Haina’\] respectively. \[The ‘S’ => ‘H’ sound-shift between Indian
and Iranian languages is well attested – c.f, for example, and not at
all coincidentally, “Asura” => “Ahura”\].

Why am I finding this amusing? Well, you see, in these Iranian languages
… “Haena” means “hostile army”. So … we say “Army”. They hear “Hostile
Army”.

Or, in other words … They Remember.

Now, as it happens, a veer-y similar situation occurs in Finnish around
Old Norse: “Herja” (‘raiding’) – which, in Finnish, means “thing to run
away from really fast”. Well, “predator”, “demon”, “malefic spirit”,
\[interestingly, particularly of the throat\], “villain”, you get the
idea … –

Because they,*too*,*remember*“

How does this pertain to The Manyu? Well, on one level, it should
already be more than readily apparent. What is The Manyu – the Mighty
Arch-Militant God. The Slayer of Foes and the Smiter of the Hater of
(proper, pious) Devotion. He presides over the Holy Army of the Vedic
Arya; with a rank and a role that would more properly be termed
‘Emperor’ in the old sense – that is, “Imperator”. Or, perhaps if we
were speaking Old Norse, Herjan. And I have chosen that translation
quite deliberately, as it is also a well-attested Theonym of Lord Odin.
Fitting, as The Manyu is Rudra (or, insofar as it is a distinction along
a spectrum of being, the ‘Roaring, Passionate-Zeal Infused War-Spirit’
Emanation of Same); and Rudra is Odin – in form, in function, in manner,
in method, and in meaning (with, it should be said, a few shades of
cultural ‘translation’ heer and there).

So it should be unsurprising to find that the Zoroastrians also appear
to have an understanding, an appreciation of The Manyu as one of those
aforementioned ‘Names To Run Away From Really Fast’ – or \[because\]
Veer-y Fast, as the case may be.

This being “Angra Mainyu” – the “Mainyu” term being*directly*cognate
with Sanskrit “Manyu”; while “Angra” appears to share etymology with the
Sanskrit “अस्र” \[‘Asra’ – Tear\]. The notion of a Crying (or, if you
like,*Roaring*) (High) Spirit, described as the Chief of the Daevas,
speculated in some academic sources to have some degree of linkage with
Vayu-Vata, and with a pointed association in various texts with concepts
of Darkness \[or, as we would say in Sanskrit – ‘Kaal’\] and Time \[but,
then, I repeat myself – at least in Sanskrit\] especially as source of
the being’s emanation. There are other potential etymologies for
“Angra”, of course – in particular, the same roots as contemporaneous
Sanskrit terms for the Throwing or Shooting of weapons, and the Slaying
and Smiting thus carried out. Of further interest and import for our
analysis, is the later attestations we have for Angra Mainyu as having
presided over the creation of the Peacock. Which matters not so much
because it has become a symbol of India – nor even because the Peacock,
as seen in a certain Greek myth upon the subject, is the bearer of the
‘Thousand Eyes’ \[a well-known characteristic of the Sky Father\] … but
because the Peacock is*also*the emblem, the ensign, and the Vahana
\[‘Vehicle’\] of Lord Skanda. Who is Lord Skanda? Why, the Son of Shiva,
the Lord of War, the Charger, the Shooter, \[His Name has etymological
and meaning-field connexions with both; and it can clearly be seen how
His habitual modus operandi as a mounted warrior bearing spear, closely
accords with each – especially together\], the Commander of the Armies
of the Heavenly Host, brought into being to strike down with great
vengeance and furious Ugra upon a particular dire demonic threat to the
DevaRajya and thusly upheld Order of the Cosmos \[Rta\]. Or, in other
words and more succinctly – “This is the happy Warrior; this is He/ That
every man in arms should wish to be”; and likely the latter,
(post-)Puranic age emblematic expression for the vitally integral Hindu
(human, as well as more-than) Armies of the Deva-Worshippers.

Now, it should be outright stated here that I am not suggesting somebody
go out and suddenly start worshiping “Angra Mainyu”. I am also
definitely not suggesting there is a precise and proven ‘identification’
that has been made here, which might support such aforementioned
objectionable conduct. One should never enter into the worshiping of
demons; and one should exercise great caution when approaching what goes
on in the mythological corpuses of another culture, lest by
irrepressible over-confidence, some over-stepping equation is made which
portends dire consequence as a fairly direct result. And besides, there
is utterly no need for such ‘transgressive’ behavior. For if I am
correct in my hypothesized linkage above – that The Manyu, as the
effective hypostasis of all that the Zoroastrian religious ‘reformers’
of the day would have hated and feared in the Indo-Iranian religious
orthodox which they were attempting to rebel against and break away
from, and therefore that they may have reasonably directly ‘demonized’
The Manyu as*the*Adversary against which they would spend their lives
to contend – then there is no need to speak positively nor piously of
“Angra Mainyu”. For we*already*have hymnals and offerings to The
Manyu, The Manyu Who Is Rudra; Temples and grand rites unto Shiva, and
to Odin. And if I am incorrect in what I have potentially suggested –
then it is well to avoid positive regard for “Angra Mainyu” anyway, on
point of general principle; and be thankful that we have such prominent
and powerful patron-protector Deities against the demonic foe.
