---
title: WORK AND ITS SECRET

---
<div>

[←](../volume_1/lectures_and_discourses/practical_religion_breathing_and_meditation.htm)
[Home](../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) /
[Volume 2](volume_2_contents.htm) / [→](the_powers_of_the_mind.htm)

  

## WORK AND ITS SECRET

(*Delivered at Los Angeles, California, January 4, 1900*)

One of the greatest lessons I have learnt in my life is to pay as much
attention to the means of work as to its end. He was a great man from
whom I learnt it, and his own life was a practical demonstration of this
great principle I have been always learning great lessons from that one
principle, and it appears to me that all the secret of success is there;
to pay as much attention to the means as to the end.

Our great defect in life is that we are so much drawn to the ideal, the
goal is so much more enchanting, so much more alluring, so much bigger
in our mental horizon, that we lose sight of the details altogether.

But whenever failure comes, if we analyse it critically, in ninety-nine
per cent of cases we shall find that it was because we did not pay
attention to the means. Proper attention to the finishing,
strengthening, of the means is what we need. With the means all right,
the end must come. We forget that it is the cause that produces the
effect; the effect cannot come by itself; and unless the causes are
exact, proper, and powerful, the effect will not be produced. Once the
ideal is chosen and the means determined, we may almost let go the
ideal, because we are sure it will be there, when the means are
perfected. When the cause is there, there is no more difficulty about
the effect, the effect is bound to come. If we take care of the cause,
the effect will take care of itself. The realization of the ideal is the
effect. The means are the cause: attention to the means, therefore, is
the great secret of life. We also read this in the Gita and learn that
we have to work, constantly work with all our power; to put our whole
mind in the work, whatever it be, that we are doing. At the same time,
we must not be attached. That is to say, we must not be drawn away from
the work by anything else; still, we must be able to quit the work
whenever we like.

If we examine our own lives, we find that the greatest cause of sorrow
is this: we take up something, and put our whole energy on it — perhaps
it is a failure and yet we cannot give it up. We know that it is hurting
us, that any further clinging to it is simply bringing misery on us;
still, we cannot tear ourselves away from it. The bee came to sip the
honey, but its feet stuck to the honey-pot and it could not get away.
Again and again, we are finding ourselves in that state. That is the
whole secret of existence. Why are we here? We came here to sip the
honey, and we find our hands and feet sticking to it. We are caught,
though we came to catch. We came to enjoy; we are being enjoyed. We came
to rule; we are being ruled. We came to work; we are being worked. All
the time, we find that. And this comes into every detail of our life. We
are being worked upon by other minds, and we are always struggling to
work on other minds. We want to enjoy the pleasures of life; and they
eat into our vitals. We want to get everything from nature, but we find
in the long run that nature takes everything from us — depletes us, and
casts us aside.

Had it not been for this, life would have been all sunshine. Never mind!
With all its failures and successes, with all its joys and sorrows, it
can be one succession of sunshine, if only we are not caught.

That is the one cause of misery: we are attached, we are being caught.
Therefore says the Gita: Work constantly; work, but be not attached; be
not caught. Reserve unto yourself the power of detaching yourself from
everything, however beloved, however much the soul might yearn for it,
however great the pangs of misery you feel if you were going to leave
it; still, reserve the power of leaving it whenever you want. The weak
have no place here, in this life or in any other life. Weakness leads to
slavery. Weakness leads to all kinds of misery, physical and mental.
Weakness is death. There are hundreds of thousands of microbes
surrounding us, but they cannot harm us unless we become weak, until the
body is ready and predisposed to receive them. There may be a million
microbes of misery, floating about us. Never mind! They dare not
approach us, they have no power to get a hold on us, until the mind is
weakened. This is the great fact: strength is life, weakness is death.
Strength is felicity, life eternal, immortal; weakness is constant
strain and misery: weakness is death.

Attachment is the source of all our pleasures now. We are attached to
our friends, to our relatives; we are attached to our intellectual and
spiritual works; we are attached to external objects, so that we get
pleasure from them. What, again, brings misery but this very attachment?
We have to detach ourselves to earn joy. If only we had power to detach
ourselves at will, there would not be any misery. That man alone will be
able to get the best of nature, who, having the power of attaching
himself to a thing with all his energy, has also the power to detach
himself when he should do so. The difficulty is that there must be as
much power of attachment as that of detachment. There are men who are
never attracted by anything. They can never love, they are hard-hearted
and apathetic; they escape most of the miseries of life. But the wall
never feels misery, the wall never loves, is never hurt; but it is the
wall, after all. Surely it is better to be attached and caught, than to
be a wall. Therefore the man who never loves, who is hard and stony,
escaping most of the miseries of life, escapes also its joys. We do not
want that. That is weakness, that is death. That soul has not been
awakened that never feels weakness, never feels misery. That is a
callous state. We do not want that.

At the same time, we not only want this mighty power of love, this
mighty power of attachment, the power of throwing our whole soul upon a
single object, losing ourselves and letting ourselves be annihilated, as
it were, for other souls — which is the power of the gods — but we want
to be higher even than the gods. The perfect man can put his whole soul
upon that one point of love, yet he is unattached. How comes this? There
is another secret to learn.

The beggar is never happy. The beggar only gets a dole with pity and
scorn behind it, at least with the thought behind that the beggar is a
low object. He never really enjoys what he gets.

We are all beggars. Whatever we do, we want a return. We are all
traders. We are traders in life, we are traders in virtue, we are
traders in religion. And alas! we are also traders in love.

If you come to trade, if it is a question of give-and-take, if it is a
question of buy-and-sell, abide by the laws of buying and selling. There
is a bad time and there is a good time; there is a rise and a fall in
prices: always you expect the blow to come. It is like looking at the
mirrors Your face is reflected: you make a grimace — there is one in the
mirror; if you laugh, the mirror laughs. This is buying and selling,
giving and taking.

We get caught. How? Not by what we give, but by what we expect. We get
misery in return for our love; not from the fact that we love, but from
the fact that we want love in return. There is no misery where there is
no want. Desire, want, is the father of all misery. Desires are bound by
the laws of success and failure. Desires must bring misery.

The great secret of true success, of true happiness, then, is this: the
man who asks for no return, the perfectly unselfish man, is the most
successful. It seems to be a paradox. Do we not know that every man who
is unselfish in life gets cheated, gets hurt? Apparently, yes. "Christ
was unselfish, and yet he was crucified." True, but we know that his
unselfishness is the reason, the cause of a great victory — the crowning
of millions upon millions of lives with the blessings of true success.

Ask nothing; want nothing in return. Give what you have to give; it will
come back to you — but do not think of that now, it will come back
multiplied a thousandfold — but the attention must not be on that. Yet
have the power to give: give, and there it ends. Learn that the whole of
life is giving, that nature will force you to give. So, give willingly.
Sooner or later you will have to give up. You come into life to
accumulate. With clenched hands, you want to take. But nature puts a
hand on your throat and makes your hands open. Whether you will it or
not, you have to give. The moment you say, "I will not", the blow comes;
you are hurt. None is there but will be compelled, in the long run, to
give up everything. And the more one struggles against this law, the
more miserable one feels. It is because we dare not give, because we are
not resigned enough to accede to this grand demand of nature, that we
are miserable. The forest is gone, but we get heat in return. The sun is
taking up water from the ocean, to return it in showers. You are a
machine for taking and giving: you take, in order to give. Ask,
therefore, nothing in return; but the more you give, the more will come
to you. The quicker you can empty the air out of this room, the quicker
it will be filled up by the external air; and if you close all the doors
and every aperture, that which is within will remain, but that which is
outside will never come in, and that which is within will stagnate,
degenerate, and become poisoned. A river is continually emptying itself
into the ocean and is continually filling up again. Bar not the exit
into the ocean. The moment you do that, death seizes you.

Be, therefore, not a beggar; be unattached This is the most terrible
task of life! You do not calculate the dangers on the path. Even by
intellectually recognising the difficulties, we really do not know them
until we feel them. From a distance we may get a general view of a park:
well, what of that? We feel and really know it when we are in it. Even
if our every attempt is a failure, and we bleed and are torn asunder,
yet, through all this, we have to preserve our heart — we must assert
our Godhead in the midst of all these difficulties. Nature wants us to
react, to return blow for blow, cheating for cheating, lie for lie, to
hit back with all our might. Then it requires a superdivine power not to
hit back, to keep control, to be unattached.

Every day we renew our determination to be unattached. We cast our eyes
back and look at the past objects of our love and attachment, and feel
how every one of them made us miserable. We went down into the depths of
despondency because of our "love"! We found ourselves mere slaves in the
hands of others, we were dragged down and down! And we make a fresh
determination: "Henceforth, I will be master of myself; henceforth, I
will have control over myself." But the time comes, and the same story
once more! Again the soul is caught and cannot get out. The bird is in a
net, struggling and fluttering. This is our life.

I know the difficulties. Tremendous they are, and ninety per cent of us
become discouraged and lose heart, and in our turn, often become
pessimists and cease to believe in sincerity, love, and all that is
grand and noble. So, we find men who in the freshness of their lives
have been forgiving, kind, simple, and guileless, become in old age
lying masks of men. Their minds are a mass of intricacy. There may be a
good deal of external policy, possibly. They are not hot-headed, they do
not speak, but it would be better for them to do so; their hearts are
dead and, therefore, they do not speak. They do not curse, not become
angry; but it would be better for them to be able to be angry, a
thousand times better, to be able to curse. They cannot. There is death
in the heart, for cold hands have seized upon it, and it can no more
act, even to utter a curse, even to use a harsh word.

All this we have to avoid: therefore I say, we require superdivine
power. Superhuman power is not strong enough. Superdivine strength is
the only way, the one way out. By it alone we can pass through all these
intricacies, through these showers of miseries, unscathed. We may be cut
to pieces, torn asunder, yet our hearts must grow nobler and nobler all
the time.

It is very difficult, but we can overcome the difficulty by constant
practice. We must learn that nothing can happen to us, unless we make
ourselves susceptible to it. I have just said, no disease can come to me
until the body is ready; it does not depend alone on the germs, but upon
a certain predisposition which is already in the body. We get only that
for which we are fitted. Let us give up our pride and understand this,
that never is misery undeserved. There never has been a blow undeserved:
there never has been an evil for which I did not pave the way with my
own hands. We ought to know that. Analyse yourselves and you will find
that every blow you have received, came to you because you prepared
yourselves for it. You did half, and the external world did the other
half: that is how the blow came. That will sober us down. At the same
time, from this very analysis will come a note of hope, and the note of
hope is: "I have no control of the external world, but that which is in
me and nearer unto me, my own world, is in my control. If the two
together are required to make a failure, if the two together are
necessary to give me a blow, I will not contribute the one which is in
my keeping; and how then can the blow come? If I get real control of
myself, the blow will never come."

We are all the time, from our childhood, trying to lay the blame upon
something outside ourselves. We are always standing up to set right
other people, and not ourselves. If we are miserable, we say, "Oh, the
world is a devil's world." We curse others and say, "What infatuated
fools!" But why should we be in such a world, if we really are so good?
If this is a devil's world, we must be devils also; why else should we
be here? "Oh, the people of the world are so selfish!" True enough; but
why should we be found in that company, if we be better? Just think of
that.

We only get what we deserve. It is a lie when we say, the world is bad
and we are good. It can never be so. It is a terrible lie we tell
ourselves.

This is the first lesson to learn: be determined not to curse anything
outside, not to lay the blame upon any one outside, but be a man, stand
up, lay the blame on yourself. You will find, that is always true. Get
hold of yourself.

Is it not a shame that at one moment we talk so much of our manhood, of
our being gods — that we know everything, we can do everything, we are
blameless, spotless, the most unselfish people in the world; and at the
next moment a little stone hurts us, a little anger from a little Jack
wounds us — any fool in the street makes "these gods" miserable! Should
this be so if we are such gods? Is it true that the world is to blame?
Could God, who is the purest and the noblest of souls, be made miserable
by any of our tricks? If you are so unselfish, you are like God. What
world can hurt you? You would go through the seventh hell unscathed,
untouched. But the very fact that you complain and want to lay the blame
upon the external world shows that you feel the external world — the
very fact that you feel shows that you are not what you claim to be. You
only make your offence greater by heaping misery upon misery, by
imagining that the external world is hurting you, and crying out, "Oh,
this devil's world! This man hurts me; that man hurts me! " and so
forth. It is adding lies to misery.

We are to take care of ourselves — that much we can do — and give up
attending to others for a time. Let us perfect the means; the end will
take care of itself. For the world can be good and pure, only if our
lives are good and pure. It is an effect, and we are the means.
Therefore, let us purify ourselves. Let us make ourselves perfect.

</div>
