---
title: THE POWERS OF THE MIND

---
<div>

[←](work_and_its_secret.htm) [Home](../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
2](volume_2_contents.htm) / [→](hints_on_practical_spirituality.htm)

  

## THE POWERS OF THE MIND

(*Delivered at Los Angeles, California, January 8, 1900*)

All over the world there has been the belief in the supernatural
throughout the ages. All of us have heard of extraordinary happenings,
and many of us have had some personal experience of them. I would rather
introduce the subject by telling you certain facts which have come
within my own experience. I once heard of a man who, if any one went to
him with questions in his mind, would answer them immediately; and I was
also informed that he foretold events. I was curious and went to see him
with a few friends. We each had something in our minds to ask, and, to
avoid mistakes, we wrote down our questions and put them in our pockets.
As soon as the man saw one of us, he repeated our questions and gave the
answers to them. Then he wrote something on paper, which he folded up,
asked me to sign on the back, and said, "Don't look at it; put it in
your pocket and keep it there till I ask for it again." And so on to
each one of us. He next told us about some events that would happen to
us in the future. Then he said, "Now, think of a word or a sentence,
from any language you like." I thought of a long sentence from Sanskrit,
a language of which he was entirely ignorant. "Now, take out the paper
from your pocket," he said. The Sanskrit sentence was written there! He
had written it an hour before with the remark, "In confirmation of what
I have written, this man will think of this sentence." It was correct.
Another of us who had been given a similar paper which he had signed and
placed in his pocket, was also asked to think of a sentence. He thought
of a sentence in Arabic, which it was still less possible for the man to
know; it was some passage from the Koran. And my friend found this
written down on the paper.

Another of us was a physician. He thought of a sentence from a German
medical book. It was written on his paper.

Several days later I went to this man again, thinking possibly I had
been deluded somehow before. I took other friends, and on this occasion
also he came out wonderfully triumphant.

Another time I was in the city of Hyderabad in India, and I was told of
a Brâhmin there who could produce numbers of things from where, nobody
knew. This man was in business there; he was a respectable gentleman.
And I asked him to show me his tricks. It so happened that this man had
a fever, and in India there is a general belief that if a holy man puts
his hand on a sick man he would be well. This Brahmin came to me and
said, "Sir, put your hand on my head, so that my fever may be cured." I
said, "Very good; but you show me your tricks." He promised. I put my
hand on his head as desired, and later he came to fulfil his promise. He
had only a strip of cloth about his loins, we took off everything else
from him. I had a blanket which I gave him to wrap round himself,
because it was cold, and made him sit in a corner. Twenty-five pairs of
eyes were looking at him. And he said, "Now, look, write down anything
you want." We all wrote down names of fruits that never grew in that
country, bunches of grapes, oranges, and so on. And we gave him those
bits of paper. And there came from under his blanket, bushels of grapes,
oranges, and so forth, so much that if all that fruit was weighed, it
would have been twice as heavy as the man. He asked us to eat the fruit.
Some of us objected, thinking it was hypnotism; but the man began eating
himself — so we all ate. It was all right.

He ended by producing a mass of roses. Each flower was perfect, with
dew-drops on the petals, not one crushed, not one injured. And masses of
them! When I asked the man for an explanation, he said, "It is all
sleight of hand."

Whatever it was, it seemed to be impossible that it could be sleight of
hand merely. From whence could he have got such large quantities of
things?

Well, I saw many things like that. Going about India you find hundreds
of similar things in different places. These are in every country. Even
in this country you will find some such wonderful things. Of course
there is a great deal of fraud, no doubt; but then, whenever you see
fraud, you have also to say that fraud is an imitation. There must be
some truth somewhere, that is being imitated; you cannot imitate
nothing. Imitation must be of something substantially true.

In very remote times in India, thousands of years ago, these facts used
to happen even more than they do today. It seems to me that when a
country becomes very thickly populated, psychical power deteriorates.
Given a vast country thinly inhabited, there will, perhaps, be more of
psychical power there. These facts, the Hindus, being analytically
minded, took up and investigated. And they came to certain remarkable
conclusions; that is, they made a science of it. They found out that all
these, though extraordinary, are also natural; there is nothing
supernatural. They are under laws just the same as any other physical
phenomenon. It is not a freak of nature that a man is born with such
powers. They can be systematically studied, practiced, and acquired.
This science they call the science of Râja-Yoga. There are thousands of
people who cultivate the study of this science, and for the whole nation
it has become a part of daily worship.

The conclusion they have reached is that all these extraordinary powers
are in the mind of man. This mind is a part of the universal mind. Each
mind is connected with every other mind. And each mind, wherever it is
located, is in actual communication with the whole world.

Have you ever noticed the phenomenon that is called
thought-transference? A man here is thinking something, and that thought
is manifested in somebody else, in some other place. With preparations —
not by chance — a man wants to send a thought to another mind at a
distance, and this other mind knows that a thought is coming, and he
receives it exactly as it is sent out. Distance makes no difference. The
thought goes and reaches the other man, and he understands it. If your
mind were an isolated something here, and my mind were an isolated
something there, and there were no connection between the two, how would
it be possible for my thought to reach you? In the ordinary cases, it is
not my thought that is reaching you direct; but my thought has got to be
dissolved into ethereal vibrations and those ethereal vibrations go into
your brain, and they have to be resolved again into your own thoughts.
Here is a dissolution of thought, and there is a resolution of thought.
It is a roundabout process. But in telepathy, there is no such thing; it
is direct.

This shows that there is a continuity of mind, as the Yogis call it. The
mind is universal. Your mind, my mind, all these little minds, are
fragments of that universal mind, little waves in the ocean; and on
account of this continuity, we can convey our thoughts directly to one
another.

You see what is happening all around us. The world is one of influence.
Part of our energy is used up in the preservation of our own bodies.
Beyond that, every particle of our energy is day and night being used in
influencing others. Our bodies, our virtues, our intellect, and our
spirituality, all these are continuously influencing others; and so,
conversely, we are being influenced by them. This is going on all around
us. Now, to take a concrete example. A man comes; you know he is very
learned, his language is beautiful, and he speaks to you by the hour;
but he does not make any impression. Another man comes, and he speaks a
few words, not well arranged, ungrammatical perhaps; all the same, he
makes an immense impression. Many of you have seen that. So it is
evident that words alone cannot always produce an impression. Words,
even thoughts contribute only one-third of the influence in making an
impression, the man, two-thirds. What you call the personal magnetism of
the man — that is what goes out and impresses you.

In our families there are the heads; some of them are successful, others
are not. Why? We complain of others in our failures. The moment I am
unsuccessful, I say, so-and-so is the cause of the failure. In failure,
one does not like to confess one's own faults and weaknesses. Each
person tries to hold himself faultless and lay the blame upon somebody
or something else, or even on bad luck. When heads of families fail,
they should ask themselves, why it is that some persons manage a family
so well and others do not. Then you will find that the difference is
owing to the man — his presence, his personality.

Coming to great leaders of mankind, we always find that it was the
personality of the man that counted. Now, take all the great authors of
the past, the great thinkers. Really speaking, how many thoughts have
they thought? Take all the writings that have been left to us by the
past leaders of mankind; take each one of their books and appraise them.
The real thoughts, new and genuine, that have been thought in this world
up to this time, amount to only a handful. Read in their books the
thoughts they have left to us. The authors do not appear to be giants to
us, and yet we know that they were great giants in their days. What made
them so? Not simply the thoughts they thought, neither the books they
wrote, nor the speeches they made, it was something else that is now
gone, that is their personality. As I have already remarked, the
personality of the man is two-thirds, and his intellect, his words, are
but one-third. It is the real man, the personality of the man, that runs
through us. Our actions are but effects. Actions must come when the man
is there; the effect is bound to follow the cause.

The ideal of all education, all training, should be this man-making.
But, instead of that, we are always trying to polish up the outside.
What use in polishing up the outside when there is no inside? The end
and aim of all training is to make the man grow. The man who influences,
who throws his magic, as it were, upon his fellow-beings, is a dynamo of
power, and when that man is ready, he can do anything and everything he
likes; that personality put upon anything will make it work.

Now, we see that though this is a fact, no physical laws that we know of
will explain this. How can we explain it by chemical and physical
knowledge? How much of oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, how many molecules in
different positions, and how many cells, etc., etc. can explain this
mysterious personality? And we still see, it is a fact, and not only
that, it is the real man; and it is that man that lives and moves and
works, it is that man that influences, moves his fellow-beings, and
passes out, and his intellect and books and works are but traces left
behind. Think of this. Compare the great teachers of religion with the
great philosophers. The philosophers scarcely influenced anybody's inner
man, and yet they wrote most marvellous books. The religious teachers,
on the other hand, moved countries in their lifetime. The difference was
made by personality. In the philosopher it is a faint personality that
influences; in the great prophets it is tremendous. In the former we
touch the intellect, in the latter we touch life. In the one case, it is
simply a chemical process, putting certain chemical ingredients together
which may gradually combine and under proper circumstances bring out a
flash of light or may fail. In the other, it is like a torch that goes
round quickly, lighting others.

The science of Yoga claims that it has discovered the laws which develop
this personality, and by proper attention to those laws and methods,
each one can grow and strengthen his personality. This is one of the
great practical things, and this is the secret of all education. This
has a universal application. In the life of the householder, in the life
of the poor, the rich, the man of business, the spiritual man, in every
one's life, it is a great thing, the strengthening of this personality.
There are laws, very fine, which are behind the physical laws, as we
know. That is to say, there are no such realities as a physical world, a
mental world, a spiritual world. Whatever is, is one. Let us say, it is
a sort of tapering existence; the thickest part is here, it tapers and
becomes finer and finer. The finest is what we call spirit; the
grossest, the body. And just as it is here in microcosm, it is exactly
the same in the macrocosm. The universe of ours is exactly like that; it
is the gross external thickness, and it tapers into something finer and
finer until it becomes God.

We also know that the greatest power is lodged in the fine, not in the
coarse. We see a man take up a huge weight, we see his muscles swell,
and all over his body we see signs of exertion, and we think the muscles
are powerful things. But it is the thin thread-like things, the nerves,
which bring power to the muscles; the moment one of these threads is cut
off from reaching the muscles, they are not able to work at all. These
tiny nerves bring the power from something still finer, and that again
in its turn brings it from something finer still — thought, and so on.
So, it is the fine that is really the seat of power. Of course we can
see the movements in the gross; but when fine movements take place, we
cannot see them. When a gross thing moves, we catch it, and thus we
naturally identify movement with things which are gross. But all the
power is really in the fine. We do not see any movement in the fine,
perhaps, because the movement is so intense that we cannot perceive it.
But if by any science, any investigation, we are helped to get hold of
these finer forces which are the cause of the expression, the expression
itself will be under control. There is a little bubble coming from the
bottom of a lake; we do not see it coming all the time, we see it only
when it bursts on the surface; so, we can perceive thoughts only after
they develop a great deal, or after they become actions. We constantly
complain that we have no control over our actions, over our thoughts.
But how can we have it? If we can get control over the fine movements,
if we can get hold of thought at the root, before it has become thought,
before it has become action, then it would be possible for us to control
the whole. Now, if there is a method by which we can analyse,
investigate, understand, and finally grapple with those finer powers,
the finer causes, then alone is it possible to have control over
ourselves, and the man who has control over his own mind assuredly will
have control over every other mind. That is why purity and morality have
been always the object of religion; a pure, moral man has control of
himself. And all minds are the same, different parts of one Mind. He who
knows one lump of clay has known all the clay in the universe. He who
knows and controls his own mind knows the secret of every mind and has
power over every mind

Now, a good deal of our physical evil we can get rid of, if we have
control over the fine parts; a good many worries we can throw off, if we
have control over the fine movements; a good many failures can be
averted, if we have control over these fine powers. So far, is utility.
Yet beyond, there is something higher.

Now, I shall tell you a theory, which I will not argue now, but simply
place before you the conclusion. Each man in his childhood runs through
the stages through which his race has come up; only the race took
thousands of years to do it, while the child takes a few years. The
child is first the old savage man — and he crushes a butterfly under his
feet. The child is at first like the primitive ancestors of his race. As
he grows, he passes through different stages until he reaches the
development of his race. Only he does it swiftly and quickly. Now, take
the whole of humanity as a race, or take the whole of the animal
creation, man and the lower animals, as one whole. There is an end
towards which the whole is moving. Let us call it perfection. Some men
and women are born who anticipate the whole progress of mankind. Instead
of waiting and being reborn over and over again for ages until the whole
human race has attained to that perfection, they, as it were, rush
through them in a few short years of their life. And we know that we can
hasten these processes, if we be true to ourselves. If a number of men,
without any culture, be left to live upon an island, and are given
barely enough food, clothing, and shelter, they will gradually go on and
on, evolving higher and higher stages of civilization. We know also,
that this growth can be hastened by additional means. We help the growth
of trees, do we not? Left to nature they would have grown, only they
would have taken a longer time; we help them to grow in a shorter time
than they would otherwise have taken. We are doing all the time the same
thing, hastening the growth of things by artificial means. Why cannot we
hasten the growth of man? We can do that as a race Why are teachers sent
to other countries? Because by these means we can hasten the growth of
races. Now, can we not hasten the growth of individuals? We can. Can we
put a limit to the hastening? We cannot say how much a man can grow in
one life. You have no reason to say that this much a man can do and no
more. Circumstances can hasten him wonderfully. Can there be any limit
then, till you come to perfection? So, what comes of it? — That a
perfect man, that is to say, the type that is to come of this race,
perhaps millions of years hence, that man can come today. And this is
what the Yogis say, that all great incarnations and prophets are such
men; that they reached perfection in this one life. We have had such men
at all periods of the world's history and at all times. Quite recently,
there was such a man who lived the life of the whole human race and
reached the end — even in this life. Even this hastening of the growth
must be under laws. Suppose we can investigate these laws and understand
their secrets and apply them to our own needs; it follows that we grow.
We hasten our growth, we hasten our development, and we become perfect,
even in this life. This is the higher part of our life, and the science
of the study of mind and its powers has this perfection as its real end.
Helping others with money and other material things and teaching them
how to go on smoothly in their daily life are mere details.

The utility of this science is to bring out the perfect man, and not let
him wait and wait for ages, just a plaything in the hands of the
physical world, like a log of drift-wood carried from wave to wave and
tossing about in the ocean. This science wants you to be strong, to take
the work in your own hand, instead of leaving it in the hands of nature,
and get beyond this little life. That is the great idea.

Man is growing in knowledge, in power, in happiness. Continuously, we
are growing as a race. We see that is true, perfectly true. Is it true
of individuals? To a certain extent, yes. But yet, again comes the
question: Where do you fix the limit? I can see only at a distance of so
many feet. But I have seen a man close his eyes and see what is
happening in another room. If you say you do not believe it, perhaps in
three weeks that man can make you do the same. It can be taught to
anybody. Some persons, in five minutes even, can be made to read what is
happening in another man's mind. These facts can be demonstrated.

Now, if these things are true, where can we put a limit? If a man can
read what is happening in another's mind in the corner of this room, why
not in the next room? Why not anywhere? We cannot say, why not. We dare
not say that it is not possible. We can only say, we do not know how it
happens. Material scientists have no right to say that things like this
are not possible; they can only say, "We do not know." Science has to
collect facts, generalise upon them, deduce principles, and state the
truth — that is all. But if we begin by denying the facts, how can a
science be?

There is no end to the power a man can obtain. This is the peculiarity
of the Indian mind, that when anything interests it, it gets absorbed in
it and other things are neglected. You know how many sciences had their
origin in India. Mathematics began there. You are even today counting 1,
2, 3, etc. to zero, after Sanskrit figures, and you all know that
algebra also originated in India, and that gravitation was known to the
Indians thousands of years before Newton was born.

You see the peculiarity. At a certain period of Indian history, this one
subject of man and his mind absorbed all their interest. And it was so
enticing, because it seemed the easiest way to achieve their ends. Now,
the Indian mind became so thoroughly persuaded that the mind could do
anything and everything according to law, that its powers became the
great object of study. Charms, magic, and other powers, and all that
were nothing extraordinary, but a regularly taught science, just as the
physical sciences they had taught before that. Such a conviction in
these things came upon the race that physical sciences nearly died out.
It was the one thing that came before them. Different sects of Yogis
began to make all sorts of experiments. Some made experiments with
light, trying to find out how lights of different colours produced
changes in the body. They wore a certain coloured cloth, lived under a
certain colour, and ate certain coloured foods. All sorts of experiments
were made in this way. Others made experiments in sound by stopping and
unstopping their ears. And still others experimented in the sense of
smell, and so on.

The whole idea was to get at the basis, to reach the fine parts of the
thing. And some of them really showed most marvellous powers. Many of
them were trying to float in the air or pass through it. I shall tell
you a story which I heard from a great scholar in the West. It was told
him by a Governor of Ceylon who saw the performance. A girl was brought
forward and seated cross-legged upon a stool made of sticks crossed.
After she had been seated for a time, the show-man began to take out,
one after another, these cross-bars; and when all were taken out, the
girl was left floating in the air. The Governor thought there was some
trick, so he drew his sword and violently passed it under the girl;
nothing was there. Now, what was this? It was not magic or something
extraordinary. That is the peculiarity. No one in India would tell you
that things like this do not exist. To the Hindu it is a matter of
course. You know what the Hindus would often say when they have to fight
their enemies — "Oh, one of our Yogis will come and drive the whole lot
out!" It is the extreme belief of the race. What power is there in the
hand or the sword? The power is all in the spirit.

If this is true, it is temptation enough for the mind to exert its
highest. But as with every other science it is very difficult to make
any great achievement, so also with this, nay much more. Yet most people
think that these powers can be easily gained. How many are the years you
take to make a fortune? Think of that! First, how many years do you take
to learn electrical science or engineering? And then you have to work
all the rest of your life.

Again, most of the other sciences deal with things that do not move,
that are fixed. You can analyse the chair, the chair does not fly from
you. But this science deals with the mind, which moves all the time; the
moment you want to study it, it slips. Now the mind is in one mood, the
next moment, perhaps, it is different, changing, changing all the time.
In the midst of all this change it has to be studied, understood,
grasped, and controlled. How much more difficult, then, is this science!
It requires rigorous training. People ask me why I do not give them
practical lessons. Why, it is no joke. I stand upon this platform
talking to you and you go home and find no benefit; nor do I. Then you
say, "It is all bosh." It is because you wanted to make a bosh of it. I
know very little of this science, but the little that I gained I worked
for thirty years of my life, and for six years I have been telling
people the little that I know. It took me thirty years to learn it;
thirty years of hard struggle. Sometimes I worked at it twenty hours
during the twenty-four; sometimes I slept only one hour in the night;
sometimes I worked whole nights; sometimes I lived in places where there
was hardly a sound, hardly a breath; sometimes I had to live in caves.
Think of that. And yet I know little or nothing; I have barely touched
the hem of the garment of this science. But I can understand that it is
true and vast and wonderful.

Now, if there is any one amongst you who really wants to study this
science, he will have to start with that sort of determination, the same
as, nay even more than, that which he puts into any business of life.

And what an amount of attention does business require, and what a
rigorous taskmaster it is! Even if the father, the mother, the wife, or
the child dies, business cannot stop! Even if the heart is breaking, we
still have to go to our place of business, when every hour of work is a
pang. That is business, and we think that it is just, that it is right.

This science calls for more application than any business can ever
require. Many men can succeed in business; very few in this. Because so
much depends upon the particular constitution of the person studying it.
As in business all may not make a fortune, but everyone can make
something, so in the study of this science each one can get a glimpse
which will convince him of its truth and of the fact that there have
been men who realised it fully.

This is the outline of the science. It stands upon its own feet and in
its own light, and challenges comparison with any other science. There
have been charlatans, there have been magicians, there have been cheats,
and more here than in any other field. Why? For the same reason, that
the more profitable the business, the greater the number of charlatans
and cheats. But that is no reason why the business should not be good.
And one thing more; it may be good intellectual gymnastics to listen to
all the arguments and an intellectual satisfaction to hear of wonderful
things. But, if any one of you really wants to learn something beyond
that, merely attending lectures will not do. That cannot be taught in
lectures, for it is life; and life can only convey life. If there are
any amongst you who are really determined to learn it, I shall be very
glad to help them.

</div>
