+++
title = "The phantoms of thexa0bone-pipe"
date = "2021-02-01"

+++
As Vidrum was leafing through some recent case studies to gather the
literature for his own production, he received a call from his
chauffeur. He had fetched Vidrum’s new car. Vidrum went out to take a
look at it. As he saw it gleaming in the mellow light of the parkway
lamp he thought of his old friends for some reason: “Clever Lootika or
Vrishchika would have said that it looks like a work of the Ṛbhu-s. That
triplet of deities meant a lot to the four sisters, but I had never
heard of them before I came to know them. May be after all there is a
reason why they say the brāḥmaṇa-s are the conduit for communicating
with the gods. No wonder this new car looks good but for some reason I
experience no thrill of the kind I experienced when I got my first
bicycle or for that matter my lamented old car.” He was snapped out of
his musing by his chauffeur who asked him if he would want to go out on
a test drive. Vidrum: “Sure. Let us drive till the foothills of the
temple of Durgā past the pond of lotuses and then go over to the hotel
Kūrmahrada and buy some dinner to take home.”

Back home from the test drive, Vidrum rang in his butler and informed
him that he had obtained dinner from outside and offered the butler and
his wife a packet of the same too. He then asked the butler to prepare
cold turmeric and almond milk for the night and dismissed him. As he was
enjoying his mouth-tingling dinner he lapsed into a train of thought: “I
wish Somakhya was around to cast a spell of protection on my car. Time
and again my mind goes back to my lamented first car. I remember that
day clearly.” As his mind drifted there, his joy from the tasty dinner
flattened quite a bit. Having concluded his meal, he went over to the
little shrine Somakhya had installed for him to worship the 16-handed
Vīryakālī, whose original was enshrined at the edge of the cemetery in
his ancestral village. When Somakhya and Indrasena had learned of that
shrine they were excited. They told him of the great significance of
that goddess as per some ancient text whose name he had forgotten. He
had promised to take them along with Lootika and Vrishchika to his
village someday. He felt his meditation gave him some focus to put a few
words to paper reporting a fatal case involving the infection of a
sanitation worker by *Burkholderia mallei*. As he was doing so, he
remembered that Somakhya had given him a monologue on the bacterium when
they were in college but Vidrum was not yet a suitable vessel to have
imbibed any of it. He kicked himself for the same because he knew it was
something important for his current investigation but he just did not
recall anything. But Somakhya and his gang were far away and in limited
contact; hence, he had to contend with whatever he had.

His mind went back to his old car and the events around it careened
across his mental screen: “I still remember those days. I had a fun ride
and drove by the shuttle-stop at the college to park the car and collect
some stuff from my cubicle. On my way out I saw Vrishchika and her
mother waiting for the shuttle. I offered to give them a ride home. They
accepted it with much gratitude but, as was typical of them, the two
remained silent through much of the ride. Unfazed by the bustle of the
city passing by us, Vrishchika’s mom was grading exam papers. That
brought back memories of her class to me. Being busy with her daughters,
she only taught part time, but was perhaps the only one of all our
female and most male instructors who had the command and the ability to
make everyone understand — some of that she had passed on to her
daughters. But her exams were always hard. Nevertheless, she was kind
unlike many of our sadistic lecturers and passed everyone in the final
exam. As we neared their home, Vrishchika’s mom looked up and said: \`I
guess you don’t have anything at hand for dinner — let me pack you
some.’ I graciously acquiesced. When we got to their home, I was seated
in the hall as Vrishchika and her mom went into the kitchen. Vrishchika
came out with a small spoon and asked me to try a pickle and see if I
liked it. It was great. Her mother then responded from the kitchen that
she would aliquot a bottle of the pickle for me. As she was doing so,
Vrishchika asked me if I was finding my new apartment boring without the
\`friends’ from the cemetery. I had to confess that I missed a bit of
all that drama though I certainly found the quiet rather beneficial.
Vrishchika darted into her room and brought out a curious object. It was
a musical bone-pipe made from a human femur. Vrishchika waved it in the
air it made some haunting music, like the wooden pipe made by the
tribesmen from the northern Marahaṭṭa country or southern Mālava. She
said I could blow into it and I might get a visit from interesting
phantoms if they happened to be pleased with the music. I was
apprehensive of any such gift but she told me it will do me good in
life. I wished Vrishchika good luck because she was leaving abroad and I
was not sure if I would ever see her again.

With my dinner in hand, I drove back home with the bone-pipe. That
weekend I blew out of it the tune of a film song. To my surprise I felt
a presence as I used to feel in my old house. There was no one in my
room but I could still feel someone seated next to me. Just as we would
do when plying the planchette, I asked if somebody was around. I
mysteriously fell asleep at that instant and saw a vision of my new car
being destroyed and me dying in the crash. I woke in fear and wished I
could talk to Vrishchika, Somakhya or Lootika about it but they were all
gone. I remembered a strange statement from Lootika when my first bike
was stolen, which she did not elaborate on: \`Wheel after wheel would be
destroyed but your wheel would keep turning.’ The day that prophesy came
true is still fresh in my mind. By some terrible coincidence my car fell
into a ditch the very place Meghana had died. I was indeed lucky not
just to evade the appointment with Citragupta but to escape unscathed
from such a tremendous crash. I thought to myself — may be, l still have
great acts to do in life.”

Vidrum shaken out of his reverie by his butler’s knock on the door to
give him his beverage. He felt a sudden urge to play the bone-pipe. He
lit a bundle of sage and as it was smoldering he took out the pipe from
a box where he carefully stored it and blew out a tune of a folk song to
the 1000-eyed goddess that his grandmother had taught him as a youth.
For a while nothing happened and Vidrum relaxed into the wafting odor of
the sage along with his beverage. With his mind crowded by various
events of the past, he almost forgot that he had plied the pipe when he
jolted by the presence of a strong fellow with some East Asian ancestry,
albeit felt only vaguely. The intensity of the presence soon increased
as it grabbed him by his legs and thrust into his chair. There he felt
another presence seize his very personage and launch him into a bout of
frenzied writing spanning a few pages.

![bhagya2](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/bhagya2.jpg?w=216&h=39)

Somakhya and Lootika were sipping their tea as the sun’s declining rays
streamed into their room. Somakhya passed his tablet to Lootika with the
scan of a manuscript on it: “varārohe, what do you make of this?” L:“Why
dear, though eminently legible, this is a very strange handwriting with
a form reminding one of sparklers on a Dīpāvalī night. What is this
strange manuscript?” S: “That metaphor for the writing is indeed very
apt. It was something Vidrum sent me. He apparently took it down some
time ago in a frenzied ghost-dictation induced by the bone-pipe your
first sister had found in our youth. He prefaces it with the comment
that it would be of greatest interest to us. Why don’t you read it out
aloud?” L: “Ah, the musical bone-pipe. I had nearly forgotten about that
one. Should I call the kids; may be they would like the story?” S: “I’ve
not read it yet. So, let us examine it first to make sure it might be of
interest or even appropriate for them. So, let them continue practicing
the workout of the conics that my father has sent them.”

Lootika read it out: “I’m glad I’ve found someone to tell my story as
also a bit of that of my friend. It was my friend who thrust you into
you chair so that I could tell my story. I was a brāhmaṇa, Bāẓ Nayan by
name. My ancestors had come all the way from Jammu and settled in the
hamlet of Indargaon. We followed the Mādhyaṃdina school of the
Śukla-yajurveda. Seeing my precocious capacity in absorbing the Veda
after my upanayana, I was sent far from home to the gurukula at
Rishikesh. There, I acquired the śruti to completion and also become a
scholar of vyākaraṇa mastering the ins and outs of sage Pāṇini and his
commentator Patañjali. But tragedy struck at that point as my family was
wiped out in an earthquake. Left with no one, I went and sought refuge
at the feet of svāmin Ātmānanda giri, a great advaita yati. He employed
me as a teacher for his brahmacāri-s. Later he acquiesced to my
intention to acquire an English education and study linguistics. I did
so in Shimla for 5 years and translated the pariśiṣṭa-s of Kātyāyana
into English. During my stay there, I befriended a Gorkha, Jang Bahādur,
who had to retire from the army after sustaining injuries in a battle
with the Cīna-s. Unfortunately, svāmin Ātmānanda giri’s āśrama was
washed away in a great flood and I was again left with no one in the
world other than my friend Jang Bahādur.

One day he showed me an advertisement in a paper for a Sanskrit
professor in a great peninsular city and suggested that we go there. He
said he might find a security job there. I thought it was a great idea
and after a long journey by train with barely any money we made it to
the city. Thankfully they spoke and understood some Hindi there and we
could make our away to a rat-and bug-ridden lodge to stay while we found
a job. The job was at the College of Antiquities which was one of
premier research centers in the country. The clerks there asked me for a
domicile certificate and a nationality certificate. As I had neither,
they rudely shooed me away. I had to make a living initially as a cook
and then as an arcaka at a temple of the terrifying Vināyaka. Jang
Bahādur found a job as nightwatchman for a street.

I still believed I was Sanskrit professor material — I was confident
that few people knew the intricacies of the vyākaraṇa, as it applied to
the śruti, the sāmānya language or the vulgar Prākṛta-s, as I did.
Hence, I went back to the college in the hope of meeting some
Sanskritists who would see my true worth. I found my way into the campus
by somehow convincing the guard to let me in by claiming I was paṇḍita
who had been called for a meeting. I searched around to reach to office
of a brāhmaṇa from the peninsula, Somaśiva Śarman. He was a learned
scholar of both the pure āryavāk as well as its vulgar vikṛti-s, who was
engaged in the project of a great compendium of pre-modern knowledge. He
looked at me quizzically, wondering if a brāhmaṇa could ever have a name
as mine. He asked my gotra and śākhā and then asked me recite sections
from the Vājasaneyi śruti. I noticed he was beginning to believe me as I
did so. I took the opportunity and pulled out my precious typeset
manuscript of the edition and the translation of the Kātiya pariśiṣṭa-s
from my bag and handed it over to him. He studied it intensely for a
while and looking up remarked that he needed to hire me right away. He
moved the bureaucracy with much effort to get the post of a staff-paṇḍit
at the college.

What followed was an exciting phase of my life. I soon got a small,
on-campus residence — a quaint little tiled roof house. I also managed
to secure my friend Jang Bahādur a job as a security man for the campus
museums. He had supplied me a manuscript from Nepal on Kiranti temples.
I studied and translated it and published an article in a white
indological journal. I followed it up with another paper in such a
journal reflecting the linguistic knowledge that I had acquired from
Somaśiva Śarman on the substrates in Indo-Aryan. The I went with
Jayasvāmin, the curator of our museum, and his wife Śilpikā to study a
Gupta temple of Bhairava and the 8 mothers in Mālava. In that
expedition, we found a cache of Gupta gold coins that we brought back to
the college museum to study. Jayasvāmin and Somaśiva with their
epigraphic expertise worked out some worn inscriptions in the temple and
based on that we wrote a paper that described the early phases of the
Bhairava-srotas and how the worship of Kārttikeya followed by the 8
mothers was an important facet of that tradition. As part of that study,
I reconstructed a verse to Skanda in the Vasantatilaka meter that was
inscribed in that temple during the reign of emperor Vikramāditya, which
described a fierce form of Skanda. This tradition was to be incorporated
as Baṭukanātha in the later Bhairava tradition. All this work earned me
some reputation in the college and mleccha visitors from aboard came to
pick my knowledge. It was then that my patrons at the college suggested
that I submit a dissertation for the doctoral degree at the university.
Thus, I could upgrade myself from a mere staff paṇḍit to a professor. As
I was wondering what I should submit as a dissertation, Śilpikā had
invited a young brāhmaṇa lady to talk about a paper she had recently
published on a comparative analysis of the substrates in the different
Yajurveda saṃhitā-s and the implications it had for the āryan conquest
of the northern India.”

Lootika paused and interjected: “O Bhārgava, this is most interesting.
The phantom’s tale is directly intersecting with our lives. Śilpikā is
none other than our learned language teacher, whom we gave much grief as
children, and the young lady he mentions is undoubtedly your own mother
— perhaps from the days just before your birth.” S: “It has to be so. I
really hope Śilpikā did not cast a spell on us that our children regress
to the mean. Yet this phantom seems unfamiliar to me. Pray continue
dear.”

L: “That lady’s paper suggested a topic for my dissertation, which was
always as at the bottom of my mind. It was a detailed comparative study
of all Yajurveda texts. I worked hard and wrote an over 1000-page
monograph of the subject. It featured many new translations, detailed
analysis of the śrauta practices and the like. Jayasvāmin and Somaśiva
presided as my preceptors and I was awarded the coveted title of
Professor. I was at the height of my powers and wanted to publish my
dissertation as a two-volume work. But the gods apparently had other
plans. Two disasters struck our college and me personally. That summer,
during the vacations, a band of uśnīśin terrorists broke into our
museum. Jang Bahādur bravely defended the premises but was killed in the
process and the terrorists made away with the Gupta gold coins and
melted them down to finance their operations. A few months later,
left-liberal activists, claiming to be righting the wrongs done to the
depressed classes, demolished a wall of our college and fired our
archives. As a result, my typeset dissertation was burnt down and lost.

Sometime before that, Cidānanda yati, a survivor of the advaitāśrama
that was washed away, had come to city and was conducting classes on
Śaṅkarācārya’s tradition. He called me to meet him and help him with the
translations of the texts of Appayya Dikṣita and Girvāṇendra Dikṣita
that he was preparing. In course of those discussions, he introduced me
to a song composed by one of the Śaṅkaramaṭha-s and told me that no
amount of yaci bham and phak were going to take me anywhere if I did not
awaken from the dream of phenomenal existence into satchidānanda. The
former would only take me on the path of rayi to the realm of the Moon,
where the forefathers dwell. Then I would return to be born again, he
said. Instead, if I followed the path of austerity, celibacy, faith and
Brahmavidyā, I would have the great awakening into the sole reality that
is Brahman. Soon thereafter a great comet appeared in the sky. A little
later, the Japanese man who was the first man to observe that comet
died.

Those events got me thinking about the arrival of the Pitṛrāṭ. I was sad
on one hand about the loss of my dissertation on the other the
possibility of never transcending the realms to know that there is only
satchidānanda. I rationalized that there was no reason to fear death at
all — after all it is something no one experiences. When one is alive
there is no obviously no experience of death. When one is dead there is
no experience of death; so, why fear something one never experiences.
However, for many death can come with suffering. There was no way to
prevent that even if one did not fear death for the suffering before
death was after all a real experience. But then if one experienced that
which is satchidānanda then one would realize that the suffering was
just like in a dream. But if one does not experience satchidānanda then
what are the experiences after death, if they exist at all, I wondered.

I was to get the answer for all this soon. Sundara Somayājin was a Soma
ritualist from the Drāviḍa country. He was performing a Somayāga in the
city. I had long wanted to witness that kind of a Yāga and went to meet
him. We had a philosophical discussion on the Vedic religion. He said
that what was important was the correct svara of recitation and precise
execution of ritual actions as per the ritual treatises. It really did
not matter if the gods like Indra or the Aśvin-s existed. They were
anyhow not gods to be worshiped in the same sense as the \`real̍ gods’
like Śiva or Gaṇeśa or Viṣṇu, he said. I became very afraid when I heard
this. I reminded him that such words were uttered by the ignorant to the
great ṛṣi Nemo Bhārgava:

nendro astīti nema u tva āha ka īṃ dadarśa kam abhi ṣṭavāma \|\|  
“Indra does not exist, o Nema” So indeed he says.  
“Who ever has seen him?” “Whom shall we praise forth?”

Thus the ignorant questioned the existence of the great god. But he made
his presence felt:  
ayam asmi jaritaḥ paśya meha viśvā jātāny abhy asmi mahnā \|  
ṛtasya mā pradiśo vardhayanty ādardiro bhuvanā dardarīmi \|\|

Here I am, o chanter: see me here.  
I’m at fore in all the species by my greatness.  
The directives of the natural laws magnify me.  
As the smasher, I keep smashing the worlds.

The Somayājin dismissed me by saying that it was all arthavāda and after
all no Indra appeared at some given time to some Nema because the Veda
was coeval with the beginning of time. In one of the talks in the
college, I had heard another śrauta ritualist talk about the Seat of
Vivasvān. He had mentioned that its knowledge was very important to
evade the arrow of Ugra Deva when one is performing a yāga.
Unfortunately, our Somayājin did not seem very aware of it and was to
learn the reality of Indra very soon. Perhaps, due to some pāpa I had
committed in a past janman, I too was to bound in karman with him. After
the Ṣoḍaśin-graha was taken, the sky blackened with a mass of clouds and
a great streak of lightning followed by a thunderous peal struck the
pandal that had been erected for the yāga. An electrical explosion and
fire followed and the learned Sundara Somayājin was borne to the abode
of Vivasvān’s son, like Meghanāda struck by the Indrāstra discharged by
the Saumitri or like Arṇa and Citraratha being felled by Maghavan beyond
the Sindhu or like the Sāmavedin-s of Vaṅga or Aṅga being washed away by
a blow from his vajra. I too was consumed by the fierce Kravyāda on that
day.

A month or so after my expiration, a band of socialists paid by a
mleccha instigator, claiming to be acting on behalf of the depressed
classes, attacked my college campus again. My house and belongings were
among the things consumed in their arson. In my heydays, among my many
foreign visitors was a Gaulish woman, Laetitia Vernon by name, who
sought my help to read Sanskrit legal texts. Despite my many stern
warnings, my only son got infatuated with her and having married her
left for the shores of a mleccha land. My son having adopted the
mlecchānusāra did not perform any kriyā-s for me. He instead wrote an
article in my memory saying that the secular India was coming of age
with progress and equity even as the brahminical superstition was
becoming a thing of the past. Consequently, upon my death I wander as a
brahmarakṣas. At least me and my friend Jang Bahādur are united in death
and we lead a mostly quiet incorporeal existence haunting the little
hill that lies between my college and the river.”

![bhagya2](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/bhagya2.jpg?w=282&h=51)

Lootika told her mother-in-law about the story and asked if she had any
recollection of this deceased man. Somakhya’s mother: “I never took the
claims of the phantasmagorical encounters of you kids seriously. But I
must say this one comes about as close to being believable as any. Yes,
Bāẓ Nayan was a learned man who was borne away by the inexorable force
of fate — after all, even the Yādava-s, be it the mighty Sātyaki or the
brave Pradyuṁna, had to clobber themselves out of existence when their
time came.” She went to the study and brought out a huge volume and gave
it to Lootika: “However, here is a copy of his dissertation. While
nobody knows this, it was not lost for good after all. I had made a copy
of it for my own study. I wanted to give it you all for it still
contains insights that will help you in your own study and practice of
the śruti but I kept forgetting. While no photo or belonging of Bāẓ
Nayan Śarman seems to have survived the one who chomps through the
Vanaspati-s, after all, my dear, the śruti has said: \`na tasya pratimā
asti yasya nāma mahad yaśaḥ\|‘”

