+++
title = "kaumAra gaja graha"

+++
We observed a description of the the terrifying elephant graha of
kArttikeya in the kAshyapa saMhita of the kaumAra tantra-s. The same
graha and the underlying mythology are alluded to in the section 129 of
the kAshyapa tantraM, the magico-medical text, which we had alluded to
on these pages. skanda having emerged from the semen of rudra, red in
complexion, was lying atop the great mountain and uttering loud roars.
Then the lord of the gods, the resplendent indra arrived to see him. The
fiery son of agni demanded that he be given airAvata, the four-tusked
elephant of indra. indra was taken aback by the insolence of the roguish
god and protested. Then skanda grabbed airAvata by his trunk and started
seizing him. Seeing this indra decided to pacify the young god by
generating a new, terrifying elephant named duHsaha and gave him to
kumAra. Then from the right side of duHsaha emerged a terrifying kaumAra
vibhava known as shAkha and from the left side another known as
viShAkha. Gratified with this they made the terrible celestial elephant
the lord of the upagraha-s in mahAsenaâ€™s army.

When a person, especially a child, is seized by duHsaha he gets
nightmarish prodromal dreams of being chased and crushed by a fearsome
elephant. Then he suffers an outburst of erysipelas known as the
gaNDa-vyUha. A number of bheShaja-s expounded by the bhArgava R^ichika
can relive a victim of the seizure by duHsaha. He may also perform a
mantra prayoga on every pa\~nchamI to be released from the hit-list of
duHsaha. A mantrin may deploy the mantra of the kaumAra gaja to torment
his foes. He may also invoke duHsaha along with a circle of awful skanda
mAtR^i-s in mahA-kumAra chakra vidhi. These mAtR^i-s are:  
1\) vashyA 2) kula-kshaya-karI, 3) puNyajanI, 4) pauruShAdinI, 5)
saMdaMshI, 6) karkoTakI, 7) indravaDavA, and 8) vaDavAmukhI in the
directions. The prayoga-s of indravaDavA and vaDavAmukhI can be used to
counter bhrAtR^ivya-s.

The mantra of duHsaha graha: duM hasti-grahaya huM phaT ||
