---
title: NATIVE INDIAN LECTURER AT PRINCES' HALL

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [European Newspaper
Reports](european_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](standard_oct_23_1895.htm)

## NATIVE INDIAN LECTURER AT PRINCES' HALL

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 3, p. 248.)

\[*London Morning Post*, October 23, 1895\]

— Last night at Princes' \[Prince's\] Hall, Piccadilly, Swami
Vivekananda, an Indian Yogi, who is at present on a visit to this
country, delivered what was described as an "oration" on the subject of
"Self Knowledge." (Of which no verbatim transcript is available. Cf. the
preceding newspaper report ['An Indian
Ascetic'](standard_oct_23_1895.htm) , pp 515-16, for another report of
the same lecture, delivered October 22, 1895.) A Yogi, it was explained,
is one who formally renounces the world and gives himself up to study
and devotion. Swami Vivekananda originally left his native land for the
purpose of giving his interpretation of the Vedanta philosophy at the
Parliament of Religions which was held two years ago at Chicago, and
since that time he has been engaged in delivering lectures on the same
subject in America. In the course of his address last night he declared
that there were indications in these closing days of the 19th century
that the pendulum of scientific thought was swinging back, for men all
over the world were rummaging in the pages of ancient records, and
ancient religious forms were again coming to the fore. To many this
seemed to be a case of degeneration, while others regarded it as one of
those outbursts of superstition which periodically visited society, but
to the scientific student there was in the present state of things a
prognostication of grand future benefit. The lecturer then proceeded at
considerable length to describe the peculiar system of philosophy which
he teaches, and traced the three different stages of the religion which
has grown out of it. He spoke with a good deal of fluency, and his
remarks were listened to with attention by the somewhat small audience.

[→](christian_commonwealth_nov_14_1895.htm)

</div>
