---
title: SPIRITUALISM AND THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY

---
<div>

[Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
9](../../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Newspaper
Reports](../newspaper_reports_contents.htm) / [European Newspaper
Reports](european_newspaper_contents.htm) /

[←](daily_chronicle_may_14_1896.htm)

## SPIRITUALISM AND THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 4, pp. 229-30.)

\[*Light*, July 4, 1896\]

When first we heard that the Swami Vivekananda was coming to London to
expound the Vedanta Philosophy, we were hopeful that his teaching would
not only confirm the faith of Spiritualists, but might also add to their
number. We hoped this, because the very essence of the Hindu Philosophy
is that man is a spirit, and *has* a body, and not that man *is* a body,
and may have a spirit also; which is as far as many a Western mind can
reach. . . .

It has been the glorious privilege of our modern Spiritualism to prove
by actual demonstration the existence of spirit apart from flesh, and it
would, therefore, seem reasonable to look for co-operation on the part
of the exponents of the Vedanta Philosophy and the supporters of
Spiritualism. We are not quite certain, however, that this desirable
consummation can be attained, for observations made very recently by the
Swami are calculated only to divide the two sects.[1](#fn1) The Vedanta
Philosophy sets before the student an ideal aim! Nothing less, in fact,
than the unfolding of the God within him, and nothing could well be more
impressive and inspiring than the presentation of this idea by a speaker
of the force and eloquence of the Swami. We could only respect and
admire, until modern Spiritualism was alluded to, and that in a manner
which left upon us the impression that the Swami condemned without
reservation all sitting for phenomena. He admitted having sat for
observation with professional mediums, and held that one and all had
practised fraud. "Spirit voices," according to the Swami, are *never*
heard to clash! As the "sepulchral dies away the small child's voice
rises up," intimating thus that ventriloquism was invariably responsible
for the sounds. "Spirit messages," he remarked,

  

were quite worthless, for they never rose above the level of "I am well
and happy," or "Give John a piece of cake."

This assertion could, of course, only be made in ignorance of the
contents of "Spirit Teachings," a book which, we think, can well stand
comparison even with the exalted teaching of the Swami Vivekananda. The
process of making up sham materialisations and working the figure on the
end of a wire was also described in detail.

We were present again the following evening,[2](#fn2) when a paper of
questions bearing upon the adverse criticism of the Swami was read out
to the meeting. Some thirty minutes were then passed in qualifying and
explaining his remarks of the night before, and, to our deep
satisfaction, the Swami not only confessed his belief in the possibility
of spirits communicating with mortals, but even expressed his conviction
that at times spirits of a high grade visited earth in order to assist
mankind. It is, however, we conceive, no part of the Vedanta Philosophy
to recommend the seeking of such intercourse, on account of its possible
"dangers." It is commonly held that the undeveloped spirit can most
easily communicate with man, consequently the Swami uttered his word of
warning and withheld any word of encouragement. . . .

[→](light_oct_28_1896.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)A Thursday evening class delivered in the summer of 1896,
    at St. George's Road, of which there is no verbatim transcript
    available.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)A Friday evening class delivered in the summer of 1896,
    at St. George's Road, of which there is no verbatim transcript
    available.
