+++
title = "Molluscan phylogeny"

+++
Long ago in our youth we were observing a trochophore larva of an
annelid under our microscope, when we raised our eye from the eyepiece
in flash of realization. Right then the morphological continuity of
Cambrian forms like Wiwaxia and the halkierids, annelids and molluscs
flashed in our minds. Some time before that we had read with excitement
regarding the many theories of molluscan origins and evolution and the
importance of monoplacophorans in all this. But given our annelidan bias
we felt that the chitons, the neomenids and chaetodermatids might have a
much greater bearing on molluscan origins than the monoplacophorans like
the famous “living fossil” Neopalina. Recent results have only gone on
to increase our confidence in such phylogenetic ideas. Of course the
idea regarding the affinity of molluscs and annelids is an old one.
Perhaps, the first to explicitly propose it was the great jaina polymath
umAsvAti in his tattvArthAdhigama sUtra: sha\~Nkha
\[gastropods\]-shuktika \[bivalves\]-sambUka \[Nautilus\]-gaNDUpada
\[earthworm\]-jalUkA \[leech\]. But the delineation of the structural
homologies between molluscs, annelids and brachiopods has been a far
more involved task. A recent molecular phylogeny of molluscs raises
several points of interest – as usual it shows how misleading morphology
can be when it comes to determining phylogeny and how much sequence you
need to get good phylogenies. This phylogeny is summarized in the
picture below and overturns several previous morphological proposals:

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-AfU6kMehqac/TrTY-vjXcJI/AAAAAAAACSw/FZ-jhTb946o/s640/molluscs.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/O43R2dfqfYfDGmLs95z2Zw?feat=embedwebsite)

What this tree shows is that the basal most split in molluscs separated
the shell-less and multi-shelled Aculifera from the primitively
single-shelled Conchifera.When this information is combined with the
morphological data from extant and fossil form such as as Wiwaxia, the
halkieriids, Odontogriphus, Orthrozanclus, Acaenoplax, and early
polyplacophoran forms it raises the possibility that the molluscs were
primitively multi-shelled like the chitons (polyplacophora). The
chaetodermatids and neomenids are seen as reverting to a shell-less
state, but with chetae-like calcareous spicules that are reminiscent of
the sclerites of the ancestral forms. Admittedly, this argument
regarding the primitively multi-shelled is a complicated one that
depends on the interpretation of the morphology of fossil taxa and their
relationship to extant taxa. The hypothesis might be developed based on
the following points:

First, it should be noted that the earliest forms clearly identified as
molluscs go back to the Early Cambrian (\~540 Mya) and include primarily
minute (millimeter size range; though a few cm range forms have been
found from the early Cambrian of Spain), single-shelled forms and a few
bivalve like forms. Unfortunately, beyond their shells, we know very
little of their soft-part morphology. Hence, we cannot be too certain
regarding their affinities. The Burgess shale and related assemblages
are from the Middle Cambrian (\~505 Mya) in which we find a profusion of
enigmatic forms that bear several features in common with molluscs-  
1\) The presence of the rasping radula is shared by Wiwaxia and
Odontogriphus with the molluscs.  
2\) Wiwaxia is united with the halkieriids, Orthrozanclus, Acaenoplax
and extant aculiferan molluscs by the presence of spicule-like
sclerites.  
3\) Halkieriids have two shells (anterior and posterior), Orthrozanclus
has one shell (anterior) and Acaenoplax has seven shells. Thus, they
share the presence of one or more shells with the molluscs.

Based on this web of shared characters, it appears that these enigmatic
Cambrian and Silurian forms were basal molluscs that survived along side
the more derived molluscs closer to the extant lineages in the earlier
part of the Paleozoic.

Now among extant molluscs the the chitons and the remaining shelled
forms share several common characters in addition to the presence of
shells:  
1\) The presence of an aorta through which the blood is pumped to the
body by the ventricle.  
2\) The structure of the radula and the presence of a distinct
esophagus, stomach and intestine.  
3\) Tetraneurous nervous system – the presence of 4 ventral nerve cords
– two pedal and two visceral.  
4\) A prominent creeping sole.  
Now the polyplacophorans and conchiferans share some other characters:  
1\) Eight sets of serial gills and dorso-ventral retractor muscles are
shared with monoplacophorans .  
2\) Eight sets of pedal retractor muscles are shared by Cambrian
bivalves and polyplacophorans.

From this we might reconstruct the common ancestor of extant molluscs as
having a heart with an aorta, a digestive tract differentiated into
histologically distinct compartments, a tetraneurous nervous system, a
creeping sole and with eight serial gills and dorso-ventral retractor
muscles. We can also infer that it had shells, but the question is how
many shells? To answer this we have to look into the relationship
between the shells and the eight segment serialization of the ancestor
of the extant molluscs. On the basis of the absence of this eight
segment serialization suggests that the halkieriids, Wiwaxia,
Odontogripus and Orthrozanclus lie outside of the clade comprised of
crown group molluscs.One might argue that they could instead be
secondarily degenerate like the chaetodermatids and neomenids, but the
above fossil forms do not show any other signs of degeneration seen in
the above-named extant clades. Acaenoplax, though a somewhat later form
from the Silurian, helps in understanding how the the eight segment
state came into being. Acaenoplax shows eight shells like the chitons;
however, these 8 shells do not correspond to eight equivalent segments
like say in an annelid’s body plan. Acaenoplax also shows such
annelid-like segments, which are about 19 in number. The eight shell are
placed atop these 19 annelid-like segments. This suggests that eight
segment shell pattern is independent of underlying annelid-like
segmentation and arose independently of the latter. This , together with
the presence of 7-8 bands in the larvae of chaetodermatids (with calcium
carbonate secreting shells) and neomenids, suggest that the eight
segment pattern arose as a consequence of the innovation of the
eight-shelled state. Now we interpret the two-shelled halkieriids and
the one-shelled Orthrozanclus as resembling intermediates towards the
eight-shelled state, with the shell-producing zones emerging from the
anterior and posterior ends and serially developing inwards along with
the emergence of associated musculature. Under this scenario, the
8-segmented patterns in the monoplacophorans (which the above phylogeny
suggests as being basal cephalopods) and the primitive bivalves is a
remnant of the ancestral eight-segmented pattern that arose as
consequence of the eight-fold shell pattern, as seen in Acaenoplax and
perhaps the even earlier Matthevia. Thus, we infer that the common
ancestor of the extant molluscs was eight-shelled and that this
serialized shell patterning was lost early in the evolution of
Conchifera. However, in at least some of the basal lineages within
Conchifera the eight-fold musculature appears to have been retained.

Among other things this new phylogeny also raises questions such as what
was the state of the eyes in the molluscan common ancestor. Among the
Conchiferans the cephalopods and gastropods share cephalic eyes, the
isolation of the head from the visceral mass, the terminally located
mantle cavity and antagonistic muscle systems. In light of the above
phylogeny we are now forced to wonder if these features are after all
convergent in those two lineages.The emergence of monoplacophorans as
basal cephalopod leads us to a speculative idea regarding cephalopod
arms : The coleoids tend to have 8-10 arms. We wonder if this number of
arms is a remnant of the ancient 8 segment pattern and is primitive for
the cephalopods. Under this interpretation the the coleoid state would
be primitive and the numerous arms of the Nautilus is seen as a
secondary proliferation. Further, this tree would also suggests that the
fossil hypseloconids with multiseptate shells as in the Nautilus might
be an intermediate form between the monoplacophorans and the crown
cephalopods.

Finally, this tree provides firm support for the completely [convergent
origin](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/11/09/on-some-convergences/)
of [cephalopod
intelligence](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/11/10/the-thought-train-of-cephalopod-intelligence/)
([also
this](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/01/04/cephalopod-intelligence-in-action/)).
The common ancestor of all molluscs can be now confidently reconstructed
as having a rather limited brain. Apparently, the emergence of a
well-developed brain happened in stages within cephalopods. The
Nautilus, as shown by the studies of [Crook et
al.](http://userhome.brooklyn.cuny.edu/rcrook/Home.html) have a
reasonable memory but not a very developed brain. [The long gone
cephalopods](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/11/12/long-gone-cephalopods/)
in the nautiloid radiation probably started showing the first advances
in neural capacity, which further expanded even as the vertebrates
started expanding their own brain power.

1\) Resolving the evolutionary relationships of molluscs with
phylogenomic tools; Smith et al.  
2\) Computer reconstruction and analysis of the vermiform mollusc
acaenoplax hayae from the Herefordshire Lagerstaette (Silurian,
England), and implications for molluscan phylogeny; Sutton et al.  
3\) A molecular palaeobiological hypothesis for the origin of
aplacophoran molluscs and their derivation from chiton-like ancestors;
Vinther et al.  
4\) Memory of visual and topographical features suggests spatial
learning in the ancient cephalopod, nautilus (Nautilus pompilius L.);
Crook et al.
