+++
title = "On The Potential Unintended Consequences Of Rome Inviting Home Foreign Gods – The Siege Of Jerusalemxa0Example"
date = "November 24, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/parade-rome-articles-ce-sack-detail-reliefs-81-ce.jpg?w=550)

Something I was … rather surprised to learn in the course of researching
a previous article, is that during the Siege of Jerusalem, the Roman
general Titus appears to have potentially performed a variation of the
‘Evocatio’ rite – the formalized Roman custom of endeavouring to entice
the God or Gods that were patrons of their foes to abandon the latter,
by offering them worshipand a home amongst the Romans instead.

According to various of the Roman accounts of the conflict (including
one – Flavius Josephus – who is technically Romano-Jewish) … this
appears to have been an invitation which was seemingly accepted: the
doors of the Temple in Jerusalem are depicted as swinging wide open and
an unearthly voice speaking with the timbre of a whole host declaring
“WE ARE LEAVING HENCE”.

It has also been suggested that Titus’ troops carrying off some rather
important holy relics from said Temple, back to Rome as spoils of war,
may actually have been bound up in this process – the notion being that
the material artefacts which ‘housed’ or were intimatedly connected to
the deity who was being ‘re-homed’ being taken back to Rome in
accordance with the ‘invitation’ made to said god by the Romans earlier.
There is some arguable precedency for this in prior Roman history, it
would appear.

Now I am not sure one way or the other whether a ‘true’ Rite of Evocatio
was performed by the Romans at Jerusalem in AD 70. There is limited
evidence for the proposition, although the evidence that there is is
seemingly reasonably suggestive of such occurring. I am also not sure
whether the material in Tacitus and Flavius Josephus around this
multitudinous voice and miraculous opening of incredibly heavy-set
Temple gates to signify a departure, actually occurred. It sounds
seriously impressive – although reasonable questions can be asked over,
particularly, Flavius Josephus’ agenda in his writing.

Yet what we DO know is inarguable – that the Romans brought back
important elements associated with the God of that Temple with them to
Rome. And whether or not the Romans made their solemn promise to said
deity to grant Him a home with them; whether or not they ever intended
to truly *honour* same (and I am not quite sure that the deposition of
these aforementioned artefacts in the Temple of Pax in Rome quite
counts) … approximately two hundred and thirty two years later, it was
fulfilled many times over. Rome became a Christian Empire, under a
Christian Emperor.

I have come to suspect that there is a *very good reason* that no other
Indo-European culture appears to have directly cognate rites to that of
the Evocatio – for few others would be as hubristic as the Romans, to go
about the place heedlessly ‘inviting’ foreign deities to come back to
Rome with them, there to be granted worship and status and integrated
into the very fabric of the culture and the city and the civilization.
No matter the perceived militant advantageousness of perpetrating such.
It is simply too risky.

To quote the words of another man named Curwen (in this particular
instance, an H.P. Lovecraft character):

“I say to you againe, doe not call up Any that you can not put downe; by
the Which I meane, Any that can in Turne call up Somewhat against you,
whereby your Powerfullest Devices may not be of use.”

Thus it may have been with Rome. Whether in the ‘overt’ formulation of
the Constantinian reforms of the early 300s, or whether it had its roots
far earlier in the forceful ‘combat theology’ of Titus at Jerusalem (and
I must confess a certain fondness for this notion of Roman armies on the
march being accompanied by members of the College of Pontiffs, priests
versed in these sorts of ‘weaponized’ rites for siege and conquest
purposes – although my preference is, as ever, for the *much less risky*
Vedic model, wherein we do not seek to get ‘too clever for one’s own
good’ by co-opting foreign deities, and instead simply conjure orbital
bombardments, bless weapons, call in flame-strikes, and request divine
assistance from *our own Gods*); it would appear that the Romans ‘called
up’ something that was above and beyond their comprehension. And wound
up, through the passage of time, fundamentally ‘changed’ in their
essence as a consequential result.

A man should be careful in the places of worship of the foreigners. For
they are not empty houses.

And a man should also be doubly careful with the places of worship of
his Ancestors – For these, too, are not empty houses to be peopled with
the ‘convenient’ incorporations from other spheres. To do so, is to
skirt the bounds of propriety, and to risk changing the fabric of what
makes that ancestral space – as with the fabric of the state of Rome was
to the Romans – into something subtly something else entirely.

That said, the Gods of the Indo-Europeans are the Gods of the
Indo-Europeans. And nothing of which I have earlier written should lead
to the erroneous interpretation that these, too, are foreign figures
unwelcome within the halls of one’s heart nor hearth. After all – They
are *already there* (for the most part, anyway – some facings and forms
have become de-emphasized amidst some descendant branches via the
inexorable erosion of time and fragmentation); and becoming aware of
other aspects and names and ‘faces’ to Them is in no way the
introduction of the outlander. At most, it is the reconciliation of
cousins.

And whilst this ALSO should not be read as advocatingsome form of
combined practice wherein elements from two or more Indo-European
religious and linguistic corpuses are incautiously brought together (for
reasons I have previously explicated elsewhere) … I nevertheless
absolutely do not believe that the (re-)introduction into Rome of Greek,
Phrygian, and other Indo-European deific forms such as Apollo,
Asclepius, Dionysus, or above all, Cybele , is in any sensible way
comparable to the notion potentially entertained by the future-Emperor
Titus of inviting the God of Jerusalem and of the Jews to relocate from
their Temple to the hearth of Rome.

And not least because I rather suspect that Cybele’s role in delivering
Rome’s victory in the Second Punic War was perhaps rather more positive
from the long-term Roman perspective, than that which occurred in AD 70
in Jerusalem.
