+++
title = "On The Crown Of Crows And The Regality Of Ravens – A Restoration And Re-Explication Of Their Incredible Indo-European Symbolicxa0Saliency"
date = "November 16, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/5845947-acuraevn-7.jpg?w=770)

One of the most misunderstood creatures in the Indo-European mythic
conceptual syllabryhas to be the Corvid – the Crow , the Raven (and I
must admit that I am biased upon this score – for it is an important
part of my own name and therefore nature). For if you asked many just
what they thought of when they heard these magnificent avians mentioned,
they would most likely speak of darkness, death, doom, and despair.
Although in recent years, knowledge of their advanced intelligence has
also become prominent and is slowly but surely helping to rehabilitate
the reputation of the revenant bird.

Yet it is not inaccurate to state that the Corvid has historically had
quite the dark reputation, even within the annals of Indo-European myth.
It is just that it is incomplete, and lacking in context. And context,
as they say, as with Corvidae – is for Kings. In fact, it was just this
*latter* pattern of association which initially inspired me to begin
putting together this piece – as perched upon the head of the reigning
monarch of Bhutan, we find just exactly that: the Raven Crown, linked to
Lord Shiva as MahaKaal (MahaKala would mean ‘Great Death / Black / Time’
– rather apt for a Raven even afore we recall that Lord Shiva is, of
course, Odin).

There, the Raven is regarded as regal – and is provided a protection
akin to that enjoyed by a holy man, and for good reason. Central to
their relatively modern foundational myth is the role of a Raven in
providing guidance to the immediate forerunner ruler of their current
reigning dynasty (himself known as the Black Monarch); and the
Raven-insignia’d battle-helmethe wore during his bloody battles against
both internal rivals as well as the foreign oppressive efforts of the
then-powerful British (indeed, the involvement of the Raven, having been
called for and invoked prior to that latter combat and thence showing up
in person, is credited with the ruler in question’s preternatural
accuracy and success in the ensuing conflict in Dewangiri against the
British).

These days, the modern Raven Crown is no longer a war helmet – but
instead something more akin to the Western conception of a hat. It does,
however, still bear consciously death-like associations via the Skulls
which ring the brim (in conscious imitation of the iconography of
MahaKala Himself – the King, as is so often the case in the
Indo-European Eternal Return / Mythic Resonancy of the Ruler, acting in
emulation of the Divine Figure bearing the Heavenly Position analogous
to his own); as well as the device, a Vajra (although formed in the
shape of a Trishula – and these are strikingly mythically equivalent in
some usages) or a Sun and Moon – both of which connote supreme
sovereignty. Interestingly for our purposes, there are also Three
Glaring Eyes to be found above the brim of the crown – echoing, once
again, the Divine symbolism, wisdom, insight, and *destructive capacity*
of the monarch; with the positioning of the eyed-skulls
equidistantaround the brim helping to reinforce that he is both
all-seeing and with a suzerainty extending across the four quarters and
cardinal points.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/800px-raven_crown.svg_.png?w=800)

Now, we have started in with an Eastern instance of this ancient
Indo-European concept , in part because I believe this to be one of the
most vibrant exemplar instances of the archaic understanding being kept
alive. Yet there are also some remnants to be found amidst the West, as
well. Most prominent of which being the Ravens of the Tower of London –
Who are, of course, presiding these days over an execution-site, yet in
confluence with Bran the Blessed (an *entirely* uncoincidental name for
such a figure!), are also providing the protection and watchful warding
that is essential to Sovereignty, and the security of the state (and
just as in Bhutan – there is quite the taboo attached to behaving
unkindly towards these Ravens by killing them : the Lord of Death knows
His Own !) . We are beginning, in other words, to see how the crowing
Corvid plays a quite important role in the symbolism and the statelyness
of the realm.

This ‘watchfulness’ also underpins the further relevancy of the Raven
for the ruler. Odin sends forth Hugin and Munin to fly in reconnaissance
for Him; and I would also surmise that the Corvid features for the
Guhyakas \[‘hidden’ ghost-like spirits that accompany the revenant
horseman deity Revanta out on His Hunt\] in part signify that they may
perform similar spying missions where necessary. The notion of these
creatures – Ravens or Raven-featured spirits and emanations of ‘mind’ –
being sent forth to ‘keep an eye on things’ for the Sky Father is an
interesting one; as the main Eye of the Sky Father (the Sun), or the
nocturnal ‘thousand eyes’ (the Stars) are in theory ‘all seeing’,
themselves. Which, of course, sets up the other side to the saliency of
the Corvid when sent forth as the emissary of the Great God: Not only to
see, but also to be seen. And often, rather pointedly, to deliver a
message from On High, as well.

At its most simple, we have the acts of divination – wherein a human
seer observes the patterns of the flight of birds, say, in order to
divine what the future might hold. This is, in effect, looking for a
message sent by The Gods, spelled out via the avians in question; or,
perhaps, the patterns already endemic in the natural world which might
be of service to the minds of man, likewise (for instance – the notion
that where crows are congregating is likely to be a scene of death and
bloodshed … and perhaps avoided as a place of hazard and peril for the
still-living, still-breathing).

A perhaps not unrelated Indo-European mythic element is the Apparition
of the Corvid as not so much the message – but rather as the messenger.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/il_570xn.352632328_bqi0.jpg?w=570)

One prominent example for this trope is even preserved amidst the
Zoroastrians, wherein their ‘inverted’ version of Yama, King Yima,
receives an important decree from a bird – the Karsiptar, the ‘Black
Winged’. There is some debate as to just which species of bird local to
the Indo-Iranisphere this should most properly represent, with recent
theorizing focusing upon either a species of Iranian Lark, or an Indian
bird known as the Cakravaka. This latter is due to the alternate Avestan
term for the Karsiptar – the Caxrwak.  
  
However, to me these prospective ‘modern’ interpolations do not seem too
likely (and not least due to the fact that at least of them is in fact
*orange* rather than ‘black’ of wing or otherwise). Instead, if we run
the plausible etymology of Caxrwakthe speculation would be that the
latter particle would be commensurate with ‘Vak’ \[‘Voice’\], whilst the
former should represent something akin to the more usual ‘Garh’ , ‘Gerh’
– which means a ‘harsh noise’. It is where we get terms such as ‘Crack’
from, as well as various other words for the Roar of Thunder; and most
directly for our purposes – it is also where we get ‘Crow’. (I should
note here that there is another possible etymology for some
Corvid-related terms such as ‘Corvus’ – going back to
Proto-Indo-European ‘Ker’, in this sense being, again, a ‘Harsh
Noise’)‘Caxrwak’, therefore, would be the ‘Harsh-Voiced’, or perhaps,
as we shall see, the ‘Indistinct Voice’/’Hidden Voice’.

The Karsiptar, the Caxrwak, being a ‘Black-Winged’, ‘Croaking’ (or, if
you prefer, ‘Crowing’) creature would logically link it to the Corvid –
especially given the strong associations of this bird-family with the
Hindu Yama, and as it happens, an array of other deities across the
Indo-European sphere with similar Deathly associations. Apollo and Shani
both have such linkages, as does Odin. This is not necessarily to imply
that all these three are the same figure (not least because at least one
is substantively the other’s Son per our reconstructive typology); but
it is evident that the same Deity has ‘leant’ conceptry to all three –
strong concordances between Apollo and Rudra are to be found, Rudra is
Odin, and Shiva in relation to Shaani is likewise a case of serious
coterminities.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/arya-akasha-huviska-yama-coin.png?w=400)

There is also a certain degree of association of the Corvid with Heaven
– although interestingly, acting to deliver messages and insight even to
other birds. One myth has the Corvid intervene at an impending
Coronation of the Owl as King of the Birds; acting to remind the avian
kingdom that they already have a ruler in the form of the aquiline
Garuda, and cunningly manipulating events so as to deny the Owl his
coronation ceremony. Another tale has the Garuda being dispatched to
learn from the Crow (and becoming humbled as a result – I hesitate to
employ the modern English idiom for such a term .. ) .  
  
Given the longstanding Indo-European associations of the Eagle with
Heaven, this occurrence of the Corvid as the wise and cunning ‘advisor’
or ’emissary’ alongside the more immediately regal Eagle is evidently
quite an ancient and resonant thematic presentation; occurring, as it
does, in symbolic terms amidst a certain Nordic we shall be meeting
later, as well as the Bhutanese foundational myth we had met earlier (in
which it is the ruler’s religious advisor, theLama Jangchub Tsundru,
who had come up with the Raven Crown worn by his King) – as well as the
incredibly strong devotion of a Crow Sage to Lord Rama, an idealized
Hindu King.

Speaking of whom … we additionally find mention relevant to the Ramayana
of the famed Brahmin sage Vasistha going to learn from the seemingly
immortal crow Bhusunda, Whom we might rather literally describe as a
Being Above Time. He has, after all, lived through not only multiple
passings through of the cyclical flow of the ages, but also the
apocalyptic cataclysms which bring to an end each ‘season’ or ‘cycle’ of
the time; witnessing the reinvention of the world, and various events
occurrent within the (re-)enacting of the Cosmic Drama, play out upon
the universe’s stage each time as if anew (and occasionally with rather
intriguingly different outcomes).  
  
Part of the manner in which he has accomplished such a feat, is due to
his mastery of a particular blessing of Varuna, around the Soul;
although I would also suspect that it isat least partially due to His
perch up high in the unassailable world-tree – the Axis Mundi about
which all, including time as well as space, shall turn. Due to his
status as literally being ‘above’ time, he is occasionally regarded as
capable of ‘time travel’ in modern Hindu interpretation – capable, one
supposes, of flight into any point in the ‘sidereal time’ which he can
see occurring out past his world’s (inner) edge vantage-point-of-view.

Of interest to us is not only his explication of metaphysical doctrines,
and teaching of a sage – but the fact that, as the living witness to so
much history, he was also regarded as the forerunner ‘compiler’ or
expounder of the Ramayana literary epic; although this is rather
curious, as Kakbushundi (Kak – Crow) is also said to have witnessed the
playing out out of the events of the Ramayana almost a dozen times, with
different outcomes and occurrences therein, which may make the Crow’s
Telling of the text either rather broader or rather different to the
better-known Valmiki version with which we are more customarily
familiar.  
  
Bhushunda evidently likes this tale very much – as every time that Lord
Rama appears in Ayodhya, the Crow flies out from his perch upon the
World-Mount to be near to the infant Rama. A tale he has less fondness
for the engagement with, however, is that of the Horse-Sacrifice of
Daksha (wherein the Wrath of Shiva fights off the entire rest of the
pantheon combined) – which Bhusunda reportedly gave up watching rather
quickly after it became readily apparent that it could only ever have
precisely one outcome (unlike the Mahabharata, Ramayana, etc.). And as
we should expect, the paternity of this Bhusunda links him to a Chanda
Crow that is of the Court of Lord Shiva.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/unnamed-8.jpg?w=512)

Yet to bring it back to Yama (and truly, there is an apt aphorism – for
eventually, all things *do* return back to Death, preserved only ever in
Image) – the Corvid is regarded for us as a Yamaduta , an Emissary of
Yama. They are also regarded as on-earth forms of the
Pitrs(‘Forefathers’, ‘Ancestors’), come back amongst us in such
black-winged form. Hence the important Hindu custom of ensuring that
They , the Pitrs as Crows / Ravens , are fed at Temples and during the
time of the Fortnight of the Ancestors (when the Shades of the
Forefathers are more prominently amongst us). The metempsychotic journey
of Aristeas of Proconnesus occuring in Corvid form – wherein he appears
to have followed Apollo as a raven, and ventured up to the gates of the
afterlife only to return to the mortal realm initially in such shape to
guide and advise men in greater piety towards his patron, is almost
certainly of a similar tincture.

This notion of the Corvid as Ancestor is perhaps surprisingly, a
potentially broader Indo-European trope: with the Wusun living in
Western China in antiquity, likely deriving their thenonym from a term
meaning just exactly that: The Descendants of the Crow/Raven. Given the
space of the sphere of the Realm of the Glorious/Ancestral Dead as
housing both the Ancestors , and also the Sky Father (also our ultimate
progenitor) in His Role as Ruler over same – it makes logical sense that
the Birds of Death should be as His Emissaries … and be drawn from the
ranks of our own Ancestors when They are sent down to meet with us, to
guide and to advise. Although speaking euhemerically for just a moment –
it is touching that the human-like intelligence of the Corvid has been
recognized via the accordance in ritual-metaphysical terms of these
creatures as having a sort of ‘human’ status in our belief.

However, the ‘trick’ with regard to this counsel of the Crows is to be
able to hear it and thence to understand it. Rather than just dismissing
it as the caw-ing of the birds. This faculty we might, of course, link
to the earlier commentary around the acts of divination (including those
carried out by the man who would be king – c.f the contest of just such
a skill entered into in some readings of the Romulus & Remus foundation
myth for Rome, itself an ‘echo’ of the Man(n)u(s) and Yama mytheme
encountered so broadly elsewhere across the Indo-European sphere);
however I believe that there is something else to be found here, and not
least due to the obvious difference between merely *watching* the flight
of the birds, and actively listening to the speech of the birds directly
to you.

One well-known instance of this is to be found in the mythology of
Sigurd Dragonslayer – wherein following his inadvertent drinking of a
small quotient of dragon’s heartblood, he gains the ability to
understand the ‘Language of the Birds’.They told him of something that
was going to happen (Regin’s intended murder of the man) … if he did not
take moves to prevent it. “He who sees his own doom can better avoid its
path. He who sees the doom of others can deliver it “, indeed. Such
potencies are also attested elsewhere amongst both Germanic and Greek
Indo-European mythologies – and via less illustrious manners and
mechanisms than first slaying a Dragon in order to drink from its
roasting heart. It is my belief that part of what is being recalled in
such mentions is the imbibification of the Soma / Meath of Poetry
granting an enhanced perceptional ability (or, if you prefer,
psychedelic experience) – and therefore finding such revelations via
communing (rather literally) with the world, nature, and the Divine.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/a46085125032d3348ba86ba770cdc6ef.jpg?w=320)

Now, however such powers of perspicacity are garnered (and the other
‘option’ is that it is an innate potency of the born Seer (Rsi) or
perhaps, as we shall see, King;), the difficulty for an ordinary person,
or even an extraordinary one in amidst ‘ordinary’ circumstance, to make
out just what is being said by these Birds – arkens back towards one of
my favourite Hindu theological concepts: ‘Vacam Garjit Lakshanam’
\[‘Thunder bearing the characteristics of Speech’; although also
renderable as ‘Indistinct Sound \[‘roaring’\] bearing the imprint of
Divine Speech’\], via the same Proto-Indo-European ‘Gerh’ that underpins
both the word for Thunder/Indistinct Speech (‘Garjana’ etc.) and various
words for ‘Crow’ – due to the ‘harsh’, loud noise of the Crow’s
characteristic (indeed literally eponymous) voice.

Now, the concept itselfhas occasionally been explained as the fact that
if you can hear thunder, it is ‘telling’ you that rain is taking place
somewhere. That prominent phenomena in the natural world correlate with
other impacts of interest out there – and can be ‘read’ in useful ways.
So, too, if one can see or hear birds being disturbed somewhere – it
indicates that somebody is likely approaching through such a vector. Or
birds and other such creatures fleeing a place where an earthquake or
other natural disaster is shortly to be impending; Crows and Ravens
gathering above the site of impending bloodshed (and even acting as
‘scouts’ for wolves that then take down prey for them to join the feast
upon). And this is not inaccurate – although it is euhemeric to insist
that that is the *only* element being communicated via it. And really, I
do pity those who hear the loud peals of thunder overhead of an imminent
and immanent storm, and *cannot* countenance the idea that there may
very be a Divine Laughter heard thereamongst.

No, what is *actually* being communicated via this aphorism, in the
theological sense – that is to say, the proper one – is that there is a
loud and prominent sound … yet whose meaning, whose intelligibility, is
hidden to those other than the intended recipient or specially competent
listener : he who is capable of recognizing that there is more to it
than merely natural phenomena. That the Voice of the Divine is speaking,
in terms and in a ‘language’ that sounds like nothing other than the
electrostatic discharge of clouds rather than the thunderous speech of
the Heavens.

Something of which we may be able to catch a glimpse in the Rigsthula’s
presentation of Kon (the emblematic exemplar of the ‘King’ figure of the
Old Norse mytho-sociology) being guided by the voice of a Crow upon his
path to greatness – to actually becoming a King. The Corvid’s sage
counsel is for the Young King to ride out in conquest against other
humans rather than merely catching birds for his prey. Perhaps there may
have been a certain note of self-interest in the Crow’s words … and
perhaps Kon was quite glad to no longer be afforded the prospect of
‘eating Crow’.

Yet the logical interpretation here is that the Crow was sent by
Kon’sFather, the God Odin (although some identify Rig with Heimdall, in
which case Odin would be Kon’s Grandfather), specifically in order to
provide the Divine Guidance to further Kon’s self-actualization and his
intended, needed destiny as part of the Gods’ Plan. The Sky Father, in
other words, the (ultimate) Ancestral Forebear of Kon, sends down a
Corvid from His Realm of the Glorious/Ancestral Dead; just as we have
seen for the Hindu understanding of the Corvid. And Speaking in avoice
which only the sort of man who was not merely a man – but rather, of the
appropriately divine bloodline and/or education and empowerment – should
be able to comprehend. Just the sort of thing one would wish to present
to one’s people if you were a newly minted king. The great diviner, the
one who can see things as they actually are, and discern the proper
pathway and godly guidance where others only hear the harsh caw-ing of
carrion birds.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/tumblr_n8hf23rnge1tqkhqfo1_1280.jpg?w=900)

This also brings us full-circle – as we began this piece by speaking of
a young King,Jigme Namgyel of Bhutan, who was provided with guidance
and the evident support of a patron deity in the course of his campaigns
to found the kingdom which his son and their descendants would
eventually come to rule … and we are ending with the youthful Kon, being
provided with the guidance and evident support of a patron deity in the
course of his campaigns to found the kingdom of which his descendants
shall inherit.

Perhaps that Crow Sage, Kak Bhusunda , was on to something in viewing
not just mythology but also history as being, in effect, a cycle of
repeats and resonancies. Patterns which themselves seem to re-occur
across time and space ‘neath the Raven’s watchful eye. Indeed, which the
Corvid in question evidently may play some role in turning about and
making to actually (re)occur. There is nothing quite like ‘active
intervention’ to render future predictions as exercises in accuracy
(indeed, near-certainty) rather than chance.

I am often fond, in these circumstances of explication around the
concepts of ‘eternal return’ and ‘mythic recurrence’ or resonancy to
mention a Terry Pratchett quote –

“‎No one remembers the singer. The song remains.”

And yet, with deference to the croaking, cawing song of the Corvid – it
is evident that occasionally, just occasionally, the Singer, too, gets
His Due.

So let it be with these magnificent beings.
