+++
title = "On Lord Shiva As Tripurantaka In Thexa0Vedas"
date = "November 29, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/19b5c6599df4afabaeac091848c2b8dc.jpg?w=825)

Tomorrow marks one of the more important Shaivite observances of the
year – Tripurari Purnima / Kartik Purnima . Which, inter alia,
commemorates the Destruction of the Three Fortresses of the Demons by
Lord Shiva .

Now, it is often asserted by some that Lord Shiva is somehow not a Vedic
God – something I have repeatedly demonstrated to be untrue; with the
mythology of Lord Shiva quite clearly and repeatedly referentially
expressed in reverence within the Vedas and Vedic layers of texts.

So, too, it is with the myth of Lord Shiva as Tripurantaka – the
Destroyer of the Three Fortresses :

To quote from the Yajurveda – VI 2 3 \[Arthur Berriedale Keith
translation\]:

“The Asuras had three citadels; the lowest was of iron, then there was
one of silver, then one of gold. The gods could not conquer them; they
sought to conquer them by siege; therefore they say–both those who know
thus and those who do not–‘By siege they conquer great citadels.’ They
made ready an arrow, Agni as the point, Soma as the socket, Visnu as the
shaft. They said, ‘Who shall shoot it?’ ‘Rudra’, they said, ‘Rudra is
cruel, let him shoot it.’ He said, ‘Let me choose a boon; let me be
overlord of animals.’ Therefore is Rudra overlord of animals. Rudra let
it go; it cleft the three citadels and drove the Asuras away from these
worlds. The observance of the Upasads is for the driving away of foes.”

Now clearly, this is a considerably ‘pared back’ description of events
in comparison to the far more grandiose language employed in the much
better known later tellings.

And that is as we should expect. It does not *necessarily* mean that
these Puranic-era narratives are the result of significant additions by
later chroniclers. But rather, it speaks to the fact that these lines of
Yajurveda text are from a long and complex rite. And that only the most
salient details of the myth have been incorporated for the invocation of
this stage of the formula.

The form of the myth that would have been in more general circulation at
the time that the YajurVeda Hymnal was codified would quite likely have
had various of these elements still included, and would form the basis
for what came down to us in the later ‘narrative’ compendium accounts.

And, indeed, we can still find various of the details in question found
referenced in various other Vedic Hymnals:

RV VI 16 39, for instance, contains this descriptor for Agni –

“Mighty as one who slays with shafts, or like a bull with sharpened
horn, / Agni, thou breakest down the forts.”

The notion of the Solar Chariot-Wheel likewise; as well as the
World-Spear of the Sky Father being formed from the mountain-tipped Axis
Mundi wielded by His Mighty Hand.

And the material around making active utilization of the codified
expressions of faith – the rites – as a Weapon, is the linchpin of RV
VIII 100, inter many alia ; especially in combination with the notion of
the Goddess (Vak Saraswati) as the active force for same \[presented in
RV X 125 as ‘bending the Bow of Rudra’ ; Savitri, likewise, as the
Bowstring in the Mahabharat presentation of the Tripurantaka instance in
MB 13 160\], and with the Rta Bowstring of Brihaspati also foremost in
mind for reasons that ought be obvious, given the Vak as in-universe
expression of Rta element.

There is more that could be said upon these suites of correspondences
between the later Tripurantaka textual presentations and the underlying
and archaic Indo-European mythic conceptry … but for now, it is enough.

Suffice to say that Lord Shiva , in this episode to , is of incredibly
ancient, Vedic, and far-reaching saliency.
