+++
title = "On The Inspiration Of The Balochistan Hindus To The Modern Indo-Europeanxa0Devotee"
date = "November 25, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/126433085_10164432635255574_6105310139845145037_n.jpg?w=945)

We occasionally may feel that it is a bit difficult being of an
Indo-European religion amidst the 21st century. In most of the world, we
are minorities – and with the major exception of Hinduism, the faith(s)
of our forefathers are near-extinct even despite some salient efforts at
resurrective, revitalizing revanchism.

Yet spare a thought for these Devotees – they are Pakistani Hindus in
Balochistan. Not only are they a minority in their own land – but they
are under fairly active threat for being so. And even in spite of this,
they have *survived* – they have put in the effort to keep their
ancestral flame burning brightly, burning *well*. It brings a tear to
the eye.

Further, the photo is from a portion of the annual Hinglaj Yatra – where
the Devotees shall march for days across an unearthly grey desert to
reach the Hinglaj Mata Shakti Peetha site in pilgrimage; stopping at
this site, the Chandragup \[‘Moon-Well’\] mud-volcano in order to ask
Lord Shiva for His permission to approach the Goddess Shrine.

So, the next time it might seem a bit hard to live properly, live
piously, live *well* for us – it is worth remembering that these Balochi
Hindus have managed to do so, despite incredibly hostile local
conditions (and I am not speaking about the desert); and endure
incredible hardships (this time, including the desert) in order to carry
out the proper and ancient fundaments of their ancestral Indo-European
Faith.

Why can’t you?
