+++
title = "Witzel On The Essential Coterminities Of Vedic And Later Hinduxa0Religion"
date = "November 20, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/28464114448_2a0929b471_k.jpg?w=1024)

Something I have often shouted in the course of my work is the fact that
Hinduism – the ‘modern’ Hinduism – is not some sort of ‘new religion’
built up atop the ruins of the old Vedic religion.

People seem to think that the two things are fundamentally different,
almost irreconcilable – and that even if we were to acknowledge any
degree of ‘carrying forward’ of concepts between the two … it would be
in the manner perhaps of how Italian fortifications of the Middle Ages
were formed from the plundered masonry of Roman marvels; a castle of the
Colosseum, Triumphal arches (Titus’ springs to mind) integrated to
walls.

Now, as I say – this is really not the case; and I have demonstrated
repeatedly how often, what may *look* like a ‘new’ religious concept, a
‘foreign’ \[i.e. ‘non-Aryan’, ‘non-Indo-European’\] integration … is
actuallymost usually a Vedic, a deeply-rooted Indo-European concept, in
slightly different clothing. The exterior expression may look a little
different (and often not even particularly much) – yet the *essence* has
remained true. And is still actively called upon, utilizing the same
religious formulae, mantras, hymnals, worshipful offerings, as we find
set down in the ancient Vedic rites and manuals.

Yet I am just a devotee out here in the wilderness (an apt place, it may
be said, for my *sort* of devotion to be found) – so I do understand, if
ruefully and with not inconsiderable bitterness, when the actual facts
of the matter are disregarded in favour of what some highly-paid,
highly-prominent ‘talking head’ with a book deal or tenure, deigns to
put forward something else instead.

So I was therefore pretty immensely pleased to happen across these
remarks of the great Professor Witzel, of Harvard, one of the best
living academic authorities upon the Vedic Hinduism, and other related
matters of linguistics, mythology, etc.

“When I was working in Nepal during the seventies (1972-77) and
occasionally later on), I noticed that many elements -as well as
structures – of rituals, customs, and beliefs have continued from the
Vedic period into modern Hinduism; nevertheless, I was also aware of the
fact that such correspondences are not recognized very easily. What is
necessary is a Vedic specialist who takes a close look at the practices
of modern Hinduism. This, of course, is usually *not* done, as the myths
and ‘theology’ of Hinduism seem to be that of the Epics and the Puranas,
and these are regarded as something intrinsically different from the
preceding Vedic period.

We may, however, easily find individual examples where Vedic concepts
and beliefs have been perpetuated into modern times.”

Or, phrased another way – Witzel has hit the nail upon the head. That
the correspondences, the fundamental coterminies of practice, custom,
and belief *are* there … if you know where and how to look for them; yet
so often, the people who are supposed to be doing the ‘looking’, are
not so adroit: and instead de-contextualize things and are surprised
when what they have seen in their minds through this manner no longer
seems to align with the Vedic context from which it sprang.

Because there is an artificial ontological separation in much of
academia and elsewhere between “Vedic” and “Epic/Puranic” era Hinduism –
which, as anybody who has actually spent serious time looking at the
elements of both canons can tell you … is at best *wildly* overstated;
if not actively confounding in terms of our comprehension – especially
given the lesser-known phenomenon of more ancient and indeed
fundamentally Indo-European elements being ‘carried forward’ into the
Puranic canon, despite warranting barely a mention in cryptic terms in
the Vedic canon itself \[see my recent work on Demeter Erinyes in
relation to Saranyu Chhaya, for a good example – Saranyu IS briefly
mentioned in the RigVeda; yet the shadowy ‘horse form’ is majorly a
Puranic concept – as well as an Ancient Greek one\].

So why does this occur? Well, the scintillating diversity of
‘appearances’ appears beguiling. To quote Witzel again –

“Levy’s analysis allows us to view Hinduism, just like any other
religion, on its own terms, as a rather well-organized *system* of
beliefs, rites, and customs. Western scholars sometimes do not see it
this way. They are often dazzled by the endless array of gods, images,
motifs, stories, mythical cycles, and so on, and by the infinite number
of gods, images, motifs, stories, mythical cycles, and so on, and by the
infinite number of smaller and larger rituals and festivals. The problem
is compounded when these elements are set free from theirselection and
interrelations in a particular community and are set adrift in some
unlocalized historical space. Scholars get lost in catalogs of the
multitude of gods, symbols, and customs of Hinduism. Hindu (or Vedic)
mythology is not just a jungle of tales that seems to sprout ever new
shoots and branches like a jungle creeper or banyan tree. The tales are
*variations* on a number of well-established themes and structures. It
is just their effulgence and their multitude that confound.”

He also makes the rather interesting if obliquely phrased point, that
Hinduism seems to come in for especial levels of frustration upon this
basis of alleged fundamental difference between archaic roots and modern
flowerings; as part of a determined effort to try and have Hinduism
declared to be a ‘different religion’ to the Vedic one; noting that:

“A thorough comparison of, say, early Buddhism in Bihar and its modern
forms in Sri Lanka or Japan would result in a large number of
incompatibilities, even though all these forms are bad on ultimately,
the same set of teachings.”

And yet we do not hear people insisting that Buddhism is not Buddhism ,
whether in Japan or in Tibet or in India a thousand years ago, two
thousand years ago, amidst the Indo-Greeks .. or even, perhaps
inadvisedly, amongst the Californian post-Hippy demographics.

Buddhism is held to be Buddhism, even despite evidently rather widely
diverging if not outright incompatible internal divisions of content and
character across both time and space … yet when it comes to Hinduism,
despite the *increasingly well apparent* deep roots to the modern tree,
we find people wanting to pretend that the branches and the roots are
not actually the same tree; that the leaves must be some other creature
entirely and the roots no longer exist nor run anywhere except into
musty academic tomes and Internet Edgelord misappropriations.

The final point I shall make note of, with regards to this decent work
by Witzel – is that he observes that Nepal is something special,
something quite different to much of the rest of the Hindusphere; for
whereas India Herself (particularly the North) had to contend with
centuries upon centuries of Muslim invasions and then European ones,
with the accompanying cultural-influential inflections of each … much of
Nepal is quite the opposite – having never come under such (direct)
foreign dominion (up until, it might be suggested, very, very recently)
, and therefore facilitating the strong preservation of an earlier (and
more ‘conservative’) ‘flavour’ of Hinduism than found out elsewhere in
lower and more accessible climes.

Fitting. The High Himalayas are, after all, Lord Shiva’s Abode – and the
realm also known upon occasion as ‘DevaLoka’ : the Demesne of the Gods.
It is only right (and righteous) that Heritage be so strong there ! And
as Mountains are also Trees via longstanding Indo-European
mytholinguisticconcordancy – so, too, do we find up in those high
reaches, the flowerings of undeniably ancient roots.
