+++
title = "The Radiant Queen and the Beautiful Princess – Two Indo-European Solar Goddesses – On Scythian Tabiti, Hindu Tapati, Greekxa0Helen"
date = "November 4, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/cccb53160905e89fc63b08ae29ded2dc-1.jpg?w=699)

I think by now that many would agree that if a little knowledge is a
dangerous thing – then Wiki-knowledge can be the summation of many
dangerous things put together. Due to its prominence as a source,
questionable material placed thereupon has a way of spreading out and
cropping up again all over the place. Something I have recently had
cause to observe when it comes to a few people bringing up the Vedic
figure of Tapati in connexion to the Scythian Tabiti – and going along
with Wiki’s twin inferences upon the matter: that firstly, these two
figures are linguistically connected (which is true), yet secondly that
due largely to this linguistic connection … that these must therefore be
the same Goddess, some sort of Proto-Indo-Iranian Fire Goddess.

This is not accurate, although I can certainly see how an inexperienced
perspective may have come to this conclusion. Yet how do we know? How
can I state this with such certainty? Well, to mis-reference a political
campaign-call of yester-year: “It’s The Mythology, Stupid!”

You see, other than the fact that both of these Goddesses are, well,
Goddesses (i.e. female) , and have an evident association with Heat and
Light (and thence, presumably, the Flames) as expressed through Their
Theonymics \[both underpinned via PIE ‘Tep’, whence ‘Tepid’, but also
Sanskrit ‘Tapas’\] – there is precious little to actually link the two.
One – Scythian Tabiti – is the Radiant Queen of the Heavens , a Great
Goddess hailed by the Scythians as a regality on par with or even
exceeding that of Father Zeus (Papaios) and one of only two figures to
whom the Scythian King Idanthyrsus declares his willingness to bow to.
The other – Hindu Tapati – meanwhile is a Queen, also .. but of a mortal
kingdom, married to the Lunar dynasty king Samvarana.

And it is there we shall begin – with detailing Tapati, and how She
actually aligns quite closely with a certain *other* radiantly beautiful
figure from perhaps better-known Indo-European myth. Namely, Helen of
Troy. Who similarly has a ‘radiant’ theonym – ‘Helen’ coming from the
same ultimate root as ‘Selene’, and referring to a brightness, a torch,
a shining, a blaze. Now, lest I be misinterpreted – ‘Selene’ (as
discussed in my ongoing series ‘The Radiant Queen of the Heavens’) is
not a term that intrinsically connotes the Moon; but rather, has come in
Greek to specifically refer to the Moon Goddess despite both i) other
terms in Ancient Greek to which this is related still maintaining a
‘fire’ association (e.g. ‘Selas’), and ii) the fact that the notion of a
primary Moon Goddess is not really an Indo-European element outside of
the Classical mythos \[as detailed in my previous work ‘On ‘Moon’ And
Moon God’, we usually tend to see *male* Moon deifics for the
Indo-Europeans\].

So seeing Helen of Troy hailed via a name that is that of a Fiery Light
– is exactly in keeping with what we should expect, given that She was
still worshipped as a Goddess with likely Solar features by the Spartans
even into the later Classical age. With Menelaus likely having a Lunar
characteristic – as attested via some attempted reconstructions of his
name, as well as both the Lunar dynasty hailing of King Samvarana, whom
we have just met … and also, as I’ve discussed in some of my previous
work at greater length, the Lunar characterization of the figure Who
marries the Sun’s Beautiful Daughter in the course of the famed Bridal
of Surya hymnal of the RigVeda \[RV X 85\].

And that notion – of being the Sun’s Beautiful Daughter – is quite key
to the identification. For both Helen and Tapati are hailed in exactly
those terms. As the most beautiful women in Their respective
Indo-European mythologies. As well as sharing, as we shall soon see, the
same paternity. I’ve covered this in far more expansive detail in my
previous works in the Radiant Queen of the Heavens series, but suffice
to say that the Vivasvan Who is Tapati’s Father is the same God Who Is
Zeus – the Indo-European Sky Father. We can tell this in no small part
due to the siblings involved. Helen has rather prominent Brothers – the
Dioscuri, Castor & Pollux. Tapati has the Asvins, the Horse-Twins. The
Paternity of the Helping Horse-Hero Twins is a key identifying feature
for the Sky Father – as shown via Odin’srole in bringing forth Hengist
and Horsa, and Rudra’s holding of this title in various Vedic texts
showing that He is Dyaus (Pitar).

Although in terms of the parentage of Helen – it should be noted that
whilst the most prominent iteration of Her Myth features a mortal woman
named Leda, I have come to doubt whether this is the best understanding
we have available to us. Apart from my own (well-founded) speculation
around Leda linking to Leto, and to a relevant Lycian term for ‘Wife’
\[therefore making the Mother of Helen and the Hero-Twins out to be
Zeus’ .. Wife – perhaps rather shockingly for those more accustomed to
the Greek presentation of the deity’s sexual enthusiasms landing
squarely *outside* of wedlock\] ; there is also the quite ancient
understanding preserved in the Cypria (and referenced also repeatedly in
later texts) – which has the Mother of Helen as none other than the
Goddess Nemesis.

This is interesting for us, because the conception of Helen via this
maternity hinges around a pursuit of the “dark faced” Goddess by Zeus
with both assuming the forms of Swans or Geese for the chase (and the
resultant egg being found or bequeathed to the mortal Leda to raise).
Which appears to mirror the occurrence in Hindu myth wherein Surya
engages in a determined pursuit of His Wife, Saranyu, with both in horse
form – similarly resulting in the conception of the strongly
horse-associated Asvins; and with the motherhood of Tapati via the ‘dark
faced’ Chhaya also bound up in these proceedings (Who, in some later
tellings of the myth becomes a mortal woman).

Matters become further intriguing when we consider the character of
Tapati’s husband, Samvarana. Other than his having to spend more than a
decade away from his kingdom in his pursuit of Her – we have the meaning
of his name: a concealment, an enclosing (or ‘capture’ perhaps), a
disguise, a (false) pretext. The name of Paris is in theory an Anatolian
one calqued into Ancient Greek – yet I suspect that the overarching
conduct of Paris towards fair Helen may nevertheless be resonant with
what is being communicated via this Sanskrit name. The ‘enclosure’
element would certainly fit with a more generalized marriage concept
wherein the groom is ‘leading away’ and ‘placing in his own house’ the
bride; whilst in light of my own interpretation of the aforementioned
Surya’s Bridal RigVedic Hymnal \[RV X 85\] wherein the Daughter of the
Sun (confusingly *also* named Surya) marries the Moon, that this hymnal
refers to a Solar Eclipse (indeed, plausibly the *specific* Solar
Eclipse of16th of April 1699 BC – see my work on the Nebra Sky Disc for
further elucidation) – the notion of the groom ‘covering’ or
‘concealing’ the radiant beauty of his Bride would certainly be an
eloquent manner to express the concept of the Moon covering over the Sun
and Her life-giving Beauty in an eclipse. (Although if we are looking at
etymologies – the further points of the same field of meaning for Tapas
in Sanskrit , where the fiery illumination, the pleasant warmth and
life-giving light, they become correlate with discomfort, an ordeal, and
even the outright infliction of pain … well, it could certainly be
suggested that Menelaus’ marriage to Helen brought about all of that and
more.)

But those are other matters for other times. The point is – we can
viably show that Hindu Tapati is very, very likely to be the same mythic
figure as Greek Helen. The parentages align (not simply in terms of
paternity – but also in intriguing ways in terms of the circumstances of
conception), the associations (of quite literally radiant, solar beauty
beyond compare) align, and other mythological elements including key
siblings and prospectively some important details of romantic partner(s)
likewise.

Which brings us on to Scythian Tabiti. The Radiant Queen of the Heavens,
Herself.

Now I shall not go into the grand exhaustive depth of detail that has
characterized our still-ongoing article series by that very name. For to
do so would be largely unnecessary – as all that is required here is the
brief elucidation as to the character of Tabiti in both Scythian and
comparative Indo-European understanding, in order to demonstrate the
lack of concordance with what we understand of Tapati – Helen. Readers
interested in greater exploration of the concepts pertaining to both the
Solar Goddesses (plural) of the Indo-Europeans as well this specific,
highest Goddess in particular, would be advised to take a look at “The
Radiant Queen of the Heavens – On Scythian Tabiti As Template For The
Greater Indo-European Solar Goddess”.

To focus upon Tabiti directly, it is not questioned that Her Theonym is
similarly derived to that of Tapati – and refers to some combination of
Heat and Light. However, where the divergences begin in the exceedingly
fragmentary information available to us from Herodotus – is in two key
respects. First and foremost, the manner in which Tabiti is addressed –
as the Queen (particularly by the Scythian king Idanthyrsus in the
course of his scorning of Darius), foremost of Those who merit worship
(and this is effectively what Herodotus states: citing ‘Hestia’ even
ahead of ‘Zeus’ (Papaios) in the listing of Scythian deities and saying
that She is “Whom they reverence beyond all the rest”; whilst
Idanthyrsus pointedly declares that it is only to Papaios and to Tabiti
that he shall ever bow); and second, as briefly touched upon just
before, in terms of the Interpretatio Graeca which Herodotus advances
for this most magnificent Goddess – hailing Her as Hestia. And it is
that last element, I suspect, where a great deal of the ‘confusion’ has
crept in.

Now we shall address the latter point first – that of Hestia relative to
Tabiti. Suffice to say that I do not believe Herodotus to have been
entirely mistaken in his points of co-identification here – only that
whilst the Classical Hestia / Vesta is a legitimate point of comparison,
what we see with this Hearth-Fire Goddess is only a part of what is
actually meant by Tabiti. After all, whilst Hestia *may* be closely
linked to the fire that is the heart (the hearth in fact) of both home
and settlement or polis, and in receipt of the first portion of a
sacrifice … this is not really the same thing as being the most revered
deity, the Queen of the Gods. Although it is not difficult to see that
there is indeed some degree of conceptual relationship here that goes
beyond the medium of sacrifice (fire) and speaks towards the integral
association with the dominion of a people. And therefore, perhaps, how
the Hestia / Vesta of the Classical mythology may have ‘descended’ from
what is found in the Scythian Indo-European mythology – given the manner
in which the Scythians often appear to have more directly ‘carried
forward’ the Proto-Indo-European belief and ethos ; as well as the
reasonably strong concordance of the elements around Tabiti with those
found in the oldest Indo-European scriptural canon available to us – the
Vedas.

And it is here that She truly begins to shine!

The best and most immediate parallel for Scythian Tabiti is Vedic Vak –
hailed as Goddess of Speech (for that is quite directly what ‘Vak’,
cognate with ‘Vox’, ‘Voice’ would mean), yet with so much more bound up
even in this concept, let alone Her scriptural and mythic appearances.
In the famed DeviSukta \[RV X 125\], my favourite RigVedic Hymnal, we
find Her hailed as the Queen , “foremost of Those Who merit worship”,
linked to the vitally integral fires which sustain life and piety, an
empowerer of both men and gods to mighty feats of martial conduct and
sagacity; as well as, appropriately given some of the associations of
the Scythians in the popular imagination – an active war-leader for Her
people, and a truly mighty martial force in Her own rite (which I mean
quite literally, as there are a number of these, also under the name of
Saraswati, wherein Her demon-slaying, foe-obliterating exploits are
regaled – including the specific sobriquet of Vritrahan : the Slayer of
Vritra). It has been said that while there are numerous goddesses hailed
in the Vedic canon … this particular Sukta is where we really do get a
sense that this is a Goddess with a Capital G.

So, with all of that in mind, when we are casting about for an immediate
‘cognate’ expression to this Queen Goddess of the Scythians, of a
certain radiant/fiery name, and of such prominency and regality to be
hailed even ahead of the Sky Father (Papaios) … it is not hard to see
just why the Vedic figure of Vak comes charging forth. And lest it be
presumed that this Goddess is a later Vedic innovation … we have
repeatedly demonstrated in the course of our research that this is quite
the contrary. Vak’s mythology and the competencies attested in Her lines
of Vedic scripture find *direct* parallels in the Greek mythology, the
Nordic mythology, and plausibly others besides.

As applies a distinguishment from Vedic Tapati or Greek Helen , the
forcefulness of the disparity should almost speak for itself (aptly
enough). But we can go one better in terms of demonstrating that a
direct equivalency of Vak and Tapati – and thus the underlying
Indo-European typology of the two figures in question – is not
plausible. It is simple. Who is the Father of Tapati ? The same God that
is the Father of the Asvins, Her Brothers. Who is that God? Dyaus Pitar
– Rudra. Who is Vak’s Husband? The veer-y same. Similarly, within the
realms of the Greek mythology – it is Zeus (Pater) Who is the Father of
the Dioscuri (the Hero-Twins, Castor & Pollux) and also of Helen. Which
is relevant not only due to the generational ‘mis-alignment’ occurrent
there , from the perspective of those who would attempt to equate Tabiti
and Tapati … but also due to the further relevant Vedic conceptry
wherein Vak exists *a-priori* to the Sky Father and brings Him into
being (something which appears to have some comparative expression
amidst the Greeks in a number of forms, as detailed briefly in one of my
recent Dionysus articles – and which we’re about to briefly meet again
in the form of Gaia & Ouranos). A feature shared with another Vedic
expression of the same Goddess, the pointedly more overtly Solar Aditi –
Whom I mention in no small part due to the rather intriguing fact that
this Aditi is *both* a Solar Goddess *and* an Earth Goddess *at the same
time*. A fact which becomes relevant in light of the otherwise slightly
curious enumeration of Scythian deities found in Herodotus – wherein
immediately following Papaios there is mention of an “Api”as His
Consort, phrased in Greek terms as ‘Gaia’.

Now this should, upon first glance introduce a complication and a
contradiction for our endeavours of Indo-European mythic reconstruction
for the Scythian pantheon – as the Sky Father is paired to the Earth
Mother (Who is, by rights, His Queen). Except, as noted above (in
multiple senses of the term), such a simplistic reading of Indo-European
deities as *only* embodying one single element or concept is not in
accordance with the complex and comprehensive world-view of our
ancestors. Whose theology did not balk at recognizing the life-giving
attributes of *both* Sunlight *and* Earth as being Maternal. I
personally suspect, therefore, that what has occurred here is Herodotus
has mentioned the same Goddess twice – the second time as referencing
something we would in Sanskrit refer to as a Dvandva pair : in much the
manner of the Vedic formulation for Dyaus AND Prithvi being invoked
together as a linguistic compound, by far the most prominent way in
which Dyaus is mentioned by name. Prithvi, lest there be any doubt, is
*also* Vak – and both are found within the chronologically later
Parvati, Wife of Rudra (Shiva) (Rudra, as noted earlier, being directly
stated to be Dyaus in the course of the Vedas).

Some further strength is leant to this interpretation given its likely
Indo-Iranian underpinnings cognate with Sanskrit “Apa” (‘Water’; seen
also in an array of theonyms especially of a patronymic flavour such as
Apam Napat, Trita Aptya, etc. – in both cases connoting an origin in The
Waters that are the liminal sphere about the edge of the Universe, akin
to the Greek concept of the Oceanus, or the highest sky being also a
kind of sea) … which in this context is precisely where we find Vak Devi
declaring Her Home/Origin (the precise Sanskrit term utilized is, of
course, ‘Yoni’) in the DeviSukta , and which would also recall the still
dimly recalled cosmology familiar to the Ancient Greeks wherein Oceanus
and Tethys (i.e. The Waters) were the source of all \[I say ‘still dimly
recalled’, because despite its attestations in Homer, this does not
appear to have been the dominant view in later Greek writing, where the
Oceanus and Tethys are instead transposed to being children rather than
forebears of Gaia and Ouranos; presumably in no small part because the
Waters had become significantly more ‘personified’ and in-universe
salient than somewhat abstractly liminal *to* universe; although the
account of Hera as the foster-child of Tethys may nevertheless preserve
this notion of the Sky Father’s Wife as hailing directly from The Waters
– albeit in a ‘compromise’ position wherein a foster relationship is
stated rather than a direct origin from the ‘Yoni’ of).

But that is a somewhat peripheral matter to be explored in greater depth
at some other time.

There is one final Hindu figure Who I believe is quite vital to our
perceptive comprehension of Scythian Tabiti , and that is a later
Puranic era Hindu Goddess – one of the Nine NavaDurga Aspects of Devi
Durga Parvati. She is called Kushmanda , a name which is strikingly
close in terms of concept to that encoded in Tabiti – wherein, just as
Tabiti effectively refers to Heat and Light : so the middle particle of
Kushmanda (‘Ushma’) means ‘energy’ expressed via heat and glow, with an
additionally relevant sense of the solar dominated warm seasons of
Summer and Spring. Although interestingly, whilst ‘Tapas’ in Sanskrit
came to also possess connotations of restraint and physical as well as
emotive control (hence its occasional translation as ‘penance’ or
‘meditation’ when undertaken as an activity in the mythology), Ushma
went in the opposite direction – retaining the senses of heightened
emotional ardour, passion, and particularly the ‘wrath’ or ‘anger’ which
so often in Indo-European mytholinguistics is correlate with the ‘hot
breath’ and steaming (itself another sense of ‘Ushma’).

As applies the full Theonym of Ma as Kushmanda , I have often preferred
to translate this somewhat figuratively – as the Power of the Sun ; as
this is both what the name is implicitly communicating (the investiture
of energy (‘Ushma’) from the Source (‘Ku’) to the Anda (Egg – in this
case, the rather prominent Egg that we see each day at breakfast, “Sunny
Side Up”, so to speak – that is to say, *The Sun*)) – and also what is
illustrated via Her relevant mythology. Wherein, in the course of the
latter, She is held to Empower the Sun and therefore bestow life out to
the universe at large. This has important additional resonancy within
the Hindu metaphysics and ritual, due to the role of the Sun as the
bestower of illumination , enlightenment – in the rather less literal
sense as well; and further, given the frequent identification of the
Indo-European Sky Father *with* the Sun, shows how the Goddess as
*empowerer* of the Sky Father in the DeviSukta has additional saliency.
I should also link this notion of the Goddess at the heart of the hearth
of creation back to Herodotus’ attempted co-identification of Scythian
Tabiti with Greek Hestia – as while the *size* of the Home and the Fire
in question is almost incomparably more vast (the distinction being
between a human-relevant scale of a familial or settlement fire altar
for a household or a town … versus the Star at the heart of our Solar
System, and on upwards from there … ) , we can nevertheless see some
degree of overlap. Albeit with the caveat that whilst Hestia may be
Mistress of the Household … Tabiti (Kushmanda , Vak Saraswati , Aditi)
is evidently Queen over All Creation. A *much* larger ‘house’ indeed!

We can therefore safely surmise, I feel, that Scythian Tabiti had a
likely Solar character rather than ‘just’ a fiery one; although with the
standard caveat around the Lightning, Fire, and the Sun, being somewhat
overlapping and conditionally coterminous within the Indo-European world
view. Having said that, despite the strong potential for a certain
degree of co-expression via what is preserved by the Greeks as Hestia –
it nevertheless seems almost patently self-evident that there is also
much divergence between the two understandings. Just as there is also
quite significant divergence between Scythian Tabiti and Vedic Tapati –
as we should be entirely unsurprised to expect, given that these are
fundamentally two *different* Indo-European deities that have been
‘carried forward’ from archaic, Proto-Indo-European times.

It is rather peculiar that so many are apparently so eager to rush to
conflation of Tabiti with Tapati, however – and upon the thinnest
margins of mis-aligned evidence. It is almost akin to the situation we
find in folk-etymology within the realms of linguistics – where simply
because a word *might* sound somewhat alike to another word in this or
some other language … it is presumed that they are of similar meaning
and ultimate origins. Except in this case, while the shared ultimate
etymology of Tabiti and Tapati is not seriously in dispute *in
linguistic terms* – the actual *meaning* of these Theonyms … the
Goddesses to which each term *refers*, are quite clearly fundamentally
distinct. Something which evidently only becomes truly, properly
apparent when a comparative Indo-European perspective showing these
fundamentally consistent features (of Beautiful Princess with Beautiful
Princess – and Radiant Queen with Radiant Queen) is engaged. And, might
I add, not one wherein the effective typology to which all is being
‘re-aligned’ is merely the Greek / Classical mythology with which most
people are directly familiar. But, as I say, the actual and underlying,
a-priori Indo-European shared and original/archaic schema – which, of
course, the Greeks, just as with the Norse, the Scythians, the Hindus,
and many others besides … are all descendants through the skeins of both
time and space.

Anything else? Why, ‘twould be to confuse a Princess for a Queen.
