+++
title = "The Black Avenging Form Of The Earth Mother And The Pursuits Of The Sky Father As Solar Horseman – A Comparative Indo-European Typological Evocation [Part One – Demeter Erinyes,xa0Poseidon]"
date = "November 7, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/640.webp-76.jpg?w=896)

  
Something that I have often found intriguing about the Indo-European
mythology – is the manner in which various peoples have preserved
differing perspectives upon what are quite clearly the same events, same
beings, same myths … yet which are recorded from different vantage
points, and with corresponding questions about how they should ‘fit back
together’.

It is rarely a case of simply saying “this tradition is the oldest or
most comprehensive – therefore the others must be erroneous and can be
safely dispensed with”. Indeed, quite often the diametric opposite is
true – we \*gain\* in our ability to understand the bigger, broader, and
older by bringing to bear what we have learned via our delvings
throughthe newer and more fragmentary (or, if you prefer, ‘more
succinct’ – the immense weight of the Hindu canon can occasionally
obscure as much as it illuminates in comparison to more straightforward
scriptural canons which have less to get lost in even and precisely as
they have less material all up).

And, I must stress, it is via all of these sources considered \*in
combination\* that the truth is most adequately revealed. A truth which
thence can radiate back out and be applicable to \*all\* the
Indo-European mythic traditions … not simply this one or that one from
whence the initial observation was pendingly derived.

Nowhere is this more clear than in the three occurrences of what I
believe to be the same myth, which we are about to encounter. One from
the Greek corpus – and two from the Hindu. More specifically, Demeter
Erinyes by way of Poseidon (with additional comparative elements to be
found betwixt Nemesis and Zeus); and Saranyu and Chhaya in relation to
Surya; Parvati and Kali in connexion to Lord Shiva, respectively.

Let’s start with the Greek.

**Demeter Erinyes – The Greek Avenger Goddess of the Blackened Earth  
**  
There is a lesser-known theonym, aspect,and mythic occurrence for
Demeter as Demeter Erinyes – the black-clad furious one who brings death
and vengeance.

In the mythology, the main instance cited in relation to this features
either Poseidon or Hades; in the case of the latter, Hades’ abduction of
Persephone causing Demeter’s rather terrifying and deadly state (with,
interestingly, a line in Diodorus Siculus wherein it is not only Plouton
but \*Zeus\* Whom She is wrathful towards – which is entirely
uncoincidental, for reasons we shall shortly explore).

But in the former, this is triggered in relation to Poseidon lustfully
pursuing Demeter – a situation which does not appear to have met with
the Goddess’s approval, for She attempts to evade Him via taking the
form of a female horse, a mare. Which may not have been the wisest
choice considering Poseidon’s strong association with stallions – in
which form He eventually manages to catch up with Her.

(Interestingly, for our purposes, this has close correspondence with
Zeus’ shape-changing pursuit of the Goddess Nemesis (another rather
black, wrathful, and terrifying figure..), the eventual result of which
is the divine progeny such as Helen , the famously beautiful figure we
have identified as a solar deity vaguely remembered by the Greeks (and
still worshipped as such in Sparta) and with apparent direct
correspondence with a Vedic solar goddess that is a Daughter of Surya,
Mothered by Chhaya – but more upon that, some other time; and we have
briefly taken a look at this \*specific\* Issue in the Radiant Queen of
the Heavens series)

Now, at some point subsequent to this ‘pursuit’ having its culmination,
two things happen: one of which is that Demeter Erinyes goes to bathe in
a particular notable river, in order to Purify Herself and shed the
Erinyes form; and the other of which is that She gives birth to at least
one and potentially two rather notable offspring – one of Whom is
prominently Horse correlated Himself \[that being the ‘greatest of
horses’, Arion – also notably, and rather significantly, endowed with
the power of speech\].

The experienced reader shall already be able to perceive at least part
of where I am going with this. But let us, for now, just briefly
highlight a few particular elements, so as to make the elucidation of
the resultant typology easier as we go through the two Hindu examples.

What we have seen here is an Earth Mother Goddess – that is to say
Demeter – winding up strongly angry, literally furious, and thus taking
on a Black Wrathful Form of incredible lethality (in this case, also via
the unfurling of famine across the land) that is only lifted via the
ending of the Furor and a ritual bathing and cleansing of the state – at
which point we may fairly presume that She becomes, as the Greeks
themselves put it, the ‘Bright Goddess’, the ‘Golden Haired’ … the
Beautiful and Light.

We have also seen that this Goddess is linked to the Sky Father deific –
not just once, but aptly enough, \*thrice\*. Both in the overt sense of
Hades abducting Persephone (and it should be noted that Hades’ situation
viz. Persephone is also likely the same mythic relationship between Sky
Father and Earth Mother being retold, refracted, once more) leading to
Demeter’s Anguish, or Poseidon pursuing Demeter … but also in the less
direct sense briefly mentioned above wherein it is not only Hades but
also Zeus ‘gainst Whom Demeter is said to be feeling Wrathful in
relation to the actions of the former.

Between these two elements – the Furor state and the Father – are also
elements of shape-changing, not only the aforementioned Black Aggressive
Avenger Form for the Goddess : but also a particular mutual adoption of
a Horse shape for the purposes of the Pursuit. Which also helps to
inform the characteristics of at least one of the resultant offspring
therefrom.

Now let’s see if we can find a Hindu myth which aligns with these
elements …

… and, of course, we can!  
  
\[To be continued in Part II\]
