+++
title = "TIWAZ in Anatolian And Germanicxa0Languages"
date = "June 14, 2019"

+++
![Tiwaz
Luwian](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/tiwaz-luwian.png?w=676)  
“Something I love about what we do, is how every so often we come across
something like this. The script at the top of the image is Luwian
Cuneiform \[cuneiform, as we all know, means ‘wedge-shaped’, and was a
Mesopotamian-developed writing system subsequently adopted by various of
the Indo-European peoples who turned up to the north of those
civilizations\].

Luwian, or Luish, is an Indo-European language of the Anatolian family
\[the same grouping, although a different sub-branch of, as Hittite,
etc.; the Anatolian family, due to its morphological features around
verb-tense etc, likely either representing a very early branch of the
Indo-European languages – or, according to some less widely supported
theorizing, potentially even something of a \*predecessor\* to the rest
of PIE’s descendents\].

Luwian itself, may have been the language spoken in Homer’s Troy
\[indeed, the name of Homeric Troy’s ruler – ‘Priam’ – has been
connected to Luwian ‘Pa-ri-a-mu-a’, meaning ‘exceptionally
courageous’\]; and was spoken in the regions of what would today be
western Turkey, from perhaps as far back as five thousand years ago,
through to the mid-first millennium B.C. .

Now, why do I find this word, in a hugely archaic and long-dead language
from the southern fringes of the Indo-European expansion to be so
thrilling?

Well, you see, “TIWAZ” is a shape-of-sound .. that is to say, a
\*word\*, not only in ancient Luwian. It is \*also\* attested in
(Proto-)Germanic. In Old Norse, it is “Tyr” – and in older English, we
get Tiwesdaeg … or, as you’d be more familiar with it, today –
“Tuesday”.

But is this merely a case of what the French call “false friends”? A
homophone with mere coincidental shades of similar sounding, yet not
actual, substantial coterminity of meaning?

Of course not.

“Tiwaz”, in Germanic derives from Proto-Indo-European “Deywos” …
entirely uncoincidentally, the ancestor also of Latin “Deus”, and
Sanskrit “Deva”. \[And, because the Zoroastrians are heretics:
“Daeva”/”Div” … which in their languages, means “demon”\].

“Deywos” itself means “God”, although more figuratively, I would perhaps
translate it as “Shining One” – as it itself descends from
Proto-Indo-European “Dyew”, meaning ‘Bright’, ‘Sky,’ ‘Heaven’
\[‘Celestial’ in its modern senses perhaps comes close to encapsulating
some of it; or ‘The Heavens’ in both its literal and figurative senses.
In any case, it should not be hard to see why The Sky and Light are so
closely interconnected; and yes, yes this is also closely related to the
even modern term “Day”\]. \[I render it as “Shining One”, as a point of
interest, because of the rather good etymology of the \*later\* Sanskrit
term “Asura”, which I have tended to write “A’sura”, for ease of
comprehension on the part of the reader \[and distinguishment from the
\*earlier\* Sanskrit term “Asura”\] – which would mean “the opposite
\[“A'”\] of Shining \[“Sura”\], and refers to a demon, the opposite of
The Gods\].

“Tiwaz” in Luwian, meanwhile, \*also\* derives from “Deywos”, and refers
to a ‘Sun God’, a ‘Solar Deity’ \[as are many of the Devas of Vedic-era
Hinduism\], or even the Sun.

Now, D=>T is a reasonably attested sound-shift, so it should not seem
surprising for “Tiwaz” to occur as a descendent of “Deywos” in both the
Germanic and Luwian languages. Albeit with not exactly coterminous
(although still stunningly recognizable) shades of meaning in both
instances.

But what renders it all the more remarkable, is the fact that this has
transpired, despite the fact that the heyday of these respective
languages was perhaps some two to three thousand years apart, and \[Odin
in some sources coming from Anatolia, potentially notwithstanding\] many
thousands of kilometers also.  
”

\[-C.A.R.\]
