+++
title = "apauruSheya shruti/Alien hour"

+++
I was awake today at an hour when I am normally never awake. I had to
see off a friend at a time that aint’t normal to me these days. Then I
learn to my horror that some womenly emotions have not been adequately
addressed. I was under the impression that e-mails always reached their
targets, but then that is apparently not the case… The thoughts are
still wandering away creating the hopeful scenarios regarding the
success of the damage control effort.

Then they drift towards a debate I had last night. What does a modern
Hindu know about the shruti. Many modern Hindus give the highest place
to shruti in their epistemology. But are they aware what is actually in
the shruti? They would normally tell you that the shruti is apauruSheya:
that is it has no human origin, and was there from the begining of time.
They also hold the shruti as something that is beyond question, but
proof in itself. This same class of Hindus often also believe that the
shruti advocates vegetarianism (I am not against vegetarianism at all)
and never had anything to do with sacrificial offerings of meat. They
also recognize a difference between the so called “karma kANDa” and the
upaniShads within the shruti.

But is this what the shruti itself tell us?  
Certainly not. The human composers of the shruti were quite clear about
their copyright and ensured that at least in part their compositions are
not separated form their names. The shruti is also a collection text of
a particular assemblage of individuals within a large ethnic group. What
is apauruSheya then? One can say that the inspiration which drove the
shruti poets to fashion their poems was the apauruSheya element, while
the words themselves are not.

This brings us to the major question: why do modern Hindus, while
according high respect to the shruti, fail to understand what is in
it?  

I do not necessarily have the answer but believe that is linked to the
denudation of brahminical intellectual activity. It is clear that even
with in the Hindu orthodoxy there is a huge need for reanalyses,
reformulation and new intellectual activity. Are the brahmins still
sufficiently educated to deal with this matter? Answer: No, because a
large section of the Hindu intellectual activity has failed to grasp the
implication of the Indo-European monophyly in terms of language,
religion and culture.

I believe that most important reformulation of Hindu thought requires a
proper understanding of Indo-European studies. Unfortunately, the
Indological fiasco has left Hindus bitter. But then one cannot be
emotional when the civilization of over 500 million people is at stake\!
