+++
title = "On Odin Asxa0Agni"
date = "February 8, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/36580420_228942727718059_9113339806569463808_n.jpg?w=640)

**  
  
Part One: Kindling The Flame  
**  
In a number of my previous works now, I have established the fundamental
equation of the Odin of the Eddic mythology with the Shiva of the Vedic
sphere. I have also shown how the Rudra, the Brihaspati, the Agni, the
Vayu, the Parjanya of the Vedas – are also all Faces, Masques, of the
Indo-European Sky Father (Dyaus Pitar). And of course, the fundamental
and the quite direct coterminity within our theology of Agni and Shiva –
something well and repeatedly attested within the Vedic materials.

Now this invites a quite intriguing question – if Odin is Shiva, and if
Agni is Shiva also … then can we fairly state that Agni is Odin
likewise?

I believe that the answer is yes. And I have already demonstrated a
number of areas in which this parallel holds – indeed has attained a
predictive value within the course of our modelling. A good example of
which is provided by the Myth of the Meath of Poetry – wherein exactly
the same role fulfilled by Odin in the Nordic reckoning is also
undertaken by Agni (in alternating form we might say, with Rudra – in
the course of the Agnicayana ‘operationalization’ of this
understanding). Another would comprise the conception of Heimdallr
(otherwise known as Skanda, Kumara) – a situation involving the Sky
Father deific (Odin , Shiva , Agni) and the Multiple Mothers correlate
to the Pleiades stars. And, speaking of conceptions, we have also
demonstrated that the role of Odin in the Volsung Saga – the bestowal of
the apple to Volsung’s father, Rerir, enabling Volsung to be born – is
similarly directly correlate to that of Agni in the relevant portion of
the Asvamedha rite. We likewise find, in the course of the Ynglinga Saga
amidst other textual sources, a suite of close concordances for the
relationship of Odin to His Folk and the Priests amongst them to what
the Vedic society understood of its relationship to Agni.

We could go on at quite some length (and, indeed, have – please consult
my previous works for additional details, incidences, and the
explications thereof) – but for me, it seems quite clear. Odin Is Agni.
In terms of the relevant mythology and in terms of the close parallels
between the mythology and the ritual understandings (which is, as we
have previously explored, the major manner in which what oncemust have
been the thriving Germanic rites of the living religion have been
preserved and transmitted down to us – via ‘mythification’ and rendering
in more symbolic form; or rather, the preservation of the myths which
had always encoded the ritual, but not the ritual understandings
themselves likewise).

Yet some will object to this – and for one rather glaringly obvious
reason. The lack of overt fire conceptry for Odin. Given how irreducibly
inflammatory Agni is regarded as in the Hindu presentation, this would
seem to be an insurmountable barrier to the objection.

Except it isn’t.

Interwoven throughout the Eddic corpus of texts are a litany of
occurrences for Odin in the position of the Pyre, associated with Flame,
and with a suite of further concordances for the ways that the Fire is
spoken of in the Vedas – to the point that it would have to seem utterly
uncoincidental, almost as if the same glorious, glowing Being was being
depicted. Because, of course, that is exactly what is unfurling in front
of us.

**Part Two – The Funeral Pyre, The Flaming Pathway To Upplands Beckons  
**  
We shall start with the most prominent initial occurrence of this within
the Ynglinga Saga:

“Thus he established by law that all dead men should be burned, and
their belongings laid with them upon the pile, and the ashes be cast
into the sea or buried in the earth. Thus, said he, every one will come
to Valhalla with the riches he had with him upon the pile; and he would
also enjoy whatever he himself had buried in the earth.”

The role of Agni in the funeral pyre is well attested – and for obvious
reason. This notion of Agni as ‘receiving’ the Dead, and enabling the
transmigration of the soul to the Realm of the Glorious / Ancestral Dead
is found for instance in RV X 15 (“Fathers whom Agni’s flames have
tasted” \[…\] “They who, consumed by fire or not cremated, joy in their
offering in the midst of heaven,— Grant them, O Sovran Lord, the world
of spirits and their own body, as thy pleasure wills it.”) and RV X 16
(“When thou hast made him ready \[‘Cooked’ – heated upon the pyre\],
Jātavedas \[Agni\], then do thou give him over to the \[realm of the\]
Fathers.” \[…\] “With thine auspicious forms, o Jātavedas, bear this man
to the region of the pious. / Again, O Agni, to the Fathers send him
who, offered in thee, goes with our oblations.” \[…\] “I choose as God
for Father-\[Ancestor-\]worship Agni, flesh-eater \[consumer of what is
upon the pyre\], who hath past within your dwelling \[the Realm of the
Gods or Glorious/Ancestral Dead\]”, etc.); with an intriguing potential
for the line of the Ynglinga Saga around the remains of the now-cremated
Nordic man being sent to the sea or buried in the earth to be a
resonancy of RV X 16 3-4: “go, as thy merit is, to earth or heaven. /
Go, if it be thy lot, unto the waters; go, make thine home in plants
with all thy members.” Although other than noting that this would
suggest that the scattering to the Sea mentioned in the Nordic text
might in fact be something rather more significant than that more
immediately implies, given that The Waters are not just a body of water
but rather the liminal sphere of the World(s), we shall leave that – for
the moment – unexplored in order to head back to our major theme of
subject.

RV X 15 finds further co-expression in the Ynglinga Saga –“Sometimes
even he called the dead out of the earth, or set himself beside the
burial-mounds”. A line which upon the surface of things would surely
seem to refer to Shiva amidst the cremation grounds – and that is not
inaccurate. Agni is, after all, also Shiva. Yet in RV X 15 9-10, we
quite specifically see Agni as presented as being able to ‘call to’ the
deceased Ancestors and bring Them with Him back to the world of the
living.

The other main Ynglinga occurence for Odin in the context of a funerary
pyre is His Own one.

“Odin died in his bed in Swithiod; and when he was near his death he
made himself be marked with the point of a spear, and said he was going
to Godheim, and would give a welcome there to all his friends, and all
brave warriors should be dedicated to him; and the Swedes believed that
he was gone to the ancient Asgaard, and would live there eternally.
Then began the belief in Odin, and the calling upon him. The Swedes
believed that he often showed to them before any great battle. To some
he gave victory; others  
he invited to himself; and they reckoned both of these to be fortunate.
Odin was burnt, and at his pile there was great splendour. It was
their faith that the higher the smoke arose in the air, the higher he
would be raised whose pile it was; and the richer he would be, the more
property that was consumed with him.”

Now, of course, it almost goes without saying that what has been
presented here by Sturluson is a garbled and downright euhemeric point
of perspective. Odin did not die as a mortal man does (although, as with
Shiva, I do not discount the possibility of Odin having died –
temporarily – in some sense. Hard to keep a good God down, and all of
that; especially the Sovereign Lord of Death and the Departed), which
presents the interesting line of inquiry: what is Odin doing in a
funerary pyre? Is it that Sturluson has presented the funeral of a Norse
nobleman, simply because that is what he is presenting Odin to be? Not
impossible – but I suspect something else to be at play. Rather, Odin is
in the Pyre … because that is where it is that Agni is to be found in
the ancient (and, indeed – of course ! – the modern) Hindu
understanding.

We can tell this, in part, because that is what we find presented in the
relevant Vedic hymnals – and how Agni’s role therein is to travel (and
conveyance) back up to the Realm of the Gods, the Realm of the
Ancestors. Bringing back blessings , taking great offerings of wealth up
with Him, and ensuring also that the Glorious Dead borne upon the
flame’s pyre and the heightening transmission of its smoke, would be
well-supported and well-looked after in their eventual heavenly
situation thanks to those things burned in the appropriate manner. This
is all contained within the aforementioned two RigVedic hymnals – and we
find, also, quite a suite of Vedic hymnals devoted to Agni , and the
rites involving He , before great battles for blessings amidst war.

In other words – as we have demonstrated for certain other passages from
the Ynglinga Saga – what we have seen here is that the descriptions for
Odin therein are direct (if ‘summarized’, and occasionally ‘distorted’
via euhemericism etc.) concordances with the Vedic liturgy, the Vedic
understanding. See my earlier work “On Odin Brihaspati As Song-Smith –
The Sung Seizing Of The Wealth Of Cows”for a suite of examples drawn
from both Vedic and Eddic canons of text of this principle’s direct
application.

A further Ynglinga Saga saliency may perhaps be found in the accounting
of the fate of King Olaf –

“The Swedes took it amiss that Olaf was sparing in his sacrifices, and
believed the dear times must proceed from this cause. The Swedes
therefore gathered together troops, made an expedition against King
Olaf, surrounded his house and burnt him in it, giving him to Odin as a
sacrifice for good crops. \[…\]”  
“The temple wolf, by the lake shores,  
  The corpse of Olaf now devours.  
  The clearer of the forests died  
  At Odin’s shrine by the lake side.  
  The glowing flames stripped to the skin  
  The royal robes from the Swedes’ king.  
  Thus Olaf, famed in days of yore,  
  Vanished from earth at Venner’s shore.”

Now there are a number of ways in which this could be read in light of
our reconstructive typology. One is that it is simply the account of a
pagan nobleman’s funeral – except presented as evidence of the barbarity
of the heathen religion (i.e. due to the perceived lack of sacrifices to
guarantee the fertility of the land, even though it is overpopulation
which is responsible for the famine per Sturluson’s account, the Swedes
had killed the king to offer \*him\* as the sacrifice instead). Another
is that this is, indeed, a largely accurate rendition of that which had
happened – and the standard sacrificial rite to the Sky Father to ensure
the fertility of the land (which I looked at in “The Queen Of Serpents –
The Serpentine Form Of The Indo-European Earth Mother”) had indeed gone
unperformed by the King up until he became the main element in its
eventual, fiery, completion.

For our purposes, it is enough to note that not only is this yet another
fundamental proof for Odin as Sky Father (i.e. the God propitiated for
the fertility of the land just as we find in the Vedic understanding for
Him), but that this again has intriguing resonancies for those
aforementioned Vedic presentations to the Flame of the Funerary and
Offering Pyres. A “Temple Wolf” is how Odin is described here – directly
akin to the “Kravya” term utilized to refer to the ‘Devouring’ head of
Agni which consumes the flesh thusly offered, especially within the
funerary pyre (c.f several occurrences of this theonym in RV X 16).
Kravya, for us, means also “Wolf”(it is cognate with “Carnivore”) – and
in one of the utilizations of this term in RV X 16 (line 11), it is not
impossible that the term “Kravya-Vahana”has been understood not so much
in the sense of the “Flesh-Conveyor” but rather as the “Flesh-eating
Animal” \[‘Vahana’ can also mean a steed or a mount\] and therefore the
“Wolf” of the “Temple” also referred to as “Odin’s Shrine”.

This notion of a ‘Wolf-Vahana’, however, is most prominently attested in
the Nordic mythology instead as something of a ‘delegated role’ – as the
Valkyries are stated to ride. Something that would most certainly keep
with the metempsychotic or transmigratory role of the Funerary Pyre for
Agni, even if it is not Agni directly and in person taking charge of
these acts of conveyancing in that portion of the Nordic understanding.
Perhaps the understanding is the result of the female followers of the
Great God in question, that are often quite lethal to mortals (c.f the
Maenads and the Ash-Nymphs of Dionysus, and also the intriguing Varoti
\[‘Vata-Putri’ – Daughters of Vata(-Vayu)\] of the Kalash).

I would also surmise that part of what is being related in the
Gylfaginning pertaining to the funerary vessel of Baldr also reflects
this understanding – there, a certain Hyrrokkin (a name whose root is
that of Flame) comes mounted upon a truly formidable wolf; summoned to
dispatch the ship of Baldr out to sea – as it could not be moved (i.e.
Baldr could not be properly dispatched on across the ocean (as liminal
space between the worlds) upon the requisite conveyance-vessel – an
understanding also found in the Vedas) in the absence of the Fire.
Hyrrokkin’s push for the ship instantly causes it to not only be
dispatched out onto the ocean – but the frictional movement of the ship
upon its rollers causes it to burst immediately into flame (recall the
rubbing of sticks to produce the sacral fire in the Vedic conceptr). The
Wolf, meanwhile, that Hyrrokkin had ridden in upon is subdued at the
behest of Odin – something that may accord with the Vedic conceptry for
the ‘Kravya’ becoming subdued so that the other facing of Agni may
instead be invoked \[as seen in RV X 16\].

**Part Three – Kravyada And Jataveda – Wolf And Eagle  
**  
That ‘Wolf’ symbolism is something that prominently occurs for Odin – in
the Grimnismal, we find the description for the entryway to Valhalla as
bearing both a Wolf and an Eagle. We have earlier seen Agni referred to
in terms relating to that of a Wolf – and we have also made brief
reference to some of those occasions wherein Agni is referred to as a
Raptor. These are in the same (i.e. directly cognate) context to Odin’s
eagle form – the major one being the bringing of the Soma, or a
particular of the relevant fire rites that is strongly connected with
same (the Agnicayana). And I would hazard that the dual ‘Wolf’ and
‘Eagle’ symbolism may have deepa resonancies– the ‘Wolf’ as the
‘flesh-eater’, or the baleful head, which \*takes\* … the ‘Eagle’ as the
more radiant, regal, and positively regarded ‘head’ – that brings and
bestows, which \*gives\*. ‘Going up’ and ‘Coming down’, respectively.
But that is purely my conjecture – and other points of symbolic
resonancy are possible. Not least given the reasonably standard ‘Eagle’
association for the Indo-European Sky Father deific (which also plays a
role in the conveyancing of the soul of the great man up to the heavens
as part of, for instance, the Apotheosis known to the Classical
mythology and political representations of this most glorious
phenomenon).

The ‘dual natures’ of Agni being represented by the Wolf and the Eagle
encountered at the entryway to Odin’s shining Hall of the Glorious Dead
would, however, make quite some sense – as in the context of those tenth
mandala RigVedic hymnals that we have quoted from earlier, which
directly invoke the correlate Vedic realm, we see the alternating
references to Agni as ‘Kravyada’ (the ‘Kravya’ / ‘Carnivore’ / ‘Wolf’
that we have earlier met), and also as ‘Jataveda’. Jataveda is a
fascinatingly complex theonym (possessed, entirely unsurprisingly, also
by Shiva) – and while we may feasibly approach it as ‘Inceptor of the
Vedas’ or ‘Re(ve)lator of Wisdom’ (exactly what Odin does in the course
of the Grimnismal – the source where this ‘Wolf’/’Eagle’ representation
is to be found, along with much other Knowledge and Wisdom besides), the
sense which interests me here is the figurative connotation for it
frequently encountered: “The Knower Of All Beings”. Not only would this
most certainly fit with Odin’s incredible ken of knowledge and depthless
reservoir of hidden counsel – but it would also resonate with the
immense range and sharpless of clarity for the Vision of the Eagle. All
things may be seen by the Eagle, all creatures may be witnessed by the
Sky Father – and all spheres are within the reach of the mighty
wing-beat (swift with ‘Speed of Thought’, akin to the wide-ranging Mind,
per RV VI 9 5) and razor-sharp talons of the King of the Avian Realm.
Perhaps this is what is meant by Odin’s theonym –Arnhöfði
(‘Eagle-Headed’); the ‘Head’, after all, is the seat of this most
swiftly flying Mind.

Predictably, we also find the Eagle invoked with direct reference to
this transmission to the Realm of the Glorious / Ancestral Dead in the
Vedas – AV XVIII 3 66 invokes the Eagle in just such a capacity also in
an iconographic sense; whilst the Eagle is also prominent in the
detailing of the third Heaven in AV XVIII 4 4 (encountered also in
slightly different capacity at line 89) at the terminus of the pathway
of Agni JataVeda to be followed also by the Glorious Dead. And given the
broader usage, I would therefore contend that just as the Eagle is
invoked in AV XIX 65 to refer to Agni as the Sun (another ‘All-Seeing’
Eye – just as with Odin in Hlidskjalf, proximate to Valaskjalf ; and His
Blazing Eye likewise), the mention for the Eagle in various capacities
with reference to Odin is another ‘residual’ solar symbolism – just what
we should expect for Dyaus Pitar amongst the Germanic Indo-European
peoples. Something which would also accord with the ‘Solar Afterlife’
symbolism pervasively found amidst the more archaic Indo-European
mytho-cosmology (most prominently, as it happens, amongst the Vedic and
Hittite texts – although also somewhat less overtly recalled in other,
younger Indo-European spectrums of gleaning perspective as to the Land
Above/Beyond The Veil).

Perhaps there may be some similar currency, in terms of ‘sendings’ for
the Raptor understood in the Vedas to also herald the transfer of
Kingship (c.f AV III 3 3-4) and Agni to empower the receiver thereof –
as that is most certainly what transpires when Odin bound to the Fire
comes to the hall of Geirroth; young Agnar is granted the Kingship even
afore his aged father is slain. A bestowal of power at the feet of the
Fire – and all in resultance from making the appropriate propitiatory
offerings thereto.

Truly, as Odin Himself puts it therein – “For a single drink / shalt
thou never receive / A greater gift as reward.”

**Part Four – Odin In Flames – The Grimnismal  
**  
But to return to our major theme – that of Odin amidst the Flames – I
would also contend that the Grimnismal is, in its general unfolding,
something which might also be drawn upon to support the identification
of Odin with Agni. After all – what we see there is the God come as a
Guest, and the bountiful bestowal of wisdom and blessing that result
from the feeding of the God held literally between the flames of
Geirroth’shall. It is not hard to see how this might be read as just
exactly that – Agni, as the Guest (Sanskrit: ‘Atithi’ – also a prominent
Agni theonym) thusly conjured (exactly as we should expect in a Vedic
fire-rite), except rather literally into the hearth rather than oddly
between two pyres as Sturluson presents Odin. Now, of course, the fact
that the Guest is maltreated means that the ‘framing device’ for the
explication of the cosmos entered into is effectively a ‘morality play’
of such – wherein the consequences for disrespecting the dweller in the
altar-fire, for disrespecting also the custom of the sacred hospitality
in general, is clearly demonstrated for the luckless Geirroth. Yet
nevertheless, this notion of the wisdom being handed to the man who
\*does\* engage in the proper sacral conduct, and make offerings into
the fire that is ‘living’ (and recall the PIE distinction between
‘living fire” (i.e. hngwnis– whence ‘Ignis’, ‘Agni’) and the more
mundane kind (‘pehwr’ – whence ‘fire’, ‘pyre’, etc)). It is, in short,
the direct demonstration of the appropriate relationship between God and
Man – and one that we have also seen earlier in the Ynglinga Saga
wherein Odin bestows teaching in the priestly ways to those men somewhat
alike to Him in such abilities, which again mirrors the situation of
Agni relative to the Angirases and other priestly lines or clades in the
Vedic sphere.

Perhaps this also explains Odin’s cryptic remark at stanza 42 of the
Grimnismal observing that the Favour of the Gods shall come to the man
who reaches into the flames in order to remove the obstructing kettle
which lies above the pyre – and which also happens to block the direct
line from the fire in the hearth up through the smoke-aperture of the
roof of the dwelling, to the Sky and implicitly the line-of-sight (or,
we might suggest, the transversal conduit) to the Gods On High. An act
that would, simultaneously, open up that ‘roadway’ or ‘conduit’ –
‘portal’, we might more properly say – and also de-mundanify the fire to
render it open to becoming a sacral context. Something that might also
be required for the transfer of the Kingship that we have briefly
mentioned earlier.

**Part Six: The Swords – Odin’s Swords – Of Fire  
**  
And speaking to that transfer of the bearance of sovereignty in the
Grimnismal – the mechanism via which it is more immediately
accomplished, I mean – there is an intriguing pattern of Skaldic
resonancies for the Sword with Odin. But pointedly for our purposes –
the Swords in question are also referred to as being those of Fire.

The Skaldskaparmal makes reference, for instance, to “Odin’s Helm-Fire”
as a way to refer to the Sword (indeed, the specific exemplar listed
isÚlfr Uggason’s presentation of the aforementioned occurrence at the
funeral pyre-ship of Baldr featuring Hyrrokkin) so perhaps the sense is
instead of Odin’s Helm-Fire being the destructive force exerted upon the
helm of the adversary by the sword’s swing. Although an intriguing
alternative explanation would be that Sturluson has misunderstood
something very archaic in his compiling of the Skaldic verses – and that
instead, the fact that the bearers of Odin’s Helm-Fire encountered there
are Berserks is what is more immediately relevant. If I am right in my
speculation, this would be a way of referring to these men as having the
Manyu / Ugra \[‘Furor’ would be an acceptable translation\] within them
as His Chosen Warriors – in a manner directly cognate to the mode in
which Diomedes and Achilles are spoken of in the Iliad thanks to the
Bestowal by Athena of the Menos (an Ancient Greek term directly cognate
with ‘Manyu’ and, for that matter, ‘Mania’ – and which I have considered
at length in ‘MahaShivRatri And The Mytholinguistics Of War \[Part 3\] –
The Mind, The Mania, The Manyu’ … or but briefly explicated upon in
‘Furor Teutonicus And Furor Poeticus – The Furious Goddess-Given Power
Of Both Barbarian And Brahmin Alike’). The understanding for ‘Manyu’ and
‘Menos’ aligning quite directly with ‘Odr’ – the implications of which
(especially given Manyu as a prominent Roudran theonym/Aspect/War God)
ought be clear.

However, to move toward a more clear-cut instance from the same text
wherein“Swords are called Odin’s Fires” –

“A sword is Odin’s Fire, as Kormákr sang:  
The fight swelled, when the Warrior,  
The Wolf’s blithe Feeder, in tumult  
Fared with Odin’s \[Gaut’s\] ringing Fire-Flame;  
Urdr came forth from the Well.”

And we can perhaps also make mention of the swords utilized to
illuminate a Hall of Asgard at Odin’s command elsewhere in the
Skaldskaparmal –

“And at evening, when it was time for drinking, Odin had swords brought
into the hall, so bright that light radiated from them: and other
illumination was not used while they sat at drinking. “

But why am I making such a point out of this connexion of Odin and Fiery
Swords? Well, precisely because the Vedas Themselves do so – in direct
reference to Agni:

Agni is depicted not only as Sword-Armed (RV X 20 6; and yes, other
weapons are also associated to Agni elsewhere, including a certain sort
of spear …), but this Sword is depicted to be in flickering, flaring
motion as an integral part of the sacrificial pyre of living flame in RV
VIII 23 – “While, served with sacrificial oil, now upward and now
downward Agni moves his sword, /As doth the Asura his robe.”

There are literally too many references for Agni’s flames being a
pointed weapon to include all of these here. But RV VI 16 28 – “May Agni
with his pointed blaze cast down each fierce devouring fiend /May Agni
win us wealth by war.” springs instantly to mind, especially given
Odin’s well-storied theonymics that are of direct application to this
notion of “winning wealth by war” and blessing afore raiding or other
conflict has commenced as mentioned in the Ynglinga Saga, inter alia.

It would be tempting to infer that the sense being communicated in these
kennings for Swords as Odin’s Fires is simply recalling the ‘pointed’
shape and destructive, life-taking and \*hungry\* element of the flame.
Yet that would not quite explicate why they are pointedly “Odin’s” Fires
rather than just fires in general (which, to be sure, we also see as a
constituent component for kennings for swords in the Nordic poetic
schemas). Instead, it is something about Odin – in connexion with the
Flame – that makes the kenning work. I would surmise that it is a
recalled understanding for this strong association of Agni with the
Blade. Not just that we have already encountered – but also the mythic
and ritual understandings of the Vedic religion, wherein the First Sword
– Asi – is conjured from the Flames and described in terms that are
quite intentionally those of Rudra.

To quote from the Mahabharat (and at length because it is really quite a
cool piece of symbolic regaling):

“The sacrificial altar became adorned with Rishis skilled in sacrifice
and competent to perform all acts appertaining thereto, with \[bundles
of sticks\] of sacrificial fuel, and with blazing fires. And it looked
exceedingly beautiful in consequence of the sacrificial plates and
vessels all made of gold. All the foremost ones among the Gods took
Their seats on it. The platform was further adorned with Sadasyas all of
whom were high regenerate Rishis. I have heard from the Rishis that soon
something very awful occurred in that sacrifice. It is heard that a
creature sprang (from the sacrificial fire) scattering the flames around
him, and whose splendour equalled that of the Moon Himself when He rises
in the firmament spangled with stars. His complexion was dark like that
of the petals of the blue lotus. His teeth were keen. His stomach was
lean. His stature was tall. He seemed to be irresistible and possessed
of exceeding energy. Upon the appearance of that being, the earth
trembled. The Ocean became agitated with high billows and awful eddies.
Meteors foreboding great disasters shot through the sky. The branches of
trees began to fall down. All the points of the compass became unquiet.
Inauspicious winds began to blow. All creatures began to quake with fear
every moment. Beholding that awful agitation of the universe and that
Being sprung from the sacrificial fire, the Grandsire said these words
unto the great Rishis, the gods, and the Gandharvas. “This Being was
thought of by me. Possessed of great energy, His name is Asi (sword or
scimitar). For the protection of the world and the destruction of the
enemies of the Gods, I have created Him.”

That being then, abandoning the form he had first assumed, took the
shape of a sword of great splendour, highly polished, sharp-edged, risen
like the all-destructive Being at the end of the Yuga. Then Brahman made
over that sharp weapon to the blue-throated Rudra Who has for the device
on His banner the foremost of bulls, for enabling Him to put down
irreligion and sin. At this, the divine Rudra of immeasurable soul,
praised by the great Rishis, took up that sword and assumed a different
shape. Putting forth four arms, He became so tall that though standing
on the Earth He touched the very Sun with His Head. With eyes turned
upwards and with every limb extended wide, He began to vomit flames of
fire from his mouth. Assuming diverse complexions such as blue and white
and red, wearing a black deer-skin studded with stars of gold, He bore
on His forehead a Third Eye that resembled the Sun in splendour. His two
other eyes, one of which was black and the other tawny, shone very
brightly. The divine Mahadeva, the bearer of the Sula \[‘Spear’\], the
tearer of Bhaga’s eyes, taking up the sword Whose splendour resembled
that of the all-destructive Yuga fire, and wielding a large shield with
three high bosses which looked like a mass of dark clouds adorned with
flashes of lightning, began to perform diverse kinds of evolutions.
Possessed of great prowess, He began to whirl the Sword in the Sky,
desirous of an encounter. Loud were the Roars He uttered, and awful the
sound of His laughter. Indeed, O Bharata, the form then assumed by Rudra
was exceedingly terrible.

Hearing that Rudra had assumed that form for achieving fierce deeds, the
Danavas, filled with joy, began to come towards Him with great speed,
showering huge rocks upon Him as they come, and blazing brands of wood,
and diverse kinds of terrible weapons made of iron and each endued with
the sharpness of a razor. The Danava host, however, beholding that
foremost of all beings, the indestructible Rudra, swelling with might,
became stupefied and began to tremble. Although Rudra was alone and
single-handed, yet so quickly did He move on the field of battle with
the sword in His arm that the Asuras thought there were a thousand
similar Rudras battling with them. Tearing and piercing and afflicting
and cutting and lopping off and grinding down, the Great God moved with
celerity among the thick masses of His foes like forest conflagration
amid heaps of dry grass spread around. The mighty Asuras, broken by the
God with the whirls of His Sword, with arms and thighs and chests cut
off and pierced, and with heads severed from their trunks, began to fall
down on the earth. Others among the Danavas, afflicted with strokes of
the sword, broke and fled in all directions, cheering one another as
they fled. Some penetrated into the bowels of the earth; others got
under the cover of mountains, Some went upwards; others entered the
depths of the sea.

During the progress of that dreadful and fierce battle, the Earth became
miry with flesh and blood and horrible sights presented themselves on
every side. Strewn with the fallen bodies of Danavas covered with blood,
the Earth looked as if overspread with mountain summits overgrown with
Kinsukas. Drenched with gore, the Earth looked exceedingly beautiful,
like a fair-complexioned lady intoxicated with alcohol and attired in
crimson robes. Having slain the Danavas and re-established Righteousness
on earth, the auspicious Rudra cast off His awful form and assumed his
own beneficent shape. Then all the Rishis and all the celestials adored
that god of gods with loud acclamations wishing him victory.”

As applies that last transition – it most certainly seems resonant with
the lines of the Ynglinga Saga with reference to Odin: “When sitting
among his friends his countenance was so beautiful and dignified, that
the spirits of all were exhilarated by it, but when he was in war he
appeared dreadful to his foes.”

Entirely unsurprisingly, along with Rudra – this most magnificent of
Swords is also keyed to Agni. Something that may, perhaps, also find
expression in various of the Vedic (and most pointedly, the Brahmana
ritual manual) texts detailing the Vajra with which Vritra was slain.
Here we have the ‘Wooden Sword’ also referred to as one of the “Weapons
of theSacrifice” forming the ‘warhead’ of this most excellent Divine
demon-(dragon-)slaying weapon. And, in other verses, we have Agni
referred to in the veer-y same role:

“For it was aftershaping Agni into a sharp point, that the Gods rushed
forward, intent on slaying Vritra; and that sharp point, Agni, swerved
not. And so does he (the Sacrificer) now rush forward, after shaping
Agni into a sharp point, intent on slaying his wicked, spiteful enemy;
and that sharp point, Agni, swerves not: this is why he sacrifices to
Agni Anîkavat.” \[Shatapatha Brahmana II 5 3\]

Not for nothing is Agni amongst the illustrious ranks of the handful of
figures accorded the title of Vritrahan (‘Slayer of Vritra’) in the
Vedas! And that theonym – Anikavat – is additionally Odinically
resonant. For, per the most excellent commentary-work of Sayana, this is
rendered as “Possessing An Army”. Agni Anikavat, therefore, is Agni
Leading/Possessing An Army”. In a manner not entirely dissimilar to
quite a swathe of Odinic theonyms –Herjaföðr,Hergautr,Herjan,Hertýr.
And, of course, in the sense of being the first into the fray, leading
the charge of the Divine Army here –Atriðr.

In other words, if I am correct in my presumption that underlying the
Nordic mythology and mytho-poetry of which we are more directly
acquainted, there lies an ancient faith that has only fragmentarily been
filtered through to us via these beautiful (yet imperfect) means, and
which has quite something in common with the Vedic faith … then it would
stand to reason that the incredibly important ritualine conceptry we
find mentioned in the Vedas around such an ultimate weapon should also
have been known to the Germanics. And that this weapon, likewise, should
have both the ‘Fiery’ associations connoted by Piety – and the same
Patron / Embodying / Wielding Deity. That is to say Rudra-Agni.

We have already demonstrated the close concordancy of Vedic and Eddic
texts in other areas of direct relevancy to this potential linkage in
various of my previous works. Even if the Eddic presentation tends more
usually to be a considerably ‘slimmed down’, ‘summarized’ and ‘pared
back’ rendition in various ways – as we should expect given the nature
of its composition and compiler.

So therefore, in just the same manner that we find expression in the
Sanskrit conceptual syllabary for ‘Sword’ (indeed, all Swords) to be
termed after the foremost and greatest of their kind in the manner of a
mythic progenitor-prototype for their species of weapon (something that,
if we think about it, is also in a manner how Manu / Mannus has become
“Mankind” for our own race) – so too should we plausibly expect a suite
of kennings to have come down to us in the Germanic sphere that do
likewise. And with the added detail that the Sword’s Wielder, Patron,
and perhaps ‘essence’ – that is to say, Agni Rudra – is also preserved
as part of the ken-name.

In short: calling a blade Odin’s Flame is to recall the great weapon of
the God Himself – something that is of obvious poetic import and a most
powerful ‘boast’ indeed to its (human) wielder. It may also, as with the
sacral Sword conceptry we have but briefly elucidated upon from the
Vedas , have connotations of righteousness and the divine service built
into its referencing as well. “Odin’s Flame”, in other words, being not
merely a weapon – but an active implement, instrument of Piety : of
Faith!

**Part Seven – The Concluding Tongue  
**  
Now for various reasons, I do not consider this to be the end of the
matter. I have no doubt that this (A)Arti-cle will trigger all manner of
comments and quibbles from readers – and more especially, title-readers
who are not all that prone to battling their way through the actual body
to my work.

It is true that this piece has left out detailed examination of several
of the most compelling (and, to my mind, outright irrefutable) skeins of
evidence in support of my argument. That is partially for reasons of
space; and partially because I consider those revelations to already be
in circulation for those who would have wish to examine them. I have
included the titles to the works in question, which have been available
for some months now, with those interested readers in mind.

However, while it might be suggested that this \*particular\* article
has been cobbled together through (over-)readings of specific
occurrences and instances within the Nordic textual corpus that may
appear rather ‘circumstantial’ evidence at best … with this, I
(unsurprisingly) do not agree. Constellations are not made up of
hard-lines of light arka-ning between the stars that we incontrovertibly
assent are there. Rather, they are the result of wise men tracing the
patterns within the Heavens (containing ‘Arka’ of a different kind), and
thence showing how beneath those apparently unconnected far-flung dots
of light there is an essential, underlying anchorage of unity. So, too,
it is with the nature of our field.

We are unlikely to ever find a direct statement inscribed upon some
incredibly ancient ruin somewhere that “Odin Is Rudra” – and yet it is
not usually held controversial to point this point. Because we can see
the pattern – the proclivity for the data-points-of-illumination in each
culture’s version of this ‘constellation’ , to align with each other and
with the Great God Who underpins both perceptions.

As applies my statement that Odin is Agni – it is the same. We DO have
the statement that Agni is Rudra – made repeatedly, and for good
theological, metaphysical, and mythological reasons – in both primary
texts and secondary analysis. Some might irritatedly suggest that simply
because Odin is Rudra, and Rudra is Agni – that this does not also mean
that Odin is Agni, as various of the conceptry for Agni is (in their
view) not strictly coterminous with that of Odin. That the pattern does
not align – or only aligns so imperfectly as to be more ‘random’ than
‘revelatory’.

This, in my experience, is usually a perspective put forward by persons
who have some sort of fundamental disagreement with what various terms
and elements actually mean. So, for example, they may object to Odin as
Agni on grounds that Agni is a priestly figure – and claim that this
ipso facto means that He cannot be Odin … ignoring the aforementioned
(and covered in far greater detail in my earlier“On Odin Brihaspati As
Song-Smith – The Sung Seizing Of The Wealth Of Cows”) Ynglinga Saga
materials showing that Odin most definitely DOES have a ‘priestly’
understanding. Or they fundamentally misunderstand what an Indo-European
“Priest” actually \*is\* – and insist that Agni cannot be Odin because
Odin is a figure associated with warfare, raiding, and killings of the
foe … apparently ignorant of the quite extensive suite of Vedic
conceptry wherein yes, yes this is exactly what Agni (or, for that
matter, Brihaspati, etc.) does. When Sarama (another Wolf) wishes to
terrify the hell out of an assemblage of demons who have stolen from The
Gods … Who does She invoke? Why, various forms of Priest, of course!
(Human priests, as it happens – although also Brihaspati, and alongside
Him, Indra as well) And this should be unsurprising – after all, whether
we are speaking of Trita Aptya, Brihaspati, Agni, or in a sense, Vak
Saraswati : the great Slayers of the mightiest Demons are held to be the
Priests (with, again, direct co-expression of the relevant conceptry
around ‘Vritra/Vala’ to be found in the Ynglinga Saga’s presentation of
Odin, as detailed in the aforementioned earlier of my works).

Or perhaps it is because they have another Nordic figure they wish to
push as the “appropriate” cognate expression for Agni ; and therefore,
Odin as Agni would be fatal for this, so it is vigorously opposed as a
result. I shall not go through those sorts of claims here – it is for
them to make their cases; although as applies two that come up with some
frequency … Viktor Rydberg’s identification of Agni with Heimdallr
appears to have been made in ignorance of a rather weighty quotient of
material that would instead demonstrate Heimdallr to be Agni’s Son
(Kumara – the same figure that is Skanda, the Son of Shiva), and which
would also fairly strongly support Odin as Agni likewise. This is not
necessarily Rydberg’s fault, however – as his major works upon the
subject were published some years before much of the Vedic canon that is
of relevancyhere was actually made available. In other words – a
charitable interpretation would be that he was operating in the early
years of the field, and made what he could from what was available to
him … but with nearly a century and a half of further advancement in our
knowledge and the materials we have access to, various of his
conclusions have understandably been superceded by the facts. There is
no shame in that.

Where there \*is\* shame to be had, however, is amongst those much more
recent sorts propelling the outright heretical and abjectly blasphemous
insinuation of Agni somehow being Loki – as this is an overt
‘demonization’ of a God, in a manner that fundamentally misrepresents
just what and who Agni actually is. And it seems that various of the
people pushing this kind of thing have deliberately anti-righteous
agendas in mind. But it is for them to speak in their own defence … as
it becomes necessary. I shall dwell no more upon it.

Suffice to say – I have no doubt that even though what we know of the
Nordic/Germanic religious sphere of a thousand years ago or more is
lamentably incomplete … what we DO know, or can safely infer with
strength or even certitude – is that the scattered stars of this
constellation of our understanding of Odin, align resoundingly with
these foundations lain down also elsewhere in the firmament , most
completely and enduringly amidst the Vedas and the Vedic Hindu religion:
that Odin is Shiva , Shiva is Rudra , Rudra is Agni , and Agni is Odin.

Great Praise and Victory to the Spear-Tongued Father Of The Sages !
