+++
title = "Hera As Indo-European Goddess – A Preliminaryxa0Investigation"
date = "February 14, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/237be23d2da788cc93eea6246a81128f.jpg?w=564)

  
Over the weekend, I somehow wound up party to a debate featuring a man
claiming that Zeus was somehow not a Sky Father. Which, needless to say,
is a contention that I strongly oppose. Zeus Pater is quite clearly one
of the Greek expressions of the Indo-European Sky Father – as we can see
via not only linguistic, but also mythic and theological analysis. But
that is not the purpose of this piece. Which instead uses another claim
that he had made as a springboard to discuss another.

One of the points he advanced in service of this .. peculiar
perspective, concerned the figure of Hera. He appeared to be insinuating
that as the Sky Father has as counterpart and consort an Earth Mother –
the fact that Gaia is quite clearly an Earth Mother, would vitiate Hera
occupying this position … and therefore similarly disqualify Zeus from
being the Greek Dyaus Pitar.

Or, as he put it –“Shall I also be tasked to defend why Hera is not
Prthivi with Gaia also sitting right there?”

My reply begins:

Now, as it happens .. you’re \*partially\* correct. I stress that it is
partial.

Here’s the thing. The Greek (and broader Classical) mythology that we
have is not really, as people often like to think, a fixed and
monolithic thing. Rather, it’s the result of about a thousand years
worth of texts that all present materials that were known and in
circulation amidst the local communities of the writers (or attempt to
bring together a patchwork of these from across a broader sphere).

This creates some interesting issues of exegesis and theology – because
what one group of Greeks called a particular divinity might be slightly
or well more than slightly different to what another group of Greeks or
Greek-adjacent people called the figure. And may have not entirely
coterminous attributes, mythology, and means of worship for same.

So, for example, if we are looking for an Earth Mother deific in the
Greek mythology – there are a number of potential figures. Gaia is one.
Rhea another. Demeter a third. Persephone is also valid. As is Cybele.

Now, you may say that that is absurd – as everybody knows that
Persephone is the Daughter of Demeter, so how can these be the same.
Except that’s just it. The mythologies are seriously inconsistent. Not
so much about some of the occurrences in question – just Who was
involved in these.

So some mythic occurrences featuring Zeus, we find Hades or Poseidon in
the same role \[which is understandable, there was a still-remembered
belief in Classical times of all Three actually being One – and yes, we
have scriptural attestations upon the matter\]; and we have various of
those Earth Mother deific candidates aforementioned in almost
interchangeable manner occupying the same position in various tellings
of the myths in question \[and to this we should also make note of
Semele, one of the Mother figures for Dionysus – because of course, this
too is an ‘Earth’ name \[c.f Russian ‘Zemyla’, or the ‘Zeme’ of
Lithuanian ‘ZemePatis’\], etc.\]

As applies the matter under discussion, it is presumably important to
not that various of the accounts I am thinking of are of a ‘romantic’
nature. Thus further demonstrating that Zeus as the Sky Father is a
viable prospect – because of the linkage in these textual accounts to
the Earth Mother(s).

In short – in the Greek mythology, we can often identify the same
underlying deific ‘informing’ multiple perceptions and expressions
simultaneously.

This is similar, but also different, to the comparable phenomenon within
the Hindusphere – wherein we can observe that Rudra is Dyaus (not least
because this is stated directly in scripture), Prithvi is Parvati, etc.
… because whereas in the Hindu case, what we are often witnessing is a
deliberate focus upon particular Aspects of the same deity, and known to
be that – in the Greek cases, we not only have that occurring, but also
these aforementioned endeavours to reconcile an array of local
traditions where the essential unity of the underlying deifics in
question may no longer be immediately obvious to the writers. Which
doesn’t stop them, upon occasion, from making a stab at stating that
that is what is happening, or simply mentioning that accounts differ as
to which of two or more deifics was actually involved in the instance in
question.

Now, why I have raised all of the above – is because it is necessary to
note that just because there is a Gaia … this does NOT mean that the
\*only\* Greek cognate for Prithvi is Gaia. Other deific figures known
to the Greeks also are non-exclusively identifiable as the relevant
Indo-European Goddess.

However, speaking of Her – it is worth noting that the situation is even
more complex than that again. For you see, what we often conveniently
and short-handedly label as the “Earth Mother” deific … is not only the
Earth Mother – but also the Waters, and the Sky. And yes, we have the
quite direct Vedic attestations for this.

Some IE descendant cultures have focused more upon particular
understandings drawn from that suite – so, for instance, the Ju- of Juno
is shared with Jupiter \[Dyaus Pitar, again\] – and denotes the ‘Sky
Mother’ typology being referenced via the theonym. As we also see with
Dione , and I have suspected may also explain the “De-” of “Demeter”
(although I accept that this is somewhat contentious – there’s quite
some academic back-and-forth about whether the “De-” in question can
actually represent “Ge-” (as in “Gaia”) or whether this is
linguistically impossible, and a “Grain-Mother” interpretation of the
theonym is more warranted).

The clearest expression of this typology would likely be Vedic Aditi –
and, of course, Her Scythian equivalent, Tabiti. The Radiant Queen of
the Heavens.

The Danann of Tuatha De Danann fame, the Danu of the Vedic sphere, and
the Scythian Dragon-Mother, are prominent expressions of this
Waters-Mother understanding of the Goddess. As is, I would contend, the
Danae that is Mother to Perseus.

Where am I going with this? Well, you pointed to Hera and said that this
was not an equivalent for Prithvi, especially in light of Gaia; and
sought to infer from this that the identification of Zeus as Sky Father
was thusly problematic.

Except here’s the thing. As we have demonstrated \[or, rather, as I can
go off and dig up the literal litany of Vedic scriptural materials to
bombard you with should this prove necessary – or, you can take my word
for it\] , the Same Goddess can be expressed and understood via these
different ‘facings’. Sky, Earth, Water. Funnily enough, the same three
‘facings’ that we see with Zeus, Hades, Poseidon.

So the existence of Gaia does not, ipso facto, prove that Hera is not
the same Goddess as Prithvi. Rather, it just demonstrates that the Earth
facing (Prithvi) of the Goddess has a Greek equivalent Earth facing –
one, as we have seen, of several that are non-mutually exclusive.

Further theological analysis, that I have not (yet) engaged in, would be
necessary to determine just where Hera would best align in terms of this
broad-spectra typology for the Goddess Whose Consort Is The Sky Father.

I would \*tentatively\* hypothesize that as we saw with “Ju-” of “Juno”
or “Di-” of “Dione” , that the “He-” of “Hera” may have some degree of
connexion to the “He-” of “Hemera” ; and would therefore connect, once
again, to the Daylight Sky and to Warmth and Light (PIE: ‘Heh’ – ‘To
Burn’ – like Heat); in a not entirely dissimilar manner to what we see
where PIE ‘Tep’ (‘Warmth’ – like Tepid; also at the root of Sanskrit
‘Tapas’) informs the theonym for Tabiti of the Scythians (although
obviously, the Greeks have … rather reduced in relative power terms this
Radiant Queen of the Heavens in comparison to the Vedic and Scythian
presentation of Her) .

What would this mean in terms of Hera? Well, it would set out a
plausible Vedic equivalent of Prithvi … or, rather, the same Goddess
that is Prithvi, but differently Aspected.

Now, it might be thought that I am making a bit much out of the various
Vedic theological directives around the Goddess in question having these
two (Heaven and Earth) or three (Heaven, Earth, Waters) expressions …
but if we look at the relevant scriptural materials (and especially
their post-Vedic continuances), we do find frequent strong coterminities
of Aditi and Prithvi. The Motherhood of Indra, for instance – and the
underpinning consort-linkage with the Sky Father (Dyaus Pitar) that
results in same.

Or, to phrase it more directly:

The existence of Hera does not render Zeus a non-viable candidate for
the Sky Father.

But rather – the existence of Hera would appear to support Him.
