+++
title = "The Past Is A Battlefield – Fought Over By The Armies Ofxa0Modernity"
date = "February 25, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/152901001_10164839898830574_2513132439171161479_n.jpg?w=510)

Some of the comments from my latest article. Which I find interesting –
because it suggests that some people who’d self-identify more toward a
“hard conservative” view … think we’re being, and I quote “feminist
\[…\] revisionists”; whereas some people who would appear to identify
more toward the “hard progressive” end of things think we’re being
“fascist”.

We’re not being either. The article in question presented – accurately –
a range of evidence drawn from the spheres of archaeology, theology /
mythology, and history; with a view to setting straight a recurring
misconception about the place of women in archaic Indo-European culture
… with particular emphasis upon the (Post-)Andronovo ones (that is to
say, Scythian and Vedic).

So as you will note, there is not disagreement from these commenters
about the actual evidence. Instead, there is merely a near-total
disengagement therefrom.

“I don’t care what feminist steppe revisionists say about the
Indo-Europeans”, says one.

Which is curious – as we’re not pushing a feminist line here, and had
spent a few paragraphs pointing out how (post-)Gimbutas feminists
actually *dislike* and have attempted to de-legitimate what we *are*
saying.

And almost by definition we’re not engaging in “steppe revisionism” – as
the Steppe is and always has been quite definitely strongly relevant for
archaic Indo-European culture, no ‘revisionism’ required. If anything,
we are *opposing* ‘revisionist’ efforts to obscurate the evidence in
question.

And as applies what he then says – the most succinct reply is that
famous one: “Eppur Si Muove”. “And Yet, It Moves”. A theological maxim I
have made some semi-frequent use of in the past. Or, phrased another way
… you can come up with an ever-more-tenuous strain of ideological “no, I
don’t want to believe that!” – it is not going to alter the facts.

Now as for the second commenter … what can we say. The presentation of
the past is declared to be “reduction to symbolic fascist fetish”. The
observation that there is a place *in* society for women demonstrated
via the scriptural, archaeological, historic evidence in question, is
declared to be “indoctrination” rather than “empowerment”.

And I mean – I suppose there is some truth in that. No person is an
atomized individual – except in horrendous, arch-libertarian theory – so
being a part of (rather than apart from) society entails the process of
socialization. Learning to be a person , living up to your heritage and
culture, I suppose you may term it “indoctrination” if you like. I would
have said “Sanskara” – “Refinement”, “Imprinting”, “Shaping”,
“Crafting”. Growing, even, is a relevant conception here.

But is history or archaic world-views – even where we are seeking to
establish that it can be a legitimate guide for the present and future –
necessarily “fascist”? For that matter, is it “anti-fascist”?

We believe it is neither.

If we are discussing the realities of life for a certain stratum of
women in Scythian or Vedic society circa four thousand years ago … it
is, if anything, *Ante-Fascist*.

It is *well* prior to the relatively modern movements and labelings
which are insistently invoked.

Just as, now that I think upon it, my observation of the theological
irreducible importance of the Queen of the Gods to the relevant (and
closely related) mytho-religions in question … is not “Feminist”, nor
“Anti-Feminist” – but “Ante-Feminist”.

Endeavouring to re-cast anything and everything in modern political
terminology just means that one is engaging with modern political
terminology.

Something often done by those who wish to reshape the past – rather than
learning from it.

Because they recognize – as we do – that an understanding of the past
provides the foundation for present existence and the guide to future
action.

So reconstruing the past as merely the backward extension of the seeming
ever-eternal present … well, that makes it improbable to genuinely
question whether this or that present-day ideology or conception of
things is actually upon firm ground.

You can see that here with the first commenter’s response – he does not
like what is in the past, and so he declares that it is a modern
reshaping of the past to be something other than what it was. He does
not like the implications that the past has for the present, and so he
attempts to de-legitimate the past. Declares it a ‘false’ past – a
“revisionist” one.

The other one – the second commenter – is cleverer. He instead proclaims
that the “symbolic” inferency from the past is the problem because it is
supporting something which he thinks he might not like.

And yes – it is indeed legitimate to call into question interpretations
of the past, and the precise sorts of linkages we then endeavour to draw
from past into present and craftings of the vision for the future.
People of a range of political persuasions (or personal agendas) all the
time make frankly bewildering wrong-inductions from even correct
evidence, correctly presented.

But that does not necessarily mean that simply because an inference has
been red-flagged that it is an inaccurate (or un-useful) one.

And while it is not necessarily a good perspective, either – I cannot
help but feel that if we are attracting opprobrium from persons on both
notional extremes of a given modernist spectrum … we are quite probably
doing something quite well and authentically as the result.

But perhaps that is my inner “feminist fascist symbolic steppe
revisionist indoctrinator” speaking.
