+++
title = "On The Current Colonial Consternation Contra Classicalxa0Studies"
date = "February 21, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/image001sized.jpg?w=720)

And so we come to it again. The periodic turning of the wheel wherein
some academic-with-an-agenda decides that Classical Studies Must Go.
It’s happened before, it shall no doubt happen again in due time. But
what interests me is the reasoning being advanced this time around. You
see, the ‘problem’ for Classics is its perceived ‘Whiteness’. And all
that that entails.

What they mean by this is that there’s no ‘space’ for non-white faces
and voices within the major canon of the Classics – except as
adversaries, occasional villains, or rather literal chattels. Or, where
this is not the case, there’s just little presence for these non-white
groups all up.

And you know, I have some sympathy for that view. Nobody likes being
reduced down to the occasional two-dimensional ‘stock filler’
caricatures of somebody else’s story, where they’re present at all.
Although that doesn’t change the fact that we are unlikely to see too
terribly much representation for the Chinese (for instance) amidst the
canon of Classical Studies in primary text format.

It would be simple enough to suggest the obvious: “if you don’t like the
fact that your particular shade of ancestors aren’t really represented
within ancient Greek nor Roman history, culture, literature,
architecture, etc. … maybe you would be less discomforted to instead
study their equivalent spheres and your own more immediately relevant
heritage instead?”

But I don’t think that’s going to satisfy anybody. Not least because, if
we get right down to it, there’s a whole suite of immensely cool stuff
in Classics that you really don’t have to be related to either the
original enactors of those cultures nor their much more recent co-opters
(and more upon that in a moment), to be able to get some enjoyment or
some inspiration or guidance from.

But you can hear that kind of justification for why Classics must stay
from most anywhere else – and an extensive list of the various ways in
which Classical-origin conceptry has helped to seriously build and
continue to inform the modern world, likewise. That is not my purpose in
writing here today.

Rather, it’s to take another look at this “Whiteness” business within
the Classical paradigm – and to show how these things really have been
turned upon their head by everybody (not just the current crop of
outrage-merchants) involved.

Now, at its core, “Whiteness” is an illusory thing. It has no intrinsic
existence. It’s a socially mediated cultural construct that has
seriously permeable and ever in flux boundaries. Classical Athenians and
Romans are, apparently, “Whiteness” incarnate. Modern Athenians and
Roman Italians are, depending upon how ‘proper’ your Old-Timey Racism,
possibly not. \[I disagree with this view, of course – but that is
partially because I don’t think that ‘White’ is a race, but DO think
that ‘Indo-European’ is one; and make jokes about how if you are being
proper about such things, an Iranian is ‘white’ but a Finn isn’t. But I
digress\] Swedes, per Benjamin Franklin, were “Swarthy”, and there was
quite a long-running judicial argument in the United States over whether
various Afghan, Iranian, and Indian persons were ‘white’ in the eyes of
their law \[much of the time – they were. Up until the final court case
upon the matter, the US Supreme Court decision in United States v.
Bhagat Singh Thind, which effectively had the Supreme Court Justices
acknowledging that the evidence presented by Captain Thind, a US Army
veteran who’d served in World War One, was for the purposes of science
indeed ‘white’ … but that they didn’t care about the science, so in
their eyes he was not\].

Whiteness, therefore, is in the eyes of just about everybody, a tacit
declaration that somebody or something is part of the
culturo-civilizational “In-Group”. Non-Whiteness, by contrast, is what
is outside of, and other to this ‘in-group’ ; and of course there is
quite a broad ‘grey area’ in between the two wherein at certain times or
in certain eyes, something may be one thing … and at other times or in
other perspectives, it may be quite the Other. Those examples around
Italians and Greeks (and, for that matter, the oft-blond Polish et co)
being ‘non-White’ in various WASP eyes, are classic (if not Classical)
exemplars for this ‘grey zone’ in action.

So … having established that what we’re meaning by ‘Whiteness’ appears
to be the standing on the in-side of this In-Group / Out-Group
distinction … this therefore leads us to consider just how that lense
may be applied to the peoples of Classical antiquity. And who’s ‘In’
(and therefore ‘White’) versus ‘Out’ (and therefore ‘Non-White’) way
back then – and thusly, for the purposes of the field’s modern
representational metrics.

And that’s where things get, I think, rather interesting.

For you see – most of the people that are being meant, today, when one
says “White”, and speaks of “Whiteness” in the academic realm … they are
not the people descended directly (for the most part) from the Classical
civilizations of old. No, they are people who are of Germanic stock,
Celtic stock. They may indeed be the people whose own more immediately
proximate ancestors of the past two to three hundred years or so made a
big deal about being the ‘Inheritors of Rome’ or ‘Intellectual Heirs of
Athens’ … but during the Classical Age, what we find is that these
groupings are NOT the In-Group. Quite the contrary – they are the
Out-Groups. The Barbarians of the Hinterland. Stock-tropes in the
popular imagination of the day who have strange customs, strange manners
of uncivilized dress and personal grooming (I mean really – Trousers?
They’ll never catch on!) , iconically mockable accents (“Baah!
Baaaaah!”), and may be easily referenced in political rhetoric as the
incipient, looming threat to the centers of power and civilization ( …
and you know what ? Those references might be right! Celts had sacked
Rome once before, and Germanic tribes caused the mysterious
disappearance of three Legions in Teutoburg as but the most famous of
their many exploits in these regards ).

And, to put further point to it – these ‘outgroup’ populations also have
that rather frequently encountered characteristic of the ‘Non-White’ in
academic discourse: they wind up Colonized People; with all the loss of
not only political and economic sovereignty (as well as life!) which
that entails, but also the compulsory reshaping of customs, culture, and
traditions that that engenders. \[It should be noted, of course, that
not ALL Celtic nor Germanic populations wound up going thus – beyond
Hadrian’s Wall, and out into the mists of Germania where Legions now
feared to tread … the indomitable Barbarians too ‘savage’ to be
corralled, civilized, nor conquered, still lived their ‘outgroup’
ways).

Although it must be said, the tables rather turn in some of the high
Classical Greek conceptry – various texts detailing the Persian Wars,
for instance. There, there are a rather large quotient of prominent
figures who are ‘out-group’, and who would probably even meet the modern
academic definition for ‘people of colour’ as well (although that, too,
is a seriously moving target dependent upon the writer and the needs of
the situation). Except the major thrust of them constitute an armed,
well-organized and quite literally imperialist effort looking to
colonize the Greeks as they have already colonized and subjugated just
about everywhere else. As Zizek pointed out – this reconstrues some of
the Greek materials (or, for that matter, the modern film The 300)
taking quite a negative view against these Persian invaders, as being an
anti-colonial struggle. Something that is additionally rather
interesting given how, I am pretty sure, the cosmopolitan Achaemenid
Empire would be a darn sign closer to a modern multi-culturalethos than
the famously parochial Greek city-states that literally gave us the
concept of “Xenophobia”.

The perceptions are not all negative, though – the Scythians, in
Herodotus’ presentation, come across as rather amazing, almost mythic
figures in their own right. There are an array of caricatures and tropes
deployed about Scythians in various texts, of course (and as a point of
interest, Aristophanes’ presentation of a ‘stereotype’ Scythian accent
in one of his plays has provided an intriguing resource for the
reconstruction of Scythian language as a result), but then, the Greeks
did that about everybody, in a manner that might perhaps be compared to
how we have modern-day dramatic affectations to demonstrate a character
is a Scot or a Texan (I’m attempting to keep things within the ‘White’
sphere for comparatives – I am not sure if a Scot counts as ‘white’
these days, or for that matter, a Texan, however).

There is a legitimate question, I think, as to whether the Scythians
really ‘count as’ ‘People of Colour’ in any meaningful sense aside from
their out-group-ery (they are, after all, well-renowned for having red
or blond hair, we know that they’re often R1B, and they’re literally a
direct continuation of the Urheimat in so many important, vital ways);
but they are also Iranic, also utilized as an ‘other’ by Herodotus to
set up a yardstick for comparison of the Greek customs in particular
those of the Black Sea colonists – so in that light, the fact that
various of them get pretty neat deeds and prominent speaking parts, I
think, may matter for the purposes of this analysis.

All things considered, it is not hard to see how if your yardstick for
the worth of a humanities subject is “are we in this” – then Classics
must seem a dry and inhospitable mental terrain. Except this presents us
with a bit of a paradox. As in a very real sense, if our mechanism for
assessing whether we’re “in this” is whether our direct ancestors were
represented at the heart of the thing – then the loudest voices
championing the continuance of the Classics are similarly on the outer.
If you are Germanic, then the major way you are encountered in the
Classical texts is as a figure of fear – or as something to be civilized
… an object to be acted upon or reacted to, we might say. Similarly for
the Celtic peoples – when one is reading Caesar’s Gallic Wars (as is
still the case for high school students learning Latin, I believe), you
are engaging with the perspective of somebody who is imperializing those
whom you may be more immediately related to. When I did Latin at high
school myself, we made use of Cambridge textbooks which took as their
setting the Roman province of Britain post-Conquest. Or, phrased another
way – you have the descendants of the colonized in that instance, making
fairly active use of the conceptry of the colonizer in their own
latter-day education some two millennia later.

And that, I think, is why we still study Classics today. Not because
there is an extreme amount of seriously cool stuff contained therein
(although it is also that). But because the Classics, however you choose
to slice it (and I am now remembering just how many verbs for “to kill”
we learned in secondary school Latin), are very much at the root of the
modern world. Which means that it is much more difficult to endeavour to
understand and to navigate its intricacies without them. Not impossible,
mind – and Anacharsis the Scythian managing to significantly impress the
whole of Athens even despite his ‘barbaric’ Scythian origins to the
point that they bestowed upon him the unprecedented honour of
Citizenship, shows how even somebody with very little backgrounding in
the milieu in question might seemingly do so. So you can certainly make
a decent fist of negotiating a political landscape without having read a
word of Caesar or Pericles; and you can rail against property developers
buying their way into politics (or, for that matter, slum-landlordism)
without ever having heard of Crassus.But it is most definitely a leg
up.

And that is because – to reference, obliquely, the Pirates of Penzance –
it is not so much whose ancestors, whose heritage they *were* … as whose
heritage they *are now*.

We, the descendants of the Barbarians upon the periphery, and those
stock-characters of Imperial propaganda and lurid literary travelogue
fiction .. have in some ways most successfully appropriated the
Classical milieu. We have made it our own. And, curiously enough, we
have ensured that it survives even amidst these other climes as a
result.

Now if you want to study something *other* than the Classics – if you
want to instead pour your mental effort and the sculpting of your
head-space into different fields, different heritages, different
pasts-which-yet-might-be … then that is OK. I, personally, am across
quite an array of different backgrounds precisely because i recognize
that there is worth and validity to be found in all of them –
particularly in cross-comparison with one another.

But the risk we are running with some of these demands that Rome and
Athens succumb to become the Carthage that must Delenda Est … is that
instead of removing a compulsion for somebody who really doesn’t see the
point in engaging with Classics – we abjure even the option for those
who *do* wish to do so, instead. Probably, I suspect rather darkly,
because a people cut off from these sorts of grand ideas and nexes of
heritage are more easily pliable – as the lessons of the past are made
ever more remote, arcane, and abstruse via comparison to accountancy or
something.

In any case, and speaking of archaic wisdom … I shall close with a few
lines from Aristophanes’ ‘The Wasps’ (a play about the dangers of
political demagoguery, warmongering, and angry old white men in the
judiciary …gosh, and who said Classics was irrelevant to today!) that
have stuck with me since I encountered them in 6th form, near a decade
and a half ago now. I feel they rather do sum up the circumstance in
which we now find ourselves upon these matters:

“Yes, we may be poor old crocks,  
But the whiteness of our locks  
Does the City better credit, I would say,  
Than the ringlets and the fashions  
And the pederastic passions  
Of the namby-pamby youngsters of today.”
