+++
title = "On The Restoration Of The Position Of Women To That Of Archaic Indo-Europeanxa0Society"
date = "February 24, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/151298380_815551482390511_6410817062069672706_n.png?w=580)

I find this image – and what it represents – rather intriguing. Because
what we are presented with here is an instance of a Past challenging a
Present. And it is something with quite archaic Indo-European
mytho-cultural resonancy. What do I mean by this? Well, first, here’s a
brief description of what’s going on in the image itself:

“Training at a Durga Vahini \[‘Army of Durga’\] camp.

The Durga Vahini is a Hindu Nationalist women’s organization, operating
as part of the Vishva Hindu Parishad \[‘World Hindu Council’\]. It has
had its share of controversies, but principle of empowering women to
make vital contribution to both political and spiritual sphere is
important.

And considering general perception of religious – more especially
religious fundamentalist – organizations as tending to relegate women to
the background … the Durga Vahini’s approach runs directly counter to
that.”

I wrote the above four years ago; and, of course, my understanding has
grown in various relevant spheres since then.

Something we often hear is this insistent – and insistently outright
wrong – metanarrative about how Indo-European culture and religion was
always the sort of patriarchy that would not be out of place in Saudi
Arabia today.

And, as we’ve covered in a few previous pieces upon the subject – that
PIE religion ‘must’ therefore have been made up of warlike *male* Sky
Gods that invaded and conquered the peaceful matriarchal Earth Mother
worshipping pre-IE in various directions.

This is, to put it bluntly, untrue in just about every respect. Insofar
as yes, most definitely Indo-Europeans have Warlike Sky Gods … but as it
happens, some of the foremost of those in the field of war are, and
always have been, *Goddesses*. Athena is probably the best-known
expression of this in the West, and Her close Vedic correlate, Vak
Saraswati helps to show just how archaic this understanding truly is.
Meanwhile, the parallel expressions of Demeter Erinyes and Parvati into
Kali , help to further show that an Earth Mother deific (Who is also a
Sky Goddess – see my recent work on Aditi, Hera, De-Meter, etc.) is
quite capable of assuming a black and furious form to rend limb from
terror-struck limb.

And it is not just in the mythology that we find these features. The
tales of ‘Warrior Women of the Steppe’ have likewise proven vindicated
via the archaeological finds of Scythian female combatants – not merely
women buried with weapons, but women who were more than capable of using
them, based around bone-development etc. … and who also took wounds in
battle. Perhaps there is even truth to Herodotus’ mention speaking of
particular Scythian nation that “In regard to marriage, it is the custom
that no maiden weds until she has killed a man of the enemy; and some of
them grow old and die unmarried, because they cannot fulfill the law.”

Certainly it is not for nothing that we find the Scythian Pantheon to be
ruled by a Queen – Tabiti – directly co-expressing that found in the
figure of Vedic Aditi, the Radiant Queen of the Heavens, and the
Sovereign of all existence and beyond.

Now, speaking of the Scythians in relation to this image – it has long
been our contention that the Scythians are a direct ‘carrying forward’
of many of the important fundaments of Proto-Indo-European culture and
religion. Certainly, they are in broadly the right area, Herodotus’
Scythians being directly on top of the Urheimat.

To refine this remark somewhat, it has also long been abundantly clear
that the Scythians represent a strong continuance of the Andronovo
(post-PIE) culture that is, effectively, that of the archaic
(Proto-)Indo-Iranians. Hence, in no small part, the Zoroastrian fear and
hatred of the Turanian – as the Turanian Deva worship is precisely the
ancient Indo-Iranian religious orthodoxy which the Zoroastrians sought
to reject and overthrow.

The Vedic Religion, too, is a direct continuance of the Andronovo one –
hence the repeated and strong concordancies that we have been able to
demonstrate between the Vedic and Scythian mytho-religious spheres.

And what do we find in the Vedas? Why, we have this similar occurrence
of a powerful place for potent women. There is a prominent female
warrior who is mentioned in a number of RigVedic hymnals, for instance;
we have female Rsis as well; and observations of Brahmin women receiving
the proper initiations that today would be a near exclusive domain of
men.

In short – the notion of a more prominent and empowered place for at
least some women within archaic Indo-European society seems like it
should be utterly uncontroversial.

And yet .. sadly, it is. Why? Well, as applies the Past side of things …
the past is a hugely contested space wherein the narratives and the
petty perspectives of the Present seek inexorably to do battle for
control of the Future. Thus it is here. And as in many a fractious and
internecine combat, strange alliances have been made.

Following Gimbutas, there has been a persistent effort by certain sorts
of feminist to present the position of women within Indo-European
society and culture as, effectively, that of silenced chattels. This is
not to say that this did not happen for some women … but, then, in a
hierarchical and likely slave-keeping situation, it would also have
happened for many men.

But the long and the short of it is that this notion of an incredibly
patriarchal warlike society and peaceful utopian matriarchy being ground
into the dust by same … it is appealing to their sensibilities.

They do not want to acknowledge that, just as we see in the animal
kingdom with the Lioness (an entirely uncoincidental frequent
iconographic association for the Indo-European Goddess-complex in
question) and in history … a woman of temperament is also veer-y capable
of carrying out acts of imperialism , committing violence – may even be
quite adroit at it and enjoy it likewise. It does not fit with their
idealized narrative preconception of ‘peaceful (and therefore superior)
women’, nor what this would imply for their (non-existent, so literally
utopian) female-dominated societies of the purported pre-IE past.

Meanwhile, much of the above also adequately describes the ‘idealized’
view of the past held by varying sorts of misogynist … who differ only
from that particular frame of post-Gimbutas feminism in which elements
they consider to be ‘good things’ about the aforementioned narrative.

Even though they may disagree quite strongly about whether some sort of
pre-PIE ‘matriarchy’ would be an improvement on ‘Barbaric’ and
‘ultra-masculine’ PIE … they both have a hugely vested psychosocial
interest in endeavouring to de-legitimate the notion of women having
agency, martial agency, or powerful and respected places within the
martially proficient and demonstrably expansionistically successful PIE
and post-PIE sphere.

There is also, it should be noted, an understandable fatigue from quite
a range of others about insistent (and often downright Wiccan) pushes to
radically ‘re-interpret’ \[and/or ‘re-imagine’\] elements of the past in
line with more contemporary proclivities as well. So every female grave
featuring weaponry – whether ceremonial or otherwise – becomes
insistently reconstrued as that of some battle-hardened ‘Shield-maiden’.
And that has the unfortunate flow-on effect of massively increasing
skepticism for entirely legitimate archaeological attestations like
those encountered in the burials of Scythia above. Because we’re now
pre-primed to presume that anything and everything that might so happen
to lie a little at odds with how we might have thought about the past is
some form of conspiratorial subversion to take dominant control of the
present. Which, to be sure – sometimes it might be!

But to bring it back to what is on display here, in this picture – it
has long been my trenchant observation that the patterns of the past
have a habit of reasserting themselves through present developments … by
which I mean, even though we may not consciously know that that is what
we are doing nor why it is that we are doing it – we come to mirror more
closely the ways of our ancestors; almost as if we are acting upon
instinct to do so.

It is not *quite* Andronovo society in various ways; but this notion of
giving young women some religious instruction, and the beginnings of
weapons-training \[because, of course, an air-rifle is … exactly that –
a rudimentary training device\], even amidst a cultural sphere that has
become rather heavily patriarchal (in large measure due to external
influences – but more upon that some other time) … well, slowly but
surely, perhaps, things may be heading back in the right direction.
