+++
title = "On Valaskjalf, Hlidskjalf, Paramevyoman: The Golden Throne And The Indo-European Solar Realm Of The Glorious/Ancestral Dead – The Indo-European Cosmology – A Brief Guided Tour: Partxa0Dieux"
date = "February 22, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/127555571_10164438521715574_3758755534090003876_n.jpg?w=397)

As we have often maintained, the ‘Vedic’ and ‘Eddic’ Indo-European
mythologic canons fit together exceptionally well. This does not simply
mean that they are closely concordant – but also that where there are
‘gaps’ in our understanding in the one, we often find some element in
the other which corresponds to the area that is now obscure to our
modern pair of eyes.

So it is with Valaskjalf and Hlidskjalf – two somewhat obscure heavenly
concepts which have come down to us largely via the Gylfaginning
(although both are also mentioned in the Grimnismal, inter alia).

Now, the major appearances of these therein are rather brief. To quote
from the Brodeur translation:

“There is one abode called Hlidskjálf, and when Allfather sat in the
high-seat there, he looked out over the whole world and saw every man’s
acts, and knew all things which he saw.” \[…\]  
“Another great abode is there, which is named Valaskjálf; Odin possesses
that dwelling; the gods made it and thatched it with sheer silver, and
in this hall is the Hlidskjálf, the high-seat so called. Whenever
Allfather sits in that seat, he surveys all lands. At the southern end
of heaven is that hall which is fairest of all, and brighter than the
sun; it is called Gimlé. It shall stand when both heaven and earth have
departed; and good men and of righteous conversation shall dwell
therein: so it is said in Völuspá.–

A hall I know standing \| than the sun fairer,  
Thatched with gold \| in Gimlé bright;  
There shall dwell \| the doers of righteousness  
And ever and ever \| enjoy delight.”

I have chosen to include the element around Gimle for reasons that shall
become obvious as we proceed further upwards through this piece;
although it should be noted that the Voluspa presentation for it is
subtly different.

However, before we get into the comparative cosmology and mythology … it
is necessary to take but a brief look at the relevant linguistics.

Both Valaskjalf and Hlidskjalf are, obviously, built around the term
‘skjalf’ – often translated as ‘shelf’, however I feel that that lacks a
certain lustre. ‘Shelf’ it most definitely enjoys some conceptual
resonancy with … but given that ‘skjalf’ itself actually rather means a
‘high place’ such as a watch-tower’s vision-station or the upper
surmounting cliffs and crags of a mountain, it seems rather diminishing
to utilize the same sort of term one would apply to a portion of one’s
kitchen pantry.

‘Vala’ (Valr) is immediately familiar to us – it occurs also in, say,
‘Valkyrie’ (or, for that matter, Valhalla), and refers to the Slain, the
Dead. So, what we have here is a High Place, such as that of a
mountain-top or the elevated portion of a fortress (tower), which is
also where the ‘Slain’ are to be found. A ‘Heaven’, we might suggest,
possessed of the shining radiancy of Silver for its exterior covering of
roof.

‘Hlið’, meanwhile, refers to an ‘opening’ – it occurs in Old Norse to
mean a ‘Gate’, and its Proto-Germanic form, ‘hlida’ makes it even more
clear: referring to a facility for a covering, a ‘lid’. ‘Lid’ is itself
from this same ‘Hlida’ particle, in case you were wondering. So,
‘Hliðskjálf’ would mean the High Opening-With-A-Lid. A High station
‘midst the Heavens and the shining sphere, phrased in terms of a
watch-tower, that is also a Throne, and from where Odin can look out and
see all.

Sound confusing? It shouldn’t be.

For you see, what is being described there is an Eye. An Eye in the Sky.
An Eye in the Sky that is radiantly situated – and illuminates as we see
it, just as it sees us down here below.

This is the frequent understanding for the Sun encountered in the Hymns
of the Vedas – the All-Seeing, oft-Unblinking Eye of Lord Varuna or Agni
(but, then, I repeat myself); and hailed in other texts as one of the
Three Eyes of Lord Shiva. It also has noted attestation in other
Indo-European linguistic and mythological corpuses – occasional
references for the Sun as the Eye of Zeus, for instance; and linguistic
artefacts such as the Old Irish ‘Suil’ being of the same root as
‘Sol(ar)’, and meaning ‘Eye’ in that language.

However, via way of more direct demonstrative explication:

AV IV 16:

“1 The mighty Ruler of these worlds beholds as though from close at
hand, / The man who thinks he acts by stealth: all this the Gods
perceive and know.  
2 If a man stands or walks or moves in secret, goes to his lying-down or
his uprising, / What two men whisper as they sit together, King Varuna
knows: He as the third is present. \[…\]  
4 He that should flee beyond the heaven far away would not be free from
king Varuna. His spies come hither (to the earth) from heaven, with a
thousand eyes do they watch over the earth.  
5 King Varuna sees through all that is between heaven and earth, and all
that is beyond. He has counted the winkings of men’s eyes. As a
(winning) gamester puts down his dice, thus does He \[Rule\].”

AV XIII 2:

“With that same eye of Thine wherewith Thou seest, brilliant Varuna. /
The active one among mankind,  
22 Traversing sky and wide mid-air, Thou metest with Thy beams our days,
/ Sun, seeing all things that have life.”

You get the idea.

Now it should be noted that the ancient Indo-Europeans did NOT have a
singular Sun God nor concept of ‘Sun’. And therefore, there is no
eminent contradiction to be beheld in a Vedic attestation for the Sun as
the Eye of the Sky Father – and yet also, upon occasion, a separate
Deity that is also the Son of the Sky Father, or for that matter an
inanimate object that glows with radiancy upon the Gods’ Command; or, as
we have repeatedly and frequently seen, at least one Solar Goddess as
well. So, likewise, there is no contradiction to be observed in the
Norse having both the Sun as a burnished shield reflecting radiancy down
from the Sky – and yet also having these mentions for the One Blazing
Eye of Odin (as found upon Odin’s divine person directly), as well as
Odin seated upon a Throne that affords All-Seeing potency out across the
universe from On High.

Indeed, it is fairly actively exactly what we should expect. The only
point which is remarkable about this is that despite the conspicuous
de-emphasis of Odin’s Solar associations (which He as Dyaus Pitar – the
Sky Father of the Bright Sky – of the Indo-Europeans must once have had
more bright-and-clearly) … the underlying pattern, the underlying
typology, has nevertheless *persisted* regardless. We do not need an
explicit designation that these features are Solar, or correlate with
The Sun, within the Old Norse canon.

For the comparative Indo-European mythology, theology, cosmology, as
best anchored via the ancient Vedas of the Aryans, provides us with the
pattern and the typology to be followed.

So, now that we have identified the Solar, Golden Throne of Odin – That
which is meant by Hlidskjaf – what of the other Skjaf? What of
Valaskjalf? Where does this fit in?

A full discursion upon the Solar Underworld of the Indo-Europeans, and
the Divine, Radiant Queen of the Heavens Who Presides ultimately over
Same, is rather beyond the scope of this piece. Suffice to say, there is
this exact recurrent pattern across many of the Indo-European descendant
cultures – Aditi, the Great Solar Goddess Uber Alles of the Vedas being
hailed as the Lord of the Pitrs \[‘Ancestor Spirits’\], the Hittites
having their well-renowned Underworld Solar Goddess(es), Hekate having
half-glimpsed saliencies in both of these directions – the Solar and the
Post-Mortem (and also the re-entry into this world therefrom, entirely
uncoincidentally .. the Solar Womb, Hiranyagarbha, being the Ultimate
Origin of All, after all … as well as before all .. as well), and
Freyja’s presiding over Folkvangr presumably deriving likewise from this
same, sacred, shared archaic ancestral Indo-European template to the
Heavens in our understanding.

Yet there is *also* quite prominently a male deific presiding up There
as well. We have already seen that it is Odin Who Rules in the Hall of
Valaskjalf (with some interesting ambiguity as to whether Hlidskjalf,
the Solar Vantage-Point, is located *in* Valaskjalf, or is its own
abode, housing a throne – I suspect that the answer, as we shall soon
see via the aid of the Vedic comparative, is actually that the one
location, broadly speaking, is and houses *both*); so Who is it Who
reigns in the RigVedic cognate instance?

Well, according to RV X 14, there are Two that reign there in. Yama, and
Varuna. Other theonyms are also occurrent, including in particular,
Brihaspati and Vivasvan \[‘the Wide-Shining One’\]; although it is my
belief that, as per usual, the usage of a greater number of theonyms
should not be read necessarily as indicating the presence of a
correspondingly greater number of Gods. Rather, Vivasvan is Yama’s
Father – and we know from our comparative modelling (see, for instance,
the Sons of the Sun series upon just precisely this fact) that the
former is Dyaus Pitar and the latter is a figure akin to the Roman Remus
(Iemus; Who rules over Remuria / Lemuria, in a much-likewise manner).
There is also occurrant mention for ‘Brihaspati’ as a way to refer to
Yama in RV X 13 5 – wherein Yama is sacrificing Himself in order to Go
Beyond and to seek out thence to rule the Realm that shall thence house
the spirits of the deceased mortal men Who shall come after Him,
fathered of His Brother’s (Manu’s) Race.

This does create something of an ambiguity for us, as Brihaspati is
*also* pointedly the term for the Sky Father encountered elsewhere in
the RigVeda – and with a suite of direct correspondences to Odin found
within the Nordic texts; a matter that is rendered no clearer when we
consider the frequent iconography of Yama as equipped with a long staff
and accompanied by two dogs, nor Odin Himself engaging in a certain act
of self-sacrifice for purposes of transcendent unlocking. The most
plausible explication that I can advance is that it is a case of ‘Like
Father, Like Son’ – with the Indo-European Sky Father indeed often being
encountered (well, perhaps not quite so literally) as the Lord of the
Glorious/Ancestral Dead, accompanied by Two Hounds (one of Whom, for
some reason, is frequently named ‘Spot’ in the relevant Indo-European
liturgical language – see, for instance, ‘Cerberus’ for the ‘Zeus of the
Underworld’, Hades; or ‘Sharvara’, for one of Yama’s Watchful Hounds),
wielding a long-staff that may be a weapon (such as a Spear) and bearing
the name that shows also the competency with the Empowered Speech … and
the Son of the Sky Father that is the Death Son, being likewise arrayed
and conceived of. Certainly, the fact that Lord Shiva has Ganesha as one
of His Sons, whilst Himself *also* being Gana-Esha \[the ‘Lord of the
Army’, to somewhat thinly translate it\], with the latter directly
inheriting one of His most prominent Hymnals from one of the former’s
RigVedic Verses, would appear to suggest that this does indeed not
infrequently occur.

But to return to the World in question – this is that place immediately
proximate to Paramevyoman : Parame \[‘Highest’ / ‘Outer’\] Vyoman
\[‘Astral’, ‘Sky’, ‘Heavens’, ‘(Holy) House for the Sun’\] that is
hailed as the residing-place of the Pitrs \[‘Forefathers’ – indeed,
‘Father’ is from the direct same Proto-Indo-European Root\]. To which
the Departed are sent upon Their way loftily skywards by being set upon
a Ship \[RV X 135 – although there is no *specific* verse on the ship
being on fire as in the Viking custom most prominent in our popular
culture today; however it would seem logical given Agni’s role in this
conveyancing and kravya-corpse-carrying department\].

And from whence, not at all coincidentally, the Pitrs do occasionally
make Their return down here to us in the realm of the living .. in the
form of Corvids – Crows, Ravens; a situation with, again, quite some
Indo-European precedency and specific Odinic resonancies even beyond the
well-known Hugin and Munin emissaries of the Lord of Ghosts (said Hugin
and Munin potentially finding additional expression ‘midst’ the thousand
Spies of Lord Varuna aforementioned in the Vedas – albeit with the other
explanation for these, that they are the Stars in the Sky, also having
quite some power to it. I am not sure these are even fundamentally
distinct, after a sort – after all, the Stars as being our Ancestors,
bearing them in mythic form, is exactly what many constellations are to
be understood as; including Canis Majoris and Minoris – that are held in
various Hindu understandings to be symbolic of the two Watchful Dogs of
the Underworld under Lord Yama’s Command .. or perhaps, as Orion is
Rudra, and the High Outer Heaven is supposedly located at the Head of
Orion at the end of the Irmin’s Milky Road, the Path of Aryaman – they
may represent His Wolves likewise; as a point of interest, the same
‘Kravya’ \[‘Carrion/Carnivorous\] terminology can designate *both* Crows
*and* Wolves for us, the implications of which are rather intriguing).

It should be noted at this point that while yes, we DO find the Realm of
Yama to be ‘underground’ in later Hindu cosmology – in the most archaic
Vedic sources, it is literally the other way around. There is not really
an ‘underworld’ – as the Worlds are Three, in escalating ascendency up
from Earth to the Mid-Atmosphere, to the High Sky; the Realm of Yama,
Pitrloka here (and later this, too, is somewhat distinguished out
therefrom) to be found near the apex of the last of these; with the
transmission between these planes accomplishable via various means
including rising upon a pyre, or ‘sailing’ – as to the ancient
Indo-European the Sky was just another kind of Sea.

With time, these understandings changed – and so we find a fairly
consistent ‘mytholinguistic’ pattern of shift for the Lord of the Sky
(conceived also as Sea) being turned into a Sea God (viz. Dyaus Pitar,
Zeus, becoming also Poseidon; and Varuna moving to being a more
exclusively oceanic God in the later Hindu mythology, as the emblematic
ur-example. For more detail, see my earlier “Swear By The Sea, Swear By
The Stars, Swear By The Sky – On The Mytholinguistics Of Varuna Neptune
Ouranos”\], just as the more literal, littoral Sea became much greater
in its prominency as the various Indo-European peoples reached oceans
for the first time, and all of a sudden, the notion of the Dark Sky of
Night being ‘under’ the Earth during the Day Time (and vice versa for
the Bright Sky of Day during the Night, presumably), gave way to at
least some of the Afterlife Realms in fact being located ‘Under the
World’ of the living at *all* times rather than just during the day.
Other of these Afterlife Realms were still preserved in the bright-lit
planes of day, however – whether the ones that one could semi-literally
(or at least literarily) ‘sail’ to such as the Isles of the Blessed of
the Greeks, or the Undying Acre (Ódáinsakr) that is ventured to out
beyond India in Eireks Saga Víðförla.

And others still, as we have seen both above and Above, remained very
much of the High Heavens. Although perhaps with some Lunar connotation
alongside of or even instead of the Solar conceptry (as potentially
suggested by the ‘Silver’ thatchings for Valaskjalf – although I am not
sure that ‘Silver’ and ‘Lunar’ is necessarily a definitive linkage as
there may be other reasons or interpretations for the material-choice in
question in the Gylfaginning). In our modern Ancestor-veneration and
nourishment rites as Hindus, we carry these out upon the time of the
month when the Moon is Dark (‘Amavasya’ – when the Sun and the Moon
‘Dwell Together’), asking Lord Surya \[the Sun\] to help transport the
tarpana libations of sustenance to our forebears, by pouring these over
the branch of a tree at Dawn as the Sun Rises up into the widening Sky.

Still, with the third Old Norse loka-le that we had mentioned towards
the outset in our excerpting from the Gylfaginning, Gimle, the Solar
conceptry for this after-life heavenly realm is quite explicit:

“At the southern end of heaven is that hall which is fairest of all, and
brighter than the sun; it is called Gimlé. It shall stand when both
heaven and earth have departed; and good men and of righteous
conversation shall dwell therein: so it is said in Völuspá.–

A hall I know standing \| than the sun fairer,  
Thatched with gold \| in Gimlé bright;  
There shall dwell \| the doers of righteousness  
And ever and ever \| enjoy delight.”

This would, again, correspond to the notion being espoused in RV X 14,
RV X 15, RV X 135, etc. – wherein housed in this Solar Realm are the
Pitrs, eulogized in terms rather close to “doers of righteousness” as a
characteristic, and most certainly ‘entertained’ (or, if you like,
“enjoying delight”). And it also bears some intriguing resonancy with
the conceptry to be found in later Hindu cosmological understanding
wherein Pitrloka is ‘preserved’, ‘held above’ the Final Fire of the
Pralaya \[‘Apocalypse’, ‘Great Unravelling’\] – so that the Ancestral
Spirits, the ‘Seed’ Ancestors, are able to come out therefrom and thence
begin the World all over again in the next cycle of Creation therefrom
(something that has a certain degree of functional resonancy with the
Hoddmímis Holt that Líf and Lífþrasir emerge from following the
devastation of Ragnarok; the ‘morning dew’ sustenance for Whom may
perhaps be linked to the aforementioned Tarpana offerings we carry out
for the Pitrs at Dawn. \].

The concept has also found a rather more terrestrial saliency in the
folk-beliefs around the City of Varanasi (or Kashi , also known as
Benares) – a holy city of Lord Shiva, that is uncoincidentally also the
place where one goes to die. It is said that it, too, shall be preserved
from the Pralaya and carried forth into the next world – in some
traditions, at any rate. The meaning of the major names in use –
Varanasi , and Kashi – are similarly salient: Varanasi deriving
ultimately from ‘Varuna’ (in part due to the name of one major river
running therethrough), and ‘Kasi’ meaning ‘Shining’ : hence its
oft-storied sobriquet, the City of Light(s) (something that also refers
to the endless Ghats,or cremation pyres, as well as Aarti
flame-offerings which take place upon the banks of the River Ganges
running therethrough. Rivers with Underworld / Afterlife conveyance
associations are, of course, prominent right across the Indo-European
sphere – although we should note here that the *terrestrial* Ganges
finds mirrored, supernal expression in the *celestial* Ganges, the
earlier extolled Path of Aryaman, Irmin’s Road, Milky Way, that leads to
the Realm of the Great God in question; the Eridanus constellation, the
‘River’ running to the head of Rudra-Orion, likewise. So it would seem
fair to state that Varanasi is a place where two planes – that of the
mortal, mundane, and temporal; and that of the immortal, mythic, eternal
– appear to cross, commingle, and otherwise co-exist in exactly the same
space and with shared essences of each dependent upon who one is and how
one so happens to be looking (at the time).

Also of relevancy, although not to be discussed in any great depth here
in, are the two higher heavens still for the Norse – Öndlangr and
Víðbláinn. Next to nothing is actually known of these two locales, and
even the etymology of these is a matter of some artistic interpretation.
The former, presumably, means the ‘Ond’ that is either ‘long’ in its
breadth and extent, or that it is a ‘long’, ‘high’ way away from us from
our perspective; with ‘Ond’ referring to either ‘Spirit’ or ‘Wind’. The
great wide expanse of the high atmosphere, with its fiercely rushing
winds, would certainly fit that description \[with some intriguing
potential resonancy with the Vindheim briefly mentioned in the Voluspa
as a post-Ragnarok home for particular kinsmen of Odin (‘nephews’ in
fact – although I have my suspicions that another PIE ‘Nep’ is perhaps
more relevant)\]; as would Víðbláinn if we took this to mean the ‘Wide’
(Víð) Blue(/Black/Dark) (Bláinn – Blue-Black being a Colour of Death,
also, in the Old Norse conceptual lexicon), with this perhaps referring
to the place *above* the Sky, where even the wind is not so present,
instead only the empty breathless ocean of the blue-black of the endless
night stretches out all around and thence above and beyond to
infinity.

In either case, the ‘Aditi’ we had met earlier would be relevant –
‘Aditi’, ‘A-‘ (‘opposite of’) ‘-Diti’ (‘limits’) , the Wide Expanse of
Infinity , being the Goddess hailed as Lord of the Pitrs, and the
ultimate investor of Life into All, from high above in the Vedas.

Although another derivation is potential for the latter – with ‘Vid’
\[derived ultimately from PIE ‘weyt’\] instead being that which refers
to a rope, a twist, a knot, a coil. Something that I mention, due to the
reference in RV X 15 3 – wherein the High Heaven is also where one
attains “Son and Progeny” from, perhaps reflecting the notion of
cyclical reincarnation carried out at the world’s summiting point, which
would represent the loka-tion upon the Axis Mundi (World Tree / Pillar /
Mountain / Sthambha) where the thread of the passage of souls is
‘tethered’, their pathway winding up around around and thence back down
again to this more mortally earthy plane of ours. \[This would, more
properly speaking, be Paramevyoman within the Vedic cosmology\]

There is some support for this most intriguing concept in another
‘Vyoman’ concept – the Vyomakesha \[‘Heaven-Hair’\] of Lord Shiva, and
which finds parallel expression in the Kyanokhaitis hair of Dionysus,
Poseidon, and Hades (but, then, I repeat myself thrice – a Rebirth
expression of the Sky Father, a Sky-As-Sea expression of the Sky Father,
and the Underworld/Realm of the Dead expression of the Sky Father,
respectively). In all of these four cases, the Hair is understood to be
‘Dark’ (and often pointedly ‘Blue’), ‘Tangled’ or ‘Flowing / Wild’; with
the Greek accounts evidently preserving the archaic Indo-European
understanding of the Hair of the Sky Father being coloured and connoted
as the Sky, likely recalling also their role as the powerful Winds of
the high vaulting reaches of the atmosphere. The Hindu perspective,
however, goes rather further, and declares that in addition to these
representing the tendrils of the Wind … these pointedly also represent
the Wind as the ‘Breath of Life’ bestowed by Vayu-Vata to bring humanity
into active-being, and with direct parallel expression in the
investiture of Önd by Odin into our ancestors, Askr and Embla, in the
Voluspa telling of the Creation of Man. There is also the mention in RV
X 125 7-8 for Devi Vak (‘Divine Speech’, the Wife of the Sky Father)
bringing forth the Pitr at the World’s Summit, a place proximate to
where the Yoni of all is loka-ted; and with Her creative potency
expressed via the Wind, a power that is beyond the bounds of Earth and
Sky.

Or, to phrase it another way, it would seem that there is indeed a
‘wellspring of life’ \[to reference the Vedic conceptry\] up in the high
heavens, where the ‘blue’ winds (which may, perhaps, also contain within
them the ‘last breath’ that is the soul leaving the body in some archaic
Indo-European conceptry; this ‘breath’ being identified with the Rudras
or the Maruts – which may mean that the Light Elves said to dwell in
Víðbláinn may have an unexpected Vedic cognate) congregate up in a
winding (some might say ‘tangled’) knot before heading back down out to
this plane and their re-investiture in mortal housings of flesh, blood,
and enacted life. The ‘Rivers of Air’ that are the Winds yet also the
Waters, being that which the souls of one’s own forebears, and
eventually also one’s own self, shall have to traverse on up to the
High.

Although I must stress that that which I have outlined above , is but a
brief endeavour of a prospective reconstruction. Each and every
Indo-European eschatology tends to feature much greater depth and
detail, often with various souls headed off in other directions either
first or for the duration and especially upon the basis of the soul’s
perceived quality; with, of course, many of these afterlives having come
to be identified with the ‘great dark’ that is *underground(s)* rather
than that which hangs (or rather, from which everything *else* hangs) up
high in the wide-blue Sky. These ‘dark’ afterlives might be (but aren’t
necessarily) the ‘negative’ ones – for ‘common’ souls rather than
worthies, heroes, great ones (whether they be priest or warrior or
grand-sire ancestor of other mighty accomplishment, of essence); the
more archaic (and ashen) representation of the Fields of Asphodel in
contrast to the more pleasant Elysian Fields, for instance; or Helheim
(or, worse, Nastrond) in contrast to various post-mortem realms in the
Old Norse. \[Although interestingly, the ‘Nifl’ in ‘Niflheim’,
‘Niflhel;, etc. is itself derived from a Proto-Indo-European particle,
‘Neb’, that usually applies to the ‘moist’ upper atmospheric layer of
Clouds and the Sky\].

I also do not mean to impugn the accuracy of the Nordic (or, for that
matter, any other) scriptural account , when I observe that here we
appear to have three (and a half) Heavenly Realms that appear to
correspond to a single area within the Vedic, and which appear perhaps
rather artificially distinguished to a degree in their Gylfaginning
appearances. Perhaps the Vedic account ‘compressed’ a broad array of
elements into this single apex point, referred to as a unitary realm
despite being more complicated in reality. Perhaps what we are supposed
to take from the material that Sturluson had referenced to make his
work, is something closer to a ‘functional interpretation’ for these
various zones rather than an active planetology: various of these
‘worlds’ concording with a role that the Heavenly Sphere is to play
within the cosmos, rather than actually being (meta-)physical locations
in and of themselves. Or perhaps not, and there really are three
mounting layers of Heaven (plus, potentially, a number of other such
adjoinments – including the much-better-known specific Deity domain
afterlife realms such as Valhalla or Folkvangr). Whatever the actual
‘practical’ interrelationship of all of these points of light and of
d(h)ata, it is ne’er the less quite readily apparent that they *do*
correspond. Even if just how they correspond, or what *exactly and
precisely* it is that they correspond *to* is a matter that is
semi-literally still rather up in the air. There are, after all,
precious few living witnesses among us who could set to rest the matter
within the span of our life-time for our convenience.

A penultimate point we should, perhaps, make concerns arguably the most
famous Indo-European afterlife of all – that of Valhalla. Now, while it
is true that it shares its fundamental linguistic component (‘Valr’)
with the Valaskjalf that we have mentioned earlier, this is identified
as being a different location, potentially even in a somewhat different
region, per the account given in the Grimnismal. And yet, if we look
closely, we can see the same familiar features beginning to make
themselves emergent. Valhalla is situated in Gladsheimr – the ‘Bright’
haven. It is the “Golden” Hall. It is roofed with “Shields” (and I would
note that the Sun, too, in Nordic conceptual syllabry is a burnished
Shield); in fact I would even go so far as to suggest that the “Spears”
which form its rafters may recall the notion of sunbeams as shafts of
light.

That would certainly fit with the ‘Solar Afterlife’ elements already
broadly attested for the Hittites, Hindus, and other Indo-European
peoples (albeit with some of these other, later groups such as various
Celtic and Slavic groups being arguably more akin to the notion of the
Sun as it set into the place beyond the dusk, taking the souls of the
dead with it; the Serbian ‘Dabog’, a clear reflexive of the earlier
Slavic Dazhbog (a decidedly Solar figure, son of the similarly Solar
Svarog – see my earlier “On Svarog As Sky Father”), being also their
Lord of the Underworld, would fit likewise).

It would also dovetail exceptionally nicely with this fine Griffith
rendering translation of RV I 35, describing the course of the Sun
through the arcing parabolic roadway of the Sky’s-land realm:

“6 Three heavens there are; two Savitar’s, adjacent: in Yama’s world is
one, the home of heroes,  
As on a linch-pin, firm, rest things immortal: he who hath known it let
him here declare it.”

There is so much that can and should be said about this particular
hymnal, and perhaps in a future (brief) piece, I shall do so – yet a
full-length exegesis of it is well beyond our ambit here; and it is
enough, for now, to state that the surrounding context makes rather
abundantly clear that the two ‘Savitar’ regions are those of the
Ascending and Descending of the Solar Chariot: They are the phases known
for the Dusk and the Dawn. Whilst in the middle of these two, we quite
naturally have the Sun at its zenith and its apex – the noon-day Sun
when it is at its highest and its widest of shining – where the Eye in
the Sky is quite literally Above All, and has its broadest ken of
visionary (per)view.

What do we find there, at that highest point? “Yama’s World” – the “Home
of Heroes”. Paramevyoman, as we have earlier termed it, is immediately
close thereto: the Highest Heaven. Inhabited by, as we saw, Varuna /
Vivasvan , the One (Solar) Eyed ‘Wide-Shining One’ Who Is All-Seeing,
upon His Golden Throne; and also His Son, the Lord of the
Glorious/Ancestral Dead, Yama the Righteous, Lawful, DharmaRaja.

So – could Valhalla truly be this bright, golden, shining ‘Home of
Heroes’ located at the apex of the Sun’s radiant roadway? I do not think
it impossible – even though it is evident that the Nordic mythology that
has come down to us is much less overt with its Solar identifications,
almost as if these things have been semi-consciously pared back in
comparison to the Vedic and more archaic Indo-European field of
conceptry. Something that, to be sure, has certainly occurred in many
other Indo-European mytho-cosmologies as well (the Greeks, for instance;
as well as the later Hindu perspectives, for that matter); although with
the unsurprisingly conservative Norsemen nevertheless managing to
preserve perhaps rather more of these ancient, underlying understandings
than some other peoples through their complex and densely interwoven
conceptual syllabry. Marvellous.

Indeed, it seems a concept so resonantly resplendent that even the
Zoroastrians were unable (or perhaps unwilling) to excise it from their
canon – Hara Berezaiti quite directly means ‘High Watch-post’, and
stands for the Mountain at the center of the worlds (i.e. the Axis
Mundi, the World Tree – or, I suppose, a Watch-Tower), which likewise is
what the Sun must shine from or shine through (dependent upon the text,
context, and era), which likewise houses the situation of a ruler, and
which likewise plays a prominent eschatological role as a destination
for the well-received ‘great-souled’/’virtuous’ dead.

So – there you have it. Valaskjalf and Hlidskjalf (plus several Nordic
Heavens more), Paramevyoman; A Golden Throne, a Golden Realm, and the
All-Seeing Golden Eye of the Sky Father along with the Great and
Glorious (Ancestral) Dead as well as the nexus-point of souls for
impending reincarnation, whirling about the top of the hitching-post of
our universe; all in the similar place, the similar space – High Above
The Sky, at the summiting apex of the world, close to the wellspring of
the Winds, and emblematically represented via the Sun.

Refracted out across various Indo-European descendant peoples, and
various mixed or subtly resonant mythic understandings even within a
given textual canon thereof.

Many diverse expressions – yet somehow all radiating back ultimately to
the single source.

Our Ultimate Ancestors, ladies and gentlemen – found gazing back via the
Heart of the Star.
