+++
title = "A Brief Metaphysics of Soma , Vak ,xa0Vajra"
date = "February 3, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/10750147_la-preparation-du-soma.jpg?w=1021)

Earlier today, I was asked a question about the nature of Soma and Amrit
. I’ve written quite extensively about these topics elsewhere – but
instead of just posting an onslaught of links, I thought it would be
helpful to provide a *brief* overview of what’s going on with these and
the true nature of same. This also touches upon some other closely
related areas of frequent interest, so I’ve also included the Vajra as
well. There are a few other points that probably could/should have been
made (including that what is represented by the Vajra as the result of
this is immanent Cosmic Law \[Rta, i.e. Rta-As-Brahman\] – hence why it
is such a symbol of power, majesty, and the successful prosecution of
the War Against Chaos) – and some additional discussion of cognate
understandings from elsewhere in the Indo-European sphere (e.g. the
Nordic Mead of Poetry … as well as how this links into the enlightening
Wells and the location of Odin’s Eye; and, in a slightly different way,
‘Eitr’; there are further points around the relationship of Life to the
Absolute, also). But for now, this should be sufficient.

Response begins:

“I mean, the really really short version of where my
metaphysics/theology is at on this issue is:

Brahman is exterior to reality and found beyond The Waters \[as liminal
sphere around the universe\]

Various Vedic concepts are, in effect, ‘brining into’ this reality that
Supernal – or some sparks thereof, imprinting thereof, etc.

So, for example, per the *excellent* theology of Sayana – Vak Devi is
in-universe expression of Rta-As-Brahman \[and this also underpins the
Vacam Garjit Lakshanam concept – Thunder bearing the
Characteristics/Imprinting of Divine Speech\] …

… and, entirely uncoincidentally, we find the citations – for example in
RV VIII 100 – for the Vajra as *also* being found out there in/beyond
The Waters, and then *brought in* to this Reality via Devi’s allowance.

Which is buttressed further by the material around Devi Vak Saraswati
working with the Asvins to do exactly this when Indra is requiring a
Vajra in order to fight Namuki in the Shatapatha Brahmana accounting of
the episode in question.

Now, of course – what *else* do the Asvins do? Preside over important
elements (including the secrets of – and the instruction in these of
same) of the Soma rite. That ‘imprinting’/’imbuing’ of the (Supernal)
essence in question.

And, to add to this, we have this notion of Saraswati in relation to the
Celestial Ganges – flowing down from the Supernal that is beyond the
universe, to Mahadev’s Head. Too pure to land anywhere else.

And hence also why these points around Amrit \[‘Immortality’ – a cognate
term both linguistically and functionally\] in relation to Soma , are
all expressing this similar concept: the investiture of the Eternal.
Brahman.

Sometimes it is in actively weaponized form – sometimes it is in healing
form (the ‘life-essence’ we may say). Sometimes it is in Speech /
Prayerful form \[and that expresses ‘both directions’ of this
relationship’ – Coming Down and Going Up\].

But in effect, whatever form it is that is bearing the imprinting , the
bestowal of this Uppland Essence – that is the vector for it.

So the question around whether it is some sort of yogically derived
‘internal Amrit’ of the soul – or some sort of empowering elixir that is
prepared with, say, psilocybin mushrooms … the answer to this is, of
course, “YES”.

Because contingent upon how you arrive at it – and one is most
definitely complementary to the other – it is coming from / going to the
same (quite literally ultimate) place.

And this is before we get into the excellent points contained in RV X
125 , the etymology of the word Rsi , and also for that matter, the
manner in which Odin acquired the Runes

… but those are stories for another time.
