+++
title = "Thursday – Jupiter’s Day, Brihaspati’s Day Rather Than Thor’sxa0Day"
date = "February 18, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/iccd11305326_galli-pietro-giove-h-3691-.jpg?w=576)

It is Thursday – Jupiter’s Day ; or, in the Hindu reckoning,
Brihaspati’s Day.

Now, there is an obvious disconnect here between Thursday as Thor’s Day
… and the day being regarded as the Day of the Thundering Sky Father.
This is due to the Interpretatio Romana framework as wielded by
post-Christianization figures having some … difficulties when it
encountered the Germanic mythology. Thor is not Jupiter – Thor would,
more properly speaking, be Herakles (or, if we are being Latinate,
Hercules), Indra, Hanuman, etc. – the Indo-European Striker/Thunderer
Deific.

That is to say – the Sky Father’s Son.

Jupiter, in other words, is the Father of the Figure that currently
bears the day’s name in much of the modern world.

Now some may point toward the obvious Thunder point and suggest that
this in fact supports a co-identification of Thor with Jupiter. It does
not. Nobody EVER said that only one Deity was allowed to wield nor cause
Thunder. In the Nordic/Germanic sphere, after all, we have Odin
prominently hailed as Þundr. We have Rudra wielding the Vajra \[RV II 33
3: शरेष्ठो जातस्य रुद्र शरियासि तवस्तमस्तवसां वज्रबाहो \| \], as does
Brihaspati \[but, then, I repeat myself – for Brihaspati Is Rudra\]. And
for that matter, we *also* have in the Greek schema – mighty Athena
along with Zeus being able to wield *that particular* unstoppable
Thunderbolt force and come arrayed with the full panoply of the Storm.

And on that last point, because I *really* like quoting it .. from
Quintus Smyrnaeus’ Fall of Troy:

“She donned the stormy Aigis flashing far, adamantine, massy, a marvel
to the Gods, whereon was wrought Medusa’s ghastly head, fearful: strong
serpents breathing forth the blast of ravening fire were on the face
thereof. Crashed on the Queen’s breast all the Aigis-links, as after
lightning crashes the firmament. Then grasped She Her father’s weapons,
which no God save Zeus can lift, and wide Olympos shook. Then swept She
clouds and mist together on high; night over earth was poured, haze o’er
the sea. Zeus watched, and was right glad as broad heaven’s floor rocked
‘neath the Goddess’s feet, and crashed the sky, as though invincible
Zeus rushed forth to war.”

Anyway – the point is, while it is not hard to see how the the
post-Christianization Romans managed to misalign the Germanic and the
Classical Indo-European mythologies, because the major
‘Striker/Thunderer’ figure of the latter had lost many of the more overt
‘Thunder’ characteristics (Herakles wields a tree-branch as a club, or
in some more archaic depictions, a Harpe \[Sword\] – perhaps akin to the
Adamantium one that turns up elsewhere in the Greek mythos, cognizant of
‘Vajra’ too as meaning ‘Unbreakable’) …

… With the application of the proper comparative Indo-European
theological analysis – we can see once more the *true* underlying
typology for the circumstance.

Now to speak but briefly to the sculpture in question – it’s apparently
a rather modern piece, finished in 1838. We can see the space in the
hand where the Spear-Shaft of the Thunderbolt \[the World-Spear – a
common iconographic element of the Indo-European Sky Father Deific\] is
to be held.

And we can also see the Eagle – the frequently encountered emblemantic
ensign of the Sky Father deific, even a Form of Him (c.f Agni as Shyena
– a Raptor; Odin’s various Eagle associated conceptry, etc.); with the
Thunderbolt between His talons.

The Past, it seems, Always Shines Through. Eventually.

Hail to the Indo-European Sky Father (And Also To His Striker/Thunderer
Son)
