+++
title = "Polytheism, Over-Divinity, And Drama Amidst The Divine Council – Some Brief Answers To Some Foundational Indo-European Theologicalxa0Questions"
date = "February 4, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/27033300_1.jpg?w=500)

I was asked the question: “can you explain how you can have multiple
gods, who struggle with each other, or would you say there is some other
entity deciding which god wins and which god loses in these struggles?”

It’s a pretty interesting one, and as far as I’m aware the person asking
it hasn’t really got an Indo-European religious background – so I
deliberately attempted to keep specialized (or, for that matter,
non-English) terminology to a minimum. I’ve also, by necessity, folded
in a brief look at somewhat contrasting perspectives on Fate and Free
Will – and proposed a spectrum of synthesis positions that help to
accommodateboth within the relevant understandings of the world.
Begins:

The answer I would run with is, effectively “both”, to varying extents.
Think of it like a Westminster style Cabinet. There are multiple
Ministers (some of Whom may be wearing multiple ‘hats’ each, and Who may
even have overlapping areas of responsibility or be Associate Ministers
acting alongside another, etc.) … but only one Queen.

And underpinning the whole thing is a form of constitution that is
seriously vast, deep, and occasionally quite abstract seeming for those
of us on the inside of the system. There’s some rather interesting legal
writing about this produced by Lord Cooke of Thorndon which is quite
conceptually relevant here for this understanding – but more upon that,
perhaps, some other time.

Said constitutional order, said Common Law, is *also* effectively
personified in said Sovereign – although the Sovereign is also acting
within this framework, Herself. \[it is therefore, not really accurate
to seek to compare this to the US system of government – wherein, other
than their enthusiasm for a ‘separation of powers’ rather than a
Bagehotian ‘fusion of powers’ model … well, their Constitution with a
Capital C doesn’t really have a personified embodiment … although I am
*slightly* overstraining / massively oversimplifying the Westminster
position of the Queen here for the purposes of illustration. Anyway\]

Now, the fact that there is a single sovereign, a single crown … does
not prevent the various ministers of the crown from having separate
personalities, separate agendas – and occasionally working at downright
cross-purposes with one another.

Although the perspicacity of the head of government \[I am now somewhat
departing from the current realities of Westminster governance where, as
you know, head of government and head of state are … not strictly
coterminous due to (d)evolution that has occurred over the previous 400
years or so\] is such that they’re aware of these things and will
probably have factored them into the plans for the administration \[I
suppose in UK terms it would be called ‘the Ministry’\]

All of this maps rather well to the Hindu understanding which I am
expounding. However, I have left out the various Sanskrit terms that
stuff correlates to, because I’m endeavouring to keep this relatively
straight-forward.

The Politics of the Heavens are a rather fascinating subject in Their
Own Rite , of course – but it is probably enough for now to note that a
deliberative ‘council’ model does appear in a number of Indo-European
mytho-religious traditions.

With, intriguingly, the Greco-Roman Classical setup being the biggest
upon the more ‘Dictatorial’ absolutist style of things, and the Germanic
one tending to favour a much more council-style approach in some regards
– that also has even Odin shown to be subject to the Law (or, if you
prefer, the Lore – and there are a few reasons for phrasing it thus .. )
and capable of being cast out into Exile \[now, how much of an actual
*punishment* this might be for The Wandering God is, of course, another
matter .. \]; which, of course, is not actually disharmonious with the
Germanic understanding of kingship \[or, for that matter, just about
*anybody’s* understanding of Kingship\] prior to certain relatively
later political-philosophical developments .

The Vedic schema has multiple Gods acting as Rajas in particular realms,
or in response to particular crises, or with oversight of particular
functions; although also maintains both a collegial comity of Gods in
particular positions … and occasional breaches of that. Most prominently
in those situations wherein one or more deities get it into Their
head(s) that They ought take on powers outside Their portfolio(s) (which
can, understandably, cause problems out in the universe for obvious
reasons if you suddenly have two Ministers acting at cross-purposes with
the elemental forces of nature, say) and/or attempt to proclaim
Themselves to be (falsely) Supreme. An attempt at a Coup, in some ways,
we might phrase it as (or, perhaps, an attempt at a No Confidence vote
in the House). And put down with sufficient force, as one should
probably expect.

Now, the other concept of saliency is the Cosmic Drama one \[again, I’m
leaving the relevant Sanskrit terminology untranslated for simplicity\];
and this is probably more immediately relevant in some ways to your line
of questioning.

What this posits is that there are Two , a husband and wife pair in fact
, that are – again, to speak both somewhat figuratively and in
remarkably close coherency to the original Hindu conceptual syllabry –
simultaneously the Producers , Directors, Script-writers, and Lead
Actors in this Cosmic Play.

A not uncommon phenomenon in some more successful Hollywood stars in
motion pictures today.

Although it must be said – as applies the Pair in question, the
expression “an ego the size of a galaxy” is, perhaps, more literal
rather than libelous. And not a negative thing.

Now, what does this mean in terms of the *other* Gods ?

Well, opinion on this is mixed in the Hindusphere.

Some effectively hold a position that renders us monotheist by proxy –
all divinities just being refractions of the one over-divine. I do not
agree with that , for a variety of reasons. But this is supposed to be a
simple and (relatively) succinct response, so we’ll leave those by the
wayside – except for one (brief) conceptual demonstration: the relevant
metaphysics would plausibly have you and I being the same person (long
story) … which is either not the case, or not a *useful* understanding
for us to hold (or both) – because the fact we are having this
conversation, the fact that you have asked a question because you don’t
know something and want to know about it, and I am providing you with an
answer to same because I’ve got some insight that I’m keen to share …
well, nothing is gained here by acting as if we *are* the same person
(not least due to the quite significant differences and asymmetries
between us that means that this interaction can – hopefully beneficially
– take place). But I digress.

My own position is rather different. And posits that yes, yes the Two
running the show (and I, again, mean that rather directly – ‘the show’)
*are* setting the script etc. \[and there is some … quite interesting
conceptry around which of those Two is more in charge – as is the nature
with many a married couple … I have my own thoughts upon that, too, but
we shall perhaps save those stories, too, for another time\] … which
opens the door to discussion over whereabouts on a spectrum from ‘hard
determinism’ through to ‘(qualified) free will’ we think we are.

Again, I do think that we have (qualified) agency …. however, attempting
to outwit Omniscience is … not likely to be especially successful. Which
doesn’t matter so much because that’s … not really the point of
existence. We’re not engaged in some sort of struggle against Ultimate
Law. That is for Demons – and it is not at all coincidental that the
Demons inevitably lose. (Although it should be noted that occasionally
there is some delusion on the part of various actors that leads them or
even Them to think that they or They are ‘actually’ said embodiment of
Ultimate Law – that ‘coup’ or ‘No Confidence’ concept I mentioned
earlier\]

No, what we have are choices within circumstance – and interesting
exercises in ‘self-overcoming’ wherein elements intrinsic to our nature
must be prevailed over by that agency and with the aid of *other*
elements to our nature.

Although I *also* tend to conceive of causality as both i)
metaphysically ‘narrative’ \[and that .. is , again, conceptry for
another time\]; and ii) having a ‘flow’ like a river to it; and in both
cases, whether it is narrative gravity or some other way of construing
the force in question, this is going to lead to certain progressions to
be rather likely to occur – even as how we *respond* to or otherwise
engage with these may be more of our choosing. \[and there are, again, a
few points of scripture that may align with this view\]

But it’s rather early in the morning / late at night for a full-scale
thing about Fate .

Hopefully that helps answer at least some of your question.
