+++
title = "On Our Mission"
date = "February 13, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/curwen-rudraabhishek-ie.jpg?w=1024)

  
  
Earlier this evening, I was asked the following question by a new
acquaintance: “Why the obsession with connecting Norse religion with
Hinduism though?”

I suspect that this is something that a fair few people looking at our
efforts have found themselves wondering; so it makes sense to reproduce
the answer here (with some slight edits for a non-chatbox medium). Think
of it as a brief (ha) primer on why it is that we do what we do here at
Arya Akasha – and a little bit upon how it is that we do it.

The way we see it – the Indo-European religion is the Indo-European
religion.

The Indo-European Gods are the Indo-European Gods.

We know that this was the case on the Urheimat – and that in the
intervening thousands of years and thousands of miles … the Gods, the
rites, the legends were carried forward in different directions.

Yet retaining their fundamental identity. Our fundamental identity. They
did not suddenly stop being the Indo-European Gods at some arbitrary
point of time or space away from these shared origins.

Some shifts have occurred, yes – yet this is a scenario of different
‘sects’ or ‘denominations’ within the same overarching faith.

Now, of this broad coterminity – we have often observed that two of the
closest of these spheres are the Eddic and the Vedic . You can virtually
read some of the materials directly across from one to the other with
little interpolation needed – as I have repeatedly demonstrated in the
course of my work.

This does NOT mean that we are only interested in that particular
concordancy, however – in the course of my work, I frequently draw
strong parallels and inferences from the Greek, Roman, Scythian,
Hittite, Celtic, Slavic, etc. etc. etc. spheres.

In some areas, we make more overt use of elements from these other
spheres, and the Nordic elements barely figure.

However it is rare indeed that we do not make strong nor salient use of
the Hindu, the Vedic corpus.

And that is because, simply put, it is the oldest and most
comprehensive, most complete Indo-European corpus we have.

It is the closest we can viably get to the Urheimat in many regards.

And in my case, it is also where I am at home – I am a Hindu. One of the
few reasonably ‘proper’ Gora \[‘white’ .. not to be confused with
‘Ghora’ – ‘terrifying’; although some of my devotees do refer to me as
(A)Ghora , Ghoracharya, etc.\] Hindus that you are ever likely to meet.

I got into this sphere not because of anything Indo-European. But
rather, because of my family – Indo-Nepali adoptive family, it is a long
story.

And then, one day, I was at Mandir \[Temple\], in front of the Durga
Murti \[the Mother Goddess\], and I was Told to do something.

Re-illuminate the shared bonds of sodality and heritage between the
various Indo-European peoples. And in doing so, reshape the world in Her
Image. \[c.f the Bharat Mata understanding – and how it is also a common
understanding in terms of ‘national personifications’ amidst more
westerly Indo-European folks\]

Now, I am, of course, Nordic by substantive swathe of my ancestry. My
surname, for instance, is a clear demonstrator of this, and we still
have a fair quotient of Swedish books and such from my Grandparents’
generation about the house here.

So in a way, I suppose there is a bit of a bias in terms of my looking
at the Nordic/Germanic sphere – because I suppose, the approach that I
have … it has lead me back to the ancestral religion of my further-back
forebears.

It is not the ‘direct’ one as applies the Germanic sphere – but it is
quite closely related. And more importantly .. it is living. It chose me
– rather than the other way around \[again, long story\].

I view it, as I say, as being quite close to the PIE religion of all of
our direct ancestors – going far back enough.

Although we also make active and tangible use of the Hindu gleanings
that we have derived – to ‘fill in the gaps’ in the incredibly
fragmentary Germanic canon and corpus.

As is commonly known, there is a fantastic and beautiful swathe of
material that we do have preserved from the Viking Age … come down to us
via Christian era authors who had to stitch together and euhemerize in
order to make what they could of it … and which is not quite a
functional religion in various key particulars.

It needs help, and reconstructive support from elsewhere in the
Indo-European sphere.

And we are in the position to provide that assistance.

The Germanic/Nordic religious revival is probably the most successful
Indo-European resurrection going on today. It is not the most successful
Indo-European religion of course – that is ours, by which I mean the
Hindu one … but that is not a resurrection … it is not a “come-back”,
because it never died, it never went away. The Nordic one, by contrast,
is pulling off something quite remarkable in doing as it is doing. And
it must be said – so, too, are some other efforts amidst the Roman,
Greek, Celtic, Slavic, and other such groups.

Our perspective is that if you are in Europe – then for various reasons,
the House of your Ancestors has burned down. That is sad – that is
tragic.

Many are engaged in the collective work of rebuilding those houses. And
that is quite a difficult thing to do – especially after all of this
time and in the absence of so much building material and even the
design, the architectural schemas for such.

So it is incredibly fortunate that our Cousins to the East have
maintained such a large and impressive house – and are in many cases
quite amenable to letting us shelter with them for awhile. For we are
Kin.

Part of my effort is to show this – that Kinship ; and to get people
thinking more properly about this. Which includes showing the
appropriate and proper reciprocal feeling of respect toward their fellow
Indo-European Man and his or her religious heritage.

Too many times, we have seen people make rather egregious mistakes –
declaring apparently without shred of irony that they consider the last
living Indo-European religion to be some sort of ‘degenerate’ thing
practiced by ‘degenerate’ people … whilst they rest upon laurels of
taking Sturluson’s Eddic materials or the like entirely uncritically and
overlooking that the modern European population is also the result of IE
and non-IE mixing and may have comparable levels of PIE DNA , dependent
upon the population group in question, to various of the Indian groups
they are now criticizing.

And also, not to put too fine a point upon it, making some fundamental
mistakes about the Hindu religion and what it is , where it is from,
what it relates to.

Self-congratulatory propaganda is pervasive – and we make it our serious
and our sincere business – our creed and our calling – to respond to
this, to educate and inform; and help everybody to work together in this
now re-illuminated light.

This world is too hazardous for the Indo-European heritage as it is –
without all of us being at each others’ throats in such a way !

So to answer the question more broadly yet directly –

It is not that I have an obsession with connecting the Nordic religion
to Hinduism.

It is that the Nordic religion is already connected to Hinduism.

My ‘obsession’, if you like – is in re-illuminating this essential
truth.

And it does not just apply to the #NAS \[‘Nordic-Aryan Sangha’ – our
attached monastic order, but also the shorthand for referring to this
Vedic-Eddic concordancy\] area of things. But to all the ancient
Indo-European faiths. Perhaps it is simply that you have not seen so
much of my work which renders in these other areas. But rest assured –
it most definitely does exist.

It is “Krinvanto Vishvam Aryam” which guides us – not just the
Nordic/Germanic sphere.

I may be from one directly … but in a way, even though I am of the
Hindusphere , and that shall always be my home ; ‘adoptive’ home though
it may be…

I would say that the best and broadest description of my religious views
is but simply this:

“Indo-European”.

The Hindusphere has been my great window in upon it.

But that is where the journey has started (and, to be sure, where I
‘hang my hat’ in regular and active acts of pious devotion amidst my
peers, at a physical Temple and upon physical Altars, afore physical
’empowered’ representations of Our Gods – something I hope one day we
can all do in the appropriate forms that are most aptly resonant for us)
… it is not the entire span nor ken of my view.

But I could not have beheld all that I do without it.

And, in truth, this goes for almost everyone else’s experience likewise.

Whether we know it or we do not – whether we choose to acknowledge this
or we do not – we all have quite a debt owed to the Hindusphere for
enabling us to understand our own ancestral depth and span of traditions
and how they interrelate to one another.

Although as applies the term you have used – “obsession” – well, what
can I say.

I am a card-carrying religious fundamentalist zealot.

If you have seen the truth of the thing as I have – and I mean that
quite directly. I have some rather … weird (in the archaic Germanic
sense) tales on that front –

then there could be no other way to approach the subject.

Divinity Tells you to do something , you don’t umm and err and maybe
later. You marvel that the legends are true , and then you go out and
you bloody well do it.

And thus it is with Arya Akasha for us.

“Come Home, Indo-European Man!”
