+++
title = "On Indo-European Divine Inspiration – And The Zoroastrian Persecutory Suppression Ofxa0Same"
date = "February 26, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/197928195_196632410.jpg?w=398)

Frequently when the subject of the Zoroastrian inversion of
Indo-European religious belief is brought up, people presume that it is
‘just’ some form of linguistic confusion – a ‘reversal of polarity’
afflicting only an incredibly limited array of things. ‘Deva’ \[‘Deus’,
‘-Tyr’, etc. – ‘God’, ‘Shining One’\] becoming ‘Daeva’ \[‘Demon’\], for
example; and if they are a bit more aware, then the list of prominent
Vedic Deities that are more directly and specifically demonized by the
Zoroastrians.

When considered in this light, it is easy to minimize what has occurred
here. To presume that it is only a matter of some surface-labelling
changing over; which, of course, rather blatantly ignores the outright
heresy that is directly and literally demonizing The Gods. But you see,
that is not all the Zoroastrians did as a part of their effort at
subverting, culture-jamming, and suppressing the previously prevailing
Indo-European (more specifically, Indo-Iranian – post-Andronovo)
religious orthodoxy in order to make way for their new cult.

There are a suit of other terms and their associated concepts that are
quite integral to the practice of our religion which they likewise took
a poisonous malice to. One example that I have already considered
concerns the shift in ‘active ingredients’ and associated experiential
elements between Vedic (and, for that matter, likely Scythian – and Old
Norse) Soma , and Zoroastrian Haoma. But this instance we shall consider
today is another one which makes my blood boil.

Now, integral to the Indo-European religious experience is the concept
of Furor – ‘Divine Inspiration’ is one way we could perhaps render this
in more modern English. We see this in Old Norse with the notion of
‘Odr’ \[a designation closely cognate with the main theonym of Odin, and
utterly uncoincidentally also with the ‘Odrerir’ functional epithet for
the major vessel of the Mead of Poetry\], and in Latin with that of
‘Vates’ \[a term for a seer or an energized/empowered poet with that
spark of the divine propelling their verses, their speech\], and other
similar terms from across the Indo-European sphere. Both Odr and Vates
are from PIE ‘Weht’, which refers unsurprisingly to becoming ‘excited’,
to be ‘enraged’, and the various other physiological manifestations
which go along with that. In modern psychiatric terms, we should
probably refer to these also as “psycho-motor agitation” – moving with
the energy and velocity of the Wind that is also what is investing the
Speaker in question who Speaks with the Voice of the Divine.

In Vedic terms, we have quite expansive and eloquent ways to refer to
this same phenomenon. My favourite, of course, being RV X 125 5 –
wherein the term used for the power of the Rsi, the Brahmin, is ‘Ugra’ …
which in other contexts quite directly means Anger, Berserk Rage, Fury.
And which is bestowed to the Man in question by the Goddess Vak – to the
Man She ‘Chooses’ \[the actual verb is ‘Kama’ – and more upon what that
means and entails, later\].

A further and reasonably close cognate for this understanding is
presented within the Greek mythos – where the empowerment bestowed to
Diomedes, Achilles etc. by Goddess Athena and represented by both
‘Menos’ and the ‘Illumination’ of coruscating flame from forehead,
enables the seeing of the world as it actually is; and even the supreme
martial proficiency to contend directly with Gods upon the field of war
if necessary. Truly, through Vak – everything is possible! \[For more
detail upon this, consult various of my previous works such as ‘Furor
Teutonicus And Furor Poeticus – The Furious Goddess-Given Power Of Both
Barbarian And Brahmin Alike’, as well as the Third Mytholinguistics of
War\]

However, another and perhaps more pervasively encountered Sanskrit means
to reference this concept is ‘Vipra’. This is, unsurprisingly, quite a
broad term in its Vedic usage, and simultaneously refers to – in specia
– that which makes a truly gifted Brahmin a Brahmin, and therefore more
figuratively to ‘Wisdom’; as well as the ‘input’ required for such – the
‘Divine Inspiration’, and the exterior manifestations of being in
possession of this quality such as a certain ‘trembling’ and
‘excitement’. It is, in other words, a shorthand for ‘religious ecstasy’
in just the same manner as we have seen with Odr, Vates, etc.

‘Vibration’ is a modern English cognate; and the ancient Latin that that
is from (‘Vibro’) is quite illuminating for our purposes – as this does
not only refer to the ‘vibration’ that we should be expecting, but also
potentially to a luminous quality to the individual ; and, of course,
the expected states of excitement and agitation, shaking with it indeed,
for the thusly impelled. Interestingly, there is also a more razor-edged
element to it as well – with the hurling of spears or threats being
covered within its definitional ambit likewise.

And that ‘weaponized’ understanding is also saliently Sanskrit relevant
– as we find precisely this cognate term, ‘Vip’, in-use to describe the
Weapon of Trita Aptya (Whom we might fairly describe, I think, as a
Warrior Priest) in RV X 99 6; something that should be unsurprising
given the emphasis in other Vedic hymnals upon the Weapon of Trita (and
an immensely powerful, Chaos-banishing and Demon Dragon-slaying weapon
it is, too!) being His Heritage of the ancestral rites and Their pious
performance; as well as the co-occurrence in Greek mythology of the same
figure as Iolaus, Hydra-Slayer, making use of Fire in the closely
correlate mythic occurrence. There is far more that I can, should, and
must say upon the Weapon of Trita – but we shall leave that for a future
(a)arti-cle.

But why am I devoting such attention to all of this in an article
ostensibly about Zoroastrian culture-jamming?

Because it is one of those various means – along with the Empowering
Elixir, with which it is often closely correlate – via which the Divine
is emanated out into the world around us. Through the skilled tongues
and guided insight of the Seers \[Rsis – Sages, Priests, Bards, Poets;
and the speculative etymology of Sanskrit ‘Rsi’ is just exactly that –
the one from whom the great welling up of this divine impartment ‘flows
forth’\], we come to be able to engage with the religious realm. We have
our beautiful myths and resonant ritual formulas provided, as well as
the further guidance even beyond and off the page for those of us who
come into such presence of the Immanentizing Divine.

In short – short of actually (meta-)physically turning up and directly
doing things Themselves (which *does* happen from time to time), that is
the major vector via which proper, authentic, and true Indo-European
religiosity has made itself an enduring element in the descendant IE
mytho-cultures. Indeed, even where The Gods Themselves are more directly
invoked, the Vedas also hail Them as being in possession of this
Vip-expressed quality.

So if you were looking to, say, cut off your subject population from
such genuine Divine engagement … you’d want to strike at exactly those
points wherein this interaction could occur.

And one way you could do that, of course, is the simple and direct
method – kill all the priests and holy-men that you can find (who won’t
swear allegiance to you ‘new order’), attempt to vigorously suppress all
knowledge of that which went before (and is implicitly beyond your
control), that sort of thing. There’s some evidence for an array of this
occurring under the early Zoroastrians (including Zoroaster’s request to
the king that was his patron to have rival priests put to death) – but
it never really got very far. Partially because they just didn’t have
the power to do so – as even despite their propagandtastic claims to the
contrary, it appears likely that they were losing the initial uprising
against ‘Daeva’ orthodoxy \[as can be seen by their having to engage in
a hurried trek far to the west to escape from the former heartland they
had attempted to domineer away from its previous faith\], meaning they
were not in a position of military supremacy to begin engaging n
seriously systemic purges in what they hoped to be their initial sphere.

But another, and more interesting reason appears to be that the groups
which wound up under or allied to the Zoroastrians had limits about just
how much deletion of the previously prevalent Indo-Iranian religious
orthodoxy that they’d grown up under which they were prepared to
tolerate. We can tell this, in part, due to the eventual
‘re-incorporation’ of certain elements that could not be suppressed
entirely outright as the Zoroastrian scriptural corpus develops through
time. Indra, for example, had been demonized as ‘Indar’; yet in later
texts, we find a Verethragna \[based upon the Iranic expression of the
familiar Sanskrit epithet ‘Vritrahan’ – Slayer of Vritra, Smiter of
Resistance; despite there being no \[Vritra-\] dragon-slaying in
Verethragna’s mythology\] being integrated in as a ‘sanitized’ and
‘controllable’ version of an Indra-cult figure of devotion. Indeed it
has also been proposed that what appears to be the gradual introduction
of the concept of Gods (plural) into the Zoroastrian texts all up is the
result of the people whom the Zoroastrians had under them just not being
positive nor keen about the Godsless earliest conception of the religion
which appears to have existed under Zoroaster himself.

The ‘culture-jamming’ switch of the active ingredient(s) for Soma, with
the ephedra which even today forms the main constituent for Zoroastrian
Haoma – is another, and far more insidious instance of this trend.
Because it is a quite a direct ‘bait and switch’ substitution. It takes
something that an ancient Indo-Iranian would have unquestionably
expected to be there at the core of his or her archaic religion – the
Empowering Elixir aforementioned, which shows the universe as it truly
is and enables communing with and receiving inspiration from The Gods –
and instead of merely endeavoring to delete or suppress this outright …
it changes the substance of it \[in multiple senses of this term\]. So
rather than an entheogen – one is instead consuming something we might
perhaps compare to a seriously strong coffee. The cultural structure is
hijacked, hollowed out, and subverted to demonstrate that the ‘new
orthodoxy’ is in fact .. orthodox, despite being obviously nothing of
the sort!

Yet this insipid process of ‘Culture-Jamming’ also manifests in other
manners as well. Whereby a pervasive ‘revaluing of values’ is
promulgated in a bid to disrupt the engagement of the subject population
with the concept in question by changing its associations to something
objectionable.

In the case of this ‘Vip’,’Vipra’ that we have found amidst the Vedic
sphere – and which has as its antecedent roots other Indo-Iranic
expressions sharing etymology; as well as, as we have seen, finding
direct pan-Indo-European expression via other terminology for the same
substantive phenomenon – this was exactly what the Zoroastrians then
proceeded to do.

The specific form of this technique which they employed is one that will
be familiar to just about every man who has attended high school –
something which demonstrates the long-term efficacy of the tactic that
it still resonates today as it did perhaps three millennia ago ‘midst
the Mazdian sphere. In short – they declared that Divine Inspiration was
now Gay , that those who engaged with Divinity in such a manner were
homosexual , and that the practices involved were tantamount to
(receptive) sodomy.

Hence, where Vip, Vipra for us in the orthodox Indo-Iranic sphere refers
to the radiant quality of the Rsi, the Seer, the bearer of sacred
insight and the communer with The Gods upon our behalf … for the
Zoroastrian, Vaepaiia meant to be homosexual ; and is utilized by
Zoroaster himself (in Yasna 51.12) as an insult toward a ‘Kauui’ (in
Sanskrit we would say a Kavi), a Poet or a Seer of the by now rival
orthodox Indo-Iranic religion.

\[Now I should almost certainly clarify at this point, in case it was
not abundantly apparent by my earlier remarks, that Zoroaster’s stances
are not my own. And that what we are engaged in here is a frank
explication of socio-politico-ecclesiastical mores of an early Iron Age
culture; rather than some trenchant template for action in the modern
day. So, in short – before jumping to the unfounded insinuation that I
may be propelling some homophobic agenda in Zoroastrian clothing …
please instead arrive at the reality – that I am detailing a situation
of the multi-millennia archaic past wherein a particular religious group
sought to propel an anti-Divine agenda in homophobic terms. Something
that, for obvious reasons, I do not support.\]

The major elocution for Zoroastrian perversion of ‘Vip’ is the Vendidad
– wherein it is set out that the land of Hyrcania was under the baelful
influence of Angra Mainyu who had suffused the land (and its menfolk)
with such conduct. Now this is interesting to us for a number of
reasons. One of which being the etymology of Hyrcania – which
effectively means the land of Wolves (and which has some figurative
relation in terms of later geography to the place of the Wolf-Headed
Warriors fought in the Shahmaneh – but more upon that, perhaps, some
other time); but the other being the relative position of Hyrcania to
the Zoroastrians’ relocated center of gravity following their defeat and
exile from Balkh of Medea. It is immediately to the north, and would at
that time have still very much been inhabited by the men of the old ways
– the Scythian #GangSteppe indomitable adherents of the broad-ranging
Indo-Iranic orthodoxy which had previously beaten the Zoroastrians’
earlier generation back in their original homeland. And, not to put too
fine a (three)point upon it – plausibly within the vicinity for ancient
Sanskrit texts describing the haunts of the Steppe Iranic worshippers of
the Deity we would know as Shiva.

The Vendidad, in its subsequent exposition upon sin and cleanliness
makes the characteristics of this ‘Vaepiia’ quite clear. That it is not,
we might say, a crime of sexual violation … but one of consorting with
“demons” – Daevas; and, indeed, one which renders the human participant
as a Daeva, himself. It is not at all hard to see how what is actually
being condemned here is not (in principle) homosexuality – but rather
homosexuality being utilized as a convenient cover to castigate those
who were actually engaged with the Divinity, the Devas – especially as a
core element in a lot of Indo-Iranic ritual orthodoxy is for the major
participants therein to become as the Gods thusly invoked for the
purposes of the ritual performance. This is not merely the case of
standing in a certain prescribed spot and reciting specific lines
attributed to the Divinity in question – in various of the rites in
question, it involves quite directly the Voice of the God coming from
one’s lips – an investiture of the Deity being inside one. Evidently the
Zoroastrians took the “a God is inside him \[i.e. the Priest\]” bit and
ran with it in quite a heavily perverted direction.

And I must confess, I find all of this particularly galling – because as
we should probably expect by now with the Zoroastrian Heresy, where they
are not inventing things wholesale or may as well be … it is a downright
inversion of authentic tradition. Why do I say it is an inversion?
Because in the Indo-European mytho-religious canon, the *direct* cognate
to what they are decrying does indeed have a rather romantic
relationship between divinely inspired Seer and Divinity … except the
Divinity in question is a Goddess.

Many would be familiar with the notion of an Artist and his Muse, and I
suppose that this is a useful paradigm with which to approach the
matter. In the Vedas, we find Goddess Vak described as relating in just
such a manner to the Rsi. My favourite RigVedic Hymnal, RV X 125, has
this bestowal of the Divine Inspiration, the Power and the Potency of
the Poet/Prophet, being granted by Vak \[‘Speech’ – like Vox, Voice\] to
the Man whom She ‘Chooses’, with the verb being rendered as ‘Chooses’
being ‘Kama’ \[i.e. ‘Loves’\]. RV X 71, the Jnanam Sukta is in some ways
more direct. Quoth line 4 – “\[to the Rsi\] hath She shown Her beauty as
a fond well-dressed woman to Her husband” (Griffith translation); or, as
Jamison/Brereton put it – “She has stretched out Her body, like an
eager, well-dressed wife for Her husband.” The Shatapatha Brahmana \[a
‘Ritual Manual’/’Commentary’ to the Vedas\], as we should expect, is
more expansive – for instance, devoting several verses in 3:2:1 to the
manner in which a Brahmin is to invoke Vak for the purposes of one of
these rites … and describing the ritual steps in question in quite
directly and overtly “flirtatious” fashion. As in, that’s literally the
process being described – that of wooing a woman. Which makes various
levels of sense, of course, given that the next steps for the ritual
also entail the Birth of Indra from the ’embryo’ that has gestated
within the rite – i.e. the ‘flirtation’ has obviously been successful
and lead to a metaphysical coital situation of a sort which pre-sages a
somewhat metaphorical progeny \[as in, the ‘presence’ of the divinity in
a ‘descended to this plane’ iteration we may say\].

And while I am not immediately aware of – nor would seek to promulgate
in the absence – *direct* presentation of a similar level of intimately
expressed engagement between Chosen Male and the Empowering Goddess in
the Greek or Nordic-Germanic canons … we nevertheless have key
consistencies in the accounts aforementioned of Athena empowering with
sparks of divinity Her favourites, and Freyja in the Ynglinga Saga being
“priestess of the sacrifices, and first taught the Asaland people the
magic art”.

It should therefore be quite abundantly clear why it is that I have
declared the Zoroastrian presentation of Vip, Vipra to be such an
Inversion in these matters. Because even when we CAN say that a romantic
relationship IS involved in the relevant ritual metaphysics … it is a
decidedly heterosexual one \[the existence of female Rsis in the Vedic
age, perhaps being a complication to this schema – I have genuinely not
looked into how they may have related to the understandings in question,
or perhaps whether the Priestly God that the Brahmin is, in some senses,
standing in for or re-enacting the previous mighty deeds of, may have
been involved\].

So why put in all this effort into not merely demonizing – and I mean
that quite literally, referring to the beings and forces involved as
‘demons’, whether human or Divine – but homosexualizing one’s religious
opponents and the previous prevailing Indo-Iranic orthodoxy of lived
belief? Surely the declaration of Daeva-ism ought have been enough?

Well, on one level, I would suspect that the insult was meant as just
exactly that – an insult. The archaic Zoroastrians most definitely hated
the bastions of the religious order they were seeking to usurp and
overthrow, and accusing a rival of effeminacy, “unnatural practices”
\[in fact, this is not strong enough of a translation – it is more
“conduct directly corrosive to the immanency of order and the fabric of
reality itself” that is meant – see Yasna 46.11, for instance\] would
certainly fit with this. The fact that the Zoroastrians had lost a war
and been set on the run by these supposedly ‘inferior’ worshippers of
the Old Gods can only have added to their venom in their spiteful
invective as they fled and rebuilt elsewhere.

Except propaganda is rarely comprised of just mere insults. There would
be little point – it would be akin to shouting into the proverbial void
\[something that, for the Zoroastrians, may have been met with the
uncomfortable realization that when you do so – the “void” may also Roar
back at you\]. It adds little to make more abundantly obvious that the
targeted group is disliked. Instead, the terminology must become
‘operationalized’ – it must provide an implicit ‘guide to action’ for
its listener out here in the non-rhetorical world.

Thus it is with the Zoroastrians’ declaration that ‘Vip’ and its
practitioners were now ‘homosexual’. For on the one hand, this provided
an open license to kill priestly practitioners of the old religion as
and where they were found (and, for that matter, to engage in
significant corporal punishment of those found more passively involved
notionally “against their will”), as confirmed by a literal litany of
Zoroastrian scripture upon the subject which even appear to suggest that
such killings are a meritorious (rather than sinful) deed.

Yet on the other – it provides severely negative and odious appearance
to the religion and its practitioners in question; in a way that goes
beyond the rather abstract notion of “engaging with demons” and makes it
a sort of maleficarum which a man of the time would be expected to
‘relate to’ with a visceral disgust. Why was this necessary? Because I
suspect rather strongly that, as with any ‘new creed’ that is
endeavouring to turn everything upon its head in an unasked for
“revolution” – the Zoroastrians had a considerable problem with the
people under their dominion ‘backsliding’ to old ways. I intend to speak
more about that particular subject in a future piece, but for reasons of
length have excised sustained discussion of it from this one.

The promulgation of the transvaluation of ‘Vip’ produced an in-built
backstop against such things. Something rendered increasingly necessary
due to the implicit realities of the Zoroastrians’ newfound situation in
Medea – where immediately to their north an immanent instance of the
‘living past’ of their warrior-caste was to be found amongst the ‘Wolf
Cults’, D(a)eva worship, Divine Speakers, and Lord of Furor deity of
Hyrcania. We can see other evidence in the early phase of Zoroastrianism
for the psychocultic needs of those warriors causing notable
developments in the religion (for example the ‘sanitized’ introduction
of Verethragna some time after the demonization of Indra), presumably
likewise to keep them ‘in the fold’ rather than tempted to head off back
to their own more ancient ways, clans, and homelands in search of what
they were now missing. The emphatic association of a potential powerful
rival for the loyalties and the emotional allegiances of these men with
what would have been portrayed as decidedly unmanly – indeed outright
emasculating – conduct is therefore a classic example of ‘demonizing the
enemy’. Conducted, as with an array of such efforts at propaganda, in a
bid to keep artificially divided and self-dividing – peoples (in this
case, Iranics) who would otherwise gradually come to realize that they
really were not so different after all.

We can see the tangible effects of this sort of psychosocial barrier
largely via its absence. That is to say – just what happened in the
closely neighbouring regions, centuries and millennia later, when the
by-then ancient hatreds were no longer kept actively alive and aimed as
they had once been. In the eras of Kushan, Kushano-Sassanian, and other
post-Persian dominance – we see groups that may have *started out* with
Zoroastrian inclinations, and certainly kept *some* of the Zoroastrian
visual stylings here and there … coming to practice a semi-syncretic
(dare I say almost ‘reconstructionist’) Indo-Iranic religion which was
in practice saliently Hindu. That is to say – strongly Deva oriented
(including by name), hailing the wisdom of the Vedic-style (song-)sages
and Seers, and worshipping as God-Emperor that veer-y same Indo-European
God Who had formed such a bete-noir-Ish template for the Zoroastrians’
demonologic conceptry in their earliest and subsequent days.

In other words, they Came Home.

It is our hope that one day soon, so too shall the rest of the
Iranosphere likewise.
