+++
title = "Kaal Hades Erebus – A Brief Look At The Darkening Veil Betwixt Light And Life, Darkness And Death – The Solar Underworld Coveredxa0"
date = "February 12, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/theoretical-part-hades.jpg?w=1024)

Something I love about our field is the manner in which the linguistics
– the etymology – facilitates the proper understanding and construal of
meaning. This is occasionally derided as being the supplanting of
serious theology via etymology … but with this I do not agree. At most,
it is the supplementation – and as we have capaciously demonstrated
through the course of our works, it is a vital tool in our arsenal. One
with serious probative, indeed outright predictive value. And which is
capable of revealing otherwise hidden mythemes held sacred and in common
cohort by our ancestors.

Now, speaking of That Which Is Hidden … This is, of course, exactly what
Hades (Aides) is held to mean. Deriving from Proto-Indo-European N-Weyd,
meaning Non- (N-) Seen (Weyd).

In this, it has a considerable coterminity with an otherwise dissimilar
appearing theonym and conceptual term in Sanskrit – Kaal (as in
MahaKaal, Kali). I should take a moment to acknowledge that there is
some disagreement and debate about the potential roots of this term, but
I connect it to Proto-Indo-European ‘Kel’ – a term to refer to a
covering; an which not at all coincidentally derives into later Germanic
words like “Hell”.

“Kaal”, for us, does not merely mean “Death”, but also “Blackness”, and
“Time”. Which renders the phrasing that Oppenheimer was translating in
his famous quotation, rather different in its proper implication, of
course (the ‘Death’ (Kaal) that is the Destroyer of Worlds is more
properly understood as Time or, perhaps, ‘Causality’/’Fate’ in its
Bhagavad Gita context – although that is plainly less apt for the
detonation of a nuclear weapon, and in any case is something of a
counterpoint given the ‘Blackness’ symbolism inherent in the term to the
Radiance of the Thousand Suns. Even if there is also an intriguing irony
that it is the Vishvarupa Darshana – the Omniform of the Universe
seemingly as it truly is, that is referred to by this term meaning
‘Veiling’ in its most archaic sense. But I digress…).

But why am I invoking this ‘Kaal’ and ‘Kel’ here? Because it is the most
succinct illustration of what is truly going on here. The sense being
communicated is that of Death as the Veil Between Worlds; the
impenetrable Blackness beyond which one cannot see. Light and Life are
inexorably co-connoted in various IE theological schemas – and perhaps
we might look at that in a future piece; but the Solar Radiancy is at
the root of the World of the Living, indeed *is* the All-Father and
All-Mother (ref: Dyaus Pitar and Vedic Aditi respectively – or, for that
matter, Vivasvat as Father and Saranyu (Sauri) as Mother to Mankind) –
and hence the dual understanding inherent in the etymology of “Loka”
(Sanskrit for Realm, Kingdom) as both a place that is inhabited (or even
a race) and also as the Light (it derives from PIE ‘Lewk’ – which also
informs our modern terminology such as “Look”).

Now, that notion of the Light as the ultimate source of Life is doubly
intriguing – because in the Vedic cosmology (afore the parallel
‘mytho-linguistic’ derivation had taken place which relegated it to the
Under-World – a pattern also visible in the other IE cosmological
understandings), where we find the Afterlife is up high in the sky.
Paramevyoman is proximate to it – YamaLoka (‘Yama’ of the latter being
used directly as a kenning for ‘Sun’, ‘Sun’s Zenith’ in the Vedas),
Pitrloka in the Solar Sphere (or Nordic Valaskjalf); Aditi hailed as
presiding over such, a parallel expression to what is found in the
Hittite ‘Solar Underworld’ figure, the situation also of Anatolian/Greek
Hekate, etc.

So this invites an obvious paradox – as we ALSO have the position
proximate to the AfterLife referred to in terms of Darkness. In addition
to the aforementioned, the prominent example is Ancient Greek Erebus
(from PIE ‘Hregwos’ – a term for Darkness, that is quite close in its
formulation to a suite of terms for ‘Rulership’ (PIE ‘Hregs’) – as we
discussed in ‘Ragnarok And The Night Lord’).

What explains this? Why is it that we have an Afterlife that is
expressly Solar connoted (although later winds up shrouded in the Earth
– and ‘Hole’, too, is from this PIE ‘Kel’ root), yet simultaneously is
covered and occluded via the Dark ?

Well, at once we have this notion of the Underworld being in the Sky –
and the Night Sky in particular being relevant for this. The Night acts
as a ‘Cover’ for the Sky , and also represents the ‘Veiling’ between
this present cycle of life and the *next* cycle of life – the
aforementioned ‘AfterLife’ – that is akin to a new dawn, a new day, a
day unending even, in the Indo-European world-view.

Over time, this has become somewhat forgotten – and the ‘Solar’ element
to the AfterLife is de-emphasized in many of these post-PIE descendant
cosmologies. So all that is left, often, is the ‘Darkness’ which shrouds
it from view as if this were the substantive and all-encompassing sphere
of the matter.

So – ‘Hades’ (as in The Unseen) becomes not a term for That Which Is
Unseen (due to the shroud of darkness between worlds) – but rather, the
underworld as having an essentialized Dark and Gloomy character. The
‘Darkness’, if you like, has not just eclipsed but actually displaced
the ‘Light’.

Something that is also, in its way, visible via the suite of conceptry
for the Master of that grim(nir) realm often preserving the luminous,
radiant terminology inherent in His descriptor and surrounding
conceptry. Hades described as the Zeus (i.e. Shining Daylight Sky –
Dyaus) of the Underworld (something which makes additional sense
considering the archaic Greek remembrance that Hades and Zeus were, in
fact, the same figure), Varuna (the dweller in Pitrloka with Lord Yama)
having both extensive Solar associations (including the Solar Eye – seen
also via Odin’s situation with Hlidskjalf, itself a ‘Lidded’ or
‘Covered’ position, as shown via the etymology of same) yet also a
‘Covering’ root to the theonym that may either (or perhaps
simultaneously) refer to the Wide-Covering illumination of the Sky
Father (c.f Vivasvat, Vivasvan, etc.) or alternatively to the Dusky
Covering of the Sun that is the onrushing Shades of Night (and c.f my
earlier work upon the Star-Studded Cloak of the Sky Father).

And which we can also find just quite directly in the conceptry around
Kali – wherein the bright, radiantly beautiful form of Parvati is
‘covered’ via the blackness of all-consuming Death, Night, Destruction
that is Kali, afore being re-illuminated via the removing (often via
‘washing off’) of this Kaal covering to reveal MahaGauri \[‘Great White
One’/’Great Beauty’ – a standard Solar understanding in the
Indo-European mythic conceptual syllabary; c.f also Aditi in relation to
Her Consort, the Sky Father) ; something directly paralleled via the
de-dark-ifying of Demeter Erinyes (the Furious Form of the Mother
Goddess) via the bathing in a particular holy river – which would attain
additional relevancy given my postulation of an alternative etymology
for “Demeter” as “De-Mater” (i.e. ‘Shining/Radiant/Solar Mother’), and
my observation of the direct correspondence of Demeter Erinyes with the
position of Sauri in various of the Hindu perceptions of the same
underlying Indo-European myth.

So there you have it. The Truth, as it were, ‘Unveiled’.
