+++
title = "On Using The IndraNet To Facilitate Indo-European Religiousxa0Revival"
date = "February 1, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/revolt-against-the-current-yuga.png?w=850)

Something that’s got me thinking – and while it starts off (as it often
does) Hindu, of broader relevancy to the wider Indo-European religious
revival that’s going on at present.

This ongoing pandemic is leading to some interesting – and creative –
developments in the religious sphere. I got a message from one of the
guys I look in a religious sense asking if I was aware of any
livestreams of Hindu religious functions.

He’s in the UK, which is presently going through a lockdown – so has
understandable difficulty with the live-and-in-person original forms.

So as it turns out, I’ve wound up sending him a link to my own Mandir in
New Zealand’s facebook page , where they’ve been posting live video of
the regular Tuesday Sunderkand Path recitation. \[I’ve also had a few
more links to Temples in India livestreaming their events, presumably
partially for this reason\]

There’s something resonant about that – an ancient religion centered in
India, and to facilitate it somebody in the UK is going to be watching
via the internet and social media a broadcast of a liturgy, live, from
Auckland New Zealand. The World being the size of a Mustard Seed,
indeed, as the Shaivite proverb goes.

Now I said that there was a broader saliency to this than ‘just’ us
Hindus – and there is.

We’re in an age wherein The Internet really does make some remarkable
things possible. I don’t mean to suggest that watching a ceremony online
can ever really replace being there in person (although there are some
quite interesting developments by some Indian Pandits around carrying
out rites via skype – the person on the other end from them carrying out
the appropriate gestures and recitations and such).

But so often we hear from people that they don’t have or don’t know
anybody in their immediately reachable area who are of their particular
flavour of revivalist / reconstructionist IE faith. Maybe they have some
groups nearby but it turns out that they’re improper in some way – or
maybe they’re out in the middle of atheist-materialist spiritual
wasteland nowhere. Or a deeply conservative Bible-Belt town where being
a religious minority usually means being a sliiiightly differing form of
Protestant or something. It happens.

What I think we’re remarkably blessed with via this technological
paradigmatic era of ours is the chance to do something different than
what was expected – and make use of the advancements in tech to actually
head back in the other direction in some ways to resurrect forms of what
came before.

Now it’s not perfect – and I maintain, as I said earlier, that watching
a livestreamed religious rite online is really no substitute for
actually physically being there for one. But I also maintain that there
is a more than zero benefit to being able to this over simply having
nothing at all.

And, perhaps more importantly – in the medium-to-long-run (which is,
after all, what we’re focused upon – moving/growing mountains, here),
these sorts of things provide something of a ‘scaffold’ for future
engagement, enlightenment and development.

They’re something remarkably effective for giving people a portal for
support in what they are seeking to do – and simply showing that another
world, another way of carrying out religiosity rather than merely having
the ‘mental’ dimension to the faith without tangible action, is
possible.

In short – online broadcasts of religious proceedings SHOULD help the
spread and uptake of the local carrying out of these same rites in
person.

And also, not coincidentally, help to show that what is involved in the
proper Indo-European religious revivalisms out there is not some sort of
empty, content-less “oh, I am such-and-such on the internet” in
twitter-bios – but an actual, meaningful set of religions with real,
vital, valid, and viable religious performative and participationary
elements thereto.

Krinvanto Vishvam Aryam via the tools that are given to us. Somewhat
unconventional-looking though they may so happen to be.

And who knows – it may also help some people out there engaged in this
or that particular form of Indo-European religion to take a bit of a
broader look and see that what their cousins are doing is ‘not so
different’ after all.

This isn’t ‘Globalism’. This is Heritage – building itself an
interconnected network of fortresses across the globe.

We’re seriously lucky here in the Hindusphere (well, ‘Lucky’, ‘Blessed’
– ‘Shiva’ is certainly an apt translation …) , because we have all of
this sort of thing already there and ready to go.

I look forward to the other Indo-European denominations being able to do
much the same !
