+++
title = "Proof For Parjanya – The Sky Father Roars Through Scripturalxa0Force!"
date = "February 6, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/eqa6gasxaaewedb-1.jpg?w=819)

It is always nice to be vindicated ! A little over a year ago, I
published a piece \[“Swear By The Sea, Swear By The Stars, Swear By The
Sky”\] which set out Parjanya as a Face of the Sky Father responsible
for Rain and the nurturing of life upon this world of ours through this.
The manner in which I had approached this was almost by accident. The
article had intended to look at the generalized Aspect of the Sky Father
in question across several Indo-European mythologies, and there Parjanya
was – consistently fitting in to the features of the typology and
finding expression in the same phrasing used elsewhere in the Vedas for
the relevant deific complex. I considered it strong evidence.

Except not everybody agreed. And there was some insistent push-back
which sought to posit Parjanya as an expression of the Indo-European
Striker/Thunderer deific instead. Partially upon a linguistic basis,
partially because the notion that *multiple* Gods might be hurling
lightning and roaring thunder appeared to be a bit of an ungraspable
concept … but mostly, it would appear, because it is the ‘established
opinion’ in various corners of the internet – so who am I to quibble
with Wikipedia.

As applies the former two points – I did what I usually do when I become
sufficiently annoyed about something (we might say – ‘infuriated’,
potentially of the ‘poeticus’ proclivity), and wrote an article which
looked directly at these matters \[‘De-Mist-Ifying Parjanya – Distancing
Perkwunos’\]. It pointed out that there was an entirely plausible
etymology for Parjanya which did *not* come from the PIE ‘Per’
underpinning ‘Perun’, ‘Perkwunos’, ‘Perseus’, etc. But which would
rather align quite directly with Parjanya’sRainfall Role – PIE
‘(S)Pergh’, meaning ‘To Sprinkle, To Sow’ \[Another possibility, hinged
around the semi-coterminous PIE ‘Sperh’, via Sanskrit ‘Sphurj’, would
instead make Parjanya ‘The Roarer’ once more directly … or, potentially,
‘The Exploder’, referring to the resounding roll of the Thunderclap; yet
also having picked up the suddenness and the radiancy of the flash of
lightning (‘Arriver’/’Appearer’, ‘Shines’/’Glitters’, ‘Cause to
Shine’/’Illuminate’)\]. I also took an in-depth look at the relevant
mythology and theology that had come down to us from the Vedas – showing
that once again, what we were being told was that Parjanya was a Masque
of the Sky Father. I have since significantly broadened this work out in
a succession of subsequent pieces upon the relevant areas.

I also – but briefly – attempted to see where this erroneous perception
of Parjanya as the Striker/Thunderer had actually derived from; and as
far as I can tell, much of it results from the misapplication of an
attempted Romantic era (Balto-)Slavic reconstructionism in the 1870s.
That is to say – it wasn’t really based on Vedic evidence, not least
because substantive translations of the Vedas wouldn’t start becoming
seriously available in earnest for some decades. I would also suspect
that, coming as far back toward the genesis of comparative Indo-European
religious analysis as it did, the position that author was attempting to
stake out within the Slavic sphere itself with what he was doing would
also be on shaky ground.

Yet that is the nature of our field, it would seem. Somebody promulgates
a questionable position based around an incomplete understanding of a
severely incompletely available textual corpus … and then this doesn’t
go seriously questioned for decades – a century and a half, it would
seem ! – after that. Even after we become availed of a far grander
swathe of the relevant religious materials in question – and other
developments that should, by rites, have furthered the fundamental
questioning of just about everything.

Instead, it just becomes such an uncritically pervasive portion of the
‘mental furniture’ of the discipline that anybody who *does* raise
eyebrow or serious issue with the notion is almost instantly rounded
upon as some sort of latter-day heretic or hack. (And, to be fair and
sure, some of those out there purporting to up-end the whole apple-cart
on some things are either if not frequently both)

But ‘Theory’ is only as good as its last encounter with the facts. And
in such situations where the theory and the facts do not align –
assuming the facts are the right ones, it would be most peculiar indeed
were the theory not re-evaluated within that most ancient and proper
light.

So it is with Parjanya. Wherein to my good fortune, a section of the
Shatapatha Brahmana that a Brahminical associate had sent to me upon an
unrelated matter, happened to contain the direct evidence to support my
theorizing – and also to show the fundamental failing of the ‘Parjanya
Is Perkwunos’ ‘received wisdom’ position.

SB VI 1 3 sets out eight elemental-associated Forms or Aspects of the
Sky Father – these being possessed of well-known Roudran theonyms, and
designations for Their nature that are also familiar to us as Facings of
the Sky Father. For example, the First of these is declared ‘Rudra’ –
and stated to be ‘Agni’ (Fire); the Fourth of these is declared ‘Ugra’ –
and stated to be ‘Vayu’ (Wind); the Seventh of these is declared
‘MahanDeva’ – and stated to be ‘Chandra’ (Moon) \[interestingly, another
Brahmana – theSankhayana Brahmana – presents the same basic format and
broad outline to the rite and ritual understanding in question, yet also
changes the associations of several of these theonyms in subtle, yet
important ways – for instance, Mahandeva in that schema represents
Aditya, the Sun, rather than Chandra, the Moon;\]. This – broadly
speaking – also accords with the understanding of the Eight Vasus
\[‘Radiances’, ‘Lights’ (or ‘Highs’, running on a somewhat different PIE
derivation) – the purport with regard to Dyaus Pitar, the Lord of the
(Day)Light Sky, being shiningly apparent\]; wherein we once again see
the Sky Father deific ‘refracted’ out into eight ‘elemental’ keyed
Aspects.

Why is this relevant? Because the Sixth of these Forms is ‘Bhava’
(another prominent Roudran theonym) – and herein, Bhava is directly
stated to be Parjanya. And both are stated to be Agni. Agni, as we are
well aware of by this point, also being Shiva (as is voluminously
attested elsewhere in both the Vedic canon directly, and demonstrated in
my own work built from same).

Each of these Eight Forms is one of the essential qualities or
characteristics which renders existence within this universe of ours to
be possible. These are therefore not only ‘elemental’ expressions in the
sense that, say, Vayu is equated to the Air which exists in our
atmosphere … but also the manner, the mode in which Vayu as the
*essential air*, the Breath of Life Itself, acts to animate – hence, in
part, the association with Ugra for Vayu: as the swift movement, indeed
even the speaking (with RV X 125 5 , where ‘Ugra’ is utilized to refer
to the investiture of the power of the Rsi, the Poet, the Prophet, very
much in mind) of this characteristic would not be possible in the
absence of that ‘Wind’ and ‘Air-Motion’ represented by ‘Vayu’.

‘Bhava’ is correlated with Parjanya in the Shatapatha Brahmana iteration
of the rite, per the text due to the fact that all ‘beings’ (‘Bhava’)
are nourished or nurtured by the quality of the Rainfall and are given
rise via the investiture into the soil and sphere of the supernal
essence of life from the Sky Father via this Form. \[For more detail
upon this specific understanding, please consult the portion of ‘The
Queen Of Serpents – The Serpentine Figure Of The Indo-European Earth
Mother’ looking at the Sky Father’s involvement in the relevant
fertility metaphysics and associated rites; and, of course, ‘Swear By
The Sea, Swear By The Stars, Swear By The Sky – On The Mytholinguistics
Of Varuna Neptune Ouranos’\] This is, needless to say, exactly the role
and effective position that our modelling had predicted for Parjanya
based on our comparative reconstructive theology.

So, to recap, what we have just witnessed is an enumerative emanation of
Eight Forms of the Sky Father, each referred to as a Form of Rudra, and
each stated to be a Form of Agni – with Parjanya quite directly cited
amidst Them.

Parjanya as Rudra should not surprise us – as, after all, even leaving
aside this above aforementioned direct attestation , there have also
always been other supports available for the theory. No less a personage
than Krishna Himself notes that the Terror-Instilling Voice of the
Enraged Rudra upon the field of war is that of Parjanya, in the
Anusasana Parvan of the Mahabharat. And the SataRudriya rite also found
in the Shatapatha Brahmana, arguably the most important of its Roudran
obeisances, not only hails the Rains as the Arrows of the Rudra(s) – but
also forms the ritual template for these other Ashta-Murti (‘Eight
Form’) understandings that we have encountered above and before.

In short, then, the straightforward proof that Parjanya is the Sky
Father – that Parjanya is Rudra the Mighty (and yes, Rudra is indeed
Dyaus Pitar – see for example, RV II 1 6 … or my earlier work ‘On The
Still Active Dyaus Pitar Of The Indo-Europeans – The Sky Father Still
Roars Supreme’, which considers an array of the Vedic textual
attestations for this – another instance of our theoretical modelling
being vindicated by primary source evidence that we only later came into
contact with directly) – this proof has been around and clearly
available if one knows where to look for some decades now. In the case
of the Shatapatha Brahmana, since at least the 1890s for an
English-speaking audience.

Which really does leave us pondering the rather obvious question – why
that position, *our* position, is not more widely held. Why it is
instead so conspicuous via its uneering absence from just about every
corner of the internet or book upon the subject that we’ve yet seen.
Instead being supplanted by the evidently untenable “Perkwunos”
pre-vayu-cations.

Probably because it now appears that many of the people involved in
‘popularizing’ and highlighting what is commonly ‘agreed’ to be the
Indo-European Mythology … do not appear to do all that much actual
engagement with the real Indo-European Mythology; instead preferring to
pick up and run with concepts first deployed by the earlier generations
of theorists and scholars, who may have made some occasionally quite
glaringly egregious errors in their work (like the claim that Dyaus
Pitar is functionally ‘dead’ or ‘inactive’, for instance – the Deus
Otiosus concept that we have also roundly rebuked and disproved in the
aforementioned (A)Arti-cle). Errors, once introduced, get repeatedly
reproduced until they become accepted as ‘fact’ – a curious kind of
“fact” that is somehow to be regarded as unutterably more ‘true’ than
what it is that these inductions are actually purporting to be
representing to the unsuspecting reader.

Now it must be clarified, of course, that in many cases – it is not
quite right to endeavour to pillory the previous generations of
theorists for their failure to see things in the proper manner. Often,
they were limited by the tools they had available to them at the time –
certain works had not been translated (or perhaps weren’t even known
about), other works had been most egregiously *mistranslated* and their
import categorically distorted by the time they got to the academics in
the adjacent fields who would so seek to make more proper use of them (a
good example of this is Nietzsche’s extensive conceptry he’d built upon
material he’d read in the Louis Jacolliot “translation” of the
Manusmriti (Law of Manu) – a work which appears to be burdened with some
rather hefty bouts of “imagination” on the part of its “translator”, a
man who also memorably just made up “Sanskrit” words wholesale in his
bid to ‘prove’ that Jesus Christ was Krishna \[Never mind, of course,
that ‘Gold’ and ‘Black’ aren’t easily the same term, either…\]).

However, that definitely doesn’t describe all of them – and even today
we have persons who almost assuredly *do* know better, *are* capable of
more meaningful engagement with the actual evidence (even in its
original languages), yet choose not to to instead pursue lurid flights
of agenda- or preference- or academic-cred driven
fallacious-flurries-of-feigned-philosophical-fancy.

And then these, too, become yet another layer of “accepted reality”,
“received ‘truth'” which forms up like silt and insidiously clogs the
arterial riverways of our lifes-drivennavigation back to the Past and
thence out to the (re-illuminated) Present (restored) and on into the
now radiant, lifes-given Future.

There is only *one* thing to do with *that*, then – Parjanya!

Explode it, we might say. Sweep it away with these Arrows of Rudra that
Hara-bring the Flood !

सत्यं तवेषा अमवन्तो धन्वञ चिद आ रुद्रियासः \|  
मिहं कर्ण्वन्त्य अवाताम \|\|
