---
title: I

---
<div>

[←](note.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](02_sir.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/012_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/013_sir.htm)  
Addressee [»](02_sir.htm)

## I

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6017e7001.pdf)* )

*Glory to Ramakrishna!*

BAIDYANATH,  
*25th December, 1889*.

DEAR SIR (Shri Balaram Bose),

I have been staying for the last few days at Baidyanath in Purna Babu's
Lodge. It is not so cold, and my health too is indifferent. I am
suffering from indigestion, probably due to excess of iron in the water.
I have found nothing agreeable here — neither the place, nor the season,
nor the company. I leave for Varanasi tomorrow. Achyutananda stopped at
Govinda Chaudhury's place at Deoghar, and the latter, as soon as he got
news of us, earnestly insisted on our becoming his guests. Finally, he
met us once again and prevailed on us to accede to his request. The man
is a great worker, but has a number of women with him — old women most
of them, of the ordinary Vaishnava type. . . . His clerks too revere us
much; some of them are very much ill-disposed towards him, and they
spoke of his misdeeds. Incidentally, I raised the topic of \_\_. You
have many wrong ideas or doubts about her; hence I write all this after
particular investigation. Even the aged clerks of this establishment
highly respect and revere her. She came to stop with \_\_ while she was
a mere child, and ever lived as his wife. . . . Everyone admits in one
voice that her character is spotless. She was all along a perfectly
chaste woman and never behaved with \_\_ in any relation but that of
wife to husband, and she was absolutely faithful. She came at too early
an age to have incurred any moral taint. After she had separated from
\_\_, she wrote to him to say that she had never treated him as anything
but her husband, but that it was impossible for her to live with a man
with a loose character. His old office-bearers too believe him to be
satanic in character; but they consider \_\_ a Devi (angel), and remark
that it was following her departure that \_\_ lost all sense of shame.

My object in writing all this is that formerly I was not a believer in
the tale of the lady's early life. The idea that there might be such
purity in the midst of a relation which society does not recognise, I
used to consider as romance. But after thorough investigation I have
come to know that it is all right. She is very pure, pure from her
infancy — I have not the least doubt about it. For entertaining those
doubts, you and I and everyone are guilty to her; I make repeated
salutations to her, and ask her pardon for my guilt. She is not a liar.

I take this opportunity to record that such courage is impossible in a
lying and unchaste woman. I have also been told that she had a lifelong
ardent faith in religion also.

Well, your disease is not yet improving! I don't think this is a place
for patients unless one is ready to spend a good deal of money. Please
think out some judicious course. Here every article will have to be
procured from elsewhere.

Yours sincerely,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
