---
title: IV

---
<div>

[←](03_sir.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](05_gupta.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/021_sir.htm) Chronology
[»](05_gupta.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/002_sir.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/003_sir.htm)

## IV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6031e7004.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna!*

C/O Satish Mukherji,  
GORABAZAR, GHAZIPUR.  
*14th February, 1890*.

REVERED SIR (Shri Balaram Bose),

I am in receipt of your letter of contrition. I am not leaving this
place soon — it is impossible to avoid the Babaji's request. You have
expressed remorse at not having reaped any appreciable results by
serving the Sadhus. It is true, and yet not true; it is true if you look
towards ideal bliss; but if you look behind to the place from which you
started, you will find that before you were an animal, now you are a
man, and will be a god or God Himself in future. Moreover, that sort of
regret and dissatisfaction is very good; it is the prelude to
improvement. Without this none can rise. He who puts on a turban and
immediately sees the Lord, progresses thus far and no farther. You are
blessed indeed to have that constant dissatisfaction preying upon your
mind — rest assured that there is no danger for you. . . . You are a
keenly intelligent man, and know full well that patience is the best
means of success. In this respect I have no doubt that we light-headed
boys have much to learn from you. . . . You are a considerate man, and I
need not add anything. Man has two ears but one mouth. You specially are
given to plain-speaking and are chary of making large promises — things
that sometimes make me cross with you, but upon reflection I find that
it is you who have acted with discretion. "Slow but sure." "What is lost
in power is gained in speed." However, in this world everything depends
upon one's words. To get an insight behind the words (specially, with
your economical spirit masking all) is not given to all, and one must
associate long with a man to be able to understand him. . . . Religion
is not in sects, nor in making a fuss — why do you forget these
teachings of our revered Master? Please help as far as it lies in you,
but to judge what came of it, whether it was turned to good or evil
account, is perhaps beyond our jurisdiction. . . . Considering the great
shock which Girish Babu has received, it will give him immense peace to
serve Mother at this moment. He is a very keen-witted person. And our
beloved Master had perfect confidence in you, used to dine nowhere else
except at your place, and, I have heard, Mother too has the fullest
confidence in you. In view of these, you will please bear and forbear
all shortcomings of us fickle boys, treating them as if they were done
by your own boy. This is all I have got to say. Please let me know by
return of post when the Anniversary is to take place. A pain in the
loins is giving me much trouble. In a few days the place will look
exceedingly beautiful, with miles and miles of rose-banks all in flower.
Satish says he will then send some fresh roses and cuttings for the
Festival. . . . May the Lord ordain that your son becomes a man, and
never a coward!

  
Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
PS. If Mother has come, please convey to her my countless salutations,
and ask her to bless me that I may have unflinching perseverance. Or, if
that be impossible in this body, may it fall off soon!

</div>
