---
title: VI

---
<div>

[←](05_gupta.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](07_atul_babu.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/028_akhandananda.htm)
Chronology [»](07_atul_babu.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/004_balaram_babu.htm) Addressee

## VI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b6040e7006.pdf)* )

*Glory to Ramakrishna!*

GHAZIPUR,  
*15th March, 1890*.

REVERED SIR (Shri Balaram Bose),

Received your kind note yesterday. I am very sorry to learn that Suresh
Babu's illness is extremely serious. What is destined will surely
happen. It is a matter of great regret that you too have fallen ill. So
long as egoism lasts, any shortcoming in adopting remedial measures is
to be considered as idleness — it is a fault and a guilt. For one who
has not that egoistic idea, the best course is to forbear. The
dwelling-place of the Jivâtman, this body, is a veritable means of work,
and he who converts this into an infernal den is guilty, and he who
neglects it is also to blame. Please act according to circumstances as
they present themselves, without the least hesitation.

नाभिनन्देत् मरणं नाभिनन्देत् जीवितम्।  
कालमेव प्रतीक्षेत नियमं भृतको यथा॥

— "The highest duty consists in doing the little that lies in one's
power, seeking neither death nor life, and biding one's time like a
servant ready to do any behest."

There is a dreadful outbreak of influenza at Varanasi and Pramada Babu
has gone to Allahabad. Baburam has suddenly come here. He has got fever;
he was wrong to start under such circumstances. . . . I am leaving this
place tomorrow. . . . My countless salutations to Mother. You all bless
me that I may have sameness of vision, that after avoiding the bondages
which one is heir to by one's very birth, I may not again get stuck in
self-imposed bondages. If there be any Doer of good and if He have the
power and the opportunity, may He vouchsafe the highest blessings unto
you all — this is my constant prayer.

Yours affectionately,  
VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
