---
title: X

---
<div>

[←](09_adhyapakji.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm)
/ [→](11_mrs_tannatt_woods.htm)

  

[«](09_adhyapakji.htm) Chronology [»](11_mrs_tannatt_woods.htm)  
[«](09_adhyapakji.htm) Addressee [»](12_adhyapakji.htm)

## X

CHICAGO,  
*2nd October, 1893*.

DEAR ADHYAPAKJI (Prof. John Henry Wright),

I do not know what you are thinking of my long silence. In the first
place I dropped in on the Congress in the eleventh hour, and quite
unprepared; and that kept me very very busy for some time. Secondly, I
was speaking almost every day in the Congress and had no time to write;
and last and greatest of all — my kind friend, I owe so much to you that
it would have been an insult to your *ahetuka* (unselfish) friendship to
have written you business-like letters in a hurry. The Congress is now
over.

Dear brother, I was so so afraid to stand before that great assembly of
fine speakers and thinkers from all over the world and speak; but the
Lord gave me strength, and I almost every day heroically (?) faced the
platform and the audience. If I have done well, He gave me the strength
for it; if I have miserably failed — I knew that beforehand — for I am
hopelessly ignorant.

Your friend Prof. Bradley was very kind to me and he always cheered me
on. And oh! everybody is so kind here to me who am nothing — that it is
beyond my power of expression. Glory unto Him in the highest in whose
sight the poor ignorant monk from India is the same as the learned
divines of this mighty land. And how the Lord is helping me every day of
my life, brother — I sometimes wish for a life of \[a\] million million
ages to serve Him through the work, dressed in rags and fed by charity.

Oh, how I wished that you were here to see some of our sweet ones from
India — the tender-hearted Buddhist Dharmapala, the orator Mazoomdar —
and realise that in that far-off and poor India there are hearts that
beat in sympathy to yours, born and brought up in this mighty and great
country.

My eternal respects to your holy wife; and to your sweet children my
eternal love and blessings.

Col. Higginson, a very broad man, told me that your daughter had written
to his daughter about me; and he was very sympathetic to me. I am going
to Evanston tomorrow and hope to see Prof. Bradley there.

May He make us all more and more pure and holy so that we may live a
perfect spiritual life even before throwing off this earthly body.

VIVEKANANDA.

  
\[The letter continues on a separate sheet of paper:\]

I am now going to be reconciled to my life here. All my life I have been
taking every circumstance as coming from Him and calmly adapting myself
to it. At first in America I was almost out of my water. I was afraid I
would have to give up the accustomed way of being guided by the Lord and
*cater* for myself — and what a horrid piece of mischief and ingratitude
was that. I now clearly see that He who was guiding me on the snow tops
of the Himalayas and the burning plains of India is here to help me and
guide me. *Glory unto Him* in the highest. So I have calmly fallen into
my old ways. Somebody or other gives me a shelter and food, somebody or
other comes to ask me to speak about Him, and I know He sends them and
mine is to obey. And then He is supplying my necessities, and His *will
be done*!

"He who rests \[in\] Me and gives up all other self-assertion and
struggles I carry to him whatever he needs" (Gitâ).

So it is in Asia. So in Europe. So in America. So in the deserts of
India. So in the rush of business in America. For is He not here also?
And if He does not, I only would take for granted that He wants that I
should lay aside this three minutes' body of clay — and hope to lay it
down gladly.

We may or may not meet, brother. He knows. You are great, learned, and
holy. I dare not preach to you or your wife; but to your children I
quote these passages from the Vedas —

"The four Vedas, sciences, languages, philosophy, and all other
learnings are only ornamental. The real learning, the true knowledge is
that which enables us to reach Him who is unchangeable in His love."

"How real, how tangible, how visible is He through whom the skin
touches, the eyes see, and the world gets its reality!"

"Hearing Him nothing remains to be heard,

Seeing Him nothing remains to be seen,

Attaining Him nothing remains to be attained."

"He is the eye of our eyes, the ear of our ears, the Soul of our souls."

He is nearer to you, my dears, than even your father and mother. You are
innocent and pure as flowers. Remain so, and He will reveal Himself unto
you. Dear Austin, when you are playing, there is another playmate
playing with you who loves you more than anybody else; and Oh, He is so
full of fun. He is always playing — sometimes with great big balls which
we call the sun and earth, sometimes with little children like you and
laughing and playing with you. How funny it would be to see Him and play
with Him! My dear, think of it.

Dear Adhyapakji, I am moving about just now. Only when I come to
Chicago, I always go to see Mr. and Mrs. Lyons, one of the noblest
couples I have seen here. If you would be kind enough to write to me,
kindly address it to the care of Mr. John B. Lyon, 262 Michigan Ave.,
Chicago.

"He who gets hold of the One in this world of many — the one constant
existence in a world of flitting shadows — the one life in a world of
death — he alone crosses this sea of misery and struggle. None else,
none else" (Vedas).

"He who is the Brahman of the Vedântins, Ishvara of the Naiyâyikas,
Purusha of the Sânkhyas, cause of the Mimâmsakas, *law* of the
Buddhists, *absolute zero* of the Atheists, and love infinite unto those
that love, may \[He\] take us all under His merciful protection":
Udayanâchârya — a great philosopher of the Nyâya or Dualistic school.
And this is the Benediction pronounced at the very beginning of his
wonderful book *Kusumânjali* (A handful of flowers), in which he
attempts to establish the existence of a personal creator and moral
ruler of infinite love independently of revelation.

Your ever grateful friend,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
