---
title: XVIII

---
<div>

[←](17_sister.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](19_adhyapakji.htm)

  

[«](17_sister.htm) Chronology [»](19_adhyapakji.htm)  
[«](17_sister.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/012_sister.htm)

## XVIII

NEW YORK,  
*2nd* \[*actually 1st*\] *May, 1894*.

DEAR SISTER (Miss Isabelle McKindley.),

I am afraid I cannot send you the pamphlet just now. But I got a little
bit of a newspaper cutting from India yesterday which I send you up.
After you have read it kindly send it over to Mrs. Bagley. The editor of
this paper is a relative of Mr. Mazoomdar. I am now sorry for poor
Mazoomdar!! (The last two sentences were written crosswise on the left
margin.)

I could not find the exact orange colour of my coat here, so I have been
obliged to satisfy myself with the next best — a cardinal red with more
of yellow.

The coat will be ready in a few days.

Got about $70 the other day by lecturing at Waldorf. And hope to get
some more by tomorrow's lecture.

From 7th to 19th there are engagements in Boston, but they pay very
little.

Yesterday I bought a pipe for $13 — meerschaum do not tell it to father
Pope. The coat will cost $30. I am all right getting food . . . and
money enough. Hope very soon to put something in the bank after the
coming lecture.

. . . in the evening I am going to speak in a vegetarian dinner! Well, I
am a vegetarian . . ., because I prefer it when I can get it. I have
another invitation to lunch with Lyman Abbott day after tomorrow. After
all, I am having very nice time and hope to have very nice time in
Boston — only that nasty nasty lecturing — disgusting. However as soon
as 19th is over — one leap from Boston . . . to Chicago . . . and then I
will have a long long breath and rest, rest for two three weeks. I will
simply sit down and talk — talk and smoke.

By the by, your New York people are very good — only more money than
brains.

I am going to speak to the students of the Harvard University. Three
lectures at Boston, three at Harvard — all arranged by Mrs. Breed. They
are arranging something here too, so that I will, on my way to Chicago,
come to New York once more — give them a few hard raps and pocket the
boodle and fly to Chicago.

If you want anything from New York or Boston which cannot be had at
Chicago — write sharp. I have plenty of dollars now. I will send you
over anything you want in a minute. Don't think it would be indelicate
anyway — no humbug about me. If I am a brother so I am. I hate only one
thing in the world — hypocrisy. 

Your affectionate brother,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
