---
title: XX

---
<div>

[←](19_adhyapakji.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](21_adhyapakji.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/017_mother.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/018_mother.htm)  
[«](19_adhyapakji.htm) Addressee [»](21_adhyapakji.htm)

## XX

17 BEACON STREET, BOSTON,  
*May, 1894*.

DEAR ADHYAPAKJI (Prof. John Henry Wright),

By this time you have got the pamphlet and the letters. If you like, I
would send you over from Chicago some letters from Indian Princes and
ministers — one of these ministers was one of the Commissioners of the
late opium commission that sat under Royal Commission in India. If you
like, I will have them write to you to convince you of my not being a
cheat. But, my brother, our ideal of life is to hide, to suppress, and
to deny.

We are to give up and not to take. Had I not the "Fad" in my head, I
would never have come over here. And it was with a hope that it would
help my cause that I joined the Parliament of Religions — having always
refused it when our people wanted to send me for it. I came over telling
them — "that I may or may not join that assembly — and you may send me
over if you like". They sent me over leaving me quite free.

You did the rest.

I am morally bound to afford you every satisfaction, my kind friend; but
for the rest of the world I do not care what they say — the Sannyasin
must not have self-defence. So I beg of you not to publish or show
anybody anything in that pamphlet or the letters. I do not care for the
attempts of the old missionary; but the fever of jealousy which attacked
Mazoomdar gave me a terrible shock, and I pray that he would know better
— for he is a great and good man who has tried all his life to do good.
But this proves one of my Master's sayings, "Living in a room covered
with black soot — however careful you may be — some spots must stick to
your clothes." So, however one may try to be good and holy, so long he
is in the world, some part of his nature must gravitate downwards.

The way to God is the opposite to that of the world. And to few, very
few, are given to have God and mammon at the same time.

I was never a *missionary*, nor ever would be one — my place is in the
Himalayas. I have satisfied myself so far that I can with a full
conscience say, "My God, I saw terrible misery amongst my brethren; I
searched and discovered the way out of it, tried my best to apply the
remedy, but failed. So Thy will be done."

May his blessings be on you and yours for ever and ever.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

  
541 DEARBORN AVE., CHICAGO

I go to Chicago tomorrow or day after.

Yours  
V.

</div>
