---
title: XXV

---
<div>

[←](24_kali.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](26_brahmananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/056_dear_and_beloved.htm)
Chronology [»](26_brahmananda.htm)  
Addressee [»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/114_shivananda.htm)

## XXV

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7149e7025.pdf)* )

U. S.A.,  
*1894*.

DEAR BROTHER SHIVANANDA,

Your letter just reached me. Perhaps by this time you have received my
other letters and learnt that it is not necessary to send anything to
America any more. Too much of everything is bad. This newspaper booming
has given me popularity no doubt, but its effect is more in India than
here. Here, on the other hand, constant booming creates a distaste in
the minds of the higher class people; so enough. Now try to organise
yourselves in India on the lines of these meetings. You need not send
anything more in this country. As to money, I have determined first to
build some place for Mother, (Holy Mother, Shri Sarada Devi.) for women
require it first. . . . I can send nearly Rs. 7,000 for a place for
Mother. If the place is first secured, then I do not care for anything
else. I hope to be able to get Rs. 1,600 a year from this country even
when I am gone. That sum I will make over to the support of the Women's
place, and then it will grow. I have written to you already to secure a
place. . . .

I would have, before this, returned to India, but India has no money.
Thousands honour Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, but nobody will give a cent —
that is India. . . . In the meanwhile live in harmony at any price. The
world cares little for principles. They care for persons. They will hear
with patience the words of a man they like, however nonsense, and will
not listen to anyone they do not like. Think of this and modify your
conduct accordingly. Everything will come all right. Be the servant if
you will rule. That is the real secret. Your love will tell even if your
words be harsh. Instinctively men feel the love clothed in whatever
language. (These two paragraphs and the last half of the fourth were
written in English.)

My dear brother, that Ramakrishna Paramahamsa was God incarnate, I have
not the least doubt; but then you must let people find out for
themselves what he used to teach — you cannot thrust these things upon
them — this is my only objection.

Let people speak out their own opinions, why should we object? Without
studying Ramakrishna Paramahamsa first, one can never understand the
real import of the Vedas, the Vedanta, of the *Bhâgavata* and the other
Purânas. His life is a searchlight of infinite power thrown upon the
whole mass of Indian religious thought. He was the living commentary to
the Vedas and to their aim. He had lived in one life the whole cycle of
the national religious existence in India.

Whether Bhagavân Shri Krishna was born at all we are not sure; and
Avataras like Buddha and Chaitanya are monotonous; Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa is the latest and the most perfect — the concentrated
embodiment of knowledge, love, renunciation, catholicity, and the desire
to serve mankind. So where is anyone to compare with him? He must have
been born in vain who cannot appreciate him! My supreme good fortune is
that I am his servant through life after life. A single word of his is
to me far weightier than the Vedas and the Vedanta. तस्य
दासदासदासोऽहम् — Oh, I am the servant of the servants of his servants.
But narrow bigotry militates against his principles, and this makes me
cross. Rather let his name be drowned in oblivion, and his teachings
bear fruit instead! Why, was he a slave to fame? Certain fishermen and
illiterate people called Jesus Christ a God, but the literate people
killed him. Buddha was honoured in his lifetime by a number of merchants
and cowherds. But Ramakrishna has been worshipped in his lifetime —
towards the end of this nineteenth century — by the demons and giants of
the university as God incarnate. . . . Only a few things have been
jotted down in the books about them (Krishna, Buddha, Christ, etc.).
"One must be a wonderful housekeeper with whom we have never yet lived!"
so the Bengali proverb goes. But here is a man in whose company we have
been day and night and yet consider him to be a far greater personality
than any of them. Can you understand this phenomenon?

You have not yet understood the wonderful significance of Mother's life
— none of you. But gradually you will know. Without Shakti (Power) there
is no regeneration for the world. Why is it that our country is the
weakest and the most backward of all countries? — Because Shakti is held
in dishonour there. Mother has been born to revive that wonderful Shakti
in India; and making her the nucleus, once more will Gârgis and
Maitreyis be born into the world. Dear brother, you understand little
now, but by degrees you will come to know it all. Hence it is her Math
that I want first. . . . Without the grace of Shakti nothing is to be
accomplished. What do I find in America and Europe? — the worship of
Shakti, the worship of Power. Yet they worship Her ignorantly through
sense-gratification. Imagine, then, what a lot of good they will achieve
who will worship Her with all purity, in a Sattvika spirit, looking upon
Her as their mother! I am coming to understand things clearer every day,
my insight is opening out more and more. Hence we must first build a
Math for Mother. First Mother and Mother's daughters, then Father and
Father's sons — can you understand this? . . . To me, Mother's grace is
a hundred thousand times more valuable than Father's. Mother's grace,
Mother's blessings are all paramount to me. . . . Please pardon me. I am
a little bigoted there, as regards Mother. If but Mother orders, her
demons can work anything. Brother, before proceeding to America I wrote
to Mother to bless me. Her blessings came, and at one bound I cleared
the ocean. There, you see. In this terrible winter I am lecturing from
place to place and fighting against odds, so that funds may be collected
for Mother's Math. Baburam's mother must have lost her sense owing to
old age and that is why she is about to worship Durga in the earthen
image, ignoring the living one. (Viz. Holy Mother Shri Sarada Devi.)
Brother, faith is very difficult to achieve. Brother, I shall show how
to worship the living Durga and then only shall I be worthy of my name.
I shall be relieved when you will have purchased a plot of land and
established there the living Durga, the Mother. Till then I am not
returning to my native land. As soon as you can do that, I shall have a
sigh of relief after sending the money. Do you accomplish this festival
of Durga of mine by making all the necessary arrangements. Girish Ghosh
is adoring the Mother splendidly; blessed is he, and blessed are his
followers. Brother, often enough, when I am reminded of the Mother, I
ejaculate, "What after all is Rama?" Brother, that is where my
fanaticism lies, I tell you. Of Ramakrishna, you may aver, my brother,
that he was an Incarnation or whatever else you may like but fie on him
who has no devotion for the Mother. Niranjan has a militant disposition,
but he has great devotion for Mother and all his vagaries I can easily
put up with. He is now doing the most marvellous work. I am keeping
myself well posted. And you too have done excellently in co-operating
with the Madrasis. Dear brother, I expect much from you, you should
organise all for conjoint work. As soon as you have secured the land for
Mother, I go to India straight. It must be a big plot; let there be a
mud-house to begin with, in due course I shall erect a decent building,
don't be afraid.

The chief cause of malaria lies in water. Why do you not construct two
or three filters? If you first boil the water and then filter it, it
will be harmless. . . . Please buy two big Pasteur's bacteria-proof
filters. Let the cooking be done in that water and use it for drinking
purposes also, and you will never hear of malaria any more. . . . On and
on, work, work, work, this is only the beginning.

Yours ever,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
