---
title: XXVI

---
<div>

[←](25_brother_shivananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](27_alasinga.htm)

  

[«](25_brother_shivananda.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/045_mother.htm)  
Addressee [»](30_rakhal.htm)

## XXVI

(*Translated from [Bengali](b7151e7026.pdf)* )

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna!*

*1894*.

DEAR AND BELOVED (Swami Brahmananda.),

. . . Well, do you think there is any religion left in India! The paths
of knowledge, devotion, and Yoga — all have gone, and now there remains
only that of Don't touchism — "Don't touch me! Don't touch me!" The
whole world is impure, and I alone am pure. Lucid Brahmajnâna! Bravo!
Great God! Nowadays Brahman is neither in the recesses of the heart, nor
in the highest heaven, nor in all beings — now He is in the cooking-pot.
Formerly the characteristic of a noble-minded man was
"त्रिभुवनमुपकारश्रेणिभिः प्रीणयन्तः — Pleasing the whole universe by
one's numerous acts of service" but now it is — I am pure and the whole
world is impure — go and get money and set it at my feet. . . . Tell the
sapient sage who writes to me to finish my preaching work here and
return home, . . . that this country is more my home. What is there in
Hindusthan? Who appreciates religion? Who appreciates learning?

To return home! Where is the home! I do not care for liberation, or for
devotion, I would rather go to a hundred thousand hells,
"वसन्तवल्लोकहितं चरन्तः — Doing good to others (silently) like the
spring" — this is my religion. I do not want to have any connection with
lazy, hard-hearted, cruel and selfish men. He whose good fortune it is,
may help in this great cause.

. . . Please convey to all my love, I want the help of everyone.
*Neither money pays, nor name, nor fame, nor learning; it is character
that can cleave through adamantine walls of difficulties*. Bear this in
mind. . . .

Ever yours in love,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
