---
title: XXVII

---
<div>

[←](26_brahmananda.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](28_brother.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/036_sister.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/037_alasinga.htm)  
[«](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/035_alasinga.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/037_alasinga.htm)

## XXVII

*1895*.

DEAR ALASINGA,

We have no organisation, nor want to build any. Each one is quite
independent to teach, quite free to preach whatever he or she likes.

If you have the spirit within, you will never fail to attract others.
Theosophists' method can never be ours, for the very simple reason that
they are an organised sect, we are not.

Individuality is my motto. I have no ambition beyond training
individuals up. I know very little; that little I teach without reserve;
where I am ignorant, I confess it as such, and never am I so glad as
when I find people being helped by Theosophists, Christians,
Mohammedans, or anybody in the world. I am a Sannyasin; as such I
consider myself as a servant, not as a master in the world. . . . If
people love me, they are welcome, if they hate, they are also welcome.

Each one will have to save himself, each one to do his own work. I seek
no help, I reject none. Nor have I any right in the world to be helped.
Whosoever has helped me or will help, it will be their mercy to me, not
my right, and as such I am eternally grateful.

When I became a Sannyasin, I consciously took the step, knowing that
this body would have to die of starvation. What of that, I am a beggar.
My friends are poor, I love the poor, I welcome poverty. I am glad that
I sometimes have to starve. I ask help of none. What is the use? Truth
will preach itself, it will not die for the want of the helping hands of
me! "Making happiness and misery the same, making success and failure
the same, fight thou on" (Gita). It is that eternal love, unruffled
equanimity under all circumstances, and perfect freedom from jealousy or
animosity that will tell. That will tell, nothing else. 

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
