---
title: XXXIII

---
<div>

[←](32_dear.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](34_shashi.htm)

  

[«](32_dear.htm) Chronology [»](34_shashi.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/087_alberta.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/117_alberta.htm)

## XXXIII

63 ST. GEORGE'S ROAD, LONDON,  
*May, 1896*.

DEAR SISTER,

In London once more. The climate now in England is nice and cool. We
have fire in the grate. We have a whole house to ourselves, you know,
this time. It is small but convenient, and in London they do not cost so
much as in America. Don't you know what I was thinking — about your
mother! I just wrote her a letter and duly posted it to her, care of
Monroe & Co., 7 Rue Scribe, Paris. Some old friends are here, and Miss
MacLeod came over from the Continent. She is good as gold, and as kind
as ever. We have a nice little family, in the house, with another monk
from India. Poor man! — a typical Hindu with nothing of that pluck and
go which I have, he is always dreamy and gentle and sweet! That won't
do. I will try to put a little activity into him. I have had two classes
already — they will go on for four or five months and after that to
India I go. But it is to Amerique — there where the heart is. I love the
Yankee land. I like to see new things. I do not care a fig to loaf about
old ruins and mope a life out about old histories and keep sighing about
the ancients. I have too much vigour in my blood for that. In America is
the place, the people, the opportunity for everything. I have become
horribly radical. I am just going to India to see what I can do in that
awful mass of conservative jelly-fish, and start a new thing, entirely
new — simple, strong, new and fresh as the first born baby. The eternal,
the infinite, the omnipresent, the omniscient is a principle, not a
person. You, I, and everyone are but embodiments of that principle, and
the more of this infinite principle is embodied in a person, the greater
is he, and all in the end will be the perfect embodiment of that and
thus all will be one as they are now essentially. This is all there is
of religion, and the practice is through this feeling of oneness that is
love. All old fogy forms are mere old superstitions. Now, why struggle
to keep them alive? Why give thirsty people ditch-water to drink whilst
the river of life and truth flows by? This is only human selfishness,
nothing else. Life is short — time is flying — that place and people
where one's ideas work best should be the country and the people for
everyone. Ay, for a dozen bold hearts, large, noble, and sincere!

I am very well indeed and enjoying life immensely.

Yours ever with love,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
