---
title: XXXVIII

---
<div>

[←](37_friend.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](39_mrs_bull.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/105_christina.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/106_mrs_bull.htm)  
Addressee
[»](../../volume_5/epistles_first_series/077_sharat_chandra.htm)

## XXXVIII

(*Written to Sj. Sharat Chandra Chakravarti, B.A*.)  
  
ॐ नमो भगवते रामकृष्णाय!

शुभमस्तु! आशीर्वादप्रेमालिङ्गनपूर्वकमिदं भवतु तव प्रीतये। पाञ्चभौतिकं मे
पिञ्जरमधुना किञ्चिद् सुस्थतरम्। अचलगुरोर्हिमानिमण्डितशिखराणि
पुनरुज्जीवयन्ति मृतप्रायानपि जनानिति मन्ये। श्रमबाधापि कथश्चित्
दूरीभूतेत्यनुभवामि। यत्ते हृदयोद्वेगकरं मुमुक्षुत्वं लिपिभंङ्गया
व्यञ्जितं तन्मया अनुभूतं पूर्वम्। तदेव शाश्वते ब्रह्मणि मनः समधातुं
प्रसरति। "नान्यः पन्थाः विद्यतेऽनाय।" ज्वलतु सा भावना अधिकमधिकं
यावन्नधिगत एकान्तक्षयः कृताकृतानाम्। तदनु सहसैव ब्रह्मप्रकाशः सह
समस्तविषयप्रध्वंसेन। आगामिनी सा जीवन्मुक्तिस्तव हिताय
तवानुरागदाढर्येणैवानुमेया। याचे पुनस्तं लोकगुरुं महासमन्वयाचार्य श्री
१०८ रामकृष्णं आविर्भवितुम् तव हृदयोद्देशे येन वै कृतकृतर्थस्त्वं
आविष्कृतमहाशौर्यः लोकान् समुद्धर्तुं महामोहसागरात् सम्यक् यतिष्यसे। भव
चिराधिष्ठित ओजसि। वीराणामेव करतलगता मुक्तिः न कापुरुषाणाम्। हे वीरा,
बद्धपरिकरा भवत, सम्मुखे शत्रवः महामोहरूपाः। "श्रेयांसि बहुविघ्नानि" इति
निश्चितेऽपि समधिकतरं कुरुत यत्नम्। पश्यत इमान् लोकान् मोहग्राहग्रस्तान्।
शृणुत अहो तेषां हृदयभेदकरं कारुण्यपूर्णं शोकनादम्। अग्रगा भवत, अग्रगा,
हे वीरा, मोचयितुं पाशं बद्धानां श्लथयितुं क्लेशभारं दीनानां, द्योतयितुं
हृदयान्धकूपं अज्ञानाम्। अभीरभीरिति घोषयति वेदान्तडिण्डिमः। भूयात् स
भेदाय हृदग्रन्थेः सर्वेषां जगन्निवासिनामिति।

तवैकान्तशुभभावुकः विवेकानन्दः।

  

(*Translated from Sanskrit*.)

DARJEELING,  
*19th March, 1897*.

*Salutation to Bhagavan Ramakrishna*!

May you prosper! May this letter conveying blessings and cordial embrace
make you happy! Nowadays this fleshy tabernacle of mine is comparatively
well. Meseems, the snow-capped peaks of the Himalayas, the Chief among
mountains, bring even the moribund back to life. And the fatigue of the
journeys also seems to have somewhat abated. I have already felt that
yearning for Freedom — potent enough to put the heart into turmoil —
which your letter suggests you are experiencing. It is this yearning
that gradually brings on a concentration of the mind on the eternal
Brahman. "There is no other way to go by." May this desire blaze up more
and more in you, until all your past Karma and future tendencies are
absolutely annihilated. Close upon the heels of that will follow, all on
a sudden, the manifestation of Brahman, and with it the destruction of
all craving for the sense-world. That this freedom-in-life is
approaching for your welfare is easily to be inferred from the strength
of your fervour. Now I pray to that world-teacher, Shri Ramakrishna, the
Preacher of the gospel of universal synthesis, to manifest himself in
the region of your heart, so that, having attained the consummation of
your desires, you may with an undaunted heart try your best to deliver
others from this dreadful ocean of infatuation. May you be ever
possessed of valour! It is the hero alone, not the coward, who has
liberation within his easy reach. Gird up your loins, ye heroes, for
before you are your enemies — the dire army of infatuation. It is
undoubtedly true that "all great achievements are fraught with numerous
impediments"; still you should exert your utmost for your end. Behold,
how men are already in the jaws of the shark of infatuation! Oh, listen
to their piteous heart-rending wails. Advance, forward, O ye brave
souls, to set free those that are in fetters, to lessen the burden of
woe of the miserable, and to illumine the abysmal darkness of ignorant
hearts! Look, how the Vedanta proclaims by beat of drums, "Be fearless!"
May that solemn sound remove the heart's knot of all denizens of the
earth. 

Ever your well-wisher,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
