---
title: XXXIX

---
<div>

[←](38_sharat_chandra.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](40_shuddhananda.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/123_mary.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/091_miss_noble.htm)  
[«](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/106_mrs_bull.htm) Addressee
[»](../../volume_9/letters_fifth_series/112_mrs_bull.htm)

## XXXIX

ALAMBAZAR MATH, CALCUTTA,  
*May 5th, 1897*.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

I have been to Darjeeling for a month to recuperate my shattered health.
I am very much better now. The disease disappeared altogether in
Darjeeling. I am going tomorrow to Almora, another hill station, to
perfect this improvement.

Things are looking not very hopeful here as I have already written you —
though the whole nation has risen as one man to honour me and people
went almost mad over me! The practical part cannot be had in India.
Again, the price of the land has gone up very much near Calcutta. My
idea at present is to start three centres at three capitals. These would
be my normal schools, from thence I want to invade India.

India is already Ramakrishna's whether I live a few years more or not.

I have a very kind letter from Prof. Janes in which he points out my
remarks about degraded Buddhism. You also write that Dharmapala is very
wroth about it. Mr. Dharmapala is a good man, and I love him; but it
would be entirely wrong for him to go into fits over things Indian.

I am perfectly convinced that what they call modern Hinduism with all
its ugliness is only stranded Buddhism. Let the Hindus understand this
clearly, and then it would be easier for them to reject it without
murmur. As for the ancient form which the Buddha preached, I have the
greatest respect for it, as well as for His person. And you well know
that we Hindus worship Him as an Incarnation. Neither is the Buddhism of
Ceylon any good. My visit to Ceylon has entirely disillusioned me, and
the only living people there are the Hindus. The Buddhists are all much
Europeanised — even Mr. Dharmapala and his father had European names,
which they have since changed. The only respect the Buddhists pay to
their great tenet of non-killing is by opening "butcher-stalls" in every
place! And the priests encourage this. The real Buddhism, I once
thought, would yet do much good. But I have given up the idea entirely,
and I clearly see the reason why Buddhism was driven out of India, and
we will only be too glad if the Ceylonese carry off the remnant of this
religion with its hideous idols and licentious rites.

About the Theosophists, you must remember first that in India
Theosophists and Buddhists are nonentities. They publish a few papers
and make a lot of splash and try to catch Occidental ears. . .

I was one man in America and another here. Here the whole nation is
looking upon me as their authority — there I was a much reviled
preacher. Here Princes draw my carriage, there I would not be admitted
to a decent hotel. My utterances here, therefore, must be for the good
of the race, my people — however unpleasant they might appear to a few.
Acceptance, love, toleration for everything sincere and honest — but
never for hypocrisy. The Theosophists tried to fawn upon and flatter me
as I am the authority now in India, and therefore it was necessary for
me to stop my work giving any sanction to their humbugs, by a few bold,
decisive words; and the thing is done. I am very glad. If my health had
permitted, I would have cleared India by this time of these upstart
humbugs, at least tried my best. . . . Let me tell you that India is
already Ramakrishna's and for a purified Hinduism I have organised my
work here a bit. 

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
