---
title: XL

---
<div>

[←](39_mrs_bull.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Epistles – Third
Series](epistles_third_series_contents.htm) / [→](41_miss_noble.htm)

  

[«](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/097_joe_joe.htm) Chronology
[»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/098_rakhal.htm)  
[«](../../volume_6/epistles_second_series/125_shuddhananda.htm)
Addressee [»](../../volume_8/epistles_fourth_series/093_sudhir.htm)

## XL

ALMORA,  
*11th July, 1897*.

My dear Shuddhananda,

I was very glad to receive your last report. I have very little
criticism to make except that you ought to write a bit more legibly.

I am quite satisfied with the work done so far, but it must be pushed
forward. I have not learnt as yet of the suggestion I made before as to
getting a set of chemical and physical apparatus and starting classes in
elementary and experimental Chemistry and Physics, especially in
Physiology.

What about the other suggestion of buying sets of all the scientific
books that have been translated into Bengali?

It now seems to me that there must at least be three Mahantas (heads)
elected at a time — one to direct the business part, one the
experimental, the other the intellectual part.

The difficulty is to get the director of education. Brahmananda and
Turiyananda may well fill the other two. Of visitors I am sorry to learn
that you are only getting Babus from Calcutta. They are no good. What we
want are brave young men who will work, not tomfools.

Ask Brahmananda to write to both Abhedananda and Saradananda to send
weekly reports to the Math without fail, also to send Bengali articles
and notes for the would-be paper. Is G. C. Ghosh getting up things for
the paper? Work on with a will and be ready.

Akhandananda is working wonderfully at Mahula, but the system is not
good. It seems they are frittering away their energies in one little
village and that only doling out rice. I do not hear that any preaching
has been done along with this helping. All the wealth of the world
cannot help one little Indian village if the people are not taught to
help themselves. Our work should be mainly *educational*, both moral and
intellectual. I have not learnt anything abut it — only so many *beggars
are helped*! Ask Brahmananda to open centres in different districts so
as to cover the largest space with our small means.

And then, so far it seems to have been ineffectual, for they have not
succeeded in rousing the people of the place to start societies to
educate the people, so that they may learn to be self-reliant, frugal,
and not given to marrying, and thus save themselves from future famine.
Charity opens the heart, but work on through that wedge.

The easiest way is to take a hut — make it a temple of Guru Maharaj! Let
the poor come here to be helped, also to worship. Let there be Kathâ
(Puranic recitals) morning and evening there — through that you may
teach all you want to teach the people. By degrees the people will be
interested. They will keep up the temple themselves; maybe the hut
temple will evolve into a great institution in a few years. Let those
that go to relief-work first select a central spot in each district and
start such a hut-temple, from which all our little work is to proceed.

Even the greatest fool can accomplish a task if it be after his heart.
But the intelligent man is he who can convert every work into one that
suits his taste. No work is petty. Everything in this world is like a
banyan-seed, which, though appearing tiny as a mustard-seed, has yet the
gigantic banyan tree latent within it. He indeed is intelligent who
notices this and succeeds in making all work truly great. (This
paragraph only is translated from [Bengali.](b7354e7040.pdf) )

Moreover, they have to see that cheats do not get the food of the
deserving. India is full of lazy rogues, and curious, they never die of
hunger, they always get some thing. Ask Brahmananda to write this to
everyone in relief-work — they must not be allowed to spend money to no
good. We want the greatest possible good work permanent from the least
outlay.

Now you see you must try to think out original ideas — else, as soon as
I die, the whole thing will tumble to pieces. For example, you hold a
meeting to consider, "How we can reap the best permanent results out of
the small means at our disposal." Let all have notice a few days before
and let each suggest something and discuss all the suggestions,
criticising them; and then send me a report.

Lastly, you must remember I expect more from my children than from my
brethren. I want each one of my children to be a hundred times greater
than I could ever be. Everyone of you must be a giant — *must*, that is
my word. Obedience, readiness, and love for the cause — if you have
these three, nothing can hold you back. 

With love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

</div>
