---
title: CHAPTER VIII

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Excerpts from Sister
Nivedita's Book](excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book_contents.htm) /

[←](chapter_vii.htm)

## CHAPTER VIII

THE TEMPLE OF PANDRENTHAN

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda and a party of Europeans and disciples,
amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady Mother"; one whose name was
Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: Kashmir.

TIME: July 16 to 19, 1898.

JULY 16.

It fell to the lot of one of the Swami's disciples next day to go down
the river with him in a small boat. As it went, he chanted one song
after another of Râmprasâd, and now and again he would translate a
verse:

I call upon thee, Mother.  
For though his mother strikes him,  
The child cries, "Mother! Oh, Mother!"  
Though I cannot see Thee,  
I am not a lost child!  
I still cry, "Mother! Mother!"

And then with the haughty dignity of an offended child, some-thing that
ended, "I am not the son to call any other woman 'Mother'!"

JULY 17.

It must have been next day that he came into Dhira Mata's Dunga and
talked of Bhakti. First it was that curious Hindu thought of Shiva and
Umâ in one. It is easy to give the words, but without the voice how
comparatively dead they seem! And then there were the wonderful
surroundings — picturesque Srinagar, tall Lombardy poplars and distant
snows. There in that river-valley, some space from the foot of the great
mountains, he chanted to us how "the Lord took a form and that was a
divided form, half woman and half man. On one side, beautiful garlands;
on the other, bone earrings and coils of snakes. On one side, the hair
black, beautiful and in curls; on the other, twisted like rope". And
then passing immediately into the other form of the same thought, he
quoted:

God became Krishna and Râdhâ —  
Love flows in thousands of coils.  
Whoso wants, takes it.  
Love flows in thousands of coils —  
The tide of love and loving past,  
And fills the soul with bliss and joy!

So absorbed was he that his breakfast stood unheeded long after it was
ready, and when at last he went reluctantly — saying, "When one has all
this Bhakti what does one want with food?"— it was only to come back
again quickly and resume the subject.

But either now or at some other time he said that he did not talk of
Radha and Krishna where he looked for deeds. It was Shiva who made stern
and earnest workers, and to Him the labourer must be dedicated.

The next day he gave us a quaint saying of Shri Ramakrishna, comparing
the critics of others to bees or flies, according as they chose honey or
wounds.

And then we were off to Islamabad, and really, as it proved, to
Amarnath.

JULY 19.

The first afternoon, in a wood by the side of the Jhelum, we discovered
the long — sought temple of Pandrenthan (Pandresthan, place of the
Pândavas?).

It was sunk in a pond, and this was thickly covered with scum out of
which it rose, a tiny cathedral of the long ago, built of heavy grey
limestone. The temple consisted of a small cell with four doorways
opening to the cardinal points. Externally it was a tapering pyramid —
with its top truncated, to give foot-hold to a bush — supported on a
four-pierced pedestal. In its architecture, trefoil and triangular
arches were combined in an unusual fashion with each other and with the
straight-lined lintel. It was built with marvellous solidity, and the
necessary lines were somewhat obscured by heavy ornament. . . .

For all but the Swami himself, this was our first peep at Indian
archaeology. So when he had been through it, he taught us how to observe
the interior.

In the centre of the ceiling was a large sun-medallion, set in a square
whose points were the points of the compass. This left four equal
triangles at the corners of the ceiling, which were filled with
sculpture in low relief, male and female figures intertwined with
serpents, beautifully done. On the wall were empty spaces, where seemed
to have been a band of topes.

Outside, carvings were similarly distributed. In one of the trefoil
arches — over, I think, the eastern door — was a fine image of the
Teaching Buddha, standing, with his hand uplifted. Running round the
buttresses was a much-defaced frieze of a seated woman with a tree —
evidently Mâyâ Devi, the mother of Buddha. The three other door-niches
were empty, but a slab by the pond-side seemed to have fallen from one,
and this contained a bad figure of a king, said by the country-people to
represent the sun.

The masonry of this little temple was superb and probably accounted for
its long preservation. A single block of stone would be so cut as to
correspond not to one brick in a wall, but to a section of the
architect's plan. It would turn a corner and form part of two distinct
walls, or sometimes even of three. This fact made one take the building
as very, very old, possibly even earlier than Marttanda. The theory of
the workmen seemed so much more that of carpentering than of building!
The water about it was probably an overflow into the temple-court from
the sacred spring that the chapel itself may have been placed, as the
Swami thought, to enshrine.

To him, the place was delightfully suggestive. It was a direct memorial
of Buddhism, representing one of the four religious periods into which
he had already divided the history of Kashmir: (1) tree and snake
worship, from which dated all the names of the springs ending in Nag, as
Verinag, and so on; (2) Buddhism; (3) Hinduism, in the form of sun
worship; and (4) Mohammedanism. 

Sculpture, he told us, was the characteristic art of Buddhism, and the
sun-medallion, or lotus, one of its commonest ornaments. The figures
with the serpents referred to pre-Buddhism. But sculpture had greatly
deteriorated under sun worship, hence the crudity of the Surya figure. .
. .

It was the time of sunset — such a sunset! The mountains in the west
were all a shimmering purple. Further north they were blue with snow and
cloud. The sky was green and yellow and touched with red — bright flame
and daffodil colours, against a blue and opal background. We stood and
looked, and then the Master, catching sight of the throne of Solomon —
that little Takt which we already loved — exclaimed, "What genius the
Hindu shows in placing his temples! He always chooses a grand scenic
effect! See! The Takt commands the whole of Kashmir. The rock of Hari
Parbat rises red out of blue water, like a lion couchant, crowned. And
the temple of Marttanda has the valley at its feet!"

Our boats were moored near the edge of the wood, and we could see that
the presence of the silent chapel, of the Buddha, which we had just
explored, moved the Swami deeply. That evening we all foregathered in
Dhira Mata's houseboat, and a little of the conversation has been noted
down.

Our master had been talking of Christian ritual as derived from
Buddhist, but one of the party would have none of the theory.

"Where did Buddhist ritual itself come from?" she asked.

"From Vedic", answered the Swami briefly."

Or as it was present also in southern Europe, is it not better to
suppose a common origin for it and the Christian and the Vedic rituals?"

"No! No!" he replied. "You forget that Buddhism was entirely within
Hinduism! Even caste was not attacked — it was not yet crystallized, of
course! — and Buddha merely tried to restore the ideal. *He who attains
to God in this life*, says Manu, *is the Brahmin*. Buddha would have had
it so, if he could."

"But how are Vedic and Christian rituals connected?" persisted his
opponent. "How could they be the same? You have nothing even
corresponding to the central rite of our worship!"

"Why, yes!" said the Swami. "Vedic ritual has its Mass, the offering of
food to God; your Blessed Sacrament, our Prasâdam. Only it is offered
sitting, not kneeling, as is common in hot countries. They kneel in
Tibet. Then too Vedic ritual has its lights, incense, music."

"But", was the somewhat ungracious argument, "has it any common prayer?"
Objections urged in this way always elicited some bold paradox which
contained a new and unthought-of generalization.

He flashed down on the question. "No! And neither has Christianity! That
is pure Protestantism and Protestantism took it from the Mohammedans,
perhaps through Moorish influence!

"Mohammedanism is the only religion that has completely broken down the
idea of the priest. The leader of prayer stands with his back to the
people, and only the reading of the Koran may take place from the
pulpit. Protestantism is an approach to this.

"Even the tonsure existed in India, in the shaven head. I have seen a
picture of Justinian receiving the Law from two monks, in which the
monks' heads are entirely shaven. The monk and nun both existed in
pre-Buddhistic Hinduism. Europe gets her orders from the Thebaid."

"At that rate, then, you accept Catholic ritual as Aryan!"

"Yes, almost all Christianity is Aryan, I believe. I am inclined to
think Christ never existed. I have doubted that ever since I had my
dream — that dream off Crete![1](#fn1) Indian and Egyp tian ideas met at
Alexandria and went forth to the world, tinctured with Judaism and
Hellenism, as Christianity.

"The Acts and Epistles, you know, are older than the Gospels, and S.
John is spurious. The only figure we can be sure of is S. Paul, and he
was not an eye-witness, and according to his own showing was capable of
Jesuitry — 'by all means save souls' — isn't it?

"No! Buddha and Mohammed, alone amongst religious teachers, stand out
with historic distinctness — having been fortunate enough to have, while
they were living, enemies as well as friends. Krishna — I doubt; a Yogi,
a shepherd, and a great king have all been amalgamated in one beautiful
figure, holding the Gitâ in his hand.

"Renan's life of Jesus is mere froth. It does not touch Strauss, the
real antiquarian. Two things stand out as personal living touches in the
life of Christ — the woman taken in adultery, the most beautiful story
in literature, and the woman at the well. How strangely true is this
last to Indian life! A woman coming to draw water finds, seated at the
well-side, a yellow-clad monk. He asks her for water. Then he teaches
her and does a little mind-reading and so on. Only in an Indian story,
when she went to call the villagers to look and listen, the monk would
have taken his chance and fled to the forest!

"On the whole, I think old Rabbi Hillel is responsible for the teachings
of Jesus, and an obscure Jewish sect of Nazarenes — a sect of great
antiquity — suddenly galvanized by S. Paul, furnished the mythic
personality as a centre of worship.

"The resurrection, of course, is simply spring-cremation. Only the rich
Greeks and Romans had had cremation anyway, and the new sun-myth would
only stop it amongst the few.

"But Buddha! Buddha! Surely he was the greatest man who ever lived. He
never drew a breath for himself. Above all, he never claimed worship. He
said, 'Buddha is not a man, but a state. I have found the door. Enter,
all of you!'

"He went to the feast of Ambâpâli, 'the sinner'. He dined with the
pariah, though he knew it would kill him, and sent a message to his host
on his death-bed, thanking him for the great deliverance. Full of love
and pity for a little goat, even before he had attained the truth! You
remember how he offered his own head, that of prince and monk, if only
the king would spare the kid that he was about to sacrifice, and how the
king was so struck by his compassion that he saved its life? Such a
mixture of rationalism and feeling was never seen! Surely, surely, there
was none like him!"

[→](chapter_ix.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)In travelling from Naples to Port Said, on his way back
    to India, in January 1897, the Swami had a dream of an old and
    bearded man who appeared before him, saying, "This is the island of
    Crete", and showing him a place in the island that he might
    afterwards identify. The vision went on to say that the religion of
    Christianity had originated in the island of Crete and in connection
    with this gave him two European words — one of which was Therapeutae
    — which it declared were derived from Sanskrit. Therapeutae meant
    "sons" (from the Sanskrit Putra) of the Theras, or Buddhist monks.
    From this the Swami was to understand that Christianity had
    originated in a Buddhist mission. The old man added, "The proofs are
    all here", pointing to the ground. "Dig and you will see!"   As he
    awoke, feeling that this was no common dream, the Swami rose and
    tumbled out on deck. Here he met an officer turning in from his
    watch. "What o'clock is it?" said the Swami. "Midnight!" was the
    answer. "Where are we?" he then asked, when to his astonishment the
    answer came back: "Fifty miles off Crete!"   Our master used to
    laugh at himself for the strength of the impression that this dream
    made on him. But he could never shake it off. The fact that the
    second of the two etymologies has been lost is deeply to be
    regretted. The Swami had to say that before he had his dream, it had
    never occurred to him to doubt that the personality of Christ was
    strictly historic. We must remember, that according to Hindu
    philosophy, it is the completeness of an idea that is important, and
    not the question of its historical authenticity. The Swami once
    asked Shri Ramakrishna, when he was a boy, about this very matter.
    "Don't you think", answered his Guru, "that those who could invent
    such things were themselves that?"
