+++
title = "Perseus , Krishna , Karna – Three Perspectives Upon The Origin Myth Of The Indo-European Striker/Thunderer"
date = "January 24, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/7a105816ed79b654c1a1930afcde0277.jpg?w=834)

  
I have been meaning for some time to take a look at the Indo-European
underpinnings of Krishna – in part because it helps to dispel this
lingering and insistent misapprehension about post-Vedic / ‘Puranic’ era
Hinduism being somehow ‘non-Indo-European’ mythology or religion.

Now, a full-scale writeup of all the observed concordancies for this
figure is a bit beyond the scope of what we’re going to do here in this
piece. Instead, I just want to take a look at one very specific element
of the Krishna mythology, which appears also to be shared with the
prominent figure of the Mahabharat, Karna. And which, in both cases,
bears significant resemblance to what we know of the Greek demigod and
hero, Perseus. This is utterly uncoincidental – it is becausethese
myths and these figures are all running off the same Proto-Indo-European
typology. They quite plausibly descend from the same original,
ancestralmyth.

But what is this mythic concordancy that I am speaking of? Well, it
concerns the circumstances of the conception and the birth of the
illustrious demigod-hero in question.

We’ll start by taking a look at that of Perseus.

**The Parodos of Perseus  
**  
To put it briefly: Perseus’s grandfather was the king of Argos,
Acrisius. This ruler was somewhat insecure in his power – at first, due
to a lack of sons, but then because of a prophecy handed down by the
Oracle at Delphi that the son of his daughter (Danae) would bring his
ruin. Reasoning that this could not transpire if his daughter was unable
to conceive such a son, Acrisius incarcerated his daughter in a
seemingly impenetrable cell open only to the sky. Which, predictably,
meant that Zeus could see her. And, perhaps more predictably, that Zeus
soon appeared to the princess in the form of a radiant shower of gold –
leaving Danae pregnant with His Son, soon to be called Perseus
\[plausibly derived from PIE ‘Per’, referring to the action of
‘Striking’, and seen also in Perun, Perkwunos etc. – the Indo-European
Striker/Thunderer Deific\].

Acrisius was rather displeased by this development, and terrified of the
prospects of losing his kingdom and his life he resolved to do something
about it. Although instead of putting the mother and child to death
(which would have invited the at-least-as-terrifying sanction of the
Erinyes – see our previous works on the serpentine ‘avenger’/’enforcer’
of Cosmic Law in the Indo-European world view) directly, he put them
both into a chest and set them adrift upon the waters; where, instead of
being lost to the waves of the stormy sea, through the grace of the Sky
Father’s intervention \[Poseidon calming the waters at the request of
Zeus\] they are eventually rescued by a kindly fisherman, Dictys.

And there ends our cursory recounting of the relevant portion of the
myth of Perseus. Which, as you can see, features a fearful ruler seeking
to imprison a female closely related to him so as to avoid the prospects
of her conceiving a son fated to bring about the end of his life and
regency … only for this plan to be undone via the Sky Father \[Zeus
Pater\] appearing with (or as) radiancy, and begetting the son in
question – which prompts the immoral king to then seek to resolve the
situation in his favour by setting the child (and his mother) adrift
upon the waters in a floating containment; a situation that does not
bring about the death of the child thanks to divine aid in navigating
(or calming outright) the churning waters. Keep all of that in mind as
we review this next portion.

**Krishna Jayanti – Krishna Born/Victorious  
**  
The Birth of Krishna is unmistakably the same series of events, told in
slightly different form. It features, again, a villainous king desperate
to cling to power in the form of Kamsa – and, again, a prophecy handed
down that he shall be undone by the male child of a female relative: in
this case the son of his sister, Devaki, by her husband Vasudeva. So
Kamsa does as Acrisius does – and imprisons Devaki to attempt to prevent
her from seeing Vasudeva, and also takes matters rather further by
killing each one of her sons that he can lay his hands upon (six, out of
a total of eight, in all). When the eighth son is to be born, various
miraculous occurrences conspire to facilitate His Father, Vasudeva,
managing to get the infant Krishna out of the place where His Mother is
incarcerated, in a basket, and thence across the Yamuna river (which is
in flood amidst a stormy darkened sky; thus rendering the passage
perilous except for the divine assistance that is provided to the
infant’s crossing, particularly via the Great Serpent, Vasuki and also
the Yamuna Herself parting to allow them to cross) to the relative
safety of a neighbouring clan who bring Him up as one of their own.

Now, if you’re wondering why I say that this is an ‘unmistakable’
different perspective upon the same series of events advanced in the
birth of Perseus, despite what on the surface seem some pointed
differences … allow me to elucidate, via the assistance of linguistics.

The Father of Krishna is Vasudeva. Vasudeva, whilst presented as a human
in the major tellings of this Hindu form of the legend, is bearing a
meaningful name. Vasu-Deva. Deva, as we know, means ‘God’ \[cognate with
‘Deus’, ‘-Tyr’, etc.\]; whilst ‘Vasu’ is a term with a meaning-field
effectively predicated upon ‘Light’. It is most commonly encountered in
reference to \*the\* Vasus, a group of deific facings that are
encountered in the celestial sphere and generally have similar ‘light’
associations. Most of the major 8 Vasus are, in fact, as we have
previously demonstrated, ‘Facings’ or ‘Masques’ of the Sky Father (e.g.
Agni, Varuna, Soma / Chandra, Vayu … and, of course, Dyaus Himself as a
directly stated member of the clade per the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad’s
recounting). So, in other words, Krishna being fathered by Vasu-Deva …
is quite closely cognate to Perseus being fathered by Zeus – right down
to the inclusion of ‘Light’ in proceedings.

And while it might seem a rather ‘loose’ interpretation to attempt to
equate the daughter of one villainous king \[Danae relative to
Acrisius\] to the sister of another \[Devaki relative to Kamsa / Kansa\]
… this, too, is a problem reconcilablevia linguistics. You see, the
Proto-Indo-European ‘Nepots’ has several meanings – generally it means
‘descendant’, although it \*also\* has specific shades around “Grandson”
and “Nephew” (and it is not at all hard to see how “Nepots” has turned
into “Nephew” via millennia of subsequent usage and derivation). Who is
Perseus relative to Acrisius? Why, his Grandson. Who is Krishna relative
to Kamsa? His Nephew. In both cases, these figures are the ‘Nepots’ of
the prophecy-fearing ruler in question.

Meanwhile, the situation of the Basket in which Vasudeva carries His Son
across the waters of a roiling River, relative to the Chest in which
Perseus (and Danae, His Mother) are borne across the churning waters of
the Ocean by Poseidon & Zeus’s Divine Grace, is again not difficult to
reconcile.

However, there is another Indian recounting of the occurrence that we
should also take into consideration afore we endeavour to produce what
may perhaps be a PIE reconstructive view of the myth in light of several
other potentially non-exclusive understanding renditions.

**The Hidden Prince In Exile – Karna, Son of the Sun  
**  
The main appearance for Karna within the Hindu legendarium is, of
course, the same as that for Krishna – within the Mahabharat, one of the
great epics of the post-Vedic Age. It is therefore perhaps rather
curious that we should find a pair of figures with such clear
coterminities of origin-stories and additional elements of resonancy
between them. However, with a view to the Greek mythology, there are
many instances of what appear to be the same figure, held by different
names, co-occurrent and even directly encountering one another in spite
of this with seemingly little difficulty. This is because the various
localized recollections of the given Indo-European mythemes and figures
in question had been preserved and developed by their bearer-folk
somewhat independently … and during the height of the Classical age, the
tales came back into contact with one another and were ‘re-integrated’
by poets and mythologers and historians. Who were often left scratching
their heads if not outright throwing up their hands as to how to
‘reconcile’ situations wherein the same God or Goddess was clearly doing
the same thing at the same time as another such ‘Facing’, yet was not
(necessarily) regarded as being the same deific in their own more
localized context. A good example of this is provided via the
generalized confusion as to which of Demeter, Rhea, Persephone, Cybele,
or others besides is the Mother (or acted as a Mother) to the young
Dionysus (another ‘Son’ to the Sky Father – although also the Sky Father
Himself, as we have previously detailed in works upon this veer-y
specific subject); something that may harbour additional relevancy for
our reconstructive account of this other Son of the Sky Father, given
the more usually cited Semele that gives birth to Dionysus (a situation
that was \*also\* brought about via Zeus appearing as shining divine
light), Who was Herself condemned to be locked in a chest and set adrift
in the accounting of Pausanias of the matter.

As applies Karna, what happens is that His Mother, Pritha \[curiously
enough, an Aunt of Krishna and Sister of Vasudeva, Herself\], is
provided with a mantra by a visiting sage that would enable Her to
summon any God of Her choosing to provide Her with a son. Pritha,
perhaps not quite thinking it is a real and genuine mantra, decides to
test it out one morning – and inspired by the rising Sun, She chooses to
call upon Lord Surya via the mantra. She is quite taken aback when Surya
appears and with the glowing radiancy one should expect superna(tura)lly
impregnates Her.

Pritha being an unwed teenager at this point in the tale, panics for
reasons that ought be obvious – and abandons the newborn infant in a
basket which She floats down the river. This basket bearing the child is
subsequently found by other parents in another kingdom who adopt the
infant … and also name the child Vasusena. An epithet which, entirely
unsurprisingly, is also one shared with Lord Krishna. And which would
mean something along the lines of ‘Whose Lord \[‘Father’\] Is Vasu’ or
‘Army/Warrior(s)/Weapon of Vasu’.

There is much more that can and should be said upon Karna in His proper
Indo-European context, but I think that the above is sufficient for now
to demonstrate the underlying concordancy with those accounts
aforementioned of Krishna and Perseus. Although it should be noted that
Surya in the Hindu reckoning is a broad term that may refer to a number
of figures (most prominently the Sky Father as the Sun, or the Sun as
the Son of the Sky Father). In this instance, the ‘Surya’ in question
would be the Sky Father; the Solar Radiancy of the Sun being also what
is linguistically referenced in the ‘Dyaus’ or ‘Zeus’ (or, for that
matter, ‘Vasu’) of the other accountings we have earlier explicated.
That is literally what Dyaus / Zeus / Ju- (as in Jupiter) etc. means –
the bright sky of day, the Heavens.

**The Proto-Indo-European Parsing Of Perseus, Krishna, Karna – A
Promising Partial Reconstruction Of The Myth  
**  
Now the intriguing thing for our purposes is that Perseus, Krishna, and
Karna all bear hallmarks associated with the Indo-European
Striker/Thunderer deific. I have already made note of one of the more
obvious ones in connexion with the plausible etymology of Perseus’ name
– PIE ‘Per’, meaning ‘To Strike’; and also found with other expressions
of this veer-y same figure such as Perun, Perkunas, etc. Other points of
useful coterminity would include both Perseus and Krishna triumphing
over a water-connected and potentially somewhat draconic monster; and,
of course, the Weapon(s) associated with each. Perseus is depicted
prominently as armed with the Harpe (a sword, also utilized by Herakles
in various depictions in Classical antiquity; and often made of
Adamantium in the mythology – the unbreakable metal and therefore a
rather irresistible force in much the same manner as the Vajra: which
can also mean ‘Unbreakable’, ‘Invincible’, etc., and even in later
usage, ‘Diamond’); Krishna is most famous for wielding a bow and arrow,
but also the Club / Mace / Gada (and one of the most frequent forms of
the Weapon of the Striker/Thunderer is quite closely coterminous with
this general design – a haft with a heavy and implacably hard head which
is swung in a per-cussive manner; consider Hanuman’s Gada, Herakles’
Club, the depictions of Indra’s Vajra as a Mace, or Thor’s Mjolnir
Hammer, or the Axe (which, admittedly, is not ‘purely’ percussive as it
is also sharpened and cutting) wielded by Perun); Karna, meanwhile, in
addition to the bow and arrow is also depicted wielding a Sword or a
Mace.

Except there are some – seeming – difficulties to be encountered with
the fulsome application of the Indo-European Striker/Thunderer typology
to these Three, based around the maternities involved. As frequently,
what we see is that the Mother of the Striker/Thunderer is the Wife of
the Sky Father – the Earth Mother deific, in particular. Prithvi as
Mother to Indra and Jord as Mother to Thor are perhaps the most
prominent of exemplars in this regard. So therefore, this suite of
incidences wherein an ostensibly human woman is involved ought throw
something of a spanner (or, perhaps, a vajra) into the works.

However, it is also the case that various Striker/Thunderer deifics are
indeed begotten with women that are not, strictly speaking, the Sky
Father’s wife or consort in the various Indo-European mythologies.
Herakles, for example, is rather famously born to such a union (much to
the consternation – hence His Name – of Hera, so it is said; a similar
situation per some tellings to that encountered by Dionysus). Hanuman,
likewise, is mothered by Anjani – a Vanara woman (the Fathers including
both the Vanara Kesari as the mortal parent .. but also Vayu / Shiva as
the divine bestower of the requisite essence; as we have previously
explored in a recent article upon the subject in relation also to
Volsung, Alexander the Great, etc.). So evidently, such a thing is not
impossible.

Except I am not convinced that this is actually quite what has happened
with each of these three parentages. Instead, I am of the suspicion that
the more ‘orthodox’ scenario – wherein the Parents of the
Striker/Thunderer Deific are, in fact, the Sky Father and His Wife
(frequently, although not exclusively, in the form of the Earth Mother –
the Radiant Queen of the Heavens deific facing is also very definitely
relevant and salient here as we shall soon see) – are actually what has
been presented here. With the fact that the myths that we have available
to us for these three figures incorporating mortal women being the
result of euhemerization and localization of the tales, perhaps.
Whatever the causation, as is so frequently the case in our field, the
\*names\* (and other theological associations) remain the tantalizing
clue to Their true nature.

So, in the case of Perseus – the Mother is Danae. Danae would plausibly
connect to ‘Danu’, ‘Danann’, etc.As we know from my recent works upon
this subject, the Sky Father’s Wife also has a ‘watery’ (or, indeed,
serpentine – or both) form Who often bears just such a name. This is the
same ‘Earth Mother’ / ‘Radiant Queen of the Heavens’ Goddess (and we
have Vedic scriptural elements to further buttress our co-identification
here, in addition to the nexus of obvious theological supports as
detailed in my previous articles), but in another form and with a
slightly differing suite of immediately salient associations – as one
should, perhaps, expect.

Karna’s Mother is Pritha – and it is immediately obvious how this
connects to Prithvi in a phonetic sense, even despite ‘Pritha’ more
ostensibly referring to the ‘hand’ in Sanskrit.

Krishna’s Mother is Devaki, feminine form for ‘Devaka’ – which would
mean ‘Celestial’ or ‘Divine’; and which would connect to the
aforementioned Radiant Queen of the Heavens deific, the Shining Heavenly
female counterpart to the Sky Father \[consider Juno relative to
Jupiter, the ‘Ju-‘ sound shared between them that is from the same root
as ‘Dyaus’; or the Dione Goddess in relation to Zeus (mentioned in some
tellings as Mother to Dionysus); or Aditi and Dyaus, as we have
previously explored elsewhere\]. Something that is also quite directly
preserved in the Hindu tradition identifying Devaki as an incarnation or
a resonancy of Aditi (‘Limitless’) – the Divine Mother of Indra.

As applies the Dionysus partial-match for the typology that we have
aforementioned (wherein Dionysus is, properly speaking, the Sky Father;
but appears to have picked up various of the features of this
origin-myth for the Striker/Thunderer as part of the general confusion
that seems to have taken place at various stages of the development of
the Greek mythologies), we again see this pattern – Semele is, once
again, ‘Earth’ \[compare the Russian ‘Zemlya’, as in ‘Nova Zemlya’\];
and Demeter, Rhea, Persephone, Cybele, etc. are also all, again, Earth
Mother(s) (inter alia); whilst Dione, as we have noted above, is the
Shining Counterpart to the Sky Father (that same ‘Dio-‘ particle also
being found in the name of Dionysus, as you may have noted).

It is therefore quite evident – at least from my perspective – that the
core elements to the paternity of the Indo-European Striker/Thunderer
are satisfied via these mythic genesis accounts for Perseus, Krishna,
and Karna. With the additional possibility that the somewhat curious
suggestion we find in a RigVedic hymnal \[RV IV 18\] that Indra may in
fact have had a foster mother (who unfortunately is killed via the
process of His delivery), perhaps helping to explicate the
transferrenceof the bearing of the Sky Father’s Seed to a mortal woman
(and, in the case of Semele, one that dies in the major accountings as
the fairly direct result; something shared by Volsung’smother as well –
albeit via caesarean section in that particular case rather than
immolation through divine radiancy).

Except while it would be tempting to leave it all there and conclude our
work by saying that these are all three of them simply differing
derivations of the same underlying myth as that we find more familiarly
in the begetting of Indra, Thor, Herakles, etc. … that would leave
unremarked upon another potential set of intriguing coterminities to
these myths which also point toward a shared and ancestral
(Proto-)Indo-European accounting. And that just simply won’t do.

For you see – in addition to the major trio of Divinities at the heart
of these recountings, there are also several other points shared between
several of them. The first of which being this notion of the Sky Father
‘appearing’ to a mortal woman as part of the investiture of essence
incorporated into the pregnancy resulting. In the case of Karna, Pritha
makes use of a mantra that summons Him in His shining, solar glory. In
the case of Semele, She makes use of a boon that Zeus has agreed to
grant to Her – a request She can make of Him that He must fulfil … which
She uses, upon the advice of a disguised Hera, to demand that He appear
before Her in His full suite of Divine Radiancy. Danae also has Zeus
appear in such a solar-radiance manner, and we have previously parsed
the ‘Vasu’ understanding as well – however those two myths are of a
slightly different flavour, as there is no invocation of the Great God
to call Him down to this mortal plane of ours.

It therefore seems quite likely that this element to the tales of both
Semele and Pritha is a shared Indo-European understanding. And, I would
go so far as to suggest, it may have something to do with the rite
carried out via which Rama (but also Hanuman, in various tellings) is
begotten – which plausibly appears to be the same ritual (connected to
the Asvamedha Horse-Sacrifice; and the Solar Horse – and its member –
involved therein) that we have also found in the Volsung Saga in
relation to the conception of the eponymous Volsung. I took a broader
look at this in my recent work ‘The Apple of Odin to Rerir, The
Fire-Seed of Agni, The Egg of Nemesis, The Paternity of Alexander, And
The Asvamedha of Dasharatha – On The Equine Investiture Of The Divine
Essence In A King’s Heir-To-Be In The Indo-European Mytho-Religious
Sacro-Political Tradition’, and shall not seek to repeat that here. For
now, it is enough to summarize that various Indo-European peoples
carried forward a ritual wherein the queen of a realm would be invested
with divine essence from the Sky Father so as to produce a suitably
mighty Son. Hanuman’s connexion to this involves part of the offering
thusly produced (and to be consumed by the King’s wife or wives) being
‘redistributed’ via interventions of divinity, to the Vanara woman
Anjani, who eats same and thus becomes the mother to Hanuman as the
result of the impartment of Shiva / Vayu essence to her.

The Semele and Pritha situations appear to have somewhat
‘decontextualized’ this – and taken the occurrence from something that
is part of a rather elaborate and proper ritual which asks for the Sky
Father to invest the essence in question, through to a private and
personal prayer invocation that results in a rather more intimate
arrival. Perhaps it is not the same ritual that has been referenced here
– but instead a close relative that has not entirely dissimilar
metaphysics involved. A princess or a queen carrying out her own plea
unbeknowest to the general kingdom at large, and potentially against the
wishes of her king or family. Whatever it is, the elements seem too
closely in accord for them to have developed separately. I have little
doubt that further examination of this topic would reveal additional
elements to further flesh out the constellation around it – but that is
for another time.

The other major element that is fairly consistent in many of these myths
is that the progeny in question goes in a basket or a chest across water
(whether a raging river or the unquiet deeps of the sea), and only makes
it to safe harbour and a more positive home-life thanks to the divine
intercedence of the Sky Father deific (et co). There are a number of
potential interpretations for this that may link it to other
Indo-European myths (including the Kusava that may be a (foster-)mother
for Indra, contingent upon how one reads the relevant RigVedic hymnal –
as this is also a hydronym); including, at the risk of indulging the
lurid and luridly ridiculous fantasies of a certain musician’s wife, the
possibility that the vessel in question is actually a placenta or
amniotic sack which bears the baby within it and does come out via
tribulation and ‘waters’. If true, that would make the situation of
Danae and Perseus something of the odd story out – as there, both mother
and child make it to safety within the chest; whereas with Semele and
Dionysus, only the child is found contained therein when it is opened
(the mother having died during the birth, in the more symbolic
interpretation of the tale), and with Krishna and Karna, it is only the
child that goes forth in the basket. Another possibility is simply that
the vessel in question represents a conveyance of the divine essence in
question, ready to be hosted and to be born into this world – and there
is some support for this when we consider that in the relevant Vedic
rite that I have aforementioned, the ‘investiture’ in question is of
‘Gharma’ \[a term that means not only ‘juice’ but also ‘sunlight’ – a
liquid radiance akin to that which falls upon Danae, with Zeus’ ‘Shower
of Gold’, perhaps\] in a clay pot. There are other potential
explanations beyond this, including the sending of the seed in question
across the water that is the liminal space between worlds (i.e. to the
world of mankind from the Heavens; which might also link this with the
situation of Romulus & Remus appearing down the Tiber to one day rule
amongst Man following Their Birth to Rhea Silvia (note the name) –
another situation involving a tyrannical king that endeavours to render
his sister unable to produce a son that may cast him down), but that
exploration should, perhaps, be left for another time. The only further
point that I shall make here concerns Vasuki’s assistance to Vasudeva in
fording the Yamuna amidst the fierce Storm – as this may be an instance
of the Serpentine Form of the Sky Father that I have meant to write more
upon (Rudra, after all, also being hailed as Ahir Budnya – the ‘Dragon
of the Deep’, in the water at the base of the world where we also find
Vasuki; and the Slavic form of the Sky Father appearing also as Veles is
increasingly well known) – but, again, more upon that in some future
(A)Arti-cle.

Now, both the stories of Danae & Perseus, as well as Devaki & Krishna,
feature a villainous king affeared of a prophecy which foretells his
doom at the hand of his female relative’s progeny. And his rather
drastic, incarceration-including and even implicitly infanticidal moves
in order to desperately prevent this prognostication’s ultimate
occurrence. I again don’t think it all coincidental that both the Greek
and Hindu versions of this myth make such a point of mentioning these
elements, especially given the shared ‘Nepots’ relationship which
underscores the relative situation of the Striker/Thunderer Son to the
king in question. Further research is most definitely needed to examine
potential co-ordinates and cognate understandings found in other
Indo-European myths and mythoi for this situation; as there is an
inherent complication to be found in the fact that the Goddess that
plausibly underlies both Danae and Devaki … does not really have a
Father, as She is the First (indeed, a-priori to all). A brother would
certainly be another possibility – although this, too, presents some
obvious complications in terms of the reconstruction of the underlain
Proto-Indo-European myth. Another potentiality is that the king that is
slain by the Striker/Thunderer is, in point of fact, the well-known
adversary of the Striker-Thunderer – the Demon Dragon that imprisons the
Waters. This would most certainly fit with the presentation that we have
of a villainous figure of power and might endeavouring to wrongfully
incarceratea female figure (as The Waters often are in the Vedic
conceptual syllabry) – a situation rectified via a turbulent liberation
as the Waters flow free from Their captivity, and ultimately resolved
via the Striker/Thunderer slaying the would-be captor.

However, this is – as with various of my Proto-Indo-European
postulations found in the last section of this piece – a rather
incomplete investigation that does not satisfactorily (to my
satisfaction, at any rate) account for various elements within the myths
that \*have\* come down to us; and would also require a careful
re-examination of the conventional translational rendering of at least
one RigVedic Hymnal \[RV I 32\] in order to be genuinely acceptable (as
in, the mythic situation of Perseus’ Mother Danae may provide a
‘corrective’ to the more usual understanding of those two lines of the
RigVedic hymnal in question; which had for some time now stood out at me
as ‘odd’ and inconsistent with what we know about the figure involved
from the broader Vedic and of course comparative Indo-European
mythology). And in any case, there are quite a glittering diversity of
other potential cognate occurrences within the Indo-European legendarium
(such as the situation of Illuyanka’s Daughter from the Hittite
mythology) that I have not yet looked at in any great detail.

For now, it is enough to state that the observed patterning of these
three (and a half) mythic accounts – two from post-Vedic era India, and
one (and a half, if we are counting Pausanias’ presentation of the
situation of Semele & Dionysus; potentially another half, or at least a
quarter if we are also incorporating the situation of Rhea Silvia &
Romulus & Remus; although each of these is, properly speaking, another
myth or figure – rather than the Striker/Thunderer, They are the Sky
Father, and the Progenitor Twins, respectively) of the Classical world –
would appear to strongly suggest that a shared and archaic Indo-European
understanding lies at the root of each.

A situation of the Solar-Radiant Sky Father begetting the
Striker/Thunderer Son with His (Watery / Celestial / Earth – and the
Goddess is all three, per the relevant Vedic scriptural citations)
Consort; with the potential ‘operationalization’ (or, if you like,
‘immanentization’) of this understanding via an invocation carried out
by a woman seeking to place herself in the position of the Divine
Consort in question; the safe passage across water that must be required
for the infant to thrive; and, of course, the overthrowing of an
illegitimate or perhaps merely villainous ruler as the direct outcome of
this most especial birth.

And, in elucidating this underlying Indo-European typology – we have
once more demonstrated that contrary to what you may hear on some
corners of the internet, the post-Vedic Hindu mythology remains
fundamentally, foundationally Indo-European in its essence-tial
attributes and character. People occasionally point to Krishna for a
number of reasons as being ‘proof’ of the ‘non-Indo-European’ or
‘de-Indo-European-ization’ of the Epic and Puranic era mythology (and
often on the most literally skin-deep of reasons – the ‘Black’ meaning
to Krishna, for example); but as we can quite clearly see here, even
outside of and after the Vedas, the Indo-European mythology is most
definitely and most firmly the roots, the trunk, and the tree both for
it and for us.

Some might endeavour to suggest that simply because some of the names –
and, indeed, some of the positions in the ‘order of being’ – have
shifted that this represents a particularly Indian distortion of things.
Art not so. As we have also seen, the Greek presentation of the same
mythic occurrence goes even further in some regards in ‘reducing’ the
Goddess(es) likely involved down to the status of a human woman or other
such changes. At least the Hindu theology pointedly preserved the
explicitly stated connexion of Devaki to Goddess Aditi, for instance.

All efforts at more properly parsing the ancient and ancestral
Indo-European heritage are, by necessity, efforts at skillful inquiry
and careful reconstruction. It is only, perhaps, with significant effort
and ardour-fuelled experience that we are more fully able to truly
perceive just how significantly pervasive and pervadingly salient these
underlying Indo-European mythemes truly are to the subsequent cultures
that have grown up and preserved same. And it is that intriguing – if
complex – scenario wherein for one culture to advance in understanding
itself, it almost inexorably requires the knowledge and assistance of
other Indo-European cultures to do so. And that may, of course,
necessitate looking past some surface-level seeming-differences to
perceive the true endogenous essences shared within.

So let it be with this – a shared story, a shared understanding, as to
the regal origins of even figures who may seem to have become the
dispossessed and disinherited in the eyes of scornful others via
comparison.
