+++
title = "On Music As Kosmosxa0(Order[ing])"
date = "January 22, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/dfd42d09fd4035ae11fc269c09e577c8.jpg?w=1024)

“धिमिद्धिमिद्धिमिध्वनन्मृदङ्गतुङ्गमङ्गल ।  
ध्वनिक्रमप्रवर्तितप्रचण्डताण्डवः शिवः ॥”

While I disagree with her on most everything else, it was said by the
famed anarchist Emma Goldman – “if I can’t dance, then it’s not my
revolution”.

” जटाटवीगलज्जलप्रवाहपावितस्थले । “

With deference to #NAS Theology and associated rites … it occurs most
strongly that in the absence of dance, of music, of rhythm .. of bass as
somewhere between ‘final frontier’ and ‘foundational baseline’ of
reality – a basstion, you might say – well, what is there.

“If it does not *dance* – if it does not *resonate*  
then it is not our Theology “

” विनिर्गमत्क्रमस्फुरत्करालभालहव्यवाट् । “

And even though we know so very well that *all* matters are,
intrinsically and in principle and in innate cause and unto effect,
matters of *theology* \[just as all crimes are, at their root, those of
impiety; and all virtues build themselves back up towards Piety at their
apex and their core\] – it is worth emphasizing, *stressing* \[sturmbeat
und drang\] that politics, too, can and should be viewed in a similar
light.

” धराधरेन्द्रनन्दिनीकुचाग्रचित्रपत्रक ।”

This was, as it happened, what the legendary ‘Pirate Republic’ of
Gabriel d’Annunzio, founded in Fiume immediately following the First
World War, sought to run upon. Right there in the (‘Free’) State’s
Constitution, there it is – an entire section devoted, dedicated to
Music as the characterization and the shaping and the highest expression
\[as piety, no less\] of a soul and of a society.

It has been said that this Constitution made Music the “central
principle of the state” – and while this is not *directly* nor
succinctly stated in the \[translation, admittedly\] version of the
Constitution I’ve been reading; it nevertheless very much comes through
as a recurrent theme. A Leitmotif, but also very much that baseline
regulating and resonating – all-*permeating* – rhythm. \[Indeed, section
63, governing the Council of Aediles, who might perhaps be thought of as
the State Aesthete-Enactors and Public Works ‘Conductors’, *specifically
cites* a sense of rhythm as a necessary qualification for elevation to
the body, and as the essential guiding principle \[along with
‘proportion’\] of the works thus engaged in by same\] \[It is worth
noting further that “music” is a characterizing quality of each ‘Body’
within the Corporatist societal model as an essential determinant of
their identity \[s.20\]; and more importantly\] \[Rhythm \[in potential
poetical connexion\], per s.64, is held as the essential regulator of
the private or economic affairs of the populace more generally\] .

Now, we are often hearing talk of the “harmonious society”; although for
some reason, the “melodious society” is less popular – perhaps due to
the seeming ease with which the dissonance collapses it , an
overabundance of “malus”, perhaps, into simply the “-odious”.

We *also* occasionally hear of the “regulated society”, the “rhythms” of
life, or even simply of the political cycle.

This proves, after a sort, that the “musical society” is not an
“anarchistic” one – but rather one which functions upon a *deeper
logic*; of rules and resonances which are no less real simply for their
being subtler in their imputation; and which produces, nevertheless, a
pervading and pervasive *profound* social order akin to the in-unison
whirling circular processions prominent amidst the Muslims of Chechnya,
or the flow of couples in a ballroom. Or, it has to be said,
line-dancing, for the (Southern) Americans in the audience. Mayhap each
people has “their” own dance, and which mirrors their essential
character as an ethnie or a polity – and which conceals within it , in
radiantly clear sight like wood upon trees, the abundant ‘secrets’ of
the mechanisms, the motives, and the wave-forms via which they might,
must be governed.

” करालभालपट्टिकाधगद्‍धगद्‍धगज्ज्वलद् । “

‘Immanence’ is, indeed, the foundational strength of Music, Rhythm,
Dance, as politico-\[\] organizational principle. It is partially
through this that its other advantages manifest – the ways in which it
can effectively ‘bypass’ the more ‘facade-level’ self-delusions of
consciousness and alleged ‘rational’ cognition, to hit us, with the
referential connotations of the phrase *fully* in mind, “right between
the eyes”.

It overcomes intersubjectivity in a way that language – well, *other*
forms of language, I should more properly say – almost invariably simply
cannot.

” नवीनमेघमण्डली निरुद्‍धदुर्धरस्फुरत् । “

There is no ‘arguing’ with a beat. There is simply the recognition that
it is there, felt even subsonically right in the primal parts of the
brain – and there’s a fascinating series of research-efforts on how
repetitive-beat and the associated music \[trance, for instance\]
actually *directly affects* the brain in the manner akin to a (positive)
drug . And, flowing from there, how to respond *within* it. It cannot be
quibbled with ,or subverted, or opposed in the manner of a more
mortal-mundane “law” or rhetorical-philosophical axiom.

To the right ears, the ‘music’, the ‘beat’, the ‘rhythm of reality’ ..
it just *is*.

“स्फुरद्दिगन्तसन्ततिप्रमोदमानमानसे । “

And as many have seen when attending the concert of a band with a
devoted following \[what is rampaging through my recollection at this
moment, is a *much* younger me, in his very late teens, at Iron Maiden
watching entire serried rows of folk in black shirts of all ranges of
ages moving in near-perfect unison, and fundamental, functional *unity
of purpose* to mirror the outward *unity of action*, a *unity of
thought* and *unity of feeling* flowing between and betwixt them. \];
when the ‘body’ of men *have* such shared hearing and appreciation of
That Which Is , its rolling, unfurling rhythms and design … then it
moves ‘in concert’. The “body of men”, in other words, has become *a*
body. An ‘organicist’ gemeinschaft , organized via the simple yet
irreducibly complex dang near *gravitational* \[an analogy with love, in
a certain sense – combined with ‘entanglement’\] forces of Music and our
*congruence* with it. Not mere passive ‘hearers’, or ‘existers in the
sonic pathway thereof’ of the sound-waves … but ‘responders’,
‘co-occurrers’, ‘shaped into the grooves’, and further vibrating like
the skin of the drum in response to the pounding.

” डमड्डमड्डमड्डमन्निनादवड्डमर्वयं । “

Now, you may perhaps think me insane for what i have said. You might
even be right. But more-than-likely it would also be because you “cannot
hear the music”.

NATARAJA – God Is My DJ

ॐ नमः शिवाय ॥

Jai
