+++
title = "Brief Preview From Upcoming Work, On Saliency Of Slavic Mythology For Indo-Europeanxa0Understanding"
date = "January 17, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/owl-fire-forest-the-sorcerer-wallpaper-preview.jpg?w=728)

Figured I’d post a brief excerpt from the book I’m working on :

“Foreword: Despite the title, this section should not be taken as the
Slavic chapter of this book. But rather, as the utilization of a Masque
of the Sky Father prominently (if fragmentarily) featured in Slavic
mythology to open up a series of vitally important windows through which
the rest of the Indo-European sphere’s beliefs may more accurately be
viewed. In this, I have to say, it is something of a microcosm for the
saliency of the Slavic mythology all up – carefully considered, of
course.

\[…\]

The Slavic Indo-European mythology is both fascinating and frustrating –
insofar as it is quite evident from even a cursory glimpse of its
authentic mysteries that it had preserved key and integral elements of
the Proto-Indo-European belief; yet the major vectors via which this has
come down to us are punished via a patina of questionable sources and
even more questionable modern adulterations in pursuit of various
agendas. All of this means that it would be easy to simply overlook the
Slavic mythology and press on as if it were not really a major nor an
integral thing – and while this is definitely something we’ve observed
in various corners (who choose to focus more upon the better-known,
better-attested, and seemingly more ‘reliable’ Greek, Vedic, Nordic,
etc.), I am of the opinion that this would be a hefty mistake!

Even leaving aside that the Slavs, too, are fellow Indo-Europeans and
have every right to a ‘seat at the table’ when it comes to the mythic
analysis and reconstruction of the ancestral beliefs of *all of our*
forebears … what HAS come down to us from their own archaic mythologies
makes for fascinating conceptry – that is often reasonably directly
cognate with various Vedic (or later Hindu) elements, and presented in
such a manner as to make for intriguing ‘bridging’ with the Germanic,
Greek, and other more prominent Western / European spheres that many of
us shall no doubt be more familiar with. This is understandable, given
the geographic position of the Slavosphere running right from historic
Central Asia to the borders of Western Europe, and the obvious
‘convection-zone’ of influences (or even outright, wholesale
incorporations) between the historic Slavs with both the Germanosphere
and the Hellenic world as well as the other Satem-speaking Indo-European
peoples to the East such as the Scythians etc. and even the more
sedentary Indo-Iranians as well.

The Slavic suite of mythic conceptry, therefore, is of potentially key
relevancy to our work and a meaningful re-communication of the
Indo-European fundaments of belief. Difficult though it can occasionally
be to engage with for various reasons both aforementioned and
to-be-mentioned shortly.”
