+++
title = "The Apple of Odin to Rerir, The Fire-Seed of Agni, The Egg of Nemesis, The Paternity of Alexander, And The Asvamedha of Dasharatha – On The Equine Investiture Of The Divine Essence In A King’s Heir-To-Be In The Indo-European Mytho-Religious Sacro-Politicalxa0Tradition"
date = "January 6, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/leda-egg.jpg?w=656)

It is curious how things align. During the course of my research,
looking over the ancient scriptural materials of two cultures in order
to demonstrate that Odin is Agni – I happened across a potent potential
explication for an otherwise rather curious phenomenon encountered in
the Greek mythos. And then one of my devotees asked me for an opinion on
a theoretical development by the great modern Vedic Sage Manasataramgini
concerning something from the Ramayana … and it became apparent that
these were all the same manifestation of the same archaic Indo-European
phenomenon. I had not sought these things out – they presented
themselves to me. Such is the way of Wyrd.

But what am I speaking of? Well, we shall start with the most obscure
element first – that of the Nordic tradition in this area – and work our
way backwards to the most clear.

In the Volsung Saga, the king – Rerir – is without progeny. He and his
wife have been unable to conceive. Until, that is, a prayer is given up
to the Gods that the situation be rectified – and Odin, in return, sends
an apple borne by a Corvid, back down to Rerir …where it is dropped into
his lap.

The apple is consumed by King Rerir in the course of a visit to his
wife. The Queen is thusly impregnated, with a most mysterious and potent
seed – to the point that the pregnancy persists for a number of *years*
until finally being culminated via the death of the mother through a
caesarean.

Now, in Nordic symbolism, the Apple being representative of a certain
force of life is not unknown. It is precisely why we find the ‘Apples of
Idunn’, after all – and longievity, youthfulness, life force, these are
all clearly heavily interconnected and entertwined terms. In a manner
strongly reminiscent, perhaps, of how we in the Vedic sphere would think
of both Soma and (Life-)Fire.

But you see, there are some other peculiarities to the tale. I shall,
perhaps, at some future point address how the circumstances of
Volsung’sbirth may resonate with a particular RigVedic presentation of
the Birth of Indra (or, for that matter, another featuring the Maruts) –
but that is another set of stories for another time.

The peculiarity of which I speak, concerns the potent-ial etymology of
Volsung’s name. Volsi – that is to say, a (semi-ritualized) horse penis.
And as for why *that* particular detail is incredibly, saliently
relevant … well, you shall have to read on to the end. We shall discuss
it in light of the *direct* Vedic Hindu cognate concept later.

For now, it is enough to know that there was a Nordic belief in the
phenomenon of a king requesting divine assistance in begetting a son …
that was fulfilled via Odin sending (in this case, via a Crow or Raven –
the emissary of the God, and we would say in Sanskrit potentially also a
Pitr, a Shade of an Ancestor – something with interesting potential
resonancies for the Nordic ‘patrilineal reincarnation’ concept) a
symbolic seed-of-life apple, landing in Rerir’s lap … and presumably
that resting-place was eminently symbolic, too, for other reasons
related to the subsequent situation of his queen.

Now, to *briefly* consider a cognate from the Hindusphere – we find
repeated references in the Vedas to this notion of Agni providing
particularly powerful sons to the invoker.

RV X 80, for instance –

Jamison Brereton translation:

“1 Agni gives a prize-bringing team; Agni (gives) a hero, worthy of
fame, outstanding through his work—  
Agni roams widely through the two world-halves, anointing them
completely—Agni (gives) a woman with a hero in her belly, Plenitude
(herself).”

Or, in the Griffith:

“1 AGNI bestows the fleet prize-winning courser: Agni, the hero famed
and firm in duty.  
Agni pervades and decks the earth and heaven, and fills the fruitful
dame who teems with heroes.”

Or the repeated closing lines of multiple Third Mandala hymnals:

“7 Agni, as holy food to thine invoker, give wealth in cattle, lasting,
rich in marvels.  
To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this thy gracious
will to us-ward.”

Or, from the Surya’s Bridal hymnal \[RV X 85\]:

“41 Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva gave:  
And Agni hath bestowed on me riches and sons and this my spouse.”

That line is of particular interest due to the strong concordance of
Odin in His Role bestowing the Mead of Poetry, with Soma (the Deity) and
Soma (the empowering elixir); which is as we should expect given the
nexus of Soma as Agni , Agni as Shiva, and Shiva as Soma.

There are, of course, a literal litany of further examples – although
for now, I shall restrict myself to citing but one. Drawn from the
Shatapatha Brahmana ritual manual/commentary \[14:1:4:15-16\], it is a
handy drawing together of several of the aforementioned elements in
situ:

“‘Thou art our Father: be Thou our Father!’–for He who shines yonder is
indeed the Father, and the Pravargya is that (Sun): it is Him he thus
gratifies, and therefore he says, ‘Thou art our Father: be thou our
Father!’–‘Reverence be unto Thee: injure me not!’–it is a blessing he
thereby invokes.

Thereupon he uncovers the head of the (Sacrificer’s) wife, and makes her
say whilst she is looking at the Mahâvîra, ‘Together with Tvashtri will
we serve Thee: (bestow Thou sons and cattle upon me! bestow Thou
offspring upon us! may I remain unscathed together with my
husband!)’–the Pravargya (m.) is a male, and the wife is a female: a
productive pair is thus produced.”

Again, we shall not be going into substantive depth nor detail about
that phase of the rite in question – fascinating though it may be.
Suffice to say, it may be succinctly parsed as a hailing invocation of
the Sky Father in Solar Salience, with this Solar element also
simultaneously conceived of as the central working-/-empowerment- space
of the ritual underway, as well as – in I suppose, semi-literally
‘distillated’ form, the resultant liquid elixir thus produced \[which
is, interestingly, referred to as ‘Gharma’ – a term that can mean both
‘juice’ as well as ‘day\[light\]’, ‘sunshine’, and ‘summer’ as well as
“warmth”; the last one particularly salient given the heat involved in
both the preparation and the serving of the beverage\].

Why does this matter ? Because in this particular royal ceremony … what
we have just witnessed is a plea to the Sky Father (that is to say –
(Agni) Odin) for the wife of the supplicant to be blessed with
pregnancy. And we have also seen that a consumable is produced that is
imbued with the divine essence to facilitate this occurrence. It may not
be in an apple form, but I have little doubt that it is fundamentally
the same principle at work. Albeit with the relevant vessel bearing the
oblation – the container referred to as the MahaVira \[‘Great Hero’ –
and ‘Vira’ is directly cognate with Latin ‘Vir’, our modern ‘Virile’ …
so has some obvious ‘manly’ imputations, we may suggest\] – being what
is meant by the apple’s outer exterior form, perhaps. \[It is also of
importance to note that Tvastra – the Celestial Artificer – is invoked
here (another Sky Father facing); a figure of obvious relevancy given a)
His close connexion with the Soma; b) His role in forging men –
something perhaps recalled via the oft-speculated cognate relationship
with the Nordic Tuisto; although more upon that some other time. The
point is that we should be expecting Tvastra to be hailed here if we are
looking at a rite that is supposed to facilitate the ‘forging’ and
imbuement of a particular heroic man to be brought into this world of
ours.\]

But let us move on, and take a look – again, but briefly – at some of
the other examples from across the Indo-European sphere that give me
such confidence that we are dealing with a genuinely archaic and
potent-ially pan-IE tradition.

Among the Greeks (and their immediate neighbours), there are several
salient instances for us to draw upon. But probably the most intriguing,
for our purposes, is that of Alexander the Great – who has often been
spoken about as being a declared ‘Son of Zeus’. Some have suggested that
this might have been a bit of wilful propaganda on the part of his
mother, Olympias – or, more scandalously, a sort of way to cover up her
having been pregnant to another (human) man prior to her marriage to
Philip II of Macedon.

However, I take quite a different view. Now, leaving aside the rather
curious detail that Philip II was quite prominently the *One Eyed* \[c.f
my previous demonstration of the One (Blazing) Eyed Sky Father mythology
found throughout much of the Indo-European sphere – most prominently in
the personage of Odin; and with the Eye in question most usually meaning
the Sun\], the salient detail from Classical accounts of the matter
concerns Olympias’ dream prior to the consummation of her marriage to
Philip (and in theory, the begetting of Alexander\] that, as Plutarch
puts it : “the bride dreamed that there was a peal of thunder and that a
thunder-bolt fell upon her womb, and that thereby much fire was kindled,
which broke into flames that travelled all about, and then was
extinguished.” Plutarch further makes reference to a gigantic serpent
“sharing the couch of his wife” as part of all of this, with the serpent
in question being spoken of as a “god” (most likely Zeus); and that this
phenomenon “dulled the ardour of Philip’s attentions to his wife, so
that he no longer came often to sleep by her side, either because he
feared that some spells and enchantments might be practised upon him by
her, or because he shrank from her embraces in the conviction that she
was the partner of a superior being.”

I would, perhaps, invite the reader to consult my earlier work upon the
Indo-European Queen of Serpents deific and other such elements, wherein
a serpentine form for the Sky Father was also (briefly) looked at.\[An
element that may be rendered additionally salient given Olympias’ name –
pertaining to a Mountain, indeed \*the\* Mountain, the Axis Mundi of a
sort in the Classical understanding : correlate, we may suggest, with
certain other Mountain Mother understandings in other IE spheres over
the ages; perhaps again as a ritually resonant and Eliadian Eternal
Return / Mythic Recurrence infused nomen. Or perhaps – along with the
One Eyed status of her husband – a rather weird-ly amazing
coincidence.\]

Yet why I raise this most intriguing biographical detail for Alexander –
is because it offers the illuminating insight that instead of Olympias
attempting to ‘talk up’ either herself or her son via claiming a
romantic affair with the God Zeus … she may very well have simply been
presenting an entirely standard Indo-European accounting for how the
divinely imparted son of a king is supposed to enter into the world in
exactly the rites we have aforementionedly discussed via the Vedic
sphere, and plausibly the Nordic occurrent instance of Volsung as well.
A ‘Sending’ from the Heavens (in the form of an Apple / Soma (Gharma in
the offering-pot) / this Thunderbolt) featuring prominent flames (the
conduit to the Divine – hence the sacral use of fire by various of the
Indo-Europeans for rites and offerings, whether Greek or Hindu).

Perhaps this is why we have the perplexity of Classical commentators
upon whether Olympias enthusiastically endorsed the mythically infused
account of Alexander’s genesis (and correspondingly entreated him to
live up to his most illustrious parentage and the worthy destiny that
came with that) … or whether she instead“repudiated the idea, and said:
‘Alexander must cease slandering me to Hera.’” \[Plutarch again\].
Because, of course, being the queen of an Indo-European kingdom, and in
receipt of a not entirely exotic (if perhaps nevertheless obscure and
infrequently talked about outside of certain priestly or regal spheres)
ritual offering/production designed to ensure an appropriately divinely
‘infused’ and elevated young prince-son … is quite another matter to
claiming one had successfully seduced the Chief of the Gods.

However, a rather more peculiar set of closely interrelated examples
come down to us from the more ‘mythic’ end of the Greek sphere –
pertaining to the Children of Leda. And I say this is peculiar because
there are multiple and not entirely reconcilabledetails about these
individuals and their parentage given in the various Classical stories
that have come down to us of Them. I have attempted to sketch out what I
suspect to be the truth of the matter , upon the basis of the
comparative Hindu understandings , in several articles and shall not
repeat the concordancy’s detailed explication here. Suffice to say that
the more archaic and underlying Indo-European form of the myth *should*
feature the Sky Father pursuing His Wife in an obscurated form (either a
‘shadowy’ guise, or that of a horse (or other such symbolically
equivalent animal for the context – a swan or a deer, in particular,
perhaps also a serpent); albeit with the potential for a ‘body-double’
situation to also be embroiled), and thus begetting the Horse-Twins (the
Ashvins, Castor & Pollux, and whilst there is no direct attestation for
this conception situation in the Nordic that I am aware of – Hengist &
Horsa) as well as a certain incredibly beautiful Solar maiden (Helen of
Troy , Tapati), inter various alia of other offspring from the
circumstance.

Now where this becomes relevant for our purposes, is the ‘entry into the
sidereal’ of what is ostensibly a mythic occurrence – via the affixion
of it to a ‘historical’ occurrence and historical human figures by the
Greeks; in the form of the Queen of Sparta, Leda, becoming a mother to
these divine figures. Either because (in the main version that many are
today familiar with) she had a liaison with Zeus (customarily said to
have been in swan form for the occasion), or more interestingly because
she is said to have picked up an egg deposited by the Goddess Nemesis
containing the offspring of Her own connexion with Zeus. The former
version of the tale is attenuated via a sort of ‘dual paternity’ where
some of the male parentage of some or all of the children in question is
ascribed to Leda’s (human) husband, the Spartan king Tyndareus – thus
producing an unwieldy situation wherein of the Horse Twins, one is
occasionally said to be (semi-)mortal rather than (semi-)divine and
therefore unlike the other … although we can tell that this is a later
Greek interpolation upon the tale due to the lack of any such reference
for the older and more comprehensively attested Asvins (however, to be
sure, of Hengist and Horsa – the latter is described as dying in the
wars against the pre-Germanic kingdoms of Britain), as well as the
significant degree of confusion in those Classical sources which *do*
mention this notion as to just which of Castor or Pollux is supposed to
be the human-fathered and therefore non-divine one … and whether this
inequity of mortality actually meaningfully persists post-mortem in the
first instance.

It would be tempting to approach the entire occurrence as merely another
case of the ‘historicization’ of a myth – wherein an event understood to
be mythic and applying to the kingdom of the divine directly in the
Vedic and the archaic underpinning Indo-European rendition … had become
‘loka-lized’ in a sidereal world situation by the ancient Greek poets
and popular perceptions of the matter. So instead of there being a
mortal queen named Leda married to the king of Sparta once long ago who
gave birth to divine offspring, the phenomenon of the Wife of the Sky
Father bearing the Sons (and Daughter(s)) of the Sky Father is what is
actually being spoken of. There is some support for that, as I have
demonstrated, in terms not only of how closely the mythic context for
the Greek narratives match up directly with the Vedic – but also with
the fact that ‘Leda’ is remarkably close to Latona / Leto (Mother of
Artemis and Apollo by Zeus; and again, with Saranyu/Chhaya being the
cognate Mother Deific in the Vedic reckoning with reasonably correlate
offspring to this particular divine pair), and both with the Lycian
‘Lada’ (meaning ‘Wife’).

This should therefore suggest that a transposition – I do not *quite*
say an euhemerization, although it is a large part of the way there,
certainly – has occurred. Perhaps as the result of an endeavour to
support a divine linkage in a more direct sense for the Spartan kings of
the day. Perhaps for other reasons.

Yet two other not-necessarily-exclusive potential explanations suggest
themselves. Either a) that this phenomenon was the result of a ‘mythic
recurrence’ / Eliadian Eternal Return style understanding and approach
(wherein the events and the marital relations of the key figures in the
kingdom – the king and the queen and the legitimacy of succession via
heirs – are understood to ‘resonate’ with the mythic template occurrent
in the heavens and the canonical religious corpus of the legendarium),
and the identity of the human queen assuming the divine female role has
become effectively lost or conflated with that of the ‘masque’ she was
wearing, whilst her husband (the human king) has not been obscurated in
quite the same way … but has been placed into an uneasy co-starring role
with the Sky Father Whom he was acting in imitation of. Hence, both
Tyndareus *and* Zeus mentioned in sexual relation to the one woman
(bearing the name of attested divine consort to the Sky Father) – rather
than Tyndareus acting *as* Zeus in such a manner. There is some support
for this in the Hindu marriage rite, wherein the Dulhan and Dulha (Bride
and Groom) are similarly said to take on the roles of a particular
(married) pair of Gods in a similarly intentionally resonant manner.

The b) option is that something relatively less dramatic has transpired
– and that that ‘egg’ of Divine offspring picked up and then somehow
borne by Leda, is the same sending as that we have previously
encountered in Apple , Soma-in-clay-pot , and potentially Thunderbolt
form earlier. I.e. the human king and queen have undertaken this
hypothetical Indo-European rite for the begetting of mighty royal
offspring – and this has somehow become bound up with the other and
otherwise somewhat freestanding mythic occurrence of the Sky Father
begetting the Horse Twins, Solar Princess, etc. \[I say ‘somewhat
freestanding’, because, of course, Vivasvan – the Wide-Shining One – is
the Sky Father ‘facing’ in question in the Vedic narrative (of the
mythic conception), and we have earlier seen just how integral the Solar
element is to these proceedings in the Shatapatha Brahmana presentation
of the relevant rite\].

Although mention should also be made that in either case – the notion we
would have as modern observers of a single paternity for a given progeny
is not necessarily the correct one for these metaphysical investitures
of essence. For that is precisely what is supposed to be going on in
various of these occurrences – an investiture of essence … and one that,
we may hazard, is not merely the ‘standard’ one of a Y-chromosome or
other sidereal-genetic contribution of a human father. Instead, it is
something more potent – and supernal rather than sidereal. Something
‘divine’, as befits a proper king.

Now an excellent example of this principle – or at least, one quite like
it – ‘in motion’ is provided via the circumstances of Lord Hanuman (the
‘Monkey’ visaged God , also known as Bajrangi \[as in ‘Vajra’\] and
other such terms – as befits the Indo-European Striker/Thunderer
deific). Ostensibly a Vanara \[a sort of bear or monkey featured
humanoid\] and the Son of Kesari and Anjana … He is also hailed as
‘VayuPutra’ – the Son of Vayu; and, likewise, has become regarded as an
Avatar of Lord Shiva.

So what’s going on here? Why is it that we have a deific figure that
appears to be in possession of two fathers, and also hailed as an
’embodiment’ of another? Well, it is quite simple. Hanuman does indeed
have two ‘conventional’ parents of His race – as well as being invested
with an essence, a sort of ‘divine fathering’ or ‘celestial pedigree’
from Lord Vayu \[the Wind God\]. Vayu, as is well known, is
co-equivalent with Lord Shiva (and it is interesting to note that some
key functions of Vayu in a Vedic context – such as the investiture of
the Breath of Life – are held by Odin in the Eddic context … entirely
uncoincidentally as, of course, this is what brings a man to life !
Renders him (or her) no longer ‘Orloglauss’), so clearly the phenomenon
of Hanuman as an Avatar of MahaDev is explicable via this ‘investiture
of the celestial essence’ by Vayu and evidently of Shiva. And thus, we
have Hanuman as an Avatar thereof. A sort of ‘patrilineal incarnation’
we may say (as compared to the ‘patrilineal *re*incarnation’ that is
much more familiar to us from the Nordic metaphysics & eschatology).

The reason that I mention this, is because in the cases of Tyndareus,
Philip II, etc. – it is likely that the more ‘authentic’ way to view the
matter would not be that these men had been robbed of sons and
successors via divine philandering. But rather, that while they HAD
carried out the essential biological role involved in the
physical-genetic begetting of progeny … in a *metaphysical* sense, an
additional ‘infusion’ of divinity had also occurred. Which is also,
funnily enough, not generally from a source ‘foreign’ to the regal line.
After all, many an Indo-European dynasty claims ultimate descent from
the relevant God – in the case of the Volsungs, Volsung’s father Rerir
is himself a Grandson of Odin. So perhaps, if kingship is held to be an
expression of an inner, innate divine essence … then these rites are, in
effect, intended to be a sort of ‘top up’ for that already held by the
king and passed down via his line. Something drawn down from On High to
ensure that the king’s successor was every bit the (godly) man that his
father had been, and perhaps then some. We certainly have some support
for the notion of divine investitures of essence as part of coronation
rites, as delivered via , for example, RV X 124 in which essences keyed
to Agni, Varuna, and Soma, are drawn down from the Sky Father to be
imparted into the human king upon his assumption of the regal role in
his society.

Whatever the truth of the matter, I feel confident in asserting that we
have demonstrated that the notion of a divine assistance/empartment for
suitably regal progeny is a broad and evidently ancient Indo-European
concept.

Which brings us back full circle to somewhere proximate to where we had
started from – and the work of the great modern Vedic sage
Manasataramgini that I had spoken of earlier.

Writing some two years ago, he had identified a curious mention for the
performance of an Asvamedha \[‘Horse-Sacrifice’\] rite in the Ramayana –
wherein rather than being undertaken for the more familiar usage of
‘coronation’ and the confirmance of the plenipotentiary power of the
king in question as a paramount sovereign upon this earth … the king in
question,Dasharatha, is having the rite performed as he is lacking a
suitable heir (and, with three wives, evidently having concluded that it
is his own fertility/virility that is the problem).

Now, even in the ‘conventional’ purposed Asvamedha rite – there is a
mention given for the phallic member of the horse involved, in relation
to the king’s chief wife (i.e. the queen) \[and, as Manasataramgini
himself notes – this finds cognate expression in the Roman ‘October
Horse’ sacral rite\]. So when the purpose instead becomes for the
begetting of a son and heir – that *other* stabilizer for the dynasty
and its kingdom , in addition to the (or rather, as a tangible
expression and overt immanentization of) the divine mandate … it would
seem only logical that the portion of the horse that would be utilized
in equine procreation has an additionally salient role herein.
Potentially – especially given the invocation of Sage Dadhyanc /
Dadhichi that accompanies this – as a ‘safe vector’ for a divine matter;
a ‘mask’ of sorts to be donned when in the ritual, mythic sphere for an
otherwise mortal participant when divinity is flowing through them \[see
my work on the horse-head of Dadhich, bestowed by the Asvins, when They
are teaching the sage the secret of the Soma rites\]. And almost
definitely with a putative linkage to the Horse symbolism for
Sovereignty that we explored in a recent article upon same which looked
more directly at the horse-sacrifice (often with a solar-fertility
aspecting) in the context of Poseidon, Thagimasidas, and Varuna. It
would almost certainly also have some coterminity with the equine *form*
of said Sky Father deity – as we had seen earlier viz. the circumstances
of the conception of the Asvins and other associated Vedic figures that
is so strongly cognate to the origination of Castor and Pollux and Helen
and Clytemnestra. Indeed, one could almost presume that this might be
how both Tyndareus *and* Zeus were supposed to be involved in the
begetting of those siblings – the God Zeus being represented not so much
in the *full* horse form that we see with Poseidon in pursuit of Demeter
or Vivasvan after Saranyu/Chhaya, but simply via the most … important
component of the equine form for the purposes ritually required.

Now why does all of that matter? Well, cast your mind back to the start
of this piece – wherein a childless Germanic king is entreating the Gods
to bless him with a Son … a son that, curiously enough, appears to bear
as the core and integral particle to his name, “Horse Penis”.

Once again – those ultra-conservative Norsemen have managed to preserve
via veiled allusion an incredibly ancient and archaic Indo-European
practice. Their major rendering of the rite contains all the essential
elements – just notably ‘pared back’ in comparison to the full-scale
explication of the Vedic sphere … or the perhaps over-stylized and
abstracted-unto-legend (rather than referenced as of rite) Greek vague
recollection of these elements in far more disparate form strewn across
an array of literary works.

Although all things considered, having spent a certain portion of this
morning engaging with those aforementioned more complete and explicit
Vedic presentations of the rites in question – I can perhaps understand
why a far more succinct and stylized iteration was produced for the
Volsung Saga itself. Certainly, the whole thing has reinforced once more
just how … foreign certain of the integral elements to the world-views
of our ancestors may appear to feel from time to time. And yet still
somehow eminently understandable – with the right ken of perspective,
and the right symbolic ciphers to one’s implicit point of view.

The Past, as I have often been known to say, is a foreign country – they
do things differently there.

Quite some Kings they seem to have back there / over then, too.
