+++
title = "Birth Anniversary of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose – Parakramxa0Divas"
date = "January 23, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/141736729_10164678717745574_2345420932397710544_n.jpg?w=460)

The 23rd of January marks the birthday of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose –
one of the greatest (if these days, sadly unremembered by some) leaders
of the Indian Independence movement. A Bengali by birth, Bose rose to
prominence as a firebrand young leader of the Indian National Congress’s
more radical factions (and, earlier, served as the head of its youth
wing). A talented writer, he established the Swaraj
\[“Self-Determination”\] newspaper; and used a variety of communicative
means – including his considerable oratical prowess – to push the
Nationalist message.

A rather serious brush with the law didn’t stop him; and it was only the
heavy-handed intervention of seriously senior figures within the
Congress movement (including Gandhi himself) which eventually forced
Bose out of official office, and onto his own path.

This would prove to be a rather adventurous one (to say the least),
which lead him to Nazi Germany – where he found a perhaps surprising
degree of support and sympathy for the Indian Independence cause. The
formation of the “Free Indian Legion” \[and its later incorporation as a
Waffen SS Division\] soon followed, with a view to delivering by force
what decades of attempted peaceful political engagement with the British
had failed to achieve.

These Wartime activities have lead to something of a controversial
reputation for Bose amidst those who know of him in the modern world. It
is generally agreed even by his opponents and post-mortem detractors
that he was an ardent patriot \[Gandhi even declared “His patriotism is
second to none”, despite their earlier serious differences of opinion\];
although those less inclined to support him have attempted to assert off
the back of both his dalliances with the AXIS Powers \[having famously
met everyone from Mussolini to Hitler\], and the content of some of his
speeches that Bose represented some sort of objectionable fascist.

Certainly, Bose’s political beliefs maintained an ardent emphasis upon
both Nationalism and Socialism, and by necessity were sought to be
implemented via a cavalier ‘charismatic authoritarianism’ which had
quite the emphasis upon militaristic uniforms and the like.

But if we are to affix a label to what Bose believed, it is perhaps
unhelpful to think purely in European terms \[even if Bose himself was
both conscious of, and open to adopting elements of European political
thought where necessary\]. “Samyavada” is one of the words most commonly
affixed to Bose’s ideology – and is variously translated as either
“socialism”, or \[to use his own words\] “synthesis” \[here referring to
the aformentioned “Nationalism”/”Socialism” synthesis – perhaps in a
manner not entirely unlike the “National Bolshevik” thinkers of both the
early 20th Century, and post-Soviet Russia today\].

Decolonization struggles and post-colonial politics rarely align
themselves neatly nor evenly to the prejudices and preferences of the
colonizing context.

In any case, to regard Bose as ‘merely’ a useful collaborator for the
Axis Powers (as many Western treatments of him seem to do), is both to
neglect a fascinating and important figure, as well as to forcibly
decontextualize him from his vital role in India’s Decolonization
struggle.

That is to say – many of the actions which some 21st and 20th century
observers find fault were, at the time, entirely understandable and
explicable (indeed – empathizable) elements in the ongoing struggle
against a foreign, implacable, and often quite brutally occupying power.

It is hard to blame him, in that light – and instead, quite easy to
lionize.

In any case, Bose’s early life certainly proved him well-deserving of
adjectives such as “principled”, “brilliant”, and “firebrand”.

But the epithet which has proven itself somewhat immortal – living on
long after his (alleged) fiery death at the age of 48 – is the sobriquet
which he was bestowed with by the troops of the Free India Legion:

“Netaji”

It means “Great Leader” \[“Ji” being an honorific for those of great
stature within the community\].

He certainly was.

जय हिंद
