+++
title = "Quenching Cyrus’ Blood-Thirst – The Tale Of Tomyris Of The Massagetae , A #GangSteppexa0Exegesis"
date = "January 16, 2021"

+++
![‘The Queen Tomyris with Cyrus II’ – Art by
[Mossacannibalis](https://twitter.com/mossacannibalis/status/1337981962410106880)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/epf3t3wu8am-wlq.jpg?w=1024)

This Is #GangSteppe

I had been meaning to write of this occurrence for some time – as it’s
quite a resonant one for various elements of our work, in perhaps
unexpected ways.

Depicted is, as some of you could probably have guessed, the Massagetae
Queen Tomyris, having beheaded the Persian Achaemenid would-be
world-emperor Cyrus. A rather pointed rebuff of the latter’s unwelcome
marriage proposal. Which is, itself, one of those major points of mythic
resonancy with occurrences elsewhere in the Indo-Iranian sphere … as
most prominently encountered via Devi Durga doing largely the same thing
to the demon warlord Mahishasur (another would-be world-conqueror)
following *his* indecent proposal in Her direction.

Now, the history of the Zoroastrian sphere’s relations with the Steppe
is quite a violent one. At the insurgent inception of that faith, it
found itself embroiled in warfare against the Turanians \[and ‘Turan’
here does NOT mean ‘Turkish’ as the term has come to be identified with
in modern usage; but rather, post-Andronovo Indo-Iranid Indo-European
peoples of the area\], who took a pretty dim view of the Zoroastrian’s
religious “reforms” and fought back against their attempt to cast down
The Gods. The Turanic sphere at that time was rather coterminous in
various ways with what we would term the Scythian one in the West – and
it is not coincidental that Herodotus made such a point of emphasizing
the famed religious conservatism of these Indo-Iranic Steppe peoples;
nor that they would therefore take such umbrage with the attempted
undermining of the proper and traditional Indo-European faith by their
southern neighbours. I do not intend to go into a lengthy digression
upon Scythian / Saka etc. religion here – but it is also utterly
uncoincidental tha we find these groups, in Hindu sources, often
referred to as Shaivite worshippers, and in a range of then-contemporary
materials as having prominent Goddess worship likewise.

Perhaps that is, in part, why the Persians had seemingly despised them
so – precisely because they had kept alive the traditions of the
Andronovo forebears; and were a living reminder of just how far,
religiously speaking, the Zoroastrians had fallen. Something to be
stubbed out as a constant uncomfortable reminder of what, actually, was
true. Or, at the very least, a source of ancient animosity upon the
basis of never-quite-forgotten age-old scars of civilizational conflict
between the perhaps BMAC-ized nascent-Zoroastrian proto-Persians and the
Steppe raiders of old.

This sets up a recurrent pattern in Persian empire-building of their
imperial projects pushing out onto the Steppes in a sort of would-be
mythic resonancy with the actions of their forebears – and ‘civilizing’
/ ‘converting’ / ‘breaking’ the Indo-European Steppe peoples. Which has
historically tended to be exactly that – a mythic resonancy, a mythic
recurrency wherein the Zoroastrian-aligned Persians have found the
Steppes to be the place where the wave of their dreams of globe-spanning
conquest has broken and begun to roll back.

Cyrus is one of the first properly recorded occurrences of this,
although I have also written extensively about Darius’ endeavours in
this area as recounted in Herodotus’ Persian Wars – and the rather
delicious encounters the latter emperor had had with the Scythian King
Idanthyrsus.

Following the failure of the former’s attempted overtures of marriage to
the Massagetae Queen Tomyris, Cyrus moved to try and take through force
what he had been unsuccessful in claiming via word and (marriage) vow;
commencing an invasion of the Massagetae’s lands out in modern-day
Central Asia.

This did not go unchallenged, and upon becoming aware of this imperial
expedition, Tomyris sent a messenger basically telling Cyrus to stop
doing what he was doing and be content with ruling his own kingdom. Or
Else. The ‘Or Else’ in question coming via his choice of either going to
meet her forces in three days’ time head on – or refusing these terms
and watching as she proceeded to invade his empire instead. In
summation, it was an invitation to an honourable combat that she was
extending. This caused some consternation within the Persian
war-council, up until Croesus (yes, *that* Croesus, the famously
fabulously wealthy once-king of Lydia) spoke up to offer his counsel.
The previous consensus position had been to, in effect, call Tomyris’
bluff – and allow her to make ready to invade Persia, receive her army,
and hope that defence in depth and the numbers and ramparts that could
be brought to bear against the Steppe Winds might bleed her dry and
enable a subsequent counter-assault back across the border in due
course. But Croesus thought differently. And advised his lord with a far
more aggressive approach – upon a decidedly misogynistic basis no less:
“And besides what I have shown, it were a thing shameful and not to be
borne that Cyrus the son of Cambyses should yield and give ground before
a woman.” \[Herodotus 1.207\]

Now, to their arguable credit, the Persians were quite capable of being
canny adversaries; and when facing the Massagetae they undertook to
utilize their foeman’s own nature against them. Knowing that the Steppe
peoples were both fond of plunder (as, to be sure, was just about every
other army of the ancient world at the time) and a good party … but
*also* were unfamiliar with alcoholic beverages, they laid a trap for
the Massagetae.

A Persian encampment was set up, lavishly appointed and defended only by
a token garrison to give the appearance of being a legitimate target.
This was, predictably, attacked and sacked by the Massagetae under the
leadership of Tomyris’ son Spargapises, with the aforementioned skeleton
resistance slaughtered. And, again predictably, the Massagetae then
proceeded to enjoy the spoils of war which they imagined they had won
through valour or opportunity rather than through Cyrus’ and Croesus’
cunning design.

The Massagetae, as I have aforementioned, were unfamiliar with alcoholic
beverages of the sort frequently enjoyed by more southerly peoples and
apparently instead had a preference for cannabinoids consumed in milk.
We can also probably presume, upon the basis of archaeological evidence
unearthed proximate to their country or in relation to their relatives,
that they would also have smoked cannabis and consumed
psilocybin-bearing mushrooms … but alcohol, it would seem, was not their
cup of tea. A feature plausibly shared with their European-side Scythian
cousins, per Herodotus’ remarks upon the subject. And which I have
previously suggested may render the alcoholic imbibing of various
Indo-European cultures to be a later development and potential
distortion from what had gone before. But I digress.

The point is that this unfamiliarity with alcoholic intoxication was to
count significantly against the Massagetae. For it lead to them becoming
drunk, and passing out in direct consequence. Only to wake up with quite
the sense of regret, as they found themselves to have been surrounded
and overpowered as they slept; and to be significantly less capable
combatants upon waking up heavily hung-over.

Tomyris’ son Spargapises was amongst those taken prisoner by this
ingenious Perisan plot; a situation which caused some consternation for
his great mother. To quote her words as given in Herodotus upon the
subject: “Bloodthirsty Cyrus, be not uplifted by this that you have
done; it is no matter for pride if the fruit of the vine — that fruit
whereof you Persians drink even to madness, so that the wine passing
into your bodies makes evil words to rise in a flood to your lips — has
served you as a drug to master my son withal, by guile and not in fair
fight. Now therefore take this word of good counsel from me: give me
back my son and depart unpunished from this country; it is enough that
you have done despite to a third part of the host of the Massagetae. But
if you will not do this, then I swear by the sun, the lord of the
Massagetae, that for all you are so insatiate of blood, I will give you
your fill thereof.” \[Herodotus 1 212\] It is interesting to note that
the Swearing by the Sun – a broadly known Indo-European custom – is in
radiant evidence here (and the Solar orientation of the Massagetae
religion is earlier attested likewise in Herodotus with the observation
of their offering up a Horse in sacrifice thereto: the ‘swiftest of
animals’ quality that mandates this form of tribute being a direct
resonancy with that we have found within the Vedas as applies the
Asvamedha Rite and Lord Varuna).

The luckless Spargapises, however, had in the mean-time come-to; and
upon realising his circumstances he petitioned his captor, Cyrus
himself, for freedom. Cyrus, perhaps anticipating that he might use
Spargapises as some form of bargaining-tool or envoy with his mother,
ordered his bonds severed. And was then most surprised to find that
Spargapises sought to free himself from bondage in a far more final and
far more powerful sense. Ashamed at having been duped and thence getting
himself and most of his command captured or otherwise subdued through
death, Spargapises killed himself upon the spot. Evidently, for the
Steppe man, freedom was such a paramount that the freedom of death was
preferable to the weight of dishonour or shackles of civility under a
foreign lord in life.

In Tomyris and her countrymen there was aroused the state of utmost fury
– and it is for good reason that Herodotus asserts the conflict which
then ensued to be the fiercest warfare waged by any men that were not
Greeks. It was fought by the Massagetae with the ethos of, as we would
say in more modern times “to the last man, the last bullet”. When they
had exhausted all ranged ammunitions completely, they closed to fight
first with their spears and thence with their daggers. A grievous toll
was wrought, and finally Cyrus himself was slain by Massagetae hands –
along with the majority of the Perisan army that had taken to the field
with him in this, the Massagetae’s own home soil.

At the conclusion of the battle, Tomyris had Cyrus’ body decapitated and
immersed the severed head in a skin that had been filled with human
blood. To quote Herodotus’ iteration of her words to the now-subjugated
opponent: “I live and have conquered thee in fight, and yet by thee am I
ruined, for thou tookest my son with guile; but thus I make good my
threat, and give thee thy fill of blood.” \[variant translation:
“quenched thy thirst for blood”\]
