+++
title = "‘Mother And Motherland Are Higher Than Heaven’ – An Arya Akasha Analysis Of A Beauteousxa0Maxim"
date = "January 26, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/08/b7d77c00d41c918fdab8c01ed2a9e1e2.jpg?w=564)

‘Mother And Motherland Are Higher Than Heaven’ – An Arya Akasha Analysis
Of A Maxim

Today marks Republic Day in India. जय हिंद !

The dual commemorations it is keyed to being the promulgation of India’s
Constitution in 1950, and the declaration by the Indian National
Congress in 1930 of their intent to fight for “Purna Swaraj” – “Full
Independence/Self-Determination”. ‘Full Empowerment’, we may perhaps
say. And you shall see why that flavour of (re-)construction is relevant
shortly.

So with that in mind, it seemed an excellent opportunity to take a look
at one of my favourite Hindu ethical enjoinments:

” जननी जन्मभूमिश्च स्वर्गादपि गरीयसी “

” Janani Janmabhumishcha Swargadapi Gariyasi “

” Mother & Motherland Are Superior Even To Heaven “

A noble sentiment found in some versions of the Ramayana (and variously
attributed to the Rsi Bharadwaj or to Rama Himself); there is some
controversy as to its ultimate origins and sourcing – although to my
mind, the sacred truth contained therein elevates it above impugnment
upon the basis of dispute as to its (human) authorship.

As with many of the best lines of poetry or scripture, it is rendered
further marvelous – to my mind, anyway – when we consider some of the
implications of the Sanskrit word-choices used in its construction.

For example, Janani has at its Sanskrit root, “जन” – a term which also
encompasses within its ambit of meaning, words for “nation”,
“community”, “tribe”. Also, as it happens, from the same
Proto-Indo-European root (Genh) which gives us “Genius”. It has also
entered into modern Hindi in the sense of a “Cause”; and, Maternal
connotations in mind, a Source, as well. A closely related term, जनन, in
Sanskrit not only means Queen, but also “solidarity”, “life”, as well as
that thread of a united-by-causation, in the hereditary sense that we
see in Jana, above.

The “Mother” referred to here, then, is intentionally phrased thus
*precisely because* this shows us that the Mother in question is Nation;
and that Nation, wherein one is expressed \[to reference me some Hannah
Arendt, also\], and from whence one comes, to whom one belongs, is both
Above All, and not entirely coterminous with the concept of the *land*
underpinning same.

Indeed, it is a supernal entity – Whose constituent bearers \[and
somewhat immanentizers\] out here in the material world, the housers of
the small-ish shards of that mighty Prakriti , are Her Children, the
Members of Same.

\[I have also left it intentionally somewhat ambiguous as to which sense
I meant “Cause” in, above – and this is because while it would
ordinarily be understood as “Causation”, the fact is that a “Cause” in
the modern sense of “something which one believes in”, is also *hugely*
relevant here. And, in a veer-y real sense, is also the *causation* of
one’s actions, if it is gen-uinely, truly, dearly held and believed
with/in\]

Now, Bhumi, which stands at the root of the ‘Janmabhumischa’ utilized in
the maxim, is similarly complex. For while in one sense, it can mean the
ground, the territory … in another, broader \[yes, this is an Old Norse
somewhat theological pun\], it can mean the Earth, particularly Earth
Mother; and in a narrower sense, means the Stage, or even a role, a
guise, a part assumed by an actor (Or, in this case, actress); and,
further, a “foundation” upon which to build.

So, in terms of its utilization here, we see ‘territory’, this stage of
the earth, as the grounds upon which the drama of nations and nationhood
is carried out … the role of Mother Nation is also one face worn by the
Goddess in question, that of Mother Earth another, and ‘Mountain
Mother/Mountain Queen’ a linkage between the two \[as I considered at
some length in my 2018 Indian Independence Day article – ‘Bharat Mata
And The Indo-European Deific Of National Identity’\].

Meanwhile, the land, the territory, its topography and terrain, its
essential characterization \[anthropomorphicized, and/or otherwise\],
provides the ‘foundation’ upon which a Nation and its expression are
‘built’, formed, molded, “realized” (in both senses of the term).

Once again, we have the Divine Synthesis of Prakriti & Purusha – the
Bhumi in question interestingly being the *latter* in a certain sense
(and yes, I am aware that I am employing these terms in somewhat
unexpected manner); as it is in my view considerable that the ‘spirit’
of the land entering into and expressing itself thence through the
medium of the People, is a valid perspective and construction ‘going the
other way’. (A sentiment perhaps somewhat parallel in construction to
Adi Shankara’s words in the opening couplets of his Saundarya Lahari
\[‘The Waves of Beauty’\] – “sivah saktya yukto yadi bhavati saktah
prabhavitum / na cedevam devo na khalu kusalah spanditumapi”. Or,
phrased another way – in the absence of this Divine Feminine
Principle/Power/Goddess-of-Cause , even Shiva Himself is unable to
Move/Radiate/Rule; which I mention in part due to the traditional keying
of Shiva to ‘Purusha’ – as we can see, the conception of the Mother
Goddess as acting within the more conventionally defined ‘Purusha’ is
not invalid)

A final element to consider, literally in terms of linguistics is the
utilization of Bhumi to mean “tongue”, or “story” – for, as I noted in
my 2019 piece on Language, Frantz Fanon really was onto something with
his observation that “to speak…means above all to assume a culture, to
support the weight of a civilization.”

Emil Cioran put it slightly differently – “One does not inhabit a
country; one inhabits a language. That is our country, our fatherland –
and no other.”

A Nation, properly construed, is *both* … a territorial body, a country,
a state, *and* all the “cultural” elements, the ‘bringing together’
which constitute the essential *soul* and psyche of its people, indeed
the very fact it has a ‘people’ at all \[rather than, say, ‘tenants’, or
‘tourists’, or others who are just simply passing through\].

And, it is also the case that a language is strongly conditioned by and
flows out of, the mouths of the people who speak it, their situation
geographically and metaphysically. How we construe things is hugely
influential upon what our resultant lexical contents shall be. What we
encounter in the immediate environs around us, is also a big influence
upon how we construe things.

Cioran’s quote is, therefore, not entirely true – as the language flows
also from the context, the ‘fatherland’ \[or, at least, the
civilizational complex\] from whence its bearers are to be found.

It does, however, most definitely continue to support and underpin and
above all \[there’s that phrasing again\] *uphold* the Nation, to
arka-en back to that Fanon quote, in an irreducibly complex cycle of
mutually interleavened growth-and-support.

The People bearing the language, the language bearing the Stories, the
Stories re-immanentizing and re-vitalizing the Nation, the Nation
emanating out the Stories, which help to preserve the language, and all
of the above construing, re-creating, ‘defining’ in many senses, The
People.

The Tongue as ‘stage’ upon which Stories are played out, expressed. (A
situation considerably enhanced via the esoteric linkage of Vak
Saraswati to the Tongue – and likewise for the Queen of Serpents deific
, Sarpa Rajni , Herself a Form of this same Goddess being understood
also in this context of the Empowered Tongue and the supporting, the
expression, the maintenance, the involvement, the pageantry of the
World)

“Myth” as the essential mortar and ‘Mythaloka’ – stage, realm once
again, wherein a Nation *can* exist. Especially, particularly,
supernally. \[And, in case you have forgotten – just because it’s a
“Myth” doesn’t mean it’s not “true”. It simply means that what underpins
its resonance is a *different kind* of true. A far *deepa* kind of
“real” , often that shall be around *long after* a lot of the more
‘mundanely real’ concepts are ash and archaeology. See my recent work
upon the true meaning of ‘Myth’ – ‘On The Correct Understanding Of Myth,
Mythos, And Mythology’\]

Small wonder, then, that the Macaulays of this world realized that you
could seriously attempt to ‘erase’ a people largely through erasing
their contact and context with their own language, culture, heritage in
those spheres – and thence do within a few generations what an invading
army might take hundreds of years to fail at.

Such is the power of language.

Although this also takes us to our conclusion.

Language, as I have briefly talked about in some of my previous efforts,
is Supreme. Vak is correlate with Rta, as an in-universe expression,
thereof. Vak, as Originator of, and transcendentally *above*, not just
‘nations’ down here on Earth, but the universe entire and at large …
well, this therefore means that the Mountain Peak of Parvati-Devi,
ascends up and through and beyond Svarga-Loka.  
  
Above the Heavens.  
  
For there Reigns Aditi. Limitless.

Supreme is Devi above all !

Jai Mata Di!

❤
