+++
title = "On Adi sha~Nkara’s theism"
date = "2019-07-25"

+++
Ghora: My conclusion (in short):

1\. shaMkara had no qualms with either shiva or viSNu being kAryabrahman
or a saguNa symbol of the Atman he held as the highest reality. He was
not your tear-jerking bhakta so favoured by the sectarian devotees of
this or that deity. He didn’t particularly care about this issue. In the
entire analysis I have restricted myself to quoting works which are
unanimously held to be authored by him. No stotras, not even his
independent works. His BSB, BGB &
UpBs(brahmasutrabhAShya,bhagavadgItAbhAShya, upaniShad bhAShyas) That’s
all

2\. He may not have been comfortable with the existing, dominant shaiva
sects of his time (pAshupatam or caturbhagini worship). In this light,
please do not that there is an extremely famous bauddha mantra which
invoked protection against various “dangerous” beings, including the
caturbhaginis.

3\. shaMkara was most likely not exposed to the mild siddhAnta form (I
have issues with his dating but this is a different story)  
Me: Why do you think so about (3)?

Ghora: Forgot to send u the main portion: Here are all the facts abt
shaMkara’s theism:

1\. shaMkara had a very dry conception of “brahman”, whom he clearly
distinguishes from viSNu by the use of an interesting simile in the BSB.

2\. There is the high possibility that he quotes a mantra from the
kaivalyopaniSat at the start of his aitareyopaniSadbhASya. As you know,
the kaivalyopaniSat is unabashedly shaiva In orientation.

3\. He definitely quotes the shvetashvataropaniSat in his BSB; which you
also know that gives a valid basis for shiva being parabrahman.

4\. In his bhASya on kenopaniSat, where umA haimavatI “schools” indra &
others, how does he gloss on the shruti’s description of umA
devI—“bahushobhamAnAm umAM haimavatIm”. That gloss itself is very
telling.

There are two bhASyas on kena. But still, both are telling. In one, he
simply says that she is rudrapatnI who is brahmavidyA herself. In the
other, he says that she is ever in contact with the sarvajña īśvara.

5\. It is true that while he rejects all systems “outside” the veda:
yoga, sAMkhyA, pāśupata & pāñcarātra, his treatment of pāñcarātra seems
to be the kindest, where he says that he does not condemn their rituals
but only their faulty metaphysics.

6\. In his gItAbhASya, he gives vinAyakas, saptamAtRkas & caturbhaginis
as examples of bhUtas. He doesn’t say that one shouldn’t worship them
but he gives bhUtas as an example of tAmasika worship. Now points 5 & 6
have been milked for all it is worth by SVs without appreciating the
context or appreciating the weight of points 1-4.

Me : Yes

Ghora: 3 is because the siddhAnta was far from well-known in the
600s/700s (I’m inclined to date earlier tbf)…Even around the 600s
(appar), it was still a fledgling movement with pAshupatas possibly
still being the dominant group  
Ghora: The four main maThas were built in places in eras when the
siddhAnta simply was not present there….

His dwelling in kAnchi & kAshmIra are generally considered hagiographic
excesses

My own note: The simile in question from the brahmasutrabhAShya is ईदृशं
चात्र ब्रह्मण उपास्यत्वं यतः प्रतीकेषु तत्दृष्ट्याध्यारोपणं प्रतिमादिषु
इव विष्ण्वादीनाम्।(īdṛśaṃ cātra brahmaṇa upāsyatvaṃ yataḥ pratīkeṣu
tatdṛṣṭyādhyāropaṇaṃ pratimādiṣu iva viṣṇvādīnām। For those who can’t
read devanAgarI).
