+++
title = "An Indo-European Palexa0Horseman"
date = "May 14, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/60122789_10161754872550574_1015139722550312960_n.jpg?w=647)

\[Author’s Note: Following on from the success of the Indo-European
Horsemen of the Apocalypse article we ran earlier this week, it seemed
only apt to take a brief closer look at the mytholinguistics of a ‘Pale
Horseman’. Particularly the ‘Pale’ bit. This is not to directly infer
that the figure from the Book of Revelation is a deliberate
Indo-European incorporation – but simply to look at a few of the
resonancies of both our mythology and our linguistics that this
evocative personage conjures up. \[-C.A.R.\] \]  
  
“Death And Conflagration” – Albert Chmielowski, \~1870.

Now *there’s* a “Pale Horseman” – also, as a point of interest, there
are at least three “Pel”/”Pelh” roots in Proto-Indo-European, subtly (or
not even at all) differing in prospective reconstructive pronunciation.

One is, entirely unsurprisingly, whence we get our modern word “Pale”
from – and in addition to its more ‘familiar’ meaning of a whiteness,
refers to pallor, a situation of looking a bit .. corpselike. In fact,
chromatologically, we would be speaking also of a certain sort of *grey*
\[compare Sanskrit: “Palita”\], such as that of a funerary shroud. (I
have previously made the case that this ties also to the colouration of
Clouds and to Mountains, given its relative prominence in particular
theonymic descriptors, also);

Another, refers to a covering – a skin, a hide, a cloth, or even, in
extension, a protective element such as a hide-shield. You can see it in
“Pelt”, and in “Pall”, as well as far more archaic terms such as
“Pallas” \[that epithet of Athena, referring to Her having a protective
garment made out of the flayed skin of a fallen foe\].

There are two such ‘coverings’, or cloaks, on show in this piece – the
first being the ‘pale’ coloured one which swathes the Horseman Himself;
the second, the pall of smoke or dusk which pours out from His burning
brand across the horizon. \[It is relevant here, also to note our
ongoing work with the “Kel-” particle of Proto-Indo-European, and its
figurative rendering as a “Veil”, whence how we get it meaning both
“Night’ and “Death” in its subsequent Sanskrit formulation of “Kaal” …
it, too, refers to a “covering”, and where the passage beyond something
is perhaps uncertain, concealed, a Hall, a Hole, a Hell \[these are all
from the same “Kel” particle\] wherein lies the Place of the Dead\].

A third, is “Pelh” in the sense of an approach … and, as refinements
would go, a strike, a drive, a charge, a thrust. \[also, funnily enough,
whence the modern English ‘interpolate’\] ; a term of clear relevancy
for an inexorably oncoming figure on horseback.

Although here, he seems in no heightened state of urgency. The brand he
bears, burns slowly, but burns complete. I must confess, when first
behelding this mighty image, I initially presumed it must have been a
fairly modern piece – the outward and overt resemblance to the oil-fires
lit by retreating Iraqi forces from Kuwait during the First Gulf War, is
remarkable. Yet it presages those events by more than a hundred years!

A situation perhaps familiar to those who have listened to Holst’s Mars,
and thought it most appropriate for World War One, only to find out that
Holst himself appears to have composed it some months before the War
began \[and, in one of those dreadful muso-historical ironies, was
apparently writing Venus “The Bringer Of Peace” at the time that Europe
conflagrated itself from those powder-keg sparks in the Balkans\].
