+++
title = "The Indomitable Eye In The Sky – ‘Athena’ Unit Patch For US NRO Spy Satellitexa0Launch"
date = "May 8, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/nrol-79_mission_patch.png?w=733)

It is FRIDAY – Devi’s Day. And therefore, a rather excellent unit patch
by way of devotional (a)art(i). It belongs to another US National
Reconnaissance Office spy satellite launch – the aptly named “INTRUDER”
naval surveillance platform, the same series as the “ODIN” launch whose
blazon I wrote about earlier.

Now, I felt this insignia deserved a writeup not simply because it is a
pretty cool rendition of Athena, nor even due to the clear resonancy
between the common understanding of Athena as ‘Goddess of Wisdom’ And
Warfare and the role of intelligence/surveillance for warmaking.

But because various of the symbolic elements of this blazon actually
have a *deeper* resonancy that enables a more comprehensive elucidation
of the iconography and mythic saliency of Athena.

We shall start with a suitably excellent excerpt from The Iliad:

“So spake he in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him, and made his limbs
light, his feet and his hands above; and she drew near to his side and
spake to him winged words: “Be of good courage now, Diomedes, to fight
against the Trojans, for in thy breast have I put the might of thy
father, the dauntless might, such as the horseman Tydeus, wielder of the
shield, was wont to have. And the mist moreover have I taken from thine
eyes that afore was upon them, to the end that thou mayest well discern
both god and man.”

This is Diomedes \[whose name we might perhaps translate as ‘Divinely
Guided’\] being granted the ‘Menos’
\[‘insight’/’inspiration’/’empowerment’\] by His Patron Goddess – and
thus gaining the ability to not only fight amazingly well against the
Trojans … but even to make war upon certain of the other Gods
Themselves! That is what is meant by having the ‘mist’ lifted from his
eyes so that he might see these figures.

Indeed, not even Ares is safe!

Pretty apt figurative resemblance for a spy satellite, you would have to
say. Lifting the ‘fog of war’ for accurate striking against any such
target as may be necessary. Regardless of how well it might otherwise so
happen to conceal.

And doing so via that ‘communication’ from On High, that impartment of
‘guidance’ or ‘wisdom’ – ‘Menos’, and its not unrelated Ancient Greek
‘Metis’ being most relevant here.

As, of course, is ‘Minerva’ – whence the Latin language of the motto
‘Victoriam Per Intelligetiam’ also refers.

However, there is a rather more immediate eye-conographic element which
demands elucidation, and that is the Eyes.

Now, the Eyes of Athena are one of Her most distinctive features, and
yet perhaps partially due to the pallidity of how we tend to imagine
Classical sculptuary today – probably one of the lesser envisaged ones
in the mind’s eye of many. Except when we think of the Owl that is so
emblematic both of Her and Her Wisdom and of Athens … and that is no
accident.

Athena is hailed as ‘Glaukopis’ – She of the Shining Eyes, Grey-Eyed,
and resonant also with the ‘Blazing-Eyed’ we find in various Sanskrit,
as well as Old Norse theonymics. \[As a side-point, in the course of the
Manyu article – MahaShivRatri and the MythoLinguistics of War – I
demonstrated that a ‘Third Eye’ concept also exists in ancient Greek
mythoreligion, veer-y strongly co-expressing what we find in the more
frequently encountered Hindu\]

An Owl, meanwhile, of the Athenian variety – is ‘Glaux’. And these terms
are clearly interrelated. ‘Glaukos’, the Greek term that is coterminous
somewhat to both – refers to that aforementioned distinctive
blue-grey-green colour which also possesses a radiant lustre of supernal
empowerment thereto.

Now, if we look at this fine portrait of Athena, we observe that yes
indeed, one Eye thereupon is of an artist’s impression of such a colour
… whilst the other is the more figurative rendition thereof – as it is
an Owl’s Eye. Thus conveying both the colouration and characterization
of the Eyes of Athena. And therefore, the supreme potency of insight and
true-seeing that this quite naturally entails.

The Owl is the supreme predator of the Darkened Sky, and so makes a
seriously logical sense when we are speaking of the Great Eye(s) in the
Ink-Dark Night-Time \[‘Kaal’\] Space above the Earth and even
Atmosphere. This is also, in the comparative Indo-European mythography
where we shall often find the Great Goddess, directly amidst the supreme
wisdom of the conceptual sphere \[the ‘Astral’, in another sense – also
referred to as ‘The Waters’\]

It is therefore eminently appropriate for the Goddess Whose Associates
Include The Owl, to be a symbolic touch-stone for a spy satellite. And
not least due to the manner in which Hegel’s famed reference to the Owl
in question observed that there were some truths that could only really
be seen in darkness. \[Albeit with the sight-in-darkness of such a
surveillance platform being geared and keyed toward ‘foresight’ rather
than ‘hindsight’, as Hegel had more directly meant it.\]

There is one final element that I shall consider here, as it pertains
subtly yet directly to these spy satellites and their intended mission.
There is much more that can and should be said upon the iconography and
mythological saliency of Athena – and my earlier works do that, so I
shall not repeat most of it here.

But the Goddess was well-known for Her close association to a particular
city, and due to the nature also of that city it seems quite clear that
the patron of *the* eminent thalassocratic power of the ancient world
with its storied navy … would be additionally pretty appropriate for
what is operationally a *Naval* reconnaissance asset.

Further, the role of Athena as Protector \[hence the ‘Gorgoneion
device’\] of said polity (and, for that matter, particular favoured
heroes) plays into this as well. As that is what the informational flows
provided by these satellites are there for. Enabling the vessels of the
fleet and other such installations and personnel to operate with
confidence ‘neath the Aegis thereof. \[I am getting in multiple shades
and flavours of referencing there – as the original Aegis of Athena is
the flayed hide of a fallen foe, worn as a protective garment; however
it has acquired a modern and more colloquial meaning of a ‘protective
umbrella’ or sphere/span of attention … whence its much more recent
application as a term in US Navy utilization, to refer to the missile
command system of its fleet. A ‘Spear’, perhaps, of a contemporary sort
of form.\]

So, there you have it. A brief synopsis of some of the relevant
conceptry and iconography of Athena, and why it is a particularly
well-chosen emblem for an American military reconnaissance/surveillance
satellite.
