+++
title = "Soma Kvasir – The Eddic-Vedic Myth Of The Meath ofxa0Poetry"
date = "May 29, 2020"

+++


![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/64784_1507106762900775_2841739811495470066_n.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/dyejltuxcaen_yx-1.jpg)

Every so often, we happen across some element that is clearly the same
thing across two (or more) Indo-European cultures; and which, regardless
of the otherwise impressive span of distance between them (whether
distance of time, or mere geography), even a lay-person can immediately
grasp that we are talking about the same concept.

Unfortunately, this can be something of a double-edged sword. Since it
is so clearly and self-evidently similar, sustained and in-depth
examination as to the precise characteristics of the coterminity – *how*
it is similar, and how deep the co-identicative elements truly go – can
occasionally be forgotten about. People may just leave it and move on to
more challenging areas, taking as read what has already been in front of
them as a ‘problem already solved’.

And this creates a further issue when we are dealing with elements from
various less perfectly attested Indo-European mytho-religious spheres,
because there are often ‘gaps’ in our comprehension of these that can
really only be filled in with some modicum of completeness via a
properly expansive and extrusive comparative approach.

One of these, is the undeniable relationship between Vedic/Hindu Soma,
and the Nordic/Germanic Mead of Poetry.

Now, before we get into the perhaps surprising areas in which the #NAS
mytholinguistic approach has helped to fill in the vessels in question,
we shall first take a brief look at each of these in their native
context. Before making the constellation of connectivity between them,
and seeing what underlying truths shall emerge from this churning. A
process which I believe, shall demonstrate that Snorri Sturluson, when
penning his Skaldskaparmal, was actually being far more authentic – and
drawing from a far deeper well – of Indo-European scripture and lore
than many would otherwise presume to be the case. And, alongside this,
that certain of the Hindu beliefs around Soma/Amrit that are often
thought to be much later developments … are actually also, themselves,
far older in initial origins and inspiration.

First, the Mead of Poetry, as described to us in the aforementioned
Skaldskaparmal.

This has its origins as the result of a meeting between two groups of
Gods – the Aesir and the Vanir – at which both spat into a vat, the
congealed product of which was a personified figure named Kvasir. This
Kvasir is renowned for his sagacious wisdom … which apparently does not
extend to not taking at face value the honeyed words of Nordic dwarves –
two of whom killed him, and drained his blood into another vessel named
Odrerir, as well as two further named Bodn and Son, in order to
manufacture an elixer capable of conferring upon its quaffer the potency
of wisdom and eloquency previously possessed by Kvasir. When somebody
got suspicious as to Kvasir’s whereabouts, the dwarves calmly explained
that Kvasir was dead, having choked upon his own intellect – having been
literally too smart for his own good.

The dwarves then proceed to kill twice more – first Gillingr, and thence
his wife (via drowning, and a rock respectively); before the son of
Gillingr, Suttungr catches up with them. He places the two dwarves out
upon an area of raised sea-floor that shall be covered at high tide
(which, in a way, is contrapasso – as it is a rock and drowning that
shall kill them); before relenting from his course following their
begging for their lives and offering him the Mead of Poetry made of
Kvasir that they have hoarded for themselves.

Suttungr places his newfound treasure (of wisdom), in a secure location
known as Hnitbjorg, under the guardianship of his daughter, Gunnlod.
And there it would perhaps have stayed if not – as with so many things –
for the Great God Odin.

Via mechanism of infiltration, involving the self-sacrifice of nine
Thralls and the inconveniencing of their former master, Baugi,
Suttungr’s brother – Odin – gains a promise of being granted access to
the Mead. Which is then fulfilled against the wishes of just about
everybody else involved, following His turning of brother against
brother and enlisting the assistance of Baugi armed with an
augur-drillto bore into the Hnitbjorg where the Mead has been secreted
away.

Odin proceeds to transform into a snake and makes His way into the
Hnitbjorg down through the path laid out for Him by Baugi, and
encounters Gunnlod, the custodian of the treasure; seduces Her, and then
after three nights of such, is given the three vessels of which He
drinks in their entirety, before turning into an eagle – and flies off
to make His escape, although not without a drop of the precious Mead
falling to earth , afore it could be delivered unto The Gods.

There, it is held under Odin’s power and aegis – to be dispensed also to
particular human figures who are deserving, so that they might become
sages and poets of great, particular, and perspicacious renown and
ability.

The Soma, meanwhile, has a rather more complex and multifaceted series
of tales to it – attested in quite an extensive array of Vedic hymnals
and subsequent scripture and custom. We shall not seek to
comprehensively address these here; only to provide those elements which
form a cohesive set of narrative arcs of direct comparative value to the
above-aforementioned Skaldskaparmal account.

The first of these concerns the obtainment of the Amrit, the Elixir of
Immortality \[literally same root – A’Mrit, Non-Death\] following the
Samudra Manthan \[‘Churning of the Ocean of Milk’\] – which, like the
circumstances that produced Kvasir, features two groups coming together
and engaging in a co-operative exercise which results in a miraculous
liquid … that is promptly made off with by a malevolent interloper.
Except where there are a pair of dwarves in the Nordic version of the
story – in the Hindu iterations, there is at least initially only one:
the demon Svarbhanu. Although I say ‘initially’, as the next stage in
the story has Svarbhanubeing decapitated by Vishnu – with the two
resultant portions of his body becoming two separate beings due to their
having already drunken of the Amrit by the time that this fate arrives.

Now, it should be noted that there are an array of elements inherent in
the Samudra Manthan incident which do not strictly align with the
development of the Kvasir in the Old Norse account; and there are a
number of potential reasons for that which we may, perhaps, delve into
at another time. But suffice to say, there is sufficient coterminity
between the two accounts for there to be probative value in the
mentioning of it here. Particularly as it is only one portion of the
overarching narrative.

Also, lest there be any confusion – Soma and Amrit are frequently held
to be coterminous, although the specific sense of each is often a little
different in terms of meaning. Amrit referring most importantly to one
quality of the Elixir in question (and it is interesting to note that
some Hindu authorities are quick to point out that the proper
interpretation of the ‘Amrit’ in question is actually congealed wisdom
and spiritual empowerment – as *that* is what provisions immortality, or
is itself undying); whereas Soma represents the more general name – and
is also more frequently to be found in the hands of those whose business
is the dispensing *of* death, rather than merely seeking to dispense
with death entirely. Curiously, there is potentially a rather strong
etymological coterminity between ‘Soma’ and ‘Kvasir’ also – ‘kvass’
effectively means to press, squeeze, crush; while ‘Soma’ in its archaic
Indo-Iranian predicate of ‘sau-ma’, directly means the same thing. As we
shall see – this is not the only area wherein a clear functional cognate
is expressed, despite being found in different terms in their respective
languages of recording.

The next portion of the comparison is simpler, yet more figurative. For
at this stage in the myth, it is evident that there are a number of
complimentary elements which come together in constellation to almost …
dance around the heart of the truth of the matter. In some Hymnals, we
have Indra visiting the dwelling of Tvastr, to quaff three vessels of
the Soma. In other Hymnals, we have Indra availed by the Falcon Shyena
Who brings the Soma to Him. In still other hymnals we have Saraswati
pointedly identified as playing a key role in the Soma’s derivation.
Upon a surface examination, it might all seem a disparate and discordant
mess. Yet if you know what you are doing with the various
correspondences of Vedic mythology – the aforementioned fundamental
unity nevertheless cannot help but emerge. Or you can take the short-cut
offered via the Nordic interpretation – wherein, perhaps somewhat
ironically, all of these guises and facings are dispensed with, and we
instead have Odin … the God Who is so often in Disguise, simply
presented as Himself to our understanding.

Here are the facts. Shyena is Agni, and Agni is Rudra-Shiva – the Sky
Father \[see, for example, RV II 1 6; or, for that matter, AV XIII 4;
and note also the prominent symbolic association of Raptors with the Sky
Father and linkage to the Heavens – for example, the classical
Apotheosis\]. Soumya / Soma Deva is also often regarded as being Shiva.
Tvastr, too, has strong connexion to the Sky Father – although for more
details upon that, you shall have to await a forthcoming article upon
the subject. \[There is an unmistakable series of identifications of
Soma with the Sky Father to be found in SV VI 2 II, as well – which also
includes the employment of the “Red Bull” iconography symbolic of the
Sky Father … that may perhaps recall an entirely more modern beverage
some imbibe in order to improve mental and physical acuity and ascend
via its having “given you wings”.\]

What I am saying, to put it succinctly – is that where the Nordic
account has Odin bringing the Mead of Poetry to the Gods in the form of
an Eagle … in the Vedic account, we have Shiva, in various forms, doing
much the same thing. Including, funnily enough, liberating it from a
“mountain” while in Falcon form \[RV I 93 6\]. This avian symbolism
being considerably furthered in the famed Agnicayana rite – wherein an
immense altar is constructed in the shape of the aforementioned Fire
Raptor, and Roudran rites (prominently featuring the number three –
three arrows in the quiver, three perambulations pouring water) are
performed to appease Rudra Who is to be found there, and to ask Him to
bless the person for whom the ritual has been conducted with His boon.

If you were looking at it in constellation with the Nordic account – you
would straightaway realize what was happening. Odin as Eagle brought the
Mead of Poetry, and it is under His Charge to dispense to worthy humans
as He sees fit. Making them, we might say in our Vedic terms – a Rsi, a
Sage, a Brahmin \[to reference me the DeviSukta, RV X 125\].

Here, Rudra \[well known to be the same deity as Odin\] is also to be
found as Eagle, bringing the Soma and allowing its benefits to accrue to
those worthies who have properly propitiated the Great God. It is, you
might say, an act of immanentization via mythic resonancy and Eliadian
Eternal Recurrence.

However, in order to more properly appreciate what is happening here,
and just how well it is that this aligns with the Nordic account, we
must rewind somewhat in terms of the latter. To where the Mead of Poetry
is to be found.

In theSkaldskaparmal, it is hidden in Hnitbjorg– the Clashing Rocks.
Or, if you like, the Pressing Stones. Some more modern interpreters of
the myth have simply taken this as a rather direct reference to the
notion of a magical mountain which can open and close in order to hide a
most vital treasure within it. And perhaps this is how it was indeed
recalled by Sturluson’s day. There is certainly that aforementioned
Vedic attestation for Shyena liberating the Soma from a Mountain to be
taken into consideration. And, for good measure, various RigVedic
Hymnals in which Brihaspati \[Galdrfodr, we would perhaps say in Old
Norse\] ventures into a Mountain in order to claim precious liquid
wealth.

Except ‘Pressing Stones’ (or ‘Clashing Rocks’) are exactly what we would
perhaps expect to find if we were endeavouring to crush a certain plant
in order to obtain its juice. ‘Kvasir’, remember? And as it happens,
this is a well-known element in the preparation of the Vedic Soma – the
application of the “Press-Stones”.

The notion of the Hnitbjorg as being ‘merely’ a magical mountain – has
indeed guarded quite the treasure within it. The fact that it is no
literal mountain at all – but rather the recollection of just exactly
what we find directly and repeatedly attested for us in the Vedic Hymns.
Indeed, RV X 94 is directly addressed *to* the Press Stones – and makes
repeated references therein to ‘ten workers’, and the like. Perhaps the
nine thralls encountered by Odin as Bolverker (which makes ten –
especially as Odin then proceeds to do their work), who are then
presented with a most miraculous stone to be used for the sharpening of
the instruments which cut and harvest plants, are a further recollection
of this.

Yet it is the next swathe of our narrative arc wherein I found myself to
be genuinely shocked by unexpected and unlooked for correspondency.

We shall switch back to the parallel (if abbreviated in many respects)
accounting of Odin’s obtaining of the Mead of Poetry to be found in the
Havamal:

“Gunnlod gave me from the golden throne  
a drink of the precious mead;  
a poor reward I let her have in return,  
for her open-heartedness,  
for her heavy spirit.”

This is, as you may recall, the instance wherein Odin spends three
nights with Gunnlod

And then we shall dance over to the Shukla Yajurveda \[Book XIX\]:

“11 When, a delighted boy, I bruised my mother as I sucked her breast,  
Free from my debt, O Agni, I become thereby. My parents are by me
unharmed.  
United are ye all: with bliss unite me. Parted are ye, keep me apart
from evil.  
12 The Asvins, the Physicians, Gods, stretched out the healing
sacrifice,  
Sarasvatî with speech was a Physician, all with heroic powers investing
Indra.  
13 Symbols of Dîkshâ are grass buds, of Prâyanîya sprouts of corn,  
Of Soma-purchasing fried grains are symbols, Soma-shoots and meath.  
14 Âtithya’s sign is Mâsara, the Gharma’s symbol Nagnahu.  
Three nights with Surâ poured, this is the symbol of the Upasads.  
15 Emblem of purchased Soma is Parisrut, foaming drink effused:  
Indra’s balm milked for Indra by the Asvins and Sarasvatî.  
16 The Sacrificer’s seat is the throne’s symbol, the jar containing Surâ
of the Altar.  
The mid-space is the northern Altar’s symbol: the cloth for filtering is
the physician.  
17 Altar by Altar is produced, power, holy grass by holy grass.  
The stake is by the stake obtained, by Agni Agni carried forth.  
18 The Asvins are the Soma store, Sarasvatî the sacred hearth.  
For Indra formed is Indra s seat, the Matrons’ Hall, the house-lord’s
fire.”

Now there is much that can and should be said about the exegesis of
these lines – however I shall restrict myself only to pointing out the
more important direct correspondences with the Nordic equivalent
verses.

“\[After Three Nights\] Gunnlod gave me from the golden throne a drink
of the precious mead;” and what do we see in the Vedic text
aforementioned ?

Much the same. There is a Throne, where the vessel containing the
bright/golden liquid is to be found. There is a rather otherworldly
female figure acting as the custodian thereof (and, I would argue, with
reference to certain other scriptural materials, the ’empowerer’ and
‘invester’ thereof and also therewith\]. There is a period of three
nights’ duration for the pouring forth, the preparation and the
consumption of the elixir.

There is also a most surprising further point of coterminity – the name
of Gunnlod, with the Sanskrit term Upasads. The former, effectively
means ‘Invitation to Battle’. The latter, has the habitual complexity of
many a Sanskrit term, but has the sense of an ‘approach’; which includes
drawing near for piety or the dispensation of wisdom \[this is also how
we get ‘Upanishad’\], but also quite specifically – warfare, sieging,
marching against, assault. There is no doubt something rather amusing in
the manner in which, if I am right, a term which is linked to “Wisdom”
and “Piety” in Sanskrit (inter alia), has become a much more pointed and
less-multi-faceted “Warfare” reference in the Old Norse iteration of the
rite and scripture. In any case, the potential saliency for Upasads in
this verse of the Soma preparatory rite, is likely itself also
intentionally including the bellicose (as well as the bella) connotation
– for as we have repeatedly seen, the usage of Soma amongst the Aryans
was not only for sages to engage in acts of true-seeing and eloquent
composition … but for warriors going to war against otherwise unwinnable
odd.

However, the actual correlate for Gunnlod, particularly in terms of the
role in the story – is not simply to be found in a single word of
Sanskrit. But rather, in the aforementioned functional role(s) of
Saraswati in both the rite, as well as the broader universe, broader
realm of myth from whence it descends.

Now, what is Gunnlod to Odin? Well, for a brief period, His lover.
Saraswati, in a RigVedic context particularly, as Vak – is what to
Rudra-Shiva-Brihaspati? His Consort. And what do we find Vak declaring
within the famed DeviSukta \[RV X 125\] ? Well, several rather important
points for our purposes. Three of them, in fact.

“I make the man I love exceeding mighty, make him a sage, a Ṛṣi, and a
Brahmin.” – or, phrased another way, She empowers Her Consort with the
might of a poet, a sage (a pattern which is repeated in RV X 71 4,
wherein Vak empowering a Vedic Sage is described as “She \[hath\] shown
her beauty as a fond well-dressed woman to her husband.”)

“I bend the bow for Rudra that his arrow may strike and slay the hater
of devotion.”, along with “I cherish and sustain high-swelling Soma, and
Tvaṣṭar” – i.e., a martial empowerment for Her Consort (interestingly,
potentially via sound, as well; the ‘Humkara’ of a twanging bow-string,
has resonancy here\], along with an emotionally attached and
‘sustaining’ one which is specifically keyed to two aforementioned
theonyms applicable to Shiva, and which are also irreducibly linked to
the flow of Soma (thus presumably also explaining the next line, wherein
Vak effectively declares that She is what makes the operation of the
liquid rite under our sustained discussion actually produce its
desired-for results)

“I rouse and order battle for the people” – or, phrased slightly
differently … an “Invitation to Battle”, you might say.

There are further elements that can be said about all of this, including
the strong connexion of Devi to ‘The Waters’ which act as a liminal for
the fringes of the universe, beyond which is to be found the power of
Brahman – and which would therefore suggest that Soma as an elixer is a
distilled and congealed imbibable sliver and portal of that \[which
links well into the broader Shakta metaphysics and cosmology that I have
so often extolled earlier\]; yet for now it is, perhaps, enough to note
thatthis sudden revelation that the female custodian and empowerer of
the Soma/Meath of Poetry is in fact Shiva-Odin-Rudra’s consort provides
new light upon the meaning of a certain verse of the Havamal, aptly
enough numbered 108 in the Bellows translation:

“Hardly, methinks, \| would I home have come,  
And left the giants’ land,  
Had not Gunnloth helped me, \| the maiden good,  
Whose arms about me had been.”

In any case, there is one final element to our narrative arc, before we
move to some concluding remarks – and that concerns the transmission of
the Soma to the Gods. This occurs in a number of forms, contingent upon
the circumstances, and we have already parsed the two major ones – the
Three Vessels held in the possession of Tvastr, and the direct delivery
via the Falcon Shyena. Both of these have easy coterminity with the
later Nordic account; however, as applies the latter means of
conveyance, there is one perhaps surprising further overlap.

The largest gathering of people upon this Earth, is the Kumbh Mela
observance celebrated every three years in a processional cycle of four
sites (one at the confluence of the three holiest rivers, three at one
river each). A full accounting of the significance and meaning of
various aspects of the Kumbh Mela is well beyond the scope of this
piece; so we shall instead satisfy ourselves (for the moment) by noting
that what is celebrated here … is the falling to Earth of precious drops
of the Amrit with which we began the Hindu section of this piece,
en-route to its delivery to The Gods. This has some resonancy with the
portion of the Mead of Poetry spilled by Odin as He flies away to
Asgard, its would-be possessor in hot aerial pursuit; although it must
be noted that whereas the spillage which occurs in the Nordic tale is
held to be responsible for poor verses (purple prose, perhaps), no such
negative connotation has accrued to the accidental discharge of the
Amrit. I mention this occasion not only due to its potentially aligning
another section of the ‘narrative arc’ of the underlying Indo-European
myth of the Meath – but also because it is, in another way, reflective
of what has happened with Sturluson’s account of proceedings.

Various people will tell you that the Kumbh Mela is some sort of
relatively recent interpolation, and that it is based on
little-to-nothing other than a temporal need for such a gathering. That
is to say – that it has no archaic mythic underpinning nor saliency. And
yet, if I am correct in my alignment of tales, it is alternatively
possible that what we find encoded in the Kumbh Mela’s reason for
convening … is the same portion of the archaic Indo-European myth and
understanding that both the Soma and the Mead of Poetry accountings are
based upon.

In other words, it is something irreducibly ancient, that has
nevertheless kept on going and found more recent preservation, in such a
manner as to be presumed to be rather dubious in its authenticity.

Which is what I mean when I suggest that it might be somewhat
‘reflective’ of at least some of Sturluson’s writing in these areas.
After all, while it is understandable to look seriously sideways at some
of his contribution – what we have hopefully demonstrated within the
span of this piece, is that there are too many equivalencies, too many
*direct* and yet *hidden* co-expressive features, for the salient
details of the story to have been wrought by Sturluson’s own hand. That
these linkages are neither a coincidentalaccident; nor merely two
vastly disparate and dysjointed remembrances that just so happen to
inadvertently coincide amidst two genetically and linguistically
‘cousin’ peoples scattered across two and a half thousand years or
more.

Instead, it seems to me quite likely that what Snorri Sturluson played
his part in preserving, via his accounts in both the Skaldskaparmal and
Havamal, is a summarized synopsis of a ritual (or rituals) formula of
basically the same form, concept, and function of rites as those which
have come down to us in the Vedas in this area. It must have been pretty
seriously redacted, and pared back, of course – perhaps intentionally,
perhaps not – but nevertheless it is still eminently recognizable to us,
here today, for what it is. If we know where and how to look.

There are further elements within the Skaldskaparmal to do with the Mead
of Poetry which can and should be subjected to sustained #NAS
mytholinguistic analysis (particularly focusing upon the ‘functional’
elements of the elixir); and in a further, future piece which I have
already begun the research for – I hope to do just that.

But for now, ’tis but a taste.
