+++
title = "The Indo-European Horsemen Of Thexa0Apocalypse"
date = "May 13, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/60174368_10161732170715574_2088912015048310784_o.jpg?w=1024)

\[Author’s Note: We are, of course, aware that the Book of Revelation is
not an Indo-European scriptural source. However, as can be seen in this
fine art-work – this does not stop it from consciously drawing upon a
veer-y Indo-European set of concepts. With that in mind, it seemed
appropriate to pen a commentary bringing together several elements from
our previous work (chiefly GHOST DIVISION) to help explore these.
\[-C.A.R.\] \]  
  
The Arrival of #GangSTEPPE , by Viktor Vasnetsov (1887).

I’m … only semi-joking, here – it is not at all coincidental that the
depiction of the First Horseman so closely resembles that of an
‘Eastern’ Horse-Archer.

Not least as there’s a pretty compelling argument for this being
intentional symbology deployed in the Apocalypse of John *anyway* about
the White Horseman – pertaining perhaps to the Parthians, those
much-feared foes of the Roman Empire who would bring about the ruin of
so many Imperators \[on a complete side-note, this is why it has always
amused me, when some Americans vaingloriously think of themselves as
“The New Roman Empire”, with “Pax Americana”, flowing and following on
from Britain, one supposes, as Thalassocratic Athens. As wars in
Iraq/Mesopotamia .. tended not to go very well for the Romans … But
again, I digress\]

Yet it goes *much* further than that. Looking out over the annals of
Indo-European history, and thence further into the Realms of Myth \[from
whence the Indo-European Ancestors have an interesting habit of riding
upon the ways of the wind *back out from again* into the
mundus-mundanus, at least temporarily, and from time to Time\] – we see
that there is an intrinsic linkage between quite an array of
Indo-European bello-social activity, and turning up on horseback, in
war-wagon, mounted upon chariot \[or, to be sure, the ‘sea-horse’ that
is a raiding-ship … which may, come to think of it, figure further into
some of the occurrences demarcated in Revelations – not least due to the
well-known aversion of the earlier Abrahamic people(s) to the Sea, the
Sea Peoples, and the Terrors which come thencefrom\], to carry out acts
of conquest, the infliction of death, and the levying of Tribute upon
the survivors.

We *keep* seeing the pattern within Indo-European Mytho-Religion of the
All-Conquering Rider, equipped with a Bow, or Spear – in each case
potentially a projectile and certainly a *skewering* weapon \[the “skw”,
if i recall correctly, PIE particule underpinning also not only the
ethnonym of the “Scythians”, but also the very term “To Shoot” in our
modern parlance!\], and very often mounted upon a ‘white’ or a ‘grey’
\[and note, with deference to Indo-European linguistics, just how close
these terms actually are – “Pel”/”Pelh” , i think, offhand, rather like
“Pale”, effectively means *both* of these within its steppe-ranging
ambit of meaning\] Horse or other mount \[These PIE words may link,
further, to terms around the sky (especially in colouration), animal
skins/hides \[also useful as shielding\], covering/encompassing,
charging \[‘pelh’\] and flying \[plew\]; \[‘peh’ – to hate; and ‘peh’
\[slightly different pronunciation\], to protect/shepherd, may also be
worth a look-in\]; the application of all of which, to such a Conquering
Cyng, the Lord of Heaven, can clearly be seen … even without having to
strain one’s eyes gazing upon the Sun-Wheel \[and, for that matter,
Moon-Wheel\] of the Chariot \[consider Lord Shiva as Tripurantaka! for
the Chariot; or the Grey Sleipnir of Odin, or the White Nandi, or the
White Antelope/Gazelle/Horse of Vayu-Vata … \];

often as the Son of the Above in multiple senses of this phrasing Red,
or in some cases, ‘Ruddy’ , Mighty Rider generally correlated with
Planet Mars, and the Iron of blood and blood-shedding weapons \[Ares,
Mars, Mangala, Thor… also, as it happens, the prominent colour
association of Ma as Katyayani , one of the fiercest Warrior Forms of
the already supremely martial Durga\] ;

no doubt, if I were to look further into it, i would find similar
symbolic resonances around a ‘black’ mounted rider, within the skeins of
Indo-European mytho-typology, also;

and as applies the Death horseman … Who rides on a Pale Horse \[‘pale’
here in the sense of ‘corpse-pallor’\]… well, leaving aside for the
moment the potential alternate or even additional interpretations of the
relevant Greek colour-descriptor “khloros” as possibly meaning
yellowish-green (potentially meaning *Gold* – PIE ‘Ghelh’, which gives
us both the modern “Yellow”, and also, at least one of the Sanskrit
terms “Hari” ) … just take a look at the notation that “Hell Followed
With Him”, iirc rendered as “Hades” in the original text. A Horseman,
you say, accompanied by the Dead … directly linked with Greek “Hades”,
further associated with “wild beasts” …

Whether or not the *entire ‘Horsemen of the Apocalypse’* so familiar to
us from popular culture – and often, in point of fact, rather unfamiliar
in its more ‘authentic’ original
Biblical/Christian-theological-and-eschatological formulations – has
previously been thought of as Implicitly Indo-European in the past …

… IT IS NOW !

Even in many of those Indo-European peoples who would probably not be
immediately thought of as steppe Horse-Folk, the ‘cultural’, ‘mythic’,
‘theological’, and ‘sociological’ Memory yet remains. Consider, for
example, why Odin of the Norse is the Attacking Rider. Or the Roman and
Greek Equites & Hippeus classes. Or the *Chariot* of Thor \[which you’d
think would be a rather impracticable conveyance, for a
mortal-projecting mythic metaphoric cultural construction grown up
amidst the mountains and fjords and un-even (even marshy, or boggish, in
some areas) grounds of much of Scandinavia\]. \[A similar thought occurs
around the Chariot’s cultural saliency in both Greek and Roman religion
and society at the height of those cultures, even despite its military
fading from prominence in both cases, not least, in the case of the
former, due to the relative terrain of Greece\]. The “White Horse” motif
that has galloped through the English ‘national’ imagination for some
centuries if not millennia now. Or all the many and various permutations
of the “Horse-Twins” to be found across the Indo-European-osphere.

And, as detailed at *quite some length* in terms of my thinking upon it,
the Very Indo-European phenomenon of the WILD HUNT mytheme!

I would also contend, as applies the STEPPE psycho-military linkage,
that this has yet continued in the more modern IE-based peoples of the
region in question – and have elsewhere written rather extensively, if
dysjointedly, about how Soviet and later Russian armoured/mechanized
doctrine is, in point of fact, GangSTEPPE, with seemingly *deliberate*
Horse-Archer characteristics, for the Modern Age. Perhaps I shall
collate those writings at some point.

… but for the mean-time, and for further elucidation upon the more
direct subject at hand, let us turn to the works of #NASLePati
Combat-Theologian Curwen Ares Rolinson: viz. the GHOST DIVISION article
published through Arya Akasha, which I shall quote from:

“Etymologically, too, the linkage is almost neon in its direction –
Harlequin, you see, derives from “Herle King”, “Herle Cyning” ; that is
to say, the Lord of the Host , the King of Raiders – the Herjan \[in Old
Norse\], a well attested theonymic epithet of Odin. And, speaking of
Odinic theonyms – consider also the “Grimnir”, “Masked One”, which lends
itself to the Grimnismal (‘Sayings of the Masked One’) article of Nordic
scripture. (As a point of further interest, “Grima”, meaning a mask or a
hood (a disguise), when it entered into Old English, also came to mean a
Spectre, an Apparition, a Ghost. It has come down to us via the modern
term “Grimace”, but in its more archaic roots in Proto-Indo-European, as
“Ghrey”, it meant ‘to smear’, ‘to paint’. This recalls, to my mind,
anyway, also the Shaivite practice of the wearing of Tripundra tilaka
markings by Devotees – or the full-scale Vibhuti (Sacred Ash, often of
the Cremation Pyres in the case of some traditions/Victory) of the more
hard-core Shaivite Sadhus. Interestingly, its Ancient Greek derivative –
Khrio – apart from sounding similar to and having figurative connections
in terms of use with, the “Krewh” PIE particle’s Greek and Latin
derivatives \[terms referring to corpses, cruelty, Ice and Cold,
coverings \[see also: PIE: “Kel”, whence “Helmet”, but also whence
“Kaal” – as in .. MahaKaal, the Shaivite Theonym of the ‘Great Death’,
‘Great Black’, ‘Great Time’ – the all-covering and all-destroying\],
carrion-eaters (such as Crows, Ravens, and even, as we shall see, the
Cremation Flame) but also, interestingly, striking, and in one case,
knocking at the door\], is also used to refer to “anointment – and
therefore, in Biblical translation, to the Anointing of a King. While
‘Grey’ theoretically has another, similar sounding PIE derivation, I do
in fact suspect that, particularly as applies “Grime” and Ash, that it
also may derive herefrom \[and while I do not seek to imply a linguistic
derivation, there is also the PIE “Greyd” particle, meaning to Roar, to
Shout – which is of obvious significance to “Rudra”\]. Which matters,
due to the role of “Grey” as the colour of Sky and Stone \[and Steel\]
\[and Smoke, for that matter – but more on that, perhaps, in another
article\]; which, as you may recall from some of my previous work, are
elements closely correlated with both Sky Father and Sovereignty …
although given the PIE Pel/Pelh, meaning “Grey”, a “Covering”, “Pale”,
but also a “Skin”, a “Hide” \[i.e. a “pelt” – like a wolf-skin, of the
famed Indo-European Wolf-Warriors … or a bear-skin, as in the
Berserkers\] , and unsurprisingly an array of terms pertaining to old
age \[Parusa, in Sanskrit, derived from the same root has wound up with
a rather intriguing range of meanings – including greyness,
barbarian-ness, piercing (like the wind), an arrow, attacking speech,
and in slightly modified form, a riddle… \] – you will perhaps forgive
me my Biblical \[and, more specifically, Apocalyptic\] indulgence when I
refer to a “Pale Horseman” \]”

“The etymological roots of the theonym of Skanda are also illuminating.
While it is conventionally regarded as deriving from PIE ‘Skendh’ – that
is, “To Jump”, and related concepts; I would instead perhaps link it to
PIE (S)Kewd – that is, “To Shoot”, “To Throw”, or rather directly .. “To
Skewer”. You can see how this is relevant for a Spear-Wielding Deity;
and interestingly, it is also the origin-point for the folk-name of
those *other* famous mounted warriors, the Scythians, with their mastery
of both riding and firing-on-the-move, as akin to the wind and the hail
and the storm themselves .. , and possessed of prominent deific figures
with long-arm weapons, mounted upon horseback.”

“The second, starts out as a concept that might *look* euhemeric .. but
in point of fact \[and/or lance, spear, arrow, and blade\], is
potentially anything but.

It is my belief that the phenomenon of the Wild Hunt, and related
mythological occurrences, are in fact something of a “Folk Memory” – of
the time when the Indo-Europeans were in fact, horse-borne (or
chariot/war-wagon mounted), shooters or spearmen \[and, in point of
fact, even the name “Scythian” derives from the Proto-Indo-European root
for “shoot”\], ‘huntsmen’ of man and beast, far-ranging and
un-keep-out-able as the Wind. An interpretation strengthened via the
perhaps surprising references to Odin Himself as hailing from the Black
Sea (or possibly Anatolian) area – whence the Urheimat likely lies.

Now lest I be misinterpreted here, I am *not* seeking to suggest that
this means they’re any less Real as a result of this. Rather, quite the
contrary. This above-proffered explanation shows a clear pathway of
connection between the Mythic and the Historical; with the co-occurring
‘Mytho-Historical’ Manifestation of the ‘Ghost Division’ therefore
bringing both the Historical \[i.e. the materialy adducible Ancestors
and Ancestral existences\] into the Mythical, and vice versa \[via the
‘grounding’ of the phenomenon, also, in the barrows of the Steppe\].

In any case, the idea is not merely one of a legend passed down to keep
alive the vague idea of what we once were … but also, and at least as
importantly, a “living” \[perhaps ironic phrasing\] memory, comprised of
figures from our past, rampaging through our present, and thence helping
to inform and refresh our glorious future. That is to say – these are
*actual* illustrious Forebears, of whatever degree of Divinity or Divine
Descent , periodically witnessed across the clouds or amidst the smoke
of the cremation pyres. And no doubt, quite especially after the intake
of the particular ancient somewhat entheogenic sacraments of Cannabis
and/or Psilocybe – which can have a considerable positive net effect,
for those able to handle it – of aiding and availing with the re-viewing
, the re-velation of the world in a much more Mythic perspective. Both
are quite strongly associated with the Lord of the Ghosts Deity in
question; and with further buttressing from both the spear-shape of the
mushroom, and the well-attested tendencies of Scythians, Sadhus, and
Shiva Himself towards the crystal-bearing cane in question. (Indeed, one
more colloquial term for Cannabis upon the Subcontinent – Vijaya
(Victory) – provides quite an interesting potential #NAS spin on the
array of Odinic Theonymics along the lines of “Victory-God”)

The identity of the “High Rider”, then, stands in most strong
elucidation as a result of all of the above. Reconfirmed not merely as
an ‘Archetypal’ resonance, a cross-cultural ‘resemblance’, nor a vague
and now-enhanced ‘remembrance’ … but as the actual Sire – that is to
say, King – of the ancient Indo-European Folk.”
