+++
title = "DE-MIST-IFYING PARJANYA – DISTANCINGxa0PERKWUNOS"
date = "May 23, 2020"

+++


``` wp-block-preformatted
```

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/97793160_10163580865290574_3088461641969303552_n.jpg?w=649)

Ours is a complex field. And as with any sphere wherein depth, detail,
and nuance swirls like mist – there are certain comfortable, complacent
conceptions of things which stubbornly stick around long after they
ought otherwise to have been dispensed with. The reasons for this are
various – and include that certain of these ‘seem’ like they *should* be
correct to the untrained or uncaring eye, or simply because something of
an ‘old boy’s club’ of established theorizing from some time in the
1800s has been allowed to persist because too many people are too
fundamentally wedded to it to actually bother to examine the evidence,
much less to change.

One of these areas … is the axiomatic insistence continually encountered
that the Vedic figure of Parjanya is somehow equivalent to Perun,
Perkwunos, Thor, Indra. The Expressions of the Striker/Thunderer
Indo-European deific complex.

This is incorrect – although to be fair and sure, it is not difficult to
see how the mistake has been arrived at, and then stubbornly persisted
with down the decades.

I have previously argued, in the course of “Swear By The Sea, Swear By
The Stars, Swear By The Sky – On The Mytholinguistics Of Varuna Neptune
Ouranos” that Parjanya is, in fact, Varuna. And that both are, as it
happens, expressions of the Indo-European Sky Father. I marshalled an
array of evidence to this cause, including a direct comparison of
certain RigVedic Hymnals, and their accompanying iconographic and
functional features also within a broader Indo-European mythological
context. I shall not seek to repeat that work here.

Instead, we shall concentrate upon this “alternative” that keeps
springing up places – of Parjanya allegedly identified with the
Striker/Thunderer. And demonstrate how this does not, cannot fit – in
favour of better alternatives.

So, what is the case that is often made for Parjanya being a
Striker/Thunderer expression? Well, there are some elements to it that
are legitimate. The association with Thunder, for one – along with the
Clouds and Rainfall which that quite naturally brings. There is also an
association with the smiting of evil – which, again, is an arguably
quite logical association with Thunder, as this tends to co-occur with
Lightning, and other expressions of formidable, caelestial force.

Now, these are not illegitimate points to raise. And, as I have said,
they are quite correct in their application to *both* the Sky Father
*and* the Striker/Thunderer deifics. However, they tend to occur with
some degrees of difference between the two – that we might better tell
Them apart. For example, there is generally a much stronger (albeit not
exclusive) association of the Smiting action of the Striker/Thunderer
with a serpentine demon-dragon of sorts (although even here there is
overlap – consider those RigVedic Hymnals wherein Brihaspati slays Vala
et co, or makes war alongside Lord Indra against Vritra/Vala); and it is
action carried out in a per-cussive manner with a club or perhaps axe
type of weapon. The Sky Father, however, in His aspect as the Stern
Judge, often has a more general concern with the punishment of “Sinners”
(c.f Varuna hymnals upon this subject, in particular), and is typically
armed with a ‘shooting’/’spearing’ weapon – a bow and arrows, a spear or
trident (or, for that matter, bident), in particular. \[Interestingly,
there is also a Charm against a particular disease in the AtharvaVeda,
AV1.2, wherein Parjanya is hailed as the Father of the Shaft,
potentially also the Shaft which brings dis-ease, in the manner of some
of the Arrows of Rudra in other RigVedic Verse – and with Indra
portrayed as protecting the devotee against such weaponry\]

And as applies the Thunder, Clouds, and Rainfall – we tend to find the
emphasis in particular upon the Rainfall, rather than simply the Smiting
action. Indra may unleash the Flood of the Waters via Thunder-Clubbing
Vritra – but Parjanya does not require such emancipation in order to
fill the Sky with water all of His own accord. I also suspect there may
be some further ‘deep(a)’ distinction around the characterization of the
Thunder – wherein the *noise* of the Thunder is subtly different in
implication, and more closely aligned to the Vacam Garjit Lakshanam
concept, particularly viz. reference to the Sky Father as Lawgiver for
His People as well as the Universe at large … but that is another
thought for another time. As is how this may link to a) the Roarer
aspect of the Sky Father and b) the Crow/Raven/Corvid associates of the
same Sky Father, particularly in His aspect as Lord of the
(Ancestral/Glorious) Dead.

But these are not significant proofs of distinction. They are both of
them ‘spectrums’ of complementary difference; and it can be fairly
argued that especially after several millennia of ‘development’ in each
culture’s mytho-scriptural canon, that even before we get into the
figure of Zeus \[Who really is doing both the Sky Father and
Striker/Thunderer portfolios at once, due in part to what we have taken
to terming “Mess-O-Potamia” influence etc. upon the Greeks … \], that
the cotermininity of the clouds does not really prove my cause. Yet it
does not harm it, either. After all,even in the relatively
well-articulated distinction of the Nordic pantheonic expression upon
this matter – we find Odin Himself bearing the name ofÞundr …
Thunderer. And yet, nobody would seriously attempt to argue that Odin
and Thor are the same deity simply based upon that term of coterminity.

They would look foolish for doing so – for surely everybody knows that
Thor is the Son of Odin. Which, funnily enough, is also enormously
relevant to our efforts at the distinguishment of Parjanya from the
‘Per-‘ termed Striker/Thunderer deific. Because one of the defining
features of the latter, as I illustrated in “Sky-Earth-Thunder – A Brief
Comparative Model of the Divine Family” last year, is that the
Striker/Thunderer is the Son of the Sky Father and Earth Mother. The
pattern is well-known – Indra is the Son of Dyaus Pitar & Prithvi Mata;
Thor’s Mother is Jord \[‘Earth’\]; Shiva’s Son is Hanuman; Kronos &
Rhea’s Son is Zeus (in this case, the ‘Striker/Thunderer’ identity of
the Deific); I could go on at some length, but you get the idea.

So – how does this pertain to Parjanya? Well, as it happens, the Wife of
Parjanya is in fact Prithvi \[AV 12.01.12; AV 10.10.6, as well,
arguably; RV 6.49.6 makes the interesting alignment also with Vata in
the same role in the same breath – which should be completely
unsurprising, as Vata, quite coterminous with “Odin” etymologically, is
also Shiva – the Sky Father thrice, four times over herein\]; so unless
we are somehow endeavouring to suggest that the Striker/Thunderer
deific is not only now an “All-Father” \[for such is another way to
interpret several verses in relation to Parjanya, Varuna, Apam Napat,
etc.\], but also married or otherwise attached to the Earth Mother –
then right off the mark, we can dismiss the speculation around Parjanya
being the Striker/Thunderer. It just does not make sense.

Notwithstanding, of course, various Greek and Roman confusions wherein
actually, yes, due to the ‘three and three’ division of their Sky Father
deific – into three ‘generations’, and then three brothers in the last –
to give us Ouranos/Uranus, Kronos/Saturn, and Zeus-Hades-Poseidon, we
*do* see an incidence wherein a deity with a Striker/Thunderer identity
is linked to an Earth Mother … as well as being the Son (and, for that
matter, Grandson) of a Sky Father-Earth Mother pairing. But that is the
Greeks for you. And, as it happens, the ‘proof’ of the pattern is also
to be found amidst the breach – consider the romantic partners of
Poseidon/Neptune and Hades/Pluto: Demeter and Persephone, respectively.
Poseidon and Demeter, in particular, produced a rather mighty Son,
Antaeus, Who also possessed various of the identifying portfolio
elements of a more ‘mortal’ tier Striker/Thunderer expression – to the
point of making an ideal ‘antagonist’ anti-figure foe for Herakles in
the course of the latter’s Labours.

\[Note: there is likely to be some controversy as applies this, with
relation to the Baltic & Slavic (and, for that matter, Albanian)
mythological setups – on grounds that dependent upon whom one talks to,
you occasionally have similar suggestion of a ‘fusion of powers’ and
portfolios in Perkwunos, Perun etc.; which gets even more complicated
when the figure of Zemyna, an ‘Earth Mother’ Goddess is considered
(wherein She might be linked to Perkunas or Dievas – that is to say, a
Striker/Thunderer, or Sky Father deific expression – contingent upon
source and reconstruction). However, without meaning to disparage our
Balto-Slavic cousins, the fact of the matter is that the materials that
we have to attest much of their pre-Christian religious beliefs are
often fragmentary, convoluted, internally contradictory with one
another, and vulnerable to having become ‘reinterpreted’ by compilers at
various points in their journey down to us – including, quite
specifically, ‘Greek-ified’ in the process. It is therefore difficult to
state with certainty what is authentically the case for many of those –
and, for that matter, whether or at what point, important details might
have changed amidst which groupings.\]

In any case, within the bounds of both the Vedic mythology – the
earliest and best-preserved record of Indo-European mythoreligion
available to us – as well as speculative reconstructive typology for
(Proto-)Indo-European mythology all up … the Familial situation is quite
clear. And thankfully, non-Freudian.

Yet it is the etymology and the functional roles which this serves to
elucidate, wherein the confusion must really become allayed. People
have, for some peculiar reason, presumed that “Parjanya” contains within
it either the Proto-Indo-European “Per” that is the mark of the
Striker/Thunderer (e.g. “Perun”, “Perkwunos”, “Perseus”, etc.), or the
“Perwh” which underpins terms for ‘Mountain’ (i.e. “Parvat(i)”, “Pirwa”,
etc.). Except that this is not easily the case – especially with the
occasionally argued *direct* derivation from “Perkwunos” that we might
see crop up from time to time.

Instead, I would suggest that Proto-Indo-European “(S)Pergh” is the more
likely origin for the theonym. A term which means to ‘scatter’, and
which also underpins Latin ‘Spargo’ – to sprinkle/scatter; and Ancient
Greek ‘Speiro’ – which means to sow. It is obvious how the meaning-field
for these terms quite closely aligns with the functional role of
Parjanya in terms of, well, sprinkling with rainfall, and also presiding
over the seeding of trees and life.

This is useful and important, because it also helps to underscore the
Parjanya-Varuna connexion I have earlier attested. Varuna likely shares
an etymological underpinning with Ancient Greek ‘Ouranos’ – with varying
sources giving the ultimate PIE root for this term of “hwers”, “uers”,
“ers”, “awers”, but all meaning largely the same thing. Water. Raining
down from On High. Sprinkling, Spraying. Which is just what we should
expect, given that the several main Vedic Hymnals unto Parjanya, along
with various more peripheral citations contained in others – are
precisely that. Requests for Rain, and hailings for the procreative
power for new life Sown which He also presides over and upon.  
  
I suppose you might say – He Makes The Rains Run On Time.

\[As a side-note, there is a further potentially interesting direction
to this which I shall leave largely unexamined in this piece – that of
the linkage in AV4.15 7&9, of Parjanya to Serpents; which I mention not
only due to its occurrence alongside the Maruts – Sons of the Sky
Father, although also frequent companions of Lord Indra as well – but
also due to the various hints of a serpentine … and more especially
serpentine-sowing association to the Sky Father deific which I first
unearthed at length in last year’s “NAGA PANCHAMI – A CELEBRATION OF
SERPENTS” ; here it is likely that the Serpents in question are also a
kenning of sorts for streams and rivers – but it is interesting to note
the difference between a Sky Father deific expression in positive
association with serpents, and the Striker/Thunderer deific’s
morewell-renowned antipathic smitery toward other water-snakes of
sorts.\]

So, that about sums it up, I feel. There is more that can and should be
said upon this matter – but much of it I have already parsed, in the
course of the aforementioned“Swear By The Sea, Swear By The Stars,
Swear By The Sky – On The Mytholinguistics Of Varuna Neptune Ouranos”;
and at some point I *do* intend to do a more explicatory writeup
entitled provisionally “The Masks Of The Sky Father”, to attempt to more
adequately compile and extol the characteristics of this most mighty of
beings as we have thusly, scripturally and mythographically, addeuced
Them.

It is in some ways understandable just why it is that we so regularly,
frequently hear people insisting that Parjanya is a Striker/Thunderer
and therefore equivalent to Thor, Perun, Perkwunos, etc. There are some
coterminities which we have cursorily observed. But those conceptual
overlaps are more easily explained by the fact that they are natural
complements (insofar as Rainfall and Thunder are frequently co-occurring
– “Thunder Only Happens When It’s Raining”, as the song goes), rather
than naturally co-identifying of the same entity at hand.

And moreover, these overlaps are more than overpowered in their scope by
the clear and salient points of distinction between the two deific
complexes – which thus, via the alignment of Parjanya with that of the
Sky Father, go to disprove the oft-proffered presumption of Parjanya
being an emblematic expression of the Striker/Thunderer deity.

With the linguistic argument, as well as the functional argument(s)
largely debunked, in favour of far more compelling counter-explications
… and the familial situation and broader place within the context of the
pantheon and cosmology also cursorily attended to –

I think it fair to say the time has come to ditch and to dispel the now
more than a century old fallacious argument that Parjanya is Perkwunos.
(Seriously – while I am not sure that it is the earliest promulgation of
the theory, I have found people stating it, off the back of largely
Slavic Romantic-era evidence about something else entirely, from the
early 1870s – some two decades or more prior to reasonably comprehensive
translations of The Vedas becoming available in the English Language. It
is no wonder that some of these points I have raised which considerably
undercut such a position were not realized at the time – and as I said
at the outset, the ‘comfortableness’ of such shibboleths presumably
helps to explain why, even in the modern age of etymological
examination, it has not yet been firmly put to rest).

We have, in short, “Poured Cold Water On It”.

The ‘Parjanya’ Thing To Do !
