+++
title = "ARYAN – IRMIN – UGRA MANxa0?"
date = "May 26, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/imageproxy.jpg?w=1024)

It often seems that everybody knows, and is correspondingly keen to
claim the mantle of “Aryan”. And it is understandably so. The term is
the most archaic Indo-European ethnonym we readily have directly
available to us. Which should not be confused for its being a general
nor generalized Indo-European ethnonym – as it is a specific formulation
whose direct occurrence is, effectively, localized to the Indo-Iranian
branches of the linguistic family; and somewhat differently applied
within Vedic scripture than what we might otherwise conventionally
presume from our modern-day lense.

That is to say, the manner in which it is made use of, is not quite to
say ‘this is the name of our people’ as a designator of who is part of
said people as distinct from others … but rather, to say that he (or
she) who is Arya, is somebody who knows and upholds the customs, the
rites of the in-group. Somebody who must, therefore, not only have an
intellectual knowledge of these, but a participatory ability. Which, of
course, correlates it with one’s ability to speak. And hence why we have
the duality of “Arya” contra “Mleccha” – the latter being those who
cannot ‘speak’, whose speech is ‘jabbering’, and ‘unrefined’ \[Sanskrit,
of course, being “refined speech”, inter alia – although that is not
quite what it means; rather what is communicated is that it is language
that *has* been refined from a previous underpinning predicate – c.f RV
X 71 2\].

This also helps to explain the corresponding ‘growth’ which “Arya” as a
designator underwent in the ensuing millennia – wherein it came to apply
not only to the very specific tribe of the Vedic lineage, but to all who
properly participated in the religion, the culture, the civilization
which they bequeathed to the lands they eventually found themselves
therein. While, on the other hand, the closely correlate term in the
Iranic sphere underwent a somewhat different shift to become an ethnonym
proper, a national designation – which you can still see in-use today as
modern ‘Iranian”.

But this short piece is not about that. Nor about whether it is proper
or even desirable for seemingly anybody and everybody with even the most
tangential of interests or cares for matters Indo-European to declare
themselves to be “Aryan”. The worthwhileness or otherwise of American
prison gangs, Neo-Nazis, the original Nazis, and Christian Civilization
advocates of the past two hundred years throughout the Anglosphere in
general, declaring that *they* are the Aryans, despite the vast majority
of these having little to nothing to do with Hinduism or the Vedic
people(s) except in colonial, sneering denigration … I think is almost
self-demonstrating.

Rather, it is about two other interesting and lesser-known ‘ethnonym’
type descriptors, also derived from other nouns, and the qualities these
encapsulate … terms which told both their bearers and those they wished
to know of them, something about themselves – what they wished to be and
to be regarded as. And how these themselves align with what it is that
we understand by “Arya”.

Perhaps it might also help other people who are seeking to revive their
ancestral heritages and traditions in these spheres to ‘think outside
the box’ when it comes to declaring themselves to be this, that, and the
Bronze Age other thing rather than going for the somewhat cliche option
of “All ‘Aryan’ All The Time”.

The first of these is moderately well-known. It is “Irmin”. A Germanic
term which has ethnonymic functions \[e.g. as ‘Irminones’,
‘Irminthioda’, and in a certain sense, ‘Eormencynn’ – ‘Mankind’\]. Its
literal meaning is ‘Great’, ‘Strong’, ‘Powerful’, ‘Whole’; and the main
places you will likely have seen it are “Irminsul”, and in its more
Nordic inflection \[‘Jormun’\], utilized as an adjectival enhancer for
“Gandr” \[stick/staff/stave/wand\] in “Jormungandr” \[really, really big
staff\].

Now, the role in “Irminsul” is interesting, because while the “-sul”
bears some coterminity with the modern English “Sail”, what is actually
being referred to is a pillar. In much the same manner as we Hindus have
sacrificial pillars, posts, that are still recalled today in the
ShivLing – so, too, did the Germanic peoples have a pillar/post that was
thought closely correlate with the Great God, the progenitor of their
(our) people(s).

The etymology of “Irmin”, beyond its Proto-Germanic ancestor of
“ermunaz”, is a subject of some contention – and I am a theologian who
occasionally delves into linguistics, not a linguist, so shall not seek
to make too many direct assertions upon this matter. Except to note that
there appears to be a pretty strong figurative coterminity of meaning
with the Vedic usage of “Arya”.

Which goes beyond both terms being utilized also in an ethnonymic sense,
and to connote that these are the people *together*, the people
*powerful*, the people *great*, the people who are *whole and proper and
true*, with expansive and expanding dominion potentially over all the
Earth entire.

Consider the figure of Aryaman in the RigVeda – the name of the Deity
ought be rather clear as to what He represents and has portfolio
presiding over. It has long been my contention that Aryaman is another
name, another form for Shiva; and as it happens, this accords rather
well with what we know of the Nordic & Germanic mythology around this
Irmin. Wherein both Aryaman and Irmin are held to have strong
association with the ‘starry road’ that is the Galaxy, the Milky Way.
And Irmin is held to be Odin, the mighty, the prime-father, as well.
\[For some further detail upon these connections, please consult “AN
INDO-EUROPEAN GUIDE-BOOK OF THE DEAD – Part Three: The River Of Stars”,
“Of Mrityunjaya and Modern Hinduism – The Deathless And Unceasing Glory
Of The Three-Eyed One”, and of course, GHOST DIVISION, inter many
alia.\]

\[As a side-note, there is a rather curious vague resonancywith the
underpinning of “Eire”, as in Ireland – wherein the roots of this term
appear to run back to PIE terms for “Fat”, and “Milk”. It is a somewhat
different theoretical root to that beneath “Arya” or what we might
perhaps consider underlying “Irmin”, but it nevertheless conveys the
sense of a ‘broad’ and richly nourished, therefore empowered place and
its people; while, as we have seen, “Milk” turns up in relation to both
Aryaman & Irmin. I do not mean to imply a direct connexion, but it is,
as I say, a curious ‘lining up’ of definitional elements what may bear
closer inspection at some subsequent point.\]

However, there is a further manner in which the figure of
Shiva-Odin-Rudra is most eminently relevant to these proceedings.

I was recently made aware, by my colleague Oli Havranek, of the
existence of another potential ethnonym, located somewhat equidistant
between the two prior examples, that also bears as its hallowed mark
both the Theonymic resonancy with the Great God aforementioned, as well
as certain qualities associated with both Him, and the Indo-European
People(s) who evidently bear and bore His name.

To quote from the article he had sent me:

“Proto-Aryan \*ugra-‘ mighty, strong, formidable, violent, terrible,
noble’ occurs in Old Indo-Aryan not only as an adjective but also as
tribal name and as a proper name of a god (Rudra-Siva) and of men; in
Old Iranian (Avestan), too, it is used of men as well as of gods.
Pekkanen’s principal authority is the Greek historian Strabo (64 BC – AD
19), who in his Geography (7,3,17) says that the most important tribe of
the Sarmatians, namely the “Royal Sarmatians” (Sarmatai Basileioi), were
also called Ourgoi. This is a metathesis form of the word ugra, attested
also in Scythian proper names such as Aspourgos (= Old Iranian aspa-
‘horse’ + ugra-) occurring nine times in the Greek inscriptions of the
Pontic coast. From the passage cited, it can be concluded that these
Ourgoi were settled between the Dniester and the Dnieper; according to
Strabo, they “in general are nomads, though a few are interested also in
farming; these peoples, it is said, dwell also along the Ister (i.e. the
Danube), often on both sides”.

-   Early Contacts between Uralic and Indo-European: Linguistic and
    Archaeological Considerations, p. 113

Now, this is interesting for a number of reasons, and to be fair and
sure, there are other possibilities also to what we have witnessed
here.

The definitional field for “Ugra” matches up with what we would expect
from an Indo-European ethnonym of #GangSteppe pedigree. It tells us
something about the people, how they wished to see themselves – and how
they wished to be perceived by others, as well. And it also encompasses
those all-important signifers of “power”, “might”, and “expansiveness”,
as well as something which we have not quite seen before: a direct
concept of martial ferocity, indeed, “fury”, berserk rage even, right
there in the name. This is not without conceptual precedency, it must be
said – “Furor Teutonicus”, after all, is the “Fury of the Teutons”, one
of the defining characteristics of that people in the minds of their
more southerly neighbours/employers/prey.

Yet the frightening and unconstrainable, even somewhat frenzied “rage”
of “Ugra”, is not quite so clearly evident in the pre-Sanskrit
etymological predicates of the term – “hugras”, “hugros”, “hewg” \[oddly
enough, not actually the root for “Huge”\]. It is true that there is
strength, power, and ferocity implied in the first two such terms. But
the refinement of this to produce what we would customarily think of in
Sanskrit when we say “Ugra”,and more especially when this is utilized
as a Shaivite (or, more properly, Roudran) theonym … this suggests that
the term’s connotations are also derived from those underpinning PIE
‘Ghowros’, which refers to the expression of Anger (and which, as I
demonstrated in “Ghora – Gorgos – Yggr – The Terrifying Face of
Thunder”, is an innate characteristic of the Sky Father; as well as
informing the symbolism of Sovereignty – via the ‘Gorgoneion’ concept).

In any case, it is clear to see how “Ugra” derived or related terms
would align with what we would expect from “Irmin” in terms of an
ethnonym – as well as bearing some symbolic resonancy with what we have
come to expect from “Aryan” in its arguably more recent connotation. It
also fulfills the other, less immediately apprehended resonancy
characteristic for an Indo-European ethnonym – it aligns with a theonym,
a characteristic of the Great God. This is what we have seen with the
Irmin deific, the Aryaman deific, and now here also with the Ugra deific
– Odin, Rudra, Shiva.

And, of course, it does something else that we often come to expect from
Indo-European ethnonymics – it tells the people who speak about the name
of this people, something about how that people wish to be perceived.
Other examples for this can frequently be found in how various Germanic
peoples spoke of themselves. The common utilization of “Geir”, meaning
“Spear”, and related terminology, for example. Or one interpretation for
the tribal name of the “Harii” written of by Tacitus – the Warriors, the
Raiding Party, the Army \[for more upon this, as well as several
theories as to what Tacitus – or his source – was *actually* describing,
please consult GHOST DIVISION\].

As applies “Ugra” – it would certainly not come as a surprise to find
that a #GangSteppe warrior people should wish to have identified
themselves as furious \[literally, in the latinate sense\], formidable
combatants. Indeed, per my own previous work upon the subject of the
Scythians and other such peoples relative to the conceptry associated
with Rudra-Odin-Shiva, “Furor” would be exactly what we would expect
them to embrace. \[see ““An Image, Frozen In Time” – What Pazyryk
Scythian Tombs Can Tell Us About Our Indo-European Ancestors”; as well
as “MahaShivRatri And The Mytholinguistics Of War \[Part 3\] – The Mind,
The Mania, The Manyu”, and of course, GHOST DIVISION\]

But to return back briefly to the ‘Gorgoneion’ concept aforementioned –
assuming that there is scope for a ‘Growling’ sound of ‘Thunder’ innate
and intrinsic to Indo-European conceptions of Sovereignty, as a
reflexive expression and function of the Sky Father … we should also be
rather distinctly unsurprised to find the parallel concept of “Vac” –
Voice \[and, in Sanskrit, also Divine Speech, a Goddess\], made use of
as an ethnonymic. The Baltic tribes spoke of the Vacija – likely
Germanic neighbours, identifiable by their fierce war-cries and speech.
Although it is also possible that it may have been a self-designation
for the people in question: returning, and bringing us full circle, to
the earlier in-group/out-group point of distinction between “Arya” and
“Mleccha” – or, for that matter, between Greek and “Barbarian” or Arya
and “Barbaras” – wherein what makes a man ‘one of us’ is the (mutual)
intelligibility of His Speech.

And, appropriately enough, we should also note that this ‘Vac’ derived
terminology accords with the dual identification of Divinities – the
Indo-European (Mountain) Mother Goddess \[of National Identity\], and
the Sky Father, both having incredibly strong associations in this
particular, shouting direction. \[For more upon the former, in
particular, please consult my earlier work – “BHARAT MATA AND THE
INDO-EUROPEAN DEIFIC OF NATIONAL IDENTITY”; and for the latter, once
again, GHOST DIVISION\].

So – what have we learned? That there are an array of Indo-European
ethnonymics that have been attested amongst antiquity. I have not
considered very many of them; and have paid my major attention to but
three. Yet even amidst this relatively small sample size, we can detect
several important points of coterminity that often come up. And several
otherwise lesser-thought of forms of their parallel expression elsewhere
in the mytho-linguistic and the Divine Realm.

Part of my purpose in writing, and popularizing these other terms – is
to broaden the depth and scope of understanding in this sphere. So that
people can find other vectors to re-connect with their heritage, other
than conspicuously co-opting a Vedic term for their own people. In a
certain sense, perhaps, it is more legitimate than we might think to do
so – there is some evidence that the Proto-Indo-European ‘Heros’
‘Herios’ may have contributed to some of the other ethnonymic and
related terms in more westerly Indo-European languages and cultures,
after all. And in the oncoming Indo-European future and its immanent
reconstruction that we are even now heer engaged in, there is a
significant debt of influence to the Vedic Aryans and their (my)
religion, which it is not inappropriate to recognize in what we are to
become.

But it is also appropriate to look into, and to resurrect – reincarnate
– one’s own more specific heredity and ways of expressing and relating
to same. So, with that in mind, perhaps a broader exploration of this
topic, shall lead to less in the way of Western Europeans attempting to
insist that they are *the* Aryans, as a result of lacking any other
immediately obvious frame of reference for talking about themselves as
their ancient past … and instead, some other, and more locally,
authentically rooted and reconstructible terms taking flight among them.
Although perhaps, for a variety of reasons, we shall not see people
referring to themselves as “Hermiones”, outside of a certain sort of
fandom for some time to come.

In any case, though, our fundamental sense of mission – unified, united,
collective campaign effort together – remains the same. “Krinvanto
Vishvam Aryam”. With the added understandings of making the world not
only “noble” \[‘Arya’\], but also – “whole” \[‘Irmin’ in one of its
shades of meaning\], and “empowered” \[‘Ugra’\], again.
