+++
title = "The Subtle Play Of Lord Shiva’sxa0Wit"
date = "May 18, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/59354414_10161712060425574_6637324901688541184_o-1.jpg?w=676)

There is a saying, in English – “Man Plans, Fate Laughs”; and it has …
somewhat ‘darker’ counterparts in Old Norse, with tales of the intent of
this or that narrative agonist (“protagonist”, he may also be – although
*agonist* (the “agon” as “struggle”) is probably much more apt, not
least due to the less … weighty expectations of
modern-morally-virtuous-conduct which it thence entails as compared to
the more ‘positively’, ‘successfully’ connoted term we customarily apply
to *the* Designated Hero of a piece, instead of one amidst many
potentially competing narrative Actors within the f(r)ame of a drama),
which similarly wind up running into ‘strife’ when a supra-human entity
or entities choose to Doom \[in the sense of ‘judging’\] his plans as an
‘amusement’ or otherwise subvert them within the span of some greater,
overarching design.

This, surely, is the underlying sentiment behind Haakon of Norway’s
statement that : “Methinks,’ said he, great Odin’s will Is harsh, and
bodes me further ill”.

An understandable apprehension, given the bloody battle that had just
lain Hakon low … a situation compounded by a psychopompic retinue of
Odin’s turning up to greet Hakon in death.

Yet examining the next lines of the Haokonarmal, we see that this
initial trepidation is proven to be misdirected. Even despite the
terrifying visages of the equerries to the Sky-Father that have just
appeared, and Hakon’s life-blood pooling amidst his crushed armour, it
is in fact treated as a joyous occasion – whereupon a notionally
*Christian* king is accepted into the Heavens’ Heer/Harja/Her, as one of
Odin’s Own.

\[Although as a bit of a counterpoint to this … you may, perhaps,
consider the fate of Geirroth, the somewhat misdirected antagonist of
the Grimnismal … also something of a fostered son of the Spear-God … and
who wound up lain low, nominally at his own hand, through a ‘close
encounter’ with (guised) Divinity\]

Still, for myself, I am rather keen on the Sanskrit concept of
शङ्करचेतोविलास – that is to say, the “play of Lord Shiva’s Wit”; the
manifestation of Mahadev’s sense of humour.

It seems more good-natured; albeit frequently no less ‘enigmatic’, from
those of us forming the ‘moving parts’ of such a joke.
