+++
title = "The Shooting Goddess Of Order And Growth – The War-Effort Of The Natural World [An Extract from ‘The Queen of Serpents – The Serpentine Figure Of The Indo-European Earthxa0Mother’]"
date = "December 11, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/130299562_773320903280236_5187891533715850933_o.jpg?w=731)

The term – and, indeed, theonym – in question is ‘Hora’, best known in
its plural formulation – ‘Horae’ (from the same root as modern English
‘Hour’, ‘Year’, etc.). In Greek usage, this refers to a set of Goddesses
Who both regulate the passing of the seasons and various elements of
righteous conduct – in both the natural and the human spheres, what is
right to be done at the right and particular time. It is no accident
that these areas of responsibility are so strongly coterminous. After
all, for the ancient Indo-European man – one was not separate from the
natural world, but a part of it; and the natural world was very much an
inextricable forest of laws and deeper order that ought inform the human
inhabitants thereof, as well. Something we have sadly lost in this
detritus of modernity where we increasingly feel ourselves to be not
only above Nature – but also above the Gods, Divine Law Itself.

Now this has further conceptual saliency when we consider the fertility
rites for the land that must be carried out. It is part and parcel, we
may say, of the wise stewardship *of* said land – we look after the
land, the environment, nature, so that nature *also* looks after us. And
those who refuse to embrace such a responsibility – or, worse, spit upon
it and seek to exploit the land whilst offering precious nothing in
return, may find themselves rendered down into fertilizer of another
kind for same.

This understanding is preserved in any number of archaic Indo-European
sources – although we have not heard much from the Nordic corpus in this
piece, so we shall start with the incidence from the Ynglinga Saga:

“Of the Death of Olaf, the Tree-Feller  
There were a great many people who fled the country from Sweden, on
account of King Ivar; and when they heard that King Olaf had got good
lands in Vermeland, so great a number came there to him that the land
could not support them. Then there came dire times and famine, which
they ascribed to their king; as the Swedes used always to reckon good or
bad crops for or against their kings. The Swedes took it amiss that Olaf
was sparing in his sacrifices, and believed the dire times must proceed
from this cause. The Swedes, therefore, gathered together troops, made
an expedition against King Olaf, surrounded his house and burnt him in
it, giving him to Odin as a sacrifice for good crops. This happened at
the Venner lake. Thus tells Thjodolf of it: —

“The temple wolf, by the lake shores,  
The corpse of Olaf now devours.  
The clearer of the forests died  
At Odin’s shrine by the lake side.  
The glowing flames stripped to the skin  
The royal robes from the Swedes’ king.  
Thus Olaf, famed in days of yore,  
Vanished from earth at Venner’s shore.”

Now it can be fairly argued, I think, that the understandings preserved
there are twofold – first and foremost, that the King had neglected his
duties of regulation in order to protect the environment and therefore
his people’s ability to live thereupon .. but second, that there are
multiple spheres, multiple ways in which he could be said to have
failed. One of which being the potentiality that he had done little to
stop the massive increase in population beyond the land’s
carrying-capacity (i.e. he had allowed through inaction, things to get
out of balance with the underlying environmental requirements of the
deeper Law); and the other being the allegation that he had not carried
out appropriate sacrifices and other rites to ensure the charitable
nourishing both of and by the Land. Therefore, they – his now suffering
people – chose to offer *him* as a sacrifice, instead!

And, entirely as we should expect … this is a sacrifice to Odin – the
Indo-European Sky Father in Nordic form – to provide, as we had seen
earlier with the fire-rites mentioned in the Vedas and associated
Brahmana commentaries, the fertility and abundance of the land one more.

Another example which beautifully illustrates this concept in action,
concerns the Hindu figure of Shakambhari – the Bearer of Shoots … or,
slightly more figuratively, the Shooter.

This is one of my favourite Hindu myths, because of just how much it
succinctly illustrates. I shan’t go into all the elaborate depth nor
detail here, but the salient details are the following:

A demon by the name of Durgamasur \[‘the invincible demon’\] had secure
a boon of erasing the knowledge of the Vedas \[i.e. their performance –
the proper pious conduct\] from the minds of Mankind. This lead, as an
obvious and direct consequence, to a cessation of sacral conduct by
humanity … and the weakening of the Gods, the ascendency of demons and
mighty demonic armies making ready to assail the Heavens, as well as the
immense degradation of the environment, nature, as a co-occurrent
result.

All seemed lost, until Devi – Who is above and beyond the Universe in
these regards (indeed, is a-priori to it) and therefore unaffected by
the happenings therein that had so weakened the rest of the Pantheon –
She manifests as the demon army is making its way toward the final
assault against the Gates of Heaven, as Shakambhari \[‘The Bearer Of the
\[Green-\]Shoots’\].

Now, usually we interpret the ‘Saka’ in question as referring to the
green shoots of new vegetation that accompany the resurrection of the
health of the natural environment with Her arrival. And I do not think
that that is inaccurate. But given Her mechanism for dispatching the
demon Durgamasur – shooting him repeatedly with Her Arrows – I would
also contend that the ‘shoots’ in question may refer to those Arrows;
as, after all, there is a well-known crossover of conceptry even in
modern English (where we have ‘Spears of Asparagus’ or ‘Blades of
Grass’) between the terms for growing consumable vegetation and sharp,
piercing weaponry.

Life is thus restored to the Earth – both through Shakambhari’s
re-introduction of the knowledge of the rites to the minds of men (and
it is interesting to note that the ‘Verses of the Queen of Serpents’
that we had earlier met, the ones accompanying the Vedic Rite
aforementioned, are actually spoken and compiled for the Rsis
\[Sages/Seers\] *by* said Queen of Serpents to begin with\] and
provision of fruits and vegetables to be rendered up as sacral offerings
to the Gods therethrough … and also through Shakambhari Durga and Her
Army slaughtering their way through the forces of the demons, watering
the world with the literal rivers of blood of the foe that thusly
result.

Yet, other than the aforementioned conceptual overlap for the ‘shoots’
of new growth rising up out of the ground, and snakes (or, in the case
of Kerkrops, snake-men) doing likewise … how does this relate to the
Serpentine Form of the Indo-European Earth Mother?

For that, we must turn to the Scythians (another ‘Shooting’ people, not
least via the etymology of their ethnonym) – and the various fascinated
Classical perspectives upon the Scythian Dragon, Drakaina Skythia,
hailed as ‘Hora’, and also occasionally referred to in subsequent
literature as an or even the Echidna: a decidedly Serpentine figure Who
is Mother to their race.
