+++
title = "On The ‘Culture-Jamming’ Suppression Of Heritage Through Spurious Association-Allegations And Other Subversivexa0Intents"
date = "December 9, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/130131365_771780736767586_4922484939847793083_n.png?w=512)

Over the years, I have made an observational study of “culture-jamming”.
It’s a remarkably effective strategy – whereby, if you are seeking to
destroy something … a concept, a culture, a way of viewing the world …
you *don’t* just go around directly suppressing things.

After all – the Streisand Effect being a thing, this may in the short to
medium term, actually only *increase* the saliency and re-broadcasting
of whatever it is that you are trying to eliminate.

Even if it might have long-term viability, the fact that, say, we can
still tell you a fair bit about Akhenaten, or some Roman figures
subjected to Damnatio Memoriae, really does kinda show that there are
some pervasive limits to how worthwhile an effort it is.

However, if you do something else … if you *subvert* things, if you
*shift* and you *alter* their meanings … so that they mean something
*else*, something different to what was intended and which in all
probability people will not *want* to take up and internalize \[in this
instance, Nazi signifers; or, in ancient Iran, terming The Gods to be
“Demons”\] – then you don’t have to suppress it.

For the “thing” has become, in effect, “self-suppressing”.

Both in terms of the *actual meaning* *Forgotten*; but also in terms of
even the exoteric signifer becoming a pariah.

Now, the Rune in question that was under discussion, Othala, is a rune
that means “Homeland”, that means “Heritage”, that means “Ours”.

And yes, yes it was indeed utilized as the basis for the unit-insignia
of at least two Axis formations during the course of the Second World
War (both SS Volunteer divisions recruited from populations outside
Germany – in Eastern Europe/Croatia and the Netherlands, respectively).

But that is just the thing.

This is a microcosm for the course of much of (early) 21st century
politics thus far.

“Nationalism”, interest and respect in one’s heritage, is all too often
*insistently reduced* down to “Naziism” by its opponents.

And, to be sure, it is *also* all too often subjected to attempted
*hijackings* by *actual Nazis*, or other distasteful political
tendencies who often seem to have previous little actual appreciation
nor respect for the source-elements, the original cultures in question.
Except for er .. signalling purposes.

So – in a very real and in a very symbolic sense – “they see Othala …
they think Nazi” – is where we are at today.

Although it has often been my view that for any given ridicularity –
there is also an equal and an opposite ridicularity. So we additionally
see ‘co-option’ coming from the other direction: various of the sort of
people who are absolutely shrill about “Nazis” both real and imagined,
who seem to have about the same level of active regard for the heritage
they seek to daub themselves in the colouration of, and about the same
level of unbridled enthusiasm for the co-option of the outward signifers
of that heritage to garb whatever modern cause celebre they may so
happen to be pushing of that particular week.

It is time to let the Heritage, the religions, the values, speak for
themselves – untrammelled by the petty ‘politik’ biases of men. Not so
much to ‘claim’ our heritage – as to be claimed *by* it. Both to carry
it forth as our torch – and to be lead by it through the darkness. The
Flame That – Protected, Protects.

Time to push back.

In *all* directions.

And therefore – to push forward.
