+++
title = "On The Subtle Satemization Of Centum In Modernxa0English"
date = "December 9, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/130475118_772463753365951_8133610582628125660_n.png?w=500)

Something I’ve been meaning to remark upon for awhile, is this rather
amusing irony when it comes to the Centum-Satem divide in Indo-European
linguistics.

Now, for those unaware, you can classify most Indo-European languages
into one of two categories – “Centum” languages, wherein an array of
“K-” \[and some “G-“\] sounds and particles in Proto-Indo-European ,
basically kept going in a “K-“ish direction; and “Satem” languages,
wherein the corresponding terms tend to have “S-” (or “Z-“/”Dz-“, etc.)
particles instead.

If you’re wondering why the sorting typology’s called Centum/Satem –
it’s because both of these terms mean “Hundred”, thus handily showing
the phenomenon in action.

(Oh, and as a minor point of semi-solicitated etymological trivia ..
“Hundred” itself, is *also*, oddly enough, well within the “Centum”
categorization, because there’s actually a reasonably well-attested K=>H
phonetic shift which occurs in the development of Germanic languages …
like, consider Latin “Quid” \[‘Kwid’\] vs Germanic “Hwat” (which is
where “What” in modern English comes from\]; or Latin “Canis” vs
Germanic “Hound” ; Latin “Caldus” vs Germanic “Hot” , etc.\]

But why do I find this amusing?

Well, you see, for various reasons – here in English, we often pronounce
a “C” … in some rather odd ways, historically-linguistically speaking.

I mean, the way it’s *supposed* to be said – as in, for instance, my
name, “Crow”, “Cryo-“, or in “Celt”, is the “Hard-C” – that is to say,
the “K-” sound. \[I would have said “like in Cold” … but as you’ll have
noted above … that’s an instance wherein it’s very phonetically similar
to the Romance Languages term meaning “warm”, so go figure 😛 \].

Yet in many instances, we *don’t* do that. Instead pronouncing it as, I
believe the term is a “soft-C” – like in “Cyclone”, or “City”, or
indeed, in “Icy” … and rather egregiously, in “Caesar” (actually
pronounced much more like the Germans’ “Kaiser”), or in “Celtic” when
one is referring to a particular football team.

It’s regrettably common when it comes to Latinate-derived words – with,
in addition to the “Caesar” example mentioned above, “Circus”, “Cellar”,
“Civil”, “Censor”, etc. being among the more common \[hard-c there
again\] examples.

Although the one you’re probably *most* directly acquainted with … is
“Cent” – as in, the unit of (decimal \[- there’s another one\])
currency, or the core particle of the units of measurement (centimeter,
degrees centigrade, etc.).

What does “Cent” mean?

Why, “Hundred”, of course …

… so why do I find all this funny?

Because after several thousand years of divergent evolution, Modern
ENglish has effectively managed to take our inherited “Centum” particle
… and turn it into something *much more phonetically coterminous
\[hard-c there again\]* with the “Satem” particles found in the “other
branch” of Indo-European languages. (i.e. an accidental partial
“re-unification” of sorts – rendered all the more … pronounced (sorry),
due to its occurrence most prominently on *literally one of the two
words* in “Centum-Satem”. – which, if you’re reading this in your head,
probably sound more alike now than they’ve done for *many thousands of
years*);

Now, to be sure, there *have* been movements back *against* this trend,
over the past century or two – hence why “Celt” has gone back to
something more closely approximating its Latinate pronunciation, for
instance.

But it’s hard to imagine much of the rest of our historically
inappropriate “soft-C” sounds words doing likewise. (while “akkelerate”
has an interesting feel to it, going around saying “Kent” as a unit of
measurement or in terms of payment, is probably not going to catch on;
although it does also occur that there are perhaps a few examples of
terms like “Celestial” wherein one would *hope* that when confronted
with its earlier iterations in English like “Caelestial” and
“Coelestial”, the “hard-C” would instinctively reassert itself\].

Indeed, given the ongoing silliness around “Gif” \[as in .gif\] – where
what *should* by all rights be a “Hard-G” sound \[I mean ..”Graphics
Interchange Format” is what the acronym stands for, no?\] is
occasionally pronounced as “Jif” (including, for some ineffable reason,
by the format’s, and therefore the term’s creator\] … which may perhaps
be thought to replicate *another* archaic sound-shift phenomenon \[G=>J;
which I may detail in greater depth in another post .. but suffice to
say, PIE stems at the root of “Glory” and “God” and “Glow” working out
as “Jaya” and “Johuyate”/”Juhoti” \[I’m playing a bit fast and loose
there as there’s actually a J=>H further shift going on – c.f “Havan”
and “Hotr”, etc. which showcase the root better\] and “Jvalati” ,
respectively\] …

… perhaps it is once again a case of “The Future Is The Past”.

Although given the realities of phonetic shifts in practice, even if
history *does* repeat … I’m not *quite* sure if it’s still going to
“rhyme” \[to reference me an aphorism of somebody who probably wasn’t
Mark Twain\].
