+++
title = "An Odinic Post On An Odinic Post – Axa0ShivLing"
date = "December 23, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/ep6q6c7u8actnsc.png?w=526)

It is Wednesday – Therefore Odinic Art Posting

And I mean that quite literally! For you see, in addition to the obvious
co-identification of Odin with Shiva that we have capaciously
illustrated elsewhere … the ShivLing is strongly coterminous with the
Irminsul.

This is, therefore, an Odinic Post about an Odinic Post.

Now, in terms of how we know this – apart from the fact that both the
ShivLing and Irminsul are dedicated to the same God, They are also made
use of in much the same way.

Both are, in effect, expressions of the same Axis Mundi that stands at
the heart of the Indo-European world; thence resonate with Yggdrasil,
the World Mountain, the Sthambha (Sacrificial Post) – and are utilized
in worship via the pouring of libations thereupon in order to
continually nourish and repair the immanency of Rta / Orlog \[Cosmic
Order\] within our world.

The ShivLing \[which, per our ritual manuals, may also be in the form
*of* a Tree\], we pour milk and other, related preparations \[such as
Panchamrit – which adds honey, and other ingredients\] upon.

The World-Tree Proper, meanwhile, we find mention in the Gylfaginning of
similar libations comprised of the White Water of Urdarbrunnr being
poured across the loka-l limb of Yggdrasil.

Interestingly, given the prominent use of honey in some of our Hindu
milky libations upon the ShivLing, the next line of the Gylfaginning
also mentions “honey-dew” falling from the Ash Tree; something that is
also known via the curious Greek ‘double-meanings’ for the Ash Tree – as
‘Meliai’ (not at all coincidentally a term that informs words linked to
‘Spear’), but also producing ‘Meli’ (Ancient Greek for Honey), and the
Meliai (singular – ‘Melia’), the Ash-Nymphs that look after the infant
Zeus and feed Him Honey (Meli again) and the Milk of Amalthea.

Clearly, the notion of offering Milk and Honey to the Great God, the
Indo-European Sky Father, is an incredibly ancient one. And rooted (pun
not initially intended) in these archaic understandings of His strong
linkage to the Axis Mundi (indeed, in Hindu terms there is quite a
direct statement of this identification; we could arguably also see an
implicit one in the Greek Dionysus – Nysian (‘Tree’) Zeus; although it
should ALSO be noted that there is a consistent pattern of the Axis
Mundi being identified with the Sky Father’s Wife – and this is not at
all contradictory, more upon that at some other time, perhaps).

We support the Sky Father in order to support and uphold the immanency
of Cosmic Order in our Universe (hence why the Roots of Yggdrasil are
under attack by demonic dragons of chaos); and therefore we support the
Post, the World Pillar in miniature, via our offerings of the nourishing
liquids of milk and honey thereupon.

So therefore – say it with me !

Hail to Those Who Look After The Tree !  
Hail to the Tree !  
Hail to Rta Orlog !

Hail Odin !  
Hail Zeus !  
ॐ नमः शिवाय
