+++
title = "On The Correct Understanding Of Myth, Mythos, Andxa0Mythology"
date = "December 15, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/69831221_10162244594780574_8221955447779753984_o.jpg?w=786)

Something I have been meaning to do for some time now, is set out in
grander detail the true meaning of the term Myth – and how ‘Mythology’
is NOT a synonym for ‘Fantasy’, ‘Fallacy’, ‘Falsehood’, ‘Fiction’. And,
from there, segue into speaking about the concepts of ‘Mythic Truth’
relative to the more ordinary, mundane, and decidedly ‘sidereal’ kind.
And how all of this intersects with the vexed matter of Scriptural
Literalism (something warned against, as it happens, by an array of
Hindu sages of yesteryear).

However, I am aware that I have a bit of a .. piquant way of putting
things; so I decided to go about this in a rather different way to
usual. By bringing together some excellent explanatory quotes from a
number of leading minds whose views I respect; with a light bit of
interspersed commentary to help weave them together into a cohesive
whole.

So to begin with … what is a Myth, what is Mythology?

Well, at its simplest – the former is a story, the latter is a
conceptual rubric; both of which assist with our navigation of the world
around us, our perception of what’s actually going on, in ways that are
meaningful. Both *to* us (i.e. how we perceive things that aren’t
initially to do with us), and *about* us – that is to say, making us
meaningful to the eyes of others (or even, for that matter, to
ourselves).

Now, none of that means “falsehood” – although it can be something that
might look a bit like a fiction dependent, to quote Obi-wan Kenobi, upon
one’s point of view. Funny thing about fiction, though – it rarely
resonates well without at least a foundational kernel of truth; and
certainly sans some ethic of relatability.

The *best* Mythology, the stuff that really does deserve the Capital M
Myth(-Os) treatment, resonates in such a way with the immanent and the
embedded fundamental realities of the universe that it is, in essence,
*more true* than mere human happenstance that we can observably record
with a cellphone camera nor crude, eye-witness account circum-scribed
some years later.

As Neil Gaiman put it: “Things need not have happened to be true. Tales
and dreams are the shadow-truths that will endure when mere facts are
dust and ashes, and forgot.”

Which does not quite answer the functionalist question of just what a
Myth is.

If pressed – and we are pressed for space before I begin bombarding you
with the far-brighter glimmering-gleanings of more illustrious names
than I – then I would probably postulate that :

Myth being what turns otherwise indecipherable squiggles upon a page
into a map, sentences; the thing that guides our interpretation and our
understanding – enables us to make sense of otherwise unconnected
data-points that we may not even be able to tell are data-points. A
means for interpreting, understanding, even perceiving, guiding our
progress through this Reality of ours. In fact, *Creating* that Reality
for us to experience – whether singly, or more properly, communally.

In that sense, it is an overcoming of the problem of the gaping gulf of
intersubjectivity between us and not only our fellow-men of the
community, but with the rest of the universe itself.

As Sam Keen puts it:

“Myth is the system of basic metaphors, images, and stories that
in-forms the perceptions, memories, and aspirations of a people;
provides the rationale for its institutions, rituals and power
structure; and gives a map of the purpose and stages of life.”

Now, the best way to understand this, I suppose, is to take a look at
the ‘alternative’ – the Mythless World. And there’s an earlier
Nietzsche-sourced aphorism I turned into an article in that direction.
But that is not where we are going to go for this one.

Rather, it is to the beautiful mind that is (I definitely do not say
‘was’) Terry Pratchett. To quote from Hogfather:

“”Now tell me ..  
WHAT WOULD HAVE HAPPENED IF YOU HADN’T SAVED HIM?  
“Yes! The sun would have risen just the same, yes?”  
NO  
“Oh, come on. You can’t expect me to believe that. It’s an astronomical
fact.”  
THE SUN WOULD NOT HAVE RISEN.  
\[…\]  
“Really? Then what would have happened, pray?”  
A MERE BALL OF FLAMING GAS WOULD HAVE ILLUMINATED THE WORLD.”

He’s referencing, of course, a bit from C.S. Lewis’ The Voyage of the
Dawn Treader:

“In our world,” said Eustace, “a star is a huge ball of flaming gas.”  
“Even in your world, my son, that is not what a star is, but only what
it is made of.”

But Pratchett, as is his wont, takes things further. Much further. His
point, in effect, is that in the world bereft of the ‘imaginative’
understanding that also undergirds our perception of Myth – we are not
human, there is no space, no sphere for ‘humanness’. There is only cold,
hard, unfeeling data sans meaning. As he so memorably puts it
–‘Imagination, not intelligence, made us human’.

We would go in a somewhat different direction, in that ‘imagination’ may
imply flights of fancy and flourishes of falsehood. This is not that. In
the religious realm (where, it should not surprise any to learn, we make
our home) – the acts of ‘imagining’ are not there to produce something
false. But rather, to help us to see beyond the end of our nose. It is
not non-sense, but an additional sense. And the most important of all –
the one that helps us to *make sense* of the world around us in more
than the most purely animalistic of limited perceptional frameworks.

It shows us the patterns that are around us, and importantly *how we fit
in*. Perhaps even, as I have explored in some of my previous work in
this field, to begin to work *with* the myths that we find ourselves a
part of – rather than being doomed to be rode roughshod over the top of
via poorly invoked forms of same, as was the case with Pakistan’s
careless invocation of Central Asian warlords for its military hardware
nomenclature, for example.

But I promised you quotes from others, so on with the show!

Mircea Eliade:

“For the past fifty years at least, Western scholars have approached the
study of myth from a viewpoint markedly different from, let us say, that
of the nineteenth century. Unlike their predecessors, who treated myth
in the usual meaning of the word, that is, as “fable,” “invention,”
“fiction,” they have accepted it as it was understood in archaic
societies, where, on the contrary, “myth” means a “true story” and,
beyond that, a story that is a most precious possession because it is
sacred, exemplary, significant. This new semantic value given the term
“myth” makes its use in contemporary parlance somewhat equivocal. Today,
that is, the word is employed both in the sense of “fiction” or
“illusion” and in that familiar especially to ethnologists,
sociologists, and historians of religions, the sense of “sacred
tradition, primordial revelation, exemplary model.” … the Greeks
steadily continued to empty mythos of all religious and metaphysical
value. Contrasted both with logos and, later, with historia, mythos came
in the end to denote “what cannot really exist.” On its side,
Judaeo-Christianity put the stamp of “falsehood” and “illusion” on
whatever was not justified or validated by the two Testaments.”

And he’s correct about that. One of the ways in which certain forces
have attempted to cut us off from the mythic understanding – to
de-sacralize the world, in essence – is to ‘revalue the values’ around
the very word, the concept of Myth and Mythology.\[A sad trend, we must
note, that Christianity has also ultimately fallen victim to itself\]

It now is abjured as ‘falsehood’ rather than ‘explication’ – and so
therefore, it accomplishes the dual effect of driving many people away
from engagement with myth on the presumption that it is fiction … and
many more away from engagement with myth, on the presumption that
invoking the *name* ‘myth’ *renders* something ‘fiction’.

This latter hinderance I have encountered dozens upon dozens of times
with understandably annoyed Hindus who have sought to castigate me for
saying “Hindu Mythology” – insisting that I ought to say “Hindu
History”, because “Ithihasa” \[a term for some of the great Hindu
Epics\] literally means ‘That Which Happened’.

Something that causes quite a problem when some of the textual details
in these Epics … do not at all accord with a scientifically verifiable
accounting for, say, the evolution of humanity or the chronology of
human civilization and the development of agriculture, let *alone*
certain vexed questions around Indo-European migration onto the
SubContinent ; and which causes further issues when it comes to
particular details of this or that version of an Epic not matching
harmoniously with what’s presented in other canonical texts.

Indeed, the trouble with this form of insistent scriptural literalism is
twofold – that it reduces fundamental details of divine truth down to
questions of, in effect, typography and matters of accurate
transposition by scribes rather than serious theological inquiry … and
second, that it means we *miss the point* of these myths in their proper
*explanatory* context.

We are focused, in other words, upon *the wrong kind of True*. And there
are actually remarks of exactly this kind within the Hindu canon itself
… that the simple-minded man will be amused reading tales of monsters
being slain, whilst the proper and true sagacious sort will grasp the
underlying meaning to the symbols employed, and harvest the bountiful
wisdom to improve himself and those around him by looking past the easy
beguilements of literary flourishes.

But I digress. More upon that some other time.

To return to this concept of the ‘Mythless Society’ – the World of
Oblivion, as Pratchett phrased it (in full knowledge, I would impute,
with the sense of Forgetting bound up with that) – it seems
unquestionable that we live, here in the West, in a ‘Mythless Society’.
Which we might instead surmise to be the ‘MythSless Society’ – as there
is room for but one, which has sought to suppress all the others.

Sam Keen again:

“It has been fashionable in the twentieth century not only to debunk
myth, … but to pretend that that reasonable and educated people could
avoid the embarrassment of religion and the risk of metaphysics by
sticking close to demonstrable facts and testable hypotheses. However,
in the course of reducing our beliefs and hopes to certainties and
proofs, we impoverished and deluded ourselves. The modern anti-myth
reduced human life to a story without a point, a tale told by an idiot,
a process without a purpose, a journey without a goal, an affair without
a climax (Godot never comes), an accidental collision of mindless atoms.
… We have hardly noticed that economics, technology and politics have
become the new myth and metaphysic. We haven’t avoided myth and
metaphysics, only created demeaning ones.”

Or, Eliade again:

“It is only through the discovery of History — more precisely by the
awakening of the historical consciousness in Judaeo-Christianity and its
propagation by Hegel and his successors — it is only through the radical
assimilation of the new mode of being represented by human existence in
the world that myth could be left behind. But we hesitate to say that
mythical thought has been abolished. As we shall soon see, it managed to
survive, though radically changed (if not perfectly camouflaged). And
the astonishing fact is that, more than anywhere else it survives in
historiography!”

Keen also adds:

“It is only from the perspective of the outlaw … that we are able to see
that mythically informed normality is a form of mass hypnosis.”

And, for good measure:

“A society that trains us to specialize in making, doing, performing,
and producing neglects to educate us in wonder and appreciation.”

Now our serious business – both here at Arya Akasha, as well as in our
personal lives … a quest you may join us upon, if you are willing and
able – is the Re-Enchantment of the World. The Re-Mythologization, if
you like. Setting free the hostages of the mind and its horizons. An act
of Liberation – cognitive and otherwise.

And that requires a far greater, indeed a far *grander* understanding of
just what it is that Myth in fact is. What these ‘Patterns’ are, and how
to distinguish the Supernally resonant ones, from the mere humdrum
socially-constructed ones that we must wade through upon our every
day-to-day out-in-public basis.

The religious world-view is comprised of exactly these. Both, as it
happens, but built around a solid core of the former. Every
Indo-European scriptural-canonical corpus contains just such ‘patterns’;
the True events \[with a capital T for that sense of Truth that is too
true to be easily confined via crude materialistic analysis and
conventional scientia nor historiography\] ; refracted out as further
patterns both appropriate to and understood by, their subsequent,
descendant bearers.

That is in large measure why we Do What We Do. Because these are windows
in upon the fundamental Reality, the True Reality – and enables us to
resurrect, to revitalize, even to ‘reincarnate’ some of those Patterns.
Not just for some certain Indo-European peoples and their reviving
mytho-religious corpora; but also to seek to re-immanentize the
fundamental, underlying Patterns out into our reality, our sidereal
mundane reality, itself.

Re-immanentization as Revanchism. Making the World Integrally Whole
again via Re-integration. ‘Krinvanto Vishvam Aryam’, indeed, as we have
so often said.

The serious study of Myth, in other words – in its proper place and in
its proper more-than-historic understanding – enables us to meaningfully
participate *in* the Myth, Do Our Part, and uphold the values, pass on
the perceptions, that are vital for a proper life even amidst the dying
detritus of the modern age.

In future installments, I intend to take a more and closer look at some
of the other concepts we’ve but briefly touched upon or cursorily
alluded to in the above. Things like scriptural literalism (and those
aforementioned Hindu caveats AGAINST such, especially in the face of
science); Eliadian ‘Eternal Return’ or as we call it ‘Mythic Recurrence’
and the ‘Mythic Resonancy’ conceptry I’ve built out of same.

But for now, this is enough.

You’ve taken your first step into a larger world.

A Mythic one.

Best be perceiving yourself a guide.
