+++
title = "The Sea Horse Of Sovereignty – On Hellenic Poseidon , Vedic Varuna, Scythian Thagimasidas , And The Essential Equine Elevator-Empowerer Of The Ancient Indo-Europeanxa0King"
date = "December 23, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/d2h5jto-fb522aac-40d9-4f5b-8ada-989e5bf52d14.jpg?w=1024)

  
Something that has long puzzled commentators is the strong association
of the Greek figure of Poseidon with the Horse. This is incredibly
prominent within the Poseidonic mythology – the form taken by Poseidon
in His pursuit of Demeter Erinyes, for instance, or that of the Son born
to that union, Arion (The Pegasus, likewise, is Fathered by Poseidon
upon Medusa); We find the Horse hailed as a sacred animal for the God,
and given unto Athens as a gift to its King by its divine creator; and
mentioned as a sort of ‘substitute sacrifice’ in the context of Rhea
offering up a small horse in lieu of Her Son to Kronos. The Horse, or
indeed a full Horse Chariot, was frequently utilized as the major
sacrifice to Poseidon, including by Alexander the Great.

So it seems quite clear that something vitally important was understood
to the ancestors of the Ancient Greeks when they called this Great God
“Poseidon Hippios” – the God of Horses, Who evidently was both author
and receiver of same, and passed on this mastery of the horse to
mankind.

But what?

Well, dear reader … I believe I have cracked it! And via our habitual
comparative Indo-European approach making ample use of the wonderful
Vedic conceptual syllabrythat has come down to us from the Hindusphere.
Further proof of my theory is to be found amidst the Scythians – and it
is there that we shall begin.

One of the most mysterious deities cited to us by Herodotus in his
arms-length presentation of the Scythian mythology, is Thagimasadas.
Identified in IV 59 as being the deity that is specifically sacrificed
to by the Royal Scythians. And that, unfortunately, is the sum total of
our definitive knowledge upon this God.

But it is most excellently useful – for Herodotus has done us a grand
favour by directly linking this Thagimasadas \[also spelled as
Thamimasadas, inter alia, just to keep us on our toes\] to the Greek
figure of Poseidon. Something that had, again, perplexed previous
generations of comparative mythology analysis.

Why did we find these three elements – the Sea God, the Horse, and
Royalty, in such frequent alignment?

**The Vedic Investiture Via The Hellenic Hippios – On Earth As It Is
Amidst The Cloud Ocean Of Heaven  
**

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/cgh9b_cw0aab_ha.jpg?w=1024)

  
Enter Lord Varuna – and the Shatapatha Brahmana. Specifically a section
on Royal Rites that may deployed for the Coronation, the Empowerment of
the King.

What do we find there?

\[VII 52 18\]: “Then on the left side (he puts the head of) the horse,
with (Vâg. S. XIII, 42), ‘The speed of the wind,’–this one, the horse,
is indeed the speed of the wind;–‘Varuna’s navel’–for the horse is
Varuna;–‘the horse, born in the midst of the flood;’ the flood is the
water, and the horse is indeed the water-born;–‘the tawny, rock-founded
child of rivers;’ rock means mountain, and the waters are indeed founded
on the mountains;–‘harm him not, Agni, in the highest region!’ the
highest region means these worlds: thus, do not harm him in these
worlds!”

Well then. The Horse is Varuna. The Horse of the Waters. The Horse,
also, that is a child of the (flood from) the Mountains, the Rocks.

Now what might \*that\* be in a comparative Greek mythology?

Well, several occurrences, as it happens. That Horse produced by
Poseidon for the putative King of Athens – we find a flood, a stream,
emergent from Rock at the same point. We also find Poseidon as Petraios
\[‘Rocky’\] striking such Rocks in order to bring forth the horse
Skyphios\[a ‘striking’ that is figurative, and is better understood in
its more descriptive Greek phrasing – Poseidon \*impregnates\* the rock
in question\]. \[Also relevant, given the frequent co-occurrence of
Rivers/Waters and Horses in this Greek understanding is the following
Shatapatha Brahmana line \[IV 2 1 11\]: “Varuna once struck king Soma
right in the eye, and it swelled (asvayat): therefrom a horse (asva)
sprung; and because it sprung from a swelling, therefore it is called
asva. A tear of his fell down: therefrom the barley sprung; whence they
say that the barley belongs to Varuna.”; which may also invite a
tantalizing supposition about the Olive Tree bestowed by Athena, and the
Barley of Varuna – but more upon that, perhaps, some other time; for now
it is enough to note the curative properties of the barley-imbued
element in question, perhaps mirroring Soma’s strongly healing role; its
application to empower the Eye speaking not only to the Solar Eye
conceptrywe shall discuss later, but the Eye of Lordship well-known
across the Indo-European sphere (consider, for instance, ‘Drakon’ – and
not at all coincidentally, the line from the Rigsthula: “ötul váru augu
sem yrmlingi” – the quality of the infant Jarl being that his eye
‘flashes’ or ‘flares’ like that of a young dragon. But we are getting
ahead of ourselves!\]

Yet what is being described in this Vedic rite? Well, when we find
‘Rocks’ out of which a ‘tawny’ liquid emerges in such rites – the
general presumption should be the similar one to what is found by Odin
‘midst the Hnitbjorg, the ‘Clashing Stones’. An Empowering Elixir,
produced via the pressing of the Stones, The Rocks, The Mountains
(figuratively described). That which makes a Sage a Sage (well, one of
several vectors for this imbuement of the Divine Essence) – and that
which, vitally, renders the King a King.

In these terms, something we have often found in the Vedic conceptual
syllabryis the notion that a man becoming a King is expected to
‘become’ – or, rather, ‘become invested’ by Varuna, by the Deity. It is
in the manner of the Eliadian Eternal Return, the Mythic Resonancy and
Recurrence, or perhaps, in a sense, Jung’s Ergreiffen explication. The
Essence of the God enters into the Man, the Man becomes more than a Man.
The King In Heaven is found also down here on Earth amidst His Folk.

It is via the imbibification of this ‘Horse’, the Sacral Brew, that this
is done.

Which renders the rejection of the Lordship, the Patronage of Poseidon
over Athens by Kerkrops / Cercrops , Her First King , all the more
interesting. We shall not speculate at this time upon what might be
covertly congealed within the Contest of Athena and Poseidon therein –
except to note that there is also quite intricate Vedic conceptry for
the Indo-European Goddess that Athena, too, is a grand expression of, to
be the Patron of the King. So it is not as untoward as it might
otherwise first appear.

**Medusa, Metis, Poseidon, Perseus – The Sovereign Striking That Splits
The Ground And Raises Up Regality  
**

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/0ac1ec1562bcade048f9221918e651cd.jpg?w=494)

  
A further support for this is demonstrated in the mythology around the
Pegasus – the Flying Horse – born first of Medusa by Poseidon, and
thence ‘born again’ we might perhaps say, out of the neck of the Gorgon
decapitated by the future-regal Perseus.

As I have long observed, the etymology of ‘Medusa’, Greek ‘Medo’ – to
quote myself ‘pon the subject: “The root of this in Ancient Greek is
‘Medo’ – to Rule, to Protect; and with the PIE ‘Med’ which underpins
that also referring to both counsel (and healing) as well as the
‘measuring’ of boundaries and imposition of ‘limits’. ” \[the
‘imposition of limits’ – both in terms of laws, and also in terms of
territorial delineation (and the ensuing defence of same) is an
incredibly potent part and parcel to what the Sovereign is supposed to
do; whilst wisdom and wise counsel are held to be integral to the King
ruling successfully – hence the ‘Metis’ and indeed ‘Royal Metis’ we find
similarly construed and derived, indeed quite literally ‘taken in’ by
the Celestial Sovereign, Zeus – interestingly, as a direct prelude to
bringing forth the grand Princess-Queen, Athena\]

A matter considerably reinforced when we consider the iconographic
saliency of the Gorgon’s Head, the Gorgoneion device, as the ensign of
Sovereignty borne by both Athena and Zeus, and also found as an
incredibly common ‘head’ for the sanctifying Mark of the Sovereign King
upon the coinage of the ancient Hellenic world.

So – once again, we have this inexorable association: of Poseidon
imparting a sort of … ‘liquid essence’ \[to speak delicately\] to a
figure associated with stone, and in a nexus that produces a Horse, and
Sovereignty, Rulership as its ultimate result. Perseus, after all,
‘liberates’ this Horse from the stone-associated Medusa, en route to his
reclaiming his birthright \[something that, admittedly, goes rather
differently in various sources – with Perseus becoming a king in other
realms, dependent upon the telling\]; and in so doing proving that he is
the Son, the bearer of some measure \[‘medo’ again\] of the (imparted)
Essence of the Sky Father.

\[A reasonably direct linkage between the aforementioned Indo-European
myth of the Sky Father ‘breaking’ or ‘impregnating’ the Stone/Earth and
the kingly investiture under discussion, is also recorded in the
Shatapatha Brahmana \[V 4 3 21-22\]: “Looking down on this (Earth) He
then mutters, ‘O mother Earth, injure me not, nor I thee!’ For the Earth
was once afraid of Varuna, when He had been consecrated, thinking,
‘Something great surely has He become now that He has been consecrated:
I fear lest He may rend me asunder!’ And Varuna also was afraid of the
Earth, thinking, ‘I fear lest She may shake me off!’ Hence by that
(formula) He entered into a friendly relation with Her \[…\]Now this
Râgasûya is Varuna’s consecration”. It makes eminently logical sense,
per the Eliadian principle of the ‘Eternal Return’, the mythic
recurrence and resonancy aforementioned, for the Coronation of the King
on Earth to mirror that of the King of the Heaven; and, indeed, the
Ragasuya is precisely that – Royal rites to just such a purpose, for a
human to become … more than such, move closer to the Divine.\]

But why a Horse?

**The Solar Asva – The Shining-Maned Horse Amidst The Sea Of Stars  
**  

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/2.jpg?w=820)

Now, at this juncture it should be tempting to make the obvious and
somewhat euhemeric presumption – that the reason for the Horse is due to
the strong conceptual saliency of the Horse, the Mounted Warrior, for
the Military applications thereof. And certainly, it can fairly be
argued that there is \*an\* element of that which is relevant.

Except that is really only a part of it. We are looking, after all, at a
specifically \*Water\* originated horse. And Sea Horsesnor Hippopotami
have tended to see significant success in martial application.

No, for this we must look out farther – out to Sea ! For a peculiar form
of quite prominent Flying Horse …

The Sun!

Now, the more usually encountered conceptual syllabryamidst various
Indo-European mythic contexts, is for the Sun to be associated with a
Chariot – either as a great, shining Chariot Wheel … or alternatively,
pulled along behind or mounted within such a vehicle. It is not hard to
see why. And yet, we also find the Horse and the Horseman as Solar as
well. (The Nordic “Dagr” has elements of this in being mounted upon the
Shining Maned Skinfaxi – although is, nevertheless, more conventionally
depicted drawing a chariot that is the Day proper, thus rendering this a
case of ‘both’ rather than ‘either’ as applies Solar Horse and Horseman
or Solar Chariot and Charioteer. I chiefly mention that figure at this
juncture, as the ‘Golden Maned’ quality is also exactly that possessed
by the Horses of Poseidon’s sea-origin chariot as reported at various
junctures within the Greek mythos. It would seem plausible that the
mounted Horse is a-priori to the Chariot, and therefore that the older
layers of conceptryshould be more directly tethered to the former, with
the latter building thereupon and helping to inform the literal
‘day-to-day’ understandings for the Solar Horse’s journey across the sky
(and that, really, is a large part of why the Horse – the journey!),
whilst the much more rare and ornately archaic coronation rites should
retain the presaging and underlying Horse at their more conservative
core)

To quote from one of the key Vedic hymnals required for the Asvamedha –
the Horse Sacrifice that confirms the plenipotentiary power upon this
earth of the King – RV I 163:

“1 WHAT time, first springing into life, thou neighedst, proceeding from
the sea or upper waters,  
Limbs of the deer hadst thou, and eagle pinions. O Steed, thy birth is
nigh and must be lauded.  
2 This Steed which Yama gave hath Trita harnessed, and him, the first of
all, hath Indra mounted.  
His bridle the Gandharva grasped. O Vasus, from out the Sun ye fashioned
forth the Courser.  
3 Yama art thou, O Horse; thou art Āditya; Trita art thou by secret
operation.  
Thou art divided thoroughly from Soma. They say thou hast three bonds in
heaven  
that hold thee.  
4 Three bonds, they say, thou hast in heaven that bind thee, three in
the waters,  
three within the ocean.  
To me thou seemest Varuṇa, O Courser, there where they say is thy
sublimest birth-place.  
5 Here-, Courser, are the places where they groomed thee, here are the
traces of thy hoofs as winner.  
Here have I seen the auspicious reins that guide thee, which those who
guard the holy Law keep safely.  
6 Thyself from far I recognized in spirit,—a Bird that from below flew
through the heaven.  
I saw thy head still soaring, striving upward by paths unsoiled by dust,
pleasant to travel.  
7 Here I beheld thy form, matchless in glory, eager to win thee food at
the Cow’s station.  
Whene’er a man brings thee to thine enjoyment, thou swallowest the
plants most greedy eater.  
8 After thee, Courser, come the car, the bridegroom, the kine come
after, and the charm of maidens.  
Full companies have followed for thy friendship: the pattern of thy
vigour Gods have copied.  
9 Horns made of gold hath he: his feet are iron: less fleet than he,
though swift as thought, is Indra.  
The Gods have come that they may taste the oblation of him who mounted,
first of all, the Courser.  
10 Symmetrical in flank, with rounded haunches, mettled like heroes, the
Celestial Coursers  
Put forth their strength, like swans in lengthened order, when they, the
Steeds, have reached the heavenly causeway.  
11 A body formed for flight hast thou, O Charger; swift as the wind in
motion is thy spirit.  
Thy horns are spread abroad in all directions: they move with restless
beat in wildernesses.  
12 The strong Steed hath come forward to the slaughter, pondering with a
mind directed God-ward.  
The goat who is his kin is led before him the sages and the singers
follow after.  
13 The Steed is come unto the noblest mansion, is come unto his Father
and his Mother.  
This day shall he approach the Gods, most welcome: then he declares good
gifts to him who offers.”

As we can see, this is a Horse … a Horse with Wings … that has as its
origins the (Celestial) Ocean, is identified as an Aditya \[i.e. one of
the 7 or 8 or 12 Solar Figures / Phases of the Sun\], indeed
specifically as Varuna – the Vedic Ocean/Celestial Ocean God Who Is Also
the King In Heaven, and quite definitely radiantly Solar\]. A ‘Winged
Horse’ would most certainly resemble Pegasus (although as a point of
interest, the \*broader\* array ofanimal symbolism might perhaps speak
to a Dragon – especially with the prominent ‘Draconic’ association with
the symbolism of Leadership, Rulership, that we have discussed in other
works, and briefly quoted from the Nordic Rigsthula in support of
well-above). ‘Swift as the wind in motion’ also almost exactly mirrors
the description for Arion, one of Poseidon’s horse-formed Sons from the
realms of Greek mythology.

And, to nobody’s especial surprise, these key elements also align with
what we find in the much-earlier aforementioned Shatapatha Brahmana
verse that I had quoted:

“Then on the left side (he puts the head of) the horse, with (Vâg. S.
XIII, 42), ‘The speed of the wind,’–this one, the horse, is indeed the
speed of the wind;–‘Varuna’s navel’–for the horse is Varuna;–‘the horse,
born in the midst of the flood;’ the flood is the water, and the horse
is indeed the water-born”

With additional support for the Solar identification of the Horse
provided by an earlier verse drawn from the same Brahmana \[VII 5 2 6\]:

“And, again, why he puts the heads of the victims thereon. Pragâpati
alone was here at first 1. He desired, ‘May I create food, may I be
reproduced!’ He fashioned animals from his vital airs, a man from his
soul (mind), a horse from his eye”

Prajapati is, of course, the ‘All-Father’ – and here, the Horse is
identified with the Eye of this Deity. We know from the Shatapatha
Brahmana presentation of the SataRudriya Rite, that this figure is
correlate with the Sky Father \[‘Dyaus Pitar’, Zeus Pater\] – as the
Emanation of the Manyu by Him is directly correlate with the Birth of
Minerva / Athena in the Classical rites and legendariums. Here, the Eye
is presented as the Horse’s origin … the Eye of the Sky Father being
quite specifically the Sun in a number of Indo-European mythic
understandings (including not only Zeus, but also Shiva, Dyaus,
underpinning Odin’s ‘Blazing Eye’, and specifically both Prajapati and
Varuna … but, then, I repeat myself, don’t I).

It would be also fair to surmise, I suspect, that the Solar Horse
understanding underpins the shared Greek – Vedic myth of The Sky Father
in Horse Form pursuing His Wife in ‘Shadow’/’Dark’ Form. For the Greeks,
this was Poseidon pursuing the Black Demeter Erinyes ; for the Vedic and
later Hindu mythology it is Vivasvan \[‘Wide-Shining One’\], Surya
\[although per my identification the Sky Father referred to as Surya,
rather than the Surya that is the Son of the Sky Father\] pursuing the
Chhaya \[‘Shadowy’\] form either emanated or assumed by Saranyu. The
progeny of both of these mythic unions is at least one prominent
Horse-styled offspring \[Arion in the Greek, Revanta and/or the Asvins
in the Hindu – and it should be noted just how important a role the
Asvins have when it comes to the position and elevation of the King\];
although what makes these interesting for a ‘Solar Horse’ identification
other than the direct and literal ‘Surya’ labelling in the latter
account, is the potential for this to present the Solar Horseman as
pursuing the Night – Who Flees from Him.

The Sky Father, Dyaus Pitar, after all, has always had an irreducible
‘Solar’ element \[it is literally right there in the linguistics , the
theonymy – ‘Dyaus’, the Bright/Shining Daylit Sky\]; and, as it happens,
this ‘Solar’ element being transmissible via heredity is also well
attested. Zeus’ pursuit of Nemesis in Swan form (part of a parade of
animal shapes perhaps not unlike what is preserved in the aforementioned
Vedic verses in an attempt to describe the characteristics of the Sun)
begets an equivalent to the aforementioned Asvins, Castor and Pollux …
and also Helen (of Troy), a Solar Goddess (as discussed in my various
previous works upon the subject; even still recalled as such by the
Doric Greeks during the Classical age), Who makes Menelaus a King via
Her marriage to him.

A Solar Woman rather than a Solar Horse – yet nevertheless, the pattern
remains: The Solar / Equine Expression of the Sky Father’s Kingly Mantle
is what is required to make a King. And also, not at all coincidentally,
what is lost to dethrone a king.

**The Solar Glories And Winged Radiency Of Persia  
**

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/ddfv3ud-f0c3447c-e84d-4aa7-af29-53be63649333.jpg?w=640)

  
We find this understanding preserved quite clearly of, in all places,
the Zoroastrian / Persian texts – the ‘Khvarenah’ or ‘Hvarnah’ that is
the ‘Radiant’ \[‘Hvar’ – from the same root as Sanskrit ‘Svar’, PIE
‘Sohwl’, as in ‘Solar’\]’ quality of the King. His “Kingliness”, we
might say – his‘Glory’ or ‘Renown’, the mantle of majesty which draws
men to follow him and the law to unfurl in an almost gravitational
fashion. There is also a potential understanding of its derivation being
via the ingestion of particular empowering consumables; and it is
important to note the ‘winged’ form this quality takes (particularly
when it is \*leaving\* a king that has failed – as with the Varayna
\[often represented as either a falcon or a raven\] that departs from
Yima; the notion of the Solar Bird as bringing the Soma – i.e. going the
other way – is found in the Vedas viz. (Agni-as-) Shyena, and the
Imperial Eagle symbolism more generally as an emphatic emblem of the Sky
Father, the Emperor of the Skies and bestower of blessings to His
designated emulator down here ‘pon this Earth of ours).

As with various other Indo-European peoples, we find a consistent Solar
conceptry for these Persian rulers – both in terms of names or epithets
\[for example, those of the mythic king Yima : Hvara-, that we have just
met, and Xsaeta-\], but also in terms of the Sun as being somehow
essential in the ‘anointing’ of a soon-to-be King. We can also, based
around our comparative IE framework advanced in the above piece,
tentatively link the well-documented sacrifices of Horses to the Sun
carried out by both the Persians themselves and the Massagetae as having
prospectively similar import. Or, at least, origination via the pan-IE
Solar Horse concept.

Of additional interests for a comparative IE approach to the Zoroastrian
mythology here, is to note that the prime bearers of the Hvarnah,
include Yima (Yama), Verethragna (a ‘sanitized’ copy of Indra), and
Thraetaona (Trita). Which, if one scrolls back up to the list of
luminaries cited in RV I 163 2, is a perfect match for the figures
associated with the Solar Horse by the Vedic verse in question. Albeit
with some .. significant shifts in the understanding of just Who and
what these figures are undertaken by the Zoroastrian heresy, as I have
discussed at great length in other works.

And where is it that we find such a magisterial quality? Well, the
Vourukasa – the Great Ocean. Following Yima’s loss of this most
essence-tial quality of Kingship, the proverbial ‘Mandate of Heaven’ (to
borrow a Chinese expression in translation), this is also where this
quality returns to, to be contended for again by potential worthy
successor(s).

Perhaps the Fravashi emblem, so frequently held to be a Mesopotamian
appropriation by the Persians, was in fact their recognition of a
salient symbol that happened to match and to mirror incredibly well, the
‘Winged Sun’ they knew from their own endogenous scripture, rites, and
mythology.

Although, importantly, with this essential quality ‘de-personalized’,
and taken from what we see in the Vedic understanding as being
essentially an imbuement of the Kingly Essence of Varuna, indeed the
\*entry into the King-to-be\* \*of\* Varuna, in a sense … through to a
relatively less characterized (in all senses) general ‘radiance’,
quality, and at best ‘animalistic’ term of referency. Even there,
though, some of the old underlying archaic Indo-Iranian concepts (likely
familiar to the similarly derived Classical-era Scythian beliefs told
to Herodotus) still shone through.

And speaking of concepts that ‘shine through’ – there is one vitally
important question that we have not yet seriously sought to answer:
namely, why The Sun?

**The Light Of Law – The Light Of Life : On The Solar Sva-Reign At The
Heart Of The Loka-Realm  
**

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/king_vikramaditya.jpg?w=480)

  
And the answer, as they say, is “blindingly obvious”. The Sun is the
ultimate source of all – all life, all energy, all light (hence the
Solar focal-origin point for the famed Gayatri Mantra, etc.). The Light
and the Law are fundamentally correlated within the Indo-European
cosmological conceptry (although the strong adherence of terms for
Darkness and Law must also be considered – as we did during the course
of ‘Ragnarok And The Night Lord’) – with regard to the Indo-European Sky
Father and an Indo-European (human) King, ‘Seeing’ is not merely
‘Believing’, but is also the essential ingredient to ‘Ruling’. This is
expressed in quite an array of ways, including the aforementioned
‘Drakon’ conceptry in both Greek and Old Norse (specifically the
Rigsthula), and Sanskrit ‘Loka’ – a term that encapsulates both the
faculty of sight and the facility of dominion: a territory, a realm,
rulership ‘as far as the eye can see’ (it’s from the same PIE root as
‘Look’ – ‘Lewk’).

The Sun is correlated with the Ruling Deities of the Universe – the
King, and quite pointedly the Queen (viz. Vedic Aditi, Scythian Tabiti –
and see my previous work for how these Goddess facings are integral to
Kingship in Their respective traditions) in Heaven. This is not only due
to the manner in which we all depend upon the Sovereigns (consider
Sanskrit ‘Bhaga’ – effectively ‘The Bestower’, akin also to ‘Lord’ in
the archaic Germanic sense of the ‘Loaf Warden’ (in fact the term from
whence ‘Lord’ derives)), nor the way in which our world can seem to
revolve around Them. But chiefly because the Sovereign is the
mouth-point, the locus of emanation, for the Cosmic Law – Dharma, Rta,
Orlog, Dikaiosune – out into our world. Human sovereigns issue Decrees,
they ‘Measure’ and they Judge. The Rulers of the Divine have only to
\*be\* to exert an incredible and incredibly potent expansive
‘stablishmentupon the universe.

They are, in effect, the ‘mediators’ of Rta-As-Brahman (Cosmic Order as
the supernal Absolute – what is also understood etymologically in Nordic
‘Orlog’ – ‘Outside/Above Law’; which is also, entirely uncoincidentaly,
effectively utilized to mean ‘Life Force’, ‘Thing That Makes Us
Sapient/Sentient/Human/Alive’, in the Voluspa) out into our world – the
empowerment of such being found via King Soma, the implacable weaponry
of the Vajra \[c.f Vak Saraswati, Shyena, and the Asvins’ role in
providing these\], and the Insight of the Sage.

The Sun – that is also the Deity (or Deities) in question – comes down
to us in an emanated form: that of the Horse. The Vedic rites then have
the Horse sacrificed so that he may re-ascend back up into the Heavens
via the Sacral Pyre (Agni), his job done down here ‘pon this Earth;
whilst meanwhile, this essential essence is mediated via the Horse that
forms between the Press-Stones – the Soma, as well as via the Flame of
Pious Rite (Agni) and His divine radiance, ‘midst other such
embodiments/transverse incarnations, to be taken into the King. The King
Who Becomes As The Sun, As The Horse, As The God, down here upon this
Earth of ours.

A fascinating example of this conceptry on ‘active deployment’ is to be
found in a most severely misunderstood hymnal – RV X 124 – wherein the
three ‘elements’ or ‘understandings’ for the bearing of this Divine
Essence (‘vectors’ for it, we might say – Agni, Varuna, and Soma), are
induced to leave a previous royal figure and instead be imbued into the
new incipient king. Because the latter figure is identified via the
title ‘Indra’ \[as a deliberate ‘mythic resonancy’ for the \*Son\* and
logical Successor of the Sky Father Who Reigns In Heaven mentioned in
line 3\], it is often taken literally rather than ritually as being some
sort of ‘dethroning’ of Dyaus or Varuna (but, then, I repeat myself);
or, more bizarrely, as some kind of ‘liberation’ from captivity within
Vritra of the three Great Gods (or, I should say, three ‘facings’ of the
Great God) and a ‘victory’ of the Devas over the A’Suraswith a
‘changing of sides’ by these Three from Asura to Deva. A full
explication of exactly why this is an incorrect (if not downright
incoherent) interpretation is beyond the scope of this piece (and
unlikely to dent the self-assured over-confidence of the people who tend
to be the most ardent expounders of this “theory”, anyway); so for now
it is enough to note that this is not merely my own opinion – but also a
view with prominent and well-regarded academic support. And also that
this rendering matches up precisely with what we SHOULD expect for the
coronation rites, the empowerment and investiture rites, for an incoming
human King who is seeing to be, as the hymnal itself puts it – “from the
godless \[state\] to immortality by secret pathways”, as Varuna is
invested into him to “come and be Lord and Ruler of my kingdom”.

To rule as a God, one must become as a God – and to act like a God
requires the requisite impartment of the potency with which to do so. It
is evident that the ancient Indo-European was well aware that mere human
figures were failable when given supreme power; and so they resolved to
endeavour to render those who were given such power .. to no longer be
merely human. Not fully, anyway.

Although as we can tell from the Ramayana, wherein Varuna enters into
Ravana – the would-be world-sovereign – and Ravana begins to break under
the strain of bearing Varuna within Him … not just any man, any vessel
is up to the standards requisite for being, becoming, housing, the God
and the Divine Potency of Kingship. The (meta)physical pressures of
Varuna within Ravana that cause the latter such discomfort are mirrored
via the eventual failings of Ravana and His rulership, likewise.

Few of us, it would seem, can truly bear to hold the Sun within us. And
those who are not up to bearing the weight of its Solar Corona are
burned apart from within – although often not before they have manage to
wreak insipid or incalculable damage ‘midst their soon-to-be
death-throes.

**Conclusions – The ‘Setting’ Sun And The Descent Of Myth As Avatara
Precept  
**

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/122244012_10164298342990574_4973903683768444652_o.jpg?w=1024)

  
As we have hopefully demonstrated once more through the course of this
rather lengthy (A)Arti-cle, the Vedic texts act as an awe-inspiring
keystone via which the unlocking of the subtle, hidden meanings of a
vast array of the more familiar (and less familiar) Indo-European mythic
sphere may be both aligned and unlocked.

We have long advocated for Poseidon to be understood as a ‘facing’ of
Dyaus Pitar – the Sky Father. And here is the proof. A Solar
characterization for Poseidon, a Sovereignty characterization for
Poseidon, an alignment of the Myths of Poseidon with Ritual Practice –
and further proof via the ‘triangulative’ possibilities afforded us by
Herodotus’ Interpretatio Graeca of the Scythian religion.

We have also long advocated that the Scythians represent a direct
continuance of the (Proto-)Indo-European mythology and religion in a way
that is unmatched except by the Vedic sphere. And, again, here is the
proof – direct correspondences between the Scythians and their Aryan
cousins, just as we should expect for these mutual bearers of the
post-Andronovo tradition. A situation rendered all the more interesting
when our major salient window into their lived practice, is comprised of
Greeks who still bear some \*vague\* degree of subconscious
understanding of these matters … but are unable to truly ‘join the dots’
in the much more comprehensive manner that we are today (due to their
own ‘loss’ of understanding of their own mytho-religion down the
centuries). What a thing – Herodotus et co lived only a few hundred
kilometers from the Scythian expanse they were describing the customs
of, and were contemporaneous with them in time … and yet we, here, on
the other side of the globe and more than two thousand, near two and a
half thousand years hence, have the apparently superior comprehension of
what they were actually practicing. Something, to be sure, only afforded
and made possible via those two cursory lines \*of\* Herodotus’ own
work, yet still a marvel.

To expand further upon the point around the Greeks’ loss of their own
archaic religious understandings – this is something we have also talked
about at great length elsewhere. We have repeatedly demonstrated that
various of the more prominent Greek myths (including, for example,
Herakles, Athena, and Iolaus against the Hydra) have direct 1:1
correspondences with the Vedic mythology … but also the Vedic ritualine
corpus. And that what is preserved in the Vedas as \*both\* mythology
\*and\* ritual processes (with the narratives helping to ‘encode’ and
structure for oral transmission precisely these rites), has lost the
latter sense and meaning in the Greek understanding, and only been
preserved there as evocatively embellished mythic recountings that may
change various rather important details for artistic purposes dependent
upon the teller. The various Poseidon and Horse myths that we have cited
above stand as salient testimony to this fact when considered in light
of the Vedic ritual verses that directly resonate with them whilst also
being more so \*precisely because\* they are understood to be ritual
processes rather than merely something that happened long ago.

The core of the Solar Horse Rites of Kingship that we have illuminated
in the above (A)Arti-cle, is that some ‘Spark’ of the Absolute – the
Cosmic Order: Rta, Orlog, Dikaiosune – emanated (indeed, continually
re-immanentized) out into our world, our universe via the Sun … descends
down (‘rises out of the Waters’ – the liminal sphere around our universe
beyond which lies the Absolute) in both Horse and God and Horse-God
form; there to be transferred and imparted into the human ruler who is
‘stepping into the shoes’ of the Divine Regent of the Heavens. As Above,
So Below – and So Below, through the Divine Grace of the Above.

It is a complex arrangement designed primarily to ensure that the mortal
realm resembles most closely its divine prototype; and to continually
reaffirm and re’stablish, re’stabilize this relationship – as RV X 124 7
puts it: “The Sage hath fixed his form by wisdom in the heavens: Varuṇa
with no violence let the waters flow.”
