+++
title = "COME HOME, INDO-EUROPEAN MAN – A Response To Axa0Critic"
date = "December 22, 2020"

+++
As I predicted, my recent post showing British soldiers engaged in Hindu
devotional practices alongside their Gurkha comrades, provoked some
strong reactions. Most of which were positive, although one chap replied
with a pretty negative comment that I think deserves the proper
response.

That being a comprehensive reply setting the issues he’s raised to rest
– not the dispatch of Gurkhas to, and I quote, “gut” him. I’m not sure
quite what lead him to believe that Arya Akasha maintains a trained
strike-team of Gurkhas on stand-by to put the “Combat” back into “Combat
Theology” … but despite my adoptive Indo-Nepali family being themselves
of strong Nepali Kshatriya roots, this is not the case. Yet.

We feel that some of the issues raised go to the heart of who we are and
why we do what we do as Arya Akasha. Namely – the promotion of the
worship of the Indo-European Gods, the guidance on how to begin to do so
– and just why it is that we feel that the Hindu understanding is not an
exclusive one ‘crowding out’ other Indo-European perspectives that we
are also seeking to help resurrect, reincarnate, revive.

In any case, here is the comment we got from the Polish chap that we are
responding to:

“you are overfetishising gurkhification of brits, who had been long
depraved of their celto-germanic traditions. It’s nothing special when
you come in with a ready product to give to a person that has no good of
his own. It’s sad really, when you choose your far away cousins ways,
because you forgot your own. I don’t care if you end up telling me to
get gutted by Gurkhas, but this isn’t a coming home. They wont honor
their IE ancestors, by choosing easy, by choosing a different path, made
by other people, for other people, in different region and context. They
would come home to IE ancestors by bringing back Celtic/Germanic
religion and traditions. You want to respect you and acknowledge IE
inheritance? Don’t be tempted by hinduist imperialism, don’t promote
other IE peoples into choosing not their own branch of IE culture.”

Now, as you can see – there are indeed some legitimate avenues of
inquiry that he has raised, even if he is somewhat brusque and bizarre
in some of his choices of phrasing.

So here is the response that I had written to him, now presented for
broader consumption here on Arya Akasha’s public page:

“… “Hinduist Imperialism” is a new one – and rather ironic considering
that it was pointedly British imperialism that brought the Gurkhas into
service for the Crown.

But to respond to what you have said – and it does deserve a somewhat
detailed response \[which I may or may not be up to delivering at 06:17
in the morning after an all-nighter\] …

What we are doing is not “promot\[ing\] other IE peoples into choosing
not their own branch of IE culture” \[unless your definition of “IE
culture” for religious purposes, includes modern-day “Anglican” Church
of England\] – What we ARE doing is promoting Indo-European people into
choosing Indo-European religion; rather than, as many are doing today –
either no religion, or non-IE ones.

Now yes, *within* that broad swathe of “Indo-European religion”, there
are of course more localized branches that have existed, or could exist
again with enough effort. But the vitally important thing, I feel, is at
least getting people to the broad sphere of Indo-European religion, and
specifically, actually engaged *with* religion, the rites and worship.
You know – the *purpose* of religion in the first place. To Honour The
Gods.

*That*, in the broad sense, is what is meant by “Coming Home” – Coming
Home to Honouring the Indo-European Gods.

The object of honouring, in a religion, is not merely one’s immediate
and directly proximate forebears. That IS *an* element, sure – and it is
one that Hinduism is quite big on \[with, unsurprisingly, strong
concordances between the Hindu customs in this area, and those found in
the Classical and Germanic spheres – because, of course, these have
developed from the same origins\];

But for a large portion of our religious veneration, we are honouring
The Gods – and it is worth noting that, speaking mythically, particular
of these Gods are ancestors to us all \[consider – Vedic Manu, Germanic
Mannus, Roman Romulus, etc.\]. Same Indo-European Gods, differently
expressed in some ways by Their descended peoples.

So, the question becomes: if you are serious about this endeavour,
Honouring the Gods, then how are you to do it?

As you acknowledge, the British have effectively lost their various
endogenous-to-their-IE-branches means to do so. Quite some time ago, in
fact – somewhere more than a millennium.

So what do you want done? Simply nothing? Wait in perma-holding pattern
doing nothing for something else to eventually perhaps turn up?
Encourage Protestant or Catholic Christianity because for the best part
of a millennium and a half, that’s what much of Britain’s population has
consistently, ancestrally been?

You mention “bringing back Celtic/Germanic religion and traditions.”

Now, the fact of the matter is that “Celto-Germanic traditions” do not
really exist anymore \[in truly ‘living’ form at least\]. Indeed, the
“Celtic” ones \[in England at least\] were rather heavily obviated by
the “Germanic”, inter alia – so it can be fairly argued that some degree
of ‘mixing’ of IE traditions has already occurred without regard to
apparently somewhat arbitrary bounds of pristine propriety.

We do not really have the material to bring back the Celtic one;
although the Germanic one is, I must say, in rather better \[albeit
nowhere near perfect\] shape.

And that is partially why we \[by which I mean myself and the rest of
the Arya Akasha team\] have been able to provide an active consultancy
support for several Germanic/Nordic revivalist efforts through the
fruits of our research.

Because yes, there is indeed something precious and valuable about
getting these other long-dormant, even dessicated ‘branches’ of the tree
growing back to life. An effort at ‘resurrection’ rather than
‘revitalization’, thouugh. We absolutely agree.

It is just that due to the fact that we *don’t have the materials* to
actually bring back these things in Europe as they historically were …
we have to make use of other elements, comparative elements, in order to
splice into the gaps. So that instead of stumbling around in the dark
wondering if this or that entirely speculative stab at a ritual
reconstruction is actually … anything at all; we can make use of the
theological templating provided for us by the last living Indo-European
religion – the Vedic/Hindu one.

And that is actually easier than it sounds, at least as applies the
Germanic. Because we *keep finding areas* wherein what is come down to
us in ‘encoded’ form in the Eddas \[written, as you probably know,
decades after the Christianization of Iceland, by Sturluson – who … got
a bit ‘creative’ with some things or did not understand what he was
trying to preserve in others or *had* to obscure things due to the
religious climate of the day, etc. .. \] , matches up seriously well
with what we know from the Vedic ritual and broader religious sphere.
Because what is going on in those Nordic texts, is a dimly remembered
and mythologized pseudo-remembering of the direct Germanic parallel to
these Vedic elements.

A good example, and I can link the articles I’ve written upon the
subject if they are of interest, concerns the presentation of the Meath
of Poetry in the Skaldskaparmal and Havamal by Sturluson – and how these
have a *suite of 1:1 correspondences* with what’s found in the Vedic
manuals for Soma preparation.

Because what is being described *is ultimately the same*, from the same
roots. It’s just that where we (Hindus) refer to the obtaining of Soma
\[‘That Which Is Pressed’\] between the clashing rocks that are the
Press Stones, etc. etc. and then ‘delivered’ by the Fire-Bird Form of
the Sky Father in the form of a bird-shaped fire-altar … the Nordic
account has the Mead of Kvasir \[‘That Which Is Pressed’\] hidden in the
Hnitbjorg \[‘Clashing Rocks’, interpreted as a magical mountain that
opens and closes\], and is delivered by the Sky Father in the form of an
Eagle flying back with it.

Now, if we *just* had the Nordic mythological materials – then you would
see all sorts of strange theories about what the scant fragmentary
details we have about the Mead of Poetry were actually supposed to mean.
There’s quite a few people out there who basically think that Sturluson
kinda made up or mangled large swathes of the relevant textual material
in the first place.

It is only *because* we have these Vedic comparative elements that we
can actually say “yes, see, this is a ritual with these elements …
here’s how you would likely begin to think about performing one today”.

In summary, I think .. the metaphor we often use is that in most of the
rest of the IE world, the religions of those people, the ‘houses’ … they
have burned down.

So we are very fortunate that, while we are working to get some of these
rebuilt \[and it is not going to be possible for all of them\], we are
able to seek shelter with our cousins – who have maintained a large and
beautiful house down the millennia, and have preserved the sturdy and
robust design elements that shall, in any case, be vitally necessary for
those other rebuilding efforts of the people more closely proximate to
us.

Now personally, I am of Scandinavian \[and also Breton\] ancestry … but
I am also a Hindu – one of the few reasonably ‘proper’ European ones
that you will ever likely meet. The way that happened is .. a long story
for another time, although in my case, it involves my adoptive
Indo-Nepali family and a set of rather remarkable events that made it so
me winding up where I did was .. not so much a matter of me having
chosen the religion, as the religion having chosen me. \[And then, some
months in, I got Told to go out there and help rebuild, as I am now
doing\] Despite the fact that my own *immediate* forebears are a line of
Christian priests \[the Reverend Rolinson being my Father, His Father
Before Him being .. you get the idea\] , I *know* that I am in the right
place. \[and even though I am not quite sure whether those forebears are
in a Christian Heaven, or what .. I do carry out every Fortnight of the
Ancestors \[‘Pitru Paksha’\] libations for the nourishment of Their
Shades\]

In terms of the “COME HOME, INDO-EUROPEAN MAN” tagline – it is a bit
memetic, but it is also true. The heritage element, you can view either
incredibly narrowly as being just the exact specific thing directly
associated with your own familial lineage back a few generations or a
few more … or you can take a bit of a broader viewpoint. Even if you are
merely running with your own family lineage, you are *eventually* going
to hit the PIE Urheimat – and there, the religion is quite *strongly*
concordant with what is preserved in the conservative Vedic elements.
\[I have demonstrated this from time to time with comparative analysis
with, say, Greek, Roman, and other ritualine materials that we have some
access to – showing the 1:1 concordances with the Vedic comparatives,
which strongly suggest that they have a common point of origin with a
recalled practice of the PIE \]

So when I say ‘the ‘Home”, there in that quote – I in fact mean that
broader sense of the Indo-European heritage and active engagement with
the religious sphere thereof … Worshipping and Honouring the Gods.

Now you can object strenuously to this, and insist that the only way
that could be proper is if the Gods in question were the *very specific*
understanding of these that one’s own immediate forebears had an
arbitrary length of time ago – although that would be curious for you to
do, considering ‘Celto-Germanic’ is a labelling you have applied, and as
i noted, that is already ‘mixed’. Perhaps you would similarly insist
that a British person hailing the Nordic names for the Germanic
understandings of the Gods rather than the Saxon ones is similarly
improper ? What about a British person of Celtic ancestry invoking Roman
names … certainly, his ancestors were known to do such following the
Roman settlement of much of Western Europe.

But until there is actually a ‘restored’ Germanic religion \[which will,
by necessity, be drawing heavily from Vedic elements for reasons
aforementioned – it is simply impossible to have a workable ritualine
canon otherwise\] , unless you are genuinely advocating that nobody have
anything to do with the last living IE religion … that nobody worship
The Gods with practices that we *know* are proper …

… unless you are genuinely advocating doing nothing until at some
distant point in the future we may have built a ‘something’ …

… then I do not see the harm in a few young men re-engaging with the
close relative of their own immediate ancestral denomination of IE
religion, worshipping the same Gods that their ancestors did, even in
perhaps less-familiar-looking panoply. The *essence* remains the same –
the honouring goes to the same divine places.

Or perhaps you disagree with *that*, too, and it becomes a question of
at what point following the migration out of the Steppe, the PIE Gods
got ‘replaced’ , and if so by Whom, and then why are these remarkably
consistent deific figures in both Eddic and Vedic mythology/theology so
… consistent and similar. When did the Sky Father stop being the Sky
Father and get ‘replaced’ by another Sky, another Father that is
nevertheless addressed in coterminous ways, worshipped in equivalent
ways, acts in remarkably familiar manners in each IE descended pantheon,
sort of thing.

Anyway, you know what my own lived example suggests ? \[a great many
things, but this reply has gone on for long enough as-is, I suspect\]

That showing that yes, there is another path that can be taken *other*
than either the ‘Abrahamic’ religions or some sort of nihilistic atheism
or just straight-up disengagement with religion all up … well, it does
in fact open people’s eyes, and they do begin to see things differently.

My own experience, and I’ve been actively engaged in this sphere, this
effort for perhaps half a decade or more now … has been that various of
the Europeans and Americans that’ve taken note of what I’m doing, do
start to realize that these ‘religions of heritage’, the IE ones, that
they have some ancient ancestral connection to … *are* actually a viable
place to return to. That the ‘Jesus or nothing’ choice they felt was
basically ‘it’ where and when they were growing up, isn’t all there is.
And, for that matter, that the ‘other options’ don’t have to basically
amount to Wiccanry and whatever it is Varg’s doing these days – that
actual, serious religion exists out there, and it’s incredibly
Indo-European, just waiting to help guide them home.

Whether that ‘home’ is in the bigger and more expansive sense that runs
all the way from Iceland to India , and takes a certain pride in much if
not most of the entire sphere … or whether that ‘home’ is the smaller
and more localized one that is most immediately and directly relevant to
them and their proximate community.

That ‘Home’, one way or another, is the House of the Gods – whether the
ones down here on Earth \[the Temple / Mandir / Hof , etc.\] or the one
that is something of an afterlife where the great among us wind up in
Their Presence.

The Indo-European Gods Are The Indo-European Gods.

I say it again:

“COME HOME, INDO-EUROPEAN MAN!”
