+++
title = "The War-Shrine Of Tanot Mata [Incredible Indo-European Holy Sites Series Partxa0III]"
date = "December 4, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/128279549_769000087045651_8496297935426530038_n.png?w=360)

One of my criteria for judgingwhether a culture is spiritually healthy,
is how it treats its religion. Is it something that is actively
integrated? Into the culture, into the state, into daily life? Or is it
merely something that is wheeled out in the manner of Easter in much of
the West – a symbol, that has little to do with what’s ostensibly being
observed, and is ultimately a chocolate shell concealing a void, to be
consumed where we can all see it and forgotten about for much of the
rest of the year.

In India, it should come as no surprise to find that this is truly a
‘spiritually healthy’ culture – indeed, it is the last actively and
overtly healthy Indo-European, literally Aryan, culture upon this earth
of ours. Others are making admirable endeavours to revive and to
revitalize their own Indo-European descendant-faiths and re-integrate
them into the life of the state, community, and country around them …
but we are all quite literally millennia behind Bharat. A land where
Gods and Rivers have legal standing – and where having a Cleric as Chief
Minister does not mean one happens to be standing in the Vatican. Nepal,
too, deserves active commendation in this regard – and as we saw in
GHOST DIVISION, the Nepali Army takes point of emphatic pride in
convening itself as Lord Rudra’s Retinue or Household Guard (Huscarla,
we may fairly say) in particular upon MahaShivRatri each year.

But it is another military infused Indo-European religious space that I
wish to speak of today. Namely, a small Hindu Mandir \[Temple\] in
Rajasthan known as Tanot Mata; near the border of both the Thar Desert
and perfidious Pakistan. Here, the Warrior Goddess is worshipped in
earnest , by soldiers as they make their way to the front lines of the
still-simmering conflict with the adversary across the sands. Once, it
was a Temple of Rajputs – those famed warriors of the eponymous state
who had fought successive waves of invaders and still, to this day,
maintain their fierce clan traditions as Hinduism’s NorthWest Shield.
Today, it is a Temple of the Border Security Force (indeed, with a
Pandit that is also a soldier) – actively administered by the Indian BSF
, who are in some ways a modern (if ostensibly paramilitary) equivalent.
Due to its sacredness and significant history with them, it has become
something of a place of pilgrimage for Indian military personnel being
deployed to the border – who come either independently, or in convoy
with their comrades in official vehicles, to pray and reflect, marvel at
the deeds and history of the site and their forebears in uniform, and to
receive the blessing-mark upon their forehead of sand from Tanot Mata …
the native earth, Indian earth, of which they are sworn to defend.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/128407777_769003190378674_7240243598324292306_n-1.png?w=600)

Now, the way in which it became a BSF temple is interesting. For it
dates to the 1965 War with Pakistan, and the battle that took place
around this site. Then, three Indian platoons (one Army, from the 13th
Grenadiers; two Border Security Force) stood in the Temple’s defence
against a large-scale Pakistani assault. Cut off and pinned down, the
men made ready to sell their lives dearly in a heroic last stand. And
yet …

Despite heavy bombardment (approximately 3,000 shells are supposed to
have been fired, with several hundred directly hitting the Temple and
Mandir’s grounds itself), multi-directional assault from three sides,
and a significant numerical disadvantage, the Indians held fast and
repulsed the invaders. It would have been a remarkable enough occurrence
for that fact alone – but the story got weirder \[in the old Germanic
sense of the term\].

For as it turned out, not a single shell fired nor bomb dropped at the
Temple had exploded. Literally hundreds of munitions had all somehow
either failed to detonate, or had mysteriously flown off-course; with
some Pakistani air force personnel reportedly claiming that during their
attack-runs, instead of being able to see the Temple … they could only
see a small girl sitting beside a lake. When we place this in context
along with the belief that the Goddess had appeared in the dreams of the
Indian soldiers arrayed in Her Defence \[and I mean this both in terms
of the Temple, as well as the ‘Her’ in question being Bharat Mata –
Mother India\] and Told them that She would protect them … it becomes
clear what has occurred.  
  

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/127977996_769000517045608_196096271418031789_o.jpg?w=1024)

This, then, is the exemplar of the other sign of a spiritually healthy
culture – not only that the religion has been actively ‘integrated’ into
the fabric of the culture and the state: but that just as the bearers of
said culture, the inhabitants of said state move to defend the religion
… so, too, does the religion defend its defenders. Dharmo Rakshati
Rakshitaha, we would say in Sanskrit – Dharma, Protected, Protects.

Following the conclusion of the 1965 War with Pakistan, the Indian
Border Security Force took over the Temple – they now run it, administer
it, and have established a small dedicated base on the grounds. This is
partially due to the proximity of the site to the border with Pakistan –
meaning that it is quite naturally within the BSF’s aegis of operations
simply due to that fact. Yet it is also, and much more significantly,
due to the events aforementioned. And to continue to uphold and protect
the Goddess and Her Mandir that did likewise for their forebears now
some fifty five years afore.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/128773478_769000623712264_8007848144415410907_o.jpg?w=1024)

And while all of that is both remarkable and stirring, there is not
where the tale of Tanot Mata amidst conflict and strife ends. For six
years later, when Pakistan again invaded India – this time in a bid to
prevent India from *stopping a genocide* – there was again a dramatic
clash around the site. I would say that the course of this combat was so
remarkable that it would only be believable in the movies … but as it
happens, the actual Bollywood production based upon the events there
(entitled ‘Border’) actually significantly toned *down* the course of
events (including by massively *increasing* the number of Indian
casualties taken at the battle).

The engagement in question is known as the Battle of Longewala, and it
commenced upon this day some 49 years afore. It is – entirely deservedly
– one of the most storied of India’s modern military history; where 120
Indian Army and Border Security Force soldiers stood against a force of
around two and a half thousand Pakistanis and at least 40 tanks as well
as numerous other vehicles. Lacking time to carry out serious
entrenchment, lacking more than a single anti-tank weapon of any
significant range, and seemingly lacking in everything other than sheer
courage, ingenuity, duty, honour, and *faith* … the company was given a
choice by battalion command – make a desperate retreat back across the
sixteen kilometers or so to the nearest significant concentration of
friendly forces, or stay and fight on alone. The Indian commander, Major
Chandpuri, assessed the risks of both propositions and chose the latter.
Partially because it almost seemed to be no choice at all. An orderly
retreat across such a distance whilst being pursued by a much larger
motorized force would almost certainly end in an encounter of
annihilationfor his command rather than successful escape; and in any
case would mean ceding the only point of resistance between the oncoming
Pakistanis and the Ramgarh staging point – or, worse, the Jaisalmer
airbase that was responsible for providing aircover to much of this
entire section of front.

And so it was that, once more, a small force of India’s defenders made
ready to sell their lives dearly; carefully positioning their assets in
the little time available to them to make the most of their severely
limited resources of both material and manpower. And so it was that,
once more, things became Wyrd. For Fate once again curiously congealed
around the site of Tanot – and the onrushing wave of Pakistan seemed to
break thereupon.

It started with the little things. The main Indian anti-tank weapon at
Longewala was a jeep-mountedrecoilless rifle. It had been supposed to
be withdrawn and re-assigned the day before the engagement; yet due to
mysterious happenstance had been significantly delayed and unable to
leave afore the reports came in of the impending Pakistani armoured
thrust. It was to prove vital in the ensuing defence. As were the Indian
artillery-pieces nearby that had only just managed to be deployed scant
hours before the commencement of the assault.

Other peculiar, if perhaps not entirely inexplicable occurrences also
helped to shape the ground and tip the scales in favour of the
defenders; adding to the soon-to-be massive weight of the heroism and
martial valour of the aforementioned thereupon. The Pakistanis made an
escalating pile-up of errors both before and during their push on
Longewala that helped to negate their otherwise imposing sets of
advantages.

At first, the Pakistanis attempted a direct assault in the hours after
midnight, preceded by heavy artillery bombardment (which killed half of
the Border Security Force unit’scamels, unfortunately), while the
Indians made a desperate attempt to finish laying an anti-tank minefield
(during the course of which, one Indian soldier was killed), plugging
gaps in the line with three lengths of barbed wire hastily repurposed
from the perimeter fencing designed to keep camels out of the post.
Engaging almost entirely at ranges of less than thirty meters, the
Indians wrought a heavy toll upon the Pakistani armour and supporting
infantry – a situation not helped for the invader by their otherwise
bizarre decision to attempt an armoured assault over un-reconnoitered
sandy ground and sans proper combat engineering support, leading to a
number of tanks bogging down amidst the unfavourable conditions.
\[Although it is interesting to note that the localized reconnaissance
failure may have partially resulted from the mysterious disappearance of
the vehicles of the Pakistani recon troupe supposedly dispatched into
this area ahead of the main force\]

The Pakistani armour had also been fitted with exterior fuel-tanks in
order to facilitate its intended deep-thrust across the Indian
countryside … which proved useful for the Indians, when these proceeded
to detonate under fire, providing handy illumination of the Pakistani
advance – along with a heavy and cloying smokescreen that significantly
obscured the defensive positions of Longewala from any Pakistani forces
not in immediate (and well-lit) engagement range. Such was the
opposition put up by the Indians that their adversary thought them to be
a considerably, a much larger force in terms of both men and munitions –
rather than the hastily prepared and underequipped reinforced company
that actually held the ground in question.

And while a sustained and direct follow-up of the thrust may have
delivered different results even despite the incredible tenacity of the
defenders, this did not eventuate. The sudden discovery of the
aforementioned three lengths of barbed wife convinced the Pakistanis
that the area under them was mined (an irony – as the barbed wire was
specifically only in the areas that were *not* mined), leading to a
breaking off of the attack and substantial delay while engineers were
brought up to clear the non-existent hazard upon these paths. Meanwhile,
Pakistani armour and infantry were called back in order to regroup and
assault from other directions – which, again, lead to further losses
amidst the former as they attempted to negotiate the sandy terrain and
burning wrecks of their peers without bogging.

With these subsequent assaults also having failed to produce measurable
impact upon the Indian position, the Pakistanis now found themselves
with a new enemy to contend with – the ascent of the Sun into the Sky,
bringing with it a different kind of illumination to the battle-field ..
and followed on swiftly by the Indian Air Force with vengeful intent
upon their minds.

Guided by an airborne observer flying in a rather rustic propeller-plane
(and who was, uncoincidentally, also the man – Major Atma Singh – who’d
provided the air-recon confirmation of the initial Pakistani thrust to
Major Chandpuri et co) at not insignificant risk to himself, Indian Air
Force Hunters and Maruts from Jaisalmer, the airbase that Longewala had
stopped the Pakistani advance towards, began an unimpeded utter
devastation of the still-attacking Pakistani grounders. Due to poor
Pakistani operational planning, Pakistani air assets (or, for that
matter, significant and dedicated ground anti-air elements) were
unavailable to counter this sudden appearance of the IAF – and what had
already begun to look like an overt failure for the Pakistanis swiftly
turned into an out-and-out debacle of a rout with thesubsequent arrival
of Indian reinforcements from both the Rajputana Rifles and 20th Lancers
(the latter being an Indian armour formation).

I must say, there is something somewhat poetic in the symbolism of all
of this. Whether the ‘Night of Destruction’ (‘KaalRatri’ – a situation
also of Mahabharat resonancy, perhaps), or the Solar Chariot taking to
the sky and being followed first by Maruts and thence by Rajputs to
finish the foe … it seems almost a case of symbolic saliency and
semi-deliberate ‘echoing’ of the ancient scriptural accounts. Although
deliberate on the part of Whom is, perhaps, another matter. Myth may be
called up, called upon, and invoked as we invoke ourselves into its
recurrence … but it is rarely at our sole command nor direction. It has
a logic whose symbols occasionally manifest obliquely in the process
even though the outcome may remain instantly apparent.

However one chooses to analyze it, there can be little doubt that the
outcome to the battle of Longewala was nothing short of legendary. Of
the 120 Indian personnel (and ten camels) present at Longewala at the
start of the engagement, only two (and five camels) had been killed. Of
the two and a half thousand Pakistanis who had dared to approach the
post, hundreds now lay dead; the incredible vast majority of the armour
they had brought with them (thirty six out of at least 40) had also been
either destroyed or captured.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/128556479_769001870378806_244279946519416727_n.png?w=700)

Given the colossal scale of operations on both fronts in 1971, it would
be inaccurate to claim that the outcome of Longewala changed the entire
course of the war. However, it most certainly did help – especially by
halting the Pakistani advance toward Jaisalmer … and, indeed, the
Pakistani advance in that sector all up. It was one of those defining
moments in the emotively resonant sense – the “Here, But No Further”
(Or, to reference Lord of the Rings, the “You Shall Not Pass”). That
place where the onrushing wave encounters the stern headland of
resistance, breaks, and thence begins to slink back.

It would be tempting to directly compare this combat to that most
indelible of military engagements upon the Western psyche – Thermopylae.
And certainly, in media reporting of the engagement in the broader
Anglosphere at the time, just such observations were made. However, I
don’t think that’s the most appropriate rendering – even if it’s about
the right period to be looking towards.

For while Thermopylae was unquestionably heroic – something of the
ur-template for the Glorious Last Stand – it was also, in most measures
except the narrative, a failure. Leonidas and his brave Three Hundred
may loom large across our collective imaginations today … yet this is so
long a shadow that it obscures the fact that their defensive position
was turned; and that they were, ultimately, unable to stop the crushing
press of tens of thousands of Persian fighting men on through the Pass
and into the rest of Greece. It is an immense story – and it was very
nearly a holding action capable of providing a strategically useful
delay in the Persianate advance – but it was, by just about every
measure, a resounding (if gloriously memorable to the point that it is
*still* resounding, even today some two and a half thousand years later)
defeat.

Not so, at Longewala.

No, I think the more correct Ancient Greek parallel to the heroic stand
at Longewala is that of Salamis – fought the same year as Thermopylae,
and somewhat less prominent today by comparison even despite its
potentially greater reputation during the course of antiquity.

Now, why I suggest this is not merely for the obvious reason – that it
was a much smaller force acting in defence of their homeland who
successfully, through superior training, tactics, and ingenuity, managed
to overcome the larger. But rather, for another reason as well: the role
of a certain Indo-European Goddess in delivering the victory.

You see, various Greek peoples who fought at Salamis have traditions
around this fact. The Athenians say that they saw Owls in flight above
their forces on the day of the battle, signifying Athena was with them.
Herodotus also records the Aeginetians as receiving another such Divine
apparition – saying that when the Greek fleet was reversing furiously
from the Persian into the bay of Salamis, immediately following the
arrival of the Aeginetian ship bringing the cult-statues of the heroic
Sons of Aeacus (their nation’s founding king, later to enjoy a storied
career as one of the Greek Judges of the Dead; it is not coincidental
that His Name means ‘The Roarer’) – there appeared the ‘phantom’ shape
of a Woman, Who roared a reproach at the Greeks at sufficient volume
that the entire fleet heard it – “Gentlemen, just how long are you going
to keep on backing water?” \[variant translations: “Men possessed, how
long will you still be backing water?”; “Madmen, how far will ye yet
back your ships?”\]

She then ordered the attack to commence – and the rest, as they say, is
quite literally history.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/129474061_769002230378770_4700750909863254450_o.png?w=1024)

Now there are numerous other emblematic instances that I could draw
from, when it comes to such circumstances from the ancient Indo-European
world. One that I often find favourable to mention is that of Cybele
being welcomed into Rome at the Sibylline Oracle’s command so that Rome
might triumph ‘gainst Carthage during the darkest days of the Second
Punic War. Another that I have just recently written upon concerns the
extended saliency of Mother Aditi (and often Mother Earth) in the
ancient Vedic Hymnals, called upon to protect and defend the invoker and
their sovereign polity in just the manner we should expect of the Great
Goddess:

RV IV 55:  
“1 WHO of you, Vasus, saveth? who protecteth? O Heaven \[Dyaus\] and
Earth and Aditi, preserve us,  
\[…\]  
7 May Goddess Aditi with Gods defend us, save us the saviour God with
care unceasing.

AV VII 6:  
“We call for help the Queen of Law and Order, great mother of  
 all those whose ways are righteous,  
 Far-spread, unwasting strong in her dominion, Aditi wisely lead-  
 ing, well protecting.  
\[…\]  
Earth, our strong guard, incomparable Heaven, Aditi wisely lead-  
 ing, well protecting.  
Let us bring hither, in pursuit of riches, Aditi with our word,  
 the mighty mother,  
 Her in whose lap the spacious air is lying: may she afford us  
 triply-guarding shelter!”

RV VIII 18:  
“4 With Gods come thou whose fostering care none checks, O Goddesss
Aditi:  
Come, dear to many, with the Lords who guard us well.  
5 For well these Sons of Aditi know to keep enmities aloof,  
Unrivalled, giving ample room, they save from woe.  
6 Aditi guard our herd by day, Aditi, free from guile, by night,  
Aditi, ever strengthening, save us from grief!  
7 And in the day our hymn is this: May Aditi come nigh to help,  
With loving-kindness bring us weal and chase our foes.”

RV X 63:  
“10 Mightily-saving Earth, incomparable Heaven the good guide Aditi who
gives secure defence”

RV VIII 47:  
“8 Resting in you, O Gods, we are like men who fight in coats of mail.  
Ye guard us from each great offence, ye guard us from each lighter
fault.  
9 May Aditi defend us, may Aditi guard and shelter us,  
Mother of wealthy Mitra and of Aryaman and Varuṇa.  
10 The shelter, Gods, that is secure, auspicious, free from malady,  
A sure protection, triply strong, even that do ye extend to us.”

RV VIII 56:  
“10 And thee too, O Great Aditi, thee also, Goddess, I address,  
Thee very gracious to assist.  
11 Save us in depth and shallow from the foe, thou Mother of Strong
Sons  
Let no one of our seed be harmed.”

RV X 66:  
“3 May Indra with the Vasus keep our dwelling safe, and Aditi with
Ādityas lend us sure defence.  
May the God Rudra with the Rudras favour us, and Tvaṣṭar with the Dames
further us to success.”

White YV 21:  
“5 We call to succour us the mighty Mother of those whose  
sway is just, the Queen of Order,  
Strong-ruler, far-expanding, ne’er decaying, Aditi gracious  
guide and good protectress.  
6 Sinless may we ascend, for weal, this vessel rowed with  
good oars, divine, that never leaketh,  
Earth our strong guard, incomparable Heaven. Aditi gracious  
guide and good protectress.”

AV VI 4  
“May Tvashtar, Brāhmanaspati, Parjanya hear my holy prayer.  
May Aditi with all her sons, the brothers, guard us, invincible,
protecting power.  
May Ansa, Bhaga, Varuna, and Mitra, Aryaman, Aditi, and Maruts guard
us.  
May we be freed from that oppressor’s hatred. May he keep off that
foeman who is near us”

As we can see, the notion of Aditi (whether Herself, or Herself and
accompanied by Her Husband And Sons) as Defender Goddess, War Goddess,
Unstoppable (and UnBound – literally that which ‘Aditi’ means as a
theonym) is quite an ancient Vedic concept. Finding expression also in
the well-known DeviSukta RV X 125\], wherein Vak (Saraswati) Devi is
directly spoken of as both “rouse\[ing\] and order\[ing\] battle for the
people” and empowering the warrior to “strike and slay the hater of
devotion.” In addition, obviously, to taking to the field of combat
Herself where the fighting is thickest and most insurmountable in
various such wars against the iniquitous, the AnAryan, the demonic. Not
for nothing is She also accorded that most impressive of Vedic hailings
– Vritrahan , the Slayer of Vritra. \[‘Vrtraghni’, per RV VI 61 7, if we
are being more grammatically correct\]

As we have long maintained, this notion of the Indo-European Warrior
Goddess is an ancient and evidently almost pan-Indo-European
understanding; matched, of course by the oft-strongly coterminous
concept of the Earth Mother deific as Mountain Queen – and with said
Mountain Queen, perhaps in the manner of the Queen piece upon the
chessboard, being an incredibly mightily potent defender of Her Children
and the Kingdom. And Who is it that is worshipped at Tanot Mata ? Just
such the Goddess.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/128684174_769006493711677_8329135988941411587_n.png?w=600)

We would more frequently know Her as Durga , Parvati \[the
‘Invincible’/’Strong-point’/’Defensive Location’; The Mountain(ess),
respectively\] in a particular Aspect.

Although there is also one further Hymnal that I should make reference
to – and I think that it is worth quoting in full herein:

RV X 77

“1 As with their voice from cloud they sprinkle treasure so are the wise
man’s liberal sacrifices.  
I praise their Company that merits worship as the good Maruts’ priest to
pay them honour.  
2 The youths have wrought their ornaments for glory through many
nights,—this noble band of Maruts.  
Like stags the Sons of Dyaus have striven onward, the Sons of Aditi
grown strong like pillars.  
3 They who extend beyond the earth and heaven, by their own mass, as
from the cloud spreads Sūrya;  
Like mighty Heroes covetous of glory, like heavenly gallants who destroy
the wicked.  
4 When ye come nigh, as in the depth of waters, the earth is loosened,
as it were, and shaken.  
This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches: come all united, fraught, as
’twere with viands.  
5 Ye are like horses fastened to the chariot poles, luminous with your
beams, with splendour as at dawn;  
Like self-bright falcons, punishers of wicked men, like hovering birds
urged forward, scattering rain around.  
6 When ye come forth, O Maruts, from the distance, from the great
treasury of rich possessions,  
Knowing, O Vasus, boons that should be granted, even from afar drive
back the men who hate us.  
7 He who, engaged in the rite’s final duty brings, as a man, oblation to
the Maruts,  
Wins him life’s wealthy fulness, blest with heroes: he shall be present,
too, where Gods drink Soma.  
8 For these are helps adored at sacrifices, bringing good fortune by
their name Ādityas.  
Speeding on cars let them protect our praises, delighting in our
sacrifice and worship.”

There are a few points of interest to this Hymnal in both a theological
as well as a broader reconstructive sense, and I have already taken a
brief look at some of these in a recent article (which looked, in
particular, at the Scythian saliency for these concepts in understanding
how they saw themselves – as Storm-Born(e) Host of the Sky Mother & Sky
Father). But my purpose in quoting it here is much simpler.

Various elements to it remind me quite poignantly of the occurrences of
the Battle of Longewala – albeit with the Maruts in question referring
more immediately to the infantry of Alpha Company, 23rd Battalion,
Punjab Regiment and their Border Security Force comrades than the HF-24
Maruts (and Hunters, and for that matter the Spotter, Major Singh) that
struck from the skies upon that day in early December, 1971. Even though
the illustrative, evocative language of the Hymnal describing the Maruts
in Their airborne assault from the clouds, raining destruction upon the
foe and the wicked, certainly does seem to pre-sage the later Indian Air
Force Maruts carrying out the annihilation of Pakistani formations with
insurmountable force and an unrestrained capacity both at Longewala and
elsewhere across the Fronts that year.

They – and those who stood there also in 1965 – Heroes, All.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/128528654_769002953712031_2660032562768868133_n.png?w=450)

Today, at Tanot Mata, there stands a Vijaya Sthambha \[Vijaya – Victory;
and a Stambha is a pillar or post, in archaic times, the designation for
the sacral post that was at the heart of many Vedic rites, with a
correlate in the Axis Mundi at the heat of the world or the Irminsul of
the Norse/Germanics, and in modern times represented also by the
ShivLing that is the Shaivite Altar in most Hindu Temples\], erected to
commemorate the stunning victory at Longewala nearby. It is accompanied
in its commemoration via various of the unexploded (although I *presume*
subsequently defused!) ordnance that was hurled against the Temple in
1965, on display in a BSF museum also located on the grounds of the
modern site.

It is a potent reminder, if any were needed, that the Past remains With
Us – and I do not simply mean the relatively recent heroics of the
Hindustani troops in the vicinity; but rather, that far more archaic,
ancient, and indeed Timeless elements. That may have found their most
clarion expression in the religious canons of ancient days, yet which
are nevertheless to be found, still resonant and resonating, all around
us even amidst the detritus of modernity today.

Hence, the BSF and other Indian military personnel undertaking
pilgrimages to Tanot Mata en route to their deployments along the border
– the tangible re-engagement, continuously, of the Present with the
Past.

And hence, also, the mystic, downright *mythic* occurrences both in and
around Tanot Mata in both the Wars of 1965 and 1971 – the tangible
re-immanentization, when called for, when needed, of the Past, the
Supernal, with the Present.

And that situation – wherein the ‘Past’, or the ‘Mythic’, is NOT merely
relegated to the proverbial side-cabinet of dim contemporary
non-recollection (or, perhaps worse, recollection in consumer-convenient
form that bears little authentic resemblance to its true and proper
essence nor form) … that is what characterizes a ‘spiritually healthy’
culture.

One Whose essence is and remains, central, vital, living, defended.

Heritage Protected … Protects.  
  
Jai Mata DI!
