+++
title = "The Near-Dioscuri Experience Of Simonides The Piousxa0Poet"
date = "December 31, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/rel0107.jpg?w=1024)

I found this rather amusing. Per Cicero, there is a tale of the Greek
poet Simonides having a near-death experience. Or, we should say – a
Near Dioscuri experience !

Simonides had been commissioned to eulogize the sporting victory of
Scopas at a banquet held by the latter. In the course of doing so, the
pious Simonides included a significant swathe of referential material to
the Dioscuri – the Indo-European Horse Twins, Castor & Pollux.

Now, some men might take it as an honour that their deeds provided ample
stage to also discuss those of the Divine – but not Scopas. Unsatisfied
with not being the entire focus and center of attention for the full
span of the poem, he brusquely told Simonides that as he’d only been the
focus for half the poem he would only be paying Simonides half of the
agreed upon fee.

And that should Simonides wish to collect the *other* half, he should
take it up with the other beneficiaries of his verses – namely, Castor &
Pollux Themselves. Preferably *in person* – which, given the situation
of at least one of the Hero-Twins, was an implicit instruction to, as
the more modern idiom would have it .. “Go to Hell”.

Later on during the evening, however, it was reported that there had
been a knock at Scopas’ door – and two young men had arrived asking to
speak to Simonides.

So Simonides got up from the banquet and went out to meet these two
young fellows who had asked for him by name … and was further dismayed
to see that there was now nobody there awaiting him. He presumed that
this must be some prank and additional prodding from the irritated
Scopas.

He was just about to turn around and go back to the feast … when the
palace of Scopas collapsed behind him, killing everybody who had been
inside, and leaving Simonides the lone survivor.

The implication is quite clear: the two young men were, in fact, the
Dioscuri Themselves – evidently rather pleased with Simonides’
favourable remarks and integration of Their deeds and reputation into
his verses for Scopas and the former’s generally mindful piety upon the
matter. And, further, rather *displeased* at the disrespect meted out by
Simonides’ ill-tempered patron, Scopas.

They had thus turned up in person to bestow a boon – that of *not* being
crushed to death by falling masonry. So, in a way, Scopas’ vitriolic
remark that Simonides should have to collect the other half of his
payment for his verses from those other figures Whom Simonides had
eulogized, preferably in person .. had indeed come to fruition.

It is occasionally said that the Hindu understanding of these figures –
the Asvins \[‘Horse \[Twins\]’ – although ‘Equestrians’, ‘Cavaliers’ is
perhaps a slightly closer translation\] – have a bit of a ‘prankster’
streak, and are certainly renowned for possessing an interesting sense
of humour. Personally, I would note that various of the occurrences we
might label as “pranks” are acts of ‘rebalancing’ undertaken with
deliberate intent and just cause in mind; although this does not stop
there from being outrage in Their wake.

Both the Asvins and the Germanic understanding of these figures –
Hengist and Horsa \[‘Stallion’ and ‘Horse’, respectively\] are also
renowned for *helping people* (with Hengist & Horsa interestingly *also*
making use of sudden lethality at large-scale feasting as a
problem-solving tool, per Nennius’ History of the Britons); indeed, it
is quite directly there in the Proto-Indo-European etymology of
“Nasatyas” \[occasionally translated as ‘Saviors’ – another way to refer
to the Asvins – also attested in the Mitanni Treaty seals; and via the
demon-lists of the Zoroastrians\] – PIE ‘Nes’, referring to a refuge,
getting home (particularly getting home safely), and to healing (being
restored to the proper, uninjured state).

As we can see here, therefore, the story of Simonides thusly features
not merely an ‘encounter’ with the Dioscuri Horse-Twins … but the Horse
Twins carrying out exactly Their mythic role and aiding Simonides,
protecting him from peril and assisting in the striking down of those
who would demean the Faith or proffer harm towards the properly pious
man.

There’s another lesson here too, of course – and it is one that *also*
has some archaic Vedic saliency:

ALWAYS PAY YOUR POET !
