+++
title = "On Odin Brihaspati As Song-Smith – The Sung Seizing Of The Wealth Ofxa0Cows"
date = "December 2, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/satyaki-sarkar-img-0123.jpg?w=720)

The Nordic textual corpus is a frustrating, glinting thing. So often we
glance across a passage therein which evidently speaks to something that
is evidently far deeper in meaning than what is written there upon the
page … and yet which the ravages of time and obscurity mean that we now
cannot feasibly interpret except via (informed) guess-work.

Or can we …

Something I have recurrently demonstrated in the course of our work is
that even despite Christianization having occurred some decades
previously – the Nordic texts of Sturluson do a surprisingly fantastic
job of preserving elements that are evidently much more ancient still.
How ancient? They run right the way back to the Proto-Indo-European
Urheimat – and afore the divergence of the Vedic and ‘Eddic’
mythologies’ respective bearer-peoples.

What this means, of course, is that when we encounterone of these
frustratingly tantalizing seeming dead-end passages that is evidently
referring to something now irrecoverable … occasionally it turns out not
to be so. Because it is a direct parallel expression of something also
found in the Vedas. Often rather condensed, and occasionally it is clear
that Sturluson either did not understand or chose not to convey his
understanding of what he was seeking to compile – but unmistakable in
its resonancy, all the same.

A grand example of this is to be found within the Ynglinga Saga, wherein
the following line otherwise seems almost innocuous in its relative
mundanity:

“Odin knew finely where all missing cattle were concealed under the
earth, and understood the songs by which the earth, the hills, the
stones, and mounds were opened to him; and he bound those who dwell in
them by the power of his word, and went in and took what he pleased.”

And yet, reading that simple line – it was as if thunder had roared with
its pleasing familiarity. For I at once recognized this as a more
succinct synopsis of something found in well more than half a dozen
Hymns of the RigVeda – wherein it is the deed of Brihaspati , the Lord
of Prayer \[compare the theonym Galdrfodr\] and the
inspirational/emblematic combat theologian par excellence Who acts as
template for later Vedic priests.

I have previously argued in a number of earlier works that Odin and
Brihaspati are the same deity – and, for that matter, that Brihaspati
and Rudra are likewise one; so I shall not seek to repeat all of that
here. Instead, we shall just take a brief look at these parallel
Vedic-Eddic expressions of the same archaic Indo-European mythic
tradition.

Now, there are a number of ‘moving parts’ to the Vedic presentations of
the myth – so it is useful to consider the ‘basic’ version first and
thence start ‘building in’ some of the ‘enhancements’ which build
thereupon.

At its most succinct, we have the version of the verses presented in RV
I 62 3:

“Bṛhaspati cleft the mountain, found the cattle: the heroes shouted with
the kine in triumph.”

Interestingly, this same hymnal also mentions Sarama, the Wolf-Goddess,
and Her ‘Brood’ \[which would presumably be the Hounds of Yama\] –
something that is considerably relevant given Her own exploits in this
area in RV X 108 against the Panis – but more upon that, perhaps, some
other time.

A more elaborate presentation occurs in RV II 24:

“2 He who with might bowed down the things that should be bowed, and in
his fury rent the holds of Śambara:  
Who overthrew what shook not, Brahmaṇaspati,—he made his way within the
mountain stored with wealth.  
3 That was a great deed for the Godliest of the Gods: strong things were
loosened and the firmly fixed gave way.  
He drave the kine forth and cleft Vala through by prayer, dispelled the
darkness and displayed the light of heaven.”

Now, this is useful to us because it sets out just *how* it is that
Brihaspati \[Brahmanaspati is a slightly more elaborate rendering of the
same theonym\] is able to ‘open the mountain’ / remove the concealment
of earth in order to liberate the cattle / treasure \[and it is, of
course, useful to note that ‘wealth’ and ‘cows’ are not so dissimilar in
the ancient Indo-European conceptual syllabry – Waters and even the Sun
and the Moon, as well as certain Womenfolk are also occasionally found
in this role in other employments of the same formula\].

So how do you think Brihaspati acquired this wealth?

Through Prayer. The Spoken – or, we should more properly say, perhaps,
the *Sung* – Powerful Speech, of which He, after all, is the Lord and
Teacher. (Also Husband – and I do not simply mean that as the potential
translated rendering of ‘Pati’ .. Brihaspati’s Wife is Vak Devi \[‘Vak’
being the ‘Divine Speech’\] : Who has a suite of conceptual resonancies
for Freyja, the Wife of Odr – as we have explored in, amidst other
works, “Furor Teutonicus And Furor Poeticus – The Furious Goddess-Given
Power Of Both Barbarian And Brahmin Alike”\]

In some tellings, perhaps unsurprisingly, righteous violence is involved
– specifically in the form of an orbital bombardment;
Brihaspati’sPrayer conjuring a Meteorite (occasionally referred to as a
‘Vajra’ – understandable given the Sonic Boom of one entering the
atmosphere, the source of meteoric iron, but most especially that this
is the congealed force of the Supreme – Brahman , Law – in in-universe
expression, as we see with the one wielded by Indra \[see, for instance,
my previous work “On Athena Storm-Bringer And The Thunderbolt Also Of
Zeus”, or “Foe-Slayer Claims Our Eulogy – Understanding RigVeda VIII
100: Indra, Vak” – and note that it is Vak that ‘unlocks’ this weaponry
and makes it available to the Sky Father and His Sons\].

Yet rather than simply being employed as a ‘brute-force’ landscaping
tool to open up the side of a mountain – it is also spoken of as smiting
‘Vala’; which is a term that must be appropriately understood.

For whilst on the one hand, Vala is a demon-dragon akin to Vritra … in
another sense, “Vala” simply means a “covering”, an “enclosure”. Which
is not inappropriate for a serpentine demon, after all – it may act as a
constrictor, entwining itself around its ill-gotten hoard of wealth in
the manner of many a Dragon depiction we are familiar with today!

However, as is often the case with the Vedic hymnals, it is not *quite*
clear which sense is being meant – the creature bearing the name, or the
generalized concept of there being a ‘covering’ to the wealth that must
be rent asunder so as to allow the entry of the Heroic Lordly Priest and
the consequent egress of the treasures now under His command.

Indeed, in some Hymnals, what we see is not only the ‘covering’ of earth
– but also of Darkness or even CLoud, that is pierced by the Prayer of
Brihaspati … and His aforementioned precision Orbital Bombardment, to be
sure.

Consider RV X 68:

“4 As the Sun dews with meath the seat of Order, and casts a flaming
meteor down from heaven. / So from the rock Bṛhaspati forced the cattle,
and cleft the earth’s skin as it were with water.  
5 Forth from mid air with light he drank the darkness, as the gale blows
a lily from the river. /Like the wind grasping at the cloud of Vala,
Bṛhaspati gathered to himself the cattle,  
6 Bṛhaspati, when he with fiery lightnings cleft through the weapon of
reviling Vala, / Consumed ḥim as tongues cat what teeth have compassed:
he threw the prisons of the red cows open.  
7 That secret name borne by the lowing cattle within the cave Bṛhaspati
discovered, / And drave, himself, the bright kine from the mountain,
like a bird’s young after the egg’s disclosure.  
8 He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as one who eyes a fish
in scanty water. / Bṛhaspati, cleaving through with varied clamour,
brought it forth like a bowl from out the timber.  
9 He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning: with lucid rays
he forced apart the darkness. / As from a joint, Bṛhaspati took the
marrow of Vala as he gloried in his cattle.”

As you can see – the Vedic Rsis often delighted in putting quite a lot
of poetic effort into saying the same thing repeatedly. Which is
understandable – it’s certainly one way to ensure that the ‘magic’ of
the mythic referential material is ‘encoded’ and drawn as if from
multiple threads together in parallel weaving for greater empowerment
to the resultant invocation.

Although this also helps to explicate just why Sturluson’s versions of
things are so often much more ‘brief’ than what we find in the Vedas –
he is presenting the mythology as narrative, rather than (for the most
part – there are plausible exceptions) something intended to be read as
a ritual scripting.

And a ‘ritual scripting’ as laid down by the Vedic Rsis is rather
heavily relevant here – because, of course, per the well-known
Indo-European principle of Mythic Recurrence / Eliadian Eternal Return /
Mythic Resonance … part of how and why we do rites is a staged
re-enactment of sorts of the original Mythic event in question, so as to
re-immanentize its benefits, its results, into our community, loka-lized
environment, and the world around us. \[I have previously argued, as a
point of comparative interest, that what’s contained in Sturluson’s
presentation of the Myth of the Mead of Poetry being obtained – is
similarly sourced from a narrative ‘guide’ or ‘manual’ for the
re-enactment of the myth in the ritualized reproduction of the Mead by
man\]

RV X 67 puts some Priests, the students/followers/sons of Brihaspati
into the frame in just such a manner:

“2 Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of Dyaus the Asura,
those heroes, /Aṅgirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured
sacrifice’s holy statute.  
3 Girt by His friends who cried with swanlike voices, bursting the stony
barriers of the prison, / Bṛhaspati spake in thunder to the cattle, and
uttered praise and song when He had found them.  
4 Apart from one, away from two above him, He drave the kine that stood
in bonds of falsehood. / Bṛhaspati, seeking light amid the darkness,
drave forth the bright cows: three He made apparent.  
5 When he had cleft the lairs and western castle, He cut off three from
him who held the waters. /Bṛhaspati discovered, while He thundered like
Dyaus, the dawn, the Sun, the cow, the lightning.”

Or RV IV 50 5 :

“With the loud-shouting band who sang his praises, with thunder, he
destroyed obstructive Vala. / Bṛhaspati thundering drave forth the
cattle, the lowing cows who make oblations ready.”

As we can see – the sudden occurrence of the Priests praying *to*
Brihaspati in this portion of the mythic cycle is simultaneously to
connote something within the narrative of the myth … but *also* to
indicate what the Priests engaged in *this particular* prayer to
Brihaspati are implicitly seeking to do, as well. It sets up, if you
like, something of an ‘infinite loop’ \[‘eternal return’, you might say,
via another name\] in reality. And is all the more powerful for so
doing.

A perhaps rather different approach to this general concept is also upon
display in RV X 108, the aforementioned Sarama Hymnal, wherein She
manages to successfully track down the Panis in a far-flung mountain
holdfast beyond the River at the edge of the world \[a location perhaps
somewhat comparable to the Nordic ‘Outgard’ / ‘Utgard’\], and
‘negotiates’ the Panis to return the ill-gotten spoils they have stolen
from The Gods … by threatening to return with the might of Brihaspati
and an assemblage of Vedic War-Priests to carry out a mythically
resonant ‘re-enactment’ against these demons as well unless they
relent:

“5 \[Panis:\] These are the kine which, Saramā, thou seekest, flying, O
Blest One, to the ends of heaven. / Who will loose these for thee
without a battle? Yea, and sharp-pointed are our warlike weapons.  
6 \[Sarama:\] Even if your wicked bodies, O ye Paṇis, were arrow-proof,
your words are weak for wounding; /And were the path to you as yet
unmastered, Bṛhaspati in neither case will spare you.  
7 \[Panis:\] Paved with the rock is this our treasure-chamber; filled
full of precious things, of kine, and horses. / These Paṇis who are
watchful keepers guard it. In vain hast thou approached this lonely
station.  
8 \[Sarama:\] Ṛṣis will come inspirited with Soma, Aṅgirases unwearied,
and Navagvas. / This stall of cattle will they part among them: then
will the Paṇis wish these words unspoken.  
9 \[Panis:\] Even thus, O Saramā, hast thou come hither, forced by
celestial might to make the journey. / Turn thee not back, for thou
shalt be our sister: O Blest One, we will give thee of the cattle.  
10 \[Sarama:\] Brotherhood, sisterhood, I know not either: the dread
Aṅgirases and Indra know them. / They seemed to long for kine when I
departed. Hence, into distance, be ye gone, O Paṇis.  
11 Hence, far away, ye Paṇis! Let the cattle lowing come forth as holy
Law commandeth, /Kine which Bṛhaspati, and Soma, Ṛṣis, sages, and
pressing-stones have found when hidden.”

Now, at this point it should be noted that the Ynglinga Saga does not
contain details of an assemblage of war-priests assisting the Nordic
figure of Brihaspati (i.e. Odin) in the recovery of cattle from neath
the shrouding of earth within a mountain. Evidently, the
‘summary’/synopsis version of the myth that Sturluson was working from
was descended from one of those archaic Indo-European flowerings of the
tale that lacked this element – as, to be sure, is the case with various
of the Brihaspati contra Vala Vedic verses we have aforementioned
earlier.

However, what we DO have is the situation which reasonably closely
resonates with the relationship of Brihaspati / Agni with the Vedic
Priests in question – that of teacher, instructor, and something of a
father figure unto them.

To quote the Ynglinga Saga again, and from the same section (literally
the next line down) as the material around Odin opening up the earth to
reveal the cattle and march in and take them :

“From these arts \[i.e. the abilities that enabled the opening of the
earth, as well as numerous further ’empowered’ potencies\] He became
very celebrated. His enemies dreaded Him; His friends put their trust in
Him, and relied on His power and on Himself. He taught the most of His
arts to His priests of the sacrifices, and they came nearest to Himself
in all wisdom and witch-knowledge. “

And, from the section immediately prior:

“He and His temple priests were called song-smiths, for from them came
that art of song into the northern countries.”

Or, phrased another way – in just the same manner that we have
Brihaspati presented as the foremost (exemplar) Priest, and acting as
the guide, inceptor-instructor, Teacher, and Father to the Priests of
quite specific clades \[as seen, for instance, with the occasional
references to Agni (also hailed as a ‘Dragon-smiting’
‘Enclosure-Smasher’) as the First of the Angirases\] . Indeed, I would
even go so far as to suggest that ‘Song-Smith’ as a sort of ‘priestly’
title (insofar as it is directly stated to be held by Odin’s ‘temple
priests’) is not only an apt rendering for our concept of Rsi \[‘Seer’ –
of Vedic verses, in particular, to Whom these are attributed in their
composition .. or compilation through ‘hearing’ \[Shruti\]\], but is
also quite an eloquent way to speak of Brihaspati in one of His other
roles within the Vedas. Namely, that of the ‘Orderer’ of the Universe
(otherwise known as Vishvakarman), wherein through Speaking / Singing /
Prayer \[and Vishvakarman is hailed as both Brihaspati and Vak Pati –
the ‘Husband of Vak’\] , He does exactly that. I was unaware of this
‘Song-Smith’ rendering in the Ynglinga Saga when I penned and titled my
previous work, “On Svarog As Sky Father – The Indo-European Sky Father
As Song-Smith Of The Cosmos”, which does make reference to Odin’s role
in ‘ordering the cosmos’ as an instance of that typology … and yet, I
said it, and have later found my words coming back to me with a slightly
different inflection (the ‘smithing’ being done *to* the ‘songs’ as well
as *with* the ‘songs’) several months later. What was it that we said
about ‘Shruti’…

So, whilst we might not have direct presentation of various Priests of
Odin directly assisting Odin in the course of the feat of opening up the
earth, cracking wide the mountain in order to liberate the wealth of
cattle hoarded therein – we most certainly do have the quite direct
statement of Sturluson that “He taught the most of His arts to His
priests of the sacrifices, and they came nearest to Himself in all
wisdom and witch-knowledge” immediately following the regaling of that
expression of His Power.

It would therefore seem eminently logical that in the same way that
Brihaspati’s (original, mythic) actions form the template to the (later,
ritual) enactments of the human priests – the pre-Christian
Nordic/Germanic religion that Sturluson was at pains to preserve at
least in synopsis may have also incorporated such imitative engagements
in its ritualine corpus. Rites that, for obvious reasons, Sturluson
either would not have had (direct) access to, or would have chosen not
to (directly) represent in the course of his writing. Instead reasoning
that it would be enough to preserve the narrative that was keyed to
same. Even though, as we can plainly see, much of the actual detail *to*
the mythic instance in question has been rendered obviated from our
understanding of the actual beliefs of the Germanic peoples – we don’t
know *why* these cattle were hidden under the earth, nor who put them
there; and the closest we get to our suspicions of a Dragon being
involved, is Tolkien’s presentation of Gandalf’s entering of the Lonely
Mountain as part of an effort to liberate its underground-hoarded wealth
in The Hobbit.

Perhaps it was enough, for the Nordic imagination, to know that there
*was* treasure over there in them thar hills – and that treasure
implicitly meant an adversary, a fight on one’s hands against the
current possessors of same; no explicit spelling out of this required
except against truly mighty foes worthy of the commenting upon. Or
perhaps it’s that Sturluson (or his sources) did not preserve the same
ambiguity of meaning as found in the Vedic material – and rather than
regarding the ‘coverer’ or ‘encircler’ of the wealth as being both earth
(or darkness) *and* the monstrous miser of same, only the former sense
(that of a physical obstacle, a visual obstruction and telluric barrier
to entry) was maintained. And while it might be tempting to postulate
that this ‘dual sense’ – or, for that matter, the demonic sense
specifically – of Vala to be some sort of Vedic interpolation or
innovation not found in the original PIE form of the myth … given that
both the ‘dual sense’ as well as the demonic-dragon identification for
Vala’s better-known brother Vritra appears to have been preserved
reasonably well by the Norse (in the form of Jormungandr – with Vritra’s
literal meaning of ‘encircler’ , ‘encloser’, ‘restrainer’ preserved via
Jormungand doing just exactly that in the waters around the world,
biting his own tail to form a ring; and the demon-dragon understanding
for Vritra being preserved with, well, Jormungandr, likewise, hence the
conflict with Thor – the Indo-European Striker/Thunderer akin to
Herakles (Who fought the Hydra, inter alia) and Indra (Who fights
Vritra, again inter alia)), the supposition that this ‘dual sense’ for
the obstacle or adversary thus encountered is a Vedic innovation would
seem rather unlikely.

Whatever the true explanation for this seeming-divergence between Vedic
& Eddic traditions upon this matter, we must count ourselves incredibly
fortunate (or, with reference to another translation of the same
Sanskrit term – ‘Blessed’) to have the former canon of material
available to us to aid in our interpretation and understanding of the
latter.

Even if, much like this author, it can occasionally go on at great
length with three times as many words as might be held necessary by the
more taciturn northman to seemingly repeat the same core point half a
dozen (hundred) times.
