+++
title = "A Stirring Extract From Sister Nivedita’s “Voice of the Mother” in “Kali Thexa0Mother”"
date = "December 29, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/12106740_10156184719985574_6300967571131944870_n-2.jpg)

“ARISE, My child, and go forth a man! Bear manfully what is thy lot to
bear; that which comes to thy hand to be done, do with full strength and
fear not. Forget not that I, the giver of manhood, the giver of
womanhood, the holder of victory, am thy Mother.

Think not life is serious! What is destiny but thy Mother’s play? Come,
be My playfellow awhile,–meet all happenings merrily.

Murmurest thou of need of purpose? Think’st thou the ball is
purposeless, with which the Mother plays? Know’st thou not that Her toy
is a thunderbolt, charged with power to shatter the worlds, at the turn
of Her wrist? Ask not of plans. Needs the arrow any plan when it is
loosed from the bow? Such art thou. When the life is lived, the plan
will stand revealed. Till then, O child of time, know nothing!

My sport is unerring. For that alone set forth on the day’s journey.
Think it was for My pleasure thou camest forth into the world, and for
that again, when night falls, and My desire is accomplished, I shall
withdraw thee to My rest. Ask nothing. See nothing. Plan nothing. Let My
will flow through thee, as the ocean through an empty shell.

But this thing understand. Not one movement shall be in vain. Not one
effort shall fail at last. The dream shall be less, not greater, than
the deed. Thou shalt go here or there for some petty reason, and thy
going shall subserve great ends. Thou shalt meet and speak with many,
but some few shall be Mine from the beginning. With these thou shall
exchange a secret sign, and they shall follow with thee.

And that sign?

Deep in the heart of hearts of Mine own flashes the sacrificial knife of
Kali. Worshippers of the Mother are they from their birth in Her
incarnation of the sword.”  
  
– Sister Nivedita ; from ‘The Voice of the Mother’, in ‘Kali The
Mother’, published 1900
