+++
title = "The Black Avenging Form Of The Serpentine Earthxa0Mother"
date = "December 28, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/singer_sargent_john_-_orestes_pursued_by_the_furies_-_1921.jpg?w=920)

\[An extract from ‘The Queen of Serpents – The Serpentine Figure Of The
Indo-European Earth Mother’, looking at the prominent association of the
Dark Avenging form of the Earth Mother deific with both Serpents, and
the upholding of Divine Law and morality.

Particular exemplar instances parsed include the Nordic Skadi’s
snake-delivered sanctioning of Loki, the Greek Erinyes (and Demeter
bearing just such an epithet) operating under the command of Athena, and
the black dread form of the Brahmahatya personification for the Hindus.

It is clear that for the archaic Indo-European, the Goddess and Cosmic
Law were fundamentally intertwined (indeed, the Vedic theology would say
that one is an expression of the other), and that the terrific Serpent
rising out of the black Earth represented Her active enforcer thereof.
\]

We have already ‘stablished that the Gorgoneion represents Sovereignty,
and in “Ghora – Gorgos – Yggr – The Terrifying Face of Thunder”, inter
alia, I demonstrated how this also recalled the Terrifying Face of the
Ruler of the Worlds. This ‘Terror’ facing is also relevant for another
reason, however – as just as Lord Shiva has terrific Avenger/Destroyer
Forms \[Such as Bhairava , MahaKaal , or Rudra Himself\], so too does
His Wife \[the best-known example of which, of course, being the enraged
transformation of Lady Parvati into Kali – the Black/Time/Death , even
of the Universe! and most certainly near anything else within its bounds
earlier than that apocalyptically appointed hour of cosmic midnight
utterdark!\]. We’ve been taking a look at this phenomenon amidst the
other major instances of our mythologies in the “The Black Avenging Form
Of The Earth Mother And The Pursuits Of The Sky Father As Solar Horseman
– A Comparative Indo-European Typological Evocation” series; in
particular, the form of Demeter Erinyes as a black and fear-inducing
image of Death and Dikaiosune \[‘Righteousness’\]. It is interesting to
note that in the cases of both Kali and Demeter Erinyes – this ‘furious’
form is described as a skin that is removed once the time for its
necessity has passed … perhaps in the manner of a snake sloughing off
its skin to be returned to ‘youthful’ appearance again.

The Erinyes are of obvious linkage to Demeter in this Form \[indeed,
Demeter or Persephone have identification as Their Mother – I would say,
also, as Their Archetype\]; and are also described as being under the
commanding aegis of Athena (for instance, in Aeschylus’ Eumenides – They
being eponymous to this ancient tragedy’s title). It is, again,
absolutely uncoincidental that the Erinyes are described as possessing
strong Serpentine features. To quote Nonnus’ Dionysiaca – “He would see
the serpentine image of the goddess of Tartaros \[an Erinys\], and leap
up scared at the many-coloured vision of the spectre”; or Statius’
Thiebaid: “Tisiphone . . . rouses from Her infernal abode Her companion
Megaera and Her kindred snakes to battle . . . \[She\] muttered into the
Earth the name of the absent one \[Her sister Erinys\], and raised aloft
a horned serpent from Her hair with long-drawn hisses: He was the prince
of Her caerulean tresses, and straightway hearing Him earth shuddered
and sea and sky . . . The other heard the sound: by chance She was
standing near Her Sire \[Haides\] . . . Forthwith She broke through the
massive Earth, and stood beneath the stars: the Manes (Ghosts) rejoice,
and as the nether darkness grows less thick, so wanes the light above.
Her fell sister receives Her, and clasps Her hand.”

Stirring stuff – and that is relevant also for the etymology; but more
upon that in due course.

The conceptry around the Sky Father’s Consort having a Serpentine
Avenging Form of blackest terror is also encountered in more residual
form elsewhere within the Indo-European mythic canons: for instance,
Skadi, a dark and adrastic \[that is to say, ‘inescapable’ as a
Huntress\] figure married to Odin, delivers the Punishment to Loki –
overseeing the hellish situation’s emplacement whereby he is bound
beneath both Earth and a venomous snake spitting venom down into his
traitorous face. The confluence of Earth and Serpent and Sanction is
clearly visible here; meted out by a Shadowy Avenger Form of the Sky
Father’s Wife. In the Hindu canon, we have the intriguing detailing of
the Brahmahatya – the personification of the most egregious sin of
Brahmanicide – described as black, horrifying, implacable, female, and
often with specifically *serpentine* visual elements; rising up out of
the Earth, and sinking back *into* the Earth when Her task is done.

The Snake, that is so often regarded as Chaotic, an enemy of Law and
Divine, Cosmic Order (that is to say, as ‘Demonic’) – it would appear in
actual fact, and female form, is the opposite upon occasion: the
*Upholder* of Dharma, Rta, Orlog, Dikaiosune, and the immanency of this
within our universe.

Indeed, they are the Forces *of* Life, given black, terrifying forms
that shroud with the imminency of Death – in order that it might be
protected. In a certain sense, we might fairly state that Life is Order
– that is to say, that Order finds in-universe expression through force
of Life. And ‘Angry’, Avenging Life is no exception.

This is, somewhat, what we should expect – as the etymology of Erinyes,
is plausibly linked to PIE ‘her’ (‘to move/stir \[up\]’). The notion is
the whipping up of Fury \[an intrinsic element for Life in the PIE
conception – to be alive is to be angry, we might say\]; yet this same
PIE particle also informs Ancient Greek ‘Ormenos’ and ‘Ernos’ – terms
used to refer to the growing shoots and stalks of green vegetation, life
itself. There is also Ancient Greek ‘Oros’ – Mountain – (again of the
same PIE root) which is of obvious general conceptual saliency for the
Earth Mother / Mountain Queen deific under consideration … although
perhaps more immediately interesting for our purposes is another Ancient
Greek term that sounds similar, although in this case is etymologically
unrelated. A case of ‘convergent evolution’, perhaps.
