+++
title = "If Santa Is Derived From The Indo-European Sky Father , Then What About His Elvesxa0.."
date = "December 24, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/franks-casket-front.jpg?w=800)

Seemingly every other page talking about Indo-European or Germanic
mythology this week: “ODIN IS / IS NOT / MIGHT BE / PROBABLY INFORMED
SANTA CLAUS”

Meanwhile, Us: “Yeah, but have you thought about the Elves, though?”

As in … Santa’s Elves. Of the North Pole.

See, here’s the thing. If Santa might be said to be considerably
informed by a Northern European remembrance of the Indo-European Sky
Father (and we would note that ‘Bhaga’, or ‘Lord’, are both terms apt
for such a deity and etymologically connote ‘apportioning/distributing
boons/gifts/bread/treasure’) … those Elves are a sort of dim
recollection of *another* ancient Indo-European mythic understanding –

Namely, that the Sky Father as Song-Smith / (A)Arti-ficer is assisted in
His Endeavours at His Workshop ‘midst the Stars \[i.e. near the top of
the Axis Mundi … the Pole that is to our North\] by a small group of
Solar Smiths of supreme ingenuity and skill.

In the Vedas, these are most clearly presented – the three Ribhus
brothers (alternate anglicization – Rhbus ), the Sons of Sudhanvan (‘The
Great Archer’), alongside Tvastr the Forge-Father. Rhbus being either
directly linguistically cognate with ‘Elf’ if ‘Elf’ is understood to
hail from a Germanic term for ‘Craftsman’ \[‘Arbaz’ / ‘Arbaidiz’, or
potentially ‘Albiz’ dependent upon reconstruction\]; or more
figuratively/symbolically cognate with ‘Elf’ if ‘Elf’ is understood to
come from ‘Alb’ \[PIE ‘Albhos’/'(h)elbhos’\] meaning ‘White’ and
referring to the Solar Radiance. \[Interestingly, per RV IV 51 6, the
Ribhus-Elves are *also* renowned for having Their work done by Dawn – a
feature shared with various of the latter European (cobbler) Elves\]

The Greeks, meanwhile, possessed another trio of subtly ‘Solar’ Smith
divinities in the form of the Ouranian Cyclopes (not to be confused with
the much-better known sort encountered by Odyseus in His eponymous epic,
etc.). Named ‘Brontes’ (‘Thunder’) ,‘Steropes’ (‘Lightning’), and
‘Arges’ (‘Bright’ or ‘Flash’), Their One Eye represents the Solar
connotation (as shown by the various other Indo-European mentions for
the Sky Father as having the Sun as His One Blazing / All-Seeing Eye;
and also quite directly by RV I 111 4 referring to the Ribhus as
likewise having this One Solar Eye characteristic); and Their works of
artifice include not only the original Thunderbolt of Zeus with which He
subdues the Titans, as well as the first Altar (amidst the Heavens, the
prototype for the subsequent Greek ritual elements down here on Earth in
emulation / Mythic Resonancy; something also done by the Ribhus in the
Vedic reckoning) upon which the Gods swore Their Oath of Unity (another
Solar association – that of Oaths and Comradeship, as we see in the
Vedic comparatives). They are also held responsible for the fashioning
of a myriad of other wonders such as the Invisibility Helm of Hades, and
the Trident of Poseidon (Zeus, Hades, and Poseidon being a trio of
expressions of the Sky Father in the Greek ‘re-organization’ of their
mythology). And, like the next major figure we shall meet, These Sons of
Ouranos, too, endured a period in captivity afore gaining Their freedom
and revenge – working alongside Zeus to set the Heavens to rights again
(I hesitate to say, sentiments of the season in mind, that this was a
matter of down-casting the ‘naughty’ and exalting the ‘nice’).

Now it must be acknowledged that the notion of ‘Solar Craftsmen’ up in
the heavens did not really make the transition into the canon of Nordic
mythology that has come down to us. Most of the time, the figures
carrying out such works of cunning artifice are decidedly un-solar – the
Dwarves.

Albeit with one incredibly prominent exception – Volundr (Wayland) the
Smith; a Prince amongst his people, again with two brothers (at least
one of whom is a very great archer indeed – perhaps an inherited
capacity). And an incredibly violent revenge story as told in the
Volundarkvida which also possesses some similarity to the Greek tale of
Daedalus (in particular, the manner in which Volundr makes his escape
from the human king who had wronged him – by giving himself the ability
to take flight, via artificial wings; rising away like the Sun laughing
at the pointedly punitive havoc he had wrought against those who had
done him ill). Which we may take a look at at some other time.

I mention Volundr not only because this is a ‘Smithing’ Elf that is not
a Dwarf – but also because this beautiful carving (the front panel from
the thirteen century old Franks Casket) depicts him and his situation
upon the lefthand portion.

Although I had chosen this exquisite piece to illustrate the Christmas
commentary for another reason – for if you look closely, upon the
*right* side of the paneling, you can see a Germanic rendering of the
Adoration of the Magi \[‘Magi’ being spelled out in runes\] of the
infant Christ in the arms of Mary in the manger.

It *is* Christmas, after all …
