+++
title = "A brief hagiography of aghorashiva deshika"

+++
The saiddhAntika tradition or the Urdhvasrotas of the shaiva
mantra-mArga has an extensive exegetical tradition that covers a variety
of topics. Of these the doctrinal sections are mainly of interest to the
practicing shaiva insider. This material has some historical value in
terms of understanding the origin of the mantra-mArga from earlier
pAshupata traditions of the ati-mArga variety. The mantra praxis and
yoga are of wider interest for they even inform the smArta ritualist in
this regard. The temple ritual and installation of the saiddhAntika-s is
again of considerable general interest. Another point of interest are
the philosophical leanings and vaidika scholarship among the early
saiddhAntika-s of both northern and southern India. In particular the
saiddhAntika-s appear to have continued the tradition of the pAshupata-s
in terms of their leanings towards the vaisheShika and nyAya systems. In
light of all this it is fruitful for a smArta to study the works of the
learned saiddhAntika exegetes. The saiddhAntika-s had a prolific line of
tAntrika-s starting from the early sadyojyotis and bR^ihaspati and
including the [Kashmirian
school](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/02/08/the-kalatman-mandala-at-angkor-wat/),
mahArAja bhojadeva paramAra and the south Indian school with aghorashiva
as its luminary ([we have briefly discussed this
before](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/09/24/the-saiddhantika-s-and-the-kaumara-s/)).
Here we shall attempt to provide a brief hagiography of aghorashiva
deshika.

The primary source on the life of aghorashiva is a text called the
gotrasantati which is not very well preserved. It appears to have to
been intended as a biographical appendix to his magnum opus, the 7
volume kriyAkramadyotikA. As per this text he finished this work in 1157
CE. Tradition holds that he was born in a family of shaiva brAhmaNa-s
near Madurai or Naraiyur or in Chidambaram itself in the Tamil country,
which followed the taittirIya shAkha and belonged to the kaunDinya
pravara of the vasiShTha gotra. He was born under the name parameshvara
and received his saiddhAntika dIkSha from the noted shaiva tAntrika
hR^idayashambhu, who was his paternal great-grandfather’s brother’s son
and thus assumed the dIkSha name aghorashiva. In this preceptorial
lineage were the famous shaivas: 1) somashambhu who was active in
Varanasi and in the haihaya kingdom at Dahala. He composed the famous
somashambhu paddhati and was also a scholar of the bhairava tantra-s of
the dakShiNa srotas. 2) dhyAnashiva, was from Bengal and a preceptor of
the sena rulers. 3) shrIkaNTha-shiva, who was known as the
va\~Nga-vR^iShbha and a famous scholar from Varendra. 4) sarvAtma-shiva
who was an AchArya stationed in the Elephanta cave. 5) vidyAnta-shiva.
6) pUrNa-shiva; both the preceding AchArya-s were rAja-guru-s of the
kalachuri-s at Varanasi. 7) brahma-shiva who was an Acharya from
Gujarat. 8) uttu\~Ngashiva who was originally from the somanAtha pITha
in Gujarat but settled in Kalyani in Karnataka and wrote a tAntrika
ritual manual, which aghorashiva refers to in his own works. This
lineage of saiddhAntika was known as the Amardaka (auNDhA nAganAtha in
modern Maharashtra) after its original maTha founded by one of the great
early saiddhAntika-s of that name. This maTha was close to that of the
glorious center of the kApAlika-s, namely chaNDikAshrama, founded by
tApasa. One of Amardaka’s students was the famous purandara who founded
the mattamayura lineage whose AdimaTha was in the Punjab. The Amardaka
lineage spread to the south, especially in the Konkan, Andhra and TN and
in the east in Bengal. aghorashiva was also a doctrinally inclined
towards the works of the Kashmirian school of saiddhAntika-s of bhaTTa
rAmakaNTha’s lineage. He calls bhaTTa rAmakaNTha-II the mahAkaNTha
kaNThIrava, whose leonine roar is supposed to defeat the rival
philosophies in debate. aghorashiva became the head Acharya of the
Amardaka lineage’s maTha in Chidambaram during the reign of the choLa
king kulottu\~Nga-I. The location of this maTha is in the suburbs of the
modern Chidambaram and the current structure that is present at this
spot appears to have been rebuilt after the Mohammedan invasion of Maliq
Kafur. His students hailed him as a second shiva and there was a
tradition that the founder of the shaiva tantra-s, durvAsas himself
arrived in Chidambaram to crown him as the AchArya of the maTha. He was
supported in his endeavors by the fierce Tamil warrior naralokavIran,
who led the choLa armies into the Godavari delta and captured Orissa,
and supported many shaiva and vaiShNava temples. A statue of aghorashiva
along with those of several other AchArya-s in his parampara is found in
the rAjarAjeshvara temple in Darasuram complex of Kumbhakonam.

aghorashiva and his students state that that he had deeply studied the
grammatical tradition, nyAya-vaisheShika and the vaidika texts and had
written on them but, to my knowledge, we do not have any of those works.
He was also a notable Sanskrit poet who composed secular poems such as
AshcaryachAra on a magical journey and kAvyatilaka, a play named the
abhyudaya and a polemical poem titled the pAShaNDApajaya that had some
thematic similarity to the play of jayanta-bhaTTa.

His doctrinal shaiva work is encapsulated in his 8-volumed work, the
aShTaprakaraNa-vR^itti, which are commentaries on 8 shaiva works:  
1\) The tattva-prakAsha of mahArAja bhojadeva paramAra  
2\) The tattva-saMgraha of sadyojyotis  
3\) The tattva-traya-nirNaya of sadyojyotis  
4\) The nAdakArikA of bhaTTa rAmakaNTha-I  
5\) The bhogakArikA of sadyojyotis  
6\) The ratna-traya-parIkShA of sadyojyotis  
7\) The mokSha-kArikA of sadyojyotis  
8\) The paramokShanirAsa-kArika of sadyojyotis  
aghorashiva’s commentaries on the last two works do not survive.

His work on the tantra-s themselves include a dIpikA on the vR^itti of
the mR^igendra tantra by bhaTTa nArAyaNa kaNTha of the Kashmirian
school. He wrote his own vR^itti-s on the dvishatikAlottara,
sarvaj\~NAnottara and mohashUrottara Agama-s. The complete dhyAna of
sadAshiva, the highest devatA of the saiddhAntika system with his
retinue of devatA-s is provided by aghorashiva in his [pa\~nchAvarNa
stava](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/02/26/the-panchavarna-stava/)
that we have discussed earlier. After these come his greatest work, the
kriyAkramadyotikA, whose clarity in the exposition of ritual and mantra
practice reaches delectable heights on occasions. Its seven volumes
were:  
1\) nityakarman; 2) naimittika-karman, pavitrAropaNa and damanakotsva;
3) dIkSha, abhiSheka and antyeShTi; 4) shiva-pratiShTha-vidhi; 5)
subrahmaNya-pratiShThA-vidhi; 6) mahottsava-vidhi; 7)
prAyashchitta-vidhi. So definitive was this work that to this date we
see the rituals in any shiva temple in South Indian being performed as
per its prescriptions. In this the memory of aghorashiva lives on, even
if all we see is a pale reminder of the choLa glory.

As a concluding remark, I would like to point out that in aghorashiva’s
ritual system shAstA was also being absorbed into the shaiva realm and
was worshiped along with skanda and vinAyaka. The worship of shAstA
appears to have followed the ajita-mahAtantra, but sadly a part of the
shAstA section of this tantra is lost in the surviving versions of the
text.
