---
title: THE RELIGION OF INDIA

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Notes of Lectures and
Classes](notes_of_lectures_and_classes_contents.htm) /

[←](note.htm)

## THE RELIGION OF INDIA

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 2, pp. 145-49, 155-56.)

*These notes of daily morning classes delivered at Greenacre, Maine, in
the summer of 1894 and recorded by Miss Emma Thursby were discovered
among Miss Emma Thursby's papers at the New-York Historical Society.
They have been lightly edited in order to conform to the style of the*
Complete Works.

Notes taken miscellaneously from discourses given by Swami Vivekananda
under the "Pine" at Greenacre in July and August 1894.

The name of Swami's master was Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. The
signification of *Vivekananda* is conscious bliss.

Meditation is a sort of prayer and prayer is meditation. The highest
meditation is to think of nothing. If you can remain one moment without
thought, great power will come. The whole secret of knowledge is
concentration. Soul best develops itself by loving God with all the
heart. Soul is the thinking principle in man, of which mind is a
function. Soul is only the conduit from Spirit to mind.

All souls are playing, some consciously, some unconsciously. Religion is
learning to play consciously.

The Guru is your own higher Self.

Seek the highest, always the highest, for in the highest is eternal
bliss. If I am to hunt, I will hunt the rhinoceros. If I am to rob, I
will rob the treasury of the king. Seek the highest.

*\[Some of the following passages are the Swami's free translations from
Indian scriptures, including the Avadhuta-Gitâ of Dattâtreya.\]*

If you know you are bound \[you are bound\]; if you know you are free,
you are free. My mind was never bound by yearnings of this world; for
like the eternal blue sky, I am the essence of Knowledge, of Existence
and of Bliss. Why weepest thou, Brother? Neither death nor disease for
thee. Why weepest thou, Brother? Neither misery nor misfortune for thee.
Why weepest thou, Brother? Neither change nor death was predicated of
thee. Thou Art Existence Absolute.

I know what God is; I cannot speak \[of\] Him to you. I know not
\[what\] God is; how can I speak \[of\] Him to you? But seest not thou,
my brother, that thou wert He, thou wert He? Why go seeking God here and
there? Seek not, and that is God. Be your own Self — One that cannot be
confessed or described, One that can be perceived in our heart of
hearts. One beyond all compare, beyond limit, unchangeable like the blue
sky. Oh! learn the All Holy One. Seek for nothing else.  
Where changes of nature cannot reach, thought beyond all thought,
unchangeable, immovable, whom all books declare, all sages worship, O
Holy One! Seek for nothing else.

Beyond compare, Infinite Oneness — no comparison is possible. Water
above, water beneath, water on the right, water on the left. No wave on
that water, no ripple. All silence, all eternal bliss. Such will come to
thy heart. Seek for nothing else. Thou art our father, our mother, our
dear friend. Thou bearest the burden of this world. Help us to bear the
burden of our lives. Thou art our friend, our lover, our husband. Thou
art ourselves.

Four sorts of people worship Me. Some want the delights of the physical
world. Some want money, some want religion. Some worship Me because they
love Me.

Real love is love for love's sake. I do not ask health or money or life
or salvation. Send me to a thousand hells, but let me love Thee for
love's sake. Mirâ Bâi, the great queen, taught the doctrine of love for
love's sake.

Our present consciousness is only a little bit of an infinite sea of
mind. Do not be limited to this consciousness.

Three great things \[are\] to be desired to develop the soul: First,
human birth; second, thirst for the highest; third, to find one who has
reached the highest — a Mahâtmâ, one whose mind, word and deed are full
of the nectar of virtue, whose only plea sure is in doing good to the
universe, who looks upon others' virtues, be they only as a mustard
seed, even as though they were a mountain, thus expanding his own self
and helping others to expand. Thus is the Mahatma.

The word *Yoga* is the root of which our word *yoke* is a derivation —
meaning "to join" — and Yoga means "joining ourselves with God" —
joining me with my real Self.

All actions now involuntary or automatic were once voluntary, and our
first step is to gain a knowledge of the automatic actions — the real
idea being to revivify and make voluntary all automatic actions, to
bring them into consciousness. Many Yogis can control the actions of
their hearts.

To go back into consciousness and bring out things we have forgotten is
ordinary power, but this can be heightened. All knowledge — all that —
can be brought out of the inner consciousness, and to do this is Yoga.
The majority of actions and thoughts is automatic, or acting behind
consciousness. The seat of automatic action is in the medulla oblongata
and down the spinal cord.

The question is, how to find our way back to our inner consciousness. We
have come out through spirit, soul, mind, and body, and now we must go
back from body to spirit. First, get hold of the air \[breath\], then
the nervous system, then the mind, then the Atman, or spirit. But in
this effort we must be perfectly sincere in desiring the highest.

The law of laws is concentration. First, concentrate all the nerve
energies and all power lodged in the cells of the body into one force
and direct it at will. Then bring the mind, which is thinner matter,
into one center. The mind has layer after layer. When the nerve force
concentrated is made to pass through the spinal column, one layer of the
mind is open. When it is concentrated in one bone \[plexus, or
"lotus"\], another part of the world is open. So from world to world it
goes until it touches the pineal gland in the center of the brain. This
is the seat of conservation of potential energy, the source of both
activity and passivity.

Start with the idea that we can finish all experience in this world, in
this incarnation. We must aim to become perfect in this life, this very
moment. Success only comes to that life amongst men who wants to do
this, this very moment. It is acquired by him who says, "Faith, I wait
upon faith come what may". Therefore, go on knowing you are to finish
this very moment. Struggle hard and then if you do not succeed, you are
not to blame. Let the world praise or blame you. Let all the wealth of
the earth come to your feet, or let you be made the poorest on earth.
Let death come this moment or hundreds of years hence. Swerve not from
the path you have taken. All good thoughts are immortal and go to make
Buddhas and Christs.

Law is simply a means of \[your\] expression \[of\] various phenomena
brought into your mind. Law is your method of grasping material
phenomena and bringing them into unity. All law is finding unity in
variety. The only method of knowledge is concentration on the physical,
mental, and spiritual planes; and concentrating the powers of the mind
to discover one in many, is what is called knowledge.

Everything that makes for unity is moral, everything that makes for
diversity is immoral. Know the One without a second, that is perfection.
The One who manifests in all is the basis of the universe; and all
religion, all knowledge, must come to this point.

*\[The following are some of the disconnected notes taken by Miss Emma
Thursby during the last of the Swami's Greenacre classes, delivered
Sunday morning, August 12, 1894.\]*

I am Existence Absolute            Kundalini  
Bliss Absolute                           Circle mother  
I am He, Shivoham  
I am He, Shivoham  
He is the learned man who sees that every man's property is nothing.
Every woman his Mother.  
Shanti — peace —                                            
We meditate on the Glory of     Hrim  (A Bija Mantra, or seed word, for
the Divine Mother.)  
Mother  
Buddhistic Prayer  
I bow to all the saint\[s\] on Earth  
I bow down to the founders of Religion  
to all holy men and women  
Prophets of Religion  
who have been on Earth  
Hindu prayer  
I meditate on the Glory of the producer of this Universe  
may He enlighten our minds.  

[→](christs_message_to_the_world.htm)

</div>
