+++
title = "The DeviSukta &xa0(A)Art(I)"
date = "October 4, 2019"

+++
![71896115_10162343879285574_2706639676420128768_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/71896115_10162343879285574_2706639676420128768_n.jpg?w=676)

जय माता दी !

” 1. I proceed with the Rudras, with the Vasus, with the Ādityas and the
Viśhvadevas; I support both Mitra and Varuṇa, Agni and Iñdra, and the
two Aśvins.

2\. I support the foe-destroying Tvaśtṛ, Pūśan and Bhaga; I bestow
wealth upon the institutor of the rite offering the oblation (havis) –
(who is) pouring forth the libation and deserving of careful protection.

3\. I am the sovereign queen (of all Existence), the collectress of
treasures, cognizant of (the Supreme Being), the chief object of
worship; as such, the gods have put me in many places, abiding in
manifold conditions, entering into numerous (forms).

4\. He who eats food (eats) through me; he who sees, who breathes, who
hears what is spoken, does so through me; those who are ignorant of me,
perish; hearken who is capable of hearing, I tell you that which is
deserving of belief.

5\. I verily myself declare this which is approved of by both gods and
men; whomsoever I choose, I render him an exalted one, make him a ṛṣi,
make him Brahman or make him highly intelligent.

6\. I bend the bow (to fasten the bow string at its ends) for Rudra, to
slay the tormenting, Brahman-hating enemy. I wage war against (hostile)
men (to protect the praying ones); I have pervaded the Heaven and earth.

7\. I bring forth the paternal (heaven – abode of the manes) upon the
crown (brows) of (this Supreme Being); my genesis is from the waters
(cosmic – the all pervading Entity); from thence, I pervade through all
beings and reach this heaven with my body.

8\. I verily myself breathe forth like the wind, issuing out form to all
the created worlds; beyond the heaven, beyond the world (I Exist
eternally – beyond space & time) – so vast am I in my greatness.  
”

– RigVeda Mandala 10 , Hymn 125 , Rao, P. Venkata Translation
