+++
title = "SkandaMata – 5th of the NavaDurgas, 5th Night ofxa0NavRatri"
date = "October 4, 2019"

+++
# ![21764951_10159392152045574_1400551655057635201_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/21764951_10159392152045574_1400551655057635201_n.jpg?w=676)

The Fifth Night of #NavRatri is dedicated to Ma as SkandaMata – the
Mother of Skanda (Kartikeya), one of the foremost of our War Gods. He
takes after His Mother in that regard 😀

Of course, before situating SkandaMata within the overarching context of
the NavaRatri Cycle, it is necessary to briefly introduce Lord Skanda,
also known as Kartikeya.

Now, it is often held that both of these theonyms refer to the er …
unique circumstances of His rather remarkable conception and birth; and
certainly, as applies Kartikeya – of the Krittikas (six of the Pleiades
star-cluster, Who gave birth to Him) – this is the case. Yet “Skanda”,
which connotes \*charging\*, \*attacking\*, and \*leaping\* or
\*springing forth\* … while I can see how this fits into the above
rubric, due to the mechanism via which Lord Agni wound up er “involved”
in the process, so to speak … to me appears far more logical to connect
to Lord Skanda’s role and function – as the great warrior. Further, the
likely PIE roots of the name, often proposed as “Skend” (‘Jump’), but to
which I would also speculatively add “Skewd” (“shoot” or “throw”, and
the same root as “Skewer” in modern English – a rather important thing
for a soldier, equipped with a spear – or, as with many depictions of
Skanda seated in the lap of SkandaMata … a bow and arrow !), both seem
far more closely connoted with the nature of the Deity rather than being
simply circumstances of conception.

\[For a more in-depth and interconnected examination of the
Indo-European mythic saliency of Lord Skanda – especially in relation to
an array of related figures, including His Mighty Father, please consult
the GHOST DIVISION article and excerpt series that we put out in belated
honour of MahaShivRatri earlier this year\]

In any case, Lord Skanda comes into existence in order to defeat the
powerful demon Taraka – who had been granted a boon of conditional
immortality by Lord Brahma (‘full’ immortality not being something
Brahma has the power to give – there always must be something capable of
killing you, and it’s frequently “buyer’s choice” … thus leading to some
demons choosing things like “no man/””only a woman can kill me” because
they do not think a woman can possibly be a martial threat … or, in this
case, “only a Son of Lord Shiva shall be able to kill me”, on grounds
that at the time Tarakasur sought immortality, Lord Shiva was very much
in mourning as a result of the death of Lady Sati – and, having burned
Kama to ashes, did not appear likely to be getting over Her any time
soon in order to (re-)marry and have a Son).

As we have seen through the previous phases of the NavaDurga Mythic
Cycle, by this point in the story, Parvati and Shiva have once again
Found Each Other, and have successfully re-married. Thus allowing for
the potential conception of a child – and throwing quite the spanner in
the works for Tarakasur’s plans of universal domination, should this
eventuate.

I won’t get into the .. precise ins and outs of Skanda’s backstory, but
suffice to say Lord Agni intervenes (with the stated reasoning of
endeavouring to keep Him safe even pre-nataly from the mighty Tarakasur
et co), and this leads to a very angry Lady Parvati cursing Agni with
the negative attributes of Flame (namely, to always be surrounded with
the blackened haze of smoke, to be indiscriminate in what He devours,
and His food always to be riven with impurities etc.) for daring to
steal Her would-be child – Who eventually winds up being gestated and
birthed by the aforementioned Pleiades (hence part of the reason He is
often depicted with six heads – one for each Mother), in safety
elsewhere. Whereupon LordAgni returns, apologizes ,and explains the
reasoning for what He has done – and Lady Parvati accepts Skanda as Her
Son, even though born to different mothers, and begins to impart the
martial wisdom and counsel to Him which She possesses in such grand
abundance.

And the Slaying of the Demon Ensues. A common mytheme with Durga, as you
may have perhaps noticed 😛

Now, to bring it back to SkandaMata .. what we therefore see here, is
the logical continuation from Ma as Kushmanda. Namely, as ChandraGhanta
to Kushmanda was the fulfilment and elevation of the Princess of the
Moon into the Queen of the Sun .. Skandamata from Kushmanda therefore
represents the Queen \*with\* a Son (and also continues the Solar Aspect
mythememm with additional connection to ‘fire’ and its piety) – the
HiranyaGarbha, the Cosmic Womb, has produced ‘issue’. A Prince. And it
is an interesting point of commentary that the Force Which Hath Created
(And Imbued) The Universe – has also produced, as well as \*is\* a
personification of War. Perhaps one might speculate, therefore, that
Warfare is very much fundamental and intrinsic to Existence – and
indeed, there are an array of other Hindu (and Indo-European more
broadly) myths which \*further\* support this contention.

\[We shall perhaps expand this into a full-length article in the future
– but two points which immediately spring to mind, are the subsequent
derivation of “Orlog” in many Nordic/Germanic languages … wherein it
goes from meaning ‘supernal law’, to ‘destiny/fate’, and thence in more
modern languages to “Warfare” – a situation which may, to be sure, also
have been contributed to by the “laga” particle of Proto-Germanic, which
roughly translates as ‘how the situation lies’, hence its interpretation
as “precedency”, “regulation”, “law” (how things are to be done). And
secondly, the rather interesting interpretation of Sanskrit “BhutAtman”
to mean “War” – given it would more directly mean “Soul/Essence of
\[All\] Being”, and can also mean “Shiva” quite specifically.
Appropriate for Odin, wouldn’t you say?

The aforementioned Sanskrit linguistic element has heightened relevancy
when we consider SkandaMata immediately following Kushmanda, and both in
the context of the Mother of the World/Universe Entire \[indeed, in
certain scriptural readings, Who \*IS\* The Universe Entire\] – as the
notion of a Mother bringing forth Her Essence, is, not least in terms of
‘heredity’, what childbirth effectively is. One could also read the
sixth line of the famed DeviSukta of the 10th Mandala of the RigVeda
\[Hymn 125\] as further supporting this – as it sings of Devi projecting
war out into the cosmos, in defence of the Holy.\]

The persona of Skandamata does not simply represent the role of a Queen
in producing an Heir, however – as Her most magnanimous adoption of
Skanda, even though He was born to other women, also represents the
practice of adopting into the direct Imperial Household men who may have
other births yet whose ‘essence’ speaks true to their lineage, so to
speak – as Julius Caesar did for Augustus, for example.

![skandmata](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/skandmata.jpg?w=676)

Meanwhile, the figure of Skanda also represents another weapon – and a
most potent one indeed – in Devi’s Arsenal. That of the ability of one’s
line to continue, of one’s work not to end with one – but to be picked
up and carried on by one’s children. And goals which one would not
perhaps be able to accomplish by one’s self being attainable through the
effort augmented through kin and progeny. It’s ‘just’ that the work and
goals in question are warfare and demon-slaying 😀

This therefore means that even though Devi as SkandaMata might \*seem\*
very different iconographically to the preceding (warrior & regal)
Aspects of Mata JI, insofar as She does not obviously appear to be armed
or equipped with the (other) accouterments of rulership … seated there
in Her lap and steadied by Her hand is a very powerful weapon indeed –
the infant Lord Skanda! And is in any case accompanied as ever by Dawon,
Her mount – after all, ‘Bravery’ \[for such His name means\] is a most
necessary and powerful weapon indeed.

\[The point around Lord Skanda as Himself, a Weapon – has intriguing
resonances, detailed in some greater depth in the GHOST DIVISION piece,
yet particularly including the figure of Vali, from Nordic mythology.
Whom we might viably identify as “The Avenging Son”, and Whose existence
is mandated in prophecy as being necessary for the purposes of punishing
those responsible for the death of Baldr; as well as surviving Ragnarok
and continuing on the Divine Kingdom in the next cycle of creation.
While it is important to note that a \*direct\* co-identification is …
problematic due to the nature (and quite emphatically, due to the
\*circumstances\*) of Vali’s maternal parentage – the overarching
mytheme of Vali, as the Son of Odin Who is both ‘Warlike’ \[one
etymology for His name being Waihalar – The Warlike One, The One Who
Confronts\], and a Living Weapon, Who carries on the Divine Work of the
Family and Protects Ultimately The Realm of the Gods as a result … well,
it is not hard to see how this resonates rather significantly with Lord
Skanda. And who knows, perhaps there is something more than simple
coincidence to the fact that both Skanda and Vali are born to different
mothers than Odin/Shiva/Rudra’s Wife – but that is purely speculative
upon my part, and I have not looked into this particular point in any
serious depth, nor am I stating there is necessarily anything to it.

Another potential ‘resonance’ would be with, interestingly enough, Lord
Indra – a Son of Dyaus Pitar, potentially the result of a rather unusual
pregnancy and birth \[RV IV. 18.5, dependent upon interpretation\], and
who in a manner directly comparable to Vali, and likely also to Skanda,
almost immediately upon being born takes up armament to slay the
relevant demonic adversary \[RV VIII. 45.4\] – but more upon that, some
other time.

The point is, the notion of progeny as prodigious combatants, warriors,
weapons-with-purpose is evidently a recurrent and endlessly resonant
Indo-European mytheme; and there are doubtless other examples we could
consider from both within the Hindu corpus and beyond.\]

Her other hands (of which there are usually three) customarily bear
lotus flowers and the Mudra of Abhaya; although some other depictions
have other elements in the mix such as the instruments of piety we have
previously seen (i.e. a bell, a liquid-bearing vessel etc.).

We pray to Ma as SkandaMata, both to honour Her as a Mother (especially,
obviously, as Lord Skanda’s Mother – additionally as this is also Her
once again looking after \*all of us\* via a creative approach to the
slaying of the demonic), and to honour the role and responsibility of
Motherhood more generally; and, it does bear noting, to worship Lord
Skanda as well – not just because there He is seated in Her Lap … but
because it is surely a high form of respect indeed to respect and honour
somebody’s Mother.

We also pray to Ma as SkandaMata in order to ask Her to bless us with
the virtues which She embodies – the greatness of spirit and charity as
She displayed by accepting Lord Skanda into Her household despite His
previous circumstances (and, the forbearance and forgiveness of Lord
Agni, into the bargain, if one has that telling of the myth in mind, I
suppose); the blessing of fertility and prosperity; the ’empowerment’
which She has given, not least as symbol-in-flesh via Her Son; and the
Clarity and Guidance which She possesses and can dispense for the
Devotee as Her child also, just as She has done for Lord Skanda. No
doubt, also, the amazing strength (of character, of will, and when Her
offspring are perceived to be under threat) of the Mother is a mighty
boon indeed.

In short, whether one is a Mother, one has a Mother, or one wishes to be
guided and protected, supported and strengthened, and empowered to live
in a virtuous way with regard to those of us around us to whom we owe
the twin duties of ‘care’ and ‘community’ .. She is a most amazing and
worthy Aspect of Mata JI to be honoured.

ॐ देवी स्कन्दमातायै नम

जय माता दी !

