+++
title = "MahaGauri – The Eighth Night of NavRatri – Eighth of thexa0NavaDurgas"
date = "October 6, 2019"

+++
![7e91f43d6194f41e06dde7aeaa80da7b](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/7e91f43d6194f41e06dde7aeaa80da7b.jpg?w=676)

The Eight Night of #NavRatri is dedicated to Ma as MahaGauri – The Great
White One.

Now, as readers of yesterday’s piece – on KaalRatri – will be patently
aware, this stands in seemingly stark contrast to the previous Night’s
Aspect of MataJI, Who is the great(est) Black one. And yet, as it
happens, a deepa perspective sees Them entirely differently. That is to
say, that Ma as MahaGauri is in fact a \*continuation\*, a
\*furtherance\* of Ma as KalaRatri. And, indeed, the ongoing trajectory
of the NavaDurga Mythic Cycle that runs right through from Ma as
Shailaputri to Ma as SiddhiDatri , and beyond.

So who is this Goddess, and what explains Her Name?

MahaGauri is a beneficent and beautiful form of Parvati (indeed, while I
have translated “Gauri” rather directly as “White” \[compare the closely
related modern Hindi term “Gora” – ‘white person’\], its rendering is
perhaps more aptly “Fair” \[and therefore, “Beauty”\] – for even more so
than today, in ancient times, “Fairness” of complexion and “Beauty” were
often \[although, as we have seen from last night’s post on Kali, not
always\] correlated); and is situated within the Mythic Cycle of
NavRatri, perhaps rather curiously, at two points simultaneously. I
shall expand upon why I think this might be so, later in this piece.

As applies Her occurrence immediately following KaalRatri, this is
because Ma as Kali, once the demonic threat was defeated and She was no
longer required to assume the Aspect of the (Dark) Annihilator, She
undertook to transform ‘back’ to a more gentle and perhaps beauteous
form. This is, in some tellings, the result of a joke made by MahaDev
toward Ma while She is still Kali – in which He comments upon Her Black
Complexion, and remarks that She is “Kaal” … which due to the inherent
double-meaning of the term, also connotes that She is Death to Him. This
is of course, truthful within the context of much of the mythology – but
I can understand why She may have been a bit upset by such a remark, and
therefore undertaken to become the opposite in at least partial direct
response.

She therefore sloughs off Her Dark Skin, to reveal the glistening White
Form which lies inside; and is recognized as MataDI in a less …
potentially-omnicidal guise, as a result.

![9d405fbc724044fab1d95495969e5cc0](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/9d405fbc724044fab1d95495969e5cc0.jpg?w=676)

This therefore shows the MahaGauri Aspect as the ‘transcending’ of an
array of the elements bound up with and intrinsic to Ma as Kali (as
well as, for that matter, an array of Durga’s other Forms – such as the
Katyayani Aspect which also precedes KaalRatri) – the supreme anger, the
death-dealing aspect, the war and violence, the terrifying experience,
the all-consuming nature of Time …

… and rather moves back toward the ‘other pole’ (or, more properly
speaking, the ‘other approach to the \*same\* pole’) of Parvati as the
Absolute, represented simultaneously by Ma as Kushmanda and Ma as
SiddhiDhatri. The much more ‘calm’ and ‘purified’ (for such, white can
also be a colour of – c.f the Brahmacharini Aspect we met upon the
Second Night of NavaRatri, in particular) visage of Uma as MahaGauri is
therefore the logical ‘progression’ between Ma as KaalRatri and Ma as
SiddhiDhatri (although, as we noted yesterday, Ma as Maha Kali is
\*also\* this ‘pole’ of Shakti in a Supreme Form and Immanentization
here into our Universe).

The ‘second’ occurrence of MahaGauri within the NavRatri mythic cycle,
is ‘actually’ chronologically earlier, if not as commonly thought of in
this context. It relates to the period immediately after Ma as
Brahmacharini had been pursuing Lord Shiva through the living of the
life of an ascetic, a ‘wild man’ up in His preferred Mountainous
environment. This had, perhaps predictably, lead to Ma winding up quite
‘dirty’ – as She had been living well beyond the ‘creature comforts’ of
Her Father’s Palace, in the wilderness. Once She had successfully won
His Mighty Heart, She therefore undertook to bathe in one of our sacred
rivers, partially as ‘purification’, so that She might once again appear
radiant for Her Marriage ceremony. Having washed off the patina of dirt
and dust and (cannabis?) smoke which had accumulated upon Her Divine
Form, She therefore was now resplendent as MahaGauri (Who then
implicitly goes on to once more (at least partially) Ascend toward
Brahman further as Ma ChandraGhanta – channelling the Illumination of
the Above through Her Moon Crown, and thence becoming, once married Ma
as Kushmanda – HiranyaGarbha Incarnate and thus Brahman). Now,
especially given the previously advanced logic that Mahadev is \*also\*
Brahman – and therefore that Ma Marrying Him \*again\* represents Her
(re-)Unification not only with Her Beloved Husband, but also with The
Absolute … this, too, shows the importance of the MahaGauri form as the
‘Purified’ stage immediately pre-ceding the (re-)Union with the Absolute
(whether Kushmanda – or SiddhiDhatri, in this instance of the NavaDurga
Processional).

Yet there are two very important elements yet to be discussed that go
deepa than this more ‘surface-level’ (perhaps ironical phrasing there)
‘narrative’ situation.

The first is the nature of the ‘impurities’ that are cleansed in order
to attain the MahaGauri state. These are, in very real senses,
‘Attachments’, as well as the physical side of things. And one can quite
feasibly reason that the ritual purifications inherent in the
\*actions\* of bathing in the Sacred River, scrubbing one’s skin,
removing dirt or .. er .. removing one’s own skin (with its
blood-spatter considering the Aspect in Question Whose Skin It Was And
Is – and consequentially, the setting aside of Weapons) etc. – these are
‘performative’ ‘echoes’, of the ‘spiritual purification’ going on
within. Indeed, due to the occasionally indirect manner by which we must
approach Sanskara matters, especially as mortals used to operating
largely in the material plane … it can definitely be argued that the
metaphysical resonance of these ‘performative actions’ is not merely
symbolic – but rather, through the acts required to establish ritual
purity in and with our bodies, not least due to the purposes to which we
are applying these actions (i.e. respect and endeavouring to allow us to
be closer to the Divine, righteousness, right-conduct in general) … they
\*also\* reshape our minds, our metaphysical presence, our spirits, our
soul.

Hence, the Example of MahaGauri is one to be followed in both senses:
that of one’s exterior form bathing in the sacred river, so to speak
(and maintaining cleanliness where possible and necessary, as
appropriate), and that of attempting to maintain a ‘purified’ spirit (as
necessary, possible, and appropriate – as the KaalRatri Aspect and
other, associated tales shows (such as the legend of KaalBhairavJi’s
necessary decapitation of Brahma), this is not always the right course
of action and precedence \*all the time\*) \*within\* said form …
‘metaphorically’ Sacred River Bathing, so to speak? … they are \*both\*
part and parcel of proper conduct.

Although, as we can see with the movement from KaalRatri to MahaGauri,
as compared to the movement from ‘wilderness-flecked’ Brahmacharini to
MahaGauri .. with greater attainment of spiritual understanding,
potency, ‘enlightenment’ following the ongoing cultivation of the soul
and one’s essence … the ‘direct’/’literal’ approach of the \*exterior\*
(performative) actions aforementioned becomes less and less required in
order to carry out the \*inner\* (transformative) actions required.
After all, to accomplish the transition to ‘Gauri’ status, Brahmacharini
must bathe in the Sacred River. Whereas KaalRatri (and, I suppose,
MahaGauri Herself, given the form ‘hiding’ (‘veiled’) under the Kali
Destroyer Aspect) is simply able to ‘will it’, so to speak – and Her
Dark Skin sloughs off to reveal the Truth Inside. (This, not at all
coincidentally, is a figurative rendering of ‘MahaGauri’ – for what can
be more beautiful than the Truth).

But what are these ‘attachments’ aforementioned? Well, on one level, it
is the necessary involvement (I repeat – \*necessary\*) and entanglement
here in this mortal-material Universe of ours. Whether as Brahmacharini
engaged in the practices of figures such as mortal ascetics (but also
the AdiYogi, of course) up in the Himalayan Mountains (practices which
do not affect Eternal Goddesses in the same way that they do mortal
ascetics, especially once They (She) have ‘remembered’ Their (Her) True
Nature 😛 ); or as KaalRatri engaged in the bloody business of
demon-slaying, and battling here on the extant planes (inside-universe).

And on another level, it is the emotional ties – which, again, are
vitally necessary, especially in the context of the NavaDurga Cycle.
After all, to reference Terry Pratchett – “What would humans be without
love?” “RARE”. So, too, with these ‘attachments’ of emotions on the part
of the Goddess. The Love of Ma Parvati for MahaDev represents the
impulse via which She returns to Him and sets the Universe back into
Balance after it had been torn asunder via the Death of Sati and the
subsequent effects upon Mahadev and the surrounding Cosmos. Without
Love, in other words, She and He may not have reunified, especially as
and when They did. Although ‘at the same time’ (in fact, earlier, as
well as ‘omniwhen’ – ‘Mythic Time’ gets complex), the passionate,
questing, errant, \*seeking\* Love displayed by Parvati for Mahadev,
that too gets Sublimated into something ‘higher’ through the course of
the Brahmacharini-through-to-(MahaGauri)-Chandraghanta evolutionary
progression. Had it remained as the hopeful ‘seeking’ ‘attachment’ (as
in, both the ‘seeking’ of re-attachment to Mahadev, as well as the sense
of this as an emotional attachment), it would have continued to bind Her
in embroilment … whereas the unification with and realization of the
Absolute, means that part is no longer necessary – the Eternal is what
remains.

The other emotional tie in question is that emblematic and intrinsic to
Ma as Kali – the great vengeance, the furious anger. This, without a
‘target’ to be affixed to and meted out upon, can only turn within … to
self-destruction. Nietzsche – “in times of peace, the warlike man fights
himself”. And this, too, is what we see (sadly) played out when Mother
Kali in frenzy inadvertently attacks Lord Shiva – for just as They are
two parts of the same Whole, (Ardhanarishvara), so too does that
represent an implicit ‘self-destructive’ / ‘self-harming’ act.

The Worlds-Burning Anger of Kali, therefore, had \*also\* to be
sublimated. For while it was necessary as the protective element, and
will be necessary still further as the World-Cleanser at the End of Time
.. it is a manifestation, a projection of the Absolute here into our
universe. As a vital form of ‘self-protection’ against the threat to
Dharma, to Rta, to the fabric of the Cosmos itself.

The Projection, however, is not the Absolute in its entirety. And
’embodying’ the Anger (for such Kali Is, amongst many, many other
elements and truth(s)), especially if it is ‘all-consuming’, is an
interference for many in \*being\* the Absolute (insofar as Brahman and
‘being’ even belong in the same sentence, particularly extra-universally
speaking), not least because it is focus (and therefore, in a certain
sense, ‘essence’) which keeps getting pulled back to concerns \*inside\*
the Universe (i.e. righteous combat against various demons) rather than
its implicit transcension .

\[Although I do maintain that the converse is also true – that the
transition between Katyayani and KaalRatri represents, further, Anger in
its escalation, as a pathway \*to\* the Absolute, for Kali is also
regarded as the Absolute, as Shakti; however, I shall refrain from
elaborating upon this point in order to perhaps expand upon it at some
future time … 😀 \]

The much more ‘calm’ and ‘beatific’ (in both, possibly three senses of
the term) demeanour and visage of MahaGauri, then, represents the
overcoming of these emotional ‘attachments’, en route to SiddhiDhatri,
and/or to Unification with Mahadev (in the context of their Marriage and
what it symbolizes; not least for and to Them).

However, there is yet a further sense by which MahaGauri is symbolic of
the movement toward and the ‘purification’ necessary on the way to The
Absolute.

I mentioned toward the start of this piece, the fact that MahaGauri
appears, so to speak, ‘twice’ within the NavaRatri Mythic Cycle – with
one of these being, arguably, somewhat ‘out of Chronological order’, and
the other being immediately following KaalRatri. These are no
coincidences.

For think about what “Kali” represents, what ‘Kaal’ means (well, \*one\*
particular element in both, I mean). “Time”.

That is to say, the realization of the Absolute (indeed, the process of
‘realization’ inherent in moving from illusion to truth, from darkness
to light – to reference a certain Upanishad … which also entails moving
from death \[also Kaal\] to immortality – the Eternal) implicitly
requires the transcension of Time. Time also stands, here, for, so to
speak “space-time” – that is to say, existence within the universe with
both its time-stream as well as the fact that, to quote Fight Club, on a
long enough time-line everybody’s survival rate drops to zero. (Some
might read the subtext there, in this Hindu context, as a hopeful note 😛
)

Thus we should find it of no suprise for the MahaGauri Aspect of Mata JI
to ‘turn up’, as and when required, ‘out of Time’ in terms of its
natural and ordinary flow, as well as immediately following the
transcension through KaalRatri.

Because she is, in a very real sense, to reference a certain
controversial thinker’s typology – a (Wo)Man Above Time. (It is an open
exercise in speculation, I suppose, as to whether Ma as KaalRatri would
therefore represent a (Wo)Man \*Against\* Time, as well … due to
standing against the rising, onrushing tide of demonic filth and
representing the armed arm of the prior virtuous age \*as well as\* the
Eternal (the ‘All-Time’), and the Outside Time, Who Shall End It)

So with all of that in mind … it should come as no especial surprise
that we invoke the example of Ma as MahaGauri, for Her beatitude and
grace, Her facility with the purification of the soul and the body and
the essence and the spirit, Her Charity and Love for Her Children – for
this, too, is from the Eternal; and represents a warm response to the
tribulations of life which we may get ourselves bound up and entangled
within, and which thus require Sublimation within this glorious White
Light lest they unconceivably (to us, anyway – trapped in the middles
thereof) hinder us upon our ongoing journeys of cultivation, development
and enlightenment.

![skandamata](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/skandamata.jpg?w=676)

The Lesson of Ma as MahaGauri for the Devotee, is simple. And, as with
many elements that are both intrinsically necessary, and beguilingly
described as “simple” … unutterably complex to actually endeavour to put
into practice. We shall illustrate this with two quotes, the first of
which (although I do not consider him to be an especially decent
mythographer; nor do I like the Freudian pseudopoppseudopsychology he
relies upon) comes from Joseph Campbell – “Atonement (at-one-ment)
consists in no more than the abandonment of that self-generated double
monster—the dragon thought to be God (superego) and the dragon thought
to be Sin (repressed id)”.

Now, as applies the transition from KaalRatri to MahaGauri to
Siddhidhatri; and, for that matter, in a somewhat different sense, this
aforementioned assumption of the MahaGauri form as the result of the
transcension of the agglomeration of the dust and dirt of the penance of
Ma as Brahmacharini – this is not quite what we are seeing. And not
least because the next portion of the quote … gets even \*more\* complex
in its (in-)applicability to this situation – ”But this requires an
abandonment of the attachment to the ego itself; and that is what is
difficult. One must have a faith that the father is merciful, and then
a reliance on that mercy. Therewith, the center of belief is
transferred outside of the bedeviling god’s tight scaly ring, and the
dreadful ogres dissolve.”

After all, while there is quite clearly a Father (God) figure involved
in proceedings – the AllFather, in fact – and while in one of these
instances (that of Brahmacharini to ChandraGhanta and Kushmanda), His
Empathy is veer-y much a fulcrum via which the story continues to turn …
in a broader sense, the “ego” commentary just \*does not quite work\* as
applies a) a Goddess, b) \*this particular\* Goddess, c) AdiParaShakti.
I mean, you could certainly suggest that Kali in full frenzy is running
on “Id”, and that the resumption of the MahaGauri form represents a
‘focusing’ of psyche away from all-pervasive (and ‘nebulous’ – in a
number of PIE relevant senses) Darkness to a unified point of light. But
this is not “transcending ego”, this is (as is Kali in another sense),
re-acquaintance with the Divine I that runs through the universe like an
axial. It is not “ego death”, but rather – at minimum – “ego
apotheosis”. Or, perhaps, a “reminder of one’s also-essential,
essence-ial nature”.

But this is not why I mention all of this here. Because it is a case
wherein the Lesson in question is one that is explicated via the
Campbell quote \*for the Devotee\*, even though it is one that we are
only able to \*figuratively\* emulate the Goddess in
undertaking/undergoing.

That of the aforementioned \*Atonement\*, and thereby, changing in some
elements of our manifestly particular existence. Which, ultimately, may
indeed entail that much-talked about concept of ‘moksha’, and complete
sublimation within some pillar of the Godhead, as various paths are
often talking about. Although, as I explored in a previous piece in this
series, it is also possible to view things ‘going the other way’ – in a
manner perhaps more comparable to Jung’s “Ergreifen” concept. But that,
we shall leave the expansion upon for another article, perhaps.

Now, I said I should be utilizing \*two\* quotes to explicate the Lesson
for the Devotee of Ma as (or, perhaps, \*becoming\*) MahaGauri; and the
second of these comes from the work of a mythographer whom I tend to
respect rather a bit more in these areas … not least because it’s \*my
own\*. To quote from the GHOST DIVISION –

“And, speaking of Odinic theonyms – consider also the “Grimnir”, “Masked
One”, which lends itself to the Grimnismal (‘Sayings of the Masked One’)
article of Nordic scripture. (As a point of further interest, “Grima”,
meaning a mask or a hood (a disguise), when it entered into Old English,
also came to mean a Spectre, an Apparition, a Ghost. It has come down to
us via the modern term “Grimace”, but in its more archaic roots in
Proto-Indo-European, as “Ghrey”, it meant ‘to smear’, ‘to paint’. This
recalls, to my mind, anyway, also the Shaivite practice of the wearing
of Tripundra tilaka markings by Devotees – or the full-scale Vibhuti
(Sacred Ash, often of the Cremation Pyres in the case of some
traditions/Victory) of the more hard-core Shaivite Sadhus.
Interestingly, its Ancient Greek derivative – Khrio – apart from
sounding similar to and having figurative connections in terms of use
with, the “Krewh” PIE particle’s Greek and Latin derivatives \[terms
referring to corpses, cruelty, Ice and Cold, coverings \[see also: PIE:
“Kel”, whence “Helmet”, but also whence “Kaal” – as in .. MahaKaal, the
Shaivite Theonym of the ‘Great Death’, ‘Great Black’, ‘Great Time’ – the
all-covering and all-destroying\], carrion-eaters (such as Crows,
Ravens, and even, as we shall see, the Cremation Flame) but also,
interestingly, striking, and in one case, knocking at the door\], is
also used to refer to “anointment – and therefore, in Biblical
translation, to the Anointing of a King. While ‘Grey’ theoretically has
another, similar sounding PIE derivation, I do in fact suspect that,
particularly as applies “Grime” and Ash, that it also may derive
herefrom \[and while I do not seek to imply a linguistic derivation,
there is also the PIE “Greyd” particle, meaning to Roar, to Shout –
which is of obvious significance to “Rudra”\]. Which matters, due to the
role of “Grey” as the colour of Sky and Stone \[and Steel\] \[and Smoke,
for that matter – but more on that, perhaps, in another article\];
which, as you may recall from some of my previous work, are elements
closely correlated with both Sky Father and Sovereignty … although given
the PIE Pel/Pelh, meaning “Grey”, a “Covering”, “Pale”, but also a
“Skin”, a “Hide” \[i.e. a “pelt” – like a wolf-skin, of the famed
Indo-European Wolf-Warriors … or a bear-skin, as in the Berserkers\] ,
and unsurprisingly an array of terms pertaining to old age \[Parusa, in
Sanskrit, derived from the same root has wound up with a rather
intriguing range of meanings – including greyness, barbarian-ness,
piercing (like the wind), an arrow, attacking speech, and in slightly
modified form, a riddle… \] – you will perhaps forgive me my Biblical
\[and, more specifically, Apocalyptic\] indulgence when I refer to a
“Pale Horseman” \]”.

So why am I quoting just shy of four and a half hundred words of
mytholinguistic tangentry around Odin’s theonym of “Grimnir” in what’s
ostensiably a piece on MahaGauri rather than MahaGrimnir ?

Well, take a look at that portion around “grime”; and that around
“masks”. What is washed off by Brahmacharini as She assumes the
MahaGauri Form? Grime. What is taken off by the later MahaGauri
assumption as She is becoming from Kali, from KaalRatri? A skin, that is
akin to a Mask.

So therefore, what has all of this go to do with the Lesson of MahaGauri
for the Devotee?

It is twofold. The former of which is more directly linked to that
“atonement” concept – the situation wherein, not just that we have
‘cleansed’ ourselves of previous circumstance that may have been holding
us down, weighing us back, and fundamentally \*obscurating\* our better
and more authentic self/being … but that what we have accrued about us
through the \*process of the penance itself\* has become similarly
washable off.

I shall say that again – it is not only an act of \*penance\* and
(ex-)purgation, cleansing that is referred to here … it is the moving
\*beyond\* even the penance, its processes, and its more immediate
outcomes. No longer being “the penitent one”, but simply “the one”, who
has been penitent in the past, certainly, and not forgotten of it .. but
is no longer abjectly defined and characterized by that, for that
\*too\* can be a fundamental \*obscuration\* of who and what we actually
are. That is the portion of the Lesson dealing with the shift from
Brahmacharini via MahaGauri, to the longed-for joyous circumstance of
Reunification .. At-One-Ment, you might say, which represents
Authenticity of Being, alongside \[indeed, \*as-also\*\] the Being we
might feasibly term BhutAtman \[VeeraBhuta would be … something we’ll
get into some other time\].

But the \*second\* sense, is that entailed in the metamorphosis from
KaalRatri to MahaGauri – and that is a little harder to place, for it is
\*not\* one of “grime” being washed off. And it is not, not necessarily
anyway, that of a “mask”, an external covering being discarded to reveal
a face beneath. Rather, it is one of \*a\* facing, \*a\* face, being
changed to \*another\* face – and both are, fundamentally, \*an\* Aspect
of the Person beneath. Indeed, quite an absolute one, as it happens, in
more than one sense, as applies the former.

It \*may\* perhaps be compared to the process undergone by the Nordic
‘Berserker’ warriors – and in, again, two senses. For there is a matter
of some debate as to whether the underlying linguistic etymology is that
of referencing warriors who fight in bear-skins – that is to say, who
have donned a ‘mask’, a ‘skin’, along with Their Fury, Their Frenzy
\[does this sound familiar, yet? Kali is, in some myths, regarded as the
Black Skin, the War Mask, the Face of Fury, ‘put on’ by Devi when
necessary; and ‘taken off’ when not\], which represents some facet of
themselves.

But it is my contention that, whatever the linguistics of the matter,
the \*other\* potential interpretation \*also\* has some considerable,
capacious relevancy here – for if it is the case that the “berserkers”
were the \*bare\*-skinned warriors, even leaving aside the fighting
without armour point, what we are left with is the idea of the fury in
question, being \*innate\*, being \*brought out from within them\*,
rather than foreign, garbed upon them, as may otherwise be implied by
the “bear-shirt” interpretation. Again, I am not speaking etymologically
with this second point – but rather, simply, ‘illustratively’.

For this gets to exactly what I am stating as applies Kali as a ‘facing’
of Devi. This is not an ‘exterior mask’, that is donned and discarded as
a garment or an element of fancy dress.

This is something \*core\* and \*intrinsic\* to the Goddess – one Face
that we … or, more terrifyingly, as seen by the Enemy … see. Part of
Her, indeed, \*actually\* \[also\] Her. But not \*always on\*, and
brought out when necessary.

So there, you see, is the \*second\* part of this Lesson of Ma as
MahaGauri for the Devotee –

When it comes to these points of ‘transition’, we do not just abandon
our past elements as if they were never there, never happened, are now
the almost exclusive property of someone else. For what would be the
point of that? Sanskara \*does not work that way\*.

Rather, we situate them within their appropriate context. Some of which,
this is true, \*are\* washed off, sloughed off, discarded amidst the
cleansing process of the ‘bathing’.

But others of which are a necessary, useful, even \*vital\* part of us.
To be ‘brought out’ and then ‘brought back’ in again, as we require.
\*That\* is a rather grand sense of self-mastery.

And it is also, if you think about it, \*exactly\* what is entailed by
Ma as MahaGauri – not only in the direct and clear sense of KaalRatri
coming out and then afterwards returning to the less ‘active’ facing.
But the very nature of the colour “white” – white light, if you should
run it through a prism, refracts out to show that it is, in fact,
\*all\* other colours of light combined. So, too, is it with MahaGauri –
in preparation for Ma as SiddhiDhatri, we see that She is the
‘penultimate’ stage wherein all are in one, all the powers and potencies
of the previous Forms and others besides are \*inherent\* in Her, She is
just ‘retaining’ them, ‘garbing’ them, ‘masking’ them, if you like,
under Her Command – under Her Control, within Her Divine White Form.
Just there beneath the surface.

A situation made possible, despite the potentially seemingly
‘contradictory’ elements of some of these ‘facings’ and Siddhis, because
She knows Herself, does not lose Herself within Them; and is capable of
‘removing’ Them from Her Outer Facing as required to get ‘back’ to what
She, at Her Core, Ultimately Is. And any point along the continuum
thereto, should She so desire or require.

In other words, the Lesson of MahaGauri’s threefold nature, is to know
when it is necessary to ‘cleanse’ and what to cleanse in such a manner
that things are discarded, versus retained; .. to know what is part of
one, to be brought out and rotated as required in the situations, the
circumstances you may find yourself under – made possible, in no small
part, by that Self-Knowledge, which enables one not to be ‘lost’ beneath
the transitions of the exteriorly expressed Self and Essence(s); … and
to have the \*control\*, the \*self-mastery\*, as flowing \*from\* that
self-knowledge (knowing just who and what it is that you are, you look
like, “underneath it all” – whether ‘grime’ or ‘war-mask’, or other
exterior visages nor veneers besides) to make all of the above actually
possible.

Iconographically, Ma as MahaGauri both recalls a number of previous
Aspects of the NavaDurgas – in particular Ma as Shailaputri (Whom She is
occasionally regarded as a perhaps younger iteration of), as well as Ma
as Brahmacharini – as well as subtly hinting at being a ‘furtherance’
from either.

![dscn0272](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/dscn0272.jpg?w=676)

She is depicted with Hands in both Abhaya and Varada Mudra, as well as
bearing the Trishula and a Damaru in Her other Hands. Now, this is
especially interesting – for almost always the Trishula and Damaru are
to be depicted Together! And, as noted in last night’s KaalRatri
posting, where They are to be separated, this is something very profound
– namely, with the Trishula standing for the Eternal, the Empowerment,
the Divine, Regal, (Adi) Shakti .. and the Damaru as the Universe – with
its Time, regulated by the flow of beats from same … this is therefore a
‘decoupling’ of the Two. A subtle yet important reminder that
ultimately, the Eternal is indeed ‘beyond’ Universe. And that the
‘regulation’ of the Universe is not (although it \*is\* affixed to ..
when the Universe is ‘in bloom’ – which MahaGauri may be represented as
\*beyond\*, in terms of ‘time’) the Eternal Rule – directly speaking,
anyway. Although the regulation of our universe, the enforcement of its
maintenance, may very well be carried out with this most fearsome Weapon
representing the grand, supra-divine, Rta Rule. The Trishula’s ensign
significance as the emblem of Mahadev and of Rulership throughout the
Three Worlds and mastery of the forces of Creation (the three qualities,
inter alia) as well as Destruction, is also pertinent here – not least
because of the implicit symbology of all of these as ‘the same’ ,
especially as it happens within the Hands of the ETERNAL MA.

(And, in any case, the Trishula – with Its fearsome and formidable
powers of potentially universal annihilation – this, too, represents
Purification. For after all, the erasure of all that is ‘delusion’ or
‘illusion’ in the sense of having contingent existence or no real
existence at all … will leave only the Eternal. The destruction, the
unmaking, the MahaPralaya of the Universe, then, is the ultimate act of
Purification – as obliquely noted in the commentary upon Ma Kali as
presented last night. Although it is also worth noting that in Her Hands
here, this is held in abeyance (bilingual pun there) by Ma MahaGauri.
(Even despite the separation of Damaru and Trishula, which might perhaps
cause one a momentary panic of thinking the End of the World had been
and gone, leaving us trapped here after the Twilight of the Gods in some
sort of utterly interminable ‘hangover-morning’ .. metaphysically
speaking..).).

The Damaru may also, via its own internal paradox, speak to the nature
of MahaGauri and indeed Shakti – as the Damaru, via its
dhagad-dhagad-dhagad beat, symbolizes the flow and regularity of time
\*within\* the Universe, directing even Gods as the beat informs a
Dancer (well, two of Them, at least 😛 ) – but is also, simultaneously,
a \*ritual implement\*. That is to say, an important part of the
processes by which we may ‘encounter’ the Divine, the Eternal – and
therefore ‘step outside’ (or the Eternal may ‘step in’ within that
Sacred Space thus created by the drum-skin and the drum-beat’s bounds
and resonance, especially with in our minds conditioned and
re-calibrated by same) the temporal. Just as MahaGauri Is. “To be \*in\*
the World, yet not \*of\* the World”, indeed.

She is also very much depicted in association with the colour White –
which in addition to the emblematic value of ‘purity’ and ‘purification’
from dirt or ‘darkness’ or attachment (hence partially why (mortal)
Widows may also tend toward wearing White – for their ‘attachment’ to
their husbands is now a thing of the past, sundered via the almost
indisputable and occasionally seemingly incessant Blade of Mortality;
and not always easily stayed even via the best wishes of and
supplication to Its Holy Wielder(s)) on these values’ own terms (insofar
as ‘purification’ as a process can be understood sans both That Which Is
To Be Purified and That Which Must Be
Burned/Washed/Scrubbed/Sloughed/Sundered Away), also represents the
contrast with Ma as Kali that signifies the (not so much ‘ongoing’ as
that implies ‘within the timestream’ , as ‘Eternal’) transcension of
Time. Time, after all, is “the Fire in which we burn”. And therefore –
in a manner similar to how the Fire, when it has subsided, leaves potent
white ash (‘Vibhuti’ – which also means ‘power’ … which we see in
Sanskrit as … 😀 ) from the burning away of something’s perceived
‘impurities’, so too may MahaGauri be thought of.

The White Bull, as well, recalls Shiva and Nandi (i.e. the Unity, the
Absolute), and in addition to representing the conveyance of one blessed
and on the ascension (as we saw with Shailaputri’s path into the
(higher) Mountains in pursuit of MahaDeva), also recalls Ma as
Shailaputri for the purpose of showing the ‘circular’ shape of the
NavaDurga Mythic Cycle. Which, although it is not a ‘closed loop’, is
perhaps better ‘visualized’ (other than with these lovely depictions of
Each NavaDurga I’v been posting, of course!) as something of a
‘helicase’, a ‘spiral’ – that is ‘circular’ in two-dimensions, yet when
considered in three, winds ‘around’ but also in so doing so, progresses
on an inexorable pathway ‘upward’.

Although, of course, if one were to view it \*four-dimensionally\* or
more (that is to say, not just in the sense of viewing it unfolding ‘in
time’ in front of one .. somehow – as it is an achingly slow process,
some might argue, dependent upon one’s perspective and
‘attachment-immersion’ within Time; but also with the ‘pathway’ of Time
mapped as well, and therefore re-intersecting out of ‘three-dimensional’
order, so to speak, functioning according to its own ‘deeper’ logic and
(no doubt,) spiraliform existence ..); then further patterns emerge.
Especially when, as is somewhat pictographically represented with
yesterday’s exquisitely beautiful murti Ma Kali as this \*also\*
intersects with The Infinite, the Eternal, Shakti ‘unbound’,
‘unfettered’, ‘unmanifested’ as the Lingodbhava running through the
Cosmos an the Dimensions, so to speak.

![Screenshot_2018-11-06-22-05-16-3601](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/screenshot_2018-11-06-22-05-16-3601.png?w=676)

In any case, She is Most Beautiful (MahaGauri); and Bounteous in Her
Charity, via the expressed desire for relief from these shackles upon
us, which She can grant, upon the road upwards, ever upwards, via
Shuddh. For just as Mata KALI is the Supreme Liberator … so, too, is
MahaGauri. And arguably in a more ‘easy’ and ‘equitable’ pathway for
those not necessarily capable or willing to manifest the Omnicidal Rage
as a tool to transcend the Universe (in either sense – that of
transcension in the sense of ‘escape’ or ‘endurance’ … or of
destruction until nothing remains \*except\* the Eternal – That Which
\*IS\*) . .

Onwards, Upwards, as the rising smoke from the ‘purification’ pyre, and
as the rising heat energy from the sacrificial Havan is a conduit to
DevaLoka …

… to SiddhiDhatri. Perfection. Shakti (Incarnate).

Jai.

ॐ देवी महागौर्यै नम
