+++
title = "Ancient Aryan Meath & Modern Afghani Meth – Axa0Remembrance?"
date = "October 17, 2019"

+++
![74467212_465688654043464_6448101192521220096_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/74467212_465688654043464_6448101192521220096_n.png?w=676)

I found this rather … disconcerting, because it is arguably an instance
of #NAS meme magic in action.

You see, many years ago now, when I was getting interested in
Indo-European ethnobotany, I happened across the academic debate over
the identity of Soma. Which – to my mind at least – has now been solved
thanks to archaeological evidence from the steppes, and other
information, which strongly suggests psilocybin-bearing mushrooms.

However, a ‘confounding’ factor to that explanation previous to the
aforementioned archaeological discovery, was the Zoroastrian traditions
around Haoma \[note the S=>H sound-shift between Sanskrit and older
Persianate languages\]; wherein they have used ephedra in their rituals
.. which, quite naturally, lead to the presumption that maybe this was
an active preservation from ancient days of an authentic ritual element.

Except that a) ephedra’s a stimulant, not a psychedelic .. and would
seem odd for .. well .. what’s described in the relevant Vedic hymnals
in effects profile; and b) it’s Zoroastrianism. My belief being that the
discordance between what they do, and what we did during the Vedic age,
being because they started ‘culture-jamming’ by ‘replacing’ the
effective content \[and literal active ingredient\] of the sacred brew
ceremonies. And certainly, there are ancient Zoroastrian statements of
castigation against the ‘pre-Zoroaster’ approach to Soma’-Haoma’.

Anyway, due to … some of my other competencies (as well as what was
prominent in the NZ news media and on TV at the time), as soon as I saw
that actually, ancient Indo-Iranian peoples had been producing powerful
stimulant substances working from an ephedrine base, you can see where
my mind went.

In more recent years, with a better command of both etymology and
comparative mythoreligion, I think I actually wrote an article about, to
sum it up briefly: Ancient Aryan Meath. Meath meaning … something
\*slightly\* different in this context, and relating to uh .. cheese.
THE CHEESE OF POWER. Doesn’t have quite the same ring to it, now, does
it. \[Before somebody calls me up on it,  
it’s an \*indirect\* relationship, at least partially relating to the
manufacturing process .. of the cheese\]

In any case – we went from making a series of jokes, over the years
about Ancient Indo-European Narcotheomythobellicosia , specifically
involving the manufacture of combat stimulants from certain herb-life …

… through to me reading about it in a headline.

Interestingly, to quote from the article:  
“Researchers on Mansfield’s team said that no one knows how Afghans
discovered the plant’s alkaloid content, which is what makes it possible
to create meth.”

Perhaps, just perhaps, somebody \*remembered\*.
