+++
title = "SiddhiDhatri – The Final Night – Ninth of thexa0NavaDurgas"
date = "October 7, 2019"

+++
![71531901_10162363446000574_6560375125152104448_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/71531901_10162363446000574_6560375125152104448_n.jpg?w=676)

The Ninth and Last of the Nine Nights of #NavRatri is dedicated to Ma as
SiddhiDhatri – often rendered in translation as the ‘Bestower of Boons’,
or words to that effect. And yet, while this is indeed a reasonable
direct translation of SiddhiDhatri (‘Siddhi’ having amongst its meanings
a ‘Boon’, often in the sense of a Gods-bestowed supernatural power;
while “Dhatri” shares a root with English terms like “Dative” and
“Donation” – the ambit of which should be immediately apparent), it
loses so much as to be arguably significantly distortionary to the
\*actual\* role, portfolio and characterization of the Goddess in this
Aspect as to make leaving the theonym \*untranslated\* almost more
preferable.

But where would be the ‘challenge’ in that.

Confused? Allow me to explain. There is a prevailing theme in \*really
bad mythtaken theological wishful thinking\* of construing the Gods (or,
indeed, the singular God of the Abrahamic approach) as, to quote a
certain tv show, something akin to a fast-food drive-thru menu: that is
to say, you place your order, and the asked-for bounty is thus presented
to you. This, as many a pious-in-the-face-of-adversity-or-ineffability
Devotee will tell you, is not how religion actually works.

Indeed, while there \*is\* a justifiable strand of something which might
\*vaguely look like\* such a thing to be found in both the ancient
Vedas, and other comparable Indo-European traditions – in the form of
Bhaga, or the ‘Treasure-Friend’ (again, to use a figurative translation
rendering, in this case from Germanic languages), or I suppose the
concept of ‘patronage’ more generally (which in its older sense where
political corruption or whatnot is not implied, requires a Patron,
dispensing influence and material support to his people, as part of a
reciprocal arrangement of loyalty on upwards and heading back ‘down’
again) … these are \*not\* to be compared to some kind of materialistic
(even as it functions on a metaphysical nominal basis) “exchange” of
putting in the coinage of declared acts of notional piety and expecting
the Vending Machine of the Gods to ‘pony up’ with the return ‘favour’.

That is, at its worst, a cynical and manipulative attempt at a
consumerist – worse, a \*capitalist\* – “interaction”. Value (in the
true sense) and passion-free.

Whereas these other examples I have enumerated, are contingent upon
something else. An actual bond, a tie of loyalty, of faithfulness, of
piety, and often – not at all insignificantly – of parentage. The
comparison of these latter forms to the abhorrent one earlier
enumerated, as if to make out that they are the same thing, can only be
made by those who have not managed to appreciate the fundamental
differences of \*kind\* rather than mere \*degree\* which exist between
them. But, then, in an age wherein one’s nine-to-five-in-the-morning
middle-management ’employer’ presumably likes to conduct themselves in
what they \*think\* is a manner befitting a feudal lord (but in
actuality is much more closely aligned to the concept of an ancient
slave-driver sans the mandatory breaks) … it should be \*entirely
unsurprising\* then, that we so frequently confuse this with the
\*actual\* conduct of a liege – a chieftain, a warrior-king, a Lord,
with all the noblesse oblige … and/or (depending upon particular
cultural inflexion and one’s role in the resultant society) the more
equitable distribution of the proceeds of a raid and the mutual sharing
of the shouldering of responsibility and active contribution that goes
with.

So why am I mentioning all of this in the context of an article on Ma as
SiddhiDhatri, and more especially having just connoted the difficulties
in translation conveying the meaning of Her theonym when it is far too
simplistically rendered ‘Bestower of Boons’?

Probably only \*partially\* for the reason you are no doubt thinking.

For yes, it is true that the role and presentation of Ma as SiddhiDhatri
is very much more closely aligned with this far more archaic approach to
the concept of both a Boon and its Bestowment. And I am obliquely
concerned that the simple ‘direct’ approach of translation utterly loses
this sense of nuance – these shades of meaning – for the fact that it is
being presented to a fundamentally ‘Modern’ audience … with all the
unique cadaverization of context and consciousness still less
\*conscience\* which that entails.

But we’ve got to go DEEPER!

Deepa, too, but that is something we’ll no doubt get to on Diwali 😀

As we shall soon see, it is not at all coincidental that Ma as
SiddhiDhatri stands at the \*end\* of the NavaDurga processional
throughout the course of the Nine Nights. Indeed, stands as one of the
array of NavaDurgas Whom we might feasibly say is emblematic of Adi
Shakti Herself. But before we get to that … let us indulge in a little
definitional presentation!

As remarked capaciously upon above, both Siddhi and Dhatri have a quite
a number of meanings – especially once the shifting shades of intonation
inherent in Sanskrit ‘puns’ and intentionally connoted double-meanings
are taken into account!

Siddhi can indeed very much mean a ‘supernatural power’, but that is not
all. It can \*also\* mean a completed work of art or artifice
(intriguingly – including ‘cooking’, which rather aptly gets across the
idea in the sense that ‘a work of art’ (not so much Aarti) perhaps does
not with such immediacy), a quality of excellence or
efficiency/efficacy, the ‘resolution to a quandary, that emphasis upon
‘completion’, and ‘perfection’ or ‘perfectability’, as well as the idea
of ‘liberation’ – especially in its \*final\* sense, so to speak. An
‘undertaking’, a ‘fulfilment’, an ‘enlightenment’ – and yes, also, a
‘payment’, a ‘bestowal’, a “boon”. Getting the ‘picture’ yet?

Dhatri, meanwhile, has three (or, three and a half, depending upon how
one chooses to count them) stems of meaning. The first and most
direct,दातृ, is the one we have already encountered – that of a giver,
a gifter, a bestower, a donor (this is a cognate term), and
interestingly, in particular, one who ‘gives away’ a female relative for
marriage.

The second,धातृ, which is technically speaking something of a homophone
due to a slight change of pronunciation on the first syllable, stands
for a ‘creator’ – and as one might presume, acquires some relevancy
especially with regard to the ‘cosmokrator’ position within the
Pantheon. While some might seek to therefore affix it to Brahma, I would
once again reiterate what was said about the mid-point in the NavaRatri
cycle pertaining to MA as the Hiranyagarbha. How this, too, fits into
both the “SiddhiDhatri” rubric I am sketching out, as well as the
overarching NavaDurga Mythic Cycle, we shall return to in a moment.

![72476162_10162363453135574_6195044446745133056_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/72476162_10162363453135574_6195044446745133056_n.jpg?w=676)

The third, meanwhile, isधात्री, which is once again a slightly
differently pronounced homophone – and which has, most interestingly, a
meaning-field which includes the notion of both a Mother and the Earth
(most appropriate, given Ma as ‘Earth Mother’ in a number of guises –
including, as our previous works have discussed, Parvati most directly,
and obviously also Prithvi Ma, and a number of others besides!) ;
however, the term \*also\* encompasses in its ambit of meaning, somewhat
‘surrogate’ Mother figures – ‘Foster-‘ or ‘Adoptive-‘ Mothers,
wet-nurses, and even midwives fall under this ambit. Although that last
one (indeed, the last two) in particular is of a subtly different shade
of meaning which shall be discussed additionally.

Now, those among ye with a certain ‘appreciation’ for the ability to
think ‘sideways’ – in the ‘adjacent’, so to speak, when it comes to
language and theological conceptry, will already have grasped the
general implication of what I am getting at here. Yet we must make it
explicit! Somewhat, at least, insofar as such a thing is possible.

\*ALL\* of the above and aforementioned meanings for these two particles
– both the direct ones which are to be found without further seeking
within the terms themselves, as well as the
different-yet-clearly-and-evidently-related meanings of the subtly
different pronunciations of Dhatri, etc. – \*all\* of these are very
much deliberately meant within the name SiddhiDhatri.

SIMULTANEOUSLY!

And you thought that the rather ‘broad’ seeming meaning-field of “Kali”
was potentially ‘complex’ 😛

The reader can, of course, amuse and/or enlighten themselves by putting
back together various English translations from the elements contained
within the above paragraph. I shall not enlengthen this piece tooooooooo
much by doing so in any great detail myself.

But it is very important to consider a few of the basic ‘mythemes’ going
on here, nevertheless.

For “SiddhiDhatri” is clearly not ‘just’ the Bestower of Boons. But also
the bestower of Perfection – the bequeather of Liberation, in the sense
that such is available to the ‘perfected soul’ … and if you cast your
mind back to that analogy of cooking I proffered earlier … it may seem a
strange thing to constitute the process of Sanskara, of reincarnation
and progressive building upon previous lives lead, as something perhaps
akin to “cooking the soul”; and yet, “stick him back in – he ain’t done
yet!” does have a certain ‘flavour’ that is rather useful in getting
across the idea here.

The Soul as (potentially speaking, at least – and guess what the
\*fulfillment\* of that potential would be rendered as in Sanskrit 😛 ) a
Work of Art … “Self-Cultivation” as the Divinely Supported – indeed:
mandated, ordinated, ordained – Project for the Ages, is quite something
to think about!

Not least because, when you look back over the course of the NavRatri
Processional of the NavaDurgas in Their Mythic Cycle, we see that this
is \*exactly\* what has been taking place over the span of same. From Ma
as Shailaputri (or even preceding this as Sati, come to think of it) –
through to Ma as SiddhiDhatri \[that is to say, the nascent and
neophyte, somewhat, Daughter of the Mountain, through to the Mother of
the Earth – a ‘beginning’ to a ‘fulfilment’, a ‘seeker’, to the ‘Truth’,
and a ‘rebirthed ember-emanation’ \[in multiple senses of the evocative
nature of this term – consider just what it was that lead to Lady Sati
dying-then-reincarnating … as Princess Parvati as Lady ShailaPutri\]
right back through Transcending Inferno (recall my commentaries on .. a
number of Devi Forms in the course of these Nine Nights, come to think
of it) eventually ultimately up to Adi ParaShakti Indeed!

Gaining powers, experience, enlightenment, and the ‘pressurization’
which forms those self-same (so to speak) ‘ashes’ , the ‘carbon’ from
which all life \[and much in the way of ‘structures’ and ‘civilization’
– and, for that matter, many wildernesses and forest terrain in
particular!\] we ken is ultimately made , as well as the impressions of
so much art and illustration and literature upon the ‘page’ or the ‘cave
wall’ or the ‘forehead \[in the case of Vibhuti markings\] … via which
this ‘carbon’ bourne of ashes … is ultimately rendered – ‘transfigured’
\[and here I am perhaps emulating a Christian theological term\] –
indeed into the Diamond .. the ‘perfect form’, the ultimate hardness,
the ultimate cutting, the ultimate self-refracting and self-reflecting
lattice-work that is therefore ‘complete in and of itself’ … and, not at
\*all\* coincidentally, one of the mighty translations of “Vajra” –
hence and whence the “Vajra” of “Vajrayana” and such in Buddhist
post-Vedic developments upon the Term; and why it is an ultimate weapon,
and invincibile, indestructible armour \[c.f one of the meanings behind
the Theonym of Bajrang Bali – Lord Hanuman .. not simply ‘wielder of the
Thunder Club’, but The Invincible!\] – the ‘flawless soul’, the
‘flawless being’, against whom None in existence can ultimately stand!

All of this is – ultimately, in both senses – the Perfection of the
Being, the Essence, the Elements & Energies (indeed, the Universe), the
Soul.

![71863889_10162363467180574_4024206604835487744_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/71863889_10162363467180574_4024206604835487744_n.jpg?w=676)

Whether you choose to take the ‘growing bonsai mountains’ (a Terry
Pratchett reference there, to the rather excellent ‘Thief of Time’)
view, of the soul, and one’s life (lived throughout, perhaps
paradoxically, many lifetimes), as being ‘self-cultivation’ in the
manner that one might attempt to grow and shape a garden (or that
aforementioned bonsai mountain) over the span of many years into the
shape one finds most pleasing …. or whether you take a rather more
‘removed’ view, which instead chooses to see the ‘self-cultivation’
being an exercise carried out not so much (or at least, not \*only\*) by
the “self” in question – and instead, an act of Divine Artifice \[I
recall both something said of/to me by somebody presenting themselves as
an oracle, a seer, in that Shaivite instance – that I was ‘carved’ by
Mahadev ; or the related maxim “I am a living weapon – crafted by the
Hands of a God” ; and, for that matter, the Nordic perception upon some
of the various Actions of Lord Odin in a bid to craft better and better
warriors for the War At The End Of The World\].

Or, perhaps, as a ‘both’ position, something akin to the way in which a
child’s growing up entails the active agency of both Mother and Child in
the course of guiding and shaping that individual into the person they
shall later become. This last, probably, is something closest to the
‘truth’ of it – after all, it’s ultimately ‘our choice’ whether we
listen to our parents .. just it is (within the bounds of ..er ..
‘material constraints’, ironically in this case) \*their\* choice to a
reasonable extent as to what they teach us, what schools or other
contexts they place us in … at least in the early (and often most
crucial) years.

Yet I have perhaps digressed.

My point is that Ma as SiddhiDhatri can bestow Enlightenment and the
guidance that will eventually lead us, too, to Perfection. Liberation,
or Moksha (and the two do not always mean the same thing – but \*that\*
is a metaphysical/theological discursion for another Night!). But also,
‘Empowerment’.

For you see, in the Hindu understanding of such things, that is what
many of these ‘Siddhis’ actually are. Outer \[or, rather,
inner-to-outer\] manifestations of a more potent inner radiance. In just
the same manner that a furnace, when stoked, shall produce ever more
heat, light, smoke, steam, and motion if it happens to be affixed to a
turbine.

The soul, the being, the person, the purpose, is the furnace \[I may be
implicitly referencing the Upanishadic ‘Five Fires’ doctrine here,
also\]; the ‘Bestowment’ is the process of increasing its inherent
‘energy’ and the self-mastery to safely project these out, through the
tools, the outlets which She can give us (like that aforementioned
turbine, perhaps – at the dangers of slipping into a sort of
teleological “techno-theology”); the “Siddhis” are the actual
manifestation and enactment of this increase, this growth and somewhat
change in inner ‘essence’.

Taking what was there beforehand \[and, to be sure, in a not dissimilar
manner to how Ma as Kushmanda provides the Spark to the Sun – so, too,
does She provide the initial fire, the initial radiance, to the Purusha
.. whether God or Mortal or indeed Material Universe alike\], and
causing it to \*grow\* into what it can, it should, it \*must\* be.

And, in the process, unlocking the “ecstasy” – in the Greek-Heideggerian
sense, of “ex-stasis” \[‘outside of time’ – permanency, but also the
complete absorption in Doing What One Was Created To Do … the pleasure
of ‘self-realization’ where we seem outside the flow of ordinary events
precisely \*because\* these are, to us, no longer “ordinary events” in
which we are engaged in – they are our Destiny, our Fate, our Calling
.. we are Being All That We Can Be – quite literally, at the upper end
of the path of which I am speaking\]; which surely must correlate with
SiddhiDhatri’s ‘Bestower of Bliss’ \[Ananda in various, indeed, \*all\*
senses and levels; for such it is to approach the World-Axis … although
this can \*also\* entail hanging in torment, perhaps for \*another\*
period of Nine Nights, in pursuit of such a Siddhi as the Power of a
Language-form – Vak, or Runes …. \]

Siddhis – that is to say, the supernatural powers which She is regarded
as possessing absolute mastery over – are not only something developed
within and bequeathed to humans, however.

They frequently turn up in scriptural and other sources as
potencieswhich other Deities are capable of both developing and
manifesting in the course of \*Their\* mythic arcs, often in \*direct
proportion\* to Their Own Pathways ‘back’ upwards toward Their full and
fully self-understood (that is to say, enlightened) Divine Natures.

The best example of which, perhaps, is Lord Hanuman – Who is rendered
amnesiac about His True Divine nature, and along with it loses His
knowledge of the Siddhis which are otherwise intrinsic to His Divinity
and ‘Personhood’ – fated only to start ‘remembering’ them, these powers,
as He learns to engage in the selfless/serious-minded service of others,
and more \*properly\* carry out His appointed role within the Cosmos.
\[Bajrang Bali as mentioned above; also illustrates the core element of
Hindu approaches to this phenomenon – the Diamond, as ‘perfected’ and
shining forth in radiant splendour, with the potency of the Divine
Thunderbolt and similar indestructibility as a result of its correctly
arranged internal structure; but also, as applies that Being especially,
something myDidi once said about being a divine spark having a human
experience – encountering Piety, at least in part, as the effort to
remember , be reminded who and what you are\]

Curiously enough, another shining illustration for the concept – which
also focuses more upon devotional energy, striving and effort \[‘Tapas’
– linguistically connected to words for ‘Heat’, ‘Light’, and ‘Flame’,
and coming to mean “penance”, “austerity”\] in order to attain the
Siddhi, the Boon in question, from the Beyond – comes to us from
Hanuman’s Father: Shiva-Who-Is-Odin.

This has been spoken about in a little more depth in my previous “To
Speak Is To Uphold The Weight Of The Universe” article comparing several
Indo-European perspectives upon language; but suffice to say, it is my
belief that the attainment by Odin of the Runes – also the culmination
of Nine Nights of Tapas-ic conduct, carried out in particular connexion
to the Axis Mundi, the World Tree \[which, as considered in quite an
array of my previous work, is \*strongly\* correlated with Devi –
theologically, linguistically, and in other manners besides\] –
represents just such an Attainment of a Siddhi, as we would expect to
observe elsewhere in Hindu myth.

I shall quote myself from the relevant previous article –

“Now, before going further with this explanation, it is necessary to but
briefly parse the concepts of ‘Purusha’ and ‘Prakriti’ as they occur
particularly in a specific Shaivite-Shakta context. A more indepth and,
er, ‘accurate’ accounting for these words would take up an article many
times the size of this one; for our purposes, we’ll simply run them as
‘Body’ and ‘Spirit’ respectively. \[I stress that they can also mean ..
other things, especially in relation to each other, including, somewhat
peculiarly, almost \*the other way around\*\] (Male) ‘Purusha’ in a
cosmological context referring to the ‘universe’, the ‘world’ itself
\[and, indeed, there have been some academic comparisons made between
the course of the Purusha Sukta and the Slaying of Ymir, in each case
for a sort of cosmogonical effect\], and Prakriti, here conceived of as
the feminine particle, being an investiture of something supernal, a
thought-form, an ‘essence’, from beyond/outside it.

So how does this relate to the Runes? Well, we’ll sketch out our
thinking in more depth in a later article, but suffice to say that as
the Runes are fundamental to reality, indeed precede it in an external
sense, as part of Orlog \[‘Orlog’ – Over-Law, Supernal,
Outside/Above/Beyond-Universe Law – i.e. Rta\], Their projection
\*into\* our reality, to the Male in question \[when He had briefly gone
beyond, above, via self-sacrifice, tied about the \*Female\* World-Tree
Axis Mundi\] seems very like the above-aforementioned concept of Vak as
Prakriti investing into the Universe, Purusha. And would also, as it
happens, in a certain sense perhaps typologically mirror the way in
which Freyja/Frigg teaches Odin magical secrets; or the famed Devi Sukta
of the 10th Mandala of the RigVeda talks about the Divine Queen
empowering the Man That SHE Loves & Chooses.”

As you can see, when we consider this in our #NAS framework of
belief,the unifying thread of the two Nordic elements drawn from here –
the Attainment of the Runes By Odin, and the Teaching of magical potency
to Him – is that both are instances of Devi bestowing, donating
empowerments to Her Husband.

That \*particular\* form of relationship also coming to the fore in
another of my favourite Hymns of the 10th Mandala of the RigVeda – the
‘Jnanam’/’Vak’ sukta, detailing the development of language and the
granting of its intricate understandings and competencies to the Seers
(Rsis): “But to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond well-dressed
woman to her husband” \[RV. X. 71.4\].

This, as I have noted above, goes with an array of the core
theme-expressions of the DeviSuktam \[RV. X. 125\] – which, in amidst an
array of other statements about how it is that Devi \[as Vak, in some
accountings, but I would more properly suggest as (Adi)(Para)Shakti, and
thence \*through\* Vak, amidst further Devi engagement(s)\] supports and
empowers the various Gods, those undertaking proper and appropriate
pious action, indeed the Universe and the Heavens and the lines of
heredity and descent themselves … is this line: “I make the man I love
exceeding mighty, make him a sage, a Ṛṣi, and a Brahman.” (variant
translation: “whomsoever I choose, I render him an exalted one, make him
a ṛṣi, make him Brahman or make him highly intelligent.”) \[RV. X.
125.5\].

So right there, we have \*exactly\* the role and some of the saliency of
Devi as SiddhiDhatri – supporting Gods and certain mighty mortals, to
carry out their proper and apportioned roles, through the bestowing of
their (and Their) relevant Powers \[Siddhis\]; also encouraging,
facilitating, \*educating\* even, beings to become more enlightened,
more powerful (Power-ful, indeed – in touch with Shakti and thusly
imbued … as is the Universe Itself at Its Highest Arc, and thence back
all the way down); and \*rewarding\* the pious and devoted conduct of
those who are making their own eventual journey up the Mountain of
existence, of life, the universe, and everything.

Glorious!

But to return to one of the metaphors deployed in the course of them
hymnals, and our own #NAS theological explication, we see something that
is once again core and immanent to prominent Hindu perspectives around
the mightiest of the Gods – the Trimurti – and Their Wives; Who, per
this interpretation, are granted to Them by Shakti, as … I hesitate to
state “augments”, or “completers of Them”, because that reduces the
female ‘component’ to just that – a “component” added to something which
already exists, rather than the “other part” which makes something into
what it truly is. And if there is anything we should not be doing in a
Shakta theological commentary, it is implicitly ‘diminishing’ Woman to a
mere adjunct.

The better perspective perhaps, is that elucidated via the quotation
around Purusha & Prakriti from my article, as reproduced above. Wherein
the ‘encounter’ between Goddess and God is an investiture of essence
which makes somethings \[plural\] that have a prior and somewhat
independent existence, into something greater than either is on their
own.

In the case of Shiva and Parvati, this is Ardhanarishvara.

![1908233_10153862668145574_1996361189_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/02/1908233_10153862668145574_1996361189_n.jpg?w=676)

Ardhanarishvara \*as\* Ishvara – The Over-God Who Is Both Parts As
Over-God, to translate a little figuratively.

Or, phrased another way, and as detailed in some of the earlier articles
of this series, the \*reunification\* of Parvati with Shiva is the
‘reconstruction’, the ‘reintegration’ via which They resume Their
position at the apex of the world. Two halves which make the Axis Mundi
whole and turn again. This is also what is entailed in the discussion
between Brahmacharini \[Who, it should be remembered, is undergoing
Tapas – as, after a manner, Shiva has been via His austere forms of
living; although He perhaps did not know that He was also, through such,
working His way back towards the Goddess … Who was also winding Her way
back towards Him\] and Lord Shiva wherein Shiva finally
realizes/remembers/is convinced that the young aspirant standing before
him \*is\* infact His Devi, His Wife, His Other Half – for it is a
theological debate upon the notions and natures of Prakriti & Purusha …
which, in a certain way, helps Shiva to ‘understand Himself’
\[‘recollect Himself’\] once more \[c.f also RigVeda X. 125.6 , coming
directly after the line around making the man She loves “mighty”, “a
Sage”, “a Rsi”, “a Brahman” – “I bend the bow for Rudra that His arrow
may strike and slay the hater of devotion.” Part of what makes Rudra …
well … Rudra, is that He is an Archer; a Destroyer – hence, here, the
Archery, the Destruction can only really take place via Devi’s
investiture and active engagement with and through Him! The Trishula,
too, as correlate in symbolism to the Bow, is closely and directly
relevant here – as noted in previous commentaries, as the Mountains, the
Mountain-Spear, the Axis Mundi within His Mighty Hands, HERSELF!\]

The famed sage Adi Shankara phrased it thus in the opening couplets of
his Saundarya Lahari \[‘The Waves of Beauty’\] –

“sivah saktya yukto yadi bhavati saktah prabhavitum  
na cedevam devo na khalu kusalah spanditumapi —

“Only if conjunct with ‘Sakti’would ‘Siva’earn the privilege to  
become overlord; otherwise the God is not able even to stir.”  
\[variant translation:  
“Lord Shiva, only becomes able.  
To do creation in this world along with Shakthi  
Without her, Even an inch he cannot move,  
And so how can, one who does not do good deeds,”\]

The next lines are \*also\* highly relevant to consider – as they state
that only one who performs noble, meritorious, good deeds, who is pious,
is able to engage with Devi.

Which, if you should recall from some paragraphs prior in this piece, is
\*precisely\* what is entailed via the ongoing life path of Hanuman, as
an example; and the general principle which it enjoins of positive deeds
and pious expression – the cultivation of both inner light and outer
radiancy of its expression, as “Krinvanto Vishvam Aryam” and Sanskara of
the Soul to correspond therewith. “Inner Development” and
“Self-Cultivation”, therefore, even leaving aside the ‘making whole and
illumination of the world around and \*outside\* us’ aspect – is a
(re-)connection with the Divine \*inside\* us, the lighting of something
akin to a Diya lamp \[the Agni within – the Conduit to the Upplands and
Beyond\], that almost bypasses the world between us and the Highest
(Uber/Over) Heaven. Except, of course, insofar as it radiates back out
again; and the ‘golden threads’ between us and It, forming chords \[in
multiple senses of the term – sonic theology is \*also\* veer-y much in
affect!\] through and to the supernal realm.

So therefore, we have two somewhat related approaches under discussion
here. The establishment of a relationship with Devi by … marrying a
Goddess; and/or via proper and meritorious, pious conduct, ultimately
directed thereup and thereto.

One of these is, for obvious reasons, rather more easily attained than
the other. For even the man who otherwise has nothing, can still have
Faith. Indeed, it has often been observed that some who are amidst the
most brimful in abundance in that regard, are so precisely \*because\*
or otherwise alongside the fact they have so little else (by accident or
by design). This does not mean that poverty and sitting naked on a
mountain-top is the only, or perhaps even necessarily the\*best\* way
towards such a state – indeed, I would contend that \[and oddly enough,
this is somewhat borne out in my reading of the Reunification Myth of
Shiva & Parvati\], doing so as a “renunciation” of the world is actually
almost the wrong way to go, for many – as it abdicates much of the
possibility of actually doing the “good deeds” side of things, in favour
of a more exclusive focus upon, if not “the self”, then at least, an
individual. \[In terms of my aforementioned reading of the relevant
Shaivite-Shakta myth – Shiva’s retreat to the Mountains in solitude,
while necessary for Him in that circumstance, is nevertheless something
that \*has\* to come to an end, for the good of the universe itself
overall\]

But in either case, and most especially in the convection-zone that is
\*both\* \[a convection zone, after all, entailing a \*rise\* and a
cycle of such same, as a direct result of \*heat\*, Tep-, Tapas,
remember?\], one should strive to be worthy; and whether this entails
that one actually somehow winds up attracting the attention of a Goddess
for a direct interaction or prolongued engagement, perhaps being Chosen
by Lady Vak as aforementioned – or whether this simply results in the
\*indirect\* strengthening of soul to the point that this or that
Siddhi, or other manifestation of the superior soul is manifested …
well, it shall surely be the result of making one’s self worthy of
Divine notice. She, after all, is “the gatherer-up of treasures”; Who
also “load\[s\] with wealth \[‘donations’\] the zealous sacrificer”
\[RV. X. 125. 2 and 3, respectively\].

And, indeed, one does not necessarily have to be ‘perfect’ to be ‘moving
in the right \[rite\] direction’. A woman will often see the potential
and the promise in a man, even if it is not \*directly\* realized at
that \*particular\* point in time – will therefore act, as we have said,
to \*make him better\* over the course of their engagement. This, too,
we can see in those relevant RigVedic hymnals – with especial reference
to the notion that it is Devi, in whichever Form, \*making\* the male in
question mighty and knowledgeable and wise and powerful. Of course, this
should not necessarily be taken as a radical statement of egalitarianism
– in these cases, it is nevertheless a small and select few who are
Chosen in any such manner; building upon pre-existing elemental,
essence-ial competencies and characteristics, and fundamental
foundations of being in the first place, we can likely surmise. For it
is not to be held to be the case that Devi makes an ordinary man Rudra –
even though, in an important and significant sense, it is Devi Who makes
Rudra Rudra. Rather, it is Rudra Who is made the greater, Shiva Who is
made ArdhanarIshvara.

And it is the great man, greater still, who recognizes that his role in
life is to live in the best possible imitation of these mythic
over-truths – picking up and resounding out their resonances … without
seeking to confuse, to delude himself that he \*is\* their ultimate
source.

The Lesson of SiddhiDhatri for the Devotee, then, is quite simple.

Find Devi.

And go both \*within\* and \*beyond\* your self, to do so. For there
\*may\* be a ‘universe’ within you – but more aptly, there is a universe
\*around\* you, and you are connected within \*it\* to the universe
\*above\* you and even further (t)hence beyond.

Allow Her to help, become Guided; and note that the marble .. chisel ..
can hurt a bit in its striking, its sanskara – sculpting.

Become Worthy of Her interest, Her assistance, Her beneficence, Her
Support. Her \*Empowerment\* \[and it is not at all coincidental how we
would often translate Shakti into English – nor how the path of Shakti
up the spine to the Crown is customarily en-traced out, leading
ultimately to the Radiance of the Sahasrara Chakra, the Resoundingness
of the MahaNada Sound pealing out across the Cosmos from the First
through to the Fabric through to the Last – just as ChandraGhanta
represents a crown of both holy light and the pious emanation of the
striking of a Temple Bell … so, too, does this concept speak to becoming
in-touch with, and a radiator out of what is drawn down from this
connexion, this conduit, with the Supreme\].

So therefore, who is Devi as Siddhidhatri, and Where can we find Her?
Well, some obvious answers have already presented themselves:

In addition to the both obvious and subtle instances of the \*direct\*
appearance of the Goddess \[whether er .. directly, or through what is
meant by Vak – ‘divinely resonant’ vocal/linguistic expression; or for
that matter, that Mata, through other forms of Darshana\] – wives,
mothers, Mandirs & Goddess(es), other teachers, refiners of our beings
and imparters of wisdom, devotional practices, meritorious deeds, pious
action, spontaneous flashes of Divinely Revelated insight \[provided
that that is actually what it is, in any given case … delusion, too, can
look like radiancy to those who dearly, desperately, are Trying To
Believe \[as, perhaps, contrasted with Fox Mulder’s “Want To Believe” –
which implies an active openness, if not necessarily a yearning
credulency that would be entailed in “Trying”\]\].

In all of these, are to be found various and varying directnesses of
pathways \[back\] to Devi.

And this should not at all surprise us. For what is the Role of Devi as
SiddhiDhatri?

It is to ‘inspire’ us, to ‘guide’ us, to ‘nurture’ us – particularly if
we’re up to listening and taking direction, acknowledging our Ma is, in
fact, \*right\* … and \*Has\* the Right.  
But also, to “bring out in us” \[hence ,धात्री as ‘midwife’\] and ‘put
into us’ \[hence, धात्री as ‘wet-nurse’, hence दातृ as in ‘donor’\] That
Which Needs Be There! The INSPIRER OF GREATNESS; the Foundation \[दातृ –
‘founder’; धात्री – ‘earth’\] and Inceptor of the inexorable rise of the
Chosen to the status and faculty of a Great Man, a Sant, a Jivanmukta
\[which, per this enhanced perspective, is not truly one who is
“self-liberated”, any more than there can ever be such a thing as a
truly ‘self-made man’. But rather, one who has been blessed and
empowered from Above and Beyond by HER to reach his otherwise
unparalleled and often semi-near inexplicable state and status of
development. It \*does\*, of course, retain the \*other\* sense of
“self-liberated” – as such we should expect entailed in the axiomatic
moving “beyond” of the limited nature of an earlier human self\].

SiddhiDhatri, is therefore the Perfect Mother .. both insofar as She is
the Mother (of All) Who Is Perfection, and also as She is the Mother
(Foster Mother, somewhat, also, to the Devotee -for We also have our
birth-mothers to acknowledge and regard! As the greatest act of piety,
indeed!) Who Is Perfect For and To Us, Her Devotes, Herदत्रिम सुत,
Adopted Children. SHE is HiranyaGarbha – the Perfect (Golden) Creator.
And even afore SHE as (Maha)Kali brings about the end of it all, SHE
also oversees and guides our pathway (our PathiWays) \*upwards\*
towards, as does any nurturing mother, ‘maturity’ – the superior state,
the more full ‘realization’ which is who and how we are supposed to be.

In terms of the Siddhis Themselves, it is as the continuance of what was
said in last night’s Ma as MahaGauri piece – that just as ‘white light’
contains within it all other colours, and just as MahaGauri shows that
She has the self-knowledge and self-mastery to ‘bring out’ the relevant
‘facing’ as and where and when necessary with reference to HerSelf … so
therefore is Ma as SiddhiDhatri the ‘furtherance’ of this. The
‘perfection’ of it, you might even say.

![71782229_10162363450180574_8314670112229556224_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/71782229_10162363450180574_8314670112229556224_n.jpg?w=676)

For here, not only are all the Siddhis to be found, but They are so
completely mastered (including also as
embodiments/qualities/emanations/projections/investments of HER), as to
be impartable out to others, at will. Indeed, \*as\* Will \[this, too,
is a somewhat figurative rendering for Prakriti\].

SHE Has Power over the Siddhis of Understanding, Piety, Enlightenment,
and Knowledge – for She\*IS\* Understanding, Enlightenment, Piety, and
Knowledge \[Especially ‘Self-Knowledge’, ‘Self-Realization’ – for She is
your Master and ultimate architect, author, artist, of our being and
becoming\]. Indeed, building from both of the RigVedic hymnals cited
above, She is both the means of communication and
examination/realization, and the means via which the results of all of
the above are actually incorporated into our selves, our being(s), our
perception(s) of the world – and therefore, our worlds, which are thusly
also reshaped via what we put back out into them again, in turn. The
“convection zone”, as previously noted, is also a “cycle”.

SHE Has Power over the Siddhis of the Material, those of growing,
changing, shrinking, shrouding \[‘seeing’ in addition to ‘perceiving’\],
increasing or eschewing entirely the density of, altering the position
within space or even time of, one’s being … for SHE \*IS\* the Tapestry
and Fabric of the Universe \[and so much more, beyond, all-permeating,
as well\], Maha-Maya, and therefore in ultimate command and control of
All That Might Transpire Within Her Domain.

Indeed, SHE Has Power over the Siddhis of Command, Control, and Conquest
– for SHE \*IS\* Command, Control, and Conquest, Itself \[c.f RigVeda X.
125.6 , amidst many \*many\* other sources\].

It is often said, for some reason, that “those who can, do – those who
can’t, teach”. This is a ridiculous axiom, as while it \*does\* encode
the possibility for one who is no longer in a position to “do”, to
nevertheless still be in a position to guide, to pass on, to impart
important wisdom and learned experience as to how to “do” to those who
are about to (i.e. to “teach”) … it completely discounts, especially as
it is often or ordinarily employed, the rather high likelihood that
those who are teaching, either \*have\* been capable of “doing”, and
\*have\* “done” in the past – or, for that matter, are very much
\*still\* doing, even now, whether inside or outside of the classroom
\[and, for a certain sort of teacher, the whole world is a class. Both
in the sense of constantly, continually teaching .. and also in the
sense of \*learning\*, themselves, from all over the place, almost
assuredly \*at the same time\*\].

The Myths of Devi more than demonstrate exactly this principle in
action. For while She is unquestionably the greatest possible Teacher –
She is also, and not coincidentally, the greatest possible Doer. Both
through setting All in motion, and through direct interventions
\*within\* the Universe \*thus\* ‘in motion’.

And woe betide the unutterably unctuous specimine who would forget that.

For they are liable to find themselves … not through a process of
self-realization … but rather, on the wrong end of the Trishula.

For such it is, both symbolically as well as literally, to seek to
oppose the veer-y Force of Creation, the Universe, Destruction, Herself.

Iconographically, Ma as Siddhidhatri is relatively simply depicted;
tending towards having four arms, wielding a Gada \[mace – lordship,
martial power, justice\], Conch-shell \[a war-horn, and also a ritual
implement utilized to call people for the actions of piety; in either
case, a resounding and rallying sound\], Lotus \[symbolizing purity,
endurance, immortality, and rejuvenation\], and Sudarshana Chakra
\[representing Vision, the Wheel of Time, the Circle/Cycle of the
Universe, and the Rolling Wheel of Dharma – also therefore Supreme
Lordship, Chakravartin\]. She is seated upon a Lotus, or more rarely,
Dawon, Crowned, Radiant, and often being worshipped directly by various
mighty Gods arrayed about Her.

![71584941_10162363459725574_6012883995979677696_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/71584941_10162363459725574_6012883995979677696_n.jpg?w=676)

The meanings of the above, ought be abundantly clear, based upon the
preceding nearly seven thousand words worth of commentary. They denote
the Supernal, the Supremacy, the Eternity, the Powerful, the Pious; the
Immanence, the Transcendence, the Active-Exercise of all of the above;
Her most august position at the heart of it All.

There are far more complex and ornate depictions of this or that
particular form of Devi out there, so it may be asked why – as She is
Queen of All – She is not more usually represented in \*much\* more
‘expansive’ fashion; say, the eighteen plus arms of some Murtis,
bedecked with every implement found in the Armoury of Durga of legendary
scripture, and then some.

And the simple answer to this is – how do you \*really\* represent She
Who Is Everything?

Again, quite \*simply\* – She is everything. And so, this symbol is but
a smaller placeholder. Beautiful to look at, elegant in its
succinctness, but ultimately, with all – and well beyond \*all\* behind
this iconographic depiction for us to \*also\* gaze out at, and up at,
in ever-expanding Wonder.

Jai Mata Di ❤

Hail to All And Everything

Jai Jagadamba

Who Is The Mother Of All

Jai AdiParaShakti

Who Is.

जय माता दी ॥


