+++
title = "The Tenth Day – The Death of the Demon – Dussehra /xa0VijayaDashami"
date = "October 8, 2019"

+++
![22104423_10159417477450574_3023156774461528949_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/22104423_10159417477450574_3023156774461528949_o.jpg?w=676)

The Day after NavRatri \[the ‘Nine Nights’ of Goddess Durga\] is known
as Vijaya Dashami / Dussehra – Victory on the Tenth,the Destruction of
Evil.

In many places, the Day is held to commemorate the Victory of Lord Rama
over the demon-emperor Ravana. In others, it celebrates the Victory of
Durga over Mahishasura. Others still, connect it to the events of the
Kurukshetra War of the Mahabarat. The common unifying factor in all of
these is, as can be clearly adduced by the name of the occasion, a
militant, martially (but also – importantly – piously) attained triumph
over the malefic, the a’Rta-ic, the Anaryan.

Now, personally, I tend to fall into the middle camp with my
observances. Both due to personal theology and resonance, and because it
makes the most sense – to me, anyway – to have this as the effective
(post-)culmination of the Nine Nights. Yet with this year’s occasion
falling upon a Tuesday (Lord Hanuman’s Day – as well as the day of
strong Mangala (Mars)), it is sensible to also have regard for the Rama
relating remembrances, as well.

But those shall not form the focal scope of this piece; which instead
seeks to continue the progression of the mythic cycle of Durga as set
out through the previous Nine Nights’ worth of commentary – and use this
(as well as this lovely devotional (a)art(i) work from Bengal – the
original of which is a rather large physical wall sculpture at a Mandir
there) as a springboard to talk about the \*other\* common feature of
Vijayadashami/Dussehra observances, Astra Puja.

I have spoken at some length about both the generalized conceptions of
“Dharma-Yuddha”, as well as the more specific struggle against the demon
Mahishasur, elsewhere and earlier in the series (in particular, the
Katyayani piece, as well as the MahaLaya/Amavasya piece with which we
closed Pitru Paksha, to name but two of especial interest); so I shall
not seek to repeat much of that material here.

Except to briefly remind readers who may not be so directly familiar
with the relevant mythology, that Mahishasur was such a dangerous foe
due to a boon he had been granted which rendered him invulnerable to all
but a woman – a weakness which he had deliberately chosen (as there had
to be \*some\* condition to his invincibility, due to the effective
nature of Hindu divine legalism in this area), as he has not believed it
possible for a female to form much of a martial threat against him.

Which therefore, lead to an escalatingly dire situation for the male
members of the Pantheon when They attempted to defend against him …
until such point as They invoked the Great Goddess, a most powerful
emanation of which – Goddess Durga – took to the field against the demon
army, outfitted with panoply of war derived from the customary armaments
and iconographic associations of the various (predominantly male) Devas
Who had beseeched Her for Aid.

The results of which I have, again, detailed much more expressively
elsewhere – but suffice to say, put Mahishasur in a situation wherein
his salience upon the battlefield was basically equivalent to “throwing
molotovs against Poseidon”. If doing that made Poseidon \*really, really
angry\*, to the point that Poseidon doesn’t just decapitate the foe, but
\*proceeds to tap-dance vigorously upon the severed head\* while also
\*continuing to eviscerate\* the attempting-to-flee spirit of the
then-pendingly deceased.

You get the idea.

The core of this element is what’s being depicted in this fine
wall-sculpture; with the beautifully enraged Devi Durga, accompanied by
Dawon \[‘Bravery’ – Her Lion Vahana\] lunging at the part-buffalo
demonic figure of Mahishasur \[likely depicted \*after\* he’d … not just
figuratively, but \*literally\* lost his head – the first one, anyway,
with the actual buffalo-ness to it, immediately prior to his
extermination via ‘finding himself’ (not via self-realization, but
implicit self-destruction through \*serious arrogance and stupidity\*)
at the \[figuratively\] wrong end of the Trishula\]. The figures around
the Combat, are Her Two Sons – Ganesha and Lord Skanda \[the martial
saliency of Ganesha is often understated – the Gana-Esha, Lord of the
Host, epithet is there \*for a reason\*; as is the sobriquet around the
Remover of Obstacles … via pulverizing and obliterating force, where
necessary. Lord Skanda, meanwhile, has a name that rather directly
translates as “Assault”, and would perhaps be thought of as our
equivalent to Ares\]; the two other members of the TriDevi, Lakshimi and
Saraswati (Parvati/Durga being the third, as you may have surmised); and
looking on from on high, presumably with pride and admiration, Lord
Shiva, Moon-Crowned \[Chandrasekhara\].

Partially, these are standard iconographic accompaniments – especially
in the Durga pandalas prominent in Bengal around this time. It is the
combination of two of the ‘ordos’ to which Durga is a vital component –
the Divine Family of Shiva & Parvati, and the TriDevi that are the Great
Goddess(e/’)s Three. Yet it also helps to recall the concept – as
considered in far more depth within the ‘Sarva Pitru Amavasya And Devi
Mahalaya’ piece with which we presaged NavaRatri this year – that both
the manifestation of Durga, and the Victory thusly obtained by the Side
of Righteousness against the Anarya, was veer-y much a ‘team effort’, so
to speak.

And we shall consider that concept, and how it pertains to \*exactly\*
why it is that we observe Vijayadashami/Dussehra in just a moment.

Yet before we do, a brief word on two of the relatively more \*recent\*
symbolic/figurative interpretations of the occasion, derived in no small
part in relation to those aforementioned ‘Anaryan’ foes.

The first of these has to be one of the more bizarre spectacles of
recent years, and consists of the attempted moves by some minority
groups within India to protest against, even to outright block and seek
to oppose through legal challenges, the celebration of Durga’s victory
over Mahishasur. The reason that they do this, is because they have
taken to considering Mahishasura something of a kinsman to them,
potentially even an ancestor – and therefore hold that the occasion is,
in effect, the glorification of an unmitigated massacre of their
forebears by “invading” Indo-Europeans and our War Goddess.

To which I can only retort, that while the Narasimhan et al dna study on
‘The Genomic Foundation Of South And Central Asia’ has yet to
conclusively identify a “Demon” haplogroup running around out there in
the wild, even if there \*were\* somehow a shred of truth to the claims
… a) the scriptural materials are \*quite\* clear as to just who it was
who was seeking to make war upon the heavens, and “indecent
propositions” to the Goddess; b) a moment’s consideration will reveal
that the \*appropriate\* action to undertake, when you find yourself
having descended from the monstrosity \*literally opposing The Goddess
at the Heart of the Universe Herself\* – is a foreswearing of his
legacy, a running away from it as fast as possible, and an attempt to
live piously and \*against\* the grain of his example; not seeking to
re-litigate a \*decisively\* settled battlefield outcome from an
existential war of who knows how long ago, through a series of scattered
and basically unsuccessful court actions.

But, then, I’m biased, aren’t I. As, in fact, is the Universe ..
Herself.

Anyway, the \*other\* somewhat more recent set of developments around
the deific and mythoreligious complex in question, concerns the rather
more immediate threats posed by historic Islamic invasion, and
subsequent British imperial dominion. The latter of which, as we
explored in the BHARAT MATA AND THE INDO-EUROPEAN DEIFIC OF NATIONAL
IDENTITY, played its part in a bit of a ‘modernizing’ of Devi to more
directly link to the emergent Indian ‘national identity’ and nationalist
cause of the time \[hence Bharat Mata – Mother India; which, to be
clear, was an ‘evolution’ veer-y much building upon enduring foundations
that were already there, and which had already been ‘developed’ in these
directions multiple times, as needed, over the preceding millennia and
across the Indo-European-isphere elsewhere in other contexts\]; while
the former saw the Muslims correlated with Mahishasur, for reasons that
ought be obvious.

In both cases, the message was elegant in its complex simplicity: the
Nation, as with the Victory, as with the Goddess – is the result of the
\*many\*, working and pooling together, just as the Gods did when
invoking Devi to send/become Durga in Their Midst.

The external threat, the external foe, which could not easily be
countered (especially in terms of its cultural impacts and attempted
erasure) nor meaningfully subdued through the grand force of the
conventional arms of individual soldiers alone (although ShivaJi of the
Marathas certainly bucked the trend somewhat on this one – equipped, it
must be noted, with the fabled Bhavani Tulwar … the Sword of the
Goddess, Herself, given unto him in a manner similar to Excalibur to
King Arthur, as a sure sign of Her Divine Favour and his destined
re-establishment of Hindu Rashtra \[‘Nation’\] by fighting back against
the Mughals et co.), \*could\* be beaten via enduring Piety; via
‘national consciousness’ as a political force (and both this and
Heritage as a collective memory); and via the Divine Blessing as seen
and secured through the onrolling, unfurling folds of Time. \[As a
certain Spanish ruler is once said to have remarked – “Time and I,
against any other two”. Not for nothing, either, is Kali \[‘Time’,
amidst other translations .. such as “Death”, “Black\[ness\]”, “Iron”,
etc.\], in Hindu terms, reckoned the most fearsome and formidable of
foes for the would-be doer of malefic ills\]

So how does this relate to the custom of Astra Puja, then, which
\*also\* occurs upon this day?

Well, at its most obvious, the honouring of weapons \[and, to be sure,
other implements of one’s societal role and function, too\] is the
exaltation of the implements, the instruments through which this Victory
is attained. And it is an appropriately \*broad\* assortment, for an
appropriately \*broad\* Success. Hence why a journalist may honour his
pen, his keyboard, for instance; or an artist, his brushes and easel.
And note \*especially\* well, for that matter, that Devi also wields
amidst Her panoply, a flame with an animal-head therein, to represent
Piety, Faith, Sacrifice/Offering/Oblation and Nourishment. Because
\*these\* are the tools via which the community is protected, exalted,
served. And, of course, not forgetting the \*actual\* and rather literal
weapons \*also\* ritually blessed upon this day.

Or, for that matter, that Speech, and all that is entailed and comes
with it \[learning, communication, thinking, knowledge, conceptry,
understanding, shouting roar of divine fury\], is the grandest, most
mighty weapon of all – and yes, yes we do have the relevant theology to
support this statement. Including one of my more fondly recalled
instances from the RigVeda in which Brihaspati conjures an orbital
bombardment of a demon-dragon via the recitation of a portion of a
prayer in the Divine Speech which summons a meteor impact. But again, I
digress. Somewhat, anyway – the point is, we exalt this Great Weapon via
engagement in the Heritage which is transmitted thence-through, and the
utilization, the learning, the uptake, the repetition, and the
re-radiance back out again of its forms, role and function.

And this, \*especially\* that notion of \*re-radiance\*, but also of
Speech (Vak), brings us right back to Devi, to Durga, to Parvati, to
Shakti.

The course of the NavaDurga Processional, up through the Nine Nights
which have preceded this day, is one of Ascension. It begins with Devi
as ShailaPutri, newly re-emergent into the World after Sacrifice and
Suffering, then arcens back up to the point at which She is once again
the glorious World Pillar, the Absolute, the Supreme. This post-ultimate
phase is not simply a ‘re-descent’ via emanation, wherein Devi ‘steps
back down’ from Her Cosmic (Lion) Throne again … but rather, a tacit and
tangible radiating back out of Her Blessings thencefrom, across and into
the universal-world. Which, if you recall, is veer-y much the idea
contained within the last lines of the justly famed DeviSukta of the
RigVeda \[RV X. 125. 7-8 , in particular\].

To be found \*also\* within that same hymnal, of course, are the clear
points around both the strong support and empowerment of Rudra
especially through His Weapon to make (Holy) war against the enemy of
piety; and Devi’s own declaration of Her involvement in such a conflict
– both personally, and in terms of rallying and ordering Her (chosen)
People in amidst and to the Cause \[RigVeda X. 125. 6\]; in a suzerainty
that is, quite literally, “all-pervading”, from the Summit of the World,
down through the worlds, and thence back up again once more to Heaven’s
Highest Height.

So on one level, the customs around Astra Puja \*could\* be seen as a
phenomenon of that wonderful Eliadian concept – the Eternal Return. And
they would, of course, be both right and \*rite\*. Beyond that
\*particular\* Vedic verse (which, it must be remembered, also has a
rather specific application, as explored in some of the previous
commentaries in this series), there are any number of other instances of
Astra related rituals to be found within Hindu scripture and broader
mythology, after all – including, most prominently, the ’empowerment’ of
various arrows and other such weapons to form, as I have occasionally
(only somewhat jokingly) termed them, “Ancient Aryan Nuclear Weapons”;
as well as, for that matter, the processes via which an aspirant becomes
an acknowledged master with his chosen craft of death, and is therefore
given a suitably mighty weapon of lore and legend as a result, a
symbolic attainment of his greatness as secured through his instrument
of will, and to be his instrument of the inscribing of that will across
the cosmos in blood and death cracked armour and shards of bone.

And, in a related sense, once we properly and truly perceive the chosen
champions of the Goddess as \*also\* being Her Weapons – then the notion
that we support and empower \*them\* in a manner perhaps somewhat
symbolically resonant of how the Gods Themselves once did likewise for
Her, in Their hour of need, attains \*additional\* significance within
this spanning sphere of referential perception. As we know from our
prior studies in the fields of Myth and Metaphysics, and
Meta(physical)Narrativistics quite specifically, the greater the
‘resonancy’ with the greater the ‘concept’, the greater the consequent,
contingent, and \*consecrated\* the results.

But in the main, I think, and we shall rather rapidly draw things to a
close here, so that I may, perhaps (just perhaps) get some sleep before
Mandir myself later today … the co-occurrence of Astra Puja and the
veneration of MahishasuraMardini \[‘Destroyer of the Buffalo\[headed
Demon’ – a theonym of the Goddess which is directly that of Her role and
victory against the aforementioned adversary, Mahishasur\] is because
they are actually the \*same phenomenon\*.

That is to say, Durga, as MahishasuraMardini in particular, is the
Weapon of the Gods. The Ultima Ratio Rta’m, so to speak. Against Whom,
None can Stand.

She is Called into being for a particular purpose, and ‘wielded’ if you
like – on one level, by the combined Pantheon at large Who have invoked
Her .. on the greater, \*truer\* level, by Herself, especially as Devi
(Shakti); and in this age of “Smart Bombs”, and Dumb Politicians, the
Weapon which Knows Itself, and is in complete Self Control, is the most
formidable prospect, indeed!

The Process of Worship via which She was Called Out To, the Missile
Armed \[‘Missile’, as in ‘Astra’, which I have quite enjoyed as a word
due to its multi-linguistic pun potential with, for instance, “Star” in
Latin; although I have also had some resonant success withशस्त्र
andशास्त्र – that is to say, weapon/instrument and treatise/field of
learning, respectively … except thatशस्त्र itself \*also\* means
“invocation”, “recitation”, as of prayer, thus demonstrating just how
coterminous the terms \*actually\* are, especially ‘in
practice’/actuality/actualization\] in multiple senses of the term, some
of them rather modern … well, it is \*exactly\* that. Astra-Puja. Devi
Puja. The continuation of Astral Warfare by any other means.

All things considered, it puts one in the mind of the words of Leonard
Cohen –

“I’m guided, by a signal in the Heavens  
I’m guided, by this birthmark on my skin  
I’m guided, by the beauty of weapons…”

And, of course, to situate things \*further\* within the context of Devi
– the meaning entailed in the name and form of the Sudarshana
Chakra.सुदर्शन, itself, referring to a beatific vision – theophany,
perhaps \[Darshana\], that is \*radiant\* .. and, in a weaponized
context, radiant in its \*destruction\* \[सुदर्शना , with the longer
“a” sound upon the end, refers more specifically to a “Beautiful Woman”
… other than in application to Devi (Who is \*Indescribably\* so), I
shall not venture to speculate how \*that\* may have eventuated\]; while
“Chakra”, on one level would refer to the destructive discus-like weapon
often associated with Vishnu, on another level, to the Wheel of Time (a
truly fearsome weapon, indeed), and potentially also to the circle, the
cycle of the universe at large – which is appropriate, considering the
Vedic-era symbolism of the Worlds as akin to a chariot-wheel radiating
out from the central Axis Mundi; and which therefore underpins part of
the Universal Sovereignty concept inherent in “Chakravartin”, as well –
She Who ordains the motion of the Wheel that is the World about Her as
Its Single Point. \[“Guided by The Beauty of our Weapons”, indeed\]

But my point is, again, quite a simple one – just as Durga-Parvati,
through the Processional of the preceding Nine Nights, had attained once
more the World-Axis, the Pleni-Potentiary Situation upon and in-deed As
the Summit of the Universe Entire; so, too, does this awesome power
thence entail \*action\*, an \*active\* stewardship and custodian-charge
\[‘Shakti’ again, in a different sense of ‘power’ … also that
Vajra-as-Lightning-Bolt we can see picked out in Gold, there \[Which can
correlate, interestingly enough, with Vak in certain Vedic contexts, as
well\]; just as the Trishula, Itself, is the World-Axis, and therefore
Her Also. You see? She is the Divine, the Ultimate Weapon, all the way
both down and up, still further!\].

A “Radiating” out across the Worlds from that Summit \[whether as Light,
whether as Empowerment(s), or Impartments \[e.g. Siddhis\], whether as
Indirect Efforts through subtle or delicate manipulations, whether as
direct issuing of Orders, Edicts, and Directions, or indeed, whether as
all that is entailed in the “strong breath like the \[somewhat Akashic –
Vata\] wind and tempest” \[RV. X. 125. 8\] with accompanying Flight of
Arrows, Birds, or Thunderbolts\] , and the consequent ‘weaponization’ of
that Radiance as a wave-form of Deva-station, Whose ultimate motion is
that of one unstoppable, spinning, Dance.

On this day, as we have had ever in our minds for the preceding Nine
Nights, we carry out the ultimate Astra Puja. The Request to serve The
Gods \*as\* Astra; and the Honouring \*of\* The Gods for Their Mighty
Role \*Supporting\* the Ultimate Astra Herself, just as we support Them
in Turn.

We Remember the heroic actions of God and Man (a consistent theme with
the ‘Sarva Pitru Amavasya And Devi Mahalaya’ which immediately presaged
the Nine Nights, also); We Recollect the sparks of inspiration from
Heritage and from History to be found even amidst the brighter lustre of
Day; We Retrench ourselves, in preparation for the next phase of the
oncoming Dharma-Yuddha;

And – above all – We \*Remember\*, and thence Re-Immanentize, Why we
need It, and why It Needs us.

जय माता दी ॥

जय जय हे महिषासुरमर्दिनि रम्यकपर्दिनि शैलसुते ॥

“We are the Mail about HER Fist…”
