+++
title = "ChandraGhanta – Third of the NavaDurgas, The Third Night ofxa0NavRatri"
date = "October 2, 2019"

+++
# ![12074939_10156171459935574_8429134478907830703_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/12074939_10156171459935574_8429134478907830703_n.jpg?w=676)

The Third Night of #NavRatri is dedicated to Ma as ChandraGhanta – She
Who Is Crowned With The Half-Moon In The Shape Of A Bell, to render it
somewhat figuratively.

Now, before going further (and for that matter, picking up the narrative
thread where we left off with last night’s Brahmacharini post), it is
necessary to briefly attempt to explain some of the symbolism inherent
in the theonym of this NavaDurga Aspect of MataJI.

As you may remember, Shailaputri is crowned with the Crescent Moon. By
this stage of the NavRatri Cycle, this has waxed to a more full
‘Half-Moon’, as She has grown in strength and power – quite directly,
also, in “enlightenment” (for such the Moon is at night – a source of
light for us down here on Earth, and brighter in the Heavens in direct
proportion to the luminosity it exudes).

And in both cases, these ‘Moon-Crowns’ recall the Theonym of Mahadev –
Chandrasekhara , He Whose Brow Is Adorned With The Moon. Or, phrased
another way, they help to connote, via the sharing of this iconographic
element between both Mahadeva and His MahaRani, that She is His Queen,
over the Cosmos Entire. As we shall see, it is entirely uncoincidental
that the Moon in question reaches this much more radiant and ‘enfilled’
state at this particular phase of the NavaDurga Cycle. But more on that
in a moment.

However, one of the most important elements of Ma Chandraghanta’s
theonymic symbolism is to be found when putting the two words which
comprise Her name together: Chandra-Ghanta. Literally, ‘Moon-Bell’. My
mind, for some reason, enjoins me to suppose that this would be a rather
ideal name for a Cat, and this is not at all mentioned in a context of
disrespect – but I digress. On the ‘obvious’ level, this name is
supposed to connote the shape of the half- or gibbous Moon – kinda like
a bell, composed of the light parts of the Moon, and with the
in/less-visible portion representing the aperature at its base. But that
is not all it is!

For a ‘Ghanta’ is not just any bell. Rather, it is a Temple Bell! One
which is rung especially in the context of ritual worship, and to let
the Gods know that we are there at Their abode! The Ringing of such an
instrument, therefore, does not simply produce an eminently sonorous
tone – and truly, from my long hours by now at Mandir, I know of few
other more beautiful sounds than that – but is quite literally the
‘sound of piety’. When one hears it, the very heart of the Devotee also
resonates with it – becomes ‘one’ with the Sound, and is gladdened and
raised in spirit and in bravery and in moral fortitude.

As we shall \*also\* see, this becomes most especially relevant – and
resonant – at this particular point in the NavaDurga Mythic Cycle. And,
as a brief footnote before we once more launch into that, joins an array
of other Moon-based (semi-visual) puns that I have quite some enthusiasm
for, in the Shaivite-Durgan corpus – the best-known example of which,
perhaps, is the mythical sword CHANDRAHAS – the ‘Laughter \[‘Glinting
Smile’\] of the Moon’ due to both its shape and its pre-Ravana
owner/wielder.

ONWARDS!

When last we left our Divine Pairing, Ma as Brahmacharini had
successfully made it to the seeming pinnacle of Her journey’s quest:
finally managing to gain the attention of Lord Shiva via long periods of
tapas and other ascetic pursuits in emulation of Him amidst the
inhospitable crags of the Himalayas, and through a personal evaluation
carried out by Him in concealed form in order to adduce what lay in Her
Heart and whether She was a ‘true’ match.

![71904452_10162335498390574_867132014204026880_n
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/71904452_10162335498390574_867132014204026880_n-1.jpg?w=676)

The next part of the story comprises Their journey ‘back down the
Mountain’, metaphorically speaking. And despite my much-favoured maxim
about how it may take a thousand steps to ascend a mountain, but only
one to come down … as we shall see, the errant simplicity implied here
(hence why I have used it to counsel addicts), does not strictly apply
in the case of Mahadev and Parvati’s next stage of Their journey
Together.

For it is not simply enough that They now have Each Others’ Hearts. In
order for things to \*truly\* be made right, They must be properly
married. And despite Mahadev’s occasional cheerful disregard for the
ordinary bounds of propriety (not least because, well, even leaving
aside His status as the Adi Vratya … He , as the Absolute, \*is\* the
Propriety Himself – and therefore is not to be weighed down by the petty
concerns of lesser figures still much less the spiteful tongues of
Pharisically inclined ‘least men’ amongst them in ‘polite society’),
perhaps motivated out of a desire to avoid a most emphatically
regrettable repeat of what had happened with His previous father-in-law
(wherein the father-in-law in question’s fractious regard for Him had
rather directly lead to the Death of Sati) , He undertakes to do things
‘properly’ – and get the approval of Her Father, King Himavat for their
blessed marital union.

Now, this is where the ‘complications’ begin to ensue. For you see, for
whatever reason, King Himavat – perhaps overburdened with pride, perhaps
simply motivated by the protective nature of a father for His cherished
daughter – … does not see the Great God when he looks upon this errant
suitor for Lady Parvati. Rather, he sees a vagrant, a ruffian, a
drug-addict, an outlaw (an interesting rendering for “Vratya”, indeed!),
a figure with the look of a criminal who is keeping the most
unsalubrious company of wild-men ascetics, ghosts, even demons! All
things considered, an ‘unruly’ chap indeed – and at stark and direct
contrast to the role of a King to Rule, and \*well\* below both the
station of a Princess, and also the King’s expectations of a figure
capable of providing for his daughter in the manner to which She
deserves.

This, needless to say, creates a bit of a problem. Particularly when the
Baraat – the traditional (armed) procession which accompanies the Dulha
\[‘Groom’\] to the house of the prospective Dulhan \[‘Bride’\] in order
for the marriage to take place – arrives at the gates of the Palace of
King Himavat. For there, Queen Menavati, the mother of Parvati this time
around and wife of Himavat, beholds this ‘unvarnished’ image of Shiva
surrounded by His retinue … and faints in terror at the sight. Now,
while I’m sure many of us have been in relationships wherein our
partner’s mother has perhaps not taken the greatest shine to us, this
might seem like a bit of an over-reaction. But consider that in a manner
rather similar to many of the Fierce Aspects of MataDI (Such as Mata
KALI), to the uninitiated or the impious or indeed the unfamiliar … Lord
Shiva can appear most terrifying indeed. After all, it is right there in
the theonym of Bhairava, and is one interpretation/translation of the
Name of Rudra. And this is before we factor in how frightening it must
be to behold the Bhole Ki Baraat – the Fiends, Ghosts, Wildmen, Vratya,
Pishachas, Rakshasas, Aghoris, Sadhus, and so forth … wreathed in clouds
of cannabis smoke, bearing fearsome weapons and bedecked with bones and
cremation-ground ash.

Upon seeing this, Parvati takes action. Assuming the Moon-lit mantle of
the Chandraghanta Aspect, She intervenes, enjoining Lord Shiva to take
on a less frightening visage (I am sure many girlfriends have had er …
not entirely dissimilar conversations with their men, ordering them to
‘scrub up’ in order to make a better impression upon their parents when
meeting them properly for the first time) – while Her radiance
illuminates the scene for what it truly is, and dispels the fear from
the hearts of Her birth-family and their courtiers, in just the same
manner that the clarion ringing of a Temple Bell and a hand in Abhaya
Mudra does for the Devotee.

Although it is a potentially interesting point to note – that the
‘ringing’ of the ChandraGhanta does not, per se, ‘dispel’ or ‘banish’
the Revenant-Retinue of Mahadev, in a manner that one might potentially
expect given ChandraGhanta’s broader mythological role and portfolio
beyond the NavaRatri Cycle. But rather, simply enables them to be
regarded as what they are. Not mere fiends or marauding apparitions and
outlaws – but instead, the trusted retainers of Rudra, here as a
traditional and expected customary part of the Marriage Ritual.

Light, in other words, can be a weapon – especially against the
‘darkness’ \[‘A-Sura’\]. But it can also illuminate to show what is
\*actually\* there, and change the way we see things to make the
seemingly dangerous or hostile into something proper or non-threatening
– friendly, even! (potentially making staunch allies out of what
appeared to be enemies, when the truth of matters is illuminated – as
happened here with the revelation that what might have been a besieging
army of ghosts and fiends and outlaws .. was in fact the mighty sena of
one about to become family) In any case, it is most apt that it is
\*Moon-Light\* we are speaking of here – for it is the light that shines
the brightest – and most beautiful! – amidst the darkness of the night
sky. A veritable beacon that can guide us, helps us to ‘keep time’
\[and there is a deeper Sanskrit meaning here, for those of you who can
see it – perhaps consider it ‘Moon-Runes’ 😛 \] as it is the principle by
which we organize our religious calendar , and perhaps most important –
because it, too, moves in ‘cycles’ … it goes away, but then after a
period of pitch-black utter-dark, it comes back. Just as Lady Parvati
did for Mahadev, even from the Death which had engulfed Lady Sati. Most
elegant, and eloquent, indeed, in the multilayered symbolism which can
be bound up in such an evocative visual metaphor.

Anyway, once the frightful disruption brought on by the arrival of the
Baraat, and the fearsome visage of Lord Shiva, has been overcome thanks
to the timely intervention of Parvati, the blessed Marriage can finally
take place. A glorious re-unification. Customarily regarded as having
occurred upon what we now observe as MahaShivRatri (not coincidentally
talked about as “the darkest night of the year”, and when the Moon is
otherwise all but spent immediately prior to entering its Amavasya (‘no
Moon’) phase – thus rendering it additionally fitting for the sudden and
perhaps unexpected bright radiance of the ‘ascending Moon’ to reappear
in their and our midst! Along with Shiva, Who is symbolized with the
sliver of silver and also the darkened Moon that remains, inter alia –
therefore when put together with His Wife making one ‘whole’ (or almost
thereabout) and transcending the bounds of time with the bonds of love
through the appearance of this (\~nearly) Full Moon at the opposite
point in the lunar cycle to where it otherwise would be beheld). And
also, as I mentioned towards the outset, a further reason for the
‘ChandraGhanta’ theonym – as now both Husband and Wife,ईशानादस्य
भुवनस्य , जगताम् पतये , रुद्र;&श्री महाराज्ञी , श्रीमत् सिंहासनेश्वरी
, भुवनेश्वरी, देवी दुर्गा , King & Queen of the Cosmos, and
crowned/adorned (and, for that matter \*adored\* !!!) appropriately.

The Ananda Couple then proceed to the next phase of Their Narrative
Together.

Now, to turn to the broader salience of Ma Chandraghanta both within but
more especially beyond Her Role in the NavaDurga Cycle … it is not
coincidental that this is also the first Warrior Form ‘proper’ to be
found amidst the NavaDurgas. For She has quite the patron role – of
demon-slayers and soldiers against the anarya & a’rta forces against
which we inevitably must occasionally \*all\* (usually in aggregate)
contend. Just as the Sacred Light and radiating peals of Her ‘Moon-Bell’
help to drive away darkness and stir the hearts of Devotees, so too does
Her mere presence inspire abject terror and dissolution in the demon –
even as it exhorts greater (astra)warrior’s ardour and imparts bravery
amidst those fighting on the Side of the Righteous.

As ever, and there is even RigVedic attestation for this, the weapon of
Piety is the greatest bane for the opposers of Dharma – the surest
\[Sura-est?\] strike against the adversaries of the Gods.

(The aforementioned RigVedic citation I have in mind is the Twenty
Fourth of Mandala Two, dedicated to Brhaspati \[Whom we have identified
as another form of Shiva – often accompanied by Devi in the form of Vak
(‘Speech’)\], in which Vala, the brother of Vritra, is slain through the
weapon of ‘Prayer’ – which also ‘dispelled the darkness and displayed
the light of Heaven’ \[- 2.24.3, Griffith Translation\]; this compares
interestingly with several of the other hymnals detailing the same or
similar encounters – in which the weapon used is referred to as
‘Thunder’, or the Vajra; which, as a result of the more-than-occasional
coterminity of Vajra and Trishula in terms of symbolism and
impact/effect, should not necessarily be taken as lacking inShaivite
resonancy; meanwhile, in others, the ‘weaponization’ of Prayer is
perhaps less direct – in at least one case, being employed to conjure a
meteor from the heavens to obliterate the foe via orbital bombardment,
and in another, set before the confrontation against Vritra, we have Vak
declaring She shall go with the warrior-lord to solve Their dragon
problem and make Him invincible in consequence; in any case, Prayer is
presented repeatedly in a RigVedic context as a truly mighty armament)

(This is further borne out by the course of events via which the
otherwise invincible demon Durgamasur is finally brought low and
defeated as related in the Devi Bhagavatam – indeed, so formidable a
force is this that it is precisely the knowledge (and therefore the
power (through performance)) of the Rituals of the Vedas, that
Durgamasur strikes at in order to attempt to assure his invulnerability.
The plan doesn’t ultimately work, however, as despite the lack of
Veda-provisioned empowerment for the Gods at large, the combined effects
of prayer to Adi Shakti bring about Her Manifestation (within the
universe, so to speak) first as Ma Shakambari , and then as Durga, to
set the universe back into balance through the judicious application of
most eminently necessary holy carnage).

![71517073_10162334952285574_7980385446007930880_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/71517073_10162334952285574_7980385446007930880_n.jpg?w=676)

Of course, in addition to the twin virtues of Piety and Perspicacity –
as well as the Courage (which She amply demonstrates, inter alia, in
‘being right when others are wrong’, communicating honestly to Her
parents, and being able to look past the terrifying to see what is truly
there) and Compassion which complement these most excellently – She is
also very well armed; being conventionally depicted equipped with:

The Trishula (the three-spear usually of Mahadev, which also signifies
power throughout the Three Worlds and is therefore something of a
‘dynastic symbol’ for the Divine Family, as well as being a super-weapon
and visually recalling both the Mountains and the Storm as well as the
forces of the universe entire – including the power to \*destroy\* the
universe entire);

The Bow and Arrow (this also connotes Shiva; and with that carried by
Durga, is identified further with Vayu in particular – Who is also
Shiva; and in addition to being a most potent weapon, represents the
ability to fly straight along one’s (spiritual) path with speed and
accuracy);

The Sword (This is Devi’s Own, and prominently figures in relation to,
for instance, the famous Bhavani Tulwar and other, related blades;
although in some tellings, the Sword wielded by Durga may perhaps be
regarded as being from Lord Yama – Death Himself \[well, \*one\* of the
Deaths … \]; which also represents in addition to its supreme
death-dealing and -mastery powers, the illuminating powers of intellect
and knowledge – the infinitely keen edge being correlated with a ‘keen
mind’, a ‘sharp mind’, and thus entailing also a ‘power of discernment’
most approppriate for ChandraGhanta, as well as the ability to ‘sever
the ties of Karma’ which can weigh down a soul; it may also be correlate
with the general carrying of cutting and hacking instruments by several
Aspects of Durga which are utilized to decapitate – to sever the
encumbrance of overweening pride arrogance, and ego in much the same
manner as Her Husband’s judicious use of the axe against certain figures
such as Sati’s father, or even Brahma and Prajapati);

The Gada (a club or mace, a significant symbol also of rulership and the
Dumezilian 2nd Function (consider the golden mace that is the ensign of
the power of the Speaker of Parliament in many Westminster democracies)
which is also identified with the Vajra carried by both Lord Indra and
in somewhat less direct form, Lord Hanuman \[‘Bajrang Bali’ – Who, while
definitely carrying a Gada and strongly identified with such, is not as
frequently depicted with a Vajra despite it literally being there in His
name\]; and represents the potent overwhelming force to smash and to
subjugate the obstacles within one’s path, as well as being a symbol of
the respect and majesty of one’s people – and, as noted above, via
Brhaspati in particular, may further be correlate with Prayer and Piety
Itself; Lord Vishnu is also frequently identified with the Gada).

In addition to these more overt armaments, She also carries a Ghanta – a
ritual bell (this symbolizes, as noted above, piety, connection to
ritual and prayer, the presence of the Divine, and the dispelling of
illusion and fear through its peals);

Kamandalu (as will be recalled from yesterday’s post for Ma as
Brahmacharini – this water-vessel is used by both ascetics and those
conducting rituals, as well as potentially containing the Amrita, or
special sacred waters of particular Holy Rivers);

Rudrakshamala (also known as ‘Japa-mala’)( translatable as ‘Tears of
Rudra’ or ‘Eye of Rudra’ after the name of the seeds which form its
beads – of especial additional significance considering Her Husband; and
utilized in the chanting of Mantras and the carrying out of prayer –
and, come to think of it, with another meaning of “Aksha” in mind, that
of the Axis, the notion of the Rudra-Axis (that is to say, Rudra \*as\*
the Aksis – about which All pivots, the Chakravartin); and/or the Aksis
\*of\* Rudra – about which Rudra embraces and cherishes) would comport
well with both Shaivite and Shakti cosmological interpretations
dependent upon direction and inflection – indeed both at once!);

The Kamala (the lotus-flower – connoting beauty, the manifestation of
life even in barren places (due to how it grows), the Divine, recurrent
life (in the sense of both immortality and coming back from death – the
importance of which ought be plainly obvious here, in the NavaDurga
Cycle), through its association with enligthenment and transcendence,
this too is regarded as a weapon upon occasion, and is a continuance
from Shailaputri’s carrying of same);

The Abhaya Mudra hand-posture (which conveys the removal of fear, as
well as the dispelling of evil – and is frequently seen upon Murtis, as
well as being performed by a number of the NavaDurga specifically);

And, dependent upon local tradition and construction/rendering, may also
bears the Conch-shell (a war-trumpet, of clear relevancy to Her
portfolio and characteristics/functions especially pertaining to the
battlefield and rallying men’s spirits and drawing force to one – also
utilized in ritual and prayer; as well as having a potential symbolic
connection with Lord Varuna; it resonates with the sound of AUM, which
recalls not only Durga’s mastery over the very forces of Creation, but
also the instance wherein “with a mere Humkara”, She reduced a
particular formidable demon to ashes – this, too, can be thought of as
the ‘Power of Prayer’ in action);

As well as a hand in Gyan-Mudra (a posture/gesture which is associated
with improving the powers of the mind – of recognition, recollection,
clarity of thinking, concentration, and calmness, as well as mental
well-being – a whetstone, verily, for the twin Blades of Brain and
Bhava- Spirit!).

And, of course, She is adorned with the fabled Moon-Crown which provides
Her Namesake, and is often depicting radiating a ‘halo’ of soft light –
much like the Moon does in the night sky. And is accompanied by Her
Vahana (‘mount’ or ‘vehicle’) – Dawon (the fearsome lion and/or tiger,
Whose very name means Bravery – and Whose Roar both heartens those who
fight alongside Them, Her Devotees … while unutterably terrifying those
who dare stand against Her. Rather like the Roar of Rudra in some
regards, come to think of it, the peal of thunder and the howl of the
Storm Wind) .

With all of this in mind, then, it should therefore come as no surprise
to find that we regard Chandraghanta as embodying the twin virtues of
Bravery and Grace – which, of course go together to produce martial
prowess; as well as having deep and complex wells of meaning to them
even in themselves (such as the intrinsic correlate of Bravery with
Righteousness in and of Spirit – the courage to speak up and to do what
is right; and Grace with deftness, dexterity, and of course, Beauty –
including the supreme beauty of piety, as well as the more (perhaps
“plainly”) visually apparent sense which She is possessed of in most
perfect abundance); as well as Charisma, the power to draw and rally
others to one – which is vitally necessary for any general and any
community (, and, as it happens, for any Queen in the true sense of the
word – rather than a mere title holder contingent entirely upon the
powers of others) ; and, most vitally/intrinsically, Her undeniable
Perspicacity and the plenipotentiary Powers and Faculties of Mind.

We pray to Ma as Chandraghanta to inspire these qualities also in us; to
augment our abilities and steel our hearts … \*especially\* in dark
places or when beset by foes; to enable us to support those who need it
(just as Ma did with Her Own Parents (itself the supreme act of piety,
per Ganesha & Skanda’s parable of the race around the world), and does
as with us); and to illuminate the truth, sharpen our minds to properly
discern it, and appropriately arm us to cut through with our wits both
illusions and adversaries; to slay both the literal and metaphorical
demons which beset us, therefore removing obstacles in our way or
showing us the proper pathway through, over, or around them – or, for
that matter, how they are not so much obstacles at all but rather
building blocks and stepping stones to greater ascent in our journeys;
to empower us with piety in our hearts and in our actions; to enhance
our ‘earthly senses’ (of sight and smell and touch and taste and hearing
etc.) as well as our ‘inner senses’ (including those of Righteousness,
foresight, and the perception beyond the ‘material’, and of ‘that which
is hidden’ from us) and those of mind; and to lift the ‘tide in the
affairs of men’ (to quote me some Shakespeare – the play Julius Caesar
in fact) just as the Moon’s gravitational attraction raises the waters
in the oceans and therefore our boats upon them.

The Lesson of Chandraghanta for the Devotee, then, is an incredibly
multifaceted one. There are many parts to it, and I could pen an entire
article – or even, perhaps, series of articles – upon them. But at their
core, they are all one: the vital importance of seeing things truly, and
then acting upon what has been thusly discerned.

This is the unifying thread of all of it. Indeed, in a veer-y real way,
of life itself and the entire spans of both mortal and Immortal
existence. For just as ChandraGhanta was able to dispel the fear of Her
parents with the illuminating radiance of Her light, which showed things
as they actually were – and thusly allowed the marriage of Parvati and
Shiva to actually take place … so too, was this marriage only to
eventuate as the result of Lord Shiva seeing Parvati (then as
Brahmacharini) for Who and What She actually, in truth (indeed, is
Truth) is. And that, itself, was only able to take place as a result of
Parvati once (re-)born, becoming aware of Her own nature, and seeking
out Her Destiny with utmost focus and resolve.

When Demons are confronted, ChandraGhanta’s example is relevant for two
reasons – first, as it reminds us to look for things ‘as they actually
are’ … the oft-somewhat hidden or otherwise not immediately apparent
weaknesses of the adversaries. Especially those which they are not aware
of, or have almost deliberately sought to overlook in themselves
(consider Mahishasur in his overweening pride thinking that he was
invincible, and perhaps forgetting that his boon of conditional
invulnerability had not included ‘women’ … at precisely the point that a
supremely well-armed and then \*further\* enraged War-Goddess took to
the field against him). And second, because – to reference Chesterton,
because She reminds us that such demons are \*not\* all conquering, are
\*never\* all powerful, and that even amidst the sea of night, they can
be found, and expurgated most gorily \[I am indulging in a bilingual pun
– “Ghora” , as in “Terrifying”, but also “Gaura/Gauri” as in
“White/Pale” … like the Moonlight, and it even means “Beauty”!\].

And that really does matter a great deal! The dispelling of fear is no
small thing, of vital importance for the warrior, or even for the
ordinary person – an anxiety disorder, as it turns out, is often
significantly a ‘fear of fear’, an ‘anxiety \*about\* anxiety
manifesting’ which turns into a cascade and physiological response. It
is not \*quite\* the case that “the only thing we have to fear is fear
itself” – it is \*rational\* when confronted with supernatural (or even
super-normal) terrors of this world or another, to experience such an
emotion. They may, after all, kill you. And eat you. Or worse. If you’re
lucky, in that order.

But the removal of fear, that most paralyzing and suffocating of
emotions, is a grand start towards being able to more properly assess
the situation (see? the power of discernment, perspicacity, wisdom once,
thrice more), and formulate the more proper and appropriate response.
(Which may, to be sure, entail a tactical retreat (which will generally
be more successful than an out-and-out rout, that is the comparable
fear-infused parallel reaction) – or may mean noting that the Hydra’s
heads aren’t growing back where they’ve caught on fire, for instance,
and applying Fire-Pewhr \[Proto-Indo-European pleonistic pun, there\] as
a problem-solving tool … which is likely to be \*much\* more effective
than just hacking at the beast blindly and hoping for the best)

![21686073_10159381030170574_2283206063511571569_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/21686073_10159381030170574_2283206063511571569_n.jpg?w=676&h=441)

To return to that Chesterton allusion, allow me to quote the paragraph
whence it comes from in full, because I do think it’s quite evocative,
and quite useful here:

“Fairy tales, then, are not responsible for producing in children fear,
or any of the shapes of fear; fairy tales do not give the child the idea
of the evil or the ugly; that is in the child already, because it is in
the world already. Fairy tales do not give the child his first idea of
bogey. What fairy tales give the child is his first clear idea of the
possible defeat of bogey. The baby has known the dragon intimately ever
since he had an imagination. What the fairy tale provides for him is a
St. George to kill the dragon. Exactly what the fairy tale does is this:
it accustoms him for a series of clear pictures to the idea that these
limitless terrors had a limit, that these shapeless enemies have enemies
in the knights of God, that there is something in the universe more
mystical than darkness, and stronger than strong fear.”

This also arcens back around to a principle of Combat Theology which
directly explains part of the mechanism via which Prayer and Piety can
be so baneful to the demonic. Because, in a miniature act of Eliadian
‘Eternal Return’, the repetition of such stories, in the properly
resonant matter \[i.e. when \*believed in\*, and with the appropriate
implements, instruments of recall\] serves as a \*reminder\* – not just
to us, that the demons in question \*can\* be slain …. but to the
demons, themselves, of a time when they (or, more likely, the far
greater, even greatest amidst their number) were hurt \*really really
badly\*. So, you might say – it is a situation of showing the \*demons\*
what’s \*actually there\*, as well! And there are few things which can
inspire a rather immediate volte-face and reconsidering your presence in
a given area than a confrontation with the realities of your own
potentially imminent mortality. Pain, too, can be a teacher. Even if the
beatings must continue, until the comprehension \*before\* beatings
improves.

Yet, I digress. Albeit rather importantly.

To return more directly to this ‘thread’ then, the Lesson of
ChandraGhanta for the Devotee – we can see this core theme expressed
also in something which She shares with Her ‘counterpart’ coming from
the ‘other end’ of the NavRatri Cycle, KaalRatri. I say ‘counterpart’,
as both are the third manifestation from the start/end point in
question; and both are strongly \[indeed, quite directly in the name in
the case of the latter\] linked to the Night’s Sky. Which is dark, but
therefore also enables points of light which would otherwise be
invisible to shine forth – not just the Moon, but the Stars, the
Planets, the Constellations, and thence astrology and much beauty for
our world. There are secrets that cannot be understood in daylight; and
some lights shine vastly more brighter when couched amidst such veiling.
Some delusions and illusions are only possible in daylight; and some
truths attain their highest saliency and relevancy solely amidst the
dark.

So, in terms of the ‘core’ Lesson of ChandraGhanta, then, while some
wisdom is inherent and innate … and other wisdom is imparted through
hard-won experience (either yours, your own – or that of somebody you
are learning directly from, in order to avoid making the same mistakes
which \*they\* did, the first time around) … it is important to consider
the messages which are inherent in that Divine Theonym of Hers – so
incredibly, lambently, illustratively illuminative.

![71501803_10162335636355574_4512299315556777984_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/71501803_10162335636355574_4512299315556777984_n.jpg?w=676)

If in doubt, ‘Look Up’ – it’s where the Moon is. Especially amidst dark
places. And, just like the Moon, the luminacy (not \*necessarily\* to be
mistaken for the \*lunacy\* – although, as in an age of darkness, a
blind man is reputed to be a useful guide, so too in an age of madness…
but more on the Avadhutta traditions some other time, perhaps), if not
immediately apparent, or seemingly departed, shall cyclically come back
around again.

Further, – ‘\*Listen\*’. And be Receptive to the guidance that you are
being shown. This is partially, as I have alluded to above, why prayer,
myth, and heritage more generally are such potent weapons \[as can also
be demonstrated when we consider just who and what it is that generally
wishes to \*Erase\* these things, and lock them far away so as to
prevent their ongoing employment and transition… by which I was
referring to the demon Durgamasur, of course\] – because they contain
all these pearls \[lunar symbolism again\] of wisdom, if you know where
and how to look for them there. Which is something \*else\* that having
a Priest Caste is rather useful for – both providing the Guidance
themselves, and/or assisting others to learn to discern such things,
where appropriate, as well.

Continuing the ‘sonorous’ theme – ‘Speak’, ‘Resound’. Like the Bell.
Which we both \*hear\*, as noted above, but which also radiates out,
much like light from a source of illumination \[and recall, also, that
Fire – Agni – can be Holy, thus making its emanation and diffusion
outwards which reveals the world, wards against the impious, likewise\],
when we should happen to ring it. The reason I mention this is, in part,
due to how that Moon-Light is ultimately derived – it is the reflected
light of the Sun \[Whom we shall be meeting in the next Night’s piece –
Ma as Kushmanda, the Power of the Sun\], yet found where the Sun is not;
or, at least, is not to be seen \*directly\*, for the most part.

So therefore, just as the Moon transmits the Sun’s light out into the
darkness where it is most needed via virtue of its absence … so, too, is
the Lesson of ChandraGhanta that one should \*see\* where there is a
lack of wisdom, and/or a necessity of action, even (protective) force –
and move to project into that space what is needed there. Illuminate
somebody’s night, by passing along wisdom, knowledge, and insight, in
other words. Dispel their fear via your presence. Show that what is
\*actually\* there is not an uncaring void between men, but rather
living bonds of sodality and heritage and \*faith\*.

\*Become\* the Moon-Light.

And remember always, should you go a’wandering neath the august
Chandradiance that “Bravery will take you into the most dangerous of
places. Overwhelming firepower will see you safely through them.”

As this, too, is another facet of the Lesson of ChandraGhanta – discern
what is actually there (which includes risk, peril), be equipped for the
situations you might encounter while so going, and know how to make good
use of those tools or other armaments you might have been given.

And above all, know that the Light of ChandraGhanta signifies one
further element – that the Eye of the Divine is rarely closed fully, and
often to be found somewhere overhead; even if It might not have made
Itself immediately visually apparent. The ‘True-Seeing’ of Parvati
enabled Her to undertake extraordinary efforts in order to attain
seeming-impossible outcomes \[the Lesson of Brahmacharini\]; guiding her
from (perhaps unexpected) Deliberate beginnings along a track of Her Own
Overwhelming Willpower \[the Lesson of Shailaputri\], to a longed-for
beneficent attainment – a prize won in no small part because the Eye of
the Divine \[in fact, the veer-y same one that had earlier burned Kama
to ashes\] was \*also\* watching, and saw truly what was within Her and
demonstrated inarguably via Her deeds, understandings and conduct \[the
Lesson of ChandraGhanta, ‘going the other way’\].

We also honour Ma as Chandraghanta this night for other reasons – not
least of which is, surely, the fact that it is as This Aspect that
Parvati successfully attains Her hugely significant goal of
Reunification with Mahadev! An act of incredible importance both for its
‘setting the universe back into balance’ (I also note that Mahadeva
re-creates KamaDeva with a glance, in some tellings, following this
happy occasion) – as well as the enthusiastic and empathic (in some
measure, as we are capable) joy which we must surely feel for both Lord
Shiva and Lady Parvati in Their Happiness at having once again found
Each Other even despite the greatest of possible barriers to be found
this side of the End of the Universe (which They shall Also overcome!).

And, of course, for Her Emblematic Ability as the Vanquisher of Demons.

Piety, Prowess, and Perspicacity.

Power.

Parvati.

JAI!

ॐ देवी चन्द्रघण्टायै नमः॥

जय माता दी
