+++
title = "Alfablot"
date = "October 30, 2019"

+++
Tomorrow is one of the most important occasions of the germanic
tradition, and as I will therefore be gone all day, I thought i’d take a
moment to write up what i can about the event.

I speak of course about Álfablót. The sacrifice to the Elves, our
ancestors who reside in barrows, and the Landvættir, spiritual beings of
nature, the hearth and home.

Very little can be reliably said about Álfablót due to the extreme
secrecy and insular nature of the rituals, including even its original
date of celebration. The Austrfararvísur relates an account from the
Christian Skald to the King of Norway, Sigvatr Þórðarson, where he is
shown away from any house he happens upon due to the event:

“he met a lady who told him to go away and said “Don’t go further inside
unlucky man! We are afraid of Odin’s wrath; we are pagans!” Then, she
chased him away as if he were a wolf and said that they were having the
elven sacrifice at the homestead.”

I personally make a sacred practice of not allowing those that are not
my kin into this ritual or of giving light to my own practices. However
i am sympathetic to many pagan who did not grow up with such practices
and therefore have no where to look for information. I would make note
of two facts in public record.

The first being that the master of the home during the ceremonies was
referred to as Olvir, which is also a name of Odin. It Refers to Beer as
a drink.

The second being that of the the elf sacrifice recorded in Kormaks Saga:

“A hill there is,” answered she, “not far away from here, where elves
have their haunt. Now get you the bull that Cormac killed, and redden
the outer side of the hill with its blood, and make a feast for the
elves with its flesh. Then thou wilt be healed.””

Seeing as how the Germanic faith is most fundamentally a Ancestral
religion primarily concerned with the worship and veneration of our
Higher Kin, the importance of a sacrifice dedicated to them and unopen
to any outsiders cannot be overstated.

Happy Álfablót
