+++
title = "Brahmacharini – The Second of the NavaDurgas, The Second Night ofxa0NavRatri"
date = "October 1, 2019"

+++
# ![24-1427181031-brahmacharini-devi-navratri](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/24-1427181031-brahmacharini-devi-navratri.jpg?w=676)

The Second Night of #NavRatri is dedicated to Ma as Brahmacharini – the
Seeker of the Absolute. This is a rather direct rendering of Her
theonym, as can be seen from the constituent parts: Brahman, and Charya
(Charini is the feminine form of this noun).

But what is actually meant by these terms, and what do they signify
within the overall context of the NavaDurga Cycle? Well, on one level it
is similar to the path of any novitiate in Hindu religious tradition –
that of ‘engagement’, ‘learning’, and ‘seeking out’ (whilst also ‘going
within’) the Divine, the Absolute, Darshan, “enlightenment”.

Yet look a little closer, and you will see twofold resonances with the
overarching mythic cycle we are presently tracing the path of. You see,
for the Shaivite Devotee, it is often the case that Shiva is regarded as
the Absolute. Engagement with Brahman, then, for these Devotees, the
Seekers of Shiva, means encountering Mahadev.

And that is \*exactly\* what Ma Brahmacharini was hoping to do. For
after She had cast herself upon the Pyre at the Sacrifice of Daksha in
response to Her father’s folly; She did not simply die – but also came
back, as Shailaputri, born to the King of Himalaya. And did so with an
intent of reunification with Her Husband, Mahadev (as detailed in last
night’s piece). And truly, there is something innately beautiful about
such a depth and power of love that it indeed transcends the severing
shackles of mortality to be reasserted across lifetimes.

Yet it is ever the case, even and especially in the great sagas of the
Gods, that few things worth having are to be gleaned without strenuous
effort and tribulation. Thus, despite Uma having successfully managed to
reincarnate even into the kingdom whose demesne was the DevaBhumi,
immediately proximate to the preferred environs of UmaPataye, there
remained significant obstacles before the Divine Couple could be
reunited.

For one thing, following the Death of Lady Sati, the grief of Lord Shiva
was inconsolable. Such was its magnitude that when KamaDeva had
attempted to strike Him with an arrow to re-engender love (in a manner
akin to how the Western concept of Cupid and associated arrows works),
Shiva had burned Kama to ashes. His Mighty Heart, in other words, was
verily, a cremation ground (although the funny thing about that metaphor
– as the preferred environs of several Aspects of MataDI, even though
all might \*seem\* death and ashes, in amidst the wrack and ruin … She
is yet there. And Vibhuti, ashes, in any case, also means Power –
Shakti).

This therefore meant that when Parvati initially happened upon the
mighty AdiYogi up in the Mountains, He was nigh totally unmoved by Her.
How could He be? He had lost His (rather mythologically speaking,
literal) “other half” \[Ardhanarishvara\], and spurned the hope of
loving again with such force that its incarnate bearer was now smoke
particles upon the Wind (although again, funny thing – this \*too\*
links back to Devi in its symbology. More on that some other time).

The young Maid of the Mountains might indeed be beautiful, might even
remind Him, in some ways, of Her. But how could She replace Her who had
been lost? How could anyone hope to ‘match’ Him?

Shiva therefore does not positively respond to Her advances. Indeed, He
finds the interruptions to His austerities, through which He is
endeavouring to assuage His almighty grief at the loss of Sati, to be
unsettling; and thus, relocates higher up in the inhospitable mountains,
in pursuit of ‘peace’ to sit and smoke and think without intrusion.
(This is in a manner similar to how, when we are on a quest to
understand and engage with something – we start out seeing it loom large
and glorious, and think that only a short (metaphorical) walk will be
required to get there … only to find, once we put some effort into
‘meeting’ it, that the thing, whatever it is, has receded from view
somewhat into the distance like a mirage. Does not mean that it doesn’t
exist – only that further effort , and meeting the element on \*its\*
terms rather than simply our own, shall be required!)

Parvati is dismayed, but not discouraged, and resolves to find a way to
pierce the veil of His indifference, and prove Herself the ideal partner
for Him once more.

To this end, She begins to undertake many of the same practices – of
austerities, of yogic conduct, perhaps even of cannabis smoking
consumption, and the enduring of the harsh elements out there in the
snow (for such “Himalaya” refers to – Hima, snow and ice, in abundance)
particularly for extended periods without shelter or heavy clothing – as
Mahadev is habitually engaged in. Endeavouring to demonstrate to Him
their fundamental compatibility and coterminity of essence via
imitation; to show that She is a ‘match’ for Him via being able to
emulate even the considerably harsh practices He is undertaking.
(Needless to say, Parvati’s parents are often – although not always –
regarded as having been distinctly unimpressed at the way in which Their
Daughter appears to be putting all this effort into hanging around a
‘rough around the edges’ male and doing all these dangerous and
uncourtly things in order to be noticed by Him)

Just as the path of one’s journey of spiritual ascent, by its very
definition, entails getting higher and higher – and just as, intrinsic
also to this, as with the climb of a mountain, the going gets tougher
and tougher in the rougher terrain and the thinned (metaphorical ..
mostly) oxygen – so Parvati follows Shiva ever further into the clouds
shrouding and wreathing the higher mountain peaks. Whatever He does, in
this context of austerities, She strives to equal. At last, successfully
attracting His interest and attention.

Wondering Who this most curious girl can be, as well as how and why She
is engaging in such superhuman feats of endurance and stamina, austerity
and aptitude … Mahadev deigns to make some rather more direct enquiries.
He therefore, as is His occasional habit (a cloaked, veiled pun there,
both senses are meant), appears to Her in disguise, and proceeds to ask
Her what She has been doing, and to what purpose and end.

She answers simply and sincerely; and in some tellings, They have quite
the metaphysical and theological debate. Impressed now, not only by Her
fortitude (in being able to carry out the austerities and survive where
He has taken up station amidst the crags and the summits), as well as
Her willpower (for insisting upon continuing with Her self-appointed
task even despite the immense physical discomfort, the uncertain and
seemingly receding reward, as well as the abject peril that would have
broken the resolve and shattered the determination of many lesser
beings) – He is also now quite intrigued by Her Mind, Her Thought, Her
Spirit (for such is surely expressed whenever the adroit meet to talk
upon Theology) and Her Essence.

Nevertheless, ever the gentleman, He attempts to dissuade Her from
continuance upon this path – and from even desiring (Marital) Union with
Shiva as Her objective. He does this by relating to Her what is
frequently said about Him, the perceived ‘negatives’ of His rough and
simple lifestyle, His unseemly (or, if you prefer, ‘unseelie’) coteries
of associates, His alleged shortcomings of personality and psychology,
and no doubt also His fondness for a particular drug, His proclivity for
violent action (where necessary), and quite likely, in a (deliberate)
‘faux-pas’ that has the power to induce a wince even here in the 21st
century … the fact He is still very much not over His previous partner;
among other things, we can presume.

Some interpret this as yet another layer of ‘test’ – seeing if Parvati’s
Heart is, indeed, ‘fixed’ and constant in its seeking of him … or
whether She may be dissuaded even after all of this, by somebody who is
seemingly in a position to know, attempting to puncture Her positive
perception of Him; or by pointing out that to marry a Vratya such as He
may very well entail having to share in a harsh and ‘outlaw’ life
characterized more by perceived-poverty than opportunistic opulence …
the latter of which being something She could easily aspire to as the
Princess of a powerful and prominent realm, not least through marriage
to some \[in reality, very much lesser\] prince or other.

Yet I suspect differently. As, while I do not at all discount the above
interpretation, and very much believe it to be a \*part\* of what has
been going on, I \*also\* suggest that Lord Shiva’s motivation here is
much more altruistic than the above perhaps implies. Through Her
actions, She has shown Herself to be quite the eminent Devotee of
Mahadev – indeed, She is regarded as not simply having undertaken a
quasi-competitive series of challenges over the course of Her Tapas, Her
Ordeal , but rather as having been meditating \*upon\* Shiva, chanting
His Name(s), and both generally and specifically carrying out the acts
of Devotion unto Him. Shiva wishes His Devotees to be Happy, \[\] – and
is therefore making these deliberate efforts to dissuade Her and
piercing enquiries of Her , in order to ensure that a life \[so to
speak\] with Him with all that that entails, is actually what She wants.
Further, given the fiery fate met by His previous Wife, Sati, due in
largest measure to the continual disapproval of Their marriage which His
father-in-law, Daksha, escalatingly portrayed … He is guarded. He has no
desire to go through \*that\* again – love somebody, and then lose Her
due to parental and other disapproval and its creating a strain more
than She can hope to bear. The dissuasion as well as the interrogatives,
then, (as well as the metaphysical & theological debate – what better
way to assess an element of essence-tial compatibility than …
‘existentially’), is His effort to seek to Protect Her. Even, indeed
especially, at the cost of His own (potential) happiness. (After all, He
can bear it – He is in that situation now already).

Eventually, however, He relents. He sees in Her Heart, the Sincerity and
the Purity of Purpose that have lead Her there, to this point. And
perhaps, He begins to Hope.

The narrative thread of this story will be picked up again with tomorrow
night’s post on Ma Chandraghanta; however even leaving things ‘hanging’
there as I have, it should be plainly apparent the resonance which the
tale of Ma Brahmacharini has for any student, any seeker of the Divine.
That maxim of Rumi – “that which you seek is \*also\* seeking you”,
rings in my head as I write this; although it is more apt to say that it
is more akin, in these instances, to that which you see, making an
assessment of the seeker, the would-be attainer – seeing whether he or
she is ready, worthy, and of good motivation and heart in what they have
set out to accomplish, before eventually allowing themselves to be made
available \*to\* their follower/pursuer. With this in mind, the
arduousness of the task, the fleeting sight of the goal, the steady
removal of support (of fellows even of ‘oxygen’) (or even outright
disapproval!), the escalating height along with obstacles, and the
various attempts at dissuasion along the way … they are both acts of
devotion and propiation to the Master, to the Knowledge, to the essence,
to the element, to the energy, to the empowerment being sought .. as
well as a ‘winnowing’ to make sure that it is only encountered still
much less attained by those of ‘the rite stuff’.

As we shall see with various other myths of the Durgan corpus – if only
Brahma was as discerning in who he grants power to in response to tapas!

In any case, both through the nature of Her Journey, and Her Herself, Ma
Brahmacharini is shown to be truly worthy of the archetype and the
theonym which goes with.

Although if you cast your mind back toward the start of this piece, you
will recall that I mentioned not one, but \*two\* senses in which She
embodied this mission, within the overall context of the NavaDurga
Cycle.

One, we have explored in reasonable detail – the seeking out of Lord
Shiva, regarded by many Shaivites as the Absolute, and Her longing for
re-Unification with Him.

Yet there is another …. for as you will recall, Shakti, \*also\* \[and
not necessarily contradictively to the aforementioned\] is regarded as
the Absolute; and in particular in the NavaDurga context, SiddhiDhatri,
the 9th and last NavaDurga, Whose Night the final Ratri is of the yearly
cycle, as the ‘perfected’ emblematic of Ma Shakti, is therefore as well
an Absolute Whom Parvati is arcing towards through the course of the
Nine Nights and the accompanying narrative.

Brahmacharini therefore represents a fitting ‘uncoiling’ and ‘expansion’
upward from the Shailaputri incarnation with which the NavRatri Cycle
was begun in the night previous. An advancement and invigorating
extension onwards and upwards from a solid foundation of ‘stone’; and a
worthy example to emulate .. even if you are not, for some reason, in
love with a Divinity.

Iconographically, Brahmacharini is depicted as a young ascetic or
student of the Divine. She is barefoot, garbed in white (a colour which,
despite the ‘bridal’ connotations we might have in a Western context for
the colour, rather signifies knowledge – and also may be a colour warn
by a widow); carries Rudraksha Mala \[prayer beads – used in the
recitations of mantras … but with “Rudraksha” also being translated as
“Tears of Rudra”, there is therefore a most poignant additional
significance to them in Her hands here, espcially in this phase of the
NavaDurga myth\], and a Kamandalu \[a water-vessel often carried by
ascetics to house their drinking water, or to cart water for ritual
purposes, or even to bear the sacred Amrit and in association with the
particular waters of holy rivers\]. Occasionally, She will also be
pictured in a pose of one who is carrying out austerities, or in the
manner of a Priest.

The Lesson of Brahmacharini for the Devotee, is clear. For the most
noble of goals, the noblest of efforts shall be required. And these are
not often nor easily understood as they are occurring, by those around
you whose eyes, whose gazes of attainment are more consistently
affixiated upon ‘conventional’ standards, ‘normal’ expectations, and
‘regular’ deeds. The path to extraordinary results is one which exerts
extraordinary demands upon its aspirant. And in the Compassion of the
Gods, not all, nor even many, are more immediately called up to walk
thereupon.

Should you wish to do so, then be veer-y careful; for this wish may yet
ignite a yearning within your soul that cannot be sati-ated via any
other mechanism nor means; and which might therefore entail you lying
broken within if not without from having once started along its precious
path, and then having turned back at some stage afore having ever really
been tested. Or, for that matter, having been found unequal to the
rigours which were demanded of you, even potentially only by yourself,
in the course of your steps on toward the Most High. And that is a sad
fate – one that it may take (much of) the rest of your life to overcome.

Yet in some ways, it is not a ‘choice’, but a ‘calling’ to endeavour to
climb this most perilous ascent. Not simply “Because It’s There” (as was
uttered by the explorer George Mallory, shortly before his death
attempting to be the first man to climb Everest – the highest peak
amidst the very same mountain range where Parvati met Her (rather
happier) Fate), but because the It has \*called out to you\* to head up
There to be closer to It. Although with #NAS principles perhaps in mind,
it is worthy of note that “for many are called, but few are chosen” is
also an appropriately Odinic motto – doubly so when we consider that the
“call” in question may also be a “howl”, a “shout”, a “roar”, and yes,
even a “lament” rather than necessarily a “rallying cry”. Your death,
too, may serve a purpose – sad, though it is, for many of the persons
more immediately involved. Think of Ravana \[similarly etymologically
derived, funnily enough\], another one who found himself called to
greatness – and, whether he knew it then or not, to the high mountain
peak amidst the Land of Snow and Ice.

Yet, assuming for a moment that you \*are\* intended to mountainheer
your way to meaning in such a manner, then what is needed – what is
necessary – within you, is such a strongly burning willpower to see it
through, that even the fairly literal frostbitten temperatures around
you shall be kept at bay through its warmth \[and, as we noted in
previous pieces – there is an interesting potential point of connexion
here between “Tapas”, the austerities undertaken by the Devotee, and the
Tabiti deity of the Scythians, a Goddess of Pious Fire, of Radiant
Devotion, apparently at the head of their pantheon\], and that not even
the screaming winds of the Vayu-Vata-sphere \[this referencing the later
developments of these terms to refer to particular ‘layers’ of the
atmosphere, ascending closer to the Akasha directly\] are able to put it
out, nor the snow and hail to douse it.

Not many people – and, for that matter, not even all that many Gods –
are willing nor especially able, to put themselves nor Themselves
through all of that for potentially rather uncertain reward. That is
partially why Mahadeva dwells there, from time to time. For it may be a
small world, at the top of the highest mountain peak – but everyone
knows Him there. And there are few, if any, pretensions to be found
amidst the bare rock and scything winds. They have all been, much like
delusion itself as we get closer to Brahman, stripped away. Often along
with the beings who dared to attempt to carry them thither up the crags
toward the utter-sky.

But, then, for those who \*know\* – really, truly, Know – that that is
where their destiny lies; it is not “uncertain reward”, at all. The
‘Reward’ (thusly construed – it really, simply, “is”) is certain. It is
only their strength, their determination, their willpower, their
aptitudes, their resources to get there, that are under “test”.

All of which reminds me of a quotation from The Count of Monte Cristo –

“So, preferring death to capture, I accomplished the most astonishing
deeds, and which, more then once, showed me that the too great care we
take of our bodies is the only obstacle to the sucess of those projects
which require rapid decision, and vigorous and determined execution.  
In reality, when you have once devoted your life to your enterprises,
you are no longer the equal of other men, or, rather, other men are no
longer your equals, and whosoever has taken this resolution, feels his
strength and resources doubled.”

And, with the concepts of karma-yoga doctrine in mind, this is a level
of dedication and highly sharpened focus that can be rendered
intensively applicable to almost any pursuit worthy of having in
\*anybody’s\* life. No mountains, no life-threatening, soul-wracking,
death-or-glory, mythic quest of (direct) theological import required.

The Lesson of Brahmacharini, therefore, is simple:

When you are Going through Kel \[PIE\] …

KEEP  
GOING

ॐ देवी ब्रह्मचारिण्यै नमः॥
