+++
title = "Kushmanda – 4th Navadurga, The 4th Night ofxa0NavRatri"
date = "October 2, 2019"

+++
# ![d5a7494a825ce10746410f3ae623a2cd](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/d5a7494a825ce10746410f3ae623a2cd.jpg?w=676)

The Fourth Night of #NavRatri is dedicated to Ma as Kushmanda – the
Power of the Sun. Now, this is my own somewhat figurative rendering of
the name; with a more direct translation working out something like
“Warmth of the Cosmic Egg”. And while it might be tempting, I suppose,
to think of the Sun as perhaps being the warmth-associated round yellow
object (like the yolk of an egg maybe) of the cosmos, there’s quite a
bit more going on here than simply that interpretation.

For in addition to the Sun (which is commanded and ’empowered’ by Her –
thus recalling, in somewhat residual format, the quite likely identity
of the Proto-Indo-European solar deity as \*female\* rather than male,
something preserved to a certain extent also with the Nordic figure of
Sol; and perhaps, also, in the Scythian Tabiti – relating to warmth,
fire, piety, and a presiding position in their pantheon), She is also
associated with the HiranyaGarbha – the ‘Golden Egg’ mentioned in an
ancient Hymn of the RigVeda (Hymn 121 of the 10th Mandala) which forms
one of the earlier Hindu creation myths.

Now, this is very interesting – for in addition to its obvious
generative function, the Egg in question is also identified in
post-RigVedic literature as Brahman, that is to say “the Absolute”. And
according to the subsequent elaborations upon the Vedic hymnal in
question, shortly after the inception of the universe via its coming
into being, it undergoes a process I suppose you might refer to as
‘mitosis’, whereby the Egg splits into two (which may, in fact, be what
is metaphorically referred to via the notion of Kushmanda \*smiling\* to
create the universe – for a mouth shape entails a line wherein the face
comes apart; while a smile ensures this is regarded positively rather
than a ‘mere’ fracture; if the grin exposes teeth it shows the ‘bones’
of its bearer, also. This may additionally, perhaps, connote a gesture
of communication – Divine Speech, an act of both Enunciation and
Annunciation with which the Song of the Universe could begin via a
single roaring, cracking note \[‘Crack’ and Garjati – the latter meaning
a roar, or a low-frequency humming, a growl, a resounding noise, the
sound of the Thunder – actually share an etymological root in PIE
‘Gerh’\] – Vacam Garjit Lakshanam, indeed \[‘Thunder having the
Characteristics of Divine Speech’, ‘Divine Speech expressed as
Thunder\[ous roaring\]’\]; And what is an “Aum”, and how does an Egg
hatch? Perhaps the background roar of the Big Bang, is precisely this
‘humming’, ‘cracking’, ‘Humkara’, of AUM at Devi Shakti’s imperious
command). These two, as with many ‘fundamental pairings’ to be found in
an array of cultures the world over (I am reminded instantly of the New
Zealand Maori figures of Rangi and Papatuanuku, the Ouranos and Gaia
(or, for that matter, Chronos & Rhea) of the Greeks, and no doubt many
more examples besides) are the Heavens and the Earth.

However, the original Vedic scripture is rather more terse when it comes
to such details – only insisting that this figure (not at all
coincidentally translated by Ralph Griffith as “Mother of the World”),
who is to be regarded and worshipped as supreme, is responsible for the
creation, filling, ordering, and I suppose one might say “en-lightening”
of the Cosmos. \[These elements are, implicitly, reiterated in a
subsequent 10th Mandala hymnal – the famed DeviSukta (Hymn X.125),
wherein Shakti – as Vak – is identified as empowering, ordering,
energizing, and even emanating out as inceptor, the subsequent core of
creation, from a position \*above and beyond\* thus. ‘Preceptor’, in
several senses, may therefore \*also\* be eminently apt labeling\]

In either case, I believe the implication is quite clear: This
‘Cosmokrator’, this Mother of the World with golden, shining radiance
as Her hall-mark (in multiple senses of the term) … is Adi Shakti. The
First Power, Who precedes the Universe, and Who is responsible for its
investiture with All and Everything at its Beginning. Which, of course,
gels with another translation often proffered for HiranyaGarbha – Golden
Womb.

Kushmanda, then, as a Theonym, does not simply refer to She Who in the
present provides the Sun with its radiance and lustre – its “warmth”
(or, ‘energy’ I suppose one might additionally render it as), as well as
its direction. But rather, to She Who at the very outset of there even
having been a Sun did so. Has always done so. Indeed, created and set
the Sun into Its Portion of the ‘Cosmic Vault’ in the very literal
‘first place’. The primordial ‘energy’ and ’empowerment’ \[for such
‘Shakti’ directly is\] at the inception of our reality.

\[And, once more, I would invoke the subsequent X.125 DeviSukta hymnal’s
references to Devi providing the facility via which energy is unlocked
from the consumption of fuel; as well as the flowing out \*of\* the
energy of the Goddess from this central point above the earth, above the
clouds, above the Sky Father Himself, through our sphere of reality. For
this demonstrates a consistency of theme in these ‘creational’ and
‘solar’ explanatory hymnals which strongly illuminate the later
presentational thinking around Kushmanda. A potentially coterminous
interpretation, would be that the “Pitaramasya” referenced in the
hymnal, is to indicate the Sun – whether in terms of this being the
ultimate ancestor of all, or directly identified with the Sky Father
Himself \[Dyaus, of course, still carrying a Shining connotation from
PIE ‘Dyew’\] (interestingly, ‘Pitaramasya’ is sometimes also translated
as referring to the Pitrloka); which gains saliency in light of our
Hiranyagarbha identification – as one way to interpret “amasya”, if a
slight contraction of the initial ‘a’ sound is presumed, would be “raw”,
“unripe”, “unheated/cooked” – from PIE “heh”, meaning “to heat/burn”,
plus a negatory “-mos” suffix, which inverts it. Or, phrased another
way, what this compound may serve to illustrate is Shakti Devi emanating
out a Sun, or a Source of All, which requires the provision of ‘heat’,
of ‘energy’ to make it work (exactly what Kushmanda does) – or, for that
matter, an ‘unfertilized’ egg \[recalling the Hiranyagarbha concept,
once more\] that yet requires the male input in order to properly
gestate and unfurl through ripeness (exactly what the Sky Father,
perhaps, does). Or, given this is RigVedic Sanskrit we’re speaking of,
perhaps all of the above at once, and quite intentionally so. \]

So, having explained and expanded somewhat upon the name “Kushmanda” and
who She ‘really’ is … the obvious question upon our minds is – just what
is She doing here, at this part and portion of the NavaDurga Cycle?
Surely, She should be positioned at the very Beginning? Or, in
considerable ‘light’ of what I have earlier said about Ma as
Siddhidhatri, She should be positioned at the \*end\* of the NavaRatri
Cycle as the re-unification of wandering Parvati’s path through the
phases with Her Greatest and Highest Self?

Ah, now you are catching on! Take another look at that last clause.
“Re-Unification”, rendering Her as Her Highest Self.

For what happened immediately prior to This Night in the NavRatri Cycle?
That’s right – the Marriage of Parvati to Shiva. What is this? Why, a
Re-Unification. But not just \*any\* re-unification. Nor even one of
most beauteous lovers separated by bounds of death and beguilement and
circumstance.

Parvati is the Earth Mother – this can be seen even most directly in Her
Theonym : (Female) Stone or Mountain. Shiva is the Sky Father.

The bringing back together of these two, then, as happened when Ma as
Chandraghanta was able to ensure Their Divinely Ordained Marriage could
once again take place (which itself was only able to take place
following the metaphysical-theological Debate of Ma as Brahmacharini
with Lord Shiva, wherein She sets out to Him and vice versa the ways in
which the two ‘parts’ of the Universe may perhaps be re-joined), thus
‘makes whole the Universe’. Putting \*back together\* the Sky and the
Earth which are regarded as having \*divided\* from the Hiranyagarbha.
And, of course, re-creating the fundamental unity of essence inherent in
the Ardhanarishvara shared/combined Aspect of Lord Shiva and Lady
Parvati. \[To reference the DeviSukta again, Shakti is also directly
identified as being found through \*both\* Heaven \*and\* Earth; and as
undertaking an emergent-emanational progression which runs from the
Source, out through the Worlds, and thence back up to the upward edge of
Reality again once more\]

Or, to phrase it perhaps more simply – At the Beginning of Time, They
were One. Even despite having emanated (back – for all of this has
happened before, in a previous cycle of Creation) into Two, They
remained so close as to be inseparable. Up until tragedy and calamity,
engineered perhaps unwittingly by the Spawn of Brahma, lead to Their
fundamental severance, with the Slaying of Sati, and a consequent
unfurling of Darkness in a most ‘benighting’ and horrendous sense –
which frayed and echoed out throughout the very fabric of space-time
with the Grief of Shiva and His wanderings throughout the Universe
bearing Her slain body (For even in Death, on one level at least, They
could not be Parted).

Which could only be \*un-done\* … via Her reincarnation, first as
Shailaputri, then as Brahmacharini, and then as Chandraghanta (in all
cases, Ma as Parvati), and re-marriage to Her Mahadev. (Har Mahadev!)

Thus, She (and, for that matter, He) (are)is once more rendered,
“whole”, “complete”, Brahman made manifest, The Absolute.

And as a further point of interest, it is also possible to trace
‘backwards’ the emanation of the Sun’s Rays through the above
enumeration of the preceding NavaDurga Forms. For The Light after sunset
and at night (remembering the aforementioned metaphysical condition of
darkness about the three worlds as a result of the occlusion of the
smoking-pyre of Sati’s self-immolatory ‘sacrifice’;) last of all falls
upon the terrestrial (the ‘Shaila’, of which She is also Putri), having
descended (the opposite of the ‘ascent’ implied in Brahmacharini – and
recall also the rendering of this Theonym as the ‘Seeker of the
Absolute!’ Finally She has Won!), from the Radiance of the Moon
(ChandraGhanta), which is itself a reflection of the Radiance of the Sun
– which, as noted above in the cursory writeup of the ‘contemporary’
role and function of Ma as Kushmanda, is generously provided ultimately
from Shakti Brahman to the Sun in the first place.

You see how it all ‘hangs together’ just so?

This also represents the ‘pathway back to the Light’ for not just the
Devotee, but also for Lord Shiva and even Lady Parvati, after a sense.
Particularly after we consider the effect of Lady ChandraGhanta to
‘clear away the darkness’ and occlusion – behind and both prior and
subsequent to which … the Sun is radiantly apparent! ‘Divinity’ in a
most direct sense! (this hinges around the etymology of the word back to
its PIE roots – from ‘Deywos’, from ‘Dyew’ (Sky, Bright,
Caelestial/Heaven), the latter of which also underpins “Dyaus Pitar”, as
noted above) Although it may take another kind of ‘eyes’ entirely to
look ‘behind’ ‘above’ and indeed ‘through’ the otherwise potentially
literally ‘blinding’ light of the Sun ‘further’ to the actual Source
Herself !

\[The notion of a source of brightness, of energy of both heat and
light, as being a metaphorical means to speak of Brahman, is a not
entirely uncommon one within the Hindu corpus – as illustrated in, for
example, the Sacrificial Pyre commented upon in the course of the
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad (wherein the sparks emanating out from the
blaze do not diminish the overarching fire that is their source – and
can ultimately return, drawn back into the flame); and also recalled,
not least in terms of overarching \*upward\* trajectory, the role of
Holy Fire – Agni – as Conduit to the Upplands, to the Gods.

Both of these attain further comparative relevancy when we consider the
Tabiti Goddess said to have been the head of the Pantheon of the
Scythians. “Tabiti” being regarded as not only Queen of the Gods and
strongly correlated with Sovereignty, but as having connection to the
ordering of the domain, and piety-through-flame. This is further
substantiated via the linguistic connection to Sanskrit “Tapa” (heat,
glow, the Sun, Indra/Lord), and thence “Tapas” (heat, but also
Penance/Religious Austerity, the period between Winter and the start of
Spring), all from Proto-Indo-European “Tep”, thence “Tepos”, referring
to ‘heat’ and ‘warmth’.

It is not hard to see how the concept of a Hearth-Fire \[Tabiti being
linked to Hestia in Greek accountings\] in an older (Steppe) dwelling is
regarded as strongly coterminous with the making of a structure into a
‘house’ into a ‘home’ – and with this investiture, producing a regal
dominion over the space thusly ensconsed at the center of, and about
which all other activities within the structure must therefore be
conducted, particularly in winter’s cold and dark and sleet and snow. On
a broader level, societies themselves can organize about the central
sacrificial rites which must, themselves, \*also\* contain and entail a
Sacrificial Pyre (something which, to bring it back to the Household
once more, we perhaps see in the circular processional about the Sacred
Fire which forms the integral binding of the Hindu marriage rite. A
family, a household, after all, being the building-block of the
community entire – its re-creation and perpetuation/furtherance being a
function of these perambulations about the central Flame). The Sky, the
Universe Entire, is also – after a certain form – a Steppe, a Steppe of
Space; and therefore, our home, our dwelling, the Gods’s dominion over
same, is \*also\* to be regarded as organized about this central pillar
(which is actually a sphere, considered only within our dimensions,
rather than as arcening down from Above and Beyond (via the Source of
its ultimate Energy), perhaps like the Jyotirlingam, the Lingodbhava,
and also recalling the Sacrificial Post/Pillar that forms the \*other\*
integral element to Older Indo-European Religious Rites and Cosmological
Structure – that Axis Mundi concept, again, you see?), this central pyre
that lies at the Heart and the Hearth of Their Heavenly Domain.

![71968882_10162339618375574_1562029178344177664_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/71968882_10162339618375574_1562029178344177664_n.jpg?w=676)

Kushmanda, particularly when we consider the RigVedic line from my
favoured 10th Mandala DeviSukta Hymnal which may present this radiance
as the Crowning Adornment of the Brow of the Universal Sovereign \[the
‘rite to rule’, indeed\], as a continuation of the ‘anointment’ and
’empowering’ of the champion (which quite specifically refers to the
active-empowerment of the Weapon of Rudra, to be utilized against those
who are enemies of “devotion”/”Brahman” (dependent upon translation) \[a
‘Humkara’, I note, can also pointedly refer to a bow-string’s twang, as
well as a roaring noise, a rising, warning growl, and the weaponized
utterance of sound. The bow-string element going together with Rta as
the Bowstring of Brihaspati \[another form of Mahadeva\], and
therefore, so too, an expression of Devi – whether as Vak (the Great
Force amidst the Universe, also, of Speech; which is itself and most
especially Herself, the most mighty armament) or as the empowering
string of the weapon which enables it to function, without which it is
simply inert, lacking in ‘energy’ nor active participle\], the
enlightened, insightful, intelligent one \[and remember – ‘Loka’, from
“Lewk” (PIE: Light), can refer to a place/plane, a conquest, “looking”,
insight/the ability to see and perceive\], the chosen one mytheme from
earlier in the hymn, has strong resonance with all of the above.

Indeed, when turned to devastation, to destruction, rather than
life-giving force, this may perhaps help to explain the unstoppable
incandescent potency of Lord Shiva’s Third Eye – an ‘adornment’ of the
brow of the Sky Father, which channels the power, the pehwr more usually
found amidst the Heart of a Star, out in a concentrated beam against
which none can stand. Ultima Ratio Rudram. And not least because It can
unmake the Universe Itself when Opened fully and with the terrifying
resolve of His Most Mighty Desolatory Intent. (Although it is via the
(comparatively softer) Light of the Moon that He gets the Last Laugh –
Chandrahas) .

For All are bhut expressions of Her Uber-Stellar Power.\]

In any case, to bring things back to the more ‘contemporary’ and perhaps
‘day to day’ (I hesitate to use the term ‘mundane’! ‘Mundus’, perhaps,
notwithstanding) sense of Kushmanda, just as Ma as ChandraGhanta
represented the Devi as the Princess endeavouring to be wed, and regal
yet with a certain sense of contingent regency upon another (an
additional appropriateness for the Lunar symbolism!), Kushmanda
therefore represents Ma as Queen. As MahaRani, indeed, of the Cosmos.
Where Her Power (both as half of the Absolute Sovereign, as well as, in
an overlapping sense, that Sovereign Herself) is not that drawn from
another and exercised ‘contingently’. But rather, ‘self-empowering’, the
‘grund-norm’ (a term drawn from an interesting legal theory as to what
makes Law Law, which is, now that I think about it both incredibly apt
for Adi Shakti, and also for Shakti-As-Brahman-As-Dharma As Rta!), upon
which all else, via the Power of the Sun (for truly, pretty much almost
all life here on Earth is, in a very real sense, either directly or
indirectly “solar powered” if one thinks upon it) Depends.

While Devi as Queen, in the more ‘matronly’ sense via which She also
literally (in a sense perhaps surely somewhat different to previous)
‘once again’ becomes a Mother, is the \*next\* phase of the NavaDurgas –
with the Birth of Lord Skanda (admittedly, to other mothers – yet more
upon that tomorrow night!); this is also arguably the first instance
wherein Devi is presented as a Mother, as well as the first instance
within the cycle wherein She is held as (resumptive) Absolute. I believe
this adds yet another layer of meaning to both the traditional Hindu
theological/ethical maxim that positive conduct toward one’s Parents is
the Highest Act Of Piety, as well as the myth of Lords Ganesha and
Skanda circumambulating the world (or, in the case of Ganesha, Their
Parents – the aforementioned Divine Pairing of Shiva & Shakti-Parvati)
which is customarily utilized to illustrate same. After all, by
performing parikrama about the HiranyaGarbha, Lord Ganesha has therefore
Traced with His Glorious Footsteps a Path around the Universe Entire.

We thus pray to and honour Ma as Kushmanda both as the act of honouring
one’s ultimate parent(s), the author(s) of not just our particular
existence – but of the Universe and the Cosmos Entire. It is right, and
it is most eminently righteous, to do so.

We also ask Kushmanda and Her Radiant Smile to bless us by bestowing the
Solar-connoted virtues which are inherent in the Sun’s en-livening rays
throughout creation. What is meant by this, is Charisma – the shining
and glowing force of one’s personality, to be directed toward positive
and productive purpose; is Health and Wealth – the former being
intrinsically contingent upon the empowerment of the Sun (and not least
via vitamin D and melatonin-regulation and suchlike), the latter also
ultimately deriving from it and perhaps also being metaphorically
resonant with the ‘sunny’ lustre of gold as its iconographic
representation; for the removal of darkness and negativity – as the
Sun’s rays quite directly do, and to reference the political maxim about
sunlight being “the best disinfectant”; for encouragement – just as the
Sun’s rising stirs our hearts and strengthens our spirits even as it
removes the gloom; for the fertility of imagination (and elsewhere) that
is directly correlate with Her role in our mythohistory, and the
illumination of concepts and (re-)connection ‘back with the source’ via
solar inspiration which She can bestow; and for Empowerment – in the
‘microcosm’ of our lives and personhoods and physical forms and
communities .. just as, in an initial and ongoing sense, the Universe,
the Cosmos at large.

The Lesson of Ma as Kushmanda for the Devotee, then, is both simple \[so
simple, in point of fact, that it’s effectively a ‘singularity’\], and
all-encompassing. But, then, aren’t they all?

Everything flows, ultimately, from the same Source.

The only questions are those of (meta)physics, and are bound up with the
two variables intrinsic to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. Namely,
what your \*position\* is, relative to this Absolute – and what your
\*velocity\* (i.e. which way you’re going, and how fast).

For obvious reasons, it is rather difficult to know precisely both at
the same time – as, if we are to ascertain the former with any accuracy
beyond the mere ‘momentary’, then it entails that you have stopped
moving. And if we are to seek to identify the latter \[I hesitate to say
‘to divine’ – as that would imply, surely, an \*Upward\* motion, an
ascendancy, even a \*transcendency\*, arcening perhaps towards an
‘escape velocity’ and thence a Moksha reference … or, er, “lack of
reference”, you might mean\] , then that axiomatically means that motion
is being undertaken, rather than static situation to be analyzed and
prognosticated thereupon. A process, in other words, cannot be
understood \[PIE- ‘mere\[ly\]’\] by stopping it. And a \[PIE: mere\]
positional is, in effect, the \*embalming\* of such a living affect and
therefore the course of (a) life.

“The universe is not like a puzzle-box that you can take apart and put
back together again and so solve its secrets. It is a shifting uncertain
thing which changes as you consider it, which is changed by the very act
of observation. A powerful man is not a man who dissects the universe
like a puzzle-box, examining it piece by piece and measuring each piece
with scientific precision. A powerful man has only to look upon the
universe to change it.”

The Eye at the Heart of the Sun is looking upon the Universe constantly.
Therefore, It is always and ever in motion. Only when It closes shall
all things cease to twirl and whirl. For then, it shall be at and after
the \[Maha\]Pralaya – the Great Dissolution, the Unraveling, the
Resetting, wherein (almost) only the smoke from Creation’s funeral pyre
\[Dhumavati – Shakti, at the other end of (all) things\] lies amidst the
Cold Dark of MahaKaal and MahaKali’s Final \[for this Cycle of the
Universe\] Embrace.

The Lesson for the Devotee, therefore, is in how we ‘approach’ – and I
mean this quite literally \[or, at least, as ‘literally’ as one can be
in these metaphysical, supernally directed and infused terms\] – this
Revelation, this Absolute.

The ‘Realization’ inherent in the concept of such Divinity, is twofold –
both attempting to bring ourselves closer to God (through emulation of
Their example, where appropriate, following Their Divine Commands, where
applicable, and eventually, for a certain chosen few, perhaps direct
propinquity at Their Side through meritorious service and recognition
there-fore and there-through) … and also through attempting to bring God
out into the world around us. “Realization” here, therefore, meaning
“Real-ization” – “Immanentization”. Closing the gap of our Immanence,
our Congruence, to the Divine, to Devi – and reducing any perceived gap
or impurity between our environs and the Divine by fostering the spark,
the flame, the fire, the light and heat back out into it. It’s somewhat
the same thing – or, at least, closely overlapping albeit approaching
the situation from opposite seeming trajectories – in either case.

Our ‘Approach’ should, therefore, seek to emulate in appropriate ways,
both the ‘velocity’ which has characterized Devi through this
upward-arcening ascent of the NavaDurga Cycle of NavRatri – starting
from (re-)birth \[Shailaputri – also, as I noted at the time, the
initial emanation out from the World Pillar as implied by Shaila
(Mountain), and Putri – coming from/daughter of\], acquiring focus and
direction \[Brahmacharini – and note the Brahman directional: \*Up\*!
the Acharini motion: Pursuing/Heading For\], attaining strong position
of mastery and encounter with the ‘light’, the next part of the journey
\[ChandraGhanta – the Moon as secondary emanator of the Sun’s Light;
Shiva as Parvati’s “other half” of the unified Brahman Whole – once They
are Reunited, enabling the continued arc of ascent to continue\] thence
to be able to radiate out and begin to ‘enlighten’ others \[again,
ChandraGhanta, in Her role as the remover of fear, the bestower of
wisdom, perspicacity, insight, and the radiating out like a Temple Bell
of the pious energy of the Divine … which also exerts terrifying effect
upon the Demons, the Adversaries of both this process and of Creation
Itself – recall the remarks upon the Humkara made above, as a
comparative/coterminate (in multiple senses of this latter term) for
this functioning\], before proceeding on further and ever closer to the
Source \[Kushmanda; although it is worth noting that, akin to the Holy
Man who descends from His Mountain in order to sort out the ensuing
chaos below, this is not necessarily the ‘end’, the ‘telos’ at this
stage, for the properly pious Devotee. Rather, it is to ‘encounter’ the
Source, to be thusly Empowered by HER – and thence, to make escalatingly
enlightened/insighted utilization of this empowerment, this investiture
for the rest of the span of the cycle(s) of one’s being and world;
before, as SiddhiDhatri, at the end of the NavaDurga
Processional-Cycle-Path, being as the Hand, being as the Expression,
being as almost … well … the representative/mask/face \[‘Grim(r)’, in
Old Norse, understood as the leader, the facing, of a people, is also
perhaps relevant here … albeit not as ‘leader’ so much as ‘delegate’\],
perhaps “Avatara” might be closer to the mark, “Incarnate”? of Devi
Herself – the thusly empowered instrument, implement, and investiture,
of Her within our world\].

Hunter S. Thompson, in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, put it thusly –
“Well, I thought. This is how the world works. All energy flows
according to the whims of the Great Magnet. What a fool I was to defy
him. He knew. He knew all along. \[…\] Never cross the Great Magnet. I
understood this now . . . ”

He got this \*completely\* right. Except for the gender …

For a Magnet is, after all, something which attracts and impels. And has
some interesting pseudo-etymological resonances with “Adamantium”, but
more upon that (and how it relates to all of this – especially in
relation to Vajra, Diamond, Meteors, Ultimate Force/Resilience, and
Bolts from (beyond) the Sky) perhaps some other time.

And, in just such a manner, perhaps akin to rivers ultimately flowing
back to the Ocean, or water particles being evapotranspirated back up to
the realm beyond the Clouds, the mountain-tops, from whence the Source
of the Streams is in either case to be found \[via the application of
heat energy, you understand – from the Sun\] … so, too, is the
theoretical trajectory of the resolute soul, the piously enacting,
Divinely Enabled being.

All has but a single source; and if you look closely, you shall learn to
divine where the ‘spark’, the ‘magic’, the ‘radiance’, the ‘charisma’,
that massively charged Smile, is to be found. Signposts to guide you,
and currents to catch, winds to empower your sails \[this, too, has
RigVedic precedency – both in terms of Breath, and also the Strong Wind
from the Devi At The Summit Of The World, the Tempestuous Force of the
Storm-Woman, the Solar Wind, indeed, of the Sun-Storm\] upon this
journey.

Knowing whence they lie, how to catch them, and to be buoyed via their
potency rather than buffeted nor blown off course and upon the shoals of
unrighteous hubris \[for even small precipitates of Greatness can
destroy those who come into contact with them, if they are unready or
unwary\], impious conduct, and less direct or even outright
\*oppositional\* direction … well, that is within the power of all the
NavaDurgas, and others, to grant – together, as one, for maximum force.
Now phrase that last maxim in Sanskrit 😉

Iconographically, Kushmanda continues the broad themes of the previous
Incarnation of Parvati as Chandraghanta – Being a multi-armed clearly
radiant Devi form accompanied by Dawon; although with significant
additions to both the Weaponry and other Instruments of Piety carried by
the previous Aspect. These are the Chakra (often associated with Lord
Vishnu, and somewhat luridly translated by myself from time to time as
the “destructo-disc”; its 108 razor-sharp edges are symbolic of Dharma,
its shape may also suggest the Solar Disc in our sky (especially with
the radiating blades/points therefrom), and its range indicates that the
scope and ambit of the Bearer’s Power is unlimited – encompassing the
Universe Entire. Most aptly appropriate for Her!); as well as another
liquid-carrying vessel that is said to carry the Amrit – the ‘elixir of
life’.

And, of course, for reasons that ought be patently obvious, instead of
the Moon, She is Crowned with the Sun. (In many illustrated portrayals,
anyway)

Homage To You Who Is Mother Of The Universe Entire

ॐ देवी कूष्माण्डायै नम

Jai Mata DI !
