+++
title = "Hanuman, of thexa0Rudras"
date = "October 22, 2019"

+++
![73003786_469953803616949_1331464862764630016_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/73003786_469953803616949_1331464862764630016_n.jpg?w=676)

Something interesting which I happened across earlier this morning, and
eminently appropriate for a Tuesday, is the identity of a particular
Rudra amidst the RudraGana in several attestations.

The Rudras (plural) are emanations, descendants, forms, and especially
favoured followers of Rudra – all of which is entailed in the term
“Gana” \[for more detail upon which, consult the relevant section in
GHOST DIVISION\] .

Now, there are many lists presented for the particular Eleven said to
form the prime cadre-clade of the Rudras; and at some point I may devote
more energy to explicating some of the symbolism going on in several of
these – and several identities in particular amidst Them.

Yet one name stood out, today – Vrsakapi.

To be sure, there are at least two ways in which such a name can be
interpreted. One, we have already partially explicated in the course of
previous works upon NandiJi – a bull-figure. \[There are additional more
figurative connotations for the name, pertaining to radiant energy, but
more upon those, again, some other time\]

The other, is familiar, not least from a RigVedic context – the
Ape(man). In said Vedic hymnal, this theonym is used to refer to, in
effect, an alternate form or facing of Lord Indra. And is something
which we can once again ‘triangulate’ via the iconographic and other
close coterminities between Indra & Hanuman – Bajrang Bali \[note
‘Bajrang’ and ‘Vajra’ as closely related terms, also\] – to show how it
works in practice.

Thor, too, is in on the action – not only via those aforementioned
iconographic and functional coterminities, but via the
hiding-in-plain-sight identification of Thor via the curious kenning of
an “Ape” in particular strains of Old Nordic verse.

Hanuman, as is well known, is the ‘essence-ial’ Son of Shiva/Vayu-Vata.
And, for that matter, is customarily regarded as an Avatar of Lord
Shiva. \[Alongside this , Indra is Son of Dyaus Pitar, and Thor is,
obviously, Odinson\].

It is both delightful and heartening, therefore, to see this customary
perception confirmed via references to Vrsakapi in several Lists of the
Luminaries of the RudraGana !

Bajrang Bali Ki Jaye !
