+++
title = "ON THE INDO-EUROPEAN TYPOLOGY OF IOLAUS – THIRD DRAGONSLAYER Part Two – The Priest ‘pon Penitent Pathway : Herakles Indra’s Roaring Rampage ofxa0Repentance"
date = "October 14, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/va_pc_2007bp0698-001.jpg?w=700)

For you see, Trisiras is a Brahmin. Slaying Him is a Brahmanicide – one
of the most grievous and serious crimes that a man, even a God, can
possibly commit. It attaches a heavy burden of sin to the enactor – even
when, as with KaalBhairavJi against Brahma, the act is a vitally
necessary and divinely sanctioned one. And this is, apparently, why
Trita is called upon to carry out the execution. Because Lord Indra is
rather keen to avoid the sanction in question. Which positions Trita as
something of a ‘scape-goat’ – a role which is picked up by the figure of
Trita in Vedic ritual, wherein He is called upon to take upon himself
the burden of the blood-shed of sacrifice, or other sins attached to the
enactor which would otherwise ruin the rite.

And here, we find a further resonancy that I believe to be at the heart
of the relevant tale of Herakles – indeed, underpinning the mythic cycle
of His Atonement Labours all up.

For if we consider just why it was that Herakles had been engaged in His
heroic quest to slay the Hydra (and many other such arduous tasks) – it
was for an act of penitence. He had, in a state of berzerk rage, killed
wrongfully (perhaps mirroring Indra’s own burden of sin for a furor
facilitated sinful killing in the Vedic mythology – which itself
requires alleviating, and under which He had been labouring in the
lead-up to the encounter with Vritra). He had carried out severe acts of
kinslaying – a heavy and high crime amongst many Indo-European cultures;
perhaps, in the absence of a Brahmin caste for the Greeks etc., of
similar opprobrium to that highest of evils. In order to expiate the sin
upon Him, He was bound to carry out certain tasks by the figure of
Eurystheus. Which, I would note, effectively destroyed quite an array of
other ‘evils’ out there in the world, or otherwise brought about
positive incidental results.

Because it was Iolaus who slays the Hydra, per the view of Eurystheus
(in truth it seems more of a ‘team effort’ – under the ultimate aegis of
Goddess Athena, per Hesiod; and made possible via the empowerment and
direction of Saraswati Vak Devi in our Vedic comparative typology for
the slaying of Vritra), Herakles is denied the portion of the expiation
of His sin that the Hydra’s blood would have otherwise provided. He does
not attain the positive status associated with His victory. Which is, as
you can see, exactly the opposite way around to the situation of Trita
and Indra – wherein Indra does not attain the *negative* status, the
burden of sin (requiring subsequent expiation) of the dragon-slaying.

And here, we shall take a brief lacuna to consider two other elements
salient to the Dragon-Slaying, before pressing forward with how this
relates to both the Zoroastrian and the Vritra contexts.

The first of these, concerns the occasionally encountered suggestion
that the manner in which the Hydra was vanquished – was to take the
poison spurting up from one of its severed necks, and utilizing this to
cauterize the wound. This makes a certain figurative sense when dealing
with a dragon … but I believe there may be something else archaically
recalled here. If we cast our minds back to the figure of Trisiras –
what we find is that one or two of his heads (dependent upon the
telling) are engaged in pious action. Drinking Soma , reciting Vedic
liturgy. Now, what is it that enables an act of dragon-slaying for the
Vedic hero? Well, the empowerment of Soma is certainly an important
element – and, as we have seen earlier, per RV X 8 (and, for that
matter, my interpretation of .. an array of other Vedic hymnals, as well
as the Vritrahan epithet shared by Agni with Indra and Saraswati Vak ) …
prayer, Vedic prayer, is an enormously powerful weapon indeed for such
purposes. So, we have a situation wherein the parallel to the Hydra
having its demise brought about via the same thing that was found in its
neck … is mirrored in Trisiras’ demise via the same things that were
found in *his* neck likewise.

The second, concerns the curious statement in later texts around the
decapitation of Trisiras leading to birds springing up from the stumps.
This is interesting and may have a number of interpretations in-line
with the species of the birds in question – but our purpose in raising
this fact is to tie it to another act of serpentine-slaying carried out
by a Striker/Thunderer figure: Perseus (you can see the ‘Per-‘ particle,
similar to that of ‘Perun’ , ‘Perkwunos’; and the parentage as Son of
the Sky Father also aligns; as does His Harpe weapon – the same device
utilized in various tellings of Herakles’ armament in the
Hydra-slaying), Who vanquishes Medusa … which produces the Pegasus
emergent from the neck of the decapitated serpentine adversary. It is
also possible that there may be some echo of this found in the Nordic
mythology – wherein Sigurd, immediately following His act of
dragon-slaying, hears the Language of the Birds upon ingesting some of
the Dragon’s heartblood. A situation I have previously connected to Soma
imbibing in various of my earlier work.

But let us return to the figure of Third. And another ‘parallel’
treatment of this most intriguing myth.
