+++
title = "The Transcendent Indo-European Typology Of The God Of Masks – The Sky Father Dances On [ On The Indo-European ‘Interpretatio’ Of Dionysus Part Dieuxxa0]"
date = "October 2, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/724fe102d25b1051d5aa4a72e06e65dd-1.jpg?w=1000)

In my previous piece upon the subject, I asserted that Dionysus is a
facing of the Indo-European Sky Father; and sought to illustrate this
via the illumination of a range of connections of Dionysus to a range of
figures from the broad Indo-European mythology – both Greek and of
further afield. This article shall go further – intending to more fully
attest the character of the underlying Indo-European deific facing (and
other attendant reconstructive theology) as traced through the
constellation of these connections, as well as picking up and expanding
upon the explication of several elements which I had excised from the
previous text due to reasons of length.

The forms via which these connections may be attested are manifold –
including by making use of what the Greeks themselves said upon the
matter (which, I would reiterate, specifically includes Hades as
Dionysus, as well as Hades as Zeus) , as well as via the deploying of a
comparative framework and typology arrived at by considering the
essential characteristics of Dionysus and these other, obvious cognate
figures. We can even make fairly inductive use of what the Greeks
\*almost\* said – for instance, their pointed and repeated ‘doubling’ of
Zeus in certain relevant areas of Dionysus’ mythology (such as the site
and situation of Their respective infancies and the direct parallels
explicitly drawn by Classical authors in \*that\* regard; or Dionysus’
lofty station seated upon the Throne of Olympus wielding Zeus’
Thunderbolt\] in pursuit of the further underlying truth of the matter.

However, of great interest to us here is not merely that we \*can\* link
these various deifics to the Indo-European Sky Father.

But rather, that these help us to understand the particular archaic
Facing of the Sky Father from whence these more recent expressions have
all clearly come.

That is to say, that we can go the other way – at least, ‘outward’ from
Him. And thus, via the cross-comparative analysis of these ‘Faces of the
Sky Father’ amidst these descendant Indo-European Peoples (and I mean
‘descendant’ here in several senses) – we can sketch out the likely
characteristics of the more specific \*Aspect\* or \*Form\* of the
Indo-European Sky Father that these are all ‘running off’ or perhaps
‘drawing from’.

**The Masques of the Sky Father  
**  
To speak more clearly about this – it is my belief that the appropriate
theological perspective for the archaic Indo-European religion does not
oversimplify Gods in the manner of saying that, say, “The Sky Father Is
(Just) The Sky Father”. But rather, has a focus out upon particular
‘Aspects’ of Gods in line with the relevant function or role – focusing
upon a portfolio-area of the deific, often operating under a
differentiated (or even different) Name so as to make additionally clear
for both ritual and mythological purposes just which competency of the
Deity is being called upon or otherwise engaged with. This is, perhaps,
quite a useful ‘safety mechanism’, helping to ‘regulate’ and provide
some measure of predictability to our attempted petitioning of the
Divine. After all, we may get quite a different response or form of
assistance if we are asking for aid from, say, the facing of the deity
oriented upon death and destruction rather than the facing of the deity
oriented upon life and growth. Although considering that Dionysus often
seems to accomplish death and destruction via making \*active use\* of
life and growth (c.f His turning of the wood of a ship He was held
captive upon to more living timber and snakes with consequent impacts
upon both morale and mortality of His would-be captors), perhaps that is
not an ideal example.

Some of the best conceptry for all of this is, of course, to be found
within The Vedas – wherein as applies the God Dyaus Pitar, hailed as
Rudra … the rituals are often \*quite careful\* to ask Rudra to instead
be ‘Shiva’ – the more ‘Benevolent’ facing – when we are asking for
something for ourselves (such as health) … and Rudra, the Roaring
Destroyer, when we are asking for something for our foes (such as the
removal of said health). We similarly have the situation of Vayu playing
the cognate role to Odin in the Creation of Man – wherein Vayu Odin
invests the ‘Breath of Life’ into man. Same Deity (and, it should be
noted, similar ‘Paternal’ consideration for us), but of course, Vayu is
‘focused in upon’ as a particular Facing of the Sky Father in order to
highlight the particular elemental association and empowerment made
utilization of in this Role.

Why I mention this, is because we have long known that there is just
such an ‘Aspect’ of the Sky Father Who is hailed for His bestowal of
another intrinsically Indo-European characteristic to His People.
Specifically, that quality of Furor (whether ‘Poeticus’ or ‘Teutonicus’
– and as I have argued, and have Vedic support to state, these are in
essence the same quality, just somewhat differently expressed) – known
to the Norse as ‘Odr’, and known to us of the Vedic sphere as ‘Ugra’ and
as ‘Manyu’ (and it is not at all coincidental that these two terms are
also Shaivite theonyms). This ‘bestowal’ may take place in a number of
conceptually resonant vectors – for example, via something correlated to
the ‘hot breath’, the ‘wind’ within us (and the underlying Indo-European
linguistic conceptry is rather close to ‘smoke’ as ‘anger’) – which
further links back to the aforementioned investment of the Breath of
Life via the Wind(Wanderer) Form of the Sky Father ; or it may take
place via the provision of an ‘altering’ elixir.

**The True Distillation Of The Indo-European Elixir – The Brew Which Is
True  
**  
This ‘altering elixir’ is known to the Old Norse as the Mead of Poetry ;
and to the Vedic religion as Soma; and it is interesting and important
to note just how closely correlated these two understandings actually
are – something I have demonstrated in my series upon the subject via
direct cross-comparison of the Eddic and Vedic accounts of their
obtaining. By which I mean both the ‘ritual’ production thereof (in the
case of the Soma) and the mythological presentation which also helps to
encode these. In these two cultures, we find the Sky Father in the form
of a Raptor bringing from Heaven the three vessels. Although it is
important to note that whereas the Vedic Soma is quite plausibly
explained via having some psychedelic psychoactive such as psilocybin as
its active ingredient (and we have archaeological support for this) –
the Norse appear to have more closely correlated their concept, perhaps
for cultural reasons, with that of an alcoholic beverage. Given the
strong concordance between the Nordic mythic account of the Meath of
Poetry’s obtaining and the Vedic ritual elements, which lead one to the
deduction that the Nordic myth is preserving the same ritual processes
as the Vedic manuals upon the subject … it is evident that if there is a
divergence between Vedic and Eddic elixirs – that somebody has deviated.
And I would posit that it is more likely the later and more
fragmentarily attested tradition that has done this, rather than the far
earlier and more comprehensively preserved one.

I raise these points, because as applies the figure of Dionysus, we of
course have the strong association with the alcoholic beverage – and the
state that this induces, which whilst it \*might\* be compared to the
Furor concept, strikes me as a rather different kind of altered state
indeed. That of drunkenness rather than the more ‘pure’ empowerment.

This helps to explicate just why the Scythians in Herodotus are so
appalled by their King becoming a Bacchic initiate – they do pointedly
express their horror at the spectacle of inebriation via alcohol; and
yet we know that they also had ‘ecstatic’ religious states and figures
of their own – including the imbibing of drug-infused consumables (and
it is interesting to note the co-occurrence of cannabis-milk amidst both
Scythian and modern-day Shaivite alike). Perhaps, therefore, they saw in
the Bacchic cult revelry something that was a dark and to their view,
‘degenerated’ reflection or recollection of their own rites and sacred
conduct. And, given the famed Scythian religious conservatism, perhaps
this is further evidence that the Greek and to an extent Nordic emphasis
upon alcohol instead of more authentic entheogenicsis the
‘deterioration’. Acts of substitution in some ways comparable to –
although actually the opposite of – the Zoroastrian substitution of
ephedra for the essential ingredient(s) of the Vedic Soma. I say
‘actually the opposite of’, because the utilization of ephedra seems to
be designed to promote the \*opposite\* of a wild and unconstrained
state – a deliberate choice presumably the result of the prominent
Zoroastrian opposition to such ‘wild’ and ‘free-moving’ elements. It is,
after all, not at all coincidental that two of the major demons of the
Zoroastrians are Indra and Rudra – the two ‘uncontrollable’ Gods Who
also have such close relationship with the Soma (and the Nasatyas – also
involved in Soma’s preparation, find similar status amidst their twisted
‘demonology’).

Importantly, this does NOT fully discount the possibility for continued
utilization of other, non-alcoholic preparations or ingestions for
‘interior’ cultic use – by Greeks or Norsemen. But that is another area
of inquiry for another time.

**Anger And Ex-Stasy– The Voice In The Wind – The Aesir-Asura Of The
Actors  
**  
To bring things back to our explication for the underlying Indo-European
typology of this Mask of the Sky Father – it is evident that there is
strong association with the notion of what Jung called ‘Ergreiffen’ :
the quality of being ‘Seized’. And this presumably also helps to
explicate the linkage of various of these Deific expressions with the
roles of Actors and playwrights, poets. Not only due to the provision of
the Inspiration for the writers of these dramas, or even due to the
furious dancing to accompany them, or the perception of the amazing
beauty unlocked via these altered states of mind that we then seek to
reproduce via culturo-artistic production. But the very act of Acting
itself – speaking with the voice of another, donning a mask (the latter
of which was quite literal in both Ancient Greek drama and the
traditional Hindu dramatic arts), assuming a role, becoming somebody
else.

This is partially what we would think of with reference to the Furor
state, of course – the Berserk warrior that is ‘not himself’ but has
become ‘something else’, perhaps even transforming into a wild animal
(or, at least, thinking himself to do so as part of drawing from its
power and competencies). This is also partially what we think of when we
are speaking about several of these Deific expressions as being
‘transgressive’ or enabling ‘transgression’ to happen for one of Their
initiates … wherein a particular persona is put on that enables
operating according to a different morality than would otherwise be the
case – particularly acting like a wild-man from the barbarian fringes
rather than a civilized and well-to-do upstanding member of society
(although with the attendant risk that, to reference Kurt Vonnegut’s
remark that “we are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful about
what we pretend to be”, we may become somewhat ‘trapped’ in this mask,
this role, never to truly come ‘home’ to our more ‘domesticated’
selves).

Yet what I am actually referring to is the facility wherein something
‘becomes’ us. Something attested in the underlying sense to the Latin
‘Vates’ (‘Seer’) and its corresponding Vedic conceptry – wherein a Rsi
may speak with the Voice of the Divine, and the Brahmins of various
rites ‘become’ the Gods in question. Because They are speaking through
us. Directing our words and conduct. Performing a ‘play’ in some ways –
a narrative re-enactment; moving us with Their force and ‘Manyu’
\[‘Spirit’/’Zeal’/’Passion’\].

**A Hunter Of Souls**

It is no coincidence that Odysseus, Dionysus , Rudra-Shiva – all go
Wandering about in disguises. Communicating with us not only \*through\*
us – but also in direct interactions in human-appearing facing, from
time to time, as well. (Something also, and entirely uncoincidentally,
undertaken by Zeus and Hermes – as well as Athena, Who is parallel in a
great swathe of these capacities – and, in a symbolic sense, Hades with
His Helm of Shrouding)

The Wandering, too, is integral. For while the more ‘conventional’ or
‘orthodox’ form of the Sky Father is at the center, both of society and
of the cosmos (and there, in a sense, I repeat myself) – \*this\* form
of the Sky Father is the opposite. We are never \*quite\* sure where He
may be … until He is standing right in front of us (and even then …).
This also connotes the ‘uncontrolled’ and ‘unconstrained’ nature of Him
– and the quality imparted by Him to the devotee. Hence also, in part,
the consistent associations with the wild, the wilderness – as source of
power and quality imbued.

This may further recollect the archaic Indo-European Past – not least
because we so frequently find this Form of the Sky Father depicted as a
mounted spear-wielder. Perhaps in a manner such as the Scythian
Idanthyrsus – as certainly, the famed ‘antlers’ of Scythian horse
adornment may explain why various of the relevant Vedic figures are
mounted upon antlered steeds; and appear to act against their Foes as if
they were hunting animals for sport \[as, again, Idanthyrsus et co do
directly towards Darius – symbolically telling the Persians thus in the
course of their confrontation, as I covered in “A Message Even A Persian
Could Understand”\].

The ‘Hunting’ element is also, as we have previously seen, reasonably
consistent amidst the relevant deific and other mythic expressions of
the figure – although of interest to us is that in a way, it is the
‘inversion’ of the more usually expected typology of the huntsman. That
is to say: rather than the civilized human figure stalking wild animals
– it is the Spirit of the Wild Who hunts and pursues the civilized man.
Potentially either directly or symbolically reducing the latter down to
the status of a prey-animal in the process. And thus further helping to
explicate the conceptual reasoning for the Tiger(-skin) and
Leopard(-skin, and vahana – mount) of Shiva and Dionysus – the animals
who are growling apex predators of their respective spheres. And a
worthwhile reminder to Man that there are far greater, more powerful
figures and forces out there in Nature than we might otherwise imagine
in an ostensibly anthropocentric cosmos. Greater than Man, specifically,
and civilized Man in specia.

The Wild Hunt, too, links in to this – wherein the Spirits of the
Greatest Dead, the Storm Spirits, pursue certain among the living. I
have previously argued that the generalized spectrum of the Wild Hunt
phenomenon – including the Einherjar of Odin and the BhutaGana etc. of
Lord Shiva – represent a sort of ‘living memory’ of the Ancestors; hence
why, in connective conjunction with the (Proto-)Indo-European Past, we
find these figures riding through the sky in accompaniment of the God
Who Is Their Sire (in multiple senses of the term). It is not hard to
see how the Scythians fit so strongly into this – as the actual living
remnants of the ancestral way in antiquity; and creatures of half-manic
myth made manifest to all.

The Wild Creatures (and Men), the Ghosts of Those Who Have Gone Before,
the Storm-wreathed Sky-Spirits … these all represent the forces and the
foci of the Sky Father’s Power – That Which Is Called Down, and Called
Upon, via His Chosen; and which is also innate within the Descendents of
Him just as they accompany Him in warlike processional across the
Cosmos. Indeed, it is not just that the Power is to be found borne by
His Descendents – the Descendents in literally veer-y real sense \*are\*
the Power also, as well.

**The Wild Sky & Wheel Of Life**

In addition to the Wild – the place beyond the fringes of civilized
thought and perceptible conceptual space brought under man’s scientific
dominion of rationality – these other two axials also stand for the
Domain, the Dominion, the Realm of the Sky Father: the Place of the
Glorious/Ancestral Dead , and the High Heaven Above The Clouds – The
Storm’s Energies’ Ultimate Source. And it is interesting to note that in
the oldest texts available to us – the RigVeda – we find that the twin
locations are almost one and the same. Paramevyoman is Highest Heaven,
above even the Leaping Lightning’s Arka of Descent. Valhalla maintains
its Uppland situation, as does Gimle. We find these recalled in the
mythic conceptry of Dionysus – wherein Dionysus is not only
co-identified with Hades, but prominently hailed as performing
successful ‘Katabasis’ venturing even ‘down’ to the Underworld and Back;
as well as Dionysus depicted Enthroned and Thunder-Wielding along with
the Scepter of Olympus. Shiva, meanwhile, is not only upon Kailash – but
also regarded as to be found amidst the Cremation Grounds : the place
wherein one migrates \*from\* the mortal realm, to the post-mortem next
placing. In common with Odin presiding over Valkyries bringing worthy
souls back to Valhalla – this evinces a more ‘active’ role presiding
over and tracing via footfall and hoofbeat the ‘conduit’ betwixt and
between Afterlife and Currently-Living.

In this way, perhaps, we may potentially seek to explicate the
underlying conceptry for the ‘dual’ symbolism of Dionysus as both ‘young
man’ and ‘old’; a feature found in several other of the expressions of
this same deific. What it refers to is the heading for the ‘liminal
spaces’ between non-living and the active life of an adult – the Youth,
wherein one is ‘coming toward’, and the Aged, wherein one is ‘going
away’. Perhaps there is some hint of the ‘reincarnation’ belief found in
many Indo-European metaphysical schemas (including, after a sort, the
Norse – and in some forms also the Greek) – that the Young figure is
expressive of the ‘Coming Back Around’ of He Who Was (and yet still is)
Old, Death, Dying, Dead.

Or perhaps it provides active coterminous expression to the evident
portfolio of the God as the Grower , the Bestower of Life. Someting we
see also in the frequent ‘green shoots’ and other such
vegetable-relevant subject-matter (and the MahaMrityunjaya Mantra of
Lord Shiva brings together these various skeins) associated to Him.
Although often given far ‘darker’ expression than a more peacable God of
Gourds may perhaps be imagined as.

After all, the consistent element to both Dionysus causing certain woods
of a ship to grow and transform – to come alive , and the Bestower of
the Furor (whether Dionysus, Odin, or Rudra) investing such quality
within a man … is that we are seeing the ‘quality’ or ‘qualities’ of
Life taken up beyond what is conventional. To a heightened state which
can be quite actively and quite deliberately Terrifying. Too much of
this ‘life force’ for a man to handle may bring about his impending
death – as well as that of those others caught around him who may so
happen to share in his unctuous crime.

But whether it is Manyu / Odr in relation to ‘Spirit’ – or the growth
and life of plants and animals – or even the essence of the empowering
elixir \[and it is worth noting that ‘Amrit’ can quite literally be
translated as ‘Life’ – ‘Opposite-to-Death’\] : what is seen here is the
power and the potency to invest Life. Something which we find also
expressed in the relevant RigVedic hymnals where such investiture is
correlate with the Rainfall and the Lightning.

**He Gave Us His Word – The Roaringly Resonant Speech of Cosmic Order
Acted Out Upon The World-Stage  
**  
Yet to Speak again to the Storm – it is this act of Speaking , precisely
in the powerful potency of the Storm’s Fury , that is truly essential to
what this Aspect of the Storm Father is about. We see this attested in
the relevant theonymics – Bromios of Dionysus , Rudra of Dyaus Pitar ,
any of quite an array of ‘Roarer’ relevant descriptive terms for Odin;
and, of course, quite few other instances as well for both the Greek
and the Hindu conceptry. My favourite expression within the realms of
the Hindu theology – Vacam Garjit Lakshanam – has similar underpinnings:
Thunder with the Characteristics of the Divine Speech.

Why does this matter? Because Words are Power – even when, as with the
other underpinning meaning of Vacam Garjit Lakshanam, we are not quite
sure what these Words may so happen to be saying. It is through Words
that the world around us is changed – indeed, in certain perspectives
upon the cosmogenesis of the Indo-Europeans, is brought into being in
the first place. First, there is Thunder – the Roaring which is only
later shaped into Words intelligible to others – and then there is the
World. And then \*within\* the Realms of the World(s), we find this
Facing of the Sky Father going forth amidst His People, in disguise,
guiding them via His Roaring, Radiant Voice. Or ‘Speaking Through’ the
senses of the Poet or the Priest or the Performer (but, then, I repeat
myself thricely) and acting through us more indirectly.

Now these Words are, of course, Law – and yet they are also Lore. Hence
the further poetical and dramateurgic association: for it is the Stories
and the Heritage, the Culture that He also both Brings and Embodies.
And, in a manner visible most clearly with the excellent Hindu conceptry
of the Universe unfolding as Drama, we see His ability to move through
the story as both a part of it and yet in many ways its master.

This also matters due to the complicated relationship of this Great God
to the concept of Law in the first place. I have expounded upon this in
far grander depth in the ‘Of Bhairava And Balance’ series – but the long
and the short of it is that this is a deity that is running upon the
Deep Law … and therefore may \*appear\* upon the surface to be anarchic,
anti-order, and not concerned about law at all. Human law, that is – the
ultimately insubstantial niceties of ‘polite society’ being amongst the
first to go. Hence why we find such reverent mention for the Avadhuta
sorts who figuratively “shake things up” \[that is also the underpinning
to their name\] by disregarding pedestrian propriety in favour of
pushing forward towards the deeper principle and greater education
through shock-value.

As I have said – this does not and cannot mean that the Sky Father is in
this aspect ‘anti-Law’; only that the seemingly “transgressive” modus
operandi of this ‘facing of the Sky Father’ is more direct in adherence
to the Deeper Law , the True Law , of the Cosmos and of Creation – and
therefore may do what is necessary even if it might violate the more
peripheral manifestations thereof in the process. So, as we explored in
“Of Bhairava And Balance”, the example of Bhairava carrying out an act
of (necessary) Brahmanicide is treated as a sin, yes, but a peripheral
one … carried out in deep adherence to the \*underlying principle\* of
the Law; and therefore a transgression on one level yet a congruence
upon the other, more vital one. That does not mean that the act in
question is entirely without detrimental consequence to its inceptor,
however – only that this form of the Deity, and this form almost alone,
has the ‘freedom of movement’ to do what must be done. In a manner that
is not reliant upon the approval and conceptual validation of what is
held to be surface-level ‘right’ for a more ordinary figure. What
appears to be ‘chaos’, in other words, is not Capital C Chaos. Rather,
it is merely (in both of the PIE senses of ‘mer’) another, deeper and
more fundamental manifestation of Order – which does not care so much if
it might happen to be mistaken by less-perceptive passive observers in
the act of its commissioning.

This, too, is part of the underpinning conceptry to the accompaniment of
this Face of the Sky Father by groupings described as ‘criminals’. Apart
from noting that there is a necessary overlap of concept between
‘criminals’ and horse-mounted Steppe raiders (as if you are being raided
by them, then ‘brigands’ certainly seems about right) – what we are
being shown here is, again, the tangible manifestation of forces that
are \*above and beyond\* human law. And yet are not above and beyond
Divine Law – for they are amidst the Retinue of the God.

Therefore, in a similar manner to the other phenomena which might be
associated with Him – to attempt to force a conforming of Him to our
petty human perceptions of what is, what ought, and what should be … is
like endeavouring to impeach the morality of a thunderstorm. The Storm
is beyond such things. It just Is. Although as this particular Storm is
also a Being – it is possible that Terry Pratchett’s excellent aphorism
about Prayer as a sophisticated way of pleading with thunderstorms is
doubly relevant here. For sometimes – the Thunderstorm does indeed
listen.

Best ensure that the invocation is proper and pious, then – and
recollect well the utter lack of wisdom implied in actively defaming to
His Face , a Figure capable of lashing forth with Tongue of Lightning in
electrifying eloquent response.  
**  
The Heaven-Haired Storm-Brow**

There are two final areas upon which we shall briefly focus our
attention before moving to our concluding remarks.

The first of these concerns His Hair. And I am entirely unlikely to
better my earlier exposition of the concept, so I shall simply quote it
here:

“Entirely uncoincidentally, we find Dionysus and Hades coterminous in
the Greek iconography upon the point of Their “Kyanokhaitis”
\[interestingly also hailed as a characteristic of Poseidon\] – the
‘Dark’ (Blue-Black) ‘Flowing/Wild’ Hair, often depicted in long locks;
and fundamentally resonant with an identifying characteristic of both
Rudra-Shiva and also various of His Holy Men: The Jatta-Hair of the
Ascetic; or, as applies Rudra Himself, the ‘Braided Hair’ spoken of in
the Vedas. This is depicted in quite the ‘wild’ fashion – whirling
around with the motion of His Dance, billowing up with crackling power,
and with the strands thereof seeming to rear and twist like serpents.
Dionysus with Serpent Hair or Garlanded with Serpents is most definitely
a Classical visualization of the God – occuring prominently in a number
of sources.”

The significance of this is immediately apparent – representing much the
same above the water as Poseidon’s form of the descriptor signifies
within it : indeed, \*as\* it. The long flowing locks of the Sky Father
in this visage represent the atmosphere itself – and more especially,
the currents of the wind, particularly when it is roiling in storm-form
so as to congeal as the dark and electricity-wreathing tendrils of
thundercloud. This meaning can be attested not only through the
transposition of the symbolism of Poseidon’s more blue form of the
emblem (although it should also be noted that Blue-Black is the colour
also of Death – ‘corpse-black’ or ‘bruise-black’ we should say in the
Old Norse especially) from the Sea to the Sky (and it must be ever
remembered that for the archaic Indo-European world-view, the two were
functionally quite the same – blending between as liminal zones abuttng
the land and the world(s) entire; hence the ability to ‘sail’ to the
High Heaven, for instance, or The Waters as liminal sphere about
Creation). But also through the direct preservation in the Hindu
tradition of such meaning for the Hair of Lord Shiva – wherein this
stands for the Wind, particularly about the upper atmosphere; hence the
hailing also of this as Vyomakesha as ‘The Heaven-Haired’, ‘Sky-Hair’.
Although it should be noted that the ‘Jatta’ hair is also the ‘matted
hair of the ascetic’, and further reinforces not only the ‘wildness’ of
Winds – but also the ‘wild men’ association of the Great God.
Particularly due to the prominence of this feature amidst His holy-men
even today amidst the Mountains and Forests of India and Nepal.

It is interesting to note that even, perhaps especially here, we find
the trinity of ‘creation’, ‘destruction’, and ‘simply that which is’.
For Shiva’s Hair as Wind is correlated with the Breath of Life (a
feature also found in the Nordic characterization of the creation of Man
– wherein it is Odin Who imparts this quite literally vital element unto
us) ; yet in its roiling force and fury is comparable to the mightiest
thunderstorm. And is also responsible for the preservation of the
Universe Entire via receiving the flow of the Ganga of the Heavens – the
Heavenly Torrent – and thence distributing / dispersing these Waters so
that They do not bore down and through the fabric of the cosmos entire.

This is incredibly interesting for our purposes, as apart from noting
the potential correlate between this and the Metis that is in Zeus’s
head in more ways than one in the Greek mythology (and at some point I
mean to write up in grander detail just how this is a parallel of
sorts), the Celestial River in the Hindu conception is the Milky Way.
Otherwise known as the Path of Aryaman, Irmin’s Road. And links also
more specifically to the ‘River’ constellation which flows to the Head
of Orion ‘midst the Stars. What are the commonalities here? A ‘River’ or
other traversable space, flowing through the Heavens, along which not
only the Wandering God may Walk – but which also inform the trajectory
of the Souls of the Dead en route to His High Heaven Realm.

**Orion Stalks Among The Stars – The Death & Resurrection Show Of
ShulaPani  
**  
The figure of Orion, too, is incredibly relevant here. Orion, after all,
is the Great(est) Huntsman, dog-accompanied, bow-wielding, ‘Earth-Born’,
and sexually linked to the Pleiades (consider Agni-Shiva’s employ of the
Krittika Stars – the Pleiades – to give birth to Lord Skanda : a
situation paralleled in Odin’s Son Heimdall’s multiple Mothers). With a
name that is etymologically either that of ‘Mountain’ or ‘Rainfall’
(‘Oros’ vs ‘Ouron’, although I suspect that rather than ‘Urine’, it is
‘Uranian’ – the PIE for both Ouron and Ouranos being the same ‘Hwers’
meaning flowing water; and therefore explaining Orion’s Poseidon-given
ability to Walk On Water as being to Wander amidst the Stars, the Sea of
Sky; an interpretation seemingly confirmed via Servius’ statement of
Orion managing to \*walk\* to the realm of the Stars); and one mythic
genesis effectively that of expressions of Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades
within the skin of a Bull \[other recountings have Zeus or Poseidon as
Father to Orion – but, then, I repeat myself … and as we have seen with
Dionysus, the terms for a paternal relationship occasionally appear more
to mean ‘facing’ that has become occluded with the traversing of
antiquated memory\].

And, importantly for our purposes, is not only a master of the
wilderness … but is also linked in partnership to a certain furious
female deific, Who is responsible for His Death. Although in some
tellings, the figure of Asclepius (correlate in important ways with a
Vedic sage learned in the secrets of Soma, as we have previously
discussed), endeavours to bring Him back to life. In other versions,
Asclepius’ intervention is to restore \*Sight\* to Orion – although this
detail, too, is mutable; and instead it is Helios that brings back
Orion’s capacity for vision. The Sun, you might say, comes to represent
the Sight Power of Orion – what we should expect for a Sky Father
deific. And perhaps, given the situation which leads to Orion’s
blindness, something with some degree of conceptual resonancy in the
Hindu myth of Parvati blocking Lord Shiva’s Sight and thus the Light of
the Sun going out.

But it is the relevant deific complex that I have just mentioned – that
of Parvati – wherein the final major point to be made in this
comparative theology is to be found. For what we see in the Death of
Orion is two Goddess names cited – that of Artemis, and that of Gaia.
Artemis, the similarly Wild Huntress, a seemingly uniquely similar
figure in preferred environs and pursuits to Orion, also a bestower of
‘Madness’ to men (which might, just as with Dionysus, actually portend
their doom), and possessed of a most powerful Fury. The parallels to
various forms of Devi – including, as it happens, the sororital
relationship of the Huntress Bhadra to Shaani (in this instance, linked
to Apollo); and, of course, viz. Bhadra-Kali, to the situation wherein
the enraged form of the Earth Mother Goddess brings about the
(thankfully temporary) Death of the Sky Father, Shiva Rudra Dyaus –
followed by Her Remorse for the situation and a restoration to life..

We have certainly already discussed at length in the previous article
the relationship of Cybele to Dionysus (with Cybele hailed in primary
source materials as Rhea – the Earth Mother) – and I have directly
addressed the irreducibly strong coterminity between Cybele and Durga
Parvati in my previous work. The notion of an enraged Gaia and/or
Artemis bringing about Orion’s demise … potentially on a temporary basis
… has parallels not only with the situation of Parvati Durga Kali with
Shiva \[not least due to the Huntress form She takes in direct parallel
to Him as a Kirata, a Hunter\] – but also with the situation of the
males linked to Cybele: Attis and Dionysus. In the former case, as I
previously observed, we have the situation of a Death and Resurrection
carried out via the intervention of a Tree and this Earth Mother. In the
latter, we have Dionysus as Zagreus being killed and further injured by
the actions of a furious Hera – and then brought back from this point
via the positive attentions of Rhea Cybele .

It is not hard to follow this story once we are acquainted with the
Hindu account. The Sky Father is in an occasionally somewhat fractious
relationship with the Earth Mother. This leads to the Death of the Sky
Father (or an expression, a facing, an Aspect thereof) – followed by the
Earth Mother in a different mood working to set things back to rights
via the resurrection of this Sky Father figure.

And as applies Orion – the ‘resurrection’ (other than that briefly
mentioned involving Asclepius in the work of Telesarchus) is achieved
via Orion’s elevation to the Heavens … in the form of the much-familiar
and most recognizable constellation of the Night Sky. That we may never
forget Him. An act which is impelled via the grief and remorse of
Artemis and/or Leto \[‘Leto’, as we have seen during the course of the
Radiant Queen of the Heavens series, being potentially linguistically
cognate and certainly somewhat mythically cognate with ‘Wife’ for
Zeus\].

**Concluding Remarks – The Singers Change .. Only The Song Remains  
**  
The figure of Dionysus is, understandably, a significantly complex as
well as a complexly significant one – even before we begin to apply the
frameworks of Indo-European comparative analysis to Him. It is one thing
to endeavour to attempt to trace the various skeins linking this or that
Greek mythoscriptural account to othertexts – whether also Greek /
Classical, or those of the broader Indo-European World. It is almost
quite another to seek to make sense of all of these, as best we can, and
chart out what the actual underlying meanings of these things are. We
might perhaps term this another instance of our Forensic Theology (a
term I had coined for the style of effort necessary to ‘reconstruct’ the
Myth and the Meaning for the archaic Indo-European account underpinning
that of the various Progenitor Twins expressions – Romulus & Remus, Manu
& Yama, etc.) .

Although in this particular case, it is less an examination of Who
Killed Whom (although it is also, I suppose, that in part) – as it is
the ‘Unmasking’ of a God of Masks. Indeed, it is the surprisingly
unsurprising revelation that said God – directly hailed as the God Going
In Disguise in various sources across the Indo-European sphere – in fact
\*has\* these Masques, and that several otherwise rather prominent
figures from a given mythology are effectively a case of this God
donning different Masks. Or, perhaps, are cases of the humans down here
in the audience – the ‘Groundlings’ to use some remarkably apt
Shakespearean terminology (and ‘Spear-Shaker’ is \*also\* a
not-infrequently encountered theonym of the God in question) – making
mistakes as to perception or recollection, transmission or
transcription. And thus assigning a functional relationship between God
and Aspect to that of the paternity between God and Son. Or other, even
more exotic or outright internally contradictory semi-competing
attempted expositions by the Ancients for things that were more Ancient
than them still.

It is fitting, then, that the path of my words’ write-wandering brought
us towards Orion as we arcened towards our terminus. For what we see
there is almost exactly what we have been hunting with all along. A
fragmentary figure wherein significant and sustained effort is
necessitated in order to begin to piece back together how the underlying
Indo-European mythic typology in question is invoked. And yet … where
such effort is almost unnecessary, in its own way, because the Stars
Themselves are effectively unchanging.

The same ones, known by the same name, shine down upon us now as they
did in the days of Hesiod – some nearly three thousand years before. And
just as in Hesiod’s day, we know that the figure in question is the
Bringer of Storms, Wild, Powerful, an Archer (or, perhaps, Spearman) – a
Huntsman beyond human compare, Canine-accompanied – Wandering amidst the
Heavens, tracing the not-quite-Trackless Paths cross the Sea of Stars
that only He Knows; Watching and Influencing us down here upon this
Earth.

And I say that it is the Stars Themselves that are \*effectively\*
unchanging – for that is unquestionably true (Supernovae etc. excepted).
At least from our perspective. Which is what \*actually\* changes – the
\*perspective\*, the more direct symbolic associations \*we\* project up
to upon Them.

As Terry Pratchett put it in The Last Hero:

“‘In the olden days,’ she said, ‘when a hero had been really heroic, the
gods would put them up in the stars.’  
THE HEAVENS CHANGE, said Death. WHAT TODAY LOOKS LIKE A MIGHTY HUNTER
MAY LOOK LIKE A TEACUP IN A HUNDRED YEARS’ TIME.  
‘That doesn’t seem fair.’  
NO ONE EVER SAID IT HAD TO BE. BUT THERE ARE OTHER STARS.”

So it is with our Sky Father Deific.

Just as some Stars may have changed Name or place within the realm of
Myth from our point of view – so, too, have some Facings of the Sky
Father come a little bit more ‘disguised’ than others. And the blessed
Illumination sent to us from Above, which takes thousands of years to
get here, may now perhaps be thought of differently.

Yet when we project ourselves back in time , trace the trajectories via
whence this image of a ‘shining one’ has came , what we find is
ourselves back at the starting-point. Before things went off in all
directions.

We find ourselves, in other words, ‘Home’.

Hail to the Indo-European Sky Father :

Long May He Reign
