+++
title = "Skanda , Heimdall , Kumara – The Star-Borne Son Of The Skyxa0Father"
date = "October 21, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/122178766_10164290067375574_8486192274250109322_n.jpg?w=701)

A brief Indo-European observation inspired by the SkandaMata Night of
NavRatri –

Skanda, the War God Son of Shiva, has Six Heads. This is due to the
rather unique manner of His Birth – wherein the embryonic Skanda is
transplanted to six mothers via Agni, the Krittika Stars (we would know
these in the West as the Pleiades). Skanda is therefore birthed by Six
Mothers, and iconographically depicted with the corresponding number of
heads.

Now, in a way this carries forward the tale of the warlike Son of Agni –
Who is similarly born to a complex caelestial parentage,following His
Father’s attempts to seduce the Seven Wives of the SaptaRishis , the
Seven Seers of the Vedas … these wives also being identified with the
Pleiades. Svaha attempts to take on the forms of each of the Seven Stars
in a bid to seduce Agni – although interestingly is only successfully
able to become Six out of the full Seven. In a further parallel, Svaha
does not ultimately give birth to Kumara in various versions of the myth
– the Pleiades having to step in for a combined effort to rear the
mighty God.

But wait – why is there Six in the Puranic era myth, Seven in the older
Vedic reference? Well, as it happens, there were originally Seven
Pleiades shining in our sky – but at some point in either the early 1st
or late 2nd millennium B.C., one of these stars dimmed sufficiently as
to fade from easy view. We find this referenced in the Greek mythology ,
wherein a narrative is concocted to explicate this transition involving
one Star ‘going out’ due to becoming mortal or going to the Underworld.
\[This may also help to explicate why Svaha is only able to take the
form of *six* rather than the full *seven* of the SaptaRishis’ Wives
during Her seduction of Lord Agni\]

So, Seven and Six are exactly the coterminity we should expect for the
same figure being talked about at different points in our history –
different vantage-points upon the same Constellation and corresponding
Mythic Figures.

And to briefly speak further about the Pleiades in Greek reckoning – it
is utterly uncoincidental that we find these Star-Maidens romantically
linked to Sky Father figures. Zeus and Poseidon being the two of
particular prominency – although Orion, too, (lustily) pursues all
Seven/Six, across the Night Sky even to this day.

So, as we can see, there is quite clearly an archaic underlying
Indo-European belief in the Sky Father engaging with the Seven (later
Six) Stars of the Pleiades in order to produce a mighty Son. \[One of
these, in particular, being Zeus and Maia – not *necessarily* to be
confused with the Vedic Maya – producing Hermes\]

All of which brings us to the Nordic figure of Heimdall. Wherein He,
too, has Multiple Mothers – although in this case, Nine rather than
Seven or Six. And yet, that is no obstacle. For not only is the
paternity the same (Shiva is Odin , Agni is Shiva ; both Shiva and Odin
are Dyaus Pitar – the Indo-European Sky Father, otherwise known
variously as Zeus Pater, Poseidon, Orion, etc.) – but there are an array
of iconographic and mythological coterminities also between Heimdall and
Skanda that I have detailed in my work elsewhere.

There is also a remarkable ‘pattern’ of a 7 => 9 shift that frequently
occurs within the transition between the Vedic and the Eddic
mythologies. Seen, for example, in the Seven Worlds in later Vedic
cosmology and the Nine Worlds in the Nordic. Which would appear to
strongly suggest that the Seven Pleiades (later Six) acting as
somewhat-surrogate Mothers for this magnificent Son of the Sky Father –
should correlate with the Nine Mothers of Heimdall. This is particularly
the case given the rather specific location given for these Nine Mothers
– at the Edge of the World.

Exactly where we should expect, in other words, Stars to be found – not
least due to the repeated Greek citations for the Pleiades in this
location, diving beneath the rim of the Oceanus , the river, the waters,
which encircle our world.

So – there you have it. The mythology around Devi Durga as Skandamata
preserves and carries forward what is clearly an archaic Indo-European
concept. Wherein the Sky Father has a Son borne by multiple, celestial
Mothers.
