+++
title = "ON THE INDO-EUROPEAN TYPOLOGY OF IOLAUS – THIRD DRAGONSLAYERxa0 Part Three – Academics And Anaryas : The Wrongful Reconstruction Of Thexa0Myth"
date = "October 15, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/cpr9vfpwgauvh3c.jpg?w=1024)

Amongst the Zoroastrians, the dragon-slayer is known as Fereydun, or
more archaically as Thraetaona. Who is, curiously, the *son* of the
Zoroastrian figure of Tritas / Thrita. Now, for the Zoroastrians, there
is no Indra – except in their lists of demons. As is well known, when
they began their heresy against the previously prevalent Indo-Iranian
religious orthodoxy, they sought to cast down The Gods and declare the
Devas to be malefic demons, so as to exalt their own belief in Their
righteous place. So, it should come as no surprise that the act of
dragon-slaying is more cleanly ascribed to this Fereydun. Although it is
interesting indeed that the Zoroastrian ‘sanitized version’ of Indra –
Verethragna – despite having a name that is a direct derivative of the
Vritrahan epithet we encounter in relation to Indra in the Vedic
religion … does not carry out an act of dragon-slaying. Evidently,
Verethragna was ‘(re-)introduced’ to the officially sanctioned
Zoroastrian mythology after Thraetona (himself ‘safely’ distanced from
the old mythology by being the *son* of Third, rather than Third
Himself) had already taken over the combined ‘Dragon-Slaying’ we would
perhaps separately think of viz. Vritra and Trisiras; yet which, as we
have already seen, appears to have been combined by the Greeks when
dealing with the Hydra. \[technically, there are at least a few other
‘resonant’ occurrences within the Greek mythology which seem to match
the Trisiras conceptry rather well – the slaying of Geryon, and the
later slaying of Cacus; but more upon those, perhaps, some other time).

The reason why I bring up the Zoroastrian account, is because it is
occasionally argued by various academics that as there is such a
concordance between the two major Indo-Iranian religions about this
figure of ‘Third’ (or, at least, Third’s son) carrying out the
dragon-slaying … that this means that Indra is a later interpolation
into the tale – and therefore, in the more extreme versions of this
theory, is a non-Indo-European deity all up, perhaps from the BMAC
(Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex).

And I suppose that if one were to consider only the Vedic and
Zoroastrian mythologies, and see that the only constant as applies the
dragon-slaying is that it features the ‘Third’ figure and the Dragon,
that it might perhaps make some sense to suggest that the original myth
must only have *had* these two – with the direct involvement of the
Striker/Thunderer being the later innovation, which eclipsed the more
archaic ‘Third’.

Except evidently, that is not the case – and can only be arrived at via
a misunderstanding, a misinterpretation of the Indo-Iranian evidence …
and is rendered further implausible via the Greek expressions of the
same mytheme that we have just countenanced. The original Indo-Iranian
form of the myth must have had the Striker/Thunderer involved – for that
is the broad, pan-Indo-European typology. The Zoroastrian version must
have *removed* said Striker/Thunderer – for this is Who we find reduced
to the status of a demon (alongside Rudra, and the Nasatya Horse-Twins,
etc.) in their twisted reflection of our mythology. The presence of
*both* the Striker/Thunderer *and* the ‘Third’ man is confirmed via the
integral role played by Iolaus in the Hydra-Slaying of Herakles – which
directly matches the features we find in the Vedic rendition of the
tale.

Once again, a comparative approach establishes that the Vedic canon is
the most comprehensive and accurate account – and that the attempts to
‘de-Indo-European-ize’ elements of its contents, its Pantheon, are
‘bright ideas’ looking for some spine to shiver up. And not Dadhichi’s.

However, there is one further element that must be noted here – and it
is really quite fascinating.
