+++
title = "Shaivite Coin Of Kushanshah  Peroz II – A Hindu God In Hindu Garb – Arte-Factsxa0#9"
date = "October 24, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/122244012_10164298342990574_4973903683768444652_o.jpg?w=1024)

Every so often, we happen across an artefact that seems to demand its
own commentary-piece – both because of its sheer visual or historic
impressiveness, yet also because it illustrates something … indeed
several somethings … quite important for our ongoing work.

This fine coin of Peroz II, the King of the Kushano-Sasanians, is just
such a thing.

Depicted upon it we have, of course, the Kushanshah himself on the
left-hand facing … and the enigmatic Kushan deity Oesho upon the right.
As you can see, there is a clear and deliberately direct effort to
synchronize the imagery of the two figures. They stand similarly, They
are equipped similarly. And in terms of cosmological role, They are to
be similarly regarded – As Above, So Below.

Except there are some important differences, too – and certain of these
help to ‘link’ the Below with the Above as the active acts of
empowerment which make the resonancy more than merely imitative and
iconographic.

But first, let us briefly consider just Who this Oesho (the deity
depicted upon the right) actually is.

Many would tell you that Oesho represents a continuation of the broadly
pen-Indo-Iranian figure of Vayu \[‘Wind’\] – specifically, the
Zoroastrian recollection of the deity. This is not entirely inaccurate,
although it is significantly incomplete. For what is actually intended
via the iconography of Oesho is abundantly, instantly clear to any Hindu
ancient or modern.

ShulaPani we should call Him – the God Who Wields The Spear.
Vrishabhadhvaja – the One Who Has The Bull As His Emblem. And this is
further supported via the strongly concordant plausibility of what we
would know as ‘Ishvara’ (‘God-Emperor’, as I translate it) and ‘Oesho’
in both linguistic and in mythic terms.

Except if all of this is so abundantly apparent – why is it of interest,
why is it even the least controversial?

Well, because there is this persistent belief that the Kushans and their
immediate successors were Zoroastrians. And to be fair and sure, in the
general semi-syncretic soup of Central Asia about the period …
Zoroastrian elements did have a place. Although often, it would seem, as
mere ‘window-dressing’ or ‘surface-expression’ for fundamentally deepa
Indo-Iranian concepts which might have severely rubbed the actual
orthodox Zoroastrians *decidedly* the wrong way.

A certain well-regarded scholar has proffered the conceptualization as
being that of Iranian, Zoroastrian deities in Hindu garb. We think (and
I am indebted to my colleague Aldo Rapace for his assistance in this
matter) that it is precisely the other way around – that what we tend to
see here are Indo-Iranian, Indo-European, Hindu deities with occasional
Zoroastrian taste in haberdashery.

Thus it is here. Wherein a deity that was quite literally demonized to
the extreme by the Zoroastrians of yesteryear – Lord Shiva – is taking
front and center stage as Royal Patron, indeed as Pati (‘Lord’) of the
Cosmos all up.

There is some loose skein of support for Vayu in such a role in the
Zoroastrian theology – wherein Vayu, Who could not be suppressed as
easily as the other facing of the same deity, Rudra, was preserved as a
figure of such potency that even Ahura Mazda was depicted praying to Him
for empowerment … yet Who also was shown as something of a patron to
Zahhak. Yet it is not Vayu that is customarily depicted armed with the
Three-Spear \[‘Trishula\], accompanied by the Bull, or any of the rest
of it.

And, as I say, with Vayu as a well-known ‘facing’ of the same deity that
is Shiva in the Hindu theological understanding – if we insist upon
holding to a Zoroastrian origination for the Vayu that is Oesho , then
the only way we can view this is an organic ‘reconstruction’ .. indeed
an outright ‘restoration’ occurrent out there upon the edge of the
Steppes. Where the Zoroastrian God and Zoroastrian Demonized Figure, are
brought back together as One. Something which seems so sufficiently
unlikely that it is far simpler and more elegant to just take things as
they directly appear – Vayu-Rudra-Shiva , the Hindu and Indo-Iranian
orthodoxy, with perhaps some tangential reinforcement from those
already-cognate Zoroastrian elements with which He was already
fundamentally in agreeance.

But let us move on to the actual coin itself, and the visual signifiers
depicted thereupon.

Probably the most interesting element, for our purposes, concerns the
major distinction between Peroz II and Oesho – for despite all the
deliberate care to depict these two as coterminous, there is just such a
dysjunction that more truly establishes the connexion between the
God-Emperor and the human ruler.

This is to be found in the right hand of either and each. In the case of
Oesho, what is held is a Diadem – in this case, a band of material which
would be tied about the head of the monarch, as the sign and sigil of
their power, in a not dissimilar manner to the more simple wreath of
leaves (laurel or otherwise) that we would perhaps be more familiar with
today. It had made its way into the Central Asian heartland of the
Kushana upon the heads of the Greek \[‘Yavana’\] conquerors as they
swept through the Achaemenid Empire (where it may have syncretized with
the already-extant Persian custom around various forms of head-wrapping
turban for the aristocracy and more especially for their emperor) and
thence stayed there post-Alexander to set up the Greco-Bactrian and
other such ‘successor’ states. It is, of course, interesting that even
some centuries – most of a millennium in fact – following the Macedonian
arrival in the vicinity, the cultural ‘aftershocks’ of this conquest
were still ripplingly apparent.

There are various ‘coronation’ reliefs carved amongst the
still-Zoroastrian Sassanids to the west of the Kushan which might seem
an obvious point of comparison here, due to the depiction of a supreme
god handing over the relic of rulership to a worthy mortal. Although it
ought be distinguished as a practice on the basis that i) Ahura Mazda is
the deity that does this for the Sassanids, and ii) Ahura Mazda hands
over a harder object (the cydaris, often termed the ‘ring of power’) to
a man who is often depicted as already having the Diadem bound about his
forehead. \[Which, to be sure, is also where the Diadem on Peroz II’s
side of the coin is in this depiction – the flowing ribbons running out
behind his head are carved to intentionally resemble those in Oesho’s
hand\]

However, what is truly ingenious with this particular numismatic
representation is the manner in which this ‘handover’ is taking place.
For you see, not only is it ‘indirect’ (as, by necessity, yet also
aesthetics, the King and the God are on different sides of the same coin
– and that, too, speaks towards the underlying meaning as previously
observed), but it is ‘functional’, ‘transactional’ in its own way. It is
not merely a case of the God Oesho handing down the Diadem of Rulership
to the mortal Ruler. Instead, there is an interlinked and corresponding
action occurrent in the right hand of the human king that has ‘unlocked’
such potency to be bequeathed in the first place.

What is that action? Well, if we cast our eyes to the non-trident
wielding hand of Peroz II – we see that his arm is held outwards and
downwards towards a small box-like device, above which stretches another
seemingly arcane glyph, and about which billow circling lines which bear
entirely uncoincidental similarity to the sigils of the Kushana script
to be found circling the outer edge of the coin nearby.

What is this? What is going on here? Why, it is Sacrifice. The
Performance of Piety. The ‘box’ is in fact a Fire Altar – that integral
element of most any Indo-Iranian ornate rite , especially of kingship or
empowerment and which finds parallel expression elsewards out across the
Indo-European sphere for exactly the same reason. It is the ‘conduit’
within which we place our consumable offerings that they may reach the
Gods Themselves – and, as is the nature of conduits, that back down and
out through therefrom comes the blessing as the directly correlated
result. This is why Lord Agni is the God of Priests and the Priest of
the Gods – for He represents exactly this linkage between ‘down here’
and ‘up there’, both going and coming in either direction. And it is He
that is ‘fed’, ‘nourished’ via the offerings, the libations, the
propitiations which are poured into Him within the Altar’s bounds. From
whence they rise as smoke – and as I say, the ‘smoke’ is here
represented via elegantly traced circular, spiraling patterns that
directly recall the text immediately adjacent to it that sets out that
this is the Kushanashah – the Κοϸανο ϸαηο. And that is, again, entirely
uncoincidental – as the Fire is ‘telling’ us something. Just as we find
Brihaspati-Agni as the Lord of the High Speech \[Brihaspati & Agni are
also facings of Shiva\]; so too do we find that the Fire is Declaring
something here.

Although whilst Words are the mightiest weapons known to the
Indo-European arsenal – these are not the only ‘weapons’ or symbolic
conveyances of meaning on show here, produced from out of the wreathing
flames. If we cast our gaze only slightly upwards, we behold something
else. A curious pattern which one might at first presume to be a Tamga
\[a ‘house mark’ or ‘dynastic emblem’\] – although this is complicated
by a number of factors, including the fact that the NandiPada symbol
(which we shall discuss in greater depth below) utilized as a Tamga by
the Kushanshah up until shortly after this period is plainly in view to
Peroz II’s right.

More likely, this particular pattern above the Fire of the Altar is a
Trishula – mirroring the one held in Peroz II’s left hand, and also in
Shiva’s. It is rising up out of the Flames, as it is an ensign of Rule –
ultimate rule. Lord Shiva’s Three-Spear is Three-Pointed precisely
because it connotes rulership over all Three Worlds ; whilst (as I
detailed extensively in WORLD-SPEAR, inter alia), it also represents the
veer-y axial of Cosmic Law, Rta, Righteous Rulership Itself. It is
therefore absolutely uncoincidental that the gesture of piety performed
by Peroz II’s right hand, resonant via Shiva’s provision of the Diadem
of rulership in HIS Right Hand , is emanated back to Peroz II’s side of
the coin via the Trishula rising up out of the Flames of Sacrifice.
Piety Precedes Power, is the simple message being conveyed here. And it
is only through the Righteous Conduct of the Rite that the Dharma, Rta,
Righteousness Itself can be congealed back out into the prospective
ruler’s hand.

Yet there is something curious about this Trishula shape upon the
Altar-Fire. It has a Crescent above the middle point , and two radiating
projections either side of the shaft heading back down in counterpoint
to the two raised outer points of the Spear. It is probable that these
two are intended to represent streamers or ribbons bound about the
Spear’s shaft – as certainly that is what is depicted in various much
earlier Kushan coinage of this type; although there, we usually see
either a more obvious tethering about the shaft of separate streamers at
multiple levels, or we see them blown in a single direction as if by a
wind.

Whether directly intentional or not, it is symbolically appropriate that
the design recall that of the stylized Vajra – not when beheld as a Club
or a Mace (‘Gada’) , but rather when more directly representing the arcs
of lightning through the atmosphere. It is three points to the sky,
three points down to the earth – a central shaft buttressed by curving
arcs. Much as we are seeing here.

This might sound odd, as the Vajra is often thought of as the Weapon of
Lord Indra, the Indo-European Striker/Thunderer (or, in the
Zoroastrian’s version of events, which was Indra-less except as applies
a certain demonized figure, Mithra) , whereas the Trishula is the Weapon
of Lord Shiva , the Indo-European Sky Father. Except we have direct
Vedic attestation for the Weapon of Rudra, too, having the status of a
Vajra – as should be expected, both due to the Storm qualities of both
Sky Father and Striker/Thunderer in active application of Their Anger ,
yet also due to what the Vajra actually represents. As I have discussed
in my previous work, it is the ‘weaponized’ form of an expression of
Brahman – Force, attained through Piety, from Beyond the Edge of the
Universe.

The Vajra, too, is held to be emblematic of Rulership – hence its status
as the ensign of the Dumezilian 2nd Function (the Warrior Aristocracy) ,
and perhaps on some unconscious basis the reasoning for its still-extant
utilization in various Anglosphere legislatures as the symbol of the
power of the master of that House \[here in New Zealand, as is the case
in various of these other polities, the Parliamentary Serjeant At Arms
bears an enormous golden mace to stand for the Power of the Speaker –
and also for its active enforcement at the Speaker’s directive\]. So, in
short, it is just what we should be expecting for a King to be
prominently associating themselves with – hence its utilization in the
royal iconography and nomenclature of, say, the Buddhist influenced
Kingdom of Thailand today.

However, I am not sure if there is such a straightforward explanation
for the crescent topping the Trishula above Peroz II’s hand. The best
that I can come up with – assuming that it is not part of one of the
characters in the script around the rim of the coin (which it shouldn’t
be, as such a flourish would be unnecessary for the characters which
comprise the text; and in any case, coins of Peroz II’s successor,
Varahran, maintain the crescent in more visually distinct fashion) – is
that it may represent a Crescent Moon. And certainly, the Great God upon
the other side of the Coin, the *original* Wielder of the Trident – is
described as ChandraSekhara : The Moon-Crowned or With The Crescent Moon
Adorning His Brow.

The Crescent Moon does turn up as a symbol for rulership and for renown,
fame, upon an array of the crowns and the other assorted regal
iconography of various eastern Indo-Iranian rulers prior to this period;
including mounted atop a staff or banner-poll as a regal ensign. It is
therefore not impossible that the addition of the Crescent to the top of
the Trident here (and it is important to note that it is only the
Trident emergent from the Flames, neither the Trident of Oesho / Shiva
nor the one in the left hands of Peroz II or other mortal rulers appears
to bear it) is designed to signify something similar. Perhaps to
underscore further that this is a Royal, Radiant Trishula; perhaps to
recall the role of the Moon in the provision of the Soma (as this is,
after all, a Fire Rite that is being depicted; and Soma definitely does
figure as a regal element in various Vedic hymnals for coronation and
the empowerment of the Monarch); perhaps it is there to signify Time.

Whatever the case, the immediate mental association a Shaivite would
make when seeing a Moon would be of the aforementioned Moon-Crowned One.
While not discounting, therefore, the possibility of this being a
symbolic of additional significance (as it does not occur in several of
Peroz II’s predecessors’ similar renditions of the tableau (and by
‘predecessors’ I am also including other regimes who imitated the design
contemporaneously) – although IS persisted with by Peroz II’s immediate
successor, Varahran) – a simple interpretation would be that the Moon
adorning the Trident is to show just exactly Whose Trident this is. Or,
at the least, to connote that it is a Regal , Imperial ‘Crowned’ device
– and certainly, the Kushano-Sasanians were quite big upon depicting
their rulers as ‘Moon-Crowned’ themselves.

To continue with our iconographic analysis, there are two further
elements to be addressed. The Swastika and the Nandipada.

As applies the former, this is of course, a symbol of broad occurrence –
even in non-Indo-European cultures across the globe. Yet in this
specific instance, it is quite clearly meant as something decidedly
other than a mere regular geometric pattern. It is a sigil of power. It
is a sign of something. It possesses the auspicious and empowering
faculties of its use elsewhere in the Dharmic sphere. And that is quite
interesting for our purposes, as it is not at all what one should expect
to find in a Zoroastrian context at this time. To be fair and sure, it
is of course not only a Hindu symbol when utilized in this manner – and
some might suggest that its saliency here may reflect an older Buddhist
influence upon the region. Yet in constellation with all of the other
elements upon the coin, I do think that it adds weight to a Hindu
understanding of both ruler and regime that it would be affixed so
prominently. Indeed, one could make that its placement at his feet
represents a Dharmic foundation for his rule.

Now in terms of the Nandipada symbol – the again three-pointed design to
the right of Peroz II’s waist – the situation is similarly complex. It
*should* be a Hindu symbol – the Bull’s Hoof , directly relating to the
depiction of Nandi (Shiva’s Bull) found on the other side of the coin.
It was also made fairly active use of as a dynastic marking for the
Kushano-Sasanian rulers following their ‘borrowing’ of this from the
last coins of the Kushan (note: not Kushano-Sasanian) Vasudeva I. There
are, again, potential Buddhist utilizations for the symbol (for example,
the alleged meaning of the same symbol on the so-called Buddhist Coin of
Tillya Tepe) – especially if it ‘blurs together’ with the more
authentically Buddhist ‘TriRatna’ symbol. Although I do not believe it
particularly likely that that is why it should occur here. Instead
preferring the infinitely more straightforward view that the Bull’s Hoof
upon the side of Peroz II’s coin correlates to the quite specific Bull
depicted upon the Divine side of the coin. A quite direct ‘mark of
divine favour’. And therefore, again, a Hindu signifer in multiple
senses of the term – both one utilized by Hindus, in a Hindu context …
and one which signifies that the coin, its symbols and meaning, were
substantively drawn from that same contextual milieu.

Why does this matter? Because, as I have said previously – the
supposition of some scholars is that the Kushans, the Kushano-Sasanians
, were Zoroastrians. And that all of the Hindu visual or other
signifiers were, as aforementioned, cases of Zoroastrian religion in
occasional Hindu clothing. And I can see how a surface-level examination
from a potentially biased perspective might bear this out. It is, after
all, the case that many of the details to this particular coin were
direct derivatives from previous and more overtly Hindu coins and rulers
elsewhere in the Indosphere. One could be forgiven for presuming that
that was all this was – the imitation, the carrying over, of the
concepts of direct relevancy to somebody else.

And that may fit for some coins, over a relatively brief period – when
the Kidarites took over and continued to use a Kushanashah as a puppet
ruler, for instance, they kept up with that ruler’s designs of coinage
for fairly obvious reasons. Yet it does not explain how or why the
Kushano-Sasanians themselves didn’t just directly appropriate nor
cursorily imitate what they were given – but actively built upon it,
developed it, refined it, and added to it. And did so for a protracted
period spanning the entire reign of their dynasty and the best part of
two centuries.

These are not, in short, the actions of men – of kings – who merely
accepted what they were given as if it were utterly meaningless except
for trinket and/or semi-literal dollar value. These are, rather, the
sorts of processes undertaken by men who do genuinely believe they are
doing something meaningful – that they are in receipt of a divine
mandate from the figure they have taken such painstaking care to ensure
is represented in ever-more-elaborately detailed, beautiful fashion.

And who have quite literally adopted the Trishula – the Shaivite Ensign
still in active use amidst places like Nepal today as a symbol for
Rulership under the Shaivite Mandate – as the symbol for their imperial
power.

We often hear it said of this or that group of the pseudo-Central Asian
monarchies that they are Zoroastrians, that they are Buddhists, that
they are Syncretic, that they are Greek. And many of these labels have
some degree of truth to them. Yet you shall almost never hear various of
these described as Hindu. At best, as we outlined earlier, you find them
approached so timidly – desultorily designated as being one of those
aforementioned groups with occasional ‘Hindu characteristics’ where it
is not possible to simply outright dismiss the Hindu elements and claim
they are something else entirely.

I hesitate to suggest that it is outright ‘Hinduphobia’ which motivates
such things – although this concern has occurred elsewhere when it comes
to the archaeology of belief upon the SubContinent, without question.
But whatever it is which motivates these perspectives , it does seem
quite the imbalance for analysis the see what are clearly and
unambiguously Hindu symbols … and instead declare via ever escalating
acrobatics of mental gymnastics that these MUST instead be rather
peculiarly unprecedented ‘Zoroastrian’ forms , or whatever else is
sought as a ‘placeholder’ to eclipse the natural Hindu identification of
them.

For what it’s worth – I absolutely do not doubt that belief out there
proximate to the Steppes was quite a rich, multi-layered and
multi-influenced sphere. I do not think that anything was entirely
‘pure’ – any more than any great center of humanity is ever such a thing
in truth. Yet just as Hinduism tends to preserve the archaic elements of
the Indo-Iranian belief , it is not especially surprising to find that a
complex conceptual mish-mash , given some centuries to be shaken about,
stirred (up), and thence allowed periodically to re-settle, should
manage to reproduce what is, in effect, a Hindu-cognate understanding
(as we saw with the previous Yama Iamso coin I have written about
earlier) – even before we take into account and consideration the strong
active and overt Hindu influence welling up from the SouthEast back
thereinto.

So – various academic writing upon Peroz II shall tell you that he is a
Zoroastrian, and that the trident-armed deity with the bull that Peroz
II is standing in imitation of … is the Zoroastrian Vayu.

Perish the thought. The God-side is Shiva. Ishvara. The God-Emperor of
the Worlds Himself. It is only right that a mortal ruler should seek to
imitate, and be granted the mandate of rulership via pious supplication
of Him.

Jai Ishvara!

ॐ नमः शिवाय
