+++
title = "ON THE INDO-EUROPEAN TYPOLOGY OF IOLAUS – THIRD DRAGONSLAYER  Part One – Indra And Iolaos : Hydras, Helpers, Heroes,xa0Hercules"
date = "October 12, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/1833800_orig.jpg?w=1024)

**  
**  
If you were to ask somebody the question “Who slayed Vritra”, you would
be presented with quite a simple answer. “I don’t know, who’s Vritra”,
probably. But for those even cursorily aware of the Indo-European
mythology – more specifically its Vedic formulation – the reply would
almost certainly come “Indra”.

And that is not (necessarily) incorrect – certainly, Vritrahan is a
well-attested hailing of Lord Indra. Yet it IS incomplete. As we covered
in several previous works (for example, “HAIL HYDRA-SLAYER” and
“FOE-SLAYER CLAIMS OUR EULOGY”), what we actually see in the mythology,
in the scriptural accounts is rather different – Devi Vak Saraswati
plays a hugely important role in the Smiting of the Demon-Dragon Who
Lies In The Water , to the point that She, too, is hailed as Vritrahan :
the Slayer of Vritra.

This mirrors, of course, Athena’s contributory role to Herakles’ own
slaying of the Hydra (a rather literal ‘water-dragon’ via both habitat
and nomenclature) , which is just as we should expect. Athena and Vak
Devi are heavily cognate in theological terms, as we have repeatedly
demonstrated; and Herakles, just as Indra and Thor, is an expression of
the Striker/Thunderer Indo-European Deific.

And yet … in technical terms, there is a THIRD figure (indeed, that is
exactly the right designation for Him – Third ) which we should mention
amidst the illustrious ranks of the Illuyanka-incinerators.

You see, the Hydra-slaying myth of the Greeks effectively combines
together elements from at least two portions of the Vedic mythology –
the slaying of Vritra, of course, as we have already covered .. yet it
also, in its more archaic forms, bears closer resemblance to Indra’s
combat against another figure. Trisiras – the Three-Headed Dragon. For
the Hydra, per various accounts, has a close association in its number
of heads with the number three. (Vritra, in case you were wondering, is
more often \*two\* headed – and we do also find a mention in Euripides
for the Hydra as bicephalic likewise) This is often overlooked in favour
of emphasizing both the high number and the regenerative capacity of the
Hydra’s heads; and yet whether it is six (as frequently seen in earlier
art), or it is nine (as in Alcaeus and Apollodorus) – or, as we see in
Euripides and Sophocles, three heads that spring up directly – the
pattern is quite clear (indeed, even the more pop-culture familiar
‘strike down one, two more spring up) is an expression of the number
three). Of additional interest is that of these three heads, or these
multiples-of-three heads, we tend to find that one in particular is the
‘immortal’ one or ‘golden’ one – as attested in Sophocles, in
Apollodorus, in Aristonicus of Tarentum, and in a certain manner in
Euripides (who holds that it is enough that one of three survive for the
beast itself to be still vital and threatening).

Now why is this interesting and of direct saliency to our linking of the
Vedic and Greek accounts? Well, for a start, the archaic depiction of
Trisiras has the three heads all doing something different – one of
which is drinking the Soma, the vital liquid of immortality. There is
also some ambiguity in the Hindu source material as to whether Trisiras
is killed via the smiting off of \*all three\* of His Heads at once – or
whether it is one head in particular that is severed from the body to
slay the Dragon.

Yet it is ultimately the same myth in either case – for what actually
kills the Hydra , what actually kills Trisiras … while in some tellings
it is the Striker/Thunderer – Indra , Herakles , Perseus – in other
tellings common to both the Greek and the Vedic mythoreligions (and with
potential parallel expression to an extent amongst the Hittites), it is
an associate working \*with\* the Striker/Thunderer Who ultimately bears
both the honour and the opprobrium of the death’s delivery.

The Greek occurrence is well-known. The figure of Iolaus aids Herakles
in the Hydra-slaying – and in many versions is directly responsible for
the victory via the judicious application of fire as a problem-solving
tool. Truly, in times of darkness, it is better to light the
flamethrower than merely idly curse the trouble – and, when calling upon
one’s comrade … it is the flamer, nay the \*heavy\* flamer that is
called for. Although more upon that, particularly in the Vedic typology,
later.

The results of Iolaus’ actions (immanentizing the wise guidance of
Athena to the pair) , are not only the Hydra’s demise – but a denial of
the ‘credit’ for the kill to Herakles by the taskmaster Eurystheus.
Eurystheus, the figure responsible for directing Herakles off upon his
penitential quests (and more upon \*that\* also, to come!), argued that
the Hydra-slaying should not count against Hercules’ tally of ten as it
had not been Herakles Who had killed the creature.

The directly parallel Indo-Iranian occurrence, however, is much less
prominent in the minds of many – except in Zoroastrian/post-Zoroastrian
Iran, for reasons which we shall look atin a moment. There, it is the
aforementioned figure of Third (‘Trita’) who carries out one of the acts
of dragon-vanquishing in question (and, in fact, potentially more than
one – RV I 187 1 has Trita slaying Vritra, also; and RV I 52 5 has Trita
either present for Indra contra Vritra, or having carried out offensive
role against Vala, a third demon-dragon). Via lopping off at least one
of the heads of Trisiras … and, importantly, doing so armed with the
weapons of prayerful conduct provided by Lord Agni. Prayerful conduct,
for the Vedic man almost axiomatically entailing ‘fire’, even before we
consider the Agni association. Trita is an associate of Lord Indra’s,
and is depicted as accompanying Him to the fight – before ultimately
stepping in and delivering the final blow to vanquish the multi-headed
draconic creature, in a manner that evidently has something to do with
fire (and it is not coincidental, either, that we find Trita’s situation
relative to Indra being explicitly couched as that of a Brahmin and a
Lord). Although it should be noted that in later texts, this had been
somewhat bowdlerized down to a mere act of decapitation accomplished via
an axe; and the otherwise obvious discrepancy over whether Indra or
Trita is to be accredited with the victory is resolved in some similarly
later tellings via ‘codifying’ the matter as Indra killing Trisiras, and
then having Trita prevent Trisiras from coming back to life.

Now straightaway, we can begin to see the direct and clear parallels
with the Greek myth. The Striker/Thunderer (Herakles , Indra) goes to
slay the multi-headed serpentine opponent (the Hydra , Trisiras) , and
is ultimately not the one to do so, even despite smiting the heads of
the adversary – for His companion (Iolaus , Trita) is the one to
actually accomplish the deed, in a manner that makes fairly active use
of Fire as well as Decapitation so as to counteract the regenerative
capacity of the foe. And who winds up bearing the resultant moral status
of having done so. And that’s where things get interesting.
