+++
title = "On The Still Active Dyaus Pitar Of The Indo-Europeans – The Sky Father Still Roarsxa0Supreme"
date = "October 29, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/5f332716df47405df6e36c0b65b99eda.jpg?w=724)

There is much misinformation and misapprehension about Dyaus Pitar (also
known as Dyeus Phter if we are going with the PIE reconstruction) – none
more so, in my estimation than that He is somehow a ‘remote’ or
‘inactive’ deity Who plays no real functional role in our still-living
mythology. In line with which, you will often hear Dyaus Pitar presented
as being what’s known as a “Deus Otiosus”; a figure largely almost
irrelevant, unremembered, unheeded and unheralded except in the
occasional dim but brief citations of the most archaic scripture.

Now as applies the Greek and Roman understandings of Him, this is almost
self-evidently incorrect. Zeus Pater and Jupiter are many things, but
shrouded and removed from the world are not one of them. Indeed, even
where the ‘shrouded’ is occurrent – as with Zeus’ testing of the Xenia
custom of sacred hospitality … or the testing in a rather different
manner of various mortal women – it would be entirely inappropriate to
claim that this renders Him to be ‘inactive’ or merely vaguely
remembered, mostly unthought of. So clearly it is not the Greco-Roman
‘Classical’ mythology that has informed this view.

Rather, it is the spurious misreading of the Vedic Hindu scriptures
which has lead people to this most erroneous of conclusions. You see,
within our own canon we have the figure of Dyaus Pitar – and for the
most part, He is indeed rarely spoken of *as Dyaus* ; most direct
mentions taking place either in the context of having Sired Lord Indra ,
or in brief citations alongside Prithvi – that is to say Earth (as in
Mother Earth). And so various scholars have drawn the obvious conclusion
– that there was once a Dyaus Pitar, yet Who faded from view, from
prominence; with His role being largely supplanted by Indra or somesuch;
functionally having ‘fallen away’ and only to be invoked (still much
less actively recalled) when Indra or some other, younger figure was
being hailed. Which is just downright curious.

Because it is *not at all* what the Vedas *actually* say upon the
subject. Where Dyaus is, indeed, prominently and repeatedly spoken of –
as the Great Lord of All Existence, still veer-y much active and
actively engaged, with a number of hymnals dedicated unto Him.

So why is it that we find virtually the diametrically opposite view
presented so frequently within the realms of academic and amateur
writing upon the subject?

To put it simply … because many people don’t grasp how our theology
works; and it almost seems that this is an *intentional* failure, in
various of those occasions wherein somebody’s personal theory would be
imperilled via the truth. The difficulty of interpreting Vedic texts
when making sole use of an English translation is also a relevant
factor.

So with that in mind – let’s take a brief look at some of the mentions
for Dyaus Pitar in the Vedas, and see just how it is that so many have
managed to get it so wrong for all these years.

We shall begin via a simple example for the linguistic side of things –
and then work our way up to the more resonant theological material.

To start with, we haveGriffith’s translation of RV II 1 6:  
“6 Rudra art thou, the Asura of mighty heaven: ” – which, in the
original, is “tvam aghne rudro asuro maho divas” ; or, phrased another
way, we have Agni identified with Rudra, the Heavenly Sire \[it is
important to note that this is ‘Asura’ in the older sense – meaning
‘Sire’ / ‘Powerful’, inter alia; not ‘A’Sura’, the latter term for an
‘Anti-Shining’ Demon\]

And straightaway, you begin to see the problem. Divas is a form of the
same noun that is Dyaus – the genitive form, to be specific. Except if
you are just going off a translation, or you aren’t familiar with the
Sanskrit grammar in question, you could easily overlook this. And to be
fair, the reading of this as Rudra being the Asura of Heaven
(place/plane) is not inaccurate. The ‘Heavenly Father’ and the ‘Father
Who Art In Heaven’ ; the Sky Father and the Father In (or Of) The Sky ;
these are not, here, mutually exclusive understandings. Quite the
contrary. The Asuro Maho Divas in question is that great generative
power of the Bright Sky – known as Rudra.

But let’ take a look at a more direct example:

Griffith’s translation of RV I 129 3 – “Indra, to thee I sing, to Dyaus,
to Rudra glorious in himself,” which, in the original is “indrota
tubhyaṃ tad dive tad rudrāya svayaśase”.

Now, some may choose to interpret this as there being three deities
hailed here. But this is not the case (dative, in case you were
wondering). Rather, it is a situation wherein the number of deities is
two – Indra and His Father. The Father being hailed by (in this line at
least) two prominent theonyms for the same God – Rudra and Dyaus.

How do we know this? Because it happens elsewhere in the Vedas as well –
RV VIII 20 17 \[Griffith Translation\]: “17 Even as Rudra’s Sons, the
brood of the Creator Dyaus, the Asura, desire, / O Youthful Ones, so
shall it be:” – which, in the original reads “yathā rudrasya sūnavo divo
vaśantyasurasya vedhasaḥ / yuvānastathedasat ” .

Now, it is clearly not the case that there are two Fathers here …
instead, it is one Father hailed by, again, two names.

And, to further strengthen this most interesting point … the Sons, the
‘Brood’ being referred to here – are the Asvins. Otherwise known as the
Divo Napata or Divah Kumarau – the Sons of Dyaus … or, in Greek, the
Dioscouri – the Sons of Zeus. And it should also be noted that the
hailing of the Horse-Twins as the Sons of Rudra is exactly what we
should expect – given the Germanic tradition’s emphasis upon Hengist and
Horsa as being the Descendants of Odin \[although it should be noted
that the major source material attesting these figures is … rather
removed from the Germanic tradition itself, and euhemerizesor otherwise
distorts matters, as we explored in the previous article upon the
subject. Hence why Hengist and Horsa are presented as *descendants* of
Odin (here reduced in status to a human tribal chief) rather than as
direct Sons).

There are other strings we could add to this bow, of course – and in the
span of my previous work, I have repeatedly addressed the iconographic
and theological evidence for Rudra as Indo-European Sky Father, Odin as
Indo-European Sky Father, etc. But where some might have criticized
those previous efforts for being works of interpretation … as we can see
from the above aforementioned, it is simply necessary to read what the
Vedas Themselves are actually saying upon the matter.

That Rudra is Dyaus Pitar , the Sky Father of the Indo-Europeans. With
not only the extensive array of mythic, theological points of
correspondencywith the Sky Father figure as found in other
Indo-European mythic perspectives – but also the linguistic
attestational supports for this right in the Vedas.

As RV VI 49 10 puts it:

“Rudra by day, Rudra at night we honour with these our songs, the
Universe’s Father.  
Him great and lofty, blissful, undecaying let us call specially as the
Sage impels us.”

So the next time somebody attempts to proclaim that we no longer worship
Dyaus Pitar , or that Dyaus Pitar is some sort of ‘Deus Otiosus’ – these
claims can be safely disregarded. It is self-evident, now, that such
contentions are manifestly in error. Rudra , known more prominently by
His additional theonym Shiva these days , is one of our most prominent
Gods. And is most certainly not a figure Who can be adequately described
as “idle”, “inactive”, or – perish the thought ! – “irrelevant”. Quite
the opposite !

Even if He does retreat up into the highest peaks of the Himalayas to
meditate and smoke cannabis, from time to time.

As a further point of interest – what we have demonstrated here helps to
once again attest that despite what you may have heard: the modern
Hinduism has actively carried forward vitally important important
fundaments of our belief from not only its Vedic era earlier expression
… but also from the Proto-Indo-European mythology and religion itself.

Just as the Sky Father Intended !
