+++
title = "Durga Near Ghazni – A “Buddhist” Representation Afghanistan’s Hindu Past – Arte-Factsxa0#10"
date = "October 26, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/b_mnaor-3653-ts-1145_0.jpg?w=789)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/c_durga-reconstruction_neu_geschn_0.png?w=556)

Further art and artefact representation for Vijayadashami – a
fragmentary Durga MahishasuraMardini depiction from Tapa Sardar in
modern-day Afghanistan near Ghazni; then part of Zabul.

Even though most of the statue is now missing (all that is blue or green
in the reconstruction), it’s still impressive! Especially considering
that head, alone, is about 64 cm tall. And excellently, elegantly carved
– beauty that remains despite some 1,200 years or more of neglect.

Curiously, this is identified by academics as a “Buddhist” version of
Durga as Mahishasura Mardini. Now, I am no scholar of Buddhism – but I
should be rather surprised to find that there was an authentically
Buddhist form of either the myth or the mythic figures involved. Or what
the need would actually be within a Buddhist context for such borrowing.

More likely, the actual religion practiced in Zabulistan – would be
something else. Not ‘Buddhist’, exactly – although certainly drawing
from this, as well as a number of other Indo-European religious
influences such as Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, the Scythian and other
Steppe IE beliefs, and even the Greeks.

With the end result being something akin to what we’ve previously seen
with various of the other regimes ruling in this area such as the
Kushans and Kushano-Sasanians – where there are deific figures,
religious beliefs that might *look* superficially like some specific
creed such as Zoroastrianism (or, in this case, Buddhism) … yet which,
upon closer inspection, is actually rather closer to what we might
recognize as Hinduism. In this particular case, quite directly so.

Most of the time, this resemblance to Hinduism is due to a combination
of things – *both* the direct Hindu influence upon the culture(s) in
question being pervasive and longstanding, thus naturally leading to a
strong saliency for Hinduism within the resulting ‘mix’. But *also*
because it is quite natural for a number of Indo-European origin
religions ‘coming back together’ to filter out some of the
idiosyncrasies in each of the strands being woven together – and
therefore produce something closer to the ‘archaic’ belief as a result.
Which, given Hinduism is, itself, a lot closer to this archaic
Indo-European belief (due in no small part to the antiquity and detailed
comprehensivity of the Vedas) – means we should be unsurprised when
‘putting things back together’ produces patterns that look a lot like
the Hindu perception of things.

To bring it back to this particular sculpture of Devi Durga as
Mahishasura Mardini – it would be tempting to presume that it’s a case
of the former. A prominent later Hindu influence leading to some
Buddhists simply having a Buddhist-style representation of the myth
produced – a direct ‘incorporation’ or ‘borrowing’ of the myth from an
external source. It’s a bit strange, but it still allows the adherents
in question to be described as Buddhists, and have that make reasonable
sense. Even despite a somewhat curious decision to have an obviously
Hindu Goddess and mythic occurrence given such lavish attention within
one’s temple. Or, as it happens, temples – plural. For this is not the
only allegedly ‘Buddhist’ rendering of Durga slaying Mahishasur that has
turned up in an Afghan ruin of Buddhist provenance.

Except I’m not entirely sure that’s what’s happened here. The mythic
conceptry underpinning Durga contra Mahishasur is not just something
which turned up out of nowhere in the (later) Puranic Hindu scriptural
canon. It has *direct* Vedic precedency as well as broad Indo-European
underpinnings and coterminous expression (for example, I would link the
Taurobolium bull-sacrifice carried out for Cybele to this same mythic
trope).

Importantly, there even appears to have been a rather specific Kushan
version of the tale in which Durga slays the demon with Her Own bare
hands rather than making use of the Divine Weaponry. These predate the
*later* Hindu scriptural materials which have come down to us in which
the Goddess is described as utilizing the aforementioned Divine Weaponry
to kill the bovine adversary; and would appear to suggest that the
Kushan had their own somewhat independent tradition around the subject
that was a parallel development to the better-known Hindu one
(curiously, the sculptural representations we have of this Kushan
iteration of the myth date from the period at which the Kushan were
notionally significantly Buddhist). As I have noted above, the Kushan
previously ruled the area that would one day become Zabul some several
centuries later.

So it is not implausible that instead of a later Hindu encounter leading
to the later Hindu refinement of the myth being directly ‘borrowed’ and
then carved with local Buddhist aesthetics … what we are instead seeing
is a myth that did not need to come from outside, to the South and East,
because it had never really left. And had been passed down by the
peoples of the area in its core form, until eventually being captured in
stone some mere decades prior to the Muslim overrunning of the place
brought it all to a sadly shattered ending.

Where am I going with all of this?

To put it bluntly – we often hear academics insistently label this or
that Central Asian dynasty or ruler as ‘Buddhist’ or ‘Zoroastrian’. And
it has frequently seemed that they almost go out of their way to avoid
terming Hindu elements of belief, Hindu believers, to actually be ..
well .. Hindu. So we have Oesho occasionally declared to be a
Zoroastrian deity – despite holding a rather prominent Trishula and
being accompanied by a Bull with a Nandipada insignia attached, for
example. Because it doesn’t fit the narrative of attempting to explain
away all seeming Hinduism of the era and area that is not absolutely
incontrovertible as being “Zoroastrian Gods in Hindu Garb” as one
scholar put it. And because as soon as one manages to show just how
non-doctrinaire these labels, these rulers actually were when it came to
whatever non-Hindu creed they’re supposed to have been espousing … well,
it casts serious doubt upon the accuracy of the labelling of them as
“Buddhist” or “Zoroastrian” etc. all up.

Which doesn’t mean that I’m attempting to suggest that there were no
‘real’ Buddhists or Zoroastrians out in Central Asia much of two
millennia ago. Only that there’s a lot more going on than either
reductionist label would seemingly imply. And that quite often, the
actual nature and substance of both practices and belief of these
figures out there proximate to the Steppe would have actively
*horrified* the more orthodox adherents of either faith back in the
heartlands thereof. That Oesho figure, for instance, is in fact a God
that the Zoroastrians had pointedly demonized and defamed during their
own religious breakaway from the previously prevailing Indo-Iranian
religious orthodoxy. And also shows up in various Tibetan Buddhist
iconographic representations being purportedly humiliated and trampled
underfoot by this or that Buddhist spiritual teacher or other such
figure of their belief as a dire obstacle to enlightenment and
perpetuator of suffering. So in both cases – regarded by the proper
Zoroastrians and many ‘proper’ Buddhists as a malefic figure to be cast
down , or at best as an obstacle to be overcome at best in the case of
the latter (the Mahayana Buddhists are more ‘forgiving’ – instead merely
re-situation Shiva as a wrong-headed peddler of falsehoods Who must beg
their messiah for true enlightenment, inter alia).

Not, as the notionally Buddhist or Zoroastrian rulers of the Kushan and
their successors wound up doing – placing the Great God as the
God-Emperor of the Universe and the Imperial exemplar Who supported and
legitimated their rule to the point that they adopted His Trishula as
their own insignia of sovereignty.

So when I see this beautiful work of divine sculpture described as
“Buddhist” – or as a “Buddhist version” of a Hindu myth, with the
implicit implication that this some sort of foreign incorporation (or,
for that matter, a ‘foreignizing’) of the Goddess and the myth involved
… you can understand my perplexity. There is little to suggest that this
is a Buddhist reinterpretation (which would be the ‘foreignizing’) ; and
I am not convinced that , for reasons aforementioned , Durga as
Mahishasura Mardini was a foreign, latter-day incorporation for the
peoples of this area of Central Asia, either. But rather, a figure that
had existed amidst their mythoreligious belief already for quite some
time.

Which, of course, invites the rather obvious line of inference – that
beneath the ‘Buddhist’ exterior given so much emphasis in modern-day
presentations of these peoples and their religious adherency …

Hindu Heritage Dies Hard.

An appropriate sentiment, now that I think upon it – for the fact that
despite this temple and this murti having been smashed asunder via a
particular wave of non-Indo-European religious invasion, which would
eventually go on also to overrun much of India and wreak incalculable
damage upon the culture, civilization, and cultic spheres of the more
well-known devotees of this Devi (and other Gods like Her) located
therein …

… we have just finished a nine night religious observance dedicated to
this very same Goddess, and the tenth day thereof which is specifically
that of the Divine Combat between Devi Durga and Mahishasur. Exactly
that which was depicted in this impressive shattered sculpture.

Or, phrased another way – some iconoclast has, indeed, managed to break
this statue of the Goddess … (although intriguingly, he has been unable
to destroy the representation’s beauty).

Yet some one thousand two hundred years on – not only is the Goddess
Herself *unbroken* (as if this could ever be in any doubt) : but our
devotion to Her still, likewise, lives on and lives abundant.

And it is the would-be conqueror’s hand which lies as dust upon the
wind, forgotten – not the Name of the Goddess nor the Belief in Her that
he sought to cast down and to destroy.

It is rather like Mahishasur himself in that regard – remarkable and
noteworthy only for his failure and consequent annihilation.

And who knows – perhaps one day in the not entirely distant future, we
might find that the ancestral folk-belief of the descendants of this
temple’s previous custodians returned to them. Even if, in keeping with
the apparent typology, it may happen to ‘look’ superficially Islamic to
some external observers removed in terms of both place and time.

As somebody once observed – She moves in mysterious ways.

जय जय हे महिषासुरमर्दिनि रम्यकपर्दिनि शैलसुते ॥

Jai Mata Di !
