+++
title = "ON THE INDO-EUROPEAN TYPOLOGY OF IOLAUS – THIRD DRAGONSLAYER Part Five – Trita Triumphant , The Restoration of the Rightful Status ofxa0Iolaus"
date = "October 30, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/herculesandhydra21x28.jpg?w=606)

  
Thus, we see the situation wherein Trita , a priestly figure (albeit
with a demonstrable martial competency afforded in no small part via …
weaponized theology) closely affiliated with Indra as companion (in a
manner perhaps also resemblent of Indra and Brihaspati in various other
dragon-slaying hymns – or Indra and Agni in RV V 86, where Trita is
directly mentioned as a comparative; and it should be noted that both
Brihaspati and Agni are, of course, \*priests\*), and providing the
vital empowerment for the act of Dragon-Slaying to be made possible –
even to the point of delivering the actual death, Himself … becomes in
the Greek comparative, the situation of an at that point mortal demigod
going forth with a close travelling companion that is His nephew and
being helped considerably when the latter makes use of some mechanism
other than sheer brute force to kill the otherwise unkillable Dragon –
with the main examples of this ‘mechanism’ being elements that are
directly or figuratively cognate to exactly that which Trita brings to
the table in the Vedic mythology.

And thus, also, we see the situation of Indra \*incurring\* the moral
status of guilt , and then having that moral status transposed and
obviated from Him due to its transposition to Trita as the killer …
turned into Herakles, (already) under a moral burden of guilt, not
having its portion lifted from Him precisely because it is Iolaos that
is regarded as the Hydra’s killer.

The parallels are all, to my mind, too close for there \*not\* to be
some measure of shared origination. With even the metaphysical conceptry
around the sanction of sin and its expiation finding an echo – more
properly, a ‘reflection’ (hence why everything is the wrong way around)
– in the far better known Greek iteration of the myth.

It would be tempting, perhaps, to presume that the more simple suite of
conceptry found within the popular Greek tellings was the more
‘original’ and originally archaic of the expressions – and that the
greater degree of complexity, and the elaborate moral drama an erstwhile
later development confined largely to the Vedic sphere. Yet apart from
noting that the Vedic expressions of this myth actually predate the
earliest Greek versions handed down to us by potentially up to a
millennium – the fact that these moral elements are still present within
the Greek renditioning shows that they must have been endogenous to the
original, underlying Indo-European canon. Rather than being later
interpolations which, as some commentators would have you believe, added
in an entire deity (i.e. Indra) to ‘eclipse’ an ‘earlier’ figure of
Trita ; or to portray meaningful depth, nuance, and subtletly of
moral-metaphysical-ethical considerations in lieu of a simplistic
“barbarian SMASH” style of not-even-really-narrative.

Certainly, the role of Fire as a sacral element is well attested in the
Proto-Indo-European mythoreligious understanding – hence why we have
such concepts as ‘Agni’ , derived from PIE ‘hngwnis’ (the same root as
Latin ‘Ignis’), and meaning quite specifically the ‘Living Fire’, the
‘Animate Fire’, rather than the mere mundane thing that just happens to
burn. A distinction perhaps akin to that in C.S. Lewis’ and Terry
Pratchett’s observation as to the difference between a Star … and a very
large ball of flaming gas. And which, now that I think upon it, may find
parallel expression between the ‘living’ understanding of religion on
the one hand which imbues mythology with life … and the dusty,
academic-grade torpor of tales told without this vitally integral spark
of both illumination and life.

As Agni, too, isprominently hailed as Vritrahan also – Slayer of
Vritra, the Dragon – it would seem that this understanding … that the
Flames of Piety and proper righteous conduct are the ultimate demon-bane
… was similarly the original Indo-European one. And therefore that the
Wielder of these most mighty of weapons – whether remembered more
properly as the Priest (or, at least, person of an aptly pious
disposition – and listening to the Divine Guidance provided to Him by
Athena Vak Saraswati ), or simply as a suitably inspired young man
looking to safeguard his dearly loved comrade (this is another use of
Flame in the underlying Indo-European world view – the binding together
of Men; something referenced also in RV X 8 4’s presentation of the
conflict in question) … even despite the Greeks losing sight of the
ritualine, metaphysical elements to their own mythology (or, perhaps,
simply not writing it down in a manner, a fashion, that has actually
come down to us – after all, the Vedic texts were an almost exclusively
oral tradition, too, for most of Their history), if we know how to look
we can still behold these same unmistakable tell-tale signs of their
presence.

And, once again marvel at just how fundamentally cohesive the mythology
of the Indo-European Peoples really is.

So, with that in mind – here’s a brief selection from RV X 8 ; phrasing
in square brackets is the result of me placing two different
translations side-by-side.

7 Through his wise insight Trita in the cavern, seeking as ever a
visionary thought according to the ways of his distant forefather,  
Carefully tended in his Parents’ bosom, \[calling the weapons kin /
speaking his own familial weapons\], goes forth to combat.  
8 \[Well-skilled to use the weapons of his Father / knowing his
ancestral weapons\] , Āptya, urged on by Indra, attacked.  
Then Trita slew the foe seven-rayed, three-headed, and freed the cattle
of the Son of Tvaṣṭar.  
9 Lord of the brave, Indra cleft him in pieces who sought to gain much
strength and deemed him mighty.  
He smote his three heads from his body, seizing the cattle of the
oniniform Son of Tvaṣṭar.

Hail to the Torch-Bearers, the Flame-Throwers, the Weaponizers of
Ancient Wisdom.

Ἰόλαος &त्रित

And also to the Striker/Thunderer Whom He Proceeds.  
