+++
title = "Red Bull – The Indo-European Sky Father And A Certain Empoweringxa0Brew"
date = "October 6, 2020"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/egxnwbmxyaawkkb.jpg?w=1024)

Something I have often taken a bit of pleasure in, is finding the
‘echoes’ of underlying archaic Indo-European symbolism amidst the
wreckage of the modern world. In various cases, these are ‘traces’ that
were probably not consciously intended as such by their contemporary
authors – and yet which nevertheless have some fundamental, recurring
resonancy back to our mythoreligious past nonetheless.

As you can probably tell via this wonderful image – today we shall take
a brief look at the Red Bull symbolism of the Indo-European Sky Father,
best known to us via the Vedas.

And before we get on to a certain energy drink … by which I mean Soma,
of course … let us examine what is actually being implied by the
symbolism in these Hymnals in order that we might get a sense of what we
are extolling here.

The Bull is unquestionably an immensely mighty animal, with a loud
bellow. It is also the male form of the bovine – the female, of course,
being the Cow. A Bull is well-renowned for having a certain temper, and
destructive faculty. These survive even in our modern idioms around the
“Red Rag to the Bull”, and the “Bull in the China Shop”.

The Cow in the context of the Vedas is a frequent symbol and metaphor
for the Earth, for the Wife of the Sky Father, for Vak Devi \[the
Goddess of Speech\]; the Nourisher of All via Her Milk \[and the Streams
of Speech are likewise thought of as Milk, interestingly enough\]. It
would therefore make sense for the male counterpart to this Goddess to
be a Bull. Especially given the noted temperament of the Bull and His
formidable power. And, of course, the ‘Fertility’ connotation – which we
find specifically referenced in an array of hymnals upon the subject,
such as those to the Sky Father as Parjanya. With the Bellowing of the
Bull finding expression as the Roaring of Thunder (the ‘Resonant
Speech’) ; and the fierce exhalations through His Nostrils as the Winds,
the clouds, likewise, from the ‘hot breath’ of His Anger and His Life,
His Vitality \[and in the archaic Indo-European conceptry, the ‘smoking
breath’ of anger, and that of life, were, effectively, one\]. Indeed, we
might even speculate as to the Horns being symbolically resonant with
the arcening Lightning; or the Thundering Hooves being exactly that; the
potential utilization of the bull to draw a plough or other earthenworks
creator finding resonancy with the Bull symbolism in relation to the
Channel for the Waters in various Vedic hymnals upon the subject.

It should therefore come as no surprise that we find the Bull as the
Emblem of the Sky Father – something which occurs also in the post-Vedic
Hindu religion, wherein Lord Shiva is directly hailed as ‘He Who Has The
Bull For His Ensign’ – Vrishabhadhvaja . And which may find a certain
residual currency with the frequency with which Zeus and Poseidon are
associated with Bulls also; as well as the recurrent Bull symbolism of
Dionysus, and the Cow symbolism of Hera.

However, we should also note that it is not only the Sky Father that is
hailed as a Bull. Indra, too, the Striker/Thunderer Son of the Sky
Father is spoken of as a Bull ; as are the Asvins – Sons of the Sky
Father, two; and, for that matter, the Maruts, Who possess similar
ultimate paternity. So, evidently these are cases of ‘Like Father, Like
Sons’; and mean that further contextual information is necessary afore
directly ascribing a given ‘Bull’ mention to the Sky Father
specifically.

So what are some of these contextual qualifiers? Well, generally
speaking we are looking for two (overlapping) things – first, those
situations wherein a Vedic deific expression we *know* to be the Sky
Father is hailed as a Bull ; and second, those situations wherein the
theological role and ritualine function involved in the line is
coterminous with that of the Sky Father. Hence as we shall see, the “Red
Bull” – and also a certain provision of … energy, perhaps we might even
figuratively suggest “wings” via His Divine Grace.

The ‘Red’ element is quite key. For it stands for the Radiant Energy –
that of Fire , and of the Sky-Disc that is the Sun. Hence the frequency
with which it is Agni specifically hailed as the Red Bull – for what
colour is Flame. And, flowing from this, partially why we find the
mentions for the Red Bull in connexion with the pious conduct of proper
rites. Because Agni is, by necessity, integral to these – as, of course,
is Brihaspati / Brahmahaspati ; Agni representing the Fire at the heart
of proceedings, Brihaspati standing for the officiating role via the
enunciation of the Sacred Speech, the Songs of Prayer. This also helps
to explain the mentions for Soma as the Bull – for this is produced in
the ritualine sense via the precise application of the pious rites (that
is to say, Agni & Brihaspati ) , in accordance with the Law (that is to
say, Varuna) , and is brought forth to empower the imbiber (in just the
same manner that Agni , Shiva as Shyena – the Raptor – flies the Soma ;
or, in the Nordic expression of this same myth and rite, as Odin bears
the Mead of Poetry in form of an Eagle; and, as we shall see, there is
frequent co-occurrence of the Falcon or Eagle in relation to the Bull in
these hymnals for just this reason – for the Sky Father is not bound
only to a single animalistic form in association nor mythic conceptry).

However, what is additionally interesting to us is that the hailing for
Agni , as the Altar-Fire and the Empowerment thereto \[Agni, as is
well-known, derives from the Proto-Indo-European term for ‘Living Fire’,
‘Animate Fire’ – whereas ‘Fire’ itself derives from the PIE for the
inanimate ‘mundane’ kind of Flame\] , is not confined exclusively to
this sphere.

Rather, it is directly and intentionally doubled to refer to the Sun.
Which makes multiple layers of good mythologic and theologic sense. For
the Sun is also a Fire ; and, indeed, is the Source of all Energy, all
Life. Just as we find the Sky Father being hailed as in the relevant
hymnaic conceptry. You can also see this in the frequent Hindu
invocation for the Powers of the Sun in the course of our rites and
rituals (the Gayatri Mantra is a stellar example); and it is not hard to
see how this, too, links back to the ‘bright drop’ of the Soma and the
investiture of life-energy which goes along therewith. Particularly
given the several Sanskrit terms that are effective doublets for
‘illumination’ via the Solar Rays and for Speech, Prayer, Sacred Song
and Rite.

And while a direct association of the Sky Father with the Sun might seem
a little curious, given that Surya is the Vedic Sun God … as we have
repeatedly demonstrated elsewhere in the course of my work, both the
Vedic and the broader Indo-European conceptry upon this point are rather
more complex than that. For a start, there are recurrent direct
identifications of the Sun as the Eye of the Sky Father. For a second,
there is the very fact itself that Dyaus refers to the Radiant Heaven –
made so *by* the Sun. For the third, there are actually *multiple* Vedic
Sun Gods and Gods referred to as The Sun; including, for the fourth, the
Sky Father – hence the paternity of various figures in the Vedic
understanding, being Surya … where in the Greek these are the Sons and
Daughter of Zeus.

And in any case, our inference is not really required – take, for
example, RV VII 88 2 : “I take the face of Varuṇa for Agni’s. / So
might he bring-Lord also of the darkness-the light in heaven that I may
see its beauty!” Agni as the Sky Father Visage of the Day , Varuna as
the Sky Father Visage of the Night.

So, where does this leave us, as applies the modern ‘echoes’ of this
archaic conceptry?

Well, the most blatant, blaringly obvious one is, of course, the Red
Bull energy drink, with its ingredient of Taurine; and, of course, its
slogan of “Red Bull Gives You Wings” – which simultaneously ‘echoes’ the
empowering function of Soma , and the atmospheric sphere associated with
the Sky Father. A loose parallel, but it nevertheless always arrives
within my mind whenever the Red Bull Vedic symbolism is mentioned.

However, the more intriguing occurrence is far less well-known. The
Indian warship, the INS Trishul . Now, the Trishula is, of course, the
‘Three-Spear’ weapon of Mahadeva. And is an expression of the
‘World-Spear’ concept we so often find in the Hands of the Sky Father.
So it is not hard to see how the name of the ship in Indian service is
Sky Father relevant. Yet here is the curious thing – when the Trishul
was undergoing sea trials with the Russians prior to its being handed
over to the Indian Navy, and therefore bearing a Russian name and ensign
… the emblem of the ship was a Red Bull, powerful clouds of steam
billowing from His nostrils.

Now, I do not know that some Russian sailor nor ship designer was aware
of what he was implicitly referencing. It’s not impossible – stranger
occurrences have, from time to time, happened; and there has long been a
deep and abiding respect for mythology amidst various naval circles when
it comes to the heraldry and the nomenclature of warships. But I would
,as I say, be quite heavily surprised were this actually what was in the
mind of the man who dubbed this vessel with the emblem of the Red Bull
for the course of its sea-trials.

Sometimes, it seems, we pick up upon concepts, elements out there from
our archaic past – without realizing that that is what we are doing.
Myth, as I have often noted, has an internal logic and forcefulness –
that which radiates out and resonates upon us as its drum-skin , almost
regardless of whether we are conscious, active, willing participants
with same or not. So, too, may it perhaps have been herein.

Anyway, with all of that conceptual explication propounded – perhaps we
should take a look at some of the Vedic Hymnals in question. Not all of
them, of course, I have had to narrow it down quite significantly given
the sheer number of Bull mentions in relation to the Sky Father in the
RigVeda alone. But these ought provide an eloquent span of emblematic
examples:

RV VI 73:  
“1. SERVED with oblations, first-born, mountain-render, Aṅgiras’ son,
Bṛhaspati, the Holy, / With twice-firm path, dwelling in light, our
Father, roars loudly, as a bull, to Earth and Heaven.  
2 Bṛhaspati, who made for such a people wide room and verge when Gods
were invocated, / Slaying his enemies, breaks down their castles,
quelling his foes and conquering those who hate him.  
3 Bṛhaspati in war hath won rich treasures, hath won, this God, the
great stalls filled with cattle. / Striving to win waters and light,
resistless, Bṛhaspati with lightning smites the foeman.”

RV II 33:

“15 O tawny Bull, thus showing forth thy nature, as neither to be wroth,
O God, nor slay us. / Here, Rudra, listen to our invocation. Loud may
we speak, with heroes, in assembly.”

RV X 8:

“1. AGNI advances with his lofty banner: the Bull is bellowing to the
earth and heavens. / He hath attained the sky’s supremest limits. the
Steer hath waxen in the lap of waters.”

RV 1 194  
“10 When to thy chariot thou hadst yoked two red steeds and two ruddy
steeds, wind-sped, thy roar was like a bull’s. / Thou with
smoke-bannered flame attackest forest trees. Let us not in thy
friendship, Agni, suffer harm.”

RV 1 140:  
“10 O Agni, shine resplendent with our wealthy chiefs, like a
loud-snorting bull, accustomed to the house. / Thou casting off thine
infant wrappings blazest forth as though thou hadst put on a coat of
mail for war.”

RV III 07:  
“5 They know the red Bull’s blessing, and are joyful under the
flaming-coloured Lord’s dominion: / They who give shine from heaven
with fair effulgence, whose lofty song like Iḷā must be honoured.”

RV III 15:  
“3 Bull, who beholdest men, through many mornings, among the dark ones
shine forth red, O Agni. / Lead us, good Lord, and bear us over
trouble: Help us who long, Most Youthful God, to riches.  
4 Shine forth, a Bull invincible, O Agni, winning by conquest all the
forts and treasures, / Thou Jātavedas who art skilled in guiding, the
chief high saving sacrifice’s Leader.  
5 Lighting Gods hither, Agni, wisest Singer, bring thou to us many and
flawless shelters. / Bring vigour, like a car that gathers booty: bring
us, O Agni, beauteous Earth and Heaven.  
6 Swell, O thou Bull and give those powers an impulse, e’en Earth and
Heaven who yield their milk in plenty, / Shining, O God, with Gods in
clear effulgence. Let not a mortal’s evil will obstruct us.”

RV VI 48  
“6 He who hath filled both worlds fult with his brilliant shine, who
hastens with his smoke to heaven; / He made himself apparent through
the gloom by night, the Red Bull in the darksome nights, the Red Bull in
the darksome nights.”

RV VII 88:  
“1. PRESENT to Varuṇa thine hymn, Vasiṣṭha, bright, most delightful to
the Bounteous Giver, / Who bringeth on to us the Bull, the lofty, the
Holy, laden with a thousand treasures.  
2 And now, as I am come before his presence, I take the face of Varuṇa
for Agni’s. / So might he bring-Lord also of the darkness-the light in
heaven that I may see its beauty!”

RV 7 5:  
“2 Sought in the heavens, on earth is Agni stablished, leader of rivers,
Bull of standing waters.”

RV I 79:  
“2 Thy well-winged flashes strengthen in their manner, when the black
Bull hath bellowed round about us. / With drops that bless and seem to
smile he cometh: the waters fall, the clouds utter their thunder.”

RV VII 55  
“7 The Bull who hath a thousand horns, who rises up from out the sea”

RV X 63:  
“3 I will rejoice in these Ādityas for my weal, for whom the Mother
pours forth water rich in balm, / And Dyaus the Infinite, firm as a
rock, sweet milk,—Gods active, strong through lauds, whose might the
Bull upholds.”

RV III 61  
“7 On Law’s firm base the speeder of the Mornings, the Bull, hath
entered mighty earth and heaven. / Great is the power of Varuṇa and
Mitra, which, bright, hath spread in every place its splendour.”

RV IX 71:  
“9 Like a bull roaming round the herds he bellows: he hath assumed the
brilliancy of Sūrya. / Down to the earth hath looked the heavenly
Falcon: Soma with wisdom views all living creatures.”

RV IX 82  
“1. EVEN as a King hath Soma, red and tawny Bull, been pressed: the
Wondrous One hath bellowed to the kine. / While purified he passes
through the filtering fleece to seat him hawk-like on the place that
drops with oil.”

There. See? We even eventually got to the ‘energy drink’ after all !
