+++
title = "Return To The Future Through Your Heritage, Your Past – Always, Always Back To Thexa0Well"
date = "September 8, 2019"

+++


![70382494_10162239856855574_447720490585292800_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/70382494_10162239856855574_447720490585292800_n.jpg?w=676)

“A people without the knowledge of their past history, origins and
culture is like a tree without roots.”  
– Marcus Garvey

Also, while it is not … \*quite\* of identical sentiment to the above,
from Njal’s Saga: “Ber er hver að baki nema sér bróður eigi.” – “Bare is
the Back of the Brotherless Man”.

This latter Icelandic maxim develops itself, when thought about, into
something inexorably similar to the quotation of the aforementioned
black nationalist. For it is not simply that a problem shared is a
problem halved … by cleaving it in two with an axe, in close
co-operation with one’s kinsman.

It is a far broader thing than that. Culture, heritage, custom – these
things are cloaks and armour amidst otherwise inhospitable (indeed, in
this modern age, outright \*barren\*) environs, whether human or
physical.

Now, this is not to say that travel, and the encountering of the
different and the foreign were concepts to be abjured by the
Indo-Europeans of old. Quite the contrary.

“Wanderlust” may have been a misunderstanding of a more recent German
term which in fact refers to the enthusiasm for hiking out there in
nature – but the concept of the Volkswanderung is a veer-y excellent
means by which we might refer to a pattern frequent within Indo-European
history, wherein not just initial forays of raiding parties and
adventurous young men but \*whole, entire peoples\* perambulated about
the Continent of Europe, Eurasia, and even further afield beyond the
tracklessness of the sea.

An enduring fascination with the concept of ‘voyage’ and ‘discovery’ can
be found in the ‘travelogue’ style literature, including some Sagas,
which had expanded in popularity as we marched through the medieval era
– spurred, in the case of the Norsemen, by the actually-then-occurring
custom of supplying semi-mercenary warriors to various more southerly
climes.

Indeed, we can directly see such influence when we consider the Saga of
Eirek Víðförla, wherein prior to his setting out to try and find the
‘Undying Land’ supposed to exist beyond “India”, Eirek gets much of his
geographic knowledge directly imparted to him by a ruler in Miklagaard –
Constantinople, the capital of Byzantium, wherein many a Norseman had
served as part of the praetorian Varangian Guard.

![33083913_206138319998500_1938731517106716672_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/33083913_206138319998500_1938731517106716672_n.png?w=676)

There is also, of course, the massive-scale imperialistic conquests of
the Classical World – Macedonians, Romans, and of somewhat earlier
dating, the Persians in many directions including the rather temporary
excursion up into Scythia.

Yet there is something interesting to be found within the cultural
experience of those two storied ‘Western’ Empires which I have just
mentioned. In both cases, while there \*may\* have been varying shades
and degrees of desire to encompass a huge ken \[or, if you prefer,
‘loka’ – a wonderful Sanskrit term which has at its Proto-Indo-European
root, words for “light” and “illumination” and “looking”, before
eventually coming more to refer to a demesne, a kingdom, a domain. “As
far as the eye can see”, a world entire, in its most extensive sense\] …
such an enthusiasm was tempered by the disquiet, the grumblings, the
occasionally outright uprising against a man or a ruler or a regime
which was perceived to have abandoned too much of his own heritage and
cultural values in favour of those of the peoples he had encountered
upon the way.

It is true to state that the tale of the Indo-Europeans is one of
inveterate borrowing. The Crows and Ravens, the Pitrs \[‘Ancestors’,
‘Forefathers’ – same root as “Father”, “Pater”\] as we would call them,
are the Shades of our Forebears not only due to their strong
intelligence, their association with death and the Lord Thereof
(particularly upon the battlefield) – but also because they \*take\*
from all over the place. \*Particularly\* that which is shiny.

And in the case of the Greeks, the Romans, the Indo-Aryans, various
Germanic peoples, we most definitely \*do\* see incorporations of
cultural kernels, customs, even wholesale divinities \[although
\*rarely\* without at least some form of underlying endogenous conceptry
to hang this lattermost upon to begin with; and usually fairly
suspiciously regarded if not outright cracked down upon or otherwise
constrained, regardless\].

But, then, consider the charges brought against Marc Antony, that he had
begun to behave in a manner that was decidedly un-Roman-like. Or
Elagabalus’ many crimes including those of ‘Orientalism’ in both matters
religious and political. And, of course, the well-renowned near-mutiny
of the Macedonian units of Alexander’s army on the way back from India,
at the thought that their lord had become too Persianified.

A somewhat similar pattern is evinced via the opposition in Hindu
culture and circles to Islamified elites, to the “BhadraLoks” in Bengal
who lived in imitation of the English and then-‘Modernity’, as well as
the absolutely justified outrage at the ‘Macaulayist’ efforts to
eradicate Sanskrit and Hindu elements from the Indian education system.

And it is most telling indeed, to look at things from the other side of
those conflicts, to realize that especially in the case of Macaulay, the
effort to erase essential connection and immersion with Heritage of the
now-subject people(s) was a deliberately done act of civilizational
vandalism designed to render them far more pliant and pliable as the
ruled-over.

The logic is simple – once a people stops being a people, thinking of
itself as a people, having awareness of just what it is that actually
\*made\* and \*makes\* it a people in the first place … then it is, by
definition, no longer a people that is resisting. It is, at most,
\*people\* resisting – and often as more isolated pockets of resistance
within a broadly less actively engaged multitude.

An effort which was thankfully unsuccessful – and, in one of history’s
curious ironies, appears to have actually backfired rather spectacularly
as applies making Hindu culture and heritage more broadly available
\[including outside of India\] through the concerted efforts to resist
the above and push back with dissemination of the relevant materials
amidst the populace, even in English, etc.

Still, it is most useful to examine the phenomenon of
Macaulayism-as-it-was-intended, especially when we are experiencing the
much more comparatively recent phenomenon of “McWorld”, “McWorldism” –
which we might briefly explain as “actually-existing globalism”, insofar
as it doesn’t actually mean what is often thought of as
“multiculturalism” nor “diversity”, but rather the roll-out of a
particular pseudo-Americanized space of quasi-cultural kampf that has a
similar relationship to the actual concept of “culture” as ‘elevator
music’ has to a symphony orchestra, or folk-songs.

If the Back of the “Brotherless Man” is indeed Bare, then the process
alluded to above, is one of first stripping him of his clothing \[which,
if the experience of Indian-textiles in the 1700s versus British cotton
is anything to go by, will likely be of superior quality as well as
beauty and \*meaningfulness\* to what might otherwise be forced down
upon us via the globalized market\] … and then straight-jacketing him
til he has forgotten how to re-spin his own previous form of the cloth ,
the tapestry, the veer-y fabric of identity. At which point, the
one-size-fits-all featureless perhaps-even-onesie is thrust upon him,
instead.

So what is the fate that lies afore us, should we somehow manage to
become that of which the Ancients could only dimly conceive – and even
then, with little so much as mournful terror.

Therein lies the direct antithesis of the Volkswanderung, a ‘converse
view’ – the “journey”, the “sojourn”, more aptly speaking, as the
metaphor for one who has become “rootless”. One who has no home to go
back to, and so therefore “wanders” about thither and yon sans
overarching purpose, guidance, direction. \[So, you know, the opposite
of what Odin, and the Wind-Riding Lords of
the[#GangSteppe](https://www.facebook.com/hashtag/gangsteppe?source=feed_text&epa=HASHTAG)do\]

He does this, because he has nothing else – and is either endeavouring
to ‘outrun’ the memories and the ashes of his previous connexion with
his Past \[and here, I more properly mean a Past that is far larger,
broader, and older than him,than his – that he is more properly to be
considered an active \*bearer\* of, rather than a full-scale much less
an \*exclusionary\* possessor thereof\], or he is searching in vain for
some shred, some skerrick of connectivity \*with\* said Past; whether
this be some yet-surviving (if perhaps far-flung) remnant to his people,
his kin, or even simply the reminders of what it was, who they were, to
be coagulated and preserved as one might attempt to reassemble the
shards of a statue.

This comes through most eloquently in the famed Anglo-Saxon poem – “The
Wanderer”; a man who, as the title suggests, is treading ‘wraeclast’ –
the Path of the Exile.

A man who is “wretched and sorrowful, bereft of my homeland, far from
noble kinsmen,”, who seeks “Where I might find, far or near, one who in
the meadhall might know about my people.”

Within the realms of dream and memory, there is no solace to be found,
either:  
“Remembered kinsmen press through his mind; he singeth out gladly
\[greets them with joy\], scanneth eagerly men from the same hearth.
They \[inevitably\] swim away. Sailor’s ghosts \[‘floating ones’\] bring
not many known songs \[familiar speech\] there. ”

Aristotle may have opined that “Whosoever is delighted in solitude is
either a wild beast or a god.” But many beasts are the exact opposite –
pack animals, creatures of community. The Wolves, the Ravens, the
Elephants – except in that last case, wherein the mighty and
memory-bound creature is going off to die.

![b93127327ae74e9ba6c4545ad6e3f31b](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/b93127327ae74e9ba6c4545ad6e3f31b.jpg?w=676)

Gods, too, shall often be found amidst the company of other Gods – with
Their solitude tending to coincide with dire previous circumstance, as
in the case of Lord Shiva’s retreat up into the inhumanly unforgiving
terrain of the uppermost spires of the Himalayas following the
Immolation of Lady Sati, there to be alone with His Most Mighty Grief,
and even burning asunder to ashes the Kama-Deva \[‘Love-God’\] Who
turned up to try and artificially rectify the situation.

Who could wish such a fate upon a man – that they become not a man
amidst Men \[and, as I am oft-fond of observing, Hannah Arendt wisely
held herself to be a political thinker rather than an abstract
philosopher, precisely because it was \*men\* rather than \*man\* which
inhabited this world\]; indeed, an “individual” rather than a portion of
“Mankind” – which, after all, is the “Kin(d) of Man(n)u(s)”, and
therefore via the word itself indicates at least some degree of
connectivity with one’s heritage. Especially given the potentially
plausible root of this concept with the Proto-Indo-European “Men”,
meaning “mind”, “thinking”, “spiritual activity” – which also provides
us with the root for terms for “memory”, such as “memento”, “mnemonic”.
In Sanskrit, मनु (Manu) has maintained a rather remarkable
close-coterminity of pretty much all of these concepts, especially once
related terms such as मन्तु (Mantu – man, men, counsel passed on,
overseer/oversight, governance), मनस् (Manas – which also includes
‘breath of life’, ‘imagination’, ‘temper’/’temperament’), मन्मन् (manman
– which has a \*very\* close meaning-field to the Proto-Germanic ‘Muniz’
which underpins ‘Munin’, encompassing also bandhs of affection, and in
Sanskrit, a Prayer and an outward expression of an inner thought or
feeling or insight/essence – which is, in a veer-y real sense,
\*exactly\* what externally manifested heredity, material culture, or
other forms of cultural heritage etc, is).

To return, then, to our “lost” \[in multiple senses of the term – for he
is not only misplaced upon the wideness of the earth, but \*within\*
himself (and therefore, in teh sense of the clan’s intrinsic, immanent
interplay inito his psyche, \*from\* himself, at least in part) from
that which previously anchored and grounded him\] Wanderer, as he
contemplates what now confronts him in the increasingly bleak absence of
community and of kin : –

“Now in place of a beloved host stands  
a wall wondrously high, wound round with serpents.”

Students of Germanic mythology and cosmology shall note that this this
exactly mirrors description of Nastrond \[‘Corpse-Shore’\] – rather
strongly implying that the narrator may be seeing a vision of Hell in
the absence of fallen comrades and isolation from his ancestral folk and
folk-ways that go with, can only really manifest with and through them.

“Storms beat on the stone hillside, the ground bound by driving sleet,
winter’s wrath. Then wanness cometh, night’s shade spreadeth, sendeth
from north the rough hail to harry mankind.

In the earth-realm all is crossed \[troubled/tangled\] ; Wyrd’s will
changeth the world under Heavens

Here, wealth is temporary; Here, friend is temporary; Here, man \[one’s
self\] is temporary; Here, Maeg is temporary;

All this earth’s frame shall stand empty.’ \[all the foundation of this
world turns to waste\]”

I have left “Maeg” untranslated, as it has several potential
interpretations – including “kin”, but also “woman”, or “power/might”,
dependent upon dialect.

It is not hard to see how these last lines, in particular, echo the
well-known axiom of the Havamal, – although in that particular case, the
moral maxim is somewhat different: while various worldly things such as
cattle and those around us are transitory, Fame, Glory lasts eternal.

However, I have often pondered the question as to how enduring the
renown of mighty deeds can be, in the absence of those who remember
them, and speak of them, sing of them, eulogize them and their authors
\[in both senses of the term – it is important also to honour the
sagacious word-artificer, without whom the folk-memory of a people is
significantly in peril. Without the Vedic Rishis,how would would the
Vedic culture and religion of three and a half thousand years ago, more,
have come down to us?\].

Whatever the answer to that particular question \[and there \*are\* some
metaphysical suggestions which mean that it’s perhaps not quite so
straigthforward as one might think …which we might delve into in more
depth at another juncture\], in The Wanderer we find a meditative
counterpoint to the modern concept that “Hell Is Other People”.

Indeed, it’s downright \*inverted\*. “Hell”, here, the place of cold and
dark and sinful infamy, wound-round with serpents and dripping with the
venom of death amidst icy waves ‘pon a trackless ocean that is uncaring
… is the \*lack\* of (certain) other people. It is the tangible
divorcedness from being “a part of a people”. Out, beyond even being
“apart \*from\* a people”, and into the erasure from this earth or
potentially even the other realms, \*of\* one’s People.

This is why, when I am counselling many of those whom I look after and
tend to, there are two enjoinments \[and that’s quite directly,
figuratively, what they are – en-\*join\*ments\] rarely far from my
lips:

“Remember Who/What You Are”  
“Become That Which You Were Born To Be”

Or, in other words – if the tree of your life is failing to flower,
seems withering in its branch-like extremities and starting to weaken
from boughs to trunk … go back to “basics”, the “foundations”. Look to
the “roots”, the “Heritage”.

There, you shall indeed find a Well of Wisdom-from-‘Memory’.

