+++
title = "Interpretatio Steppona"
date = "September 12, 2019"

+++
![70950934_10162249624665574_8224481154837774336_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/70950934_10162249624665574_8224481154837774336_n.jpg?w=676)

Strange thought that I may do some more work upon:

If you’ve spent pretty much \*any time at all\* around the field of
comparative mythography …. then you’ll almost certainly have run into
the phrase “Interpretatio Romana”.

And despite it getting a lot of criticism these days for being ..
blatantly not quite accurate, at least partially because it’s a stellar
example of “instead of attemptinglook at and understand another
culture’s .. culture on its own terms, let’s attempt to force it into
our own more familiar paradigm”, I’ve previously defended it to a degree
because it nevertheless manages to \*preserve\* and \*illuminate\* some
otherwise obscurated elements. But that is another story for another
time.

Yet for all their saliency within \*our\* collective imaginations when
the phrases “world-spanning empire” and “how did they get all the way
over \*there\*?!” are brought up, the cultural contacts of the Greeks
and then Romans with an array of the further-afield \[yet more
important, especially in the modern day\] Indo-European peoples were
actually pretty limited. And therefore, so too, are the Interpretatio
Romana / Interpretatio Graeca conclusions which might be looked at.

Which, in one sense, isn’t too much of a problem. The field of
Indo-European mythoreligion and (comparative) theology has long since
caught up and overtaken them in just about every way possible except
actually being able to physically march across the ancient world and
directly encounter the peoples, the customs, the religion(s) in question
as living faiths, with the exception of Hinduism.

Yet we still find ourselves seemingly inevitably bound by and weighed
down with, the pseudo-theological cognitive effort of some luminaries of
the Great Civilizations of the Mediterranean.

Which is a bit of a shame, not only because it leads to insistent and
insistently distortionary thought-patterns when people attempt to think
of what an(other) Indo-European pantheon or mythoreligious setup might
look like at the outset … but also because this \*neglects\* an array of
\*other\* and rather more ‘at the coalface’ “Interpretatio” style
interactions and “interpretation” rubrics that flourished elsewhere in
the Indo-European world.

What I’m getting at, is that in the “convection zone” about the area of
modern Afghanistan, western Pakistan, eastern Iran, etc, and the
Steppes, , the archaeological evidence is quite clear that the notion of
“this God of the religion over \*there\* is equivalent to this God of
the religion over \*here\*” was not just some sort of idle semi-academic
curio for some back home in the Imperial Centres, nor simply an easy
tool for diplomatic and administrative facilitation of neighbouring and
newly-subjected peoples.

It was an \*actual\* way of viewing the world, and acutely relevant to
how these people saw themselves, and saw the world thence around them.

Not least due to vastly enhanced experience with and more in-depth
knowledge of, the other Indo-European mythoreligious cultures in
question, this also appears to have produced rather more significant
deductions, inductions, and “reconstructive” deific efforts on the parts
of these peoples – whether Indo-Greeks, or Scythians in the area, or
others still more exotic besides.

Outside of rather specialized circles, we don’t tend to know nor perhaps
\*care\* to know very much of these; and yet there’s so much that is
interesting, vibrant, indeed \*vital\* to how they did things in these
areas.

My “strange thought”, then, with which I began this piece, is that if we
were to look into the equivalent “interpretatio” approaches of these
places, we might find something no less relevant, and likely
considerably more useful, than the more frequently commented upon Greek
speculations around “Indian Herakles”, Roman guesses at “Celtic Mars”,
etc.
