+++
title = "Cybele In Spain – The Return of Myth toxa0Madrid"
date = "September 28, 2019"

+++


![71563899_10162317227005574_7892685916085420032_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71563899_10162317227005574_7892685916085420032_n.jpg?w=676)

It is FRIDAY – Therefore, Devi-otional (A)Art(I)

One theme I’ve attempted to weave into my work is “Indo-Europeanism For
The Modern Age” – the notion, the concept that what we do is not merely
“mythology”, in the sense of pouring over musty tomes \[and/or online
scan-uploads of same\] to attempt to describe and detail the bygone
beliefs of the far-ancient past (although it is \*also\* that); but
\*also\* to look at how these elements from the past – or, as applies
Hindu elements in particular, the “past-which-yet-lives” \[in fact, in
some was it is inadequate to refer to these as “the past”, as that
implies a certain lack of saliency, of immanence to us here in the
present. The “Ancient-And-Enduring” isn’t quite there, either. The
“Ever-Living-Flame” might be getting closer – and not least due to the
Tabiti deific we commented on briefly in my last week’s Cybele post; or
the manner in which AdiParaShakti is above and beyond space and time,
and intersects through all\] – how these Indo-European elements are
capable of turning up amidst our Modern World. Occasionally, indeed
\*especially\* where we might not perhaps be expecting them!

So that brings us to this week’s piece. This is a fine fountain from a
national capital, depicting Cybele – the Mountain Queen, Great Mother
\[Magna Mater\], and a deity both embodying and concerned with the
defence of the realm, the upholding of national identity and
sovereignty. I’ve covered the deific complex in question in greater
detail in several of my previous works \[including the “Votive Plate of
Cybele, Great Goddess, Mountain Mother – Arte-Facts #5” which was
written last Friday, and the “BHARAT MATA AND THE INDO-EUROPEAN DEIFIC
OF NATIONAL IDENTITY” piece I penned for Indian Independence Day the
previous year\], which will also explain how and why I’m taking a
somewhat \*broader\* view on Cybele than some Classical era accounts
might seem to directly contain.

But why am I finding this statue extraordinary? I mean, it is a physical
representation of a deific complex whose iconographic, linguistic, and
theological/mythological/portfolio coterminities stretch from Iceland to
India – and that is undeniably pretty amazing! But why \*this statue\*
in particular?

![71103704_10162317227330574_5131489404702949376_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71103704_10162317227330574_5131489404702949376_o.jpg?w=676)

Well, it’s in Madrid (as you can probably tell by the Spanish flag),
situated upon the City’s formerly eponymous plaza (since renamed from
“de Madrid” to “de Cibeles”), and immediately outside the civic palace
from which the city is governed. It is also, as it happens, apparently
the site where the Real Madrid soccer team observes its sporting
triumphs – with the captain of the team garlanding the statue with a
flag and scarf of the team, and therefore their community (of whom some
might say they are somewhat literal standard bearers, ‘defenders’, near
embodiments more than representatives), and offering any trophies thusly
accrued to the Goddess amidst major communal celebration.

![71323181_10162317531055574_5909712744021491712_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71323181_10162317531055574_5909712744021491712_o.jpg?w=676)

Or, to phrase it another way … we not only have an ancient deity
regarded as closely connected to national, civic affairs, the heart of a
community (and, in terms of the linguistics of the matter, as detailed
in my previous works, seriously bound up with both mountains, and
settlements/cities, and most especially both at once) – but Whose
worship has generally encompassed the highest patriotism \[see the
worship of Bharat Mata in India for a contemporary, indeed \*the\*
contemporary best possible example; or Athena of ancient Athens,
perhaps, Who in many ways is running off the veer-y same deific
complex\]; and Who is specifically thanked for victories and other forms
of deliverance, by the great men \[indeed, in Latin terms, the “best
men”, in some cases\] of the country, the city-state. And Who is
symbolically welcomed to the community She is hosted by in just such a
manner.

![71184578_10162317520880574_3615484821024800768_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71184578_10162317520880574_3615484821024800768_o.jpg?w=676)

Now, just as we often fail to give the people of antiquity due credit
for knowing things that we know now, and assume they just \*happened\*
to do this or that without actually knowing the surprisingly sound
reasons \*why\* that we can now observe … so, too, is it the case that
sometimes we don’t give \*modern\* people the proper credit for knowing
why it is they do something.

And, to be sure, sometimes they \*don’t\* – it’s just something that’s
been passed down, and which they are now ignorant of the underlying
archaic purpose(s) thereof, or it is something that they have
(re-)developed in a manner that now bears clear resemblance to the older
elements, without their quite knowing \*why\* they’ve done it, and just
acting upon some deepa subconscious guiding force, so to speak. Mythic
Reality tends to shape regular reality, within its bounds, without the
former ever having to make itself even semi-apparent to the latter. It
just \*Is\*.

So in this spirit, I’m not quite sure how much of the above was
\*intended\* or is consciously undertaken today, by the people of Madrid
and their illustrious soccer team, with a view to the direct emulation
of something Ancient, something True. Or whether it is the case that
some things just ‘felt right’ and so they went with them; and the city
changed itself around this eminent statue.

![71219108_10162317559650574_2958516710644121600_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71219108_10162317559650574_2958516710644121600_o.jpg?w=676)

Certainly, the fact that the statue was designed and sculpted in the
late 1700s \[the former, in 1777 by Ventura Rodríguez, Francisco
Gutierrez, Roberto Michel, and Miguel Jimenez; the latter process being
completed in 1782, installed 1794\], would lend credence to the notion
that \*somebody\* knew what was going on … and yet, it wasn’t until
several decades \*after\* the statue’s unveiling that the area around it
began to become an important civic center. Indeed, prior to this, it had
spent much more time either as the fringes of the growing city, or as a
Royal retreat situated thereupon.

It would be more than a hundred years before the building that is
currently designated the Palacio de Cibeles was actually even begun
\[the first stone being lain in 1907, the opening in 1919\]; and then
more than a hundred more before it would be bear the name \[2011\] – a
change which was instituted only a few years after it had been turned
from one of the world’s most impressive postal offices \[technically a
broader telecommunications hub – including still running telegraphs into
the late 1980s\] into a civic building with the relocation of the Madrid
civil center from the Casa de la Villa in 2007.

![70839875_10162317565695574_1948315122447417344_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/70839875_10162317565695574_1948315122447417344_o.jpg?w=676)

Real Madrid, meanwhile, was only founded as a club in 1902; and appear
to have had any significant association with the statue until 1986 (or,
roughly two hundred years after its creation and installation), when the
significantly Real Madrid-ian Spanish national team’s unexpected ascent
to the quarter finals of that year’s soccer world cup appears to have
triggered spontaneous celebrations at (and in) the site of the statue
and fountain. A situation which was then repeated during the next year’s
European Cup semi-finals. And on it went \[although admittedly, going
\*heavily\* awry following a 1993 loss – wherein drunk hoodlums broke
off and carried away one of the statue’s arms, to general outrage and
uproar\]. \[As a point of comparative interest, a rival team from the
same city – Atletico Madrid – has since adopted a Neptune statue some
distance down the road, as its own equivalent … which has a ‘resonance’
when we consider the potentially somewhat ‘competitive’ relationship in
Phrygian mythology between Cybele and their Sky Father representation;
and before somebody writes in to correct me upon this point, Neptune,
running off the Proto-Indo-European “Neb” particle as well as other
supporting evidence, is strongly contendable to be part of the Classical
‘triple-aspect’ refraction of Sky Father, along with Zeus/Jupiter and
Hades/Pluto/Dis Pater\]

My point, then, is a simple one.

It would have made a certain sense for the Cybele statue to have been
placed at the heart of a burgeoning civic center, deliberately connoted
and deployed to become an icon of the polis, and a symbol of its
collective identity, to be propitiated also with the frenzied ecstasy of
that community in triumph while garlanded with its insignia and offered
up its trophies, accompanied by its civic heroes … and casting a
watchful eye upon its duly empowered functionaries and leaders.

![71693202_10162317567555574_1872020714970677248_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71693202_10162317567555574_1872020714970677248_n.jpg?w=676)

But that is \*not\* what happened. Not intentionally, nor by mortal
direct design, anyway.

\*Instead\*, the veer-y opposite appears to have occurred.

The statue of Cybele was placed, and then over the course of the next
two centuries or so, the civic and communidentity elements of Madrid
\*moved \*to\* Her\*.

It may have taken more than two hundred years … but all of this quite
naturally eventually occurred. It takes time, after all, to cultivate,
sculpt and grow a ‘bonsai mountain’.

As I say, I doubt how much of this was ever actually consciously
\*intended\* by anybody, at any stage of the above process – or at
least, anybody merely human.

But this is not how Myth works. It can be \*observed\* as it is
unfolding – more rarely, it can be \*influenced\* to some degree in how
and where and when it might happen to unfold. Yet in reality, in
Reality, it has an a-priori existence, the proverbial “life of its own”
\[and one(s) that it takes on, takes \*for\* its own, in just such the
manner as we have seen, evidently, with the City of Madrid playing host
and then \*becoming\* Host \[in multiple senses of this term\] to the
mythic complex, the Myth in question\].

![71091995_10162317532265574_19899378051317760_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71091995_10162317532265574_19899378051317760_n.jpg?w=676)

Once Invoked, in fact even \*before\* it is invoked – intentionally and
perspicaciously, or otherwise – events, places, and always, always
\*people\*, begin to reorganize themselves in a manner that looks like
but utterly isn’t “of their own accord” to better and more closely
resonate, immanentize, resemble, and thence eventually (almost) to
\*be\* , the Myth in question.

And perhaps, the not-entirely-ancient maxim of Vox Populi Est Vox Dei
rather in mind, it is the case that these larger and less ‘structured’
bodies of people may be capable of picking up upon these ‘resonances’,
thence resonating themselves, in ways that a smaller number of top-down
directors would be less able or even willing to countenance.

Who, after all, would \*intentionally\* endeavour to set up a civic
mythoreligious resurrection in the heart of a modern city, that would
enfold the triumph rituals of apex sport along with the symbolism and
the physical situation of governance …. in a manner that simultaneously
re-enacts the distant past, and re-infuses these ancient ethoi into the
present.

Well, I mean, \*I\* would – but within the realms of religious
fundamentalist zealotry, this is pretty much par \[or ‘pur’\] for the
course.

![71169745_10162317526525574_995081392054337536_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71169745_10162317526525574_995081392054337536_n.jpg?w=676)

However it has eventuated, it is difficult in the extreme to look upon
some of the accompanying photography of the Cybele statue in question,
flanked by Spanish flags, spoken to directly by the worthies of the
polis upon raised platform \[interestingly \*also\* a frequent Cybele
devotional architecture/ritualine element\], backed by the architecture
of city-governance, devotedly garlanded with Real Madrid ensigns, quite
literally feted amidst what can only be described as a latter-day
Triumph, in tribute and in thanks …

… and, even though it is a contemporary sports team, in a contemporary
city, in a nominally largely Catholic country …

… and not feel that you are somehow glimpsing into something which has
once more resonated out, just as it has done in the ancient world
countless times over, from the Uppland Lokas of Myth and the Divine.

![71169874_10162317524110574_2150428522391273472_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71169874_10162317524110574_2150428522391273472_n.jpg?w=676)

I can quite honestly state, when I started doing all of this, that I
would not have anticipated citing, still much less with approval, a
soccer tradition as excellent latter-day Indo-European-ism. Indeed, I
would not even have thought to \*look\* in that direction, or anywhere
\*nearly\* close thereto.

Which just goes to show – Indo-Europeanism For The Modern Age, the
Return of Myth, is where it is to be found. Not only where we might
perhaps somewhat pretetniously \*presume\* it to be.

Jai Mata Di.  
Bharat Mata Ki Jaye.  
Ave Magna Mater.  
Jai Shakti Devi.

