+++
title = "“Einu nafni hétumk aldregi / síz ek með folkum fór”xa0– “By one name I have never been known / since I went among thexa0people”"
date = "September 19, 2019"

+++


[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/09/19/eino-nafni-hetomk-aldregi-six-ek-medfolkomfor-by-one-name-i-have-never-been-known-since-i-went-among-the-people/52024268_780631915627989_6240808728167075151_n/)

![52024268_780631915627989_6240808728167075151_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/52024268_780631915627989_6240808728167075151_n.jpg?w=394&h=492 "52024268_780631915627989_6240808728167075151_n")

[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/09/19/eino-nafni-hetomk-aldregi-six-ek-medfolkomfor-by-one-name-i-have-never-been-known-since-i-went-among-the-people/odin/)

![odin](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/odin.jpg?w=274&h=492 "odin")

Earlier this week, one of our associates – who’s a good guy, although we
don’t always agree – put up a thought about comparative Indo-European
theology. It included the following:

“All IE religions have a sky father, Earth mother and twin Gods. But,
that doesn’t mean those Gods aren’t sovereign entities, uniquely
different from their cognates of other cultures. \[…\] Divinity
manifests differently according to the specific tribe it tailors to.”

Now, I think that this is a useful quote; because it affords us a
springboard to talk about one of the really important, core issues to
the entire thing. There’s no getting around the fact that this or that
Indo-European people’s mythology both has similar elements … but can
express even the similar bits in occasionally \*wildly\* different ways.
And it’s tempting, when you see something like that, to conclude that
that’s for the deceptively simple reason that they may have different
Gods.

But this is not the position we take at #NAS – the Nordic Aryan Sangha;
nor is it the position of Arya Akasha, when we are speaking
theologically rather than, say, reducing the whole thing to an exercise
in comparative literature. Or however it is that the people who study
mythology that aren’t religious approach such things. With caution, one
would hope.

Anyway, there are three broad ways to construct the argument for our
position. Which I won’t go into \*huge, expansive\* detail upon, within
the span of this piece.

All of them, of course, are predicated upon the idea that actually, yes,
Gods exist. Surprising position for religious people to take, I know,
but apparently an increasingly less common one in these days of
pseudo-Jungian archetypes and placenta-autism cult-LARP-ery.

The first of these is what we might term the ‘Genetic’ perspective. We
know that the Proto-Indo-Europeans had, broadly speaking, a unified
pantheon. Which then – again, broadly speaking – went \*with\* the
various Indo-European groups out with them when they embarked upon their
migrations.

It would not make sense, I do not think, to assert that the same Gods,
worshiped by the same people, once … are now somehow \*different\* Gods,
Who just happen to be suspiciously similar looking and acting. And to
oppose that They’re the \*same\* Gods, and always have been, largely if
not entirely because the people in question is now living a few hundred
or a few thousand kilometers further distant from where they started
out, or where their cousins have wound up at.

I mean, if you were to take that position, you might as well declare
that the Thor worshipped in America is “American Thor”, and that this is
not necessarily the same deity as “Nordic Thor”

Which, I grant you, a certain comic book company slash Disney cinematic
universe … and, in a different way, if one recalls correctly, a certain
well-regarded fantasy author plus associated TV series … appear to be
attempting to take things.

Now if you’re really quite intent upon insisting that the Gods of
various Indo-European peoples are \*not\* the same Gods, despite
acknowledging that the Indo-European peoples and assumedly their Gods
\*were\* of unified origin once upon a time … I’m sure that the
creative-fiction types out there within the backwoods of France or
facebook shall put forehead-straining effort (from effort of bashing
into a brick wall) into coming up with SOME sort of headcanon
pseudosplanation with which to buttress their continued obstinance upon
this subject. As I have often been known to observe, even a mirror shall
not show you the image of your face if you are absolutely determined not
to see it therein. So whether it’s “MITOSIS” , or “IMPOSTERS”, or some
yet more far-fetched handwavium entirely, I have little doubt that
somebody’ll turn up to try and opposite what has just been said because
they would prefer not to believe it. That is on them. Reality, as I
think Philip K. Dick may have observed, is that which persists
\*regardless\* of whether you choose to acknowledge it.

However, having said all of that, it would be something of a mistake – a
mythtake, indeed – to get \*too\* cavalier about things, and attempt to
completely throw out all degree of differentiation between the various
Indo-European mythoreligions, just because we are aware that the same
Powers underpin (almost) all of them \[there’s one that’s … something
different, but we’ll … talk about that some other time\].

It is completely accurate to state that there are significant ‘bones’ of
coterminity – of fundamental ‘unity of essence’ – between pretty much
all the Indo-European mythoreligions. It is also completely accurate to
state that there are important differentiations and distinctions between
them, and the societies which they both underpin and reinforce, and are
reinforced and influenced \*by\*. There are also \*less\* important
distinctions, distortions, and even downright errors, often as a result
of “New Developments In \[local\] Theology” or foreign syncreticisms (or
a rather large-scale religious civil war, for that matter) and it can
often be difficult to easily determine just which is which.

All of that’s a \*phenomenally\* big topic, and we’re not going to get
much into it here; not least because we’ve covered some of these
examples elsewhere, but also because it’s secondary to the overall
thrust of our argument. Which is, functionally, that the \*existence\*
of certain differences – the valid ones, I mean; the \*intended\* ones,
as we shall soon see, and more especially the others that are lacking
such imperative pedigree – is easy to get caught up in, to the point
that you miss the actual underlying Unity beneath, between, beyond.

But as a bit of a working model, we shall briefly parse how we approach
this situation here at #NAS – Nordic Aryan Sangha. Which, as you can
probably tell from the name of the organization, if you haven’t heard or
read of us before, is a monastic order centered around the simultaneous
“Vedic” and “Eddic” devotional spheres; in largest part because we
believe that these are the two closest (prominent) Indo-European
mytho-religions – to the point that the Nordic religion often feels
closer to a ‘sect’ within the Hindusphere than something more distant
and different.

Yet just becausewe are resolutely of the opinion that whether we are
speaking in Eddic or Vedic termswe are speaking of the same Gods, this
does \*not\* mean that we seek to deny that there \*are\* important
differences of the appearance of things, of ethics, and in other such
theological matters between the various Indo-European mythoreligious
corpuses

Indeed, quite the contrary – we tend to advocate that those are there,
generally speaking, for good reason and should be respected.

That is to say, that while there \*are\* instances wherein we can
feasibly determine that something has something has gone awry; and
often, via comparative and historical analysis, it is possible to
determine not just some of what’s missing, but suggest feasible partial
‘reincorporations’ in its absence … in many cases, these differences are
not

the results of accidents or happenstance; they are \*deliberate\*,
purposeful actions, designed to attain particular results, inculcate
particular traits within the long-arc development of these various
Indo-European societies as according to Their design.

A good example of this, I think, is the differences between the Nordic
caste system versus the Vedic one. My general explanation for that, is
that the Nordic model of caste, along with the rest of its societal
model and climactic conditions, supporting and buttressing mythic corpus
etc. … is to produce strong, hardy warriors, explorers, alcoholics, and
builders of kitset furniture. While the Vedic CaturVarna model has been
set up to do a number of things, but in particular, to foster and
maintain a seriously excellent priest-caste which does profound academic
and theological development – and also acts as a fortress, a bastion for
the preservation of the ancient Indo-European mythoreligious elements,
heritage, even when its flame largely (but not entirely) goes out
elsewhere in the world. Indeed, in the absence of Vedic materials
faithfully passed down in unbroken Brahminical lineages of transmission
for almost four millennia continuously now, the field of comparative
Indo-European mythography would … be much different, indeed could hardly
exist today.

Now, in terms of the occurrence of this \*within the mythology itself\*,
I illustrate the principle ‘in motion’ in the GHOST DIVISION series we
ran via Arya Akasha earlier this year.

In its course, I observed that whereas the Einherjar of Odin is made up
of downright superhuman warriors that’ve been produced by the Germanic
peoples and then died gloriously (with a stated purpose of \*direct\*
combat in the War at the End of Time, inter alia … as well as being,
proverbially, “The Boys”) … the Ganas of Shiva \*also\* include pious
holy-men (although it should perhaps be noted that this does not at all
mean that they’re useless in a fight. Apart from many Shaivite holy-men
carrying Trishulas or axes and \*really\* knowing how to use them, they
are also often able to make use of powers that can include everything up
to the proverbial “Ancient Aryan Nuclear Weapons” due to their insight
and command of religious elements – such as the ‘words-as-weapons’
employment of Sanskrit and certain mantras\] .

Taking a step back, in both cases, we see a mythological codification of
what each Indo-European society considers to be amongst its ideal men –
what it has set itself up (or \*been\* set up) to produce.

And it is not hard, I think, to see how these are actually
\*complementary\* , especially on the .. er .. macrocosmic level, and
even right down here on earth in the 21st century.

Now,to be sure, I \*did\* say earlier that when it comes to these
differences in appearances and teachings, they are “for the most part”
deliberate. Human error is human error, and whether because somebody
mis-perceived something, or misrecorded it, or somebody wrote over the
top of it somewhat some decades or even centuries later, you \*do\* get
shifts within particular mythoreligious canons and more especially, the
deutercanonical and apocrypha verging in ‘pop-culture’
\[consider/compare “Word of Dante” as a phenomenon\] that seem to bring
things ‘out of synch’ with everybody else; \*diverge\* from the Divine
Plan, even?

A great example of which being … basically the Ancient Greeks after the
mid-centuries of the 1st millennium B.C. – wherein thanks to a number of
factors including cultural contact with various Near Eastern peoples,
and just generally forgetting/de-emphasizing what had, in the Homeric
era been much more \*core\* concepts \[see my general rant on the
Euthyphro Socratic dialogue for an example – it’s about, in effect, the
Greeks of Athens at its near height, having apparently \*forgotten\*
their own version of the concept of Rta, of Orlog\], they wound up with
a religion that had diverged in quite a few respects from what, say, the
Germanic and Hindu mythoreligions were doing, were preserving.

In fact, I somewhat suspect that that’s at least partially \*why\* the
Nordic & Vedic are arguably the two closest (living/viable)
Indo-European mythoreligions today. Because neither group \*diverged\*
as much as what most peoples’ baseline standard for “polytheism” and
“Indo-European mythology” did – i.e. them Greeks and those they directly
influenced later.

It’s \*also\* the case that , as mythology is effectively (an) art, you
are going to get differences in portrayal, and over time these may come
to be much more significant, and visually or literature-ly prominent to
the point that they may obscure to the untrained eye the essential
coterminities going on.

Like, Odin has a Spear, that is derived from the World-Tree – the Axis
Mundi. Shiva has a Trishula … which looks like a trident, but is
definitely (also) a Spear – the three points, in part, being to
symbolize that this weapon is closely linked to the Axis Mundi \[and we
\*also\* see Zeus, Hades, and Poseidon having one-pointed, two-pointed,
and three-pointed spear-like weapons, respectively … although this is
not the moment for the more in-depth discursion on how all three are
effectively ‘aspects’ of the Sky Father that the Greeks ‘refracted out’,
and in one case spliced in with their Striker/Thunderer deific likely
under Mesopotamian/Levantine influence). Thor has a Hammer, Hanuman has
a Gada (Club/Mace). Freyja rides a chariot pulled by lynxes (forest
cats, I mean, people seem to not have remembered, a lot of the time,
that … the “cats” we’re talking about … aren’t housecats), Durga rides a
lion or a tiger.

Sure, in some areas the differences get a little more pronounced – Thor
rides that goat-drawn chariot across the sky. In many Hindu accounts,
Indra rides Airavata – a very large elephant whose name means
“Storm-Cloud” … because, I mean, it makes sense, right? An elephant is
big, grey, makes a really loud noise with its trunk \[I think from
memory, although I may have to check this, that “Garjit”, in addition to
referring to a thunder-crack, can also refer to an elephant’s
roar/trumpeting; it can certainly refer to the ‘roaring of the
Storm’\]and also when stampeding; indeed, the tusks may even look a bit
like lightning, as well.

Why doesn’t Thor ride an Elephant when turning up to the Nordic peoples?
Well, probably because it wouldn’t make a huge deal of sense to them …
as elephants, except of the rather furry but also frozen and extinct
variety … aren’t really a thing up there. And therefore, there’d be
limited symbolic importance encoded in an Elephant, nor would they know
what to describe it as. \[There is, if memory serves, a limited mention
of “Ulfandi” in Old Norse … although despite the likelihood that this is
a calque-derivative in from Latin ‘Elephantus’, it appears to have wound
up meaning “Camel”.\]

But as I say, it is easy to get so over-focused upon what’s immediately
in front of you when you look at some art – especially if it’s
effectively an artistic representation of the ‘popular (myth)perception
of’ – that you lose sight of what’s actually being represented, and the
key, core, underlying \*essence\* which radiates out through those
various mythologies, and then hopefully too through some of the
\*better\* devotional artwork. Or theological writing upon the subject.
And in the cases I have briefly alluded to above, while we’re not going
to go through in-depth nor detail to re-litigate our positions here
(we’re supposed to be moving towards concluding remarks!), these areas
are spoken about at \*much\* greater length in our relevant previous
publications. GHOST DIVISION detailing Rudra-Odin-Shiva-Vayu-Vata, and
BHARAT MATA AND THE INDO-EUROPEAN DEIFIC OF NATIONAL IDENTITY speaking
about Devi Durga/Parvati/Bharat-Mata, Freyja and associated Nordic
aspects, even Athena and drawing in some other elements such as the
little talked about Hittie “Pirwa” figure.

In any case, it should be clear by now that we don’t disagree that the
Gods can and do appear differently to different Indo-European peoples.
(Indeed, They can appear differently to the same Indo-European people at
different times or in other different circumstances. Gods are quite
versatile like that – we’ve even got an array of scripture and hymnals
on precisely this subject, as it happens, both within the Vedic and
Eddic corpuses. Almost as if it were … \*intended\*).

However, it’s vitally important to further elucidate that we \*don’t\*
think that appearing differently, especially where it’s because of a
deliberate reason on the part of the God or Gods in question … but also
where it’s the result of “human error” in recording or in recollection –
we don’t think that appearing a bit differently here and there means
They’re somehow not the same Gods. Especially when at least one of Them
is rather well-renowned for adopting disguises and diverse theonyms, for
the purposes of doing \*exactly that\*.

It would be an unfortunate thing indeed, to get so hung up on the
observation that the Spear may have a single point or three , that one
were to miss the fact that the Spear-Shaft \[and the fact that it is,
functionally, a Spear\] goes all the way down.

