+++
title = "Shailaputri – First of thexa0NavaDurga"
date = "September 30, 2019"

+++
# ![d95c94917c4d0910228c2d9142cfaba6](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/d95c94917c4d0910228c2d9142cfaba6.jpg?w=676)

The first night of NavRatri is dedicated to Ma as Shailaputri – the
Daughter of the Mountain. As noted in the introductory piece, the
Mountain in question refers to King Himavat – the Lord of the Himalayas,
and the father of Parvati \[‘\[Daughter\] Of the Mountain’\] in this
particular cycle of Her incarnation. However, I shall also advance a
rather intriguing ‘alternate’ linguistic theory, which would perhaps
situate Her more clearly within the overarching mythic cycle as the
reincarnation of Lady Sati – but more on that later.

Now, if you have just joined us, and have come from a more ‘Abrahamic’
perspective on theology, you are no doubt wondering how it is that a God
can die? Or, for that matter, perhaps more astoundingly, be quite
literally (mythologically speaking) reborn. These are fair questions,
albeit with full answers well beyond the scope of this piece. Suffice to
say, that the previous incarnation of Parvati was rendered deceased (at
least directly) by Her own hand – casting Herself upon the pyre of the
most inauspicious \[not least in the sense of there pointedly being no
Shiva there – auspiciousness Himself\] horse-sacrifice being carried out
by Her father, Daksha.

Yet rather frequently in Hindu mythology, “Death Is Not The End” – in
fact, for many figures of note, it is instead “Only The Beginning”. So
it is with Parvati; whereby, not least because of the Eternal nature of
Shakti \[the feminine-connoted ‘power’ which both precedes, transcends
and even outlasts and ultimately unmakes the universe), a re-incarnation
was perhaps going to be inevitable. Not, of course, that this assuaged
the grief of Mahadev upon learning of His Beloved’s rather incandescent
mortality impairment.

With the eminent foresight that one would unquestionably expect from the
MahaRani, the One who has most eminent claim to the title of
Chakravartin – as She is the axis around which the wheel of Mundi truly
turns – Parvati therefore managed to be reborn in the Court of King
Himavat and Mena/Minavat (Daughter of Mt Meru) – the latter, according
to some myths, having previously been a retainer of Lady Sati and in
this light granted a particular boon of giving birth to a very specific
daughter …

This was fortuitous for two reasons. First, Himavat proved to be a far
less conceited and much more reasonable figure than had been Daksha. But
second, just as the Himalayas is known as the DevaBhumi – the Land of
the Gods – the ‘deeper’ Himalayas were especially favoured by Lord Shiva
as a retreat; and following His recoiling from the world after what had
happened with Lady Sati, He had retired to them to lead the existence of
a renunciate ascetic – His only distractions from the unutterable pain
of losing His other half, being the austerities and cannabis, and
perhaps the natural beauty of this most radiantly inhospitable setting.

Uma’s appearance here in the Himalayas, then, can clearly have been no
accident. Although I have no doubt that no matter where They are or Who
and How They wind up … the Divine Couple will nevertheless find Their
way back to Each Other. Indeed, even the End of the Universe, the Death
of Time Itself , is not enough to keep Them apart for long.

But to turn back to Shailaputri for a moment – this is, after all,
supposed to be Her piece – if Lady Sati represents an exemplar of
married womanhood (unfortunately, with all of the evidently potentially
lethal contradictions which such a role can entail), then Shailaputri is
somewhat at the opposite end of the spectrum, being the Maid of the
Mountains – young, unmarried, and setting out into the world upward in
search of Her destiny. This mirrors the path of the Devotee, the
neophyte who is just beginning their journey toward greater illumination
and empowerment, and for whom much of the world is seen with the
exhilarating glittering of fresh and unjaded eyes.

In all senses, then, She is Pristine.

![shailputri-devi](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/shailputri-devi.jpg?w=676)

The very close connection between Her and the Mountains, the Earth, also
connotes Her role as a figure rather akin to “Mother Nature” – the
Princess of the Mountains, and therefore in implicit command of all the
natural phenomena and such to be found within Her and Her Father’s
domain; but also, as we shall see, ‘nature’ far more broadly afield, as
symbolized cosmologically via the positioning of the Mountains at the
‘center’ of creation \[and, indeed, Meru, who would therefore be
regarded as Shailaputri’s maternal Grandfather, \*is\* one of the key
Axis Mundi in Hindu mythic geography\], from whence radiates out all ..
particularly in the form of rivers, the slow movement of glaciers and
agglomerations of eroded material from Them out into the broader world.
In a certain sense, then, all that is around us is ultimately derived
from the Mountains, in one way or another – and just as the sea-bed
fossils still to be found amidst the highest peaks of the Himalayas
demonstrate (for this was once the now ‘akashic’ Ocean of Tethys in the
far-distant past when dinosaurs still roamed), to Mountains they may
somewhat inevitably return. Even, come to think of it, should they slide
under the crust of the Earth via subduction zone to be spurted forth
once more through volcanism activity.

The ‘mythic’ situation of Shailaputri, then, standing freshly
(re-)formed following the terminus of a previous span of existence in
most dread fire and destruction (for such, surely, we must regard the
apparition of VeeraBhadra and in some tellings BhadraKali, too, amidst
the pageantry of Daksha’s Folly, following Her self-immolation
thereupon), resonates most strongly with what has just been said about
physical (as well as mythical) geography, and plate tectonics. As it
connotes a ‘return to the Center’, from outside margins … there to begin
the helicase ascent toward the Heavens where the Absolute more, most
truly lies \[as we shall see with tomorrow night’s piece on Ma as
Brahmacharini – the Ascending Seeker of the Absolute\].

This ‘final’ goal having been elucidated somewhat in my introductory
piece, and effectively – after a sort – presenting as the
‘reunification’, the ‘re-realization’, the ‘re-membrance’ of the
ascending Maid and then Mother of the Mountains with the ‘perfect’
\[‘Siddhi’\] status of Siddhidhatri as one of Shakti’s highest forms
here within this realm.

\[Indeed, one can also trace out a not entirely dissimilar ‘arc of
(re-)ascent when considering the example of Lord Hanuman in the Ramayana
– wherein Bajrang Bali is consigned to Earth, and stripped of His
Siddhis, in order to allow Him to progress back up toward ‘full’ Godhood
\[I am oversimplifying and using slightly askew theological terminology
here for a non-specialist audience\] via the sanskara of positively
imprinted experience that can ‘reshape’ His ethical nature and
personality back toward ‘The Light’\]. \[It also, helpfully and handily
displays a very different approach to the concept of ‘Moksha’ than an
array of Vaishnava and Buddhist philosophies would put forward – insofar
as the ‘liberation’ thusly entailed does not mean sublimation and
dissolution, but rather ‘unfettering’ – an understanding which is
definitely supported in the ancient Upanishadic metaphors around the
‘chains of Karma’ being loosened, entailing and enabling complete
freedom of action. Just what we would expect from the all-powerful –
indeed, Adi-Powerful, Ma Shakti!\]

![0390be0ec47a7ed61aa5b56694a993a5--beautiful-sketches-hindu-art](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/0390be0ec47a7ed61aa5b56694a993a5-beautiful-sketches-hindu-art.jpg?w=676)

What I have said also chimes in rather intriguingly with that
aforementioned ‘alternative’ linguistic speculation I had thought upon
when researching this piece. You see, while Sanskrit is capable of being
a most eminently precise language when it comes to many religious terms
… it is also capable of, in an almost playful way, combining and
conflating both the meanings within a word \[such as the way in which
“Kaal” connotes ‘Death’, and ‘Time’, as well as ‘Iron’, and
‘Darkness’\], as well as previously different words in together. It is
not quite accurate to think of these as “folk etymologies” or “false
friends” – as due to the nature of Sanskrit, these processes tend to
reveal previously ‘hidden’ qualities of the concept or persona being
talked about.

Now, the ‘fields of meaning’ for Shaila \[which, much to my surprise –
and perhaps slight horror – is actually likely etymologically related to
the Australian and New Zealand female given name and epithet of
“Sheila”\], are not simply concerned with mountains and mountain-related
concepts such as stones (including, potentially, ‘precious stones’ a la
jewels, per Pali interpretation), foundations, and the apex portion of
the support skeleton of a dwelling from which everything else hangs. But
with slight changes in inflexion, produce terms for the scarf or veil
often worn by a married woman (an element which it has in common with a
comparable although not directly cognate Old Norse term – Faldr – which
has much the same meaning, and which is derived from the visual
similarity between this head-covering and a snow-capped mountain peak\],
harvesting (including, interestingly, of fossils – bringing into the
present elements from the very much archaic, indeed verily pre-historic
or even Primordial past!\], Iron, and camphor, but also for form,
beauty, piety, dispositions, traditions, virtue, and proper conduct. (We
therefore have both renderings of the modern English term – Habit 😛 )

I suppose you could say, then, that ‘Shailaputri’, would also connote
via somewhat homophonic resonance, not only “Daughter of the Mountain” –
but also the best daughter, the beautiful girl, one born of a line of
ancient and emphatically pious conduct (for such, ultimately, is why
Sati ‘exited the stage’ \[this, too, is a well-attested Shaivite-Shakta
metaphor; that of the God and Goddess as supreme actors/dancers/singers
in the ‘Cosmic Play’ – नटित नटार्ध नटी नट नायक नाटितनाट्य सुगानरते\] ,
and in the Shakta incarnation/expression lineage is She situated\], an
exemplar of a daughter and maid.

However, it goes deeper. For there is also the related term ‘S(h)ala’ –
which refers to a house, a home, a hall … and perhaps more interestingly
for our purposes (although ‘Nilaya’ is also an attested Name and Nature
of the Goddess), derives ultimately from the Proto-Indo-European “kel”
\[‘to cover’, ‘to protect’\], that gives us an array of similar terms in
Western Indo-European languages – as well as, in my reckoning, the
“Kaal” we see in “Kali”. This is doubly appropriate, as in addition to
the mythic account whereby it is \*Kali\* to whom the consort of Raj
Himavat gives birth … we also see here, then, the Kali ‘hidden’ (another
pun – both “hidden” and “conceal” are similarly derived) within the
outwardly perhaps more ‘innocuous’ exterior of Ma as Shailaputri.
Although I would be \*vastly\* over-reaching to infer a ‘Daughter of
Death”, except in symbolic terms as a reference to the reincarnation and
its reasoning for occurrence.

Or would I … for there is also the “Shula” term – which while nominally
… or, I should say, \*nominatively\* … derived from a slightly different
root, works out as referring to a ‘peak’, a ‘point’, a ‘sharpness’ – and
therefore, an instrument of wounding, weather a weapon (no, that is not
a typo – it is a hailing! As found out by the most unfortunate fate of
the skeletal travellers at RoopKund ‘neath the Triple-Mountains of
TriShul – which is surely aptly nama’d here!\] , or an instrument of
justice (an axis about which a corpse’s body of criminality is to be
found – not that I am necessarily seeking to imply that the world at
large is a criminal, except if we are talking about the Nordic
cosmogonic myth of Ymir); and in an abstract sense, sorrow, grief, and
pain. The dual connotations \*there\* then, would be of a child of
suffering – which is clearly evocative, once again, of the regrettably
literal self-sacrifice of Sati which gave rise to Shailaputri in the
first instance; but also, via the focus upon the ‘point’, the ‘peak’ of
the mountain, the ‘tip of the spear’ – further supports the regality of
Her. As well as connecting back to the supremely well-armed nature of
the Goddess in the vast majority of Her Aspects, Forms, and Incarnations
– and, with what I have just said about a Spear further in mind, the
most excellent insignia of both Shiva and Shakti in the form of the
Trishula , which additionally connotes ‘samrajya’ over the ‘three
worlds’ with each of its three supremely sharp tips, as well as the
flensing power to discern and dissect truth from illusion as the Supreme
Deities are enjoined to do.

![Goddess-Shailaputri_oil-on-canvas](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/goddess-shailaputri_oil-on-canvas.jpg?w=676)

Yet even these were not what initially caught my eye and turned my hand
to spelunking amidst etymological-mythography. Rather, it was by chance
stumbling across an array of very similar terms in non-Sanskrit
languages – including the “Sila” in Serbian \[‘Force’, ‘Power’,
‘Strength’, and ‘Violence’ – also, apparently how “The Force” of Star
Wars fame is translated in that language\] with close cognates in other
Slavic and some Romance languages; as well as terms in the Baltic
languages which refer idiomatically to ‘new growth’ upon a previously
barren area of land (the rather more direct rendering would be of a
coniferous forest on a sandbar, \[and it is worth noting the strong
linkage of even the term “coniferous” , ‘fir tree’, etc. to the Mountain
Queen Indo-European divinity detailed in my previous Bharat Mata
article, amongst further conceptual linkages between the Goddess in
question and ‘silvic’ or forest/tree life – perhaps this even forms a
‘branching point’ of sorts with the wild woodland Goddesses so prominent
in Romano-Greek myth\],), and with a hypothesized chain of derivation
wherein the word for the ‘barren land’ in question would previously have
meant an area ‘burned’ \[the saliency of which, is strikingly,
electrifyingly obvious given the previous phase in the Sati-Shakti
mythic cycle\]. The ‘skel’ root in question, entirely unsurprisingly,
also providing us with the modern English terms of ‘Skull” and
“Skeleton” \[perhaps, that which is uncovered, revealed, when the
outwardly obscuring form is peeled\] – which fits most aptly with both
the iconographic depictions of many of the more wrathful forms of Devi,
wherein She is frequently bedecked with Mundamala \[a garland or a
necklace of skulls\], often carrying a Kapala \[a skull-cup\] from which
She may drink, equipped with a Khatvanga \[a ‘skull-staff’\] , and even,
in some cases, quite directly has a Skull visage – as is the case
particularly with Chamunda.

This also, clearly, produces a nexes of associations with the Cremation
Grounds wherein Kali dwelleth, as both a burning place, and one wherein
the corpses of the deceased, and consequent illusions are ‘burned away’
– leaving skeletons, skulls, or simply ‘earth’ and ash \[‘Vibhuti’\] .

But to bring things back once more to Ma Shailaputri and the
circumstances of Her Incarnation – it would also connote that out there
in the akashic ‘background’ of the term, that we have a Daughter of the
Pyre … and, going forward, the notion of fresh new life , wilderness
even, springing up from what was previously dry and dessicated dead-land
or desert.

This, then, handily illustrates both the Path of Ma Shailaputri –
springing forth from deva-station (for such was the ruin of the palace
and sacrifice of Daksha following Lady Sati’s self-immolation and the
consequent Rage of Rudra via Veerabhadra et co), into desolation (for
such was the state of the Heart of Shiva following the Death of His
Beloved – the universe Howled with grief & rage, for They are the
Universe\] … and to it bringing with Her new life, new love, the
“re-enchantment of the world”. But also, with the implicit connotations
of the restoration and reinvigoration of tradition and piety – as well
as the sincere support of violence & rulership with which this grand
mission \[a figurative translation indeed for Dharma-Yuddha – this being
subtly tied to our broader work in that field via the Devi Bhagavatam
and the key situation of Durga therein) may be upheld.

And the ‘shadow’ understanding that contained within and intrinsic to
this new beginning … is also the ultimate End. Indeed, the Ekpyrosis,
the Pralaya, the Funeral Pyre for all of creation. And thus the cycle
goes on, around, again. Periodically becoming renewed via ‘sendings’,
’emissaries’ from the Axis about which the Universe truly turns. As
noted beforehand, exactly that connotated by the Mountain, and the
Daughter Therefrom.

“Shailaputri”, we might say.

That which is ‘Old’ (the Mountain), is ‘New” again (the Daughter); that
which is fixed and great and eternal, appears also in our midst as a
young maiden; and that which was thought lost forever, has a weird –
indeed, a \*wyrd\* way of finding its way back to us, given enough time.
From small beginnings, perhaps akin \[in multiple senses\] to a pebble
that comes down a mountain-side one night – great things, avalanches
indeed, can be sprung. And contained within that pebble, is the veer-y
essence of Mountain-hood Itself.

Thus is the Lesson of ShailaPutri to the Devotee. That, and that as the
Divine Willpower is the most mighty force in the universe \[indeed, in a
certain sense, this is partially what is meant by the connexion of
Shakti and Prakriti – essence, which renders Purusha operational and
mobile rather than ‘mere’ (again, in multiple senses) matter\], while it
is good indeed to ‘begin as you mean to continue’, sometimes the best
thing for the moment is simply to \*begin\*.

वंदे वाद्द्रिछतलाभाय चंद्रार्धकृतशेखराम \|

वृषारूढां शूलधरां शैलपुत्री यशस्विनीम्‌ \|\|

Iconographically, the customary depictions of Ma Shailaputri tend toward
an ‘elegant simplicity’ – She is generally shown associated with a white
bull, NandiJi (this also connoting the conveyance of the seeking Devotee
upon their destined path of enlightenment – as well as the linkage and
increasing proximity to Shiva, “Nandi” also meaning ‘Joy’, ‘\[Opening\]
Prayer’ (particularly of a play or drama), and other such elements that
are eminently appropriate for Her early station within the Processional
of the NavaDurgas), wielding the Trishula (the meaning of which is
discussed above), crowned with the Crescent Moon (which as we shall see,
grows more full with empowerment), often bearing a lotus flower (with
the customary meanings of beauty, purity, blessing, bounteousness; and,
as a point of interest, the metaphorical value inherent in the way in
which the lotus – an emblem of beauty and divinity – grows from the
empty, barren earth, therefore connoting a sort of supernally sourced
permanence amidst the tumult of oft-imperfect (material) existence)
and/or with a hand posed in Abhaya Mudra (connoting blessing, the
removal of fear – also helping to signify Her role as a Guide), and
occasionally wearing a head-scarf.

ॐ देवी शैलपुत्र्यै नमः॥

