+++
title = "Give Me Bhaga"
date = "September 5, 2019"

+++
![69836096_10162223958970574_6020480294182715392_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/69836096_10162223958970574_6020480294182715392_n.jpg?w=676)

This Is #GangSteppe – a trio of Scythians, circa the 4th century B.C.

Now, what is going on here is the warrior to the right (the bare-chested
chap equipped with the arrows and bow) is presenting the head of a slain
foe (likely a Macedonian, going by the Vergina Sun emblem on the
pauldron of the armour) to his Lord, while another Scythian nobleman
looks on.

In return, the Lord is presenting his man with a golden vessel. And that
is why I am posting this image, because it represents a very ancient and
veer-y vitally integral Indo-European concept: that of, as we would say
in Sanskrit – Bhaga \[ भग \]

But what is ‘Bhaga’ ? And why is it so important to understanding the
actual nature of the society of our ancestors?

Well, in one sense, it is “Lordship” – and in its cognates in other
(Satem) Indo-European languages such as the Old Persian 𐎲𐎥 (Baga) and
the array of “Bog” sounding terms in Slavic languages, we see a
considerable ‘refinement’ of that particular dimension to produce terms
for a God. Something not entirely dissimilar takes place within Sanskrit
– wherein ‘Bhaga’ goes from being a term applied to an array of Lordly
RigVedic Deities, and with a handful of potential mentions \*as\* a
\[Solar\] Deity Himself, through to being prominently attested and well
regarded Aditya \[Solar Deity\] in the later Puranic texts.

And it is this “Solar” association, which really beautifully illustrates
what is \*actually\* going on with the underlying meaning of both term
and concept of “Bhaga”.

For what is the Sun? It is a singularly impressive yet singularly remote
object within the sky; and in terms of how it regulates the flow of days
and seasons, does indeed impose a broad and pervasive form of Order upon
the (localized) cosmos and the realms and affairs of men. Much like our
modern conception of a Lord, a King.

But more importantly for what I am getting at here, the Sun \*also\*
bestows upon us the vitally important energy of its rays – without
which, life upon this earth (let alone social organization) would be
rather difficult indeed. The gleaming radiance of the Sun, then, is not
simply the far-removed pomp and pageantry of a Louis XIV \[the so-called
“Sun King”\] – it is an active distribution of the necessities of
existence, good weather, and good fortune out to the world and its
mortal inhabitants.

So, it should come as absolutely no surprise to us to find that the
Proto-Indo-European from whence this term derives – Bhehg/Bhag – means
“to distribute”, “to divide \[up\]”, “to apportion”, “to hand out”.

Because \*that\* in this ancient sense, is what a Lord does. Not simply
sit idly by on a throne somewhere collecting the tithing and the spoils
of the fruits of his subjects’ labour as some kind of pseudo-symbolic
quasi-para-parasite. That is our seriously modern conception of what
Royalty is, because that is functionally most of what we actually allow
our monarchs to do in many of those countries which yet retain them.

And, to be sure, it is not a concept without some certain level of
historical precedent. Part of why the French Revolution happened, is
\*precisely because\* the Lords of that country had fundamentally
‘forgotten’ just what it was they were there for – The centralization of
the aristocratic court and all its (now concentrated and considerably
exacerbated) pretensions at Versailles under that aforementioned “Sun
King” lead inexorably to a considerable ‘imbalance’ in the relationship
between nobility and much of the rest of their society. Noblesse Oblige
being replaced by “To the Nobles, thou art Obliged … to pay hand over
fist, and be thankful for the privilege”.

There was rather more to that particular historical occurrence’s
causation, of course – but I maintain that the fundamental \*breaking
down\* of a reciprocal relationship between actually (locally) involved,
interested, engaged, and compassionate aristocracy and those under their
aegis of bestowment and protection, in favour of massively increased
taking \*from\* the latter to fund the lavish excesses of the former …
lies at much of the heart of it.

And you could find without too much effort, probably half a hundred
other examples from the past of pretty much exactly the same phenomenon
in action, and with similarly dramatic results. The Russian Revolution,
and particular phases of the rulership of Israel in the Old Testament
spring \*instantly\* to mind.

So to return to what’s happening in this image, then, what we see is
decidedly \*not\* this Modern bete-noir of a basically pointless except
in symbolic terms and/or for the purposes of suspending Parliament
Monarchs/Nobles Who Don’t Really Do Anything … but rather, its exact
opposite.

The warrior on the right, kneeling before his King and presenting the
severed head of a slain foeman upon the field of war, has risked his
life for his sovereign and people. He is demonstrating , in a sense,
\*another\* Sanskrit concept – भक्ति – Bhakti, “Devotion” (interestingly
enough, from the same PIE root as ‘Bhaga’, and derived via the notion of
the division of one’s efforts to declare and prioritize that which one
is devoted to).

The Lord, in recognition of this and justly pleased by his valiant
efforts, is (re-)distributing unto him a valuable piece of booty \[and,
on a side-note, somewhat to our general amused observation here at #NAS,
the more modern connotations of “booty” are rather directly mirrored in
both some certain meanings of “Bhaga” in Sanskrit, as well as the
understanding of भग in modern Hindi\].

The engagement, the “entanglement”, the actively breathing,
‘operationalized’ relationship we see before us is भक्त \[Bhakta\] – one
of those wonderful Sanskrit terms with several facings of a concept all
bound up in a mere few syllables. In this case, meaning not only the
“distribution” and “apportionment” side of things, but also the bonds of
loyalty and faith, and even the sense of an active, participation in and
with.

Now, interestingly and perhaps importantly, the treasure in question is
a dish – something which could be utilized for a number of purposes, to
be sure, but which directly conjures within the mind its role in the
provision of sustenance. Something we eat off, I mean. Or, as it
happens, something we might utilize when making offerings \*of\*
sustenance to The Gods. Which matters also, as the concept of Divinity
(and, more particularly, our relationship \*with\* many of said
Divinities) in an array of Indo-European religions is \*also\* closely
bound up with this notion, and its performative aspects going all ways,
of Bhaga. Hence, in part, its theonymic and theological utilizations
even prior to the rendition of it, simply, as “God” in those Slavic &
Iranic languages aforementioned.

But why is this interesting to me? That it is a \*dish\* being handed
down in (dis)tribute here, I mean. Well, consider the modern English
word of “Lord”. It comes down to us from Old English – Hlaford,
Hlafweard. These terms, literally rendered, would mean something like
“Loaf-Ward(en)”. \[The female equivalent, meanwhile, Hlafdige, means
something like the Kneader/Maker of Bread – the “dige” part referring to
that preparatory, formulative action; and finding additional expression
in Old Norse Deigja, meaning a ‘maid’ in the sense of a ‘milk-maid’ or a
servant\]

So why is our modern term for a powerful man, a respected man, a
noble-man (of a certain sort and clade these days, to be sure)
apparently derived from an archaic Germanic term for what could, if you
were not paying attention, be accidentally confused for a humble baker?
\[And oddly enough, “Baker” is derived from \*another\*
Proto-Indo-European “Bhehg”, of slightly different pronunciation, which
means ‘to roast’, ‘to bake’, ‘to fry’\]

Well, isn’t it obvious? “Give us this day our daily bread”, as the
Christian prayer and verse of New Testament scripture goes;

The bread is, in one sense, material sustenance \[a rendering
prominently preserved, of all places, in rap, wherein it may also refer
to money – or, er, potentially other baked goods which may or may not
involve flour and perhaps baking soda\].

After all, it is the sacred responsibility of a Lord to provide meat and
drink to his loyal retainers and other warriors \[indeed, in the later
decades following the Viking Age, the ambit of the duty in question had
become extended from applying chiefly to the “Hird” of a Germanic/Nordic
Lord, comprised of the immediate military retinue his Huscarla
\[‘House-Karls’\], through to an entire elaborate network of patronage
which brought in upon particular feast-days even low-born men in their
Lord’s employ for symbolic ‘breaking of bread’ with\]; not least
because, one might observe, a lord \*unable\* to do so would likely
suffer a steady erosion of his forces via the desertion of his men to
other figures who may be better able to look after their needs. In
extreme cases, as with our French Revolution example above, this may not
entail “desertion” so much as an “involuntary abdication” carried out at
sword-point.

Yet even though we can see a somewhat vaguely similar concept at play in
the Roman ploy of “Bread and Circuses” – wherein a would-be
man-on-the-make or an establish(ment/ed) figure looking to maintain
favour with the ordinary people of the locality, would put on exactly
that …

… to attempt to explain this concept of the Lord as “Bread-Giver”, in
fundamentally if not purely \[puerile-ly, one might suggest\]
materialistic terms, is to almost miss the point entirely.

There are an array of terms in the various Germanic languages which
might, perhaps, serve to help illustrate my point. Phrases like
“Gift-Throne”, “Treasure-Friend”, “Gold-Friend”, “Ring-Giver”, and many
others besides. Consider the connotations of these constructions, even
rendered as they are into English.

They do NOT simply mean “employer” or “paymaster”.

Rather, the notion of the “Gift” shows that it is a bestowment
considerably different in kind from mere “wages”; the frequent
utilization of “Friend” connotes the depth and degree of \*affection\*
imparted and implied within the context of the relationship \[something
which also turns up in the meaning-field of Sanskrit Bhaga – and, in its
slightly more developed direction of “Love”, may perhaps explain the
more .. amorous interpolations in later Indian linguistics for the term
and its descendants\]; and the “Ring” also bears with it the notions of
fealty, reciprocal loyalty, indeed, \*oaths\* of binding and unending
portent.

The Lord \*may indeed\* be, in one rather narrow sense, the general
arbiter of who gets access to what resources within his domain, as its
controller \[which may partially help to explain “Bhaga” as in ‘fortune’
– in both senses of the term, luck and wealth, derived from
Proto-Indo-Iranian ‘Bhagas’, which also means “fate”, “destiny”,
‘outcome’ – your Lord has a rather large hand in many angles of your
‘fate’, after all, as well\]; and the apportioner, the divider up of the
spoils of warfare and raiding to those of his subjects without whom he
could not likely have prevailed \[and note the subtle yet important
shade of distinction between ‘giving’ versus ‘dividing up’, even where
the latter \*also\* entails the former within its ambit immediately
following.\] .

Yet he is also something much more – not simply the “heart” in the crude
biological sense, even as he sets the rhythm for the rest of the body
via his tempo and tenor of beats \[bryttu, a Germanic term of some
functional coterminity with the bestowment, dividing up elements of
Bhaga,etc, also sharing an etymological root with terms for ‘beating’,
as it happens\] and redistributes the vital life-blood of, well, blood
throughout the constituent components of the physical body and body of
society. But rather, the “heart” in the much more poetic sense that has
developed therefrom – a place, a site of feeling, of emotion, of
dearness, of ambition, of striving, of steering, of steeling, and of
both compassion and of rage.

The Scythian King handing his loyal soldier a golden dish, therefore, is
not to be thought of in such narrowly (ultra-)modern terms as an
effectively ‘mercenary’ activity – the materialist purchase of
materialist pseudo-“loyalty” on a paid-by-the-hour style and source of
basis.

That did happen, of course, and there are many and varied tales of such
things blowing up upon the rulers who sought to try them – hence
“mercenary loyalty” as a phrase having acquired the rather
tongue-in-cheek connotations that it has today. (Although rather often,
issues arising in such matters were less about this or that perfidious
mercenary figure or force turning upon a steadfast employer in pursuit
of greater gains, perhaps motivated by the proverbial and literal
“higher bidder” to change sides mid-battle … but instead, unscrupulous
leaders thinking they could avoid actually paying in whole or in part
for the services which they had sought to benefit from, and Consequences
Ensuing.\]

But here, it is something different. Something else. It is Righteous
Conduct on the part of all involved. A Sacred Bond.

Idealized, this is true – but it is important to understand just what
that Ideal actually is.

Talking about this concept of Bhaga would draw disbelieving ire from
many modern-minded people. And for the simple reason that, as I have
earlier said and stated, because they have a fundamental opposition to
elements drawn from pre-Modern, pre-Capitalist systems of societal
organization, direction, and responsiveness, control.

And you know what? I absolutely do not disagree that looking around what
passes for “nobility” , either in literal or figurative terms these
days, I can \*well\* understand why the notion of many if not most of
those sorts having \*any\* power let alone actual direct responsibility
for a citizenry … is likely abominable, if not downright farcical. It
is, in a certain sense, not only “how we got here” over the previous few
hundred years – but, in terms of those “figurative” nobles, these
\*actually existing” elites of the modern age \[and there’s some
Thorstein Veblen in here somewhere\] , a very large part of \*why we’re
still in\* this situation all up. “Status Quo”, as Ronald Reagan pithily
observed, is Latin for “the mess we’re \[currently\] in”.

But if I may be permitted to continue my steppe-flight of idealist
thought-raven for just a few moments more … consider what we have
conceptually replaced such a wonderful, noble idea as “Bhaga” with, in
practice. A relationship with an employer that is likely \*at best\* to
be a fundamentally lop-sided economic exchange in which at least one
party is often (but not always) attempting to do its darndest to
outright \*exploit\* the other; and whose only real underpinning is the
dubiously appreciated provisios of materialistic economic necessity.

Weighed up against \*that\*? Against the effective hijacking of even the
concept of service, let alone however much of the apportioned hours of
the day our almost sole, exclusive simulacrum of human connectivity is
to be found in satiating somebody else’s profit motive \[as opposed, you
know, to a Prophet Motive\], desperation to simply get by, or petty
desire for control …

… give me Bhaga, every day !
