+++
title = "Skanda in Kushan [Afghani Arte-Facts Postingxa0#2]"
date = "September 13, 2019"

+++
![69760624_10162252739410574_1600481556688797696_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/69760624_10162252739410574_1600481556688797696_o.jpg?w=676)

This
Is[#GangSteppe](https://www.facebook.com/hashtag/gangsteppe?epa=HASHTAG)–
a fine 2nd century AD Kushan depiction of Lord Skanda, from Gandhara in
present-day Afghanistan/Pakistan.

Something I find pretty cool about this particular rendering, is that
the well-known Hindu deity has been presented in a manner that doesn’t
simply ‘update’ the features of the representation to be more in-line
with Kushan mores and Greek-derived sculptural techniques:but it
\*preserves\* the Hindu elements as well – most prominently, the rooster
He is holding \[this is one of the ways in which His bird vahana is
often depicted\]; and the Spear He is armed with.

So to recap, somewhat, on what’s going on here if you’ve just started
reading/following my STEPPE posting – the material and religious culture
in question is part of a ‘convection zone’ that even for centuries
before this sculpture’s creation had seen a continuous interplay of
mostly Indo-European peoples impacting upon and influencing each other.

It’s the same general area that the Indo-Aryans themselves went through
to get to Northern India, perhaps two thousand years before; but in more
recent times \[by which I mean, like, the previous half-millennium or so
to this statue’s rendering .. not \*literally\* “more recent times” –
which would basically have meant the Soviets in 1979, maybe, and
Pakistani ISI agents coming across Afghanistan’s Eastern border …\], had
seen the previous Indo-Iranian cultural dominance of the sphere
challenged by the “Yavana” \[“Ionian”\] Greeks and related persons
coming East from across Persia, under Alexander.

This exerted quite an enduring effect upon the region, even after the
dissolution of the Indo-Greek \*political\* suzerainty by (re-)invading
Indians, and (still-)Steppe Indo-Europeans.

So what we have here, in effect, is a Hindu deity, represented in a
manner drawing from both Greek techniques and Steppe material culture,
in a region that was significantly \[if syncretically\] Buddhist. And,
to \*add\* to the ‘diversity’ of influences, there’s also a theory that
the Kushan themselves may have been Tocharian IE speakers – which would
mean they were a Centum-IE language grouping incursioning into what’s
otherwise solidly been SatemGang for pretty much as long as the
Indo-Europeans have been there.

Fun.
