+++
title = "Immortalizing, Through Pitruxa0Paksha"
date = "September 17, 2019"

+++
![70820836_10162272674120574_4543250782627037184_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/70820836_10162272674120574_4543250782627037184_n.jpg?w=676)

“‘Some people say you achieve immortality through your children,’ said
the minstrel.  
‘Yeah?’ said Cohen. ‘Name one of your great-granddads, then.'”  
– Terry Pratchett

Sunday marked the start of Pitru Paksha – the Fortnight of the
Ancestors, wherein the borders between worlds are regarded as being
thinner and more insubstantial than usual; and the Pitrs – the Forebears
– return to be amongst Their yet-still-living descended kin.

Arya Akasha published an article last year discussing in some greater
depth the meaning of this observance, and I am not seeking to
reduplicate that work here. But I happened across that Pratchett quote
yesterday, the same day that the Fortnight began, and something in it
resonated within me.

See, there’s a grand truth in there, concealed behind an irreverent
witticism. Often, the best thoughts and insights are. For while on one
level, Pitru Paksha is about the provision of sustenance to the Shades
of the Ancestors – and I’ll briefly detail two Puranic tales on exactly
that in a moment – it’s \*also\* about the recognition, the
\*remembrance\* of Those Who Have Gone Before.

Because even leaving aside the rather resonant meta-narrativistic
concept that a man is only truly dead when his name is spoken for the
last time, his deeds no longer recounted and having faded from all
overtly acknowledged salience and therefore significance … looking at it
from the perspective of the Dead, one of the more painful things about a
post-mortem existence must surely be the sense that everybody has
forgotten you. That, even despite having left your genetic fingerprint
upon the enduring descendants of your community, that in some ways it is
almost as if you never were.

This is partially why we have developed the concept of gravestones –
and, in rather more grand and sweeping (indeed, downright
\*archaeological\*) format, Runestones. Which are far better for
actually telling something of a \*story\* with. And it is also why we
have often had quite some enthusiasm for the building of mausoleums,
sepulchers \[there’s a Pericles quote in there somewhere\], and
increasingly elaborate tombs. Because despite what the quip might seek
to tell you about how no matter how grand your life, everybody is equal
in death by virtue of having the same sized grave … this is abjectly
incorrect. And your refutations may be found in Pyramid, Taj Mahal, or
Ship-Burial format, just to name a few.

Speaking of Pericles, his deservedly famous Funerary Oration contains
something of a counterpoint to the above, that nevertheless considerably
strengthens and elucidates my overall point:

“The whole Earth is the Sepulchre of famous men; and their story is not
graven only on Stone over their native earth, but lives on far away,
without visible symbol, woven into the stuff of other men’s lives.”
Another translation renders the last portion as “For heroes have the
whole earth for their tomb; and in lands far from their own, where the
column with its epitaph declares it, there is enshrined in every breast
a record unwritten with no tablet to preserve it, except that of the
heart.” And while it might seem a matter of mere semantics, I do think
that there is a quite important shade of difference between the notion
of one’s memory, one’s legacy, one’s glory being “woven into the stuff
of other men’s lives” as compared to it lacking preservation “except
that \[contained within\] the heart” of those who come later. Because
one of these things is much more “immanent” than the other – and it is
the latter that is eminently more “erasable”, obviatable, through lack
of direct recollection on our part. You have heard the saying that the
body is a temple? Well, the Heart is its sanctum. It is both prudent and
proper to take proper care of it, lest it be relegated to the status of
a ruin and its contents to detritus or archaeological curios akin to
pottery fragments in place of properly cared-for and still vital relics,
heirlooms, treasures.

Part of this process of Honouring, of Remembrance is again eloquently
elucidated by Pericles, in the course of the same address and
immediately prior: “They gave her their lives, to her and to all of us,
and for their own selves they won praises that never grow old, the most
splendid of sepulchers — not the sepulchre in which their bodies are
laid, but where their glory remains eternal in men’s minds, always there
on the right occasion to stir others to speech or to action.”

In a sense, this recalls Eliade’s concept of the Eternal Return. And
justly so; for it is functioning off the very similar if not outright
the same metaphysical and meta-narrativistic notion of re-immanentizing
the great and glorious actions of the past into our ever-less-impressive
and increasingly-disenchanted present. This is additionally the case, in
its own way, when we consider the recurrent phenomenon within particular
portions of the Indo-European world of the actual and outright
\*deification\* of the ancestors of certain worthies. Or, going the
other way around, some bloodlines having been oft-regarded as directly
\*descended\* from Divinities Whose examples had to be lived up to. But
I digress, somewhat.

The Act of Remembrance is one which is not simply positive, desirable,
nor beneficial for the Ancestor(s) in question; as Pericles’ quote in
translation so amply shows, it is also there for the benefit of us,
ourselves, the still-living. The reconnection with heritage, the
striving to live up to ancient standards, and keep our Ancestors alive
not simply with word, but through deed as well – these are
commemorations whose positive impacts radiate out through our lives and
our communities. And demonstrate great respect to the contributions of
the Pitrs by continuing to uphold them – to carry on and transmit the
Flame. Show most directly what we are not ingrateful for.

Yet in the form of the Traditions that have grown up around Pitru
Paksha, this “enlightened self interest” can also manifest directly. As
can be seen in these pair of Hindu tales which illustrate just what
happens when the proper rites and conduct are \*not\* upheld, and that
Epitaph inscribed upon the Heart is left to be worn down via the
grinding wheel of time to obviation.

The first concerns the sage Jaratkaru, a revered and well-regarded wise
man who practiced a life of the most stringent asceticism. Which,
perhaps unsurprisingly, included celibacy. He is steadfast in his
approach to life, and persists with it even unto old age, evidently
untroubled by the fact that he has become a solitary figure divorced
from the more conventional norms of family or community. Until one day,
in the course of his Wanderings, he encounters some of the Shades of his
Ancestors – Who vitriolically upbraid him for having failed in his dual
duties to his forebears. First, to have performed the appropriate rites
for his Pitrs so that they may be looked after in the afterlife; and
second, to have married and produced at least one heir so that his
bloodline would not be snuffed out entirely when he himself died
eventually. The second point also circles back into the first, as
without an heir, it would have been impossible for these rites to be
\*kept\* going subsequent to Jaratkaru’s death anyway, and the problem
would have simply repeated itself with more dire elements.

The story of Jaratkaru’s ill-fated marriage to Manasa, a female serpent
deific, is beyond the scope of this piece; but suffice to say that while
it did not go well in many particulars, it \*did\* produce the requisite
heir – the renowned sage Astika.

In some ways, this is a better illustration all-up of the duty and the
benefit accruing to the Forebears rather than to one’s self – after all,
Jaratkaru’s carrying out of his Ancestors’ wishes did not exactly make
him a happier man in the immediate scheme of things. But it should also
be remembered that had Jaratkaru \*not\* addressed his issue (that is to
say, in part, his lack of one), not only would he have been increasingly
burdened with the guilt of having been confronted with the results of
his failings towards his Ancestors – but that, as an older man by this
point, he would himself have been next in line to find himself in the
same situation they were hanging in had the matter continued to remain
unresolved. In this way, self-interest was \*also\* served by doing the
‘rite’ thing by one’s Pitrs.

The second story, I shall simply quote from my previous work (rude to do
in public, I know, but I am unsure that I would be able to better it in
its execution at this precise moment in time):

“A tale told about the character of Karna, from the Mahabharat,
illustrates this, and also provides one explanation for Pitru Paksha as
a whole. According to this tradition, upon Karna’s death and ascension
to the afterlife, he found himself asking of the relevant God whose
domain it was for food … and being presented, in response, with gold.
Karna was surprised by this, and pointed out that he couldn’t eat gold,
and asked why it was being offered to him; to which he was told that
while he had indeed been conspicuously generous in life in his
\*monetary\* offerings to Temple and the Gods and such … he had never
made offerings of food. He was therefore ‘reaping as he had sown’ – as
he could only be given in the afterlife what either he himself or his
descendents had given.

A slight variation upon this has the explanation as being that Karna had
never offered food and water to his Pitrs while he was alive … which,
while it may sound egregious, unforgivable, and abominable now, was
arguably in fact the result of the circumstances of his birth and
abandonment by his mother – meaning he had never known his Pitrs in the
first place to be able to make the appropriate offerings.

To make matters worse, due to the death of all of Karna’s sons in the
Mahabharat War, there were therefore now no longer any descendents who
might ‘fill the void’ and provide for him from the world of the living.

Karna therefore beseeches the God in question – often identified as Lord
Yama (which would potentially make Karna His half-brother), although I
have also seen it stated as Lord Indra – to be allowed to return to
Earth to attempt to make things right.

Depending on which version of the story one reads, this either entails
Karna using the two weeks he is given here on Earth to perform the rites
for his Pitrs (and therefore also himself) that he should have been
doing the last time he was here; or alternatively it involves him
spending the time feeding the poor and engaged in other acts of piety.
In another (potentially somewhat darker) telling, it is said that upon
his (temporary) return from the dead, the king frantically attempts to
popularize the concept of providing food and water to the shades of
one’s ancestors in order to avert others from experiencing the same
deleterious circumstances which he had after death.

However it played out, it should come as no surprise to find that these
fourteen days are often regarded as being the same point of the year as
Pitru Paksha. Although as a brief note of hope, Lord Yama in His Mercy
is stated in some sources to have decreed that on Mahalaya Amavasa (the
last day, where there is no moon), the offerings will benefit \*all\*
departed souls; thus in part avoiding the problem encountered by Karna –
provided, of course, that offerings continue to be made in the first
place!”

As you can see, we once again have the needs of the individual met also
through the needs of his Ancestors – and the descendant in question
having been placed in quite a perilous position via their ongoing (even
if unintended) neglect. It is also important to note the broader scale
benefit that accrues as a result of Karna’s endeavours in the field of
Pitru-piety. Not just to his \*own\* ancestors or self, but thanks to
the successful pleas to his kinsman (sort-of – it’s … complicated), Lord
Yama, to the Shades of the Dead, the Ancestors of the Hindu eth(n)os all
up, potentially. Both directly, through the Mahalaya Amavasa custom
aforementioned, and indirectly through the promulgation and highlighting
of the proper custom upon these two-weeks when the Veils
\[Proto-Indo-European “Kel” particle veer-y much in mind\] between the
largely illusory present and the Past-Eternity are seriously thin and
permeable.

To return to the Pratchett quote with which we began this brief piece,
it is not exactly the case that “immortality” or ‘survival’ post-mortem
(odd choice of phrasing, I know) is something that can only be achieved
through the possession of heirs. Local metaphysics and eschatology shall
understandably differ upon this score, but generally speaking it appears
that the expectation is that one shall often “keep on going” (in some
direction, and with some degree of substantiability, at least) after
death almost regardless of that fact. But just as the point of life is
not “dying”, but may occasionally be thought of as “dying well”
\[therefore turning the baseline of the relevant inevitability into
something that can be built upon to turn it into a \*superior\*
telos-and-outcome\] , so too is it the situation that there are better
and there are worse forms of metempsychosis and after-living.

In a certain sense, then, the “immortality” angle is already taken care
of. It is rather rare and rather hard (although neither unheard of nor
axiomatically impossible) to die \*again\* after death (at least,
without having reincarnated again first … ‘walking it off’ on a long
hard road out of Hel, perhaps, notwithstanding). Which means that it is
the dual-thread of both the quality of (after-)life, and the boon to
those still yet living of the Ancestral immanence (‘Heritage’, you might
say, via way of partial explanation), which must instead be focused on
and attended more directly to.

It is therefore not our merest existences that render our Ancestors
‘immortal’, still much less ‘Immortalized’. But our continuous,
\*active\* efforts at keeping Them in our hearts and minds, and
providing such assistance to Their circumstances as we can from all the
way over here in the land of the living (occasional efforts at Katabasis
and amateur psychopompery perhaps not necessarily withstanding) that is
the important conduct, the proper conduct, the righteous conduct, and
the pious conduct.

After all, even leaving aside the ‘golden thread’ of “it’s what I’d want
done if I were in their position” \[and there really is no “if” about it
– “as you are, we once were; as we are, you shall be”\] … it’s just the
compassionate, the caring, the courageous (in some small way) thing to
do.

“Immortalization”, is an Act of Remembering.

Ensure your memory – and that of your line – runs long.
