+++
title = "The Departure And Arrival Of No Moon – Sarva Pitru Amavasya And Devixa0Mahalaya"
date = "September 28, 2019"

+++


[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/09/28/the-departure-and-arrival-of-no-moon-sarva-pitru-amavasya-and-devi-mahalaya/71108772_10162322251265574_7175755934789009408_n/)

![71108772_10162322251265574_7175755934789009408_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71108772_10162322251265574_7175755934789009408_n.jpg?w=386&h=420 "71108772_10162322251265574_7175755934789009408_n")

[](https://aryaakasha.com/2019/09/28/the-departure-and-arrival-of-no-moon-sarva-pitru-amavasya-and-devi-mahalaya/71169177_10162322249170574_8397340871103610880_o/)

![71169177_10162322249170574_8397340871103610880_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/71169177_10162322249170574_8397340871103610880_o.jpg?w=282&h=420 "71169177_10162322249170574_8397340871103610880_o")

Tonight marks the last night of Pitru Paksha – the Fortnight of the
Ancestors; and is also the MahaLaya event which precedes and forms a
bridge with the NavRatri (Nine Nights) of Goddess Durga yet to come.

The purposes of this occasion, then, whether regarded as Sarva Pitru
Amavasya, or as the ‘prelude’ to NavRatri, actually share something of a
fundamental unity – even though on the surface, they may look rather
different.

In the case of the former, the event is dedicated to the offering made
to \*all\* the shades of the departed; and in the case of the latter,
the observance is of the Great Devi, Durga, taking form and empowerment
from the shared essences of the Gods in order to physically smite evil
with ultra-violent light.

How are these the same principle in motion? Look closely. They are
\*both\* cases of pious action undertaken by individuals, groupings
(whether the still-yet-living mortals or the Gods assembled together for
this purpose) – which are directed ultimately \*outward\* towards the
general benefit and welfare of \*all\* the worlds’ dwellers. And
accomplished, as ever, through offerings of light and substance made
towards the asa-radiant power that presides above and precedes over all
– in the former case, often via Surya, and in the latter case, as
refracted through a number of intermediaries \[including, as we shall
see upon Night Four, Kushmanda-via-Surya\] back up to the Source of All.

But let us speak specifically about each tradition that takes place
today.

First, the close of Pitru Paksha; the Fortnight wherein the shades of
our forebears come to visit us, as the spaces between the worlds draw
nearer than usual; and are treated as honoured guests within our homes
and our hearts over the course of that time.

Whereas the preceding fortnight has largely been devoted to the making
of offerings and oblations to one’s departed ancestors; this Last Night,
when the Moon is Dark before it can grow again, is instead given over to
the provision for \*all\* the shades of the dead – hence the “Sarva” in
the observance’s name.

Via way of explication for the underlying reasoning of the tradition,
let me quote from my earlier works:

“A tale told about the character of Karna, from the Mahabharat,
illustrates this, and also provides one explanation for Pitru Paksha as
a whole. According to this tradition, upon Karna’s death and ascension
to the afterlife, he found himself asking of the relevant God whose
domain it was for food … and being presented, in response, with gold.
Karna was surprised by this, and pointed out that he couldn’t eat gold,
and asked why it was being offered to him; to which he was told that
while he had indeed been conspicuously generous in life in his
\*monetary\* offerings to Temple and the Gods and such … he had never
made offerings of food. He was therefore ‘reaping as he had sown’ – as
he could only be given in the afterlife what either he himself or his
descendents had given.

A slight variation upon this has the explanation as being that Karna had
never offered food and water to his Pitrs while he was alive … which,
while it may sound egregious, unforgivable, and abominable now, was
arguably in fact the result of the circumstances of his birth and
abandonment by his mother – meaning he had never known his Pitrs in the
first place to be able to make the appropriate offerings.

To make matters worse, due to the death of all of Karna’s sons in the
Mahabharat War, there were therefore now no longer any descendents who
might ‘fill the void’ and provide for him from the world of the living.

Karna therefore beseeches the God in question – often identified as Lord
Yama (which would potentially make Karna His half-brother), although I
have also seen it stated as Lord Indra – to be allowed to return to
Earth to attempt to make things right.

Depending on which version of the story one reads, this either entails
Karna using the two weeks he is given here on Earth to perform the rites
for his Pitrs (and therefore also himself) that he should have been
doing the last time he was here; or alternatively it involves him
spending the time feeding the poor and engaged in other acts of piety.
In another (potentially somewhat darker) telling, it is said that upon
his (temporary) return from the dead, the king frantically attempts to
popularize the concept of providing food and water to the shades of
one’s ancestors in order to avert others from experiencing the same
deleterious circumstances which he had after death.

However it played out, it should come as no surprise to find that these
fourteen days are often regarded as being the same point of the year as
Pitru Paksha. Although as a brief note of hope, Lord Yama in His Mercy
is stated in some sources to have decreed that on Mahalaya Amavasa (the
last day, where there is no moon), the offerings will benefit \*all\*
departed souls; thus in part avoiding the problem encountered by Karna –
provided, of course, that offerings continue to be made in the first
place!”

As one can see, this is an action wherein the otherwise highly
\*specific\* pathways of devotional action from the preceding fortnight
are now broadened out to be, in effect and hoped-for ambit, somewhat
more all-encompassing. And, as we know from the operation of the law of
Karma via the parable of Lord Indra’s Net … the hoped-for benefit of
this generalized virtuous conduct, via improving the overarching moral
and metaphysical situation of the universe at-large, shall eventually
\*also\* arcen back to you, should you require it.

In a way, I suppose, you could think of it as ‘hedging one’s bets’ via a
combination of Pascal’s Wager and Prisoner’s Dilemma. It’s Pascal’s
Wager, as we are taking the gamble that when we find ourselves in the
waiting-room of eternity having shuffled off this mortal coil … we shall
be provided for and looked after by our descendants. But then protecting
ourselves from the prospect of this \*not\* transpiring (either because
our descendants have forgotten us, or are simply unable to perform the
relevant and required rites … or, perhaps, because we for whatever
reason have no descendants, living or otherwise), through this
generalized mechanism for the spiritual welfare.

As in, both the welfare of the spirits – and also, through the morally
positive impacts upon one’s character and soul from having undertaken
proper and righteous conduct with good motivations in mind, the
spiritual welfare of ourselves, into the bargain.

It’s Prisoner’s Dilemma, because the best move is to \*co-operate\* –
both across generations, and in a more general sense, between people
still breathing as well (it ultimately honours \*all\* our dead, and
eventually, ourselves as well) ; while in a situation wherein one
‘co-operates’ but the other ‘cheats’, then the overall net welfare is
severely impinged, breaking down significantly further if \*both\*
neglect their moral duties.

The institution of traditions designed to re-inform us and thence
re-immanentize what \*proper\* moral conduct is, therefore, helps
considerably by reducing problems and quandries such as these to
“previously solved problems” – and by assisting in the overcoming of
‘collective action problems’ that are engendered by the difficulties
inherent in intersubjectivity, through providing shared moral and
informational (and, indeed, empathic) basis through which to guide and
induce action.

Which brings us on to the MahaLaya Devi mythocurrence that is
contemporaneously observed in various parts of India.

Now, I should probably at this point note that my interpretation of the
pre-saging of the MahishasuraMardini occurrence is a bit deepa than the
direct and literal words of the scripture themselves would imply upon a
plain and ordinary reading. This is, I suspect, strongly intentional –
as there are ‘gaps’ within the ‘literal’ interpretation that seem to so
snugly fit the \*other\* and often far older elements which I bring to
it, that it is akin to a key in a lock, opening up a far grander and
more Powerful \[Shakta, indeed\] revelation in the process.

I shall perhaps detail this further, with proper citations, in a
subsequent piece – as this one is quite lengthy already for what’s
supposed to be a brief two-topic-combined introductional.

But suffice to say, the ‘literal’ rendering has the various Gods coming
together, pooling Their radiant might and weaponry, to form a ‘mountain
of light’ that is the Warrior Goddess, to slay the buffalo-headed demon
whom They have been unable to halt.

And that is great, for what it is – but it misses something. Namely,
looking at it \*directly\*, what you wind up with is people coming away
from it assuming that the Goddess is ‘merely’ the emanation of the
shared power of other Gods; the creation of, often male Divinity, and a
servant to Their inestimable Will.

Whereas what is \*actually\* going on, once we read this in concert
especially with the famed Devi Suktam of the RigVeda, and its shared
elements of the Devi Upanishad etc. – is the Power \[Shakti, indeed\]
which Devi has emanated out and \*invested\* in these Gods, the Universe
as a whole (at a ‘background’ level, which \*is\* the fabric of reality
itself, according to certain readings .. concentrated and pooled in
particular areas, elements, beings, more so than others – and
\*particularly\* in HER Chosen Champions and Higher Harjas –
HiranyaHarja, now
\*that’s\*[#NAS](https://www.facebook.com/hashtag/nas?source=feed_text&epa=HASHTAG)!
) … that Power is being \*returned\* TO Her.

AdiShakti, AdiParaShakti, in other words, is ‘reaching back into our
world’ in more high-light form, in order to set to right the Order of
the Universe \[the immanentized state of Rta, which Mahishasura had
thrown out of balance and thusly into peril, along with everything – and
I do mean ‘everything’ – as well, in consequence and as a result\].

In this way, what is going on here, and what is observed upon this Night
(especially amongst the Bengalis, who are ever renowned for the strength
and luminosity of their Durga piety), is much the same as what is
connoted and venerated upon the last night of NavaRatri – Siddhidhatri’s
Night. But more upon \*that\* when we come to it, in a few nights’ time.

The overarching point – for it is, indeed, an ‘archet’, a \*bow\*, a
\*weapon\*, and “arete” in the Ancient Greek sense – is that these are
instances of people, of beings, of Gods Themselves, \*coming together\*,
and undertaking these \*collective actions\* of piety and of the caring
maintenance of the Universal, Divine Order \[Dharma & Rta Combined\], in
a mode and in a manner that re-enacts previous Great Actions that can
and have benefited us all.

It is the Eternal Return, as carried out by Gods and Mortals, and to
service of both the Eternal One and the Ones Now Beyond Death.

As I have often been known to say, in times of darkness and iniquity,
rather than simply cursing the circumstance – it is better to light the
flamethrower. A veer-y useful theological implement and/or metaphor,
indeed.

For it dispels darkness/occlusion \*and\* it kills demons – often, \*at
the same time\* !

And so, therefore, as you carry out the rites to the Pitrs, the
forebears of all … and also, the ritual honorific processes via which
the Mother of All is welcomed back into the world, have in mind that
these are both forms of the same ultimate actions.

And that the essential unity of all conduct, should ultimately be
towards the same purpose.

Krinvanto Vishvam Aryam, it is said in the Vedas. Accomplished via all
sorts of noble and morally upright actions. And therefore augmenting the
Divine Strength, to slay those who would attempt to usurp, upset,
despoil, and denigrate both such Righteous Conduct, and indeed the
veer-y fabric and immanence of Righteousness within this Universe,
Itself.

Honour Your Ancestors – Honour The Goddess  
Help The Dead – Help The Living  
Make the Worlds – on \*all\* sides of the Kaal-Veil of Life and Dying –
A Brighter, Righter Place.

Jai Mata Di !  
Hail and Thanks to the Pitrs !!  
Jai Shakti Devi !!!
