+++
title = "“HERE BE INDO-ARYANS?” On the Vedic Gods of thexa0Mitanni"
date = "September 16, 2019"

+++
![70383053_10162268033965574_3121450345172041728_n
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/70383053_10162268033965574_3121450345172041728_n-1.jpg?w=676)

I’ve had this document on my mind for quite awhile now. Not just because
of what it is (which we’ll get on to in just a moment), but also because
of what it \*represents\*.

See, this is one of the world’s oldest surviving international
peace-treaties. Dating from the mid-14th century B.C., it seeks to
solemnize an end to the conflict between two then-prominent Near Eastern
regional powers – the waxing Hittite Empire under Suppiluliuma, and the
seriously waning Mitanni by this stage under Shattiwaza. But its status
within the annals of the history of international diplomacy is not why I
find it seriously interesting to think about.

Instead, it’s for linguistic and religious reasons. Surprising, I know.

To cut straight to the chase before I get carried away building up the
‘broad strokes’ underpinning this piece – the treaty in question is
written in an \*Indo-Aryan\* language, rather than an Anatolian I.E.
one; and makes direct reference to several strongly important Vedic Gods
and concepts. It’s therefore pretty fascinating, precisely because these
things are rather unexpected – and cause us to re-examine what we
thought we knew about the development and the spread of Indo-European,
and more especially, Indo-Iranian – again, pointedly \*Indo-Aryan\* –
mytho-religion and language.

Now, in order to ‘set the scene’, we should probably briefly introduce
the respective agonists of the agreement. And by this, I do not mean the
rulers whose names are baked into the terms of the tablet; but rather,
the polities, the peoples for whom they stood. Because that’s where
things start to get interesting.

The Hittites should already be relatively familiar. They turn up just
about everywhere dealing with the period – rampaging down to Babylon,
fighting Ramses II at Kadesh (in what is probably one of history’s first
recorded instances of deliberately promulgated “Fake News”, as applies
Ramses’ presentation of the outcome of the battle as a crushing Egyptian
victory), likely making war on the Greeks quite to the west, and
potentially even turning up in the Bible – which is probably where most
of us know the name from. In the mid-1300s, they’re a real regional
Great Power, pretty much at the apex of their suzerainty.

For our purposes, they’re the principal Anatolian Indo-European group;
and that’s also the linguistic sub-family they belong to. Their
mytho-religion, while it retains its Indo-European elements, has also
hybridized to a certain extent with that of the Hattians and then
Hurrians whom they overran and assimilated in the course of their
conquest of their future imperial heartland, as well as with
Mesopotamian mythoreligion through ongoing external contact. It’s a
matter of significant debate just which bits from what we know of their
overarching beliefs come from where. Which matters, as due to the
relative antiquity of the Hittites, as well as their early ‘branching
off’ from Proto-Indo-European linguistic and mythological corpus, they
form a quite an important source when it comes to PIE mythoreligious
(re)constructionism.

But I digress. Despite the fact that they’re \*unquestionably\* the
\*severely\* dominant party to this peace-treaty (it’s really more of an
imposition than an equal-footing act of diplomacy, in realpolitik terms;
the Mitanni’s position after this is effectively that of a client-state
of the Hittites, sealed with the marriage of Suppiluliuma’s daughter to
the Mitanni’s new ruler Shattiwaza … who’d effectively been placed upon
the throne \*by\* Suppiluliuma following a period of considerable
instability amidst the Mitanni characterized by a string of
assassinations and overthrows), the Hittites are not supposed to be the
stars of \*this\* show.

Instead, that honour goes to the Mitanni – or, more specifically, to
their courtly language and religious customs. Which, as I noted
somewhere towards the intro, aren’t exactly what you’d expect in
Northern Mesopotamia/South-Eastern Anatolia.

Now, the Mitanni themselves, are thought to have basically been a
Hurrian people, who at some point in their history had wound up with an
Indo-European (or, at the very least, considerably Indo-European-ized)
ruling class. Except rather than being something like the Hittites –
wherein a group of \*Anatolian\* Indo-Europeans rolls in and
occupies/assimilates/subjugates/incorporates the non-Indo-European
previous inhabitants (Hurrians, broadly speaking, in both cases;
although also the Hattians for the Hittites earlier on) – the Mitanni
are coming at a similar starting situation from the opposite angle.
Literally. As in, from the \*East\*, as far as we can tell.

And instead of conquering and assimilating the Hurrians into an
Indo-European dominant culture, the Mitanni’s Indo-European ruling elite
find themselves increasingly Hurrian-ized, to the point that by the time
this treaty is signed, it seems that they themselves are likely speaking
Hurrian on a day-to-day basis, with their own original language having
become increasingly reserved only for ‘special occasions’ – the
incredibly serious and indelibly closely related fields of formalized
politics/matters of state and religion.

To phrase it in linguistics terms – whereas in many what we might term
“Indo-European cultural encounter” situations, after the Wolf-Warriors
and the #GangSteppe on horseback or chariot have done setting fire to
your town and rebuilt it at least once, what remainsis a
non-Indo-European “substrate” (residual traces of the previous language
and culture that have been ridden over the top of, potentially rather
literally) – in Mitanni, what we have is an Indo-European
\*superstrate\* on a largely non-Indo-European language, culture, and
people (the riding-over-the-top-of having left hoof-prints … rather
literally, considering all the horse-related terms in Mitanni that have
this origin (although that is both another story, and another stele, for
another time) – upon what was there before and yet still remains).

Looking from the Hittites to the Mitanni and back again then, one could
almost conclude that their essentialized civilizational experiences have
just about been ‘mirror images’ of each other. Which does not mean that
they were ‘identical’; but rather, that things are facing pretty much
the opposite way around.

Unfortunately, we do not know enough about the Mitanni themselves to
make accurate nor adequate inductions about just how much of their
culture and mythoreligion was “Indo-European-ized”; but I do not
consider it to be coincidental that it is in the religious realms, the
courtly realms, and the horse-training realms that the Indo-Aryan
language features, indeed names and nouns, are seemingly most strongly
preserved. All are, after their own way, effectively sacred, sacral
actions; and the reign-names of their rulers – which often directly
included elements around divinity and/or horses and chariots – are
effectively at the apex of all three. I suspect that the relegation of
the original Indo-Aryan language brought forward to the Mitanni by their
Indo-European (horse-)elite, to that of a largely liturgical and
technical tongue rather than its maintenance as an ongoing day-to-day
vernacular, may have erected an effective ‘fire-wall’ between the
traditional elements bound up and expressed within it, and those that it
would otherwise have ‘rubbed shoulders with’ in the cultural canons and
corpus of the ‘host’ Mitanni-Hurrian culture. There is therefore, in the
treaty in question, little surprise that we have \*exactly\* the right –
indeed, the \*rite\* – Indo-Iranian/(Pre-)Vedic deities invoked, with
highly recognizable names to scholars or speakers of Sanskrit
(admittedly, in at least one case with the addition of a Hurrian
grammatical suffix), rather than the situation prevailing in many other
texts from, say, the Hittites, wherein theonyms (or even entire deities)
from the cultures they were in contact with are straight-imported and
placed alongside or otherwise overlain over the top of the Hittites’ own
Indo-European theology.

Of course, it should be noted that there IS a criticism of this
perspective – insofar as the treaty text under discussion is a Hittite
one, promulgated by a Hittite ruler to a now-subject people, and
\*including\* these Indo-Iranian deifics amidst a rather more broad and
general list of deities from the Hittite end of things. However, the
\*lack\* of similar attestation for these Indo-Iranian theonyms in other
Hittite texts, in concert with those aforementioned other Mitanni
textual sources such as lists of reign-names and a rather famous
horse-training manual, nevertheless seem to support the view that
actually, yeah, the Mitanni \*were\* in possession of significant
mythoreligious and (culturo-)linguistic influence from the ‘main’
Indo-Iranians to the East.

So other than the immediately obvious point around an Indo-Iranian
diffusion heading West (whether the people themselves, or possibly
simply imparting cultural elements to tribes driven out before them and
migrating ahead of the front of the storm) in a sort of a Bronze Age
Pincer maneuver that would meet in the southern shadow of the Caucasus
and west of the Zagros, why is this interesting?

Well, consider the dates. The treaty is tentatively ascribed an
authorship of about 1380 B.C.. The language-clade which gave rise to the
terms under discussion, is Indo-Aryan. The Gods are immediately
recognizable as the (Proto-)Vedic ones. Why does this matter? Because
somewhere smack in the middle between where the Mitanni were, and where
the core of Vedic society had set up amidst the Seven Rivers, there are
the early Iranians – the Persians, and other such peoples. Who speak a
different branch of Indo-Iranian languages, and who at some point come
under the thumb of the religious inverter Zoroaster – one of whose
‘reforms’ specifically demonizes Lord Indra.

It’s \*possible\*, to be sure, that some of this \*could\* be explained
by impressively long-distance trade and cultural contacts with the Vedic
Aryans far to the east, which somehow bypass the (Old) Iranians
somewhere in the middle; however while this \*may\* account for the
technical terminology around horse-training etc, I suspect that this
would be a pretty unsatisfying explanation for the presence of
(Proto-)Hindu conceptry in reign-names and the apparent pantheon of the
Mitanni’s ruling elite.

The \*better\* explanation – at least, to my mind; as well as being the
more immediately ‘useful’ one – is that this all suggests that the
Zoroastrian heresy was considerably \*later\* and more marginal in its
earlier phases than some have otherwise sought to suggest. It may also
indicate that Indo-Aryan itself was more broadly distributed as a
development of Proto-Indo-Iranian, and/or that the divergence between
Indo-Aryan and Iranian languages may have happened somewhat later than
is often presumed. But this is getting \*well\* above my pay-grade
within the realms of theoretical linguistics, so we shall leave that for
others to ruminate upon for the moment.

But the thing that was most playing upon my mind when considering this
treaty-tablet most recently, was none of these things. At least, for
part of the evening/morning when I was thinking about all of this.

Rather, it was that there’s this incredible duality between the Deities
mentioned in this text – assumedly, the deities the Mifanni held dear –
and the Mitanni themselves. Hell, even the Hittites in whose imperial
mouth(piece) They (the Gods) are Invoked.

See, of the Mitanni, we know if not “next to nothing”, then hardly too
much more than that. We have a few fragments of Imperial correspondence,
a horse-training manual (that is surprisingly – and I mean
\*surprisingly\* – almost ultra-modern in its techniques), some
scattered inscriptions here and there, and pretty much what can be
untangled from the accounts of the people by those who lived in their
immediate vicinity and warred against and/or intermarried with them
(usually in that direct order). Even when it comes to the actual,
physically baked hard-text in front of us, so much of what we present as
fact about them is, ultimately, simply well-informed (albeit quite
likely via inference) conjecture.

We can, in short, barely even tell you who or what they were as a
people. It’s gotten to the point wherein we’re not even entirely sure if
they’re \*a\* people, or just what precise role these Indo-Aryans among
their midst \*actually\* played within the kingdom itself – warrior
elite binding together a confederacy? royal family and upper aristocracy
at the heart of an empire by then in decline? expatriate professionals
within the relevant fields of war and equestrianism (and perhaps
\*especially\* both at once) from further East who may have seen an
opportunity for some “vertical integration” and taken it? We just simply
don’t know.

But then, you look at the Gods enumerated and called upon by the
Mitanni, and then echoed by the Hittites in the course of the drafting
of this Treaty. Names we \*instantly\* know and recognize – Indra
(In-Da-Ra), Mitra (Mi-It-Ra), Varuna (U-Ru-Wa-Na / A-Ru-Na), Agni
(A-Ak-Ni-Is), the Nasatya Horse-Twins (Na-Sa-Ti-Ya-An-Na), along with
the familiar concept of Rta.

Now, even though it is also true to state that these RigVedic era Hindu
Deities are in some respects less prominent than some of Them once were,
They are still worshipped, still prayed to, still veer-y much a part of
active Hindu religion in the here and now, today, some three, nearly
three and a half millennia hence. Indeed, we very much could not
\*have\* Hindu religion without Agni, nor a cosmos, a cosmology without
Rta. And it is not like either the specific and specifically
recognizable theonymic forms of these Gods nor the more general Divine
Identities referred to by them were restricted to the Vedic Aryans,
either. We see Mitra turn up eventually right across the Indo-European
World, borne by Roman legions. We see immediately the resonance of Eddic
Thor with Vedic Indra. I maintain that Varuna finds form in the more
westerly Indo-European religions in a number of ways – including Njord
of the Sea, and Ouranos of the Sky, but this is … another article I keep
meaning to get on with writing. \[Along with a much more in-depth
analysis of the precise reasoning why these \*specific\* Indo-European
deities are strongly resonant with the concept of (inter)National
treaty-making and diplomacy, alliances, in the first place … and, for
that matter, whether Suppiluliuma \*really\* meant to suggest that
necromancy was one of the Cassus Belli for this \*particular\*
war-effort against his neighbouring rivals; but I digress\]

What I am trying to say here, is that while the Mitanni may nowadays be
a mere historical-linguistic footnote,… and while even the once-mighty
Hittites themselves, are something that is now ever-increasingly distant
in the rear-view mirror of time – the Gods, the Gods Themselves, are
still around. Not merely “alive”, nor “echoes”, but immanent, resurgent
– downright \*making a comeback\*. Although perhaps that’s precisely the
wrong term to use. You don’t call it a “comeback” if They’ve been here
for years. Except insofar as it’s \*us\* that are doing the “coming
back” – \*to\* Indo-European mythoreligion, in any number of
diverse-yet-unified (and fundamentally, foundationally strong because of
it) locally salient, immanent branches thereof.

“Sic Transit Gloria Mundi”, definitely.  
“Memento Mori”, by all means.  
Yet “Sanatana Rta”, “Orlog”, means Divine Order Above All; Ancient,
Eternal, True.

Reality is defined, in a certain sense, as that which remains/persists
even when you stop believing in or perceiving it. It is true to state
that part of the point of piety – as well as recent experiments in
quantum physics around the degree to which focusing upon something,
believing in it might actually alter the thing itself and its outcome –
is to strengthen and augment those particular ‘parts’ of reality, those
Divine Personages, to Whom we owe our fealty and our loyal adherence.
But that does not “make” reality – it “enhances” certain elements within
it. Although this is rather rapidly arcening towards me making a
potentially somewhat controversial ‘democracy of the Divine’ metaphor
\[wherein it is pointed out that politicians, except in rather specific
circumstances, don’t tend to stop existing simply because you haven’t
voted for them, or they’re not in office at this particular moment in
time), so we’ll save further unpacking of this perhaps somewhat
tangential battle-line of thought for a future article.

The point is – when looking at this Treaty text, I got a sense both
alike to and unalike that which I experience when hearing a verse of
RigVedic hymnal sung aloud in a devotional context. For, in both cases
we have The Past being ever with us. In both cases, the Past has come
down to us here in the present. And in both cases, from evidently
remarkably similar starting-origin points. It’s just that whereas the
Vedic verse is part of a liturgy of devotion whose lineage has remained
\*alive\* and \*active\* for this previous span of perhaps almost some
four thousand years (a frankly unfathomable scale and span of time for
pretty much any mortal … it’s a timescale that is downright
\*archaeological\* in scope, and even then some), the mythoreligious
experience of the Mitanni has been something of a cul-de-sac branching
off therefrom. It went some ways, and thence was subsumed, snuffed out,
functionally ended and relegated to the status of archaeological
discovery rather than, say, “cultural encounter” or “living tradition”.
It died with its people, in other words.

Or, at least, a portion of it, a \*facet\* did. And the twig that hath
been broken off from the Tree of Mighty Indo-European Mythoreligion, has
become so desiccated with the passage of the ages that even planting it
anew in fresh soil or seeking to graft it on to a yet-still-healthy
bough is singularly unlikely to be able to resurrect it in a truly
meaningful sense.

But as for the \*rest\* of it, this broad-spanning macro-mythology,
Rta-religion, \*that\* is another matter entirely.

Even though the mouths of the Mitanni and the hands of the Hittites may
now be nought but dust in tombs and blowing hence across the desert
wind, their cultures a matter for speculation both academic or upon the
black-market in antiquities pilfered … as Terry Pratchett once memorably
put it:

“No one remembers the singer. The song remains.”
