+++
title = "Aum Gananam Tva Ganapatim…"
date = "September 3, 2019"

+++
![69474847_10162220229130574_6755708764600401920_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/69474847_10162220229130574_6755708764600401920_n.jpg?w=676)

Ganesh Chaturthi began yesterday, and as one should properly expect,
this has been accompanied by a considerable escalation in expressions of
piety towards the deity in question. Frequently, these have included a
particular and rather prominent verse of Sanskrit, drawn from the
RigVeda, and attributed as a prayer to Him:

गणानां तवा गणपतिं हवामहे कविं कवीनामुपमश्रवस्तमम \|  
जयेष्ठराजं बरह्मणां बरह्मणस पत आ नः षर्ण्वन्नूतिभिः सीद सादनम \|\|

Now, here is the thing. I do not question that this particular sloka has
come to refer to Ganesha in contemporary usage; but it is worth noting
that in its \*original\* RigVedic context, it was quite directly part of
the praise of Brihaspati – another deity, and One that I would instead
identify with Ganesha’s Father, Shiva. \[For more detail upon this,
consult my GHOST DIVISION work – which has an entire section upon the
subject\]

So how has the interpretation of this verse developed in such a way over
the course of the intervening millennia?

The ‘blending’ likely emanates from the key words of the first line –
the famed “Om Gananam Tva Ganapatim” beginning to both hymnal and
mantra. “GanaPati”, you see, would mean “Lord of the Host”, or “Lord of
the Retinue”, of the tribe – “Gana” having a similar root to our English
terms such as “Genus”, and referring to a body of persons united by
something (whether heredity, or a cause, the service to a lord, or other
axial of group bonding and loyalty); while “Pati” derives from the same
root as “Father”, as “Patriarch”, and means exactly that – a Lord, a
Father. \[compare the Odinic theonym of Her(ja)Fodr; and, for that
matter, if we are speaking of Brihaspati – Galdrafodr\]

“GanaPati” is also another name for Ganesha – GanaEsha, again referring
to a Lord of the Host, and to my mind, usefully understood in some
contexts as Lord Shiva’s Son acting as a princely commander of His
Custodian Guard, a seneschal of the Watch – acting both in complement
and coterminity with His Own Brother, Lord Skanda, as Marshal of the
(usually attacking) Armies of the Heavens.

Particularly when we consider the rest of the meanings of the lines in
question, with praise His mighty qualities of supreme wisdom, fame, and
beneficence in aiding and availing the Pious, it is not hard to see how
this has come to be thought of as a Ganesha reference. The Words, so to
speak, apply almost equally well to the Son as they do to the Father.

However, there is one further point I yet wish to make upon the matter.
Going through the rest of the Hymnal in question \[RV II 23\], even
though I maintain that it is quite clear as a song of praise about and
to Brihaspati, it is inescapable to feel that the strong symbolic
resonances with the portfolio and personality of Ganesha are very much
there all the way through.

For just as Ganesha is regarded as the Remover of Obstacles and the
Pusher Aside of Problems, so too do we see exactly these noble
characteristics eulogized in the course of this Brihaspati Hymn. Often
by running them over in His Car/Chariot, or otherwise directly engaging
them in fiery combat.

Just as Ganesha is regarded as the Sentinel, the Guardian Who Stands
Watchful over both the Devotee and the Site of Devotion \[hence why you
will almost invariably encounter a Ganesha murti \*somewhere\* at the
entrance to a Mandir or other such shrine\], so too do we see see these
qualities and sacred, solemn duties spoken of in the course of the
Brihaspati Hymn.

Just as Ganesha is regarded as a bringer of Joy and Prosperity, so too
do we find these qualities ascribed to Brihaspati in the course of this
Hymn – admittedly, potentially via the crushing of one’s enemies and the
redistribution of their ill-garnered gains as booty. A ‘Bronze Age
Solution’ that shall thankfully never truly go out of style.

And just as Ganesha is rightfully spoken of as a Presider over Piety – a
Guide also to the Devotee and a Guardian of the Path of Righteousness ,
an Imparter of Wisdom, and Instructor in the chartered course of proper
conduct – so, too, do we see this in the very name, and of course in the
very Hymnal Text, of Lord Shiva As Brihaspati !

So therefore, what I am seeking to say is quite simple.

The RigVedic Hymnal in question was originally, initially one dedicated
to Brihaspati; and it slightly bemuses me each time I see an
enthusiastic devotee ascribing a role in RigVedic Verse to Ganesha. Not
out of any ill-will towards the deity in question, you understand! Of
course not! But simply out of due respect to the facts – and the filial
piety whereby the Glory of the God Who Is HIS Father is upheld by the
proper recognition thereof.

And, as we know from one other tale, probably my favourite of the
mythological accountings of Ganesha – specifically the one in which
Ganesha wins a race with His Brother, Skanda, around the world by simply
circumambulating Their Parents (as to Him, They \*are\* His World) –
this is a value most highly prized and prioritzed by Him. Indeed, it is
a key illustration of the fundamental Hindu principle that the support
and positive regard for one’s parents is the highest act of piety, of
faith.

But whatever its origins, the Verse in question has found admirable more
‘modern’ application with Ganesha; and this is further corroborated via
the ongoing character and characteristics referenced in the subsequent
slokas of the RigVedic Hymnal in question.

An admirable demonstration in practice of both the way in which Hinduism
elegantly combines ‘continuity’ and ‘development’ ; as well as that
ancient principle of a worthy Son attaining and bearing His (Al)Mighty
Father’s Mantle.

So, in closing \[as well as in Opening – a phrasing is, after all, a
gateway, a portal!\] , I say again once more:

ॐ गणानां त्वा गणपतिं हवामहे  
कविं कवीनामुपमश्रवस्तमम् ।  
ज्येष्ठराजं ब्रह्मणां ब्रह्मणस्पत  
आ नः शृण्वन्नूतिभिः सीद सादनम् ॥

ॐ Sri Ganeshaya Namah

❤
