+++
title = "Votive Plate of Cybele, Great Goddess, Mountain Mother – Arte-Factsxa0#5"
date = "September 21, 2019"

+++
![70439603_10162288630125574_7769451720836382720_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/70439603_10162288630125574_7769451720836382720_n.jpg?w=676)

This Is #GangSteppe – and also, fine Devi-otional (A)Art(I) for Friday !

Depicted is Goddess Cybele on an offering-plate, from 3rd century B.C.
Ai-Khanoum, amidst the ruins of the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom.

Now, I find this artefact fascinating for quite a number of reasons. Not
simply because of the various iconographic features upon it which come
from pretty much right the way across the central and eastern
Indo-European-isphere \[all the way from Greece, to Anatolia and the
Steppes, and thence through to India\], but because they’re all
\*combined\* into one radiant whole.

Not in a manner that is, as we would say utilizing our particular
meaning of the word, “syncretic” \[that is to say, putting together
unlike things in the manner of the politically-convenient efforts of the
Greeks in Egypt, for instance\] – but rather, in the appropriate putting
\*back\* together of elements that \*do\* and always have had, a
fundamental underlying unity to them.

This is, as I have said before, part of the reason I find the general
‘convection zone’ of Indo-European cultures extant in Afghanistan from
Gandhara down to the Ghaznavids \[and sadly being suppressed from then\]
to be such a great sphere to delve into for our purposes. Because that
underlying sacred thread of Unity is so seriously present, and
impressively, immanently, integrally preserved for and thence presented
to us. But I have let my enthusiasm run away with me – back to what is
immediately in front of us here!

The first element we must consider is this Goddess, Cybele. I have
detailed in greater length in my BHARAT MATA AND THE INDO-EUROPEAN
DEIFIC OF NATIONAL IDENTITY, the broader complex into which Cybele very
much fits.

We might refer to this in short hand, perhaps, as “Mountain Mother”,
which links back to both the much more immediately familiar “Earth
Mother” concept, and also \*forward\* to the “Divine Queen” and “Patron
Goddess of a People” developments – indeed, the “Mother of the Nation”,
with the “Nation” in question being fixed and focal around a
strong-point, a defensible position, a high-place of both piety and Pur
\[settlement\], an Axis Mundi perhaps at its very core \[c.f the perhaps
surprisingly strong linguistic and figurative coterminities of terms for
“Tree” and “Mountain”, and thence “World Tree” and “World Mountain” in
especially ‘Eddic’ and ‘Vedic’ thought – Fir, Fjall; Parnin, Parvat,
respectively, to name but a small number of examples, and note the P=F
sound-equivalency, as also seen in, for instance, “Father” and
“Pitar”\].

And, flowing from this close identification with the Indo-European
Nation or Nationalit(ies) in question, the strong attribution to this
maternal-regal figure of the characteristics associated with the Warrior
Elite – being a competent combatant, often mounted either upon a steed
or in a chariot (which, in either case, is only rarely correlate with
horses (Although Hittite Pirwa \[closely related, again, to terms for a
rock/mountain/outcropping, and identified as a Queen\] is somewhat an
exception to this rule) – much more often being a ‘big cat’ such as a
tiger or lion \[Dawon, Vahana of Durga\] or lynx in the case of the
former, or drawn by one or more thereof in the case of the latter
\[consider Freyja’s chariot\]; more rarely, although turning up
frequently in Hindu and potentially also in Phrygian/Anatolian sources,
a white (lunar) bull), equipped with a spear and/or bow and/or sword (in
both the case of the spear and the sword it can be interesting to
observe the overlapping terms for each with the local words for
“mountain”), and generally regarded as being capable of ascending into a
divine fury against whom none can stand … possibly while having imbibed
an intoxicating brew.

In this, She – in whichever form, Freyja, Parvati, Cybele, and others
besides – is the counterpart, often overtly the equal or even sometimes
the \*superior\* of Her Husband, Who is the Wind-Lord, the Roaring of
the Storm Wind, a Steppe-Warrior inherited archetype of the wild and
boundless form of Dyaus Pitar.

\[Some scholars in the audience may question this direct element of the
typology as applies Cybele in particular, on the basis of the more usual
Classical Greek/Roman linkage of Cybele to a figure known as Attis – a
Phrygian shepherd whose most notable feature appears to have been
castration … but I am not so sure that this is the best way to approach
the situation; on grounds that not only do we have castration elements
present in several other Indo-European representations of the Sky Father
complex – including, most prominently, Ouranos/Uranus – but we also have
occasional mentions that seem to link Cybele closely to the Thracian,
Phrygian, and occasionally Scythian complex around Sabazios; and, of
course, that \*other\* mutilated figure, Dionysus\]

This ‘superiority’ element comes not simply from Her regent status as
the Queen of a People, Mighty though They and Her may be upon the field
of war. But also from Her position both within and apparently \*beyond\*
Creation Itself – hence the identification I have endeavoured to
elucidate in both Nordic & Hindu mythoreligious corpuses of the Goddess
in question \*with\* the Axis Mundi, and also with the ability to impart
\*into\* this world from \*beyond\* it. In line with this, She is
regarded as correlate not simply with Sovereignty … but with Cosmic
Order \[and thence, flowing from it as a reflexial, Divine Sovereignty,
of which the Sovereignty of mortal Kings here upon this Earth is, at
best, an Eternal Return-resonance-echo-echolation’d thereof\] Itself.

This may be taken as my strong preference for Shakta theology; however
it finds additional expression, according to some interpretations, in
the work of the Roman philosopher Lucretius. I shall not here include
the lengthy excerpt from Book II of his De Rerum Natura which
illustrates this, but we may post it at some subsequent point as its own
piece, as it’s rather excellent and also includes direct mention of many
of the features of the Goddess \[here, identified as Magna Mater – Great
Mother\] I have earlier alluded to.

Now, as for why \*that\* matters, it helps us to elucidate some of the
iconographic features on clear showing in this excellent piece of votive
artistry. We shall start at the left and work our way through.

The first feature we can make out, carefully picked out in Gold, is a
Parasol. An Umbrella. What this likely represents, is the very same
principle as that bound up in the Imperial TItle of ShivaJi –
Chhatrapati, which would literally be rendered something like
“Umbrella-Lord” \[Pati, like “Patriarch(y)”, meaning Lord or Master or
Father – like “Sire”, as in a King, potentially; while Chhatra means an
Umbrella, a Parasol\], but more figuratively translated as “Over-King”,
as other rulers are under the ‘umbrella’ of the the greater Sovereignty
represented by it; with the shaft of the umbrella potentially also
correlating with the Axis Mundi, the support of the superstructure of
the world and its unfurled order that is the shelter against the chaos
and iniquity, evil and strife, which exist in the absence of the Gods’
Divine Rule. It is also, of course, in more euhemeric terms, a symbol of
being powerful and important, to have a chap with an umbrella following
you around keeping you shaded. And it is a symbol of my sleep-deprived,
somewhat manic state, that this paragraph nearly contained a
several-line discursion on the exact and resonant saliency of all of
this in Rihanna’s 2007 hit “Umbrella”. Especially the quite literally
tempestuous meteorlogical \[that’s not a typo, that’s a portmanteau in
three languages\] phenomena which accompanied it.

The Goddess Herself is depicted in a Chariot, the taller figure of the
two standing therein (the other is Nike – Victory, and also, via
etymology, war and assault; it is perhaps not coincidental, either, that
She is so very often depicted as Winged – “Feather”, and these terms for
Tree aforementioned share common roots\], and with a headdress that
perhaps recalls the “Battlemented Crown” ascribed to Her by Lucretius
\[recall the Fortress, Defensive Strong Point, City (these strongly
overlap with a rocky outcropping, a hill, for reasons that ought be
obvious) symbolism of the overall Mountain Mother/Queen deific
complex\], and/or the frequent references to ‘Mountain’-style headgear
found in other Indo-European mythoreligious complexes’ talk about both
the Goddess, and the customary apparel for a wife as a resultant echoing
thereof \[to quote myself upon the subject: “One of these is the epithet
“Haglfaldini” cited in the Sexstefja of Thjodolfr Arnorsson, meaning
“hail-hooded” \[comparable to the modern English idiom “snow-capped”\],
with the ‘hood’ in question, the Faldr, being a word for a woman’s
head-covering.”\]. Her hand is clasped over Her Heart, and She is also
turned directly to face the supplicant presumably making overt use of
the offering-plate.

The Chariot is itself a furtherance of the Sovereignty/Order visual
mytho-metaphor, as well – as in addition to its obvious saliency as a
war-vehicle, it rests upon an axle \[correlate, one again, with the Axis
Mundi and with Order – we have Vedic hymnals commenting quite directly
upon this concept, and regarding the Wheels thus affixed, with their
spokes, to be as the Worlds; see also my previous work around the
concept of ChakraVartin – One Whose Wheels Are In Motion, as \*another\*
way of suggesting a Paramount or Universal Sovereign; and, of course,
the KalaChakra cycle of Time’s unfolding\], and symbolizes \*movement\*,
as a furtherance of the ‘fixed’ and ‘immutable’ principle of Her as
Mountain – although the rocky terrain underneath the wheels thereof,
which has also been deliberately picked out in gold itself, perhaps
symbolizes that anywhere and everywhere is upon the slopes of the
World-Mountain, something that must have seemed almost self-evident
amidst the topography of Afghanistan at the time, adjacent to the Hindu
Kush and with the Himalayas and Mt Meru not too far distant. (with the
zig-zag pattern of embossing upon the Chariot itself beneath the
railing, perhaps \*also\* recalling the mountain-ranges … and, in
inversion of a certain Abrahamic maxim, mayhap representing that the
Mountain may come to \*you\* ! \]

The long projection held by Nike, as Her Charioteer, is likely a rod
utilized to direct and control the Lions Who are pulling the vehicle; it
is probably not coincidental that the arcening of its length points
upwards to the Solar and Lunar pairing behind Helios in the upper right
of the plate \[the Solar emblem, interestingly, is the Vergina Sun so
beloved of the royal house of Macedon that gave rise to Alexander,
which, especially in the context of the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom, would
further strengthen the Sovereignty, and Divine Order connotations of the
piece\]. The Rod, therefore, especially picked out in gold as it is, is
a ray of Solar and Lawful Rule; its unembossed but rather delicately
brush-stroked nature enabling a feeling of suppleness, of flexibility,
yet still radiantly catching the eye and dominating the field it runs
through (in just the manner of ‘enlightened \[pun not initially
intended\] rule’\] – although given that it is emanating out \*from\*
the Chariot of the Goddess and up \*to\* the Sun and Moon \[themselves
also operating on regular cycles of time and forming a baseline
‘regulus’ for mortal society and the natural world, both in terms of
months (necessary for ritualine calendars) and something as simple and
vitally important as day-and-night\], this perhaps recalls something
akin to the Shakta Hindu understanding of Ma \[Mother Goddess\] as
Kushmanda \[‘Power of the Sun’, as I have figuratively translated it ,
\[Providing\] Incepting Warmth/Energy/Radiance to the Cosmic Egg \[here
also understood as the Sun, as well as the seed of creation in another
context\], would be a little more direct\] – wherein the Energy which
fuels all of creation is transmitted out from Her, to and through the
Sun, reflecting/emanating also off the Moon, and thence down here to us
on Earth \[an ‘echo’ of the potentially \*female\* Solar Deity in
Proto-Indo-European cosmology survives also in Nordic mythology with Sol
being, well, female – while the Moon is Male, as is Lord Chandra \[often
closely identified with Shiva, Sky Father\]\]. The Rod, therefore, both
points out this arcening trajectory, and symbolizes that even these most
prominent of caelestial orbs are under Her Divine Command. Helios
looking on approvingly, even Jovially, from On High \[consider/compare
“Dyaus Pitar” in its oldest PIE sense having specific correlation also
with the \*Shining\* Daylight Sky as Father\].

The Lions represent a number of concepts. In the Roman reckoning, they
were often spoken of as the ferocity and untamed wildness of the natural
world – yet here, under Her power \[note the reins – the reigns, and
harnesses, also picked out in gold; as are the quite fantastic manes and
hair of the legs, as well as the claws, although not as much of the
adornment has survived upon those) and expressions of Her ferocity,
regality, vigour, and valour. It is potential that the raised forelegs
may not only signify \*motion\*, but impending martial force and
combative power, and perhaps are also coterminous with the
raised-foreleg gesture of guardian animal statuary in further-Eastern
cult sites, or the bestowment of prosperity and Abhaya from outstretched
forepaw.

The more modern-familiar connotations of the Lion as a symbol of
Kingship, of the Roar as a rallying-cry \[and inspiring terror in those
who are \*not\* upon its side\], of bravery, and of victory, are
similarly directly relevant – particularly given Cybele’s strong role in
the provision of the dual powers of physical force and psychological
courage to Her men, nation(s) \[and it is interesting how it is the
\*plural\* which turns up in the Roman formulations\], and other such
combatants.

The direction of the image’s features also tells something of a story –
the trajectory of the flow from the Parasol, the Axis Mundi, radiating
out perhaps like the unfurled spokes and awning of the umbrella, across
the plate, towards the far right of the votive offering; and thence
signifying, also, Her coming to the pious priest who is sacrificing in
Her Name – in the same matter that Rta, Cosmic Order, Orlog, is
\*upheld\* and becomes more permeating, through the acts of piety of the
Indo-European peoples \[‘Krinvanto Vishvam Aryam’, as the RigVedic
Mantra-Maxim refrain most frequently of the flowing Soma-Rites goes!\];
and also, more overtly, in the manner that She responds to the prayers
of Her Faithful.

What can stop the progress of this most Mighty Goddess out to even the
farthest corners of Her Divine Realm.

The construction of the rite on the furthest extreme of the plate is
interesting, as it is a stepped altar of the type we should often expect
to see amongst the Eastern Indo-European Peoples. And while an in-depth
discussion of the construction of (fire) altars is rather beyond the
scope of this already significantly lengthy piece (!), it is worth
noting that the steeply stepped shaping of the Altar in effect mirrors
that of a Mountain \[steep steps, often leading up to a sacral situation
such as a throne, appear to be a frequent furnishing of Cybelian
devotional architecture\] – which, to my mind at least, represents an
underlying ‘symmetry’ to the image. The Axis Mundi recalled by the
Parasol on the left, which is often represented as the World-Mountain,
and is where She is to be found, radiating out and down across the
slopes to us here on Earth \[Which She also Is, if we are resonant with
Bhumi-Mata, Prithvi-Mata, in this accounting\], is recalled and mirrored
by the ‘miniature-mountain’ of the Altar structure \[its six or seven
subdivisions are also likely uncoincidental, as both numbers are
frequent factors in a number of Eastern Indo-European cosmological
setups when it comes to numbers of lokas, and such\]; with the gold
object at the top that may form another implicit layer, being where the
active element of the Rite is housed.

This, too, is #GangSteppe – as it recalls the Tabiti Goddess Who was the
Scythian Divine Queen, and Whose Name and role is also \*directly\* that
of Fire-Rites, Who is thusly absolutely integral to the Order and
Prosperity of both Household and Kingdom (but, then, I repeat myself –
albeit at a larger scale); Whose Radiant, Fiery Beauty is to be found
extolled also in the Hindu figure of Tapati, a name of similar meaning.
Appropriate that the vessel is picked out in Gold, then, although
whether it is a brazier, or a dish, or a goblet/cup is somewhat
indistinct. So, too, regrettably, is whatever is going on above and
immediately behind the priest-figure – there is fragmentary trace of a
faint line of gold extending out from his mid-back behind him, but I
refer instead to the upraised section of plate that is seemingly
attached to his headgear – and which \*may\* recall the (Western, and
subsequent by perhaps four hundred years) Classical accountings of
Cybele’s priest as wearing a prominently plumed war-helmet.

This is an absolutely fabulous, excellently fascinating element of both
artifice and art – indeed, Artha (अर्थ ) – from ancient Afghanistan, and
yet, entirely unsurprisingly, except given the modern state of its
former situation, drawing in elements from across the Indo-European
World. We have, in no particular order, a Goddess allegedly brought with
the Phrygians when they migrated to Anatolia from the lands proximate to
the Steppes, Who resonates strongly with Indo-European deific-complex
expressions already found there prior, and Who then overrules the
Greek-Athenian would-be prohibitionism upon the following of ‘foreign’
Gods within the City to become one of their worshiped figures (also
turning up in Rome and becoming quite prominently central \*there\* as
well, with intriguing almost direct resonances to elements in Hindu
Shakta theology from a thousand years and more beforehand, and a
thousand miles and more further East, attendant), and then both ‘going
along with’ the Yavanas as they marched to the Sunrise through Persia
\[perhaps this, too, is what is reflected in the ‘directional’ flow of
the illustration, the Sun and Moon symbolizing an end to the eclipse of
the power of the Sovereign Sun\], as well as \*already being there
waiting\* for them when they arrived there in the East.

The iconographic elements on show here are drawn from a similarly broad
\[‘Jord’, you might say – an Old Norse term for, well, the Earth Mother,
of Thor, the Thunderer/Striker … that also links to “Broad” more
directly\] array of Indo-European cultures; and, as I have earlier
stated, in a way that brings them all together to illuminate the shared
heritage \[“Mother of Nation(s)”\], the Goddess adored in whichever form
by Indo-Europeans all.

One final note, concerns the earlier piece I prepared on the
Indo-European Deific of National Identity – Bharat Mata. Now, I mention
this not simply to remind the reader that many of these (my)themes are
further explored in much greater detail as applies other Indo-European
pantheons and mythoreligious complexes therein … but because when we
look at much of the (a)art(i) around Bharat Mata – Mother India – what
we in fact see, is many of the \*very same\* elements that are on
display \*right here\* in this nearly two and a half millennia old
Greco-Bactrian artefact.

This, some would perhaps find somewhat surprising, given that Bharat
Mata \*in theory\* is a relatively recently promulgated Aspect of MataJi
(leaving aside for the moment, that She is Durga, and so therefore the
coterminities of symbolism in terms of iconography should be somewhat
expected\], Who has been prominent for arguably only a few decades,
perhaps not much longer than a century \[if we are running from the
BangaMata national personification of Bengal Who popularized about the
time the British sought to partition \[no, not that Partition, an
earlier one\] the formerly unified state into East and West in 1905\].

Yet in reality, the undeniably strong \*visual\* and \*metaphorical\* –
indeed, mythic – resonances between this ancient depiction of a
(Western) Indo-European Goddess from a long-dead people found in a
long-dead ruin of a long-dead kingdom, and the \*very much Alive\*
\[indeed, Life Itself\] National Goddess of a present-day country at
somewhere close to the other end of the Indo-European-isphere from
Cybele’s much earlier situation amidst the Balkans … well … what does
one expect. Why should one be surprised, when it turns out that two
observers, when asked to draw an image or recall the appearance of a
Being they have each beheld, should produce representations and
remembrances that are so strikingly similar, even despite a gap of
multiple millennia and a multitude of miles in either direction
\[Proto-Indo-European shared origins, for this part, notwithstanding\]
that one would perhaps otherwise presume should lead to
\*insurmountable\* ‘cultural drift’.

Gosh, it’s almost like they are both talking about a Real Being or
something 😛  
\[Indeed, no “almost” about it – and dependent upon how one runs one’s
Shakta theology, \*only\* She is real … we’re all less so. But that is
another metaphysical tangent for another time!\]

JAI MATA DI !

❤
