+++
title = "“What’s The Magic Word?” – A Brief Primer On Practical Indo-Europeanxa0Prayer"
date = "September 6, 2019"

+++
![ernalda-ceremony](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/ernalda-ceremony.png?w=676)

**Ignition – Introductions**

This piece is going to be very different from much of our previous
output.

Most of the time, when we put out material through Arya Akasha, it’s
pretty high-minded and somewhat theoretical stuff. In-depth etymology
and theological inquiry that’s fascinating – and, for those outside a
certain sphere of interest, perhaps seemingly fascinatingly useless.

Still, it has had an impact, an effect. We have had a steady stream of
people contacting us (and others) to say that the efforts of those
writing about and otherwise publicizing Indo-European Religion, have had
a considerable impact in getting these people to become much more aware
that this is an actual, real thing. You know, not just an idle, academic
set of curios in books somewhere – but a vital, viable, real-world
religion with real Gods, real heritage being reconnected with, real
faith.

They’ve therefore felt – as we have – a drawing in,deep down … a
calling to start learning a bit more – and importantly, to start
\*actively participating\* in same.

Now this can seem a bit of a daunting prospect. Where does one even
begin with such an endeavour, such a quest? If you’re reading this,
you’ve probably already got \*some\* idea of where you want to go.
Future articles may attempt to provide more pointedly specific guidance
when it comes to finding a devotional pathway and a trajectory, a
tradition that’s rite for you. But whether you’re just starting out
along this journey, or you’ve been around for many years now, we
\*strongly\* recommend that you seek out, reach out to somebody who
Knows What They Are Doing.

But let’s bring it back to that key wording from the above – “Active
Participation”. This is what separates a devotee, a religious person
from somebody who is ‘merely’ knowledgeable about a faith. It’s what
transforms those ‘motionless’ mythological texts upon your bookshelf,
into the open portals towards the core and the cornerstones of your
religious practice.

It is, in short, what \*you\* want to do. Not just \*reading\* about
practices and beliefs – \*doing\* them, \*believing\* (in) them; and
\*being\* an adherent of the faith(s) of your forefathers.

The simplest and most straightforward way to go about this, is to find
an already-existing religious body in your area, replete with
Pandit/Priest/Gothi and an extant body of ritual, calendar of
observances, and appropriate forms passed down since time immemorial.
Find that, ask the Expert(s) there what you should be doing, and you’re
away laughing, rite?

It’s a nice theory; but one thing we’ve observed from a lot of the
correspondence we’ve had from various people asking about this sort of
stuff … is that apparently, it’s surprisngly hard to put into practice
for many people. Maybe there’s just simply no Mandir in their area;
perhaps there’s no Nordic religious assembly, and they don’t feel up to
working through another tradition even if it leads to the same Deities.
Perhaps you’re still working up the courage to actually seek out a
physical, real-world religious community. Or maybe you’re busy, working
odd hours, and you just don’t have the time for regularly scheduled
conventional activities of devotion with other people.

Whatever the reasoning, in the absence of direct guidance upon the
matter, nor a group of fellow-believers to engage in religious ceremony,
pious, worshipful observance with … it’s lead to an escalating frequency
of people asking one very simple, very \*key\* question: “How do I
pray?”

Now, like I said at the outset, this piece is going to be quite
different from many of our previous offerings. We aren’t going to engage
in a whole lot of high-minded
comparative-mythography/etymological-linguistic analysis of various
different forms of prayer found in this or that Indo-European religion
to attempt to divine some form of underlying Proto-Indo-European formula
for actively-engaged and \*performative\* piety.

If you are interested in such things, then that is great – and we would
thoroughly recommend you delve into various of our other works that are
more closely aligned with such subjects. Should you wish to become a
priest, or an academic, a theologian, then fostering and cultivating an
aptitude, a curiosity in those areas will become absolutely key, vital –
it shall be who you are, and what you (are to) do.

But not everybody possesses those baseline competencies nor interests –
or for that matter the time and resources to get to grips with phrasing
in millennia-old liturgical languages, and all of the rest of the things
which are thusly entailed therein within them.

And you know what? That’s OK! Everybody has their own form of
contribution to make – and the significant specialization in what others
might feel difficult or boring, is in large measure why we have Priests
to begin with. (This is also, as it happens, part of why you should be
supporting those who \*are\* engaged in the serious, strenuous efforts
of the First Function – because they’ll often have very little time or
ability to actually do too terribly much else. But I digress)

Yet however one chooses to approach the issue, anybody seeking
participation, belonging in a religious movement should have at least a
certain level awareness of, or at the very least a degree of interest
and an enthusiasm to learn about, relevant religious conceptry.

Particularly the portions which form arguably the sine qua non of
religiosity, of piety – the proper mindsets of, as well as the actual
application of piety in the form of prayer.

Anything else, to paraphrase me some Terry Pratchett, is running the
whole thing basically just as a way to keep in touch with the
neighbours. Or, in these trying modern times, to have a way to pretend
to be interesting at parties and build an online persona and/or
multi-level-marketing sc(he/a)m(e) around.

**Form And Content – Altar And Flame**

![21167217_10159277435035574_3409686083461224092_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/21167217_10159277435035574_3409686083461224092_o.jpg?w=676)

Now, there are two general perspectives we shall briefly consider upon
the metaphysics of prayer – that is to say, How It Works.

These are the ‘Formulaic’, and the ‘Pious/Communicative’.

I stress that we’re doing these really, really briefly; and that in
practice, these are non-exclusive positions – \*both\* can in fact
simultaneously be true, and feed into one another, as we shall soon see.

The first of these, which I’ve shorthanded as ‘Formulaic’, holds that
prayer works because certain elements in what is done ‘resonate’ with
the universe. In much the same way, perhaps, as paying your phone bill
causes you to be able to use your phone on into the future – whether or
not you’re dealing with a human at any step of that process, or if it’s
automated machinery and computer programs \[and/or hold-music\] all the
way down.

Now, it might be suggested that this position has no place within an
authentic Indo-European world view. And it’s not inaccurate to feel that
it is, at best, a severely incomplete approach to (myth)understanding
the universe, from our religious perspective.

We believe, after all, in The Gods as actual, real, beings Who possess
and exert real Agency. This Agency can often seem to approach the
fundamental and underlying laws of the Universe as more akin to
‘guidelines’ – although in many of the major mythological instances of
such a phenomenon that I can think of offhand, I say “seemingly”,
because there tends to be either a ‘counterbalance’ going on to ‘bring
things back into order’ … and/or the Deity in question is actually
running on a deep-a conception of Divine Order than it might otherwise
first appear.

This differs considerably from you or I, for whom the attempt to ‘bend’
reality by bashing one’s head into it repeatedly, is likely to, at best,
result in a bit of a headache. Or, worse, finding out that while reality
\*can\* become somewhat ‘elastic’ … it only tends to be stretchable \*so
far\* in any given and particular direction, before it snaps back, and
hits you in the face.

In any case, my underlying point is that while it is true to state that,
say, the laws of physics are – broadly speaking – a thing; and that the
laws of metaphysics are so, likewise … an attempt to predict with
iron-clad sureity that a \*mere\* \[in both PIE senses of the term\]
‘formulaic’ approach to interfacing with the Divine, will actually
\*work\*, is unlikely to be an especially good idea when speaking about
Beings For Whom said Laws of (Meta)Physics are at least somewhat
something of an afterthought. Or, at the very least, something that
doesn’t really \*apply\* in the same rigorous way to a God. Something
that happens to other people.

Yet this does \*not\* mean that there’s no proper position for “formula”
and “formulaic” elements in Indo-European prayer. Quite the contrary, in
fact, as we shall soon see.

But for the moment, suffice to say that in both of the mythoreligious
complexes we tend to deal most with – the Nordic, and the Hindu – there
are solid examples of formulaic components having tangible and vitally
important use even when not attempting to petition a Deity.

In the case of the Nordic, this is supplied by the physical forms of the
Runes. They are carved, and they gain their empowerment, through their
representation of patterns fundamental and immanent to reality. This
does not mean that they are a supreme force within the universe, nor
that the utilization of runes can ever truly, properly, appropriately,
take the place of more \*actual\* and Deific-oriented Piety. Yet it is
nevertheless something to be considered.

The Sanskrit equivalent example, meanwhile, is exactly that – Sanskrit.
Properly said, these words form a Language of Creation, once again
immanent and fundamental to the fabric of the universe itself \[which,
per some cosmogonical viewpoints, is made up of Words, Itself\] – and
are therefore capable of affecting and altering it and its contents
simply via their enunciation. Although while this does partially
explicate the how and why of a mantra being intoned by a yoga
practitioner somewhere in the Anglosphere helping to provide a general
sense of calm and wellbeing, say \[at the lower order of the spectrum of
impacts\] … it is important to note that actual proper \*comprehension\*
of the deeper underlying meanings of the sacred syllabry in question is
necessary in order to do particularly much with it. Hence why you find
the mythological tales of what I semi-jokingly refer to as “Ancient
Aryan Nuclear Weapons”, wherein the empowerment mantras for these can
only be provided, much less spoken aloud, by those who either have spent
their lives in incredibly engaged meditation upon the mysteries of same,
or been initiated by the former into some level of understanding of the
phraseology in question. There is also the matter of the appropriate
\*gestures\* to be undertaken when performing many of these more ancient
elements … and thence, the further fact that many of these are actually
also Asking Very Nicely for Divine Intercession, as well … and, on top
of \*that\*, the existence of the Goddess of Speech, Lady Vak, all up …
but, again I temporarily digress.

The point is: you \*can\* get a certain distance by adopting a perhaps
rather crude “formulaic” approach, that may seek to skip out the
\*proper\* elements of piety, of prayer, in favour of something that you
think is much more closely and entirely under your own control and
auspices. Hence, no doubt, why its plausible outcomes are so much more
inveterately limited.

But why would you?

Now, the \*second\* of these rather broad \[and, I stress again,
\*non-exclusive\*\] perspectives – is that “Pious/Communicative” one.
Here, instead of treating the universe as some form of puzzle-box, or
electronic circuit which you can build yourself \[albeit with the
ever-attendant risk of electric shock due to your own
malfeasance/incompetence .. rather than Lighting Bolts from On High …
insofar as there might be a difference, from the point of view of the
somewhat scorched mortal on the other end of proceedings\] – the idea,
the objective, the \*purpose\* of your prayerful efforts is to
\*petition\* a Power for aid and availment. Or, perhaps, dependent upon
just what form of prayer we’re talking about … for the wrathful and
destructive attentions of the Deity or other being(s) in question to be
directed instead over yonder \*thataway\* at somebody else. Rather
important distinction, that – and one that is often forgotten in this
modern age wherein almost every has some level of vague Judeo-Christian
subconscious underpinning to their theological approach.

The point is, that whereas that former, “Formulaic” approach emphasized
getting the right \[outer\] “shape” for what one is attempting to do –
in Sanskrit metaphysics \[and yes, I know I said I was going to try
avoiding using words in millennia-old liturgical languages\], we would
say that this was “Purusha” … “matter” – in this case of
“Pious/Communicative” effort, it is the “essence”, which should
rightfully be the “inner core” of the ‘message’, which is emphasized –
“Prakriti” in Sanskrit.

**The Principle of Prayer – Respect**

![a41bc637a8417195eabde446f9cf6704](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/a41bc637a8417195eabde446f9cf6704.jpg?w=676)

Now this is where things get really interesting, and where we begin get
to the crux of what I initially wished to address in the course of this
piece. Namely, the Principles which should govern both the ‘form’ and
the ‘essence’ via which you craft and offer your Prayer.

The first and most absolutely fundamental, grund-norm element to Prayer,
is Respect. It should hardly need to be said nor emphasized, but in
these curious times, it seems surprisingly often to be forgotten. In
fact, if not in theory.

For example, while a devotee may not consciously, overtly intend
\*disrespect\* with their conduct … attempting to treat a God in a
manner that’s basically suggestive of a “Cosmic Vending Machine” \[or,
for that matter, a Mandir as a McDonalds Drive-Thru Window\], wherein
you go up, put in a small degree of expendable coinage, and press the
button for your selection, which is then delivered as and when you like
it, on a regular, recurrent basis that has hardly any thought, any
feeling, any genuine \*reverence\* to it … well, it is not hard to see
how that is, in very real terms, “disrespectful”.

You would not treat your own parents like that \[past a certain age\];
it would seem not just unjust, but perhaps even \*terminally\* unwise to
attempt to do so to, let us remember, (A) GOD(S)!

And speaking briefly upon that “terminally unwise” point … a cursory
examination of Indo-European mythologies and scriptural corpuses should
clearly show you that it is not always a good idea to have nor attract
the attention of a God. Particularly \*particular\* Gods, and
\*especially\* if it’s for not a good reason (or, for that matter, not
for a good reason).

If the Deity in question is often known as “The Terrifying”, “Death”,
“The Destroyer of the Universe”, “The Bale-Worker”, “The Really, Really
Angry One”, “Has A Potentially Rather Lethal Sense Of Humour”, “Finds
Weakness To His Immortal Disliking”, “Responds To What He Finds
Offensive Swiftly … And With An Axe”, “God of Nobility”, “God Who Brings
Strife Among Ye”, etc. etc. etc. …

… well, while there are \*some\* circumstances and some means via which
prayer in that direction shall be appropriate, you would generally be
advised to think a bit, and consult somebody wiser and more learned than
yourself, to ensure that you are doing the correct thing, and in the
correct manner.

For is it not written:  
“He who lives in the eye of the storm is a mote in the eye of an angry
god.”

In any case, the detailing of how one works out just Whom one should be
offering prayer \*to\*, is a bit beyond the originally intended scope of
this piece. And is a matter that is best considered not in general, but
rather specific terms – both in terms of the ‘situational’ (points
conditioning your position relative to the Deity – such as what your
pressing need is, Whose portfolio it may fall into … and in some cases,
Whom you may have family ties in the direction of, etc..), and also the
more broadly ‘theological’ (e.g. things that may not be directly to do
with you, but rather are significant at a much more macroscopic level –
like how a particular Deity may differ in important ways between this or
that Indo-European mythoreligious corpus in how They relate to the
people, or what the appropriateness or otherewise is of particular forms
of sacrifice etc. to go with the entreaty, etc.).

So, if in doubt – once again, consult somebody who Knows What They Are
Doing; do your research; and find a pathway that’s \*appropriate\* for
your tradition and purposeful understanding.

But nevertheless – all of these relevant considerations are,
fundamentally, those of Respect. When we seek to address a prayer to a
Deity about a matter in Their portfolio, rather than Another’s, we are
demonstrating both the respect of properly directing our attempted
correspondence, and the respect of actually having sought to do the
appropriate due diligence to find out Who it is that that portfolio is
presided over by. In situations wherein we do \*not\* do these things –
and attempt to gain the boon of help from a Deity who may be entirely
unconcerned with the area in question, or an active rival of the Deity
who \*is\* … we not only demonstrate a certain \*lack\* of respect (your
local understanding of how much tolerance and forgiveness-value there is
for “ignorance”, may vary considerably), but we may invite either
\*inaction\* on our behalf – or “Unintended Consequences”, which might
be quite \*impressively\* “amusing” in nature. And a Divine sense of
humour is not always something to be laughed at, except from a safe
distance – and preferably laughed \*with\*, so to speak.

Now, in terms of \*what\* is asked for, and therefore also \*how\*,
there are various opinions about this. One particularly wise one
\[appropriately enough\] comes to us from the Havamal; it is a maxim
which one of my comrades is especially fond of citing, for guidance on
both scores:

“Dost know how to write, dost know how to read,  
dost know how to paint, dost know how to prove,  
dost know how to ask, dost know how to offer,  
dost know how to send, dost know how to spend?  
Better ask for too little than offer too much,  
like the gift should be the boon;  
better not to send than to overspend.”

The messages within it are clear. First, that there are an array of
elements which may form a viable portion of a devotional act. Second,
that the art of working out just what to give as a part of this is not
anything as crude as a ‘negotiation’, yet is nevertheless not strictly
subject to fixed tariffs, either \[although local custom will, of
course, vary\] – but rather fluctuates, in particular with the scale of
that which is asked for. Third, that it is better to err on the side of
Respect, by asking for a lower boon, than to spend beyond one’s means –
and potentially put one’s self in \*further\* dire straits as a result
of the considerable scale and scope of one’s \[over-\]investment
relative to potential immediately-plausible return.

There is a similar maxim attributed to the Spartan Lycurgus – “Another
asked him why he allowed of such mean and trivial sacrifices to the
gods. He replied, “That we may always have something to offer to them.”
We have some similar such customs within Hinduism for many devotees – of
giving in donation what one can afford, which may not be very much, in
an absolute sense, dependent upon the devotee’s circumstance. There are
tales of even immensely powerful Deities being significantly pleased by
what would otherwise seem to be trifling gifts, if they were sincerely
offered and appropriately garnered and presented. Although woe betide
the man who attempts to cheat the Gods out of Their duly apportioned
share – this, to briefly dip back into the Greek corpus, was the
\*actual\* sin of Prometheus … that of Impiety, in attempting to hide
the parts of an offering designated for the Gods, amidst offal so as to
be consumed by others later. Bringing it back to Hinduism – the
requirements for this or that ritual are much more defined, but in terms
of the Dakshina (the offering made also to the Pandit and the
institution such as a Mandir \[Temple\] acting upon your behalf) it is
forbidden by custom for the Brahmin to actually name a figure, the
donation in question being one that is supposed to be made of one’s own
free will. The whole institution works as a rather literal “honour
system” – both on the part of the Brahmins (who, in older times and even
today, may have little or no other source of income or even means of
material support), and on the part of the supplicants who would make use
of their services and knowledge. It is, in a word, a principle of
“Respect” – and one that many would do both well and wisely to remember
as not \*only\* applying to the Gods in such situations; but also to any
other figure who has played a worthy role in helping your devotional
proceedings to come about.

Another interesting element from Lycurgus’ societal reforms which is
likely of far broader Indo-European saliency, concerns the mandated
redistribution of a portion of that which a Spartan man should offer in
sacrifice, to the communal mess-hall. This is often explained as a
further interior buttressing of the communal spirit amidst his people
which Lycurgus had sought to foster – although I suspect rather strongly
that it is something a bit deeper and more ‘resonant’ than that. In
Hinduism, we have various customs around some of our rites – wherein the
offerings of fruit and sweets, after they have been partaken of by the
Deity or Deities in question, are then redistributed out to the humans
in attendance. Dependent upon the rite, the Priests may be required to
take first share or of particular parts of the offering; but the general
point is that the benefit of the sanctified consumables is passed out to
everybody in attendance – the Prasad, is partaken of, and literally
eaten \[rather than, in most cases involving Murtis \[Living Statues of
the Gods\], ‘symbolically’ eaten\] by the mortal Devotees. A similar
principle can be observed in the carrying out of an Aarti – in which all
present can participate and through both song, and physical propinquity
to sacred, blessed flame, often making small offerings themselves during
its course. In both cases, the concept is clear – that even beyond the
‘trinity’ of participants that is the donor, the priest(s), and the
Gods, the ritual is often a ‘communal’ affair. Everyone who eats of the
Prasad or acquires the blessings of the Aarti flame can thus share in
the benefit of the act of piety that has ensued. And that, in its own
way, comes back to the fact that, for the most part, an Indo-European
man is only rarely to be considered in the singular. That it is “men”
rather than “man” who inhabit Indo-European societies – “people”, “a
people”, in preference to a mere \[this time, only in one PIE sense of
the similar sounding word\] “person”. Something which also comes across
most strongly in the directly mandated role of \*families\* in rites –
and even, in some cases, the exclusion of ‘outsiders’ (whether those
beyond the immediate kin-group, the appropriate caste(s),
nationality/ethnic-grouping, dependent upon tradition), from
participation or even simply being potentially able to oversee or to
overhear proceedings.

But to return to that excellent Havamal excerpt, what it has also
implied to me is the vital importance of \*how\* one performs the prayer
– these are the “formulaic” elements of which I spoke, earlier. And
while it has ever been my position that if you are \*not\* one of those
who “knows how to” write, read, paint, prove, ask, offer, send, spend …
then you should probably be seeking out somebody who \*does\* possess
these capabilities, this knowledge, in order to garner instruction and
guidance as to how to do things properly, this is apparently not an easy
option for many people, judging by how frequently others seem to have
significant difficulty in finding such knowledge and its bearers, in
whatever mythoreligious corpus they are operating within. I do not seek
to encourage nor condone people operating beyond their competencies and
“doing it yourself” with Prayer, any more so than I would endeavour to
encourage people to perform the main-line electrical wiring of their own
homes. And would further suggest that, properly construed, the very acts
of seeking out the properly skilled, especially if it entails
significant effort and journeying and mental exertion upon your own
part, would form part of the offering, the prayerful process in the
first place. As well as being an admirable exercise in devotional
contemplation, and getting one’s self into the \*proper\* mindset that
religious, mythical elements are not “toys”, nor “theme park” amusements
or post-boxes – and are rather to be regarded with their appropriate and
due reverence as ‘intersectionals’, ‘hitching-posts’, jutting between
the more mundane mundus of our ordinary world, and the World of the
Divine. Which is not to make the case for a fundamentally ‘dualist’
cosmology, of course – but nevertheless, as the old saying goes,
“familiarity breeds contempt”. And therefore, that which is \*too\*
easily attained, \*too\* readily available, or \*too\* commonly
approached … ceases to command the proper Respect, the eminently apt
emotion of Awe, which can be the only correct perspective when regarding
the Divine. That, and Terror – which it may often be said to rather
closely, and rather more than partially resemble.

**Conduits And Communicative Means**

![2d499c50d0625aabf4d5d080325372a8](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/2d499c50d0625aabf4d5d080325372a8.jpg?w=676)

This leads us on to the next key element to consider – the means for
communication, itself.

Which come in at least two general varieties:

First, ‘Conduits’ which are created or situated, often with a physical
‘anchor’ such as a particular holy-site (such as a holy well or spring,
a rock formation or mountain, religiously significant tree etc.), or a
sacred post \[whether a Vedic Sthamba or Yupa or Lingam … or an Irmin,
or potentially a Herm\], or the Sacred Fire which has been duly
constructed and rendered ‘alive’ via the proper and appropriate opening
rites/mantras for the purpose.

The importance of the “Conduit” is difficult to overstate. The analogy I
was given by a wise Pandit back when I was being taught the proper ways
to carry out relatively simple Pujas \[Prayer/Ritual\] at Mandir, was
that of utilizing a radio for the means of communication. It was noted
that the outward ‘forms’ of the Puja-attempt in question mattered, in
much the same way that tuning a radio to find the appropriate frequency
for ease of comms did. I have since somewhat extended this metaphor,
when I am seeking to elucidate further depth and detail upon how it is
we do things, to be rather more directly akin to that of the situation
of inter-vessel communications on a 20th century battleship. That is to
say, while it \*is\* possible to communicate to another ship by shouting
across the gulf between you, or even by frantically waving one’s arms or
engaging in other such visual signifiers in order to overcome the
intersubjectivity of the roaring ocean and necessary distance between
you … you’re going to have a \*far\* easier and more efficacious time of
it via the application of somewhat more ‘involved’ means. Which may
entail something as comparatively simple as a mirror reflecting pulses
of sunlight with which to transmit Morse Code, or on a more complex
level, the perhaps underappreciated art of semaphore if one has the
flags for it and the appropriate knowledge on the part of both sender
and intended recipient. Although that latter, in particular, lacks a
certain subtlety as it is effectively ‘open’ to anyone with a telescope
to pick up upon (subject to ‘decoding’), and is also contingent upon not
only actually possessing the flags with which to do it, but the limiting
effect that these can have upon what you are trying to say – consider
Nelson’s famed “England Expects…” message being altered in exactly this
manner. Hence the importance of the “Conduit” represented by the ship’s
radio-room – via which a much more reliable (for the most part – there
are, of course, exceptions, atmospherics, jamming, EMP, and so on and so
forth …) and \*direct\* point-to-point faculty for the transmission of
communication from supplicant to receiver. Albeit, something that only
really works if i) the requisite transmission hardware, an antenna for
example \[there’s that Column/Pillar metaphor again\] remains in place
and unbroken, and ii) if one actually knows how to operate the
technology, find the frequency, even something as simple as turn the
power on on those old, archaic devices, in the first place … which, in
the latter score, is \*exactly\* why it is so important to have a
dedicated Priest Caste, whose business it is to know such things, and
how to set up a transmission array as and where and when needed. I
suppose, with Sacrificial Pyre firmly in mind, even in the absence of
\*proper\* illuminated and awakened fire that has been empowered to
function as a metaphysical “Conduit” through the efforts of one’s
Priests … that one could perhaps still attempt to send ‘Smoke Signals’.

In fact, come to think of it, the Priest Himself is \*also\* in this
manner, something of a “Conduit”, even notwithstanding the additional
accouterments of ‘technology’ such as an altar, offerings, temple,
pillar, and other such things.Which is not, necessarily, to get
involved in the ongoing debate I’ve seen in various places around the
concept of “every man in his own home is his own priest” – a maxim that
I consider, personally, to be something of a “Cultural Protestantism”,
despite the not entirely unsound notion upon which it has initially been
built.Outside of ‘desperate times’, and dependent upon tradition, such
daily or otherwise regular ‘household rites’ or acts of especially
\*intra\*familial piety as may be required, I am not sure that an
ordinary person has much business attempting to carry out more complex
or involved rituals nor prayers; and would much more favour the view of,
in such situations as concerns the household itself, something like the
Hindu concept of a Purohit – a ‘Household Priest’ \[often a Priest who
will provide his services to several households in the area, in a manner
perhaps like a family doctor, and in a way for much the same reason\] –
as being the preferable approach.

And second, there is the ‘medium of communication’ itself – which, to be
sure, is not always easily distinguished in whole or in part from the
physical situation mentioned above. In the case of the Living Flame of
the Vedic Fire Altars aforementioned, the Fire is \*also\* the medium,
\*as well as\* the conduit, hence the salient importance of pouring the
offering-libation \[itself a medium, as well\] thereinto. But in the
main, what I seek to address here is something potentially more
pervasive as a medium of communication – that is to say, \*language
itself\*, and what we do with it, how we choose to hone and craft the
‘offerings’ and ‘entreaties’ which we render unto the Gods. How we
choose, in sort, to Speak to Them, and make representations to the High.

Because there, too, there is a fundamental ‘risk element’ for the
incautious, the irreverent, and the unwary. For you see, the fact that
the Gods may appear in human-seeming form, and possess those most
immediately familiar Human attributes of Thought, Speech, and Hearing …
can lead to a fundamental subconscious \[or, indeed, actively-conscious
and therefore impious\] misapprehension on the part of those seeking to
petition the Divine. Namely, that simply because the Gods can seem
somewhat human-like in some small ways, and be communicated with via not
entirely dissimilar manners than how we might speak to our neighbour or
a family member … that this therefore axiomatically means that They are
somehow ‘just’ like us, but on a somewhat grander scale. And to be sure,
this is adjacent to an observation that is not entirely incorrect – the
Indo-European Gods \*are\*, in many instances and in many ways,
‘relatable’ to us, indeed, in some cases we are related to Them. Which,
if anything, should perhaps render one \*more\* terrified of the
prospects of annoying – or, worse, \*somehow infuriating\* the Divine –
the annals of human history are not exactly short on cautionary tales of
What Happened When The Commoner Seemingly Deliberately Disrespected The
King/Don/Warlord … and that is \*before\* we factor in the demonstrable
penchant for ‘contrapasso’ and other forms of (meta-)narrativistic
Creativity to be found amidst the imaginations of the key narrative
agonists of pretty much \*every\* Indo-European mythoreligious
collection of lit.

\[That phrasing “key narrative agonists” of the legendariums in question
is quite deliberate – it serves as a reminder of your appropriate role
and place within the Cosmos. You may be a hero of your own story …
indeed, some among us are the shining, radiant and saga(s)-starring, or
at least cameo/crossover-featuring-in heroes of the stories of \*many\*
people, even “peoples” as a whole. Yet to a God? Our own personal
stories, although potentially individually and/or occasionally
interesting, when judged upon their own merits … and at their great
intersectionals, an intriguing battlefield-terrain of sorts for the
great games of influence played out above the lower-sky … are
nevertheless largely pretty threadbare by comparison to Theirs. And
therefore, one should always be aware-y that a potentially rather minor
fictional character seeking to attract the attention of the Author(s) or
Editors of the anthology in which he or she appears … is
\*fundamentally\* at the mercy, even in terms of one’s very existence,
of the mightily supernal Hand That Doth Wield The Pen – and which also
takes The Long View, the Broad Perspective, the Deep Discernment unto
potentially the very cores of your being and your fate.

If you have, for some reason, forgotten the eminently appropriate
sensations of Majesty if not outright Mind-Scything Terror which the
term “God” ought axiomatically entail …. perhaps that
perspective-refresher shall remind ye.\]

So clearly, from our “Respect” point of view, the appropriate “forms” of
the communication that is to take place matter – and can matter quite
significantly.

**Saecula Saeculorum – On The Sacredness of the Sacred Speech**

![60643104384393c07c99d328a2d703b1](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/60643104384393c07c99d328a2d703b1.jpg?w=676)  

This brings us nicely on to a rather vital point for the practical
modern person. For while, if you hunt hard enough, and scour sagaciously
with superhuman sufficiency, you’re more than likely to find that there
\*is\* in fact a proper and appropriate rite or prayer for your
circumstances, written in the correct flavour of archaic Indo-European
tongue, and with a handy level of detail for the eloquent performativity
thereof in your own home or local environs thereof … this takes time and
competencies not possessed of by most would-be devotees. Which is,
again, a large part of Why We Have A Priest Caste (this is my
generalized soul-ution to just about everything, as you may have
noticed).

So while in an ideal world, you \*should\* be deferring to those
materials and those such intermediaries in order to Do Things Proper,
the approximate frequency with which we have seen discussions and
high-minded debates over that recurrent question “Is It Possible To Pray
In English”, would appear to suggest – for a whole host of reasons –
that this is not, in fact, the best of all possible worlds which we are
currently domiciled within. The struggle between ‘vernacular’ and
‘liturgical language’ is hardly a modern one, and even beyond the most
frequently cited instances of the Catholic Church for most of the last
millennium or so, it seems to be a contratemps endemic to just about
\*any\* religion with a history and a heritage longer in spanning scope
than the few decades or centuries it may take for the habitual language
of its adherents to change with sufficient significancy to render it no
longer clearly interchangeable with that utilized for ecclesiastical
purposes by the faith’s founding fathers.

In the case of Indo-European religions, there are a number of
complicating factors which render a single and unilaterary answer as to
whether English is “appropriate” for such purposes, difficult to state
with confidence. However, while I am almost always going to express a
vocal enthusiasm for utilizing Sacred Language for Sacred Purposes … and
am fundamentally disquieted by the notion that English is, in any easy
way a “Sacred Language” (rather than, perhaps, in the mouth and hands of
the skilled and pious practitioner, an imperfect vessel which may
nevertheless be usefully employed to communicate some portion of the
Sacred) … I appreciate that this is not the ‘full story’; and that there
are other considerations inherent in what we seek to do and how we seek
to do it, that may in fact render, for example, an eloquently expressed
entreaty in English, the superior means for prayer as composed to a
poorly chosen, poorly pronounced, and poorly misunderstood phrasing in
the otherwise eminently more “appropriate” liturgical language.

I’m also aware that, for whatever reason (including, for example, the
notion that as English is a Germanic language, it ought be fine for
petitioning Germanic Gods with), some people are never going to be able,
nor perhaps even \*willing\* to more fully step beyond their localized
comfort zones and desist with using English in whole or in part for
their prayerful efforts – in which case, the least we can do is attempt
to guide their conduct so that it’s less potentially egregious than it
might otherwise be. I should also, lest I be accused of an unwarranted
elitism, confess myself to be somewhat of this number. My facility with
Sanskrit is … not exactly ideal; and while I have made prominent and
strongly successful utilization of Mantras, Hymnals and other devotional
elements in the language in question, even to the point of being able to
develop some of the above myself … were I called upon, upon the spur of
the moment, to express my thoughts and pious passions, within a
pressurized religious context where I had not the luxury of time to
prepare something well afore the time it was required – I would almost
certainly \*at the very least\* be augmenting the aforementioned
Sanskrit structures with a capacious quotient of English expressionism.

But let us turn to the actual application of those conceptual frameworks
and Principles which we have earlier discussed; so that readers may
perhaps make up their own minds as to the potential viability or
otherwise of our guidance upon the matter to their own devotional
practice. Guidance, I might add, which is not intended to substitute for
the actual and authentic \*direct\* authoritative statements of your own
religious tradition upon the matter. But rather to endeavour to augment
and expand upon it, especially considering the … lack of
all-encompassing-ness to the otherwise excellent canon of
bronze/iron-age solutions in this day of modern problems.

The first thing which must be said, is that when it comes to the duality
of Form and Function, the ‘Formulaic’ versus the ‘Communicative’
considerations outlined way above …. the matter of Language is,
fundamentally, \*both\*. Language is a mode, a medium, and a means of
communication – but it is \*also\* a set of forms, itself.

This matters, and not merely due to the enhanced efficacy as a point of
general principle which phrasing things \[or writing/inscribing things\]
in forms immanent to the fabric of reality is likely to engender or
impart.

Even if we were to accept the proposition that, as derivative languages
to their greater forebears, our modern vernacular languages therefore
carry and contain within them some ‘residual’ efficacy borne from the
emanated simulacra of the shapes of their illustriously resonant
ancestors … the example that I would use is one of attempting to
communicate utilizing a written script. Which, of course, in some
senses, Runes themselves are.

Not only are more recent English fonts and other forms of writing likely
to be \*much\* less, or even non- or \*counter\* effective at some
things as compared to Runes \[including, both literally as well as
figuratively, an “inscribing” process – chiseling into hard surfaces, or
for that matter, the meta-hard ‘surfaces’ of reality on an implied,
metaphysical level about you\] due to their fundamentally differing
shape and intended purpose or (sound) values … but were one writing a
letter, with the intent of being taken seriously by a figure with power
over a situation, what is going to look better and make something closer
to the desired effect: Times New Roman? Or Comic Sans.

Because that, it really can be argued, is something at least somewhat
equivalent to the degree of difference between utilizing a more proper,
formal, and perhaps even \*ornate\* or ostentatious form of
communication, versus how one might casually chat with a buddy across
the bar. And this is before we factor in that, in the case of Runes
versus Modern English Script, we are literally dealing with a different,
and not always particularly coterminous mode of written communication.

It is therefore not simply a matter of attempting to argue, as I have
seen some do from time to time, that Gods, as, well, Gods, \*must\* be
able to understand conversational modern English, and so therefore
what’s the point of jumping through all the additional hoops required to
construct something that’s \*not\* fundamentally ‘just’ a sentence of
that contemporaneous tongue. Perhaps, one day in the far-distant future,
we shall indeed see people attempting to entreaty the Heavens via using
terms like “Yeet”, “Cancelled”, the comparatively venerable ‘1337’, and
replacing directly scripturally drawn references to the Roaring Laughter
of a particular Deity with some form of semi-phonetically pronounced
acronym such as “lol” or “rofl”. Because that way, ultimately, is the
unutterable \[somewhat literally\] direction in which the over-emphasis
upon the Vernacular and the Temporal at the expense of the Sacral and
the Supernal, shall take you. If “Mleccha” was coined to refer to a
jabbering, indistinct speech of those unable to talk properly within the
bounds of a religiously constituted society and public nor ritualine
sphere \[and, in a somewhat different way, “Barbarian”, “Barbaras”, as
well, or so I am told – the “Bah”ing sounds of ‘uncivilized’ speech to
both Sanskritized as well as Grecophone ears\], I can only wonder what
our ancestors (mortal or more-so) might have made of that which our
generation and the ones to come immediately after us have come to
consider fairly mundane and ordinary forms of speech. Once they’d gotten
over Tumblr, of course. And let alone were any of the above deployed
deliberately in an attempted sacral context. But I digress.

The proper and appropriate principle to be deployed here is, once again,
that of Respect. And that, as we have seen and shall see, is a mater of
\*both\* Intent (on the part of the petitioner), as well as Form (which
is another mechanism via which intent is ultimately to be displayed).
Either one, by themselves, is not necessarily a bad start – but for
\*proper\* piety, one should ideally be striving to have \*both\*
present, in radiant panoply and gallant, zealous exertion. But, then,
I’m a religious fundamentalist zealot.

This is also why it is often so important to actually pay careful
attention to various scriptural sources that contain within them details
of how to pray, what formulas should be used, and related matters.
Because in many cases, and the two which spring instantly to mind are
anything attested as Word of Odin or of Brihaspati \[but, then, I repeat
myself\] in the Eddic & Vedic corpuses respectively, what you are in
fact reading is a God deigning to \*tell you\* how They would prefer it
for you to make efforts at prayer. In other cases, these compendious
volumes will instead bear material that has been arrived at via more
mortal hands and mouths and minds – the results, often quite explicitly,
of perhaps even centuries of in-depth contemplation, refinement, and
‘testing’ and evaluation. Either sort “reduces the problem to a
previously solved one”, when it comes to the crafting of a prayer and
the selection of wording and other elements of ‘form’ to use in the
actionizing of the intent underlying it. But those instances of the
former – Word of God, so to speak – should be considered especially
prized, from this perspective, as what can be higher as a form of
respect and piety than \*actually doing what you’ve been Divinely
instructed to\*.

**The Priority of Priests – The Dominion of Doctrine**

![Screen Shot 2018-03-07 at
9.49.19](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/screen-shot-2018-03-07-at-9.49.19.png?w=676)

This also handily segues back into another element around the role of
Priests, which I briefly touched upon above in the “Conduit” section.
Now, as I said there, there is this ongoing effort to debate just what
sort of role (proper) priests in general (or a specialized caste
thereof) versus ordinary but enthusiastic people should have in ..
various religions, Indo-European and otherwise. It is particularly
prominent amidst and around various European ‘revivalist’ efforts, for
reasons ranging from the understandable and at least somewhat
evidentially based … through to the knee-jerk reactionary “we want to be
different!” anti-Christian, anti-Institution, pseudo-anarchic sentiment
that has no real place within a serious religious movement. Indeed, is
actively defined precisely \*by\* its opposition to even the implicit
concept of \*being\* a serious religious movement, it would seem. Yet I
digress.

The point is, in various traditional accounts, the ‘Word of God(s)’ upon
the situation is that one \*should\* be, or indeed \*must\*, engage the
services of a properly qualified Priest for the purposes of particular
forms of prayer. It therefore goes beyond the simple underpinnings of
general efficacy to seek out such a figure, and on into the direct
realms of proper, pious conduct itself.

But to briefly turn back to the “efficacy” style of argument, to quote
Tristan upon the matter – ”  
“Theology requires education and understanding, its a very complex
academic subject, and when you let the common man at the thing without
giving him those things first, they come up with all manner of absurd
conclusions and horrendous heresies.  
Just look at the history of Christianity, there is a reason that the
bible was kept in Latin, and when it was translated to the vernacular,
within a century or two we had dozens of major heretical offshoots.”

It is not at all hard to see how this applies to this particular field
most directly under immediate discussion – both in terms of the
\*direct\* risks of somebody carrying out the actions in question in a
sub-par manner, as well as the potentially rather greater risk entailed
in a man seeking out guidance in these matters and finding himself
unwittingly mislead as a result. I say “potentially rather greater”, on
grounds that somebody who knows they’re unsure of their way is usually
unlikely to go \*half\* as far astray as somebody who places full trust
in somebody who \*thinks\* they’re heading in the right direction … and
really, really isn’t.

**The Priority of Priests II – The Direct Line Upstairs**

![18157645_10158640848030574_5654366510363303189_n
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/18157645_10158640848030574_5654366510363303189_n-1.jpg?w=676)

But let’s leave all of that aside for the moment, and continue with the
“efficacy” argument.

Even if you’re for whatever reason pretty iffy about the general concept
of an ordained clergy, the notion of something intending to be a
religion actually possessing a semi-defined ‘dogma’, or are steadfastly
obstinate in your insistence that Gods \*should\* be able to understand
English and so therefore you \*should\* be able to pray in that language
as and when you feel like …

… I rather strongly suspect that most of us are \*also\* going to accept
that not everybody is in actuality ‘equal’ in terms of their degree and
depth of connection with the Divine.

Now, there are any number of reasons, based upon your individual point
of view and the specific metaphysics slash meta-narrative-istics which
your branch of the Indo-European mytho-religion may be running.

Maybe it’s his karma, something attained via an extensive series of
meritorious deeds and strongly pious living over the course of this or
many other lifetimes. He might have performed such a series of heroic
and pleasing deeds as to be “owed favour” in recognition, restitution,
and recompense for injuries otherwise sustained and sacrifices duly made
in their course. He could even, if he (or, to be sure, she) were
seriously shining in storyhood, be viewed fondly as something even
approaching a “friend”.

Perhaps he’s in possession of such qualities of the soul (potentially up
to and including “a good sense of humour”; and in many cases, a rather
readily apparent skill at arms, or tongues, or preferably \*all of the
above\* and an acute awareness that the Tongue is Also a (Stabbing,
Slashing, Potent(i-ally) All-Devouring) Blade) that he is paid more
attention by the Upplanders … which might have lead to a rather
“interesting” life, and occasionally some quite maddening misfortune
upon his behalf. Like I said – living under the Eye of the Gods (and
others) does not have to equate to living life luxuriantly, easily, or
“well” according to various definitions which we might find modernly
appropriate.

Maybe he is actually \*related\* to one or more of the Gods in question,
and rather less remotely (relatively speaking) than many others who
might otherwise claim to be \[and here, I mean anyone who’s cottoned on
to the idea that “Mankind” in fact means “Kin(d) of Man(n)u(s)”, with a
“Son of Surya”, or other equivalent Divine parentage for Manu then also
‘grandfathered’ into their own remote-distant ancestry\] – and it is
ever the nature of beings to bend their ears more readily to Their
kinsfolk.

Or perhaps, just perhaps, it is a situation wherein actually living
properly, doing your bit and playing your part, paying attention to “how
things ought to be done” and propending piety in its praiseworthily
stipulated forms … actually marks you out as somebody more worth
listening \*to\*, because you have already done the foundation and
foremost thing of \*listening\* first to your greaters and betters.
Which is, all up, rather what we \*expect\* a Priest to be living like,
anyway, but I somewhat digress.

The point is – however it might be explicated as having occurred, and no
doubt there are numerous other explanations which might be conceivably,
feasibly advanced for such phenomena as the Man or Woman Who Seems To
Have The Direct Line To The Divine – that as there are such people out
there, it therefore makes clear sense to seek them out when in
significant need, and to enlist their aid in ensuring that your own
prayerful entreaties get some measure of due consideration Upstairs.

It makes sense, in other words, to go petition first a man who is
favourably received by the Heavens for an audience, and then have him as
advocate and counsel in such a regard. Rather than standing outside in
the metaphorical, metaphysical street, say, shouting in what’s
potentially a bit of a foreign language or a mongrel cant, and demanding
to be taken seriously therefrom.

I know that I have earlier eschewed and disavowed reading \*too far in\*
to this or that analogy which seeks to cast Divinities in altogether
“human” terms; yet it nevertheless seems that the most succinct way to
illustrate this may be via recourse to some more tangible and real-world
relatable examples.

Considered thus, whether we are approaching this from the angle that to
gain the attention of a Feudal Lord, a Mafia Baron-Don \[inasmuch as
there might be thought to be a difference, if we are speaking more
favourably of the latter\], or a Politician … rarely, is it the case
that one will march up to their dwellinghaus, office, castle, keep, or
situation in the street \[should they even \*be\* approachable within
the spear-thicket of their retinue abounding\] and \*demand\* by
shouting, that one be given aid.

Now, this is not to suggest that such a thing \*cannot\* happen, and
would, if attempted, \*never\* result in any semblance of a chance of
success. And it is also – perish the thought! – not to seek to imply
that a man in immediate peril who raises his lips and his hopes to the
heavens in beseeching of Those Who Dwell There, ought be liable to have
his prayerful enjoinment slapped down simply and only because he didn’t
attempt to make his way through the pseudocratic “red tape” approach
first.

But it most definitely \*is\* to suggest that, outside of those more
\*immediately\* dire life-and/or-death situations, that the “Rite” way
is inestimably more likely to take you rather further than the
“Rite-less” approach, generally speaking. And, further, to add to our
“shouting at your local lord in the street” metaphor, that in cases
wherein this may perhaps be myth-interpreted as being the habituated
conduct of one lacking in the proper respect … well …especially where
it is \*blatantly untrue\*, seeking to point out that the Emperor in
question is modelling an exciting new fashion-trend in nudist
a’apparell, is liable to lend you an extensive term in penury for the
serious offence of lese-majesty .. but I digress.

**“Better Call a Lawyer” – Devotee Phone Homa**

![797baab3164cf8189eec4d074d00a84a](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/797baab3164cf8189eec4d074d00a84a.jpg?w=676)

Perhaps the better metaphor for what I am seeking to illustrate here, is
the situation of finding one’s self in court – likely as a defendant,
although perhaps also as the aggrieved party. Mayhap even both
simultaneously, dependent upon the nature of the situation and the
‘offence’, or other such predicament.

I am a man of many associates, and some of them have from time to time
had cause to rather-less-than-voluntarily find themselves in just such a
position. Namely, that ofstaring in trepidation down the barrel of the
gavel held aloft by His Honour. \[As a point of \*brief\* Indo-European
Mytho-political Trivia, the Club, Mace, Gada, Hammer (and occasionally,
Axe or Sword) of the Thunderer/Striker has often come to represent an
instrument of Law and its Upholding and Protection – even in political
and legislative contexts that have otherwise all but forgotten their
Indo-European Roots. Consider the large golden Mace carried by the
Serjeant-At-Arms of a Westminster-style Parliament, for instance, and
representing the power of the Legislature through its Speaker.\]

One thing they’ve pretty much \*all\* said, to a (wo)man, if asked for
advice to a younger person who so might find themselves amidst similar
circumstances (other than, of course, the obvious-yet-important “Don’t
Get Caught”)… was “GET A LAWYER”.

To paraphrase further: “I know you think you’re pretty sharp – and, in
all honesty, you kinda are … the circumstances via which you’ve found
yourself here, evidently notwithstanding – but not only will a proper
lawyer know \*far more\* than you do about how to do things properly,
and with the maximal chance of securing, whether via argument,
direct-intercession, or still yet other means, the longed-for, desired
outcome …. but they are \*also\* \*far and away\* \*less\* likely to
offend the Judge while they’re at it.”

Which is not simply a matter of perhaps not knowing the ‘magic’ Latin
phrases to stand up and spout in interjection, when so called for .. nor
even how to \*avoid\* finding yourself running up into the perilous
shoals of Contempt of Court should you be attempting interjection when
\*not\* so called for, and getting upon His Honour’s nerves due to frank
incompetence, from time to time, in what would otherwise be the most
basic of matters for a more properly trained legal or amicus curiae.

\[And yes, yes this \*is\* a rather apt part of the metaphor as well –
it is a risky business, at least some of the time, drawing the Eye
\[singular, especially\] of the Divine … for some Gods are great in
Their most magnanimus \[this is not a typo\] mercy – and others are
Great in their Terrific Attributes, by which I mean (also that) They Can
Most Easily Beget TERROR\].

But also, the simple overall propriety of the thing.

I had it explained to me at the time, that a Judge, having been a young
lawyer once, and having put in rather a lot of time, effort, energy, and
proper conduct to get where he or she is, will generally look a bit in
askance at some foolhardy interloper who just turns up and attempts to
leapfrog all of that in pursuit of a ‘quickie’ outcome – it’s almost as
if you aren’t taking the thing seriously, in their perspective and
potential perception. \[although for obvious reasons … with some notable
exceptions, this doesn’t tend to be a part of my metaphor that’s of a
huge degree of direct coterminity with Indo-European devagenesis …
except when it is\]

All things considered, then, if you would not seek to try and barge your
way up to your elected national representative (or even, more aptly,
Cabinet Minister or local functional equivalent), in whichever
alleged-democracy you may happen to currently domicile within, and
potentially attempt to gain their attention with a shouty “WTF LOL” in
the hopes of garnering their inestimable favour , heedless of the
prospect of being thence immediately thrown out by their (body)guards,
and potentially even trespassed from the premises forthwith (perhaps
even, if you are something of a runctious repeat offender, for a period
pushing up upon ‘Perpetuity’) …

I do not at all see why you would attempt to conduct yourself in much
the same manner as applies beings of far \*grander\* majesty and \*true
power\* than the average, ordinary, common(s)-or-garden elected
politician. Not if you’re smart, humble, pious, and wise, at any rate.

Sometimes, it is most certainly true, that extreme acts and extreme ways
shall be necessary in order to draw the attention of Those Who Stand
Above The World.

It is true, also, that in times of desperation, protocol and propriety
going out the window may be somewhat overlooked, especially if the cause
is just.

But I do not think, in situations wherein there is the scope and
capacity to do things ‘properly’, that it is wise to abjure from the
realms of “proper intent”, the polite formalism of one’s endeavours at
interaction. Which, to be sure, encompasses a whole range of things –
including, as I have attempted to emphasized through the course of this
piece, not just the “Rite” language, but also often simply the “Right”
language … at least enough to show one is making the appropriate degree
and scalar of effort. And with it also being important to remember that
theseelements of formalism, have a significance for the scope of your
efforts running \*far\* beyond ‘mere’ intent alone – indeed, which can
at the very least be viewed as augments capaciously ‘enhancing’ “intent”
through the vehicularization, the operationalization of it.

If one is to be seeking otherwise-exceptional outcomes \[up to and
including, the ‘bending’ or even outright abrogation of the more
\*usual\* laws of physics and non-narrative \[ok, well,
non-\*Narrative\*\] causality\] – then it only makes sense that one put
in the requisite exceptional efforts in order to ask for their aid in
delivery.

To make the proper effort, and if possible, do the ‘exceptional’ \[at
least in the sense of ‘it stands out’, catches the Eye(s) and therefore
more easily/readily invites Favour\] is to more properly propitiate the
Deity or other spirit in question.

To fall short in their execution is, perhaps, one thing; yet to never
have even endeavoured to \*try\* to carry out an undertaking worthy of
note in pursuit of said worthily remarkable outcome, simply suggests
that one is neither worthy, nor remarkable, nor taking the whole thing
seriously enough to actually be in sufficient need of supplying aid and
availment to in the first place.

And that is, indeed, at least part of the justification for why kings
and emperors might put \*incredibly\* elaborate swathes of resources and
other signifers of effort into the rituals whose success or failure
shall have immanent impacts upon their kingdom.

Yet to return down to the street-and-household level perspective of the
more usually Crownless: yes, it is true that a “wing and a prayer” will
get you so far. The “Wing” is the Formal Elements earlier discussed, and
here, the “Prayer” stands for Intent and direct voicing thereof.

And both of these (\*together\*) will almost \*certainly\* fly you
further than a mental equivalent of a millennial’s emoji-ridden
text-message – particularly one that may not even be sent due to a lack
of insight into how the phone works, let alone to the right number \[the
spectrum and degree of Divine connectivity for the purposes of this
mobile-powered metaphor ranging on a scale down through ‘personal phone
numbers’, ‘business phone numbers’, and ‘front-desk receptionists’,
along with ‘looking up \*entirely\* the wrong phone-book’ …although
with it being important to note that even, perhaps especially where one
gets the correct number, one neverthelessdoes somewhat run the risk of
the eternal aching trepidation: “Nu Fone Hu Dis” in response to a
particular request, if you catch my meaning\], and not least because you
may be standing out in an area of very little to no reception, with no
actual credit upon your phone-account with which to txt, anyway.

To continue with the phone-et(h)ics…. well, “Old is Gold”, and in
situations of a serious nature, few could argue that an actual physical
letter or face-to-face meeting, or even a polite phone-call (or, in a
pinch, a proper text message) may get you far further than attempting to
pxt a meme. Or whatever it is the kids do these days on SnapChat, etc.

\[As a point of perhaps interest, or at least some level of explication
– my own mobile phone is presently in its second decade of operation
\[i.e. … it’s old, doesn’t do internet, or even pxt .. but \*does\* have
eminently sensible battery-life, and can probably be used in a jiffy as
some sort of Thunder-Club with which to smite a serpent-demon-dragon
which might rear its head in an altogether too literal equivalency ot
the game of Snake … by \*throwing the phone at it\* \]; which may
perhaps explain some of my afore-inferred degree of cynicism about more
recent communicative technological advancements and innovations.

However, the notion of an “older phone” which lacks some of the inbuit
capabilities of the newer and more “swipe-right” capable models is
nevertheless somewhat useful for what I’m getting at here. If the
“phone” in question that is supposed to be doing the receiving, is one
that’s deliberately some generations older than the one that you’re
utilizing with which to \*send\* \[and I say “deliberately”, because
they’re often much more \*reliable\*, you know?\] , then it only makes
sense to cater to this particular set of communicative constraints –
rather than throwing up your hands and pouting that they’re yet to make
more frequent, fulsome use of a newer model.\]

But enough about phones.

**In The August Presence of the Gods – Know Your Place; Strive To Be
Worthy Of It**

![e0f47f6dc62a7299d09c1b7ceaa87ac0](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/e0f47f6dc62a7299d09c1b7ceaa87ac0.jpg?w=676)

One of the most useful ways to conceive of many forms of more properly
formalized Indo-European prayer, is the following. It is sourced from an
academic text \[Catherine Bell – “Ritual – Perspectives & Dimensions”\],
and is detailing in this instance a specifically Hindu approach – yet
the general precepts and perspectives are nevertheless remarkably common
to prayerful, devotional conduct across the Indo-European
mytho-religious world.

“Hindu devotional worship known as puja is a good example of a system of
simple offerings that appears to have no purpose other than to please
the deity. These offerings can range from the simple and private to the
elaborate and public. Sometimes they are visualized rather than
performed. Whether presented to the image of a deity in the home, at a
temple, or at a religious festival, puja rites evoke the ceremonies of
hospitality traditionally shown to honored guests, particularly in
ancient court life. Indeed, it is fair to say that in the home or at a
festival, such rites cast the deity as a lofty but temporary guest,
while in a temple setting they acknowledge the deity as ensconced in the
equivalent of his or her own palace.”

It is a relatable perspective, it is a useful perspective, it is an
understandable perspective – and most important of all, it is a
\*respectful\* perspective. Both in terms of the clear and overt
manifestations of treating the Deity in your presence as an honoured
guest, a visiting lord – and, for that matter, treating the situation of
being in a Deity’s Presence as that of yourself standing in the court of
the most august possible ruler, emperor, lord. But also because the
above is not simply something that was done because it “felt right” and
therefore became something that “felt rite”. But rather, because we have
direct Shruti \[‘Heard’ – in this instance, a category of scripture
that’s something reasonably close to, and often directly coterminous
with the notion of “Word of God” in terms of infallibility in its
initial encountering and Inception/Inspiration\] statements that this is
how something \*ought\* to be done. I was running through and partially
re-translating a RigVedic Hymnal the other night for our Ganesh
Chaturthi post, and indeed the first two lines were \*directly\* this.
Hailing the Deity, Praising Him, and then asking Him to be seated in the
position of honour at the sacrificial rite that was about to take place
amongst us. \[Of course, as a brief aside, when reading some \*other\*
Vedic hymnals, particularly to certain forms of a Deity Who would often
generally fall within the ambit of Terrifying, Impressively Lethal,
Incredibly Angry, etc. as outlined much further up in this piece, I was
reminded of a quote from Terry Pratchett – “The prayers of most
religions generally praise and thank the gods involved, either out of
general piety or in the hope that he or she will take the hint and start
acting responsibly.”\]

The would-be petitioner who approaches the Power with properly
appropriate deference and reverence-in-respect, and who may perhaps make
interesting conversation (as one of our #NAS comrades wisely observed),
is \*far\* more likely to be heard than one who does the opposite … who
is rarely to be seen, and seemingly has only turned up in an impudent
bid to make declaratory (if not outright defamatory) demands.

“Know Your Place”, indeed.

Now it is also prudent to state that even when one \*does\* carry out
the proper forms and pleasing approaches of appropriately potent piety,
this is not a surefire guarantee of success in your Asking. There can be
any number of reasons for this, some of which may be less your fault (or
even anything hugely much to do with you \*directly\*) than others.

And some of which comes down to pondering if you’re sure you’re Asking
in the right way – via the right conduits or medium, with the right
words, and through the right intermediary, to the right patron (or
matron, as the case may be). Hast thou Done Enough to Deserve Victory?
(It may even indeed be something that you are supposed to do “yourself”)

A lack of success in such endeavours may also be due to thenature of
wyrd, of narrative causality. In which case, the point is to do the
righteous thing anyway, if not “regardless”, then at the veer-y least
\*because\* it is the \*right thing\*, even in such instances as it
might not be of tangible, direct benefit to you, personally.

And if you’re not interested in doing that if it doesn’t lead to you,
personally, having some on-demand wish-fulfillment, then I am not sure
how you can properly call yourself “religious”. Or, for that matter,
community-minded – in fact, in a certain sense, anything other than a
solipsist.

**Concluding Remarks**

![c585438719d1c5ee579e7be454c6c50e](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/c585438719d1c5ee579e7be454c6c50e.jpg?w=676)

This has been … a pretty lengthy article, even without the weightyness
of much of our more usual sorts of subject-matter. Much of it could
unquestionably have been foreshortened down to a few eminently more
readable paragraphs – bullet-points of synopsis, even.

Yet what I have often observed, is that in those instances wherein we do
such a thing … people may have an easier time physically reading what’s
been written, but at some degree of cost to the actual “understanding” –
and here, I do not mean simple linguistic comprehension, but actual,
genuine “Ohh! So THAT’S why!” , the moments of revelatory insight and
thence immanentization into the reader’s thought, praxis-form, mindset,
perspective, and being.

A not entirely dissimilar effect, albeit going the other way somewhat,
can be observed with some of our more \*usual\* sorts of content. Many
readers may ‘get’ at least \*some\* of what we’re on about, but don’t
quite register an array of the rest – and thence, don’t necessarily
“integrate” the rather important parts, at least partially because it
still sounds “Foreign”, “Esoteric”, “Unnecessary”, or simply downright
“Arcane”.

And you know what? That’s largely if not entirely my fault. My writing’s
not usually especially accessible even \*before\* we factor in all the
terms in millennia-old liturgical languages, semi-explained references
to potentially somewhat obscure materials, Deities, elements or
concepts, and the ongoing complexities of the cumulonimbus of quixotic
in-text footnotes/expansions/digressions I keep inserting all over the
place.

So instead of … most of that (we’ve still got the footnotes, inter
alia), I thought we’d try something different.

As was said in the introductory paragraphs, over the past few months
we’ve encountered an ever-increasing number of people who are taking
steps in these religious spheres, and who have written in asking us for
some degree of guidance on \*how\* to actually pray, engage in proper,
pious conduct and living, and other such matters.

That formed one part of the initial impetus for this piece. The other
being our ongoing encountering of an array of fallacies, poorly thought
out positions, and other such errancies in these affairs from people who
may \*think\* they’re doing things correctly – or may simply have not
really given it much thought at all, in favour of relying largely if not
entirely upon the self-assurance of an over-inflated ego.

Now, in neither case is an in-depth and academic-grade discursion
actually the ideal implement with which to meaningfully engage with and
change behavior. The “form” might be there and difficult to argue with,
if there’s several hundred or several thousand words replete with full
scriptural citations and excerpts on “how” to do something …. but the
“essence”, well, it might struggle somewhat to make itself apparent and
thence leap itself into the mind of the reader.

Adding to the complexity and difficulty of trying to do something like
the above, is the challenge of producing something that’s (once again,
not a full-scale academic-grade cross-comparative analysis of the sort
that could and often \*literally\* is a book and a PhD thesis) going to
be useful, useable, and able to speak relevantly across an array of
Indo-European mytho-religious traditions.

Instead, the goal here was to set down a few basic principles, here and
there, that would be of use and relevancy to just about anyone
endeavouring to follow an Indo-European faith. While also seeking to
counter some of those aforementioned questionable canards we seem to
keep running into for some reason.

Especially in the case of the latter, it has generally been my
experience that one doesn’t get too far by simply shooting out straight
facts, scriptural enjoinments, or other such things. But rather, by
\*showing\* how things can work, in a manner that can take a reader with
the line of reasoning, if possible from ‘start to finish’, and
preferably also in ways that make the content thus brooched more
immediately relevant and intuitive to them. Hence my hefty reliance upon
several analogous examples in various parts of this text.

In any case, the overarching point of this piece has been one thing:
attempting to make it easier for us to get into the appropriate,
requisite mindset for petitioning and for praising the Gods of our
Ancestors. It continually bemuses me the manner in which quite a number
of people who otherwise profess to have an enthusiasm for this or that
historical Indo-European people and their ways and beliefs … haven’t
quite realized that The Past itself is something of an undiscovered
country, not simply inhabited by (psychologically, psychosocially)
‘modern’ humans who just happen to be dressed differently and speaking
another language.

Partially in relation to and outgrowth from that, and partially as a
standalone complex of Modernity, many people also seem to have some
degree of difficulty with accustoming themselves to a proper and
appropriate religious (let alone ‘sacral’) headspace. This is often
because one has spent many years in a different kind of religious and
metaphysical framework than those that tend to characterize the
Indo-European architectures of belief, and therefore either doesn’t
re-evaluate these when migrating over here; or, worse, consciously and
conspicuously defines themselves against them in some sort of puerile
act of rebellion. I say “worse”, because what it tends to mean in
practice is seeing “ABRAHAMISM” anywhere and everywhere and \*most
especially\*, apparently, in actual, proper, appropriate, well-attested,
thousand(s) of years old tradition.

But I digress.

The point is – piety is much like a muscle, or other faculty of our
senses and our thoughts. When fostered properly and appropriately, it is
likely to flourish and grow; and be capable of accomplishing eminently
more than when one started out, or in the absence of such fostering,
training, and care. You’re also liable to “pull the muscle”, the
hamstring, the tendon, potentially even dislocate something or otherwise
seriously hurt yourself if you attempt to try to “lift” too much and/or
too quickly.

If it feels at all unfamiliar or uncomfortable to you to exercise it,
then that is partially because for so long in your life, you have likely
not had much cause to use it. Indeed, it has semi-actively been
suppressed, repressed! Or, perhaps, you are used to utilizing it
significantly differently than to the shapes and the immediate-forms to
which you are now endeavouring to bend it. It may also be the case that
you need to “stretch” first, and make other, broader alterations within
your lifestyle \[and, perhaps appropriately enough given the metaphor,
“diet” can be quite a significant one here\] – including most
especially, the seeking out of a coach, a mentor, a gym. And not
\*necessarily\* taking everything one sees in every self-proclaimed
“expert”‘s youtube videos or “buy my book!”‘s entirely at face value or
perhaps even seriously.

So there’s something to get you started. Or to help you to re-start, or
get back to the basics if you’ve gone a bit awry or astray at some point
along the way.

If you’ve made it this far – and even if you haven’t!

Congratulations

You’ve taken your first steps into a larger world.

“Krinvanto Vishvam Aryam”, indeed.  
Jai Vak, Jai Brihaspati. Jai Agni.  
Jai Devi.




