+++
title = "Eunotosaurus, Pappochelys and the crisis in reptilian phylogeny"

+++
[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-pKtv_NX5jMU/VgeBztnle5I/AAAAAAAADYE/L4Ow2QvSHBE/s800-Ic42/eunotosaurus1.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/S2ysojDwCWL4R21rd4vj2tMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

*From: Evolutionary origin of the turtle skull G. S. Bever, Tyler R.
Lyson, Daniel J. Field & Bhart-Anjan S. Bhullar; A Middle Triassic
stem-turtle and the evolution of the turtle body plan Rainer R. Schoch &
Hans-Dieter Sues; An ancestral turtle from the Late Triassic of
southwestern China Chun Li, Xiao-Chun Wu, Olivier Rieppel, Li-Ting Wang
& Li-Jun Zhao; Evolutionary Origin of the Turtle Shell Tyler R. Lyson,
Gabe S. Bever, Torsten M. Scheyer, Allison Y. Hsiang & Jacques A.
Gauthier*

In the eighth year of our life we became fascinated by the remarkable
reptile Eunotosaurus and its most unusual anatomy. Most of the work on
it was rather obscure and hardly accessible on the Indian subcontinent.
Hence, we almost had to move heaven and earth to get our hands on some
primary literature on this beast. What we learned suggested that it was
of unprecedented importance to understand the evolution of reptiles, but
frankly we were left puzzled about many of its features.

Eunotosaurus was discovered in 1892 at Beaufort West, South Africa and
first described by Harry Seeley, a naturalist from Britain. Seeley was
an aggressive critic of Darwin and Huxley and sought to find fault in
their studies. He represented a certain strain of British
paleontologists whose ghosts persist to this date. Seeley was a sharp
observer of important anatomical similarities between organisms but
often ended up drawing wrong evolutionary conclusions in part due to his
fixation with showing the Darwinian camp wrong. Hence, while Seeley
initially saw a possible link between Eunotosaurus and turtles he
finally decided that it was related to the primitive parareptilian
group, the mesosaurs. The other British paleontologist and prolific
collector of fossil reptiles, DMS Watson, who again had an exceptional
eye for vertebrate anatomy, brought Eunotosaurus back to the limelight
by pointing that it was the likely ancestor of turtles. However, in the
late 1960s, paleontologist Cox restudied Eunotosaurus and declared that
it had little to do with the ancestry of turtles. Just an year before I
began my studies, a new complete skull of Eunotosaurus was discovered
and it was declared that it was indeed unrelated to turtles. By the
1990s a series of studies made a return to the past and reinstated the
basic evolutionary model propounded by DMS Watson based on earlier
studies by the [forgotten paleontologist
Goodrich](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/03/19/amniotes/)
that reptiles came in two great clades: eureptiles and parareptiles.
Eureptiles include the and basal forms like captorhinomorphs and
protorothyrids and the diapsids. The latter in turn include the the
archosaurs, today represented by crocodiles and avian dinosaurs, and the
lepidosaurs, today represented by lizards and the tuatara. The
parareptiles were seen to include a wide-range of forms including the
mesosaurs, millerettids, procolophonids, pareiasaurs, lanthanosuchids,
bolosaurs, nyctiphruretids and nycteroleterids, which were all
completely extinct by the beginning of the Jurassic. In this period,
morphological cladistic analyses recovered Eunotosaurus as a parareptile
too.

In parallel there was the vexing morphological question of the origin of
the turtles. Turtles have linked to almost every major clade of amniotes
at some point in the past. Despite an early view of them being diapsids
due to the pioneering work on the reptilian skull by the Danish
anatomist Tage Lakjer, the consensus shifted towards them being
“anapsids”. As with Eunotosaurus the early cladistic studies on the
origin of the turtles put them among the parareptiles; indeed, they were
seen as the only parareptile lineage surviving to date. Within
Parareptilia, some workers claimed that turtles were related to
procolophonids, like Owenetta. Others claimed turtles was related to or
nested within the parareptile clade of the pareiasaurs. But none of
these early workers recovered a link between turtles and Eunotosaurus
within Parareptilia. Rather Eunotosaurus lay close to the base of
Parareptilia along side the millerettids or forming a clade with them.

In a dramatic shift from the emerging consensus, Rieppel reverted to the
position of Lakjer by showing that turtles were not parareptiles but
nested within diapsids. His trees recovered them as being as sister
group of the lepidosaurs in a clade with the sauropterygians (nothosaurs
and plesiosaurs among others) within the now more inclusive clade of
Lepidosauromorpha. While this was being debated, the first molecular
phylogenies of reptiles were published. They established beyond any
measure of doubt that the turtles were diapsids. But contrary to all
morphological analysis they were recovered as archosauromorphs. This
position of the turtles has become unquestionable with the advances in
genomics. However, barring Merck’s mostly unpublished phylogeny, the
morphologists in this period failed miserably to obtain any evidence for
the archosauromorph position of the turtles. They either obtained the
same result as Rieppel, with some minor reconfigurations or they
regressed back to the old parareptile hypothesis, but this time with a
twist. Within Parareptilia, turtles emerged as the sister group of the
enigmatic Eunotosaurus.

It is against this background that in the past couple of months there
have been dramatic developments concerning turtle origins from the
morphological side. Both these studies concur on the following: 1)
Eunotosaurus is a stem turtle and 2) the Eunotosaurus+turtle clade is
now within Diapsida.

One of these papers describes a new reptile Pappochelys from the
Ladinian age (late Middle Triassic \~240 Mya) of Germany. Thus, it
predates the previous oldest turtle Odontochelys by at least 20 My. This
reptile has large, antero-posteriorly broad ribs with the dorsal surface
sculpted with ridges and rugosity suggesting that it formed some kind of
a protective surface. The shape of these ribs and their approximately
T-shaped cross-sectional outline is strikingly similar to that of
Odontochelys to the exclusion of all other reptiles with expanded ribs,
except for Eunotosaurus. This form of the ribs has also be noted in an
early developmental stage of the snapping turtle before the ossification
of the shell elements begins. Odontochelys while lacking a carapace of
the crown turtles is clearly turtle, with a well-developed plastron.
Pappochelys has no plastron but it does have thickened paired gastralia.
Their orientation is also similar to the spinous ends of the plastron
ossifications of Odontochelys, suggesting that the turtle plastron arose
via fusion of the gastralia, into which were incorporated elements of
the shoulder girdle in the anterior region. Consistent with this, at
least some gastralia are fused in Pappochelys resulting two-headed forms
similar to the spinous endings of the plastral elements of Odontochelys.
The general form of the pelvis is also close to that of Odontochelys.
The tail is long and whip-like, again closely paralleling that of
Odontochelys.

While the post-crania of Pappochelys resemble the basal turtle
Odontochelys, the skull is notably primitive. Both Odontochelys and
Pappochelys share the feature of having conical teeth on their jaws.
These are however lost in the first turtles with shells, namely
Proganochelys, which only retains palate teeth on the vomer and the
pterygoid like the more primitive forms. However, unlike the
un-fenestrated skull of Odontochelys, Pappochelys displays a proper
diapsid skull, but the lower temporal fenestra is ventrally open.

The second paper re-examines the skull of Eunotosaurus the approximately
260 My old reptile from the Middle Permian period of South Africa.
Earlier work had shown that the ribs of Eunotosaurs are indeed close to
Odontochelys and now to those of Pappochelys. Surprisingly, the new
study of the skull showed that the skull is not anapsid as previously
believed but diapsid. The juvenile specimen of Eunotosaurus shows a
plainly diapsid skull with both the upper and lower temporal fenestra
being clearly visible. Scanning of the adult skull revealed that the
growth of the long supratemporal bone obscured the upper fenestra, which
could be otherwise seen in its classical form below that bone. A
similar, obscuring of the upper fenestra by the supratemporal bone is
also seen in the thalattosaurs, engimatic marine reptiles from the
Triassic. Interestingly, the lower fenestra was ventrally open just as
in Pappochelys. The discovery of a plainly diapsid skull in Eunotosaurus
thus brings it out of the parareptile part of the tree, where it had
remained for a good part of the last two decades, because the upper
temporal fenestra is considered synapomorphic for diapsids. There are
other subtle features that might be relevant to the potential
relationship of Eunotosaurus to the turtles: The tall but narrow
quadratojugal is similar to that seen basal turtle Proganochelys and
also the archosauromorphs like Azendohsaurus and archosauriformes.
Eunotosaurus further has a bony laterosphenoid in the brain case, which
while not clearly illustrated by the authors, still seems to have the
general shape of the [laterosphenoid seen in the turtles and
archosauromorphs](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/05/31/azhendosaurus-the-early-archosauromorph-radiation-and-a-new-position-for-turtles/).
Moreover, like in the turtles it makes a similar limited point contact
with the preotic bone. The squamosal of both Eunotosaurus and
Pappochelys is dorso-ventrally tall and narrow. This resembles the state
for primitive diapsids and certain parareptiles like nycteroleterids and
millerettids with lower temporal fenestration. However, this is very
distinct from the more dorsally placed and shorter squamosals of the
basal turtle Proganochelys and the archosauromorphs.

With these forms being presented as diapsid stem turtles the
morphologists can at least rescind the parareptile position of turtles
to which they kept returning even as of recently. As a consolation they
could claim that their intuition (dressed up with the pseudo-objectivity
of cladistics) regarding Eunotosaurus was partly right and it was a stem
turtle, although now as a diapsid rather than a parareptile. But does
this mean the morphologists finally have all they need to get a better
picture of early reptilian evolution? They certainly have good new data
that could get them there, but the indications are they are as of now
faced with crisis in reptilian phylogeny from the morphological
viewpoint:

1\) Despite having a diapsid Eunotosaurus and Pappochelys morphologists
thoroughly fail in getting the correct archosauromorph position of
turtles within Diapsida in their trees. Instead they usually get them as
lepidosauropmorphs grouping with the sauropterygians, which might be
part of a larger clade of aquatic reptiles. Some trees, like those in
the Eunotosaurus work show the turtles as a sister group of Sauria (i.e.
Archosauromorpha+Lepidosauromorpha). Thus, despite the new data,
morphologists are doing no better with the position of the turtles than
Rieppel in the 1990s.

2\) All this time Eunotosaurus was firmly nested inside the parareptile
part of the tree. There was never a hint that it might be deep in
Diapsida as suggested by the current analysis of its skull and the
discovery of Pappochelys. Even when the similarities between its ribs
and those of Odontochelys were noted it pulled the turtles back into
Parareptilia in morphological trees and not the other way around. In
fact the authors earlier tried to compare the broadening of the ribs
shared by Odontochelys and Eunotosaurus to the incipient broadening of
the ribs observed in the parareptile Milleretta. This raises the serious
question as to what is going on with the anatomical studies on
parareptiles: Is that the morphologists got it all wrong only with
Eunotosaurus in placing it with the parareptiles?; have they got it
wrong with other parareptiles too, which should actually be occupying
positions elsewhere in the reptilian tree?; is that Eunotosaurus is
still a parareptile and its move into Diapsida is all wrong?

[![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-UY9REdEcUi0/VgeBPdBQ7WI/AAAAAAAADX8/Tlj_2NXVV08/s800-Ic42/eunotosaurus2.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/v8H_I73_C_u8U2SE0IWHJdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

*From: The ﬁrst record of a nyctiphruretid parareptile from the Early
Permian of North America, with a discussion of parareptilian temporal
fenestration Mark J. Macdougall & Robert R. Reisz; Early loss and
multiple return of the lower temporal arcade in diapsid reptiles
Johannes Müller*

3\) With regards to moving Eunotosaurus into Diapsida we would like to
point out that temporal fenestration is way more common than it was
previously believed. It is unclear if the mesosaurs had a temporal
fenestra because it has been argued both ways, and the interpretation
depends on the preservation of the specimens. However, in the following
groups temporal fenestration has been confirmed:  
Millerettids – here in Milleretta the lower temporal fenestra was
reported in juvenile individuals which is closed up in adults.  
Australothyris – a basal parareptile has lower temporal fenestra.  
Lanthanosuchids and their sister group Delorynchus – show lower temporal
fenestra, suggesting that fenestration was possibly fixed early in this
clade of parareptiles despite their proclivity for ontological
variability.  
Microleter – displays narrow ventrally open lower temporal fenestra.  
Bolosaurs – closed lower temporal fenestra.  
Nycteroleterids – At least Macroleter displays small closed lower
temporal fenestra.  
Procolophonoids – several procolophonoids show a ventrally open lower
temporal fenestra. Within the procolophonoids the owenettids show a
similar pattern but addition in at least one form, Candelaria there is
also an apparent upper temporal fenestra, which is not very different
from the state seen in Eunotosaurus.  
Nyctiphruretids – displays narrow ventrally open lower temporal
fenestra.

Thus, the lower temporal fenestration of Eunotosaurus in itself is not
inconsistent with what is widely seen in parareptiles, especially the
ventrally open state it displays is not uncommon among several
parareptilian lineages. Moreover the tall narrow squamosal is also seen
in some parareptiles as noted above. Thus, the prevalence of the lower
temporal fenestra in parareptiles, and its presence in Diapsida and in
Synapsida, the other great amniote clade, suggest that the lower
temporal fenestra could have been ancestral to amniotes and merely lost
in certain early reptiles like captorhinomorphs and possibly mesosaurs
due to developmental plasticity – a feature already suggested by the
condition in the procolophonoids and millerettids. Now the upper
fenestra, which is considered synapomorphic for diapsids, cannot be
taken for granted either because as noted above it seems to be present
in the parareptile owenettid Candeleria. This could mean that either i)
the upper fenestration could have emerge independently more than once;
or ii) that it is more widespread and has merely been overlooked as it
was in Eunotosaurus. The second point could mean that the reappraisal of
Eunotosaurus as a diapsid might be premature as it could merely group
with other parareptiles with a previously undetected upper fenestra or
that at least some further parareptiles are actually diapsids like what
is now being proposed for Eunotosaurus (let us not forget that the ribs
of Milleretta were compared to Eunotosaurus). All this means that there
might be more uncertainty in reptilian phylogeny than currently
believed.

4\) Recently there has been the redescription of another enigmatic
diapsid, Elachistosuchus from the Upper Triassic of Germany. The
phylogenetic analysis using the data from this reptile and various
recent data matrices deployed in reptilian phylogeny reveals the great
degree uncertainty in them. Elachistosuchus as well as the overall tree
topology considerably varies depending on the matrix and the method used
(maximum parsimony or Bayesian analysis): Sometimes Elachistosuchus
groups with archosauromorphs, sometimes with lepidosauromorphs and other
times emerges as a basal diapsid. This suggests that the character
states are considerably discordant throughout the base of the diapsid
tree and we should be rather circumspect about our understanding of
early diapsid relationships. In a similar vein this uncertainty is
likely to play into any matrix used to test the origin of turtles.

In conclusion, these new discoveries regarding Pappochelys and
Eunotosaurus are likely to play a major role in the phylogenetics of
reptiles by morphological means for a long time to come. There is no
doubt that Pappochelys is a diapsid. However, we would be a bit cautious
regarding its identity as a stem turtle. It has several primitive
features that are not quite typical of crownward archosauromorphs, which
share several features with stem turtles like Proganochelys. While the
most basal confirmed archosauromorphs are rather conservative there is
nothing linking the turtles to those or Pappochelys. Regarding
Eunotosaurus, we do see its striking similarities with Pappochelys. It
is because of this, with considerable caution, we accept it as being a
diapsid. But again there is nothing particularly archosauromorph about
it.

However, there could be light at the end of the tunnel. The recent work
by Rieppel and colleagues recovered the large clade of aquatic reptiles,
first seen in the fossil record from the Triassic, including
[thalattosauriformes, sauropterygians, saurosphargids,
ichthyosauriformes, hupehsuchids, and Wumengosaurus as
archosauromorphs](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/11/14/the-monophyly-of-euryapsids-and-the-radiation-of-marine-reptiles-after-the-permian-triassic-extinction/).
It is conceivable that turtles too belong to this clade, thus aligning
morphological and molecular phylogenies. However, it remains to be seen
how Pappochelys and Eunotosaurus might fit in such a framework.

Fossils of the first bona fide amniotes, both synapsids and reptiles,
are from the Moscovian Stage of the Carboniferous period (311.7–307.2
Mya). The first diapsids fossils are from the slightly later Kasimovian
stage of the Carboniferous period around 305 Mya – right in this period
we see evidence for some diversification of the diapsids, with a fully
terrestrial lizard-like morph represented by Petrolacosaurus (albeit
with synapsid-like canines) and a partly aquatic form represented by
Spinoaequalis. However, the first confirmed archosaurmorphs and
lepidosauromorphs appear much later: respectively Eorasaurus \~260-255
Mya and Paliguana 251.2-252.6 Mya. Thus there is a nearly 50 My or more
gap between the first diapsid and the first representatives of the two
crown clades. This window is one of great obscurity. If indeed
Eunotosaurus was a stem-turtle as proposed by the authors of these
recent reports then it would mean that archosauropmorpha had already
begun diversifying before 260 Mya. In this scenario Eunotosaurus will
have the enormous significance of being the earliest currently
recognized archosauromorph and point to a cryptic diversity of
Archosauromorpha, which still remains unrecognized or unsampled in the
fossil record. Under this scenario the phylogenetic positions of many
Permian diapsids, which are typically considered basal members of
Diapsida as a whole, might need to be re-examined more closely to see if
they actually represent stem versions of Archosauromorpha and
Lepidosauromorpha. Likewise some parareptiles could also find a place in
Eureptilia. If Eunotosaurus was not related to turtle ancestry then it
could mean that it was yet another basal diapsid or parareptile that
merely converged to a diapsid state with convergent turtle-like
features. Thus it is poised to be of considerable significance for
dating the split between the line leading to lizards and that leading to
birds.
