---
title: THE PREPARATORY RENUNCIATION

---
<div>

[←](../bhakti-yoga/the_method_and_the_means.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Para-Bhakti or Supreme
Devotion](para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_bhaktas_renunciation_results_from_love.htm)

  

CHAPTER I

## THE PREPARATORY RENUNCIATION

We have now finished the consideration of what may be called the
preparatory Bhakti, and are entering on the study of the Parâ-Bhakti or
supreme devotion. We have to speak of a preparation to the practice of
this Para-Bhakti. All such preparations are intended only for the
purification of the soul. The repetition of names, the rituals, the
forms, and the symbols, all these various things are for the
purification of the soul. The greatest purifier among all such things, a
purifier without which no one can enter the regions of this higher
devotion (Para-Bhakti), is renunciation. This frightens many; yet,
without it, there cannot be any spiritual growth. In all our Yogas this
renunciation is necessary. This is the stepping-stone and the real
centre and the real heart of all spiritual culture — renunciation. This
is religion — renunciation.

When the human soul draws back from the things of the world and tries to
go into deeper things; when man, the spirit which has here somehow
become concretised and materialised, understands that he is thereby
going to be destroyed and to be reduced almost into mere matter, and
turns his face away from matter — then begins renunciation, then begins
real spiritual growth. The Karma-Yogi's renunciation is in the shape of
giving up all the fruits of his action; he is not attached to the
results of his labour; he does not care for any reward here or
hereafter. The Râja-Yogi knows that the whole of nature is intended for
the soul to acquire experience, and that the result of all the
experiences of the soul is for it to become aware of its eternal
separateness from nature. The human soul has to understand and realise
that it has been spirit, and not matter, through eternity, and that this
conjunction of it with matter is and can be only for a time. The
Raja-Yogi learns the lesson of renunciation through his own experience
of nature. The Jnâna-Yogi has the harshest of all renunciations to go
through, as he has to realise from the very first that the whole of this
solid-looking nature is all an illusion. He has to understand that all
that is any kind of manifestation of power in nature belongs to the
soul, and not to nature. He has to know from the very start that all
knowledge and all experience are in the soul and not in nature; so he
has at once and by the sheer force of rational conviction to tear
himself away from all bondage to nature. He lets nature and all that
belongs to her go, he lets them vanish and tries to stand alone!

Of all renunciations, the most natural, so to say, is that of the
Bhakti-Yogi. Here there is no violence, nothing to give up, nothing to
tear off, as it were, from ourselves, nothing from which we have
violently to separate ourselves. The Bhakta's renunciation is easy,
smooth flowing, and as natural as the things around us. We see the
manifestation of this sort of renunciation, although more or less in the
form of caricatures, every day around us. A man begins to love a woman;
after a while he loves another, and the first woman he lets go. She
drops out of his mind smoothly, gently, without his feeling the want of
her at all. A woman loves a man; she then begins to love another man,
and the first one drops off from her mind quite naturally. A man loves
his own city, then he begins to love his country, and the intense love
for his little city drops off smoothly, naturally. Again, a man learns
to love the whole world; his love for his country, his intense,
fanatical patriotism drops off without hurting him, without any
manifestation of violence. An uncultured man loves the pleasures of the
senses intensely; as he becomes cultured, he begins to love intellectual
pleasures, and his sense-enjoyments become less and less. No man can
enjoy a meal with the same gusto or pleasure as a dog or a wolf, but
those pleasures which a man gets from intellectual experiences and
achievements, the dog can never enjoy. At first, pleasure is in
association with the lowest senses; but as soon as an animal reaches a
higher plane of existence, the lower kind of pleasures becomes less
intense. In human society, the nearer the man is to the animal, the
stronger is his pleasure in the senses; and the higher and the more
cultured the man is, the greater is his pleasure in intellectual and
such other finer pursuits. So when a man gets even higher than the plane
of the intellect, higher than that of mere thought, when he gets to the
plane of spirituality and of divine inspiration, he finds there a state
of bliss, compared with which all the pleasures of the senses, or even
of the intellect, are as nothing. When the moon shines brightly, all the
stars become dim; and when the sun shines, the moon herself becomes dim.
The renunciation necessary for the attainment of Bhakti is not obtained
by killing anything, but just comes in as naturally as in the presence
of an increasingly stronger light, the less intense ones become dimmer
and dimmer until they vanish away completely. So this love of the
pleasures of the senses and of the intellect is all made dim and thrown
aside and cast into the shade by the love of God Himself.

That love of God grows and assumes a form which is called Para-Bhakti or
supreme devotion. Forms vanish, rituals fly away, books are superseded;
images, temples, churches, religions and sects, countries and
nationalities — all these little limitations and bondages fall off by
their own nature from him who knows this love of God. Nothing remains to
bind him or fetter his freedom. A ship, all of a sudden, comes near a
magnetic rock, and its iron bolts and bars are all attracted and drawn
out, and the planks get loosened and freely float on the water. Divine
grace thus loosens the binding bolts and bars of the soul, and it
becomes free. So in this renunciation auxiliary to devotion, there is no
harshness, no dryness no struggle, nor repression nor suppression. The
Bhakta has not to suppress any single one of his emotions, he only
strives to intensify them and direct them to God.

</div>
