---
title: 'THE HIGHER KNOWLEDGE AND THE HIGHER LOVE ARE ONE TO THE TRUE

  LOVER'

---
<div>

[←](universal_love_and_how_it_leads_to_self-surrender.htm)
[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Para-Bhakti or Supreme
Devotion](para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_triangle_of_love.htm)

  

CHAPTER VI

## THE HIGHER KNOWLEDGE AND THE HIGHER LOVE ARE ONE TO THE TRUE LOVER

The Upanishads distinguish between a higher knowledge and a lower
knowledge; and to the Bhakta there is really no difference between this
higher knowledge and his higher love (Parâ-Bhakti). The Mundaka
Upanishad says:

द्वे विद्ये वेदितव्ये इति ह स्म यद्ब्रह्मविदो वदन्ति। परा चैवापरा च॥
तत्रापरा ॠग्वेदो यजुर्वदः सामवेदोऽथर्ववेदः शिक्षा कल्पो व्याकरणं
निरुक्तं छन्दो ज्योतिषमिति। अथ परा यया तदक्षरमधिगम्यते॥

— "The knowers of the Brahman declare that there are two kinds of
knowledge worthy to be known, namely, the Higher (Parâ) and the lower
(Aparâ). Of these the lower (knowledge) consists of the Rig-Veda, the
Yajur-Veda, the Sâma-Veda, the Atharva-Veda, the Shikshâ (or the science
dealing with pronunciation and accent), the Kalpa (or the sacrificial
liturgy), grammar, the Nirukta (or the science dealing with etymology
and the meaning of words), prosody, and astronomy; and the higher
(knowledge) is that by which that Unchangeable is known."

The higher knowledge is thus clearly shown to be the knowledge of the
Brahman; and the *Devi-Bhâgavata* gives us the following definition of
the higher love (Para-Bhakti): "As oil poured from one vessel to another
falls in an unbroken line, so, when the mind in an unbroken stream
thinks of the Lord, we have what is called Para-Bhakti or supreme love."
This kind of undisturbed and ever-steady direction of the mind and the
heart to the Lord with an inseparable attachment is indeed the highest
manifestation of man's love to God. All other forms of Bhakti are only
preparatory to the attainment of this highest form thereof, viz the
Para-Bhakti which is also known as the love that comes after attachment
(Râgânugâ). When this supreme love once comes into the heart of man, his
mind will continuously think of God and remember nothing else. He will
give no room in himself to thoughts other than those of God, and his
soul will be unconquerably pure and will alone break all the bonds of
mind and matter and become serenely free. He alone can worship the Lord
in his own heart; to him forms, symbols, books, and doctrines are all
unnecessary and are incapable of proving serviceable in any way. It is
not easy to love the Lord thus. Ordinarily human love is seen to
flourish only in places where it is returned; where love is not returned
for love, cold indifference is the natural result. There are, however,
rare instances in which we may notice love exhibiting itself even where
there is no return of love. We may compare this kind of love, for
purposes of illustration, to the love of the moth for the fire; the
insect loves the fire, falls into it, and dies. It is indeed in the
nature of this insect to love so. To love because it is the nature of
love to love is undeniably the highest and the most unselfish
manifestation of love that may be seen in the world. Such love, working
itself out on the plane of spirituality, necessarily leads to the
attainment of Para-Bhakti.

</div>
