---
title: THE TRIANGLE OF LOVE

---
<div>

[←](the_higher_knowledge.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Para-Bhakti or Supreme
Devotion](para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_god_of_love_is_his_own_proof.htm)

  

CHAPTER VII

## THE TRIANGLE OF LOVE

We may represent love as a triangle, each of the angles of which
corresponds to one of its inseparable characteristics. There can be no
triangle without all its three angles; and there can be no true love
without its three following characteristics. The first angle of our
triangle of love is that love knows no bargaining. Wherever there is any
seeking for something in return, there can, be no real love; it becomes
a mere matter of shop-keeping. As long as there is in us any idea of
deriving this or that favour from God in return for our respect and
allegiance to Him, so long there can be no true love growing in our
hearts. Those who worship God because they wish Him to bestow favours on
them are sure not to worship Him if those favours are not forthcoming.
The Bhakta loves the Lord because He is lovable, there is no other
motive originating or directing this divine emotion of the true devotee.

We have heard it said that a great king once went into a forest and
there met a sage. He talked with the sage a little and was very much
pleased with his purity and wisdom. The king then wanted the sage to
oblige him by receiving a present from him. The sage refused to do so,
saying, "The fruits of the forest are enough food for me; the pure
streams of water flowing down from the mountains give enough drink for
me; the barks of the trees supply me with enough covering; and the caves
of the mountains form my home. Why should I take any present from you or
from anybody?" The king said, "Just to benefit me, sir, please take
something from my hands and please come with me to the city and to my
palace." After much persuasion, the sage at last consented to do as the
king desired and went with him to his palace. Before offering the gift
to the sage, the king repeated his prayers, saying, "Lord, give me more
children; Lord, give me more wealth; Lord, give me more territory; Lord,
keep my body in better health", and so on. Before the king finished
saying his prayer, the sage had got up and walked away from the room
quietly. At this the king became perplexed and began to follow him,
crying aloud, "Sir, you are going away, you have not received my gifts."
The sage turned round to him and said, "I do not beg of beggars. You are
yourself nothing but a beggar, and how can you give me anything? I am no
fool to think of taking anything from a beggar like you. Go away, do not
follow me."

There is well brought out the distinction between mere beggars and the
real lovers of God. Begging is not the language of love. To worship God
even for the sake of salvation or any other rewards equally degenerate.
Love knows no reward. Love is always for love's sake. The Bhakta loves
because he cannot help loving. When you see a beautiful scenery and fall
in love with it, you do not demand anything in the way of favour from
the scenery, nor does the scenery demand anything from you. Yet the
vision thereof brings you to a blissful state of the mind; it tones down
all the friction in your soul, it makes you calm, almost raises you, for
the time being, beyond your mortal nature and places you in a condition
of quiet divine ecstasy. This nature of real love is the first angle of
our triangle. Ask not anything in return for your love; let your
position be always that of the giver; give your love unto God, but do
not ask anything in return even from Him.

The second angle of the triangle of love is that love knows no fear.
Those that love God through fear are the lowest of human beings, quite
undeveloped as men. They worship God from fear of punishment. He is a
great Being to them, with a whip in one hand and the sceptre in the
other; if they do not obey Him, they are afraid they will be whipped. It
is a degradation to worship God through fear of punishment; such worship
is, if worship at all, the crudest form of the worship of love. So long
as there is any fear in the heart, how can there be love also? Love
conquers naturally all fear. Think of a young mother in the street and a
dog barking at her; she is frightened and flies into nearest house. But
suppose the next day she is in the street with her child, and a lion
springs upon the child. Where will be her position now? Of course, in
the very mouth of the lion, protecting her child. Love conquers all
fear. Fear comes from the selfish idea of cutting one's self off from
the universe. The smaller and the more selfish I make myself, the more
is my fear. If a man thinks he is a little nothing, fear will surely
come upon him. And the less you think of yourself as an insignificant
person, the less fear there will be for you. So long as there is the
least spark of fear in you there can be no love there. Love and fear are
incompatible; God is never to be feared by those who love Him. The
commandment, "Do not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain", the
true lover of God laughs at. How can there be any blasphemy in the
religion of love? The more you take the name of the Lord, the better for
you, in whatever way you may do it. You are only repeating His name
because you love Him.

The third angle of the love-triangle is that love knows no rival, for in
it is always embodied the lover's highest ideal. True love never comes
until the object of our love becomes to us our highest ideal. It may be
that in many cases human love is misdirected and misplaced, but to the
person who loves, the thing he loves is always his own highest idea. One
may see his ideal in the vilest of beings, and another in the highest of
beings; nevertheless, in every case it is the ideal alone that can be
truly and intensely loved. The highest ideal of every man is called God.
Ignorant or wise, saint or sinner, man or woman, educated or uneducated,
cultivated or uncultivated, to every human being the highest ideal is
God. The synthesis of all the highest ideals of beauty, of sublimity,
and of power gives us the completest conception of the loving and
lovable God.

These ideals exist in some shape or other in every mind naturally; they
form a part and parcel of all our minds. All the active manifestations
of human nature are struggles of those ideals to become realised in
practical life. All the various movements that we see around us in
society are caused by the various ideals in various souls trying to come
out and become concretised; what is inside presses on to come outside.
This perennially dominant influence of the ideal is the one force, the
one motive power, that may be seen to be constantly working in the midst
of mankind. It may be after hundreds of births, after struggling through
thousands of years, that man finds that it is vain to try to make the
inner ideal mould completely the external conditions and square well
with them; after realising this he no more tries to project his own
ideal on the outside world, but worships the ideal itself as ideal from
the highest standpoint of love. This ideally perfect ideal embraces all
lower ideals. Every one admits the truth of the saying that a lover sees
Helen's beauty on an Ethiop's brow. The man who is standing aside as a
looker-on sees that love is here misplaced, but the lover sees his Helen
all the same and does not see the Ethiop at all. Helen or Ethiop, the
objects of our love are really the centres round which our ideals become
crystallised. What is it that the world commonly worships? Not certainly
this all-embracing, ideally perfect ideal of the supreme devotee and
lover. That ideal which men and women commonly worship is what is in
themselves; every person projects his or her own ideal on the outside
world and kneels before it. That is why we find that men who are cruel
and blood-thirsty conceive of a bloodthirsty God, because they can only
love their own highest ideal. That is why good men have a very high
ideal of God, and their ideal is indeed so very different from that of
others.

</div>
