---
title: THE GOD OF LOVE IS HIS OWN PROOF

---
<div>

[←](the_triangle_of_love.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
3](../volume_3_contents.htm) / [Para-Bhakti or Supreme
Devotion](para-bhakti_or_supreme_devotion_contents.htm)
/ [→](human_representations_of_the_divine_ideal_of_love.htm)

  

CHAPTER VIII

## THE GOD OF LOVE IS HIS OWN PROOF

What is the ideal of the lover who has quite passed beyond the idea of
selfishness, of bartering and bargaining, and who knows no fear? Even to
the great God such a man will say, "I will give You my all, and I do not
want anything from You; indeed there is nothing that I can call my own."
When a man has acquired this conviction, his ideal becomes one of
perfect love, one of perfect fearlessness of love. The highest ideal of
such a person has no narrowness of particularity about it; it is love
universal, love without limits and bonds, love itself, absolute love.
This grand ideal of the religion of love is worshipped and loved
absolutely as such without the aid of any symbols or suggestions. This
is the highest form of Para-Bhakti — the worship of such an
all-comprehending ideal as the ideal; all the other forms of Bhakti are
only stages on the way to reach it.

All our failures and all our successes in following the religion of love
are on the road to the realisation of that one ideal. Object after
object is taken up, and the inner ideal is successively projected on
them all; and all such external objects are found inadequate as
exponents of the ever-expanding inner ideal and are naturally rejected
one after another. At last the aspirant begins to think that it is vain
to try to realise the ideal in external objects, that all external
objects are as nothing when compared with the ideal itself; and, in
course of time, he acquires the power of realising the highest and the
most generalised abstract ideal entirely as an abstraction that is to
him quite alive and real. When the devotee has reached this point, he is
no more impelled to ask whether God can be demonstrated or not, whether
He is omnipotent and omniscient or not. To him He is only the God of
Love; He is the highest ideal of love, and that is sufficient for all
his purposes. He, as love, is self-evident. It requires no proofs to
demonstrate the existence of the beloved to the lover. The
magistrate-Gods of other forms of religion may require a good deal of
proof prove Them, but the Bhakta does not and cannot think of such Gods
at all. To him God exists entirely as love. "None, O beloved, loves the
husband for the husband's sake, but it is for the sake of the Self who
is in the husband that the husband is loved; none, O beloved, loves the
wife for the wife's sake, but it is for the sake of the Self who is in
the wife that the wife is loved."

It is said by some that selfishness is the only motive power in regard
to all human activities. That also is love lowered by being
particularised. When I think of myself as comprehending the Universal,
there can surely be no selfishness in me; but when I, by mistake, think
that I am a little something, my love becomes particularized and
narrowed. The mistake consists in making the sphere of love narrow and
contracted. All things in the universe are of divine origin and deserve
to be loved; it has, however, to be borne in mind that the love of the
whole includes the love of the parts. This whole is the God of the
Bhaktas, and all the other Gods, Fathers in Heaven, or Rulers, or
Creators, and all theories and doctrines and books have no purpose and
no meaning for them, seeing that they have through their supreme love
and devotion risen above those things altogether. When the heart is
purified and cleansed and filled to the brim with the divine nectar of
love, all other ideas of God become simply puerile and are rejected as
being inadequate or unworthy. Such is indeed the power of Para-Bhakti or
Supreme Love; and the perfected Bhakta no more goes to see God in
temples and churches; he knows no place where he will not find Him. He
finds Him in the temple as well as out of the temple, he finds Him in
the saint's saintliness as well as in the wicked man's wickedness,
because he has Him already seated in glory in his own heart as the one
Almighty inextinguishable Light of Love which is ever shining and
eternally present.

</div>
