+++
title = "The matta-mayUra vaMsha of mantra mArga siddhAntin-s"

+++
An important, but neglected aspect of the history of India before the
cataclysmic Islamic interruption, was the role played by the
mantra-mArga siddhAnta shaiva-s in the unification of the country. We
had earlier spoken of our historical clansman, the great
[varmashiva](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/06/varmashiva.html) of
vodAmayUtA, who converted to this lineage of shaiva-s and had
considerable influence with the royal patron of his age. But this just
one point in the broader scheme of things. A truly influential but now
forgotten branch of these shaiva-s was the branch of matta-mayUra, whose
history now can only be reconstructed from various scraps of information
such as the numerous inscriptions from various parts of India. The idea
here is not to enter into a detailed discussion of the controversial and
investigative aspects of this history – to be frank my own studies on
the matter are currently slow-moving due to preoccupation with
interesting problems in other areas of research. We simply present a few
of note here.

Their own tradition states that when rudra appeared at dArukavana to
perform fearsome deeds, he initiated a lineage of muni-s into the
tantras of the Urdhvasrotas. The teachers of this sampradAya descended
from this first initiate propagated these tantras, studying in the
forests around kadaMbaguha, shankhamaThika, and toraMbi all in the
region south of the charmanvati (Chambal) River near Gwalior and
Amardaka in Maharashtra (auNDhA nAganAtha). In the 800s of the CE a
brahmin of this lineage named purandara practiced yoga in the Himalayas
and became a siddha puruSha. The local chieftain avantivarman of the
matta-mayUra dynAsty became a student of purandara in the mantra shAstra
and as dakShiNa conferred his capital city of matta-mayUra to his guru.
purandara built a great maTha here and continued to teach the tantras
here; after which his school and sampradAya came to be known as the
matta-mayUra vaMsha. He then founded another maTha at raNipatra (in
direction of Jhansi traveling from Gwalior) where he consecrated his
student kavacha-shiva as his successor. His student in turn was
sadA-shiva, followed by hR^idaya-shiva, followed by the notable
vyoma-shiva. vyoma-shiva was a great exponent of the vaisheShika
darshana and developed the Hindu atomic theory. In this line came
lambakarNa, who migrated to dhAra, the capital of the paramAras and
founded the gorATika maTha. This maTha became associated with
[bhoja-deva
paramara](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/12/raja-bhoja-glory-and-tragedy-of.html),
one of the greatest kings of the world, who wrote the famed work on the
siddhAnta doctrines known as the tattva prakAsha. In this line of the
matta-mayUravaMsha arose vimala-shiva and his successor the illustrious
IshAnashiva mishra. Like wise distributed throughout the country where
various mantra shAstra proponents stemming from the matta-mayUra vaMsha
and were teachers for various kings of shilahara, chola, rAShTrakUTa,
chAlukya, paramAra and bhUpAla dynasties. Thus spreading over the
country they played a major role in unifying the country even as the
tripartite struggle of Indian history was playing out.

IshAna shiva mishra was definitely a major figure of this lineage. His
paddhati covering all aspects of the siddhAnta mantra-mArga survives to
date. However, there is much controversy as to whether the paddhati as
we have is the original work of his. Provided below is the list of
prayogas that need to be mastered by a mantra-mArga shaiva as per the
tradition of IshAna shiva (described in the mantra pAda section of his
massive paddhati):  
1\) prapa\~ncha gaNapati 2) mahAgaNapati 3) vinAyaka ekAkShara mantra 4)
siddhivinAyaka 5) uchChiShTa vighneshvara 6) dashabhuja gaNapati 7)
tripurA-saMgraha 8) haMsa-vAgIshvarI 9) dashAkShara vAgIshvarI 10)
siddha-vAgIshvarI 11) shrI-hR^idaya 12) sAmAnya shakti-pUja 13)
hR^illekhA-pUja 14) bhuvanAdipati pUja 15) ekAdashAvarNa-pUja 16)
khadga-sAdhana 17) tvaritA 18) tvaritA-pa\~njara 19) nitya-klinnA 20)
vajraprastAriNi 21) nityA tryakShari and ekAkSharI mantras 22)
mAtR^ikA-mAlini 23) gaurI 24) mahAshakti 25) durga-pa\~chakaM 26)
vanadurga krama 27) shUlini 28) vasudharA 29) bhUhR^idaya 30) annapUrNA
31) devI-mantra prayoga 32) mAta\~NgI/shyAmalA 33) sUrya 34) bhAskara
ShADAkShara 35) saMgrAmavijaya 36) mArtANDabhairava 37) shaiva
aShTAkSharI 38) tantric mR^ityu\~njaya 39) vedic
mR^ityu\~njaya/tryaMbaka 40) shatAkShara shiva mantra 41) dakShiNAmUrti
mantra 42) aghorAstra 43) pAshupatAstra 44) vyomavyApin 45) chintAmaNi
46) shAstA 47) kShetrapAla 48) chaNDeshvara 49) indra 50) jambhala 51)
karNa yakSha 52) yakShINi prayogas 53) vaiShNava aShTAkSharI 54) viShNu
hR^idaya 55) narahari mantra 56) nR^isiMha rasAyana prayoga 57)
nR^isiMha mAlA mantra 58) mahAvarAha mantra 59) sudarshana prayogas 60)
trailokya mohana viShNu.

Thus one can see that the mantra mArga shaiva-s were pretty eclectic
acquiring mastery over a wide swath of the mantra shAstra, over and
beyond the basic shaiva mantras, like the pa\~nchAkShari and
pa\~nchavaktra. The resemblance between the Ishana-shiva mantra pAda and
other mantra manuals is rather obvious. Many mantras described here
overlap with the shAradA tilakA of lakShmaNa deshikendra, prapa\~ncha
sAra presented by sha\~Nkara bhagavatpAda, the phetkAriNi tantra, mantra
mahoddadhi of mahIdhara the yajurvedin, shrividyArNava of vidyAraNya
yati, and the tantra-sAra-saMgraha (sammuchaya) of chennas nArAyaNan
nambUtiripAD. The resemblance with the latter is particularly striking,
because after the mantra section the ishAna shiva mantra-pAda gives a
brief coverage of topics of relating to the viSha tantras and viSha
prayogas that are extensively covered in the work of the nambUtiri.

From the citations it is clear that ishAnashiva was after the
prapa\~nchasAra and used it as a guide. There is absolutely no evidence
that he used the shArada tilakaM, shrIvidyArNava or mantra-mahodaddhi.
At the same time he cites the works of king bhoja-deva paramAra under
the name bhojendra, which is consistent with his belonging to the dhAra
branch of the matta-mayUra vaMsha. This is generally consistent with the
idea that he probably lived in the century after bhoja. This is also
supported indirectly by the fact that kShatriya vairochana, the student
of ishAna-shiva mishra, cites kumAra-shiva, the notable matta-mayUra
vaMsha AchArya at vArANasi, who initiated the chAlukya king mUlarAja in
the late 900s of CE into the mantra shAstra. Thus, ishAna-shiva should
have been after both mUlArAja and bhoja-deva and around the time of the
kShatriya chief dvAranatha who was the father of vairochana-deva. It
appears most likely that IshAna-shiva’s mantra pAda served as the model
for the work the nambUthiri while composing tantra-sAra-saMgraha.
However, it is clear that both of them drew their viSha-tantra related
work from the magico-medical treatise kAshyapa saMhitA or a work related
to it. The chera magician seems to have directly provided the material
from this work in the TSS rather than abbreviating it as done by
ishAna-shiva in his mantra-pAda. In contrast he seems to have contracted
the ishAna-shiva mantra pAda in composing his mantra section in the TSS.
