+++
title = "Some notes on the kAshyapa tradition"

+++
There is much reason to believe that the kAshyapa tradition is a real
coherent tradition of magico-medical practices in post-Vedic India that
survived in some form or the other in the midst of other traditions
until recently. At some point, after we discovered the coherence of this
tradition, we had thought of a 3-way collaboration with shAradA and R to
produce a more scholarly piece on the various aspects of this tradition
— both in terms of the printed texts and what ever little information
we could gather about unpublished manuscripts of this tradition.
However, the travails from saMsAra-bandha-s have prevented us from doing
this. In any case here are some notes on the topic.

Many tangled lines of our investigations over the years led to this body
of unique sanskR^it literature that we came to term the kAshyapa
tradition.  
1\) The tracing the post-atharvaNic development of medicinal practices
has lead most students to the obvious successors in the form of the
great saMhitA-s of charaka and sushruta, which represent early high
points in the development of Hindu medicine. However, more careful
investigation also leads to the now incompletely preserved but fairly
extensive text of early Hindu medicine the kAshyapa tantraM (also called
saMhitA, hence forth KT) that covers a wide range of topics especially
pediatrics.  
2\) The investigation of the early kaumAra mythology and liturgy leads
to the same KT that has extensive chapters on kumara and his graha-s,
revatI, mukhamaNDikA and ShaShThi, and their pacification in the context
of application of pediatric drugs. It provides the complete narrative of
kAshyapa on how devI revatI dispatched by skanda destroyed the asura
kanyA dIrghajihvI and others.  
3\) The investigation of the early history of Hindu zoology — the study
of snakes, insects, arachnids and rodents leads to another kAshyapa
saMhitA or the kAshyapa garuDa saMhitA (henceforth KS-G).  
4\) The study of the successors of the atharvaN tradition on toxicology
and the link to the treatment of snake bites obviously leads to the same
KS-G.  
5\) The search of remnants of the once extensive shaiva garuDa tantra-s
also points to the KS-G which is the source book of several garuDa
prayogas.  
6\) The common section on magico-medicinal practices presented in the
tantric treatises of the ishAnashiva mishra and the Chera magician
chenas nArAyaNan nambuthiripAD also suggest that their source was the
same KS-G.

As we can currently identify it this kAshyapa tradition covers the
following texts: 1) The kAshyapa saMhitA, KS-G 2) The kAshyapa
tantra/saMhitA- KT 3) The manuscript termed kaShyapa saMhitA of
shiva-pArvati saMvAda, which covers several diseases like tuberculosis,
leprosy, tumors and the like. 4) The kAshyapIya roganidAnaM also on
diverse diseases. The paippalAdas in their assorted late productions
preserve a text termed garuDopaniShat. While not mentioning kAshyapa its
contents suggest a close relationship with KS-G. The viSha sections of
ishAnashiva paddhati and tantra-sAra-saMgraha also are derivatives of
the kAshyapa works.

The KT is wider in its scope and its surviving portion covers a variety
of medical topics under the following headings:

sUtra sthAnaM: 1) lehAdhyAya- covers pediatric drugs which are
administered by licking. 2) kShirotpatti- covers suckling children,
problems relating to milk-borne infection, like those attributed to
skanda grahas. 3) danta janmika- the treatment of conditions of children
growing teeth and defects of milk teeth 4) chUDakarNIya- the issue
relating to piercing of ear-lobes. 5) snehAdhyAya- on lipids and oils.
The identification and treatment of lipid metabolism related conditions.
6) sveda- sweat and techniques to induce sweating to remove toxins from
the body. 7) upakalpanIya-mainly dealing with digestive problems. 8)
vedana- a large section describing various types of morbidity and
painful symptoms associated with all parts of the body. 9)
chikitsAsaMpAdanIya- mainly physicians qualities and qualifications 10)
roga- detailed description of diseases and their causes. Notes the
connection between blood physiology and bile production in liver. 11)
lakShaNa- physical examination of children for bodily defects and signs
of disease. It also mentions 22 physio-personalities types.

vimAna-sthAna: 1) shiShyopakrama- qualifications of medical students and
the aspect of medical education

shArIra sthAna: sense organs and saMkhya thought. 1) asmAngotrIya- sex
and uterus 2) garbhAvakrAnti- a description of fetal development. 3)
sharIra viShaya- anatomy. Discusses amongst other things the arteries
and veins and the sweat glands. 4) jAtisUtrIya- discusses reproduction
and child birth related issues.

indrIya sthAna: 1) oSHadha beShaja covers a melange of topics including
dreams caused by the seizure by agents of kArttikeya, and some
properties of drugs.

chikitsA sthAnaM: 1) jvara chikitsA- diagnosis of fevers. 2)
garbhiNIchiktisA- attendance to diseases of pregnant women. 3)
duShprajAtAchikitsA- dealing with birth defects. 4) bAlagraha- deals
with the stories of the emergence of the retinue of kumAra and various
magico-medical means of dealing with seizure by the agents of
kArttikeya, like revatI, pUtanA, mukhamaNDikA and ShaShThi. 5)
plIharoga- spleen disease. Correctly identifies that blood flows through
the spleen sinuses. 6) udAvarta- colon diseases. 7) rAjayakShma-
tuberculosis and its treatment. Mentions a secret drug involving frog
skin secretions in treating the condition. 8) gulma- classification and
treatment of tumors. 9) kuShTha- diagnosis and treament of leprosy. 10)
mUtra-kR^ichChra- urinary tract infections, complications of diabetes
and their treatment. 11) dvivraNa- classification, identification and
treatment of boils and sores. 12) pratishyAya 13) uroghAta- cardiac
problems 14) shotha- inflammations and their treatment 15) kR^imi-
helminth infestations, especially of the alimentary tract. 16)
madAtyAya- alcoholism. 17) phakka- polio diagnosis and management. 18)
dhAtrI- nursing diseases

siddhi-sthAnaM: 1) rAja putrIyA 2) tri-lakShaNA 3) vamana virechanIyA 4)
nastaH karmIyA 5) kriyA 6) basti-karmIyA 7)pa\~nchakarmIyA 9) ma\~Ngala

kalpasthAna: 1) dhUpa- fumigation and use of smokes in various
procedures like disinfection and sedation. 2) lashuna-preparation of
garlic for medical purposes. 3) kaTu-taila- making of medicinal oils in
connection to spleen disease. 4) ShaT- mainly concentrates on eye
infections. 5) shatapuShpA-shatAvarI- describes preparations from fennel
and aloe plants for different purposes. 6) revatI- this kalpa contains
an account from the kaumara lore relating to how kumAra and his agents
destroyed the asuras. It the goes on to describe the magico-medical
treatment for pediatric diseases attributed to agents of kumAra headed
by revatI. 7) bhojana kalpa- summary of basic nutritional and dietary
issues. 8) visheSha- deals with sannipAta jvara. 9) saMhitA- a summary
kalpa on the kAshyapa tantra. It gives the following origin mythology
for the tantra: Diseases first emerged from the wrath of rudra that
destroyed the sacrifice of prajApati dakSha. Then kashyapa produced this
great saMhitA of the medical lore counter the ravages of disease.
jIvaka, the son of the bhArgava R^ishi R^ichika mastered this medical
lore of kAshyapa and systematized and summarized it as the kAshyapa
tantra even as a young boy. But when he went to teach medicine the other
vipra-s refused to take him seriously as he was just a boy. He then he
took a bath in a lake formed by the ga\~NgA and emerged as a serious
elderly man. The R^iShis now learned from him calling him
vR^iddha-jIvaka. Subsequently the tantra was lost, but the yakSha
anAyAsa recovered the text and restored it. Then a descendant of jIvaka
of the vAtysa clan of bhArgava-s pleased the yakSha with rites and
re-obtained the tantra and propounded it in the kali yuga.

khila: This is a large appendix that follows the main saMhitA and
provides further technical details on many of the topics in the saMhitA
as well as other topics like dermatology.

Thus, the KT resembles the more famous early medical saMhitA-s like
those of charaka or sushruta. However, it is distinct in having a major
body of kaumara material and several prayoga ritual practices that
accompany the conventional medical practices typical of Hindu medicine.
It provides one of the most detailed early accounts of pediatric
practices and in this connection deploys several kaumAra prayoga-s to
the kaumAra deities.
