+++
title = "Do we have control over our decisions/actions"

+++
We set out on an utterly free afternoon on a long and interesting drive
towards the place known as the Sahayadri. We passed by Mis-creant’s
house but resisted the temptation to call on her, then we passed the
hilly outcrops where the rough rowdy lived, and arrived at the spot
where the muni’s horse had fallen as he was fleeing the black dasyus of
viTmaru. Then we arrived at Sujata’s house. To our surprise we saw
Mis-creant with Sujata and they excitedly told us how they were planning
to ply the bhUta-chakra with K. We knew how boring that would get and
proceeded on to the Sahayadri. There we met our good friend who
mysteriously passed out of our life 2 months after the Great War 1.

\~\*\~\*\~\*\~

Many years latter he stumbled upon these pages and contacted Sujata to
ask if they were my doing. Sujata did not know of their existence till
that point, and reached me to ask if they were my productions. I heaved
a sigh of relief that I had hardly mentioned Sujata on these pages. I
was struck by the fact this ancient friend of mine could recognize me
from my style of writing after more than 16 years. I never knew it
remained so distinctive after all this time. I ran into an aged
mathematician who developed algorithms for text similarity recognition
on the elevator. He told me that his latest algorithm identified a
strong signal in all my writings on distinct scientific topics with a
high level of confidence. So may be even the neural networks in my
friend’s brain did the same. However, it did trigger some panic: What if
some names mentioned on these pages in saMdhyA bhAsha figure the
identity of the writer in the same way. But it also triggered other
darker thoughts. Well over 16 years had passed by, and we saw that we
were no youngsters now. That fire of youth seemed a thing of the past,
almost like the condemnation from sha\~Nkara’s poem, inspired by a
dotard trying to master paNini’s DukR^i\~nkaraNa. Yet, there were some
like our coeval mahAkAyini , who, to our wonderment, awe and even a
tinge of consternation, went about with un-diminishing appetite and
success in her endless sexual, alcoholic and substance-inspired
adventures. Some felt their ships were still sailing while others saw
them floundering like that of Odysseus on the distant coast of the sea
of sorrow. Even him who first narrated to us that tale was now with
vaivasvata.

\~\*\~\*\~\*\~

At my good friend’s house we switched on the TV to watch a match. These
days I boycott this class of matches. Shrikanth was batting with much
finesse and dispatching the ghazi ruffians all over the place. Then
inexplicably he guided the ball down to the gaping maw of a gleeful
Turk. We were distraught, even as the Greenmen from the North-West
frontier province went corybantic on the TV screen. At that point my
friend asked: “tell me, do we really have control over our decisions or
actions? Surely Shrikanth could not have possibly intended to play that
shot.”

\~\*\~\*\~\*\~

It was a grim winter day, as most true winter days are– the abhorrent
draft wafted a dead odor and a sprinkling of snow. We were on our
solitary path in the quest to satisfy agni who is omnipresent. O
jAtavedas- you who dwell on Earth, the mid-regions and heavens these are
all oblations for you. The moon was rising, and this was the graha of
soma for the deva-s. All around us their presence was felt as the wrath
of vAta or the terrible rudra.  
“vAtasya nu mahimAnaM rathasya rujanneti stanayan-nasya ghoShaH”  
We were ruing our fate at the battles of pAShaNDa-parvata and the field
beyond indrANI’s stream. We asked that question again: “Why despiting
being fully aware had we glided the ball so smoothly into the hands of
the waiting slips”

\~\*\~\*\~\*\~

I had then answered my friend in a manner that remains surprisingly
unaltered. Some may think that such thinking is the cause for the big
mistakes in the game of life, while others might point out that
precocious wisdom is of no value.  
No\! We do not have control over our decisions or actions. The net
vector of our decisions and actions is the resultant of our biology and
the external inputs that the biological learning system receives. There
are many innate signals, most of which we do not completely understand,
but clearly all evidence is in the favor of our tendencies being
biologically determined. Hormones are the strongest and best understood
of our biological determinants: testosterone and estrogen are the
foremost. Then there are the neuropeptides some of which might be
considered hormones additionally: Oxytocin, vasopressin and galanin
being some of the key entities of this class. Of course there are the
regular neurotransmitters: acetylcholine, serotonin, dopamine, nitric
oxide and the whole slew of peptides and small molecules. Thus, the
decisions and action we reach are all a probabilistic consequence of the
expression and delivery of the neurotransmitters or hormones and their
receptors.

On this underlying uneven canvas acts the software or the memes. Thus,
some people might congenitally do dislikable actions due their
neurochemistry, or as in the case of the Abrahamists due to their
memetic downloads from pre-infected Abrahamists. Thus, we may conclude
that there is nothing like real freedom of decisions or actions. Natural
selection is merely shaping the biological determinants thereof such
that decisions or actions do not efface fitness of the organism with a
high probablity. Those of us who make those big mistakes in life may be
at the adverse edge of natural selection, much as a shishupAla’s head in
the the pANDava sabha.
