+++
title = "Anandrao Bhosle"

+++
This remarkable issue was brought to my attention by a person who
specifically wishes to remain un-named on these pages on account of
certain private reasons related to this narrative. It is clear that
Shahji was a rather distinguished military leader and he had transmitted
this genetically influenced trait to not only his famous son Shivaji,
but also the forgotten elder son
[Sambhaji](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/some-notes-on-shahji-and-sambhaji.html).
In reality he also passed these genes on to another son who has been
largely forgotten in modern Maharatta histories. When Shahji was was in
Bijapur having left his wife in the environs of Pune, he secretly took
up a woman of unknown provenance as a sexual partner. This fact would
have been quite improper for a well-bred Maratha of the era, and was
accordingly hushed up, except for the Shedgaonkar bakhar that explicitly
mentions it. As a result of this union was born a son called Anandrao
Bhosle. He was placed in the custody of the young deshastha brAhmaNa
Venkoji Datto and subsequently served in the Shahji’s command at Bijapur
in his early youth. He and Venkoji Datto then left Shahji’s service and
moved over to Pune and enrolled themselves with Shivaji to defend the
Hindu Svarajya. The Sabhasad chronicle also confirms this by mentioning
that mentions that “Venkoji Datto, an able brahmin officer of great
accomplishment, and Shahji’s son Anandrao joined Shivaji’s service at
Pune after leaving Shahji at Bijapur”. Shivaji appointed both of them to
the rank of Panch-hazari (commander of 5000), which was a high rank in
the Maratha army of the time that could possibly be attained only due
high military ability or perhaps genetic relationship in the case of
Anandrao. In any case Anandrao clearly proved himself to be of high
military distinction. They were placed under the Sarnobat of the Maratha
army, Prataprao Gujjar and marched with him for the attack on Surat.
Following the plundering of Surat, Daud Khan Quereshi led the Moslem
hordes along with Ikhlas Khan and suddenly ambushed Shivaji between Vani
and Dindori in Northern Maharashtra. Shivaji quickly divided his forces
into four divisions and began harrying the Mughals avoiding open
confrontation. He personally led one division, even as he gave command
of another to Anandrao. Anandrao distinguished himself on the field by
leading the Marathas to safety when the Mogols pressed with great
ferocity on his division. This distractionary move allowed Shivaji to
personally attack the Mogol army after his division united with that of
Anandrao’s and kill 3000 Moslems in the encounter that followed.

Subsequently, Awrangzeb arranged for a combined attack on the Marathas
by the divisions of Daud Khan, Ikhlas Khan, Diler Khan and Bahadur Khan.
Diler Khan began a systematic massacre of Hindus in the vicinity of Pune
to draw Shivaji away while Ikhlas Khan took Salheri and Mulher forts in
the north. In the fierce encounter Shivaji’s childhood friend Suryarao
Kakde was killed. Shivaji immediately dispatched his brAhmaNa prime
minister Moropant Pingle along with Prataprao and Anandrao to destroy
Ikhlas Khan. They took the Mogol army on the open field — an important
point in Hindu history because it showed the Marathas were now fully
capable of engaging the one of the best equipped and most ably lead
forces of the world in plain open combat. Anandrao showed exemplary
valor in this this battle in which the Mogols faced a major defeat with
several thousands dead. This phenomenal victory, one the greatest of
Shivaji’s army, was in no small part due to the strategy and on-field
leadership of the brAhmaNa Moropant Pingle, but the valor of Anandrao
and Prataprao on the field were equally important. They captured the
Mogol general Ikhlas Khan on the field. As result Anandrao was elevated
to the peculiar rank of Haft-hazari- a rank that was for all practical
purposes equivalent to the Sarnobat himself. This unusual rank, which
Shivaji rarely awarded at that time, again shows that there was some
special deal about Anandrao.

After the brAhmaNa officer Ravlekar conquered the fort of Panhala, the
Adil Shahis were shaken and dispatched their ace general Bahlol Khan to
retake the fort. The Mogols immediately made common cause with their
Moslem brethren to attack the Maharattas, and held a meeting to plan a
combined strike on the Marathas. But Shivaji got wind of this plan and
dispatched his half-brother Anandrao and commander Prataprao, each with
around 7500 troops to preemptively attack Bijapur. The Maratha generals
rapidly surged forth and fell on Bahlol Khan at Umrani close to Bijapur
before the Mogols could join him. On a hot April day the Marathas
cut off the water supply of the Moslems and fell upon them in a
combined attack by Prataprao and Anandrao. The Moslems were completely
outclassed in the fierce battle, the Marathas routed them, and Bahlol
Khan was completely surrounded by the former. He secretly sent a message
to Prataprao saying that he had no intention to fight Shivaji and was
only making a show. Prataprao foolishly fell to the ploy and let Bahlol
Khan go scotch-free. Prataprao then continued on to invade the Kanada
country. Bahlol Khan retaliated with a replenished army and defeated the
Maratha army. A little later on vijaya dashami day Shivaji worshiped
bhavAnI and initiated a new campaign as he saw it as holy moment for
war. He invaded the Kanada country again with the aim of taking both the
uplands and the coast, when he got the news that Bahlol, who was let off
by his Sarnobat, was returning to attack him. Furious, Shivaji sent a
stinging letter to Prataprao that he need not show his face again until
he destroyed Bahlol Khan.

Prataprao pricked by the letter sought Bahlol, and learned that he was
fording the pass of Nessari just south of Kolhapur. He responded
impulsively and charged at the Moslems with just 6 other men leaving the
rest of his army far behind. What followed was a disastrous encounter in
which the seven heroes went down fighting in a blaze, leaving a trail of
slaughtered enemy troops. Shivaji deeply regretted his letter that lead
to his ace general’s death and made sure that his clansmen were
well-provided and promised Rajaram to Prataprao’s daughter. Anandrao
Bhosle was now made acting Sarnobat and Shivaji asked him to punish the
Moslems severely. He ably rallied the dejected Maratha troops. He made a
deep thrust into the Bijapur territory and bore down on Bahlol Khan. At
this point the Mogol army under Diler Khan came to the aid of Bahlol
Khan and fell on Anandrao. Anandrao seeing himself outnumbered decided
to resort to the classic tactic of feigned retreat like that used by the
Mongols and with his cavalry rode into Karnataka at extraordinary speed.
The Khans unable to keep up gave up, with Bahlol Khan retreating to
Kohlapur, which he had taken earlier, and Dilir retreating northwards
after a failed attempt on Panhala. Within a month Anandrao struck at
Sampgaon near Bankapur which was Bahlol Khan’s jagir and looted his
treasury carrying away 150,000 gold coins and 3000 ox-loads of other
plunder. He demolished a Dutch outpost there and plundered it. Alarmed
Bahlol Khan and Khizr Khan tried to intercept the Marathas, but Anandrao
led a strong retaliation killing Khizr Khan and his brother and putting
to flight Bahlol Khan. In the process the Marathas captured several
war-elephants, several hundreds of horses and the Khan’s cash reserves.
He then avoided any further brushes with the enemy and rapidly retreated
to the Maratha territory. Soon there after Shivaji held a grand review
of troops at Chiplun in the Konkan and appointed [Hambirrao
Mohite](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/06/death-of-hambirrao.html)
as the Sarnobat in place of Prataprao, recognizing his great deeds in
the attack on the Mogols during the invasion of Baglana, Khandesh and
Ahmedabad.

Anandrao also played a notable role in the campaigns of Shivaji in South
India: In early 1678 Anandrao led a division of troops along with
Shivaji in the capture of Lakshmeshvar and Gadag in Karnataka from the
Adilshahi control. In middle of the same year he along with the able
brAhmaNa general Hanumante conquered the fort of Vellore from the Adil
Shahis and took the region. He was then sent north by Shivaji in the
next year to deal with the Mogol garrison in central Maharastra near
Akola. He scored a great victory on the Mogols capturing the fort of
Balapur from them. Then in late 1679 when Dilir Khan invaded Bijapur,
the British simultaneously attacked the Marathas on the West coast.
Shivaji facing a possible 3 front war invaded Khandesh along with
another division under Hambirrao Mohite to counter-attack the Mogols
while he sent Anandrao with 10,000 troops to pincer the Mogols by
appearing before Bijapur. Angre was dispatched to lead the Maratha navy
against the Britons. Anandrao moved just south of Pandharpur and
attacked the Mogol army. Through a constant series of harrying attacks
he kept frustrating Dilir’s attempts to besiege Bijapur. Dilir to his
alarm realized that he might be caught between two Maharatta armies
escaped by making a westwards diversion in course of which he
slaughtered many Hindus. After this last successful attack on the Mogols
trying to besiege Bijapur Anandrao Bhosle passes out of Maratha history.

The accounts indicate that clearly he had, like his elder half-brother,
inherited Shahji military abilities and was a notable commander of
Shivaji’s army, probably as capable of Hambirrao himself. Yet, most
Maharatta accounts are muted about him. Further, while Shivaji clearly
trusting him with many important operations, and appointing him to an
unusual high command, never really made him Sarnobat, even though he
briefly acted in this capacity. Why was this ? Perhaps his birth outside
the wedlock was a black mark that precluded him from occupying such a
rank without a scandal. Perhaps Shivaji was also concerned that his
blood relationship to Anandrao might have possible consequences on his
successors if he legitimized his half-brother with a formal high
appointment.
