+++
title = "Mongolian rAmAyaNa"

+++
The vaiShNava journeying beyond the hallowed Oddiyana pITha, where he
had performed the worship of vArAhI, and karNamoTini, arrived at the
oasis of Khotan. Having obtained several manuscripts of various Indic
texts in Central Asia he moved further ahead on horse to make a
rendezvous with his Mongolian guide. Having mounted a fresh horse and
penetrated deep into the steppes they arrived after a week at the remote
outposts of what was once the organizing ground of the great Oirat
emperors, Esen Taiji and Amasanji Taiji. There he found a guru in the
lineage of the mysterious brahmin wanderer Zaya paNDita who had visited
the courts of the Chingizid Kha’khans like Mangku and Kublai, journeying
from Bihar to Tibet to Mongolia. On being introduced to the vaiShNava he
invited with respect and showed him an aged manuscripts in the Oirat
script. They were said to be translations and transcriptions of works
with Zaya paNDita. Two of them contained the tale of rAmachandra. One of
them was the ikShvAku vaMsha giving the history of the ikShvAku kings
from manu down to the nAstIka siddhArtha, and his sAkhya branch of
ikShvAkus of kapilavastu. In this the tale of rAmachandra was
considerably developed.

The second was called the tale of king jIvaka and his son. Here jIvaka
had 3 wives but no son. He was told by his mantra-vAdins that he would
need to get a flower of the audumbara tree and make his wives eat it for
them to bear a son. He wandered to the oceans and found the said flower
on an island in the middle of the ocean. He gave it to his wives and the
eldest of them gave birth to a son called rAma. When he grew up he
assumed kingship and ruled his people as the ideal king. He invited a
buddha and let him spread the dharma.

Then a rAkShasa king from lanka came to distract the R^iShis in the land
in the form of an antelope. They took the help of rAma and jIvaka and
they shot stones to blind the antelope’s eyes and drove it away. In
return the vipra-s conferred invincibility on rAma.

In the past the rAkShasa king of lanka had a daughter. The court
soothsayer said that she would destroy lanka if alive. So they threw her
into the sea in a chest. The chest floated to jambudvIpa and was picked
up by a tiller. The farmer brought up the girl sItA (Mongolian word for
furrow used) and gave her to king rAma as a wife because of her great
beauty.

In the meantime dasha-grIva became emperor of lanka and was the lord of
ten chiefs. He came to known from his sister that rAma had a beautiful
wife and wanted to abduct her. So he sent mArIcha in the form of an
antelope to entice rAma away while he kidnapped sItA and took her to
Lanka. Then rAma in search of her came to the kingdom of apes where he
saw two apes fighting. One of them called for rAma’s help and so on his
behalf rAma killed the other ape vAlI. This surviving ape sugrIva gave
his army under his commander hanumAn to rAma and aided him to retrieve
sItA from Lanka.

rAma invaded Lanka with the army of apes and fought a fierce battle with
the rAkShasas. The rAkShasas on their flying horses started fleeing
north and riding through the steppes drawing rAma into an ambush. Then
the great golden eagle garuDa helped rAma, as it had come to the aid of
Chingiz Kha’Khan when he fought Shidurgo of the Hsia’Hsia. Flying down
on the demons it took away their food reserves and blocked their paths
with gusts of wind. Trapped thus they were forced to turn back and were
met by rAma and the apes and slain. Then rAma decided to seek out
dasha-grIva and kill him. He had a palace in Lanka called Bolor Toli
whose ruins were apparently still there when the navy of Kublai Kha’Khan
had attacked Lanka. The Bolor Toli had a hundred mirrors and so no one
could tell which was the real dasha-grIva and which were his
reflections. Thus he would keep evading his enemy and no one could
shooting. The intelligent ape hanumAn detected the real dasha-grIva and
signaled to rAma who killed him with a single shot from his arrow. Then
he returned to kapilavastu with sItA and happily ruled ever after.

Then two prayoga vidhis for hanumAn and sugrIva were given.

This Mongolian version is congruent to that of the naked jainas narrated
in the mahApurANa of puShpadanta.
