+++
title = "paschimAmnAyeshvarI and shiva of the shikhA"

+++
We first salute the master of the school, matsyendra and ku\~nkumAMbA
who was his kulA\~NganA without whom none of these mysteries would be
known to us mortals.  

“siddhamAtA vibhuH shabdarAshIti yonyArNavI vAgvishuddhAsi vAgeshvarI”  
That provides the inspiration of the rudra-shaktI – mahAsena-sambhoginI.
The one with pretty curves, who is the queen under the chinchini tree,
manifests simultaneously in all her glory in the great oDDiyAna,
jAlandhara, pUrNagiri and kAmarUpa. The very name kubjIshAna causes the
ullAsa that cannot be described in words, the leading steps on the kula
path. Even a moment of revelation of kubjIshAna is just like the
drinking of the tIvra soma, sweeted for the sacrificial rite. He is the
glorious navAtman like a thunder cloud, the wielder of the pinAka bow.
On his lap, like streak of brilliant lightning illuminating that roaring
thunder cloud is our goddess, paschimAmnAyeshvarI, the queen of the
samayavidyA. The one who can recite the daNDakaM recalls the words “tvaM
navAtmAnadevasya chotsa\~NgayAnAshritA“. 
 
From the 32 syllabled samayavidyA’s shikhA mantra emanates svachChanda,
who is the manifestation of the tantric aghora mantra. One who has
stilled his mind for the expansion of the mighty samayavidyA sees a
preta ma\~ncha. On that is seated lokeshvara, the mighty yogin bearing
the universe in him. On him emerges a bright blue lotus. In the pericarp
of that lotus is seen the terrific serpentine ananta, blazing forth with
all-conquering power of heat and other radiations. He is the deadly
kAlasaMkarShaNa, armed with a musala and halAyudha. On his shikhA is
seen an eight-petalled lotus. In that is the powerful shiva of the
shikhA or svachChanda. From him emerge 32 brilliant mayUkhas, which are
the energies of the samaya-vidyA. He is adorned by ornaments of various
colors. He has 4 heads and 10 hands and inspires extreme terror. At the
same time he is imbrued with the shR^ingAra rasa and tightly hugs a devI
of dark color, the great dUtI, with ornaments of all colors. In her
manifests the power of the vaShaT.

tavAdhAre mUle saha samayayA lAsyaparayA  
navAtmAnaM manye nava-rasa-mahAtANDava-naTam |  
ubhAbhyAm-etAbhyAm-udaya-vidhim-uddishya dayayA  
sanAthAbhyAM jaj\~ne janaka-jananI-maj-jagadidam || (SL 41)

In your mUlAdhAra (of kulasundarI) I meditate upon navAtman dancing the
great tANDava, along with samayA performing her lAsya. This world came
to own these two as generator and generatrix due to their grace for the
act of the emergence of the world.

The great samayavidyA:  
namo bhagavati shrI kubjikAyai hrAM hrIM hroM \~na \~Na Na na me
aghoramukhi chAM chIM kiNi kiNi vichche ||
