+++
title = "At the feet of the lords of the world"

+++
Even by counting ourselves out, it is clear that the synapsids dominate
the current era. There is something subjective about this dominance
thing, yet we seem to instinctively understand it. We may attempt
objective measures such as occupying the top nodes of the food-web
network or being the largest mass forms of the faunal population. In any
case the synapsids have not been always dominant. The Mesozoic largely
belonged to the archosaurs, especially the dinosaurs. But prior to that
in the Permian the synapsids had their first phase of dominance. Thus,
it looks like the archosaurian ascent was sandwiched between two phases
of synapsid domination.

It is clear that we do not understand these event fully, and new
surprises are always round the corner. Yet we may chalk out the
following broad trends: The rise of the amniote egg seems to have
clearly opened the field for world dominance. The two major amniote
lineages the synapsids and the sauropsids staked a claim for dominance
starting in the Permian. The synapsids took the lead with several major
lineage rising to dominate the ecosystem in the Permian: “Pelycosaurs”,
Dinocephalians, Gorgonopsians, Therocephalians and anomodonts like
Suminia that acquired the ability to process plant food by chewing. This
spawned a great radiation of synapsids that continued to remain on top
till the early Triassic, with forms like Cynognathus, after sneaking
past the great Permian extinction. By the mid-Triassic their fortunes
started fading with the rise of the archosauromorphs amongst the
sauropsid amniotes. Amongst them, first the crocodile-line and then the
dinosaur-line rose to the top of the Mesozoic ecosystems with the
synapsids declining to herbivorous and insectivorous niches and reducing
in size further and further. Throughout the Mesozoic the surviving
synapsids, the mammaliforms, were believed to have been marginal.

Then the great Cretaceous extinction event put an end to the dominance
of the dinosaurs, with the only surviving dinosaurs being the birds. For
a brief period, in the recovery phase after the Cretaceous extinction
the archosaurs made an attempt to re-assert their dominant position. The
giant diartrymoid birds in the Northern continents and the
Phorusrhacoids in South America made an attempt to review the old
dinosaurian glories. The crocodile line to made a second attempt with
terrestrial predatory forms emerging in many lineages like the
sebecosuchians in South America, mekosuchians in the Pacific islands and
the pristichampsines in the Northern continents. While these attempts of
the birds and the crocodiles were considerably successful in the
southern continents until very recently, they did not last too long in
the North. The dominance shifted to the placental mammals, the main
lineage of mammals that made it past the Cretaceous event. Of course
only New Zealand largely remained the realm of the dinosaurs until
recently. The dinosaurs still held the air — while bats acquired flight
they had to do so at night when most birds were fast asleep. Thus, in
all fairness we may say that while the placentals rule the world, the
dinosaurs and other surviving archosauromorphs, the crocodiles and
turtles were not doing too badly in the mammal dominated world. In fact
until very recent events, including our presence, broke things ups they
were fairly dominant in the south. So much so that there were no major
mammalian predators during the avian dominance of South America, and in
Australia the mammalian predatory presence was lesser than expected.

Similarly, how were the mammals doing when the dinosaurs ruled? Only
recently are we getting evidence that they in fact were doing pretty
well. We have fossils of a wide range of old mammaliforms from the
Mid-Mesozoic now. We have Castorocauda lutrasimilis, a docodont
mammaliform that had a tail like beaver and head more like an otter.
This indicated that early in their Mesozoic evolution itself the
mammaliforms had acquired a rather serious adaptation to the aquatic
niche. Likewise, we have Volaticotherium a crown group mammal that is a
sister group of the multituberculate, triconodont, eutheria+metatheria
clade to the exclusion of the australosphenidan mammals like the
platypus. This mammal appears to have been a glider, that had a patagium
like a flying squirrel and represent the earliest synapsid invasion of
the air that might have been coeval with Archaeopteryx, the earliest
known aerial dinosaur. Then we have Fruitafossor, that appears to have
specialized in eating colonial insects, possibly the early Mesozoic
termites, suggesting that this high nutrition niche was already
colonized by mammals. It also appears to belong the the radiation just
prior to the multituberculate, triconodont, eutheria+metatheria clade.
Then we even have Repenomamus a mid-sized predatory triconodont mammal
that even hunted dinosaurs. Thus, we might say that just as the
dinosaurs were not doing all that bad in mammalian era, radiating and
occupying many niches, the mammals were also correspondingly doing
pretty well in the dinosaurian era. To their credit the dinosaurs had to
do all this in the Cenozoic with just two legs, having already lost
their hands to the over-specialization of flight.
