+++
title = "Indra Herakles, Trita Iolaus, Vak Athena against Hydra Vritra – A Distillation [Arya Akashaxa0Arka]"
date = "March 9, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/arya-akasha-hydra-slayer.png?w=900)

As part of my ongoing drive to make our work more accessible \[ Arya
Akasha Arka \]… here’s a seriously summarized comparative of a pretty
central Indo-European mytheme: the combat of the Striker/Thunderer
Deific \[e.g. Indra , Herakles\] against the Demon Dragon of the Waters
\[e.g. Vritra, Hydra\].

I’ve left out … quite a lot from this chart – including pretty much all
the other occurrences of Striker/Thunderer vs Dragon combat from the the
Indo-European mythic canons (e.g. Thor vs Jormungandr) – in order to
focus in upon something quite specific, and often under-acknowledged.

Namely, the fact that in the two best attested presentations of the
mytheme in question, we find that the task of slaying the adversary is
not something accomplished by the Striker/Thunderer alone … but rather,
in collaborative effort with a Companion \[i.e. Trita Aptya (a ‘Warrior
Priest’ we might say); Iolaos\], and considerably availed & empowered by
a certain Goddess \[Vak Saraswati ; Athena\].

To be sure, both the Vedic and Hellenic canons include recountings
wherein it is ‘only’ the Striker/Thunderer Who deals death to the demon;
however, these tend to be rather cursory in their scope – and the more
elaborate (and, for that matter, often the more archaic) renderings tend
to emphatically present this less ‘single-handed’ recollection.

The best guide to understanding the truth of the occurrence is preserved
in the Vedic perspective. This is partially because it is simply the
most comprehensive source-canon we have available to us (where it is
quite regular to find that elements which comprise perhaps a few
scattered lines in the Greek or Old Norse spheres instead have entire
pages upon them within the Vedic); however it is also because we can
demonstrate the Hellenic understanding to have ‘moved’ in various ways
from the underlying Indo-European template (for example – Herakles is no
longer, at this point, a God (pending His post-mortem apotheosis); and
rather than the Vajra, Mjolnir etc. … is often depicted wielding far
more mundane reflections of the Divine Armament – a tree-branch, for
instance, or a boulder or a Harpe (Sword), flaming spears, etc. All of
these *do* have clear correspondences with the way the Vajra is talked
about in the Vedic texts – yet are evidently incredibly heavily
euhemerized from these lofty origins)

Drawing from this, then, the Fire wielded by the Companion at the
instruction / empowerment of the Goddess – is no mere ‘inanimate’ blaze,
but is rather the Flame of Faith. It is weaponized in concert with the
Ritual phrasings uttered by the Companion as Warrior Priest.

And hence – the adversary of the Divine Order is countered not simply
via the brute-force solution of going clubbing … but by the tangible
immanentization of that Divine Order – through prayer.

This concept of ‘weaponized prayer’ is directly attested in various of
the Vedic presentations of the Armaments of Trita Aptya; and has obvious
saliency for the invocation of the Flame we find in these encounters.
Indo-European religious ritual, after all, frequently having an
irreducible incorporation of the ‘active’, ‘living’ flame as conduit to
the Gods.

Hence, in the Vedic schema – we do not merely find Indra hailed as
Vritrahan \[‘Slayer of Vritra’\] … but also Trita, as well as Agni (for
reasons that should be clear – ‘Agni’ means ‘Flame’, and represents also
the active force of piety, the empowering potency of the Rite); and, of
course, Vak Saraswati.

The Goddess of the Divine Speech \[Vak – cognate with ‘Vox’, ‘Voice’
etc.\] is therefore the Slayer of the Dragon, because without Her …
there could be no development nor deployment of the tools with which the
Dragon is defeated. Even in those accounts wherein it is Soma and Vajra
which empower Indra to combat the Foe – it is only through Vak that the
Soma and the Vajra are produced.

Similarly, without intending to steal Herakles’ Thunder … in the major
Greek accounting of the combat – I do not think that the situation would
have gone nearly as well for the Striking Son of Zeus even aided and
availed by trusty Iolaus had Athena not illuminated the proper mechanism
via which the Threat could be ended.

Hail Hydra Slayer , indeed !

Links to a number of the works of mine summarized into this piece –

Hail Hydra-Slayer: On The Mythic Combat Of Herakles And Athena – Indra
And Vak Saraswati, Against The Demon-Dragon Of The Water  
<https://aryaakasha.com/2020/07/31/hail-hydra-slayer-on-the-mythic-combat-of-herakles-and-athena-indra-and-vak-saraswati-against-the-demon-dragon-of-the-water/>

Foe-Slayer Claims Our Eulogy – Understanding RigVeda VIII 100: Indra,
Vak  
<https://aryaakasha.com/2020/08/07/foe-slayer-claims-our-eulogy-understanding-rigveda-viii-100-indra-vak/>

On The Indo-European Typology Of Iolaus – Third Dragonslayer

Part One – Indra And Iolaos : Hydras, Helpers, Heroes, Hercules  
<https://aryaakasha.com/2020/10/12/on-the-indo-european-typology-of-iolaus-third-dragonslayer-part-one-indra-and-iolaos-hydras-helpers-heroes-hercules/>

Part Two – The Priest ‘pon Penitent Pathway : Herakles Indra’s Roaring
Rampage of Repentance  
<https://aryaakasha.com/2020/10/14/on-the-indo-european-typology-of-iolaus-third-dragonslayer-part-two-the-priest-pon-penitent-pathway-herakles-indras-roaring-rampage-of-repentance/>

Part Three – Academics And Anaryas : The Wrongful Reconstruction Of The
Myth  
<https://aryaakasha.com/2020/10/15/on-the-indo-european-typology-of-iolaus-third-dragonslayer-part-three-academics-and-anaryas-the-wrongful-reconstruction-of-the-myth/>

Part Four – Ritual Renditions and Mythic Memorializations : The
Underlying Yet Obscured Ritualine Sense Of The Myth  
<https://aryaakasha.com/2020/10/28/on-the-indo-european-typology-of-iolaus-third-dragonslayer-part-four-ritual-renditions-and-mythic-memorializations-the-underlying-yet-obscured-ritualine-sense-of-the-myth/>

Part Five – Trita Triumphant , The Restoration of the Rightful Status of
Iolaus  
<https://aryaakasha.com/2020/10/30/on-the-indo-european-typology-of-iolaus-third-dragonslayer-part-five-trita-triumphant-the-restoration-of-the-rightful-status-of-iolaus/>

Saraswati Puja – The Power of the Smiter of Foes  
<https://aryaakasha.com/2020/01/30/saraswati-puja-the-power-of-the-smiter-of-foes/>
