+++
title = "The ShivLing – A Guide To The Cosmos [ Glorious Modern Hindu Art (of) Post For MahaShivRatrixa0]"
date = "March 11, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/16939420_10158304628020574_7979424010441902978_n.jpg?w=562)

Another favourite Shaivite work of (A)Art-i for #MahaShivRatri – this
depicts a ShivLing , which we might succinctly describe as a Shaivite
Altar, although which has as its essence both the Axis Mundi of the
universe entire and the Sthambha – the Sacrificial Post – of the Vedic
religion.

It is closely correlate with the Irminsul of the Germanic Indo-Europeans
– and, indeed, the offerings of white liquid (of Urdarbrunnr) to the
Limb of Yggdrasil that we find attested in the Gylfaginning, are quite
directly cognate to our understandings of the libations we pour upon the
ShivLing.

As we should expect ! For Shiva and Odin … are the Same Great God known
by multiple names amidst the Vedic & Eddic spheres.

I took a further look at the relevant conceptry in this previous
article, which also touches upon some potential Greek co-expressions –
<https://aryaakasha.com/2020/12/23/an-odinic-post-on-an-odinic-post-a-shivling/>

Now one thing that I love about this depiction – is that it shows Shiva
in His Cosmic Function. The Pillar of the Universe, most certainly … but
also receiving the irrepressible and implacable force of the Celestial
River into His Hair from Above, so as to thence distribute it out
through the cosmos (The Hair in question depicted here whirling out wide
– as it should be, Sanskrit Jatta, Vyomakesha and Greek Kyanokhaitis
that it is). Something which can only be done by He – as any other being
would be reduced to pulverization by the incredible force and purity of
the Stream undiluted from Absolute.

In quite the resonant manner (given the ultimate source of the liquid
elixir in question), if we look closely at this image we *also* see the
Shiva that is the ShivLing (a Jyotirlingam, indeed – a Lingam of Stars
and Starlight!) becoming Shyena – the Raptor Who bears the Soma to
deliver it from Above in exactly the same manner that Odin in Eagle Form
brings the Mead of Poetry.

A River of Stars \[and consider the Germanic Irmin’s Way – the Milky
Way; as well as the parallel IE conceptry of the River of Souls running
to the Head of Orion\] and a Map for Existence ; a depiction of Worship
and its immanent resonancy with the Universe Entire – and of course, of
the Great God, the Indo-European Sky Father, Lord Shiva !

*Exactly* what the Dhatta Ordered !

ॐ नमः शिवाय
