+++
title = "Against The ‘Superhero’ Reductionism Of Indo-Europeanxa0Mythology"
date = "March 19, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/religion-of-superheroes-pie-censored.png?w=510)

An associate asked this question – and I think it is an interesting one
for us to address.

My reply :

“I mean … not necessarily – like, it depends upon what you mean by
“superhero”, of course – but there’s pretty strong evidence that PIE
deifics aren’t … super-powered humans ; like, it’s one of those areas
wherein I think that people have fallen into the trap of presuming that
our further back ancestors were just as unsophisticated as some of the
people we see around us every day on the bus.

It’s an appealing, beguiling lie to presume that just because they’re in
the past – they’re therefore less advanced. It’s just not the case.

The PIE understanding of divinity – as we can tell via the fairly
consistent patterns of derivation and the related metaphysics (that are
similarly fairly consistently derived) is a *lot* more ‘immanent’ to
fabric of universe, sort of thing.

You can see that when it comes to the direct coterminity – indeed,
co-identification, of the particular Goddess I had mentioned in my
recent Cosmic Order / Dharma article … with just exactly that.

To the point of Her turning up as a Black Avenging (and Serpentine
associated) Wrathful/Furious form as an inbuilt ‘enforcement clause’
when the terms and fabric of Cosmic Law are violated.

She *is* Cosmic Law – and She *is* simultaneously, that ‘enforcer’
thereof in reaction to the egregious breaches of same.

It’s a pan-PIE-descended pattern.

Although here is the curious thing – what we *actually* tend to see in
various of the IE mytho-cultures is a *descent* from this model … a
degeneration we may say , almost an euhemerization. So we go from
something , someOne Who is so closely bound up with this Universe
concept …. to what we find in later texts , of a Goddess that is more …
spoken of almost as a particularly supernaturally gifted human woman.

This is endemic within the Nordic canon for obvious reasons – it is
Getting Stuff Past The Radar for the post-Christianization context in
which this was written down for the first time. And you are familiar
with the other instances of Odin being turned into , yes , a really
powerful human (priest-)king.

Although it is not exclusive to the Germanosphere. The Greeks likewise
had this happening in spades, even at the height of the Classical age –
I covered in my recent work on the Three Eyed Indo-European Sky Father ,
exactly this phenomenon occurring . I shall quote from myself:

“What we can say is that there was a certain trend of ‘rationalization’
and almost euhemeric re-working of Indo-European myth going on at some
junctures of the Classical Age – hence Herakles going from a Vajra
(Lightning/Thunder) wielding Deity to a club-wielding pre-Apotheosis
demigod when He slays the Hydra, for instance … an occurrence which
Pausanias, to demonstrate this tendency in action, overtly expresses
doubts about various of the characteristics of the major antagonist
involved therein – turning the multi-headed and otherwise mythic monster
into, as he puts it, a single-headed (although admittedly rather large)
serpent, because that is what he is “ready to believe”. He insists that
the more memorable – indeed downright iconic – mythically resonant
elements to even that well-known tale (which, as we can demonstrate via
our Vedic comparanda, are most definitely the archaic, underpinning, and
true form to the Myth) are merely the result of poetic license and
exaggeration by a poet endeavouring to ensure “his poetry might be more
remarkable”. With that in mind – it is not hard to see how the same
figure or those of the similar mindset might ‘reduce’ something
obviously supernatural such as a Three-Eyed Seer … into a poetically
phrased riddle for a man with a one-eyed conveyancy. Perhaps this
‘planing away’ approach also underpins the fading from view in the Greek
sphere elsewhere of the Three Eyes of the Sky Father.”

Now this does not, of course, vitiate those circumstances wherein a
*human* *does* wind up seriously empowered in Indo-European metaphysical
terms – but that is not , perhaps, what you had been referring to. “

—

Now as it happens, he had a somewhat more nuanced point not quite
captured by the phrasing of the initial question – and I may take a look
at that in due course (effectively, he was positing the not incorrect
(although I would contend – incomplete) notion that mythology being
man-relevant almost axiomatically entails having figures worthy of
emulation … and as i say, that is not an incorrect observation –
although it *is* an incomplete one, as applies deifics, some of Them at
least, being considerably *beyond* human emulation in various vitally
important ways .. more upon this some other time, because it really is
something interesting to think about).

But I did think this was a useful springboard for talking about
something rather important for us to get right.
