+++
title = "Operation Jarjara – The Worship Of Indra Amidst The Modernxa0Age"
date = "March 4, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/operation-jarjara-arya-akasha.png?w=800)

For the past few weeks, we have been working on something a bit special.
We call it Operation Jarjara – an exploration-and-exposition series
focused upon the revelation of the modern Indo-European worship of Lord
Indra.

Now note that I said “revelation” – not “restoration”. For despite what
you may have heard, the Hindu religion never really discarded Indra.
There is less emphasis, sure, in comparison to the height of the Vedic
Age – but even today, Indra is still hailed; and has a vitally integral
role in various ritual and mythic understandings drawn from right across
the (modern) Hindusphere.

In short: “Don’t Call It A Comeback – He’s Been Here For Years”.

Except while some would be content to merely *talk* about these matters,
as if briefly name-checking a few festivals and temples were enough … We
are looking to go Deepa. Our goal is not simply to counter the
misperception that Indra-veneration is a thing (only) of the Past – but
to actively support the (re-)spreading saliency of Indra amidst the
Present and the Future as well.

In order to do this, we intend to make available key elements and
understandings gleaned from our research; soundly sourced materials that
shall Strengthen The Shout of prayerful exultation in His Cause. And
provide accessible mechanisms via which not only Hindus, but also the
broader Indo-European religious family, may seek to move closer to and
to support He.

For after all – as the Vedas Themselves put it –

We are Heer to :

इंद्रं वर्धंतो अप्तुरः कृण्वंतो विश्वमार्यं ।  
अपघ्नंतो अराव्णः ॥
