+++
title = "Why OIT vs AMT In Some Ways Misses The Point At The Heart Of The Modern Indo-Europeanxa0World"
date = "March 30, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/1200px-indo-european_branches_map.svg_.png?w=1024)

I spent .. an extended period this morning responding to a
misunderstanding about a certain Scythian archaeogenetic study. A chap
who’s quite a fan of OIT \[‘Out Of India Theory’\] had read it
completely the wrong way. You know how it goes. Anyway, after putting a
few hours into showing how the study said the opposite to what he
thought it did … I came out with this. About how, in some ways, getting
bogged down in the OIT vs AMT “debate” is missing the point.

“But in any case … if there ar reputable studies showing that
Indo-Europeans came from somewehre other than the generally accepted
Urheimat – then I shall await their production.

As I have said – if the evidence really does change, then there is
nothing wrong with changing one’s view. In some ways, it won’t affect me
so much. It is not like I have some deep and abiding loyalty to the
Ukraine , after all –

India is a different matter. I may not be from there , and I have never
yet set foot there. But in a different sense, it is a home to much that
I hold dear and has exerted a truly gravatic weight upon who and what I
am.

But until somebody actually manages to produce peer-reviewed publication
of something showing the relevant Bronze Age migration out of India and
into Europe in archaeogenetic terms , and simultaneously somehow
vitiating years of repeatedly attested analysis showing the migration in
multiple directoins from the Urheimat upon the Pontic Steppe …  
I shall take it as being a fact.

And keep on getting on with more important things

As I have said earlier – I do not require thinking of myself as being
from India in an ancestral-genetic sense in order to do what I do to
serve India.  
and that is something which i think gets .. overlookedd when these sorts
of things brew up

various people get so wound up shouting about things that … are in some
ways of limited saliency for today

that they fail to honour and engage in the things that are salient for
today.  
the whole thing just degenerates into some online cockfight about “who’s
superior” or “more original” or “purer” or whatever.  
and that doesn’t foster sodality and common feeling of kinship, it ust
gets everybody annoyed

besides, as you know – it is my observation that while the Indo-Aryans
ultimately came from somewhere else … that doesn’t mean that the people
descended from teh Indo-Aryans today are somehow “Impure” or whatever;
or the religion is “inferior” or heaven forbid – “novel” \[in th senes
of ‘new’, ‘innovative’\]

Quite the contrary. The religion – and I quite pointedly use the
singular, as I do not make a distinction between “Vedic” and “Modern
Hinduism” as many are wont to do – is the oldest attested Indo-European
faith that we can find and engage with. It is most certainly the oldest
one still living – and in most regards, it is the last one still
standing .

We can show how it, and it alone, has maintained in active engagement
and performance, elements straight from the PIE Urheimat \[and I have
done so frequently in the course of my writings\].

When verses of the Greeks and the Norse are but pretty lines of poetry
‘pon the page, readable only in translation to but fleetingly glimpse
what might have been … Mandirs all around the globe, this world of ours,
actively re-immanentize them into the contemporary present on a daily
basis with life, indeed as life.

So I guess waht I am trying to say is – I have everything around the
opposite way to people on all sides.

I don’t think we’re all from India ; but I do think that the Indian
civilizational-religious complex is the most ancient , and most
definitely the most venerable, from our perspective in the here and now,
today.”
