+++
title = "Do Hindus Have A Monopoly On Dharma – Or Is It A Broader Indo-European Notionxa0?"
date = "March 17, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/alexander-honours-achilles-in-ilion-troy1.jpg?w=740)

  
If you asked many Hindus to identify a cornerstone concept to our faith,
I have no doubt that they would cite one word: “Dharma”. Fantastically
complex in its applications both theoretical and tangible/practical,
there is no getting around its saliency – not just for the Hindusphere,
but also for those other religions which have their origin in the
Sanskritized milieu such as Buddhism and Jainism.

However, recently I’ve wound up embroiled in a series of arguments with
people about the nature and the ‘exclusivity’ of this concept. What it
really means, and who really has access to such a thing. I shan’t bore
you with the details – except to state that one was a probably well
meaning Indian chap who appeared to want to insist that there was an
Indian/Hindu monopoly upon Dharma … and the other was a Zoroastrian
attempting to push the notion that Hinduism had abandoned Rta \[more
upon that in a moment\] in favour of this ‘new’ concept called Dharma.

The latter is just outright wrong, as we shall soon see – but the former
is … correct in some ways, but incomplete and incorrect in others. We
shall also see what I mean by that in due course. For now, let us get
acquainted with some of the core terms so that we may move on to our
comparative explication.

**What Is Dharma ?  
**  
Dharma is often phrased as being difficult to translate. In some senses,
this is true – but I tend to find that “Duty” does a reasonable job of
getting across the basic meaning of the term (with additional shades of
“Fate”; and, of course, “Righteousness”). The fact that we don’t always
think “Duty” can fill in for “Dharma” in English translations of
Sanskrit texts – has less to do with the perceived untranslatability of
‘Dharma’, I feel, and rather more to do with the fashion in which “Duty”
has become quite the devalued term over the centuries in the West. Once
upon a time, giving an Oath, a Word, meant something quite tangible –
now it is as insubstantial as the proverbial ‘oral contract’ … not worth
the paper it is printed upon. But I digress.

“Duty” is one thing, but a duty \*to\* what (or, for that matter, whom)?
Well, at that point we must introduce another concept – Rta.

Rta in essence means ‘Cosmic Order’ or ‘Cosmic Law’. It is identified
out-of-universe with Brahman (the Absolute), and this Absolute is
a-priori \*to\* the Universe, being expressed \*in\* universe in quite a
number of ways … including as the fundamental underpinning to the fact
that there is even a universe to speak of to begin with. And I say “to
speak of”, because per the wonderful theology of Sayana, Vak Devi may
\*also\* be thought of as an in-universe ‘expression’ of Rta-As-Brahman.
Hence, in no small part, why words in the Empowered Speech (and spoken
also with Intent for maximum impact and efficacy) have such Power as
they do. Because they enable the interaction with this fundamental
cogs-and-gears-and-fabric of the world.

There are pretty strong cognate understandings for this notion of “Rta”
to be found elsewhere across the Indo-European world. “Orlog”, in Old
Norse, is a personal favourite – as it effectively means ‘Supernal Law’
; and there are a whole sphere of Ancient Greek etc. terms to express
the fundamentally contiguous concept in their version of the IE
cosmology. Indeed, ‘Cosmos’ itself quite literally refers to the notion
of Order \[‘Cosmic Order’ thus becoming something of a mutually
reinforcing tautology\] – and thence, to the expanse \*under\* said
order – the Universe, generally, in our modern parlance – in much the
same manner as a “Regime”.

And, further showing just how closely cognate these understandings are
in terms both metaphysical as well as mythic– the close identification
of Goddess(es) with Cosmic Order is something that continually occurs
amidst the various Indo-European descendant peoples: Amongst the Romans,
Cybele / Magna Mater is spoken of in such terms amidst the works of
Lucretius; we also have the Greek constellation of female divinity
linked to their relevant concepts of Justice and Divine Law (and, for
that matter, the Avenging of the breaches of same); and I have recently
managed to demonstrate a further expression of this amidst the
Nordic/Germanic sphere via Skadi (the binding of Loki and the
Serpent-expressed punishment of that figure fitting the typology in
question quite neatly – consult my recent work on the serpentine form of
the Earth Mother deific for additional details); whilst the situation of
Frigg as being supremely acquainted with Orlog (c.f Lokasenna 29) is
most definitely relevant here also. The situation may reach its highest
point with Vedic Aditi – not only directly identified with this
aforementioned concept of Rta, this aforementioned concept of Brahman …
but spoken of by the Vedic Rsi Sunahsepa in RV I 24 as being also, in
effect, the state of Law and Lawfulness to which one should wish to be
foundationally in concord \*with\*. Being returned to the proper paths
of piety and modus vivendi is akin to being reunited with Her.

So how does Rta intersect with Dharma? Well, Dharma expresses this
etymologically – the root of the term effectively means “To
Hold/Support”, we might even say “depend”.

That is to state – that one’s Dharma is ‘dependent upon’ Rta ; one’s
Duty is a contingent understanding to the broader Cosmic Law … but
\*also\* that one’s Duty, properly engaged in, acts to \*support and to
uphold\* the immanency of Rta, \*of\* Cosmic Law here in this universe
of ours. Something quite vital if we wish for our universe to continue
to actually be habitable within for our kind – we do not prosper
(indeed, nothing but the forces of self-destructive demonic iniquity do
well) when Cosmic Law is being actively abjured and sundered. You can
see that, to take but one brief example, in the situation entailed in
the rise to power of the demon Durgamasur – who wiped out the knowledge
of sacral conduct from the minds of men, and presided over an age of
starvation and drought as a result …. because the natural order of
things had become woefully disrupted, the Gods disempowered, and chaos
reigning all around. It was only put an end to (violently) by Vak Devi
as Durga , specifically Shakambhari , appearing to personally set things
right again – that is to say, Cosmic Order appearing in beautiful, and
beautifully destructive, Goddess Form to re-water the cosmos with the
blood of slain demon armies and breathe restored life and Law and light
back into the worlds. But again I digress.

The point is – how one is supposed to ‘do one’s duty’ to uphold Rta ,
that is one’s Dharma. And these things can manifest in just as many ways
as there are people and subjective personal experiences of living in
this universe of ours. It is difficult to really generalize a ‘human
Dharma’ all up except in the broadest possible terms (of course, ‘Piety’
is a rather good general start).

Although as we refine down the granularity upon our perspective (say, we
go from ‘Human’ to ‘Kshatriya’ .. and by this i mean quite specifically
Indian Kshatriyas of a rather particular period and ethos) – we arrive
at more specific understandings of just what it is that we are meant to
do and how it is we are meant to approach the problems around us in
order to more fully make our contribution and uphold our Duty. The
Kshatriya example I have cited because one of the most well-known Hindu
religious texts – the Bhagavad Gita – is largely a treatise upon what is
termed ‘Kshatriya Dharma’. Hence, in part, why it has such emphasis upon
doing the right thing regardless of various feelings and ephemeral
considerations about the matter – when the Avatar of the God (in this
case, Krishna of Vishnu) informs you that your cousins over on the other
side of the battlefield and this civil war must be put to the sword in
service of the immanency of Dharma in this world \[hence why Kurukshetra
is occasionally referred to as a Dharma-Yuddha – a war for the saliency
of Righteousness in the Age\] …. well, you do it, if you are a
Kshatriya. Because it is what you are there to do.

Personally, I tend to think that that may very well be Kshatriya Dharma
… but not only is there some place for creative, critical thinking
within the realms of the Kshatriya in \*pursuit\* of the righteous and
proper principles… but that if we are a Brahmin, say, then as we are
acting as the ‘brain’ of the nation and society rather than the ‘arms’,
this means that there is quite a lot more necessity for the thinking to
be taking place. Although also, of course, a lot of ‘doing’ – and
particularly a lot of ‘perceiving’. Including acting as the guides and
instructors for those who are more inclined toward the ‘doing’ end of
things. The ‘Head’ of society, after all, contains both Memory and major
sense organs.

Now this is NOT supposed to be an in-depth meditation upon the
Caturvarna/ Purusha model of society , so we shall not be examining in
depth what everybody is supposed to be doing under that schema – nor how
these actually map over occasionally rather usefully to some elements of
pre-Modern European culture and society \[although it gets … rather
complicated as applies the Jarl caste, for instance, in the Nordic
model\] … however there is something important to that distinction we
have just made, that goes right to the heart of what my Indian
interlocutor had been attempting to push forward:

Namely, that as various Indo-European societies outside of the
Hindusphere have quite different interlocking parts and societal models
… it quite naturally follows that they are also going to have rather
different understandings of just what it is that the members of those
societies are supposed to be doing. If we agree that a Kshatriya and a
Brahmin are going to have different (although overlapping) Dharmas –
then it stands to reason that even despite the overt similarities
between a Kshatriya and a Knight, that some culturally specific
understandings are going to also be quite occurrent \*within\* the
specific groupings which have given rise to and informed those
identities.

Indeed – we often take things rather further and assay that just as a
Kshatriya and a Brahmin have different usual manners to make their
Dharmatic contribution to the immanency of Rta … so, too, may different
descendant Indo-European societies and their religious complexes have
different ways to do things likewise. Not “wrong” or “superior/inferior”
necessarily (although some of these shall obviously have become degraded
and mis-aligned mis-understandings via the passage of the ages, human
error and interpolation) , just “different”.

In this sense, then, I do not think it inaccurate to agree that as
applies “Dharma” … it is a Hindu concept (although occurrent in somewhat
different senses in other Sanskrit-shaped religious spectra, as briefly
noted above), and that we should tread lightly about presuming to speak
of the “Dharma” of a Greek man practising the Hellenic religion, or a
Nordic revivalist engaged likewise. If we want to push it, then it is
not (necessarily) inaccurate to say that they \*have\* a Dharma each ,
in the generalized sense … but the actual interpretation of that, and
the conceptual nuances brought to bear when unpacking the term, are
going to be different to what a Hindu would have taken as the face-value
application of the term in specia. So yes – endeavouring to just extract
out a term such as “Dharma” and apply it everywhere does
de-contextualize the notion and make something more particularly
“Indian” into something “Indo-European”, arguably unnecessarily.

I say “arguably unnecessarily”, because the conceptual understanding –
at its core – communicated by “Dharma”, is not unique to the term
Dharma, nor to the Hindusphere. There are quite an array of other
Indo-European terms more specific to those descendant cultures in
question which convey quite the same general idea.

**The Closely Comparative Conceptry Of The Greeks – Eusebia, Dikaiosune,
Themis, Moira  
**  
One that a recently met associate has pointed out to me is Eusebia – an
Ancient Greek term actually used quite directly to translate “Dharma”
into Ancient Greek by Ashoka in one of his more famous inscriptions. It
is actually a rather good fit (and, indeed, the notion of the “Good Fit”
is quite important for “Rta” – Sukha, for instance, being understandable
as the joy derived from moving well in congruence with one’s Dharma);
with the essential underpinning meaning of it being “To Do The Righteous
Thing” – “Eu-” as in “Good”; “-Sebia” , from “Sebomai”, effectively
meaning a sense of being “God-Fearing” \[and that is .. rather literal
for the Greeks\], and thence undertaking action aware of both the Awe of
the Divine , and the Holy Terror of what happens to you should you
attempt to actively go against Same. We might think of it as “Applied
Piety” in that sense – for it took on a broad range of particular areas
under its aegis in terms of social relationships and cultural custom,
all of which were underpinned and overseen by The Gods. \[And, as we
have noted above – with both Divine figures, Goddesses for the most
part, as the \*positive\* expressions of these … as well as, via the
Erinyes and Nemesis (Who could also preside over ‘positive’ deserts),
the ‘Negative’ and ‘Enforcement’ aspect, likewise\].

I tend to point to ‘Dikaiosune’ when I am after a Greek rendering for
Rta – as what it means, “That Which Is Pointed Out” \[from
Proto-Indo-European ‘Deyk’ – the root for Greek ‘Dactyl’
(‘Finger’/’Digit’), Germanic ‘Teach’ (via D => T sound-shift), and
Latinate “Dictate”, “Dictator”, etc.; all of which effectively build
from its ‘Pointing’ original kernel of meaning\], nicely conveys the
sense of something which is already immanent , yet which not all of us
may be able to perceive … thus requiring the Seer to do just exactly
that : “point out” what it is that is Just. And certainly, “Justice” is
what the term most usually means, the “Fulfilment of the Law” , but also
the general essence-tial quality \*of\* the Law to begin with. Which,
again, takes us back to Ancient Greek ‘Dike’ – and the Goddess of that
particular name.

Astraea, for those of you taking an interest in the Heavens, forms the
figure of Virgo in Western Astrology precisely due to this concept –
‘pointing out’ the righteous conduct … and hence also pointing ,
perhaps, at Libra, the bearer of the Scales of Justice. The situation of
Astraea having vanished from this mortal globe of ours in order to take
up stance and station ‘midst the Heavens is also quite relevant – as in
a similar manner to how the saliency of Rta declines and diminishes over
the course of the Yuga cycle , eventually seeming much more seriously,
significantly absent during the Current Yuga … so too does it appear
that the Greeks thought that Cosmic Order became an ever more remote
‘Graha’ \[body exerting ‘gravity’, we might say – from the same root,
and also tends to mean a celestial object\] – although never \*quite\*
vanishing entirely, and still being very much visible \*if\* you knew
where to look. Pointing upward, we might say, to the Celestial Spheres.
Where She still stands to this day, to inspire and lift our gazes and
our aspirations for the ‘good life’, the pious life, likewise.
Illuminating our dark night.

Another point of relevancy would, of course, be Themis – both in terms
of the Goddess by that name, but also the notion of ‘Divine Law’
directly entailed by the theonym and accompanying noun. Themis means
both Divine Law (and Divine Justice) – but also the active expression of
that law , via custom and our adherency thereto ; as well as, going the
other way, via various sendings and oracular manifestations to man from
the Gods and the broader Divine Realm. “That Which Is Pointed Out”,
indeed (Which implies that certain oracular events are actually somebody
correctly perceiving the underlying ‘plan’ and ‘order'\[ing\] of the
Universe – getting a peak at the ‘script’ for the Cosmic Drama/Divine
Play, perhaps we may suggest).

I mention Themis here because there is actually a rather good fitting
(again) between what is understood by Rta (wherein the Divine Order,
Cosmic Law is in fact ‘over and above’ the Gods – and also binding upon
Them), and what we get from the Greeks’ perspectives upon Her.
InAntoninus Liberalis’ Metamorphoses, for instance, we find Zeus
wanting to smite some humans who have disturbed the sanctity of a holy
site to make off with the wealth contained therein … and being told
sternly by Themis et co that even He is unable to kill anybody upon such
incredibly sacred ground. And so, relenting, He instead turns the
impious would-be desecrators into birds instead \[as it happens, the
theme of sacred ground being inviolable to killing is a broadly pan-IE
one – a major example that many shall be familiar with concerns the
Aesir not putting the Fenris Wolf to death precisely because said wolf
was in such a space and to do so would be to violate the Cosmic Law\].

The concept of the Moirae , and of Moira , is also relevant here – we
would know these in modern English, perhaps, as the Fates and Fate,
respectively. Dharma in the sense of one’s fate’ (or, if we are being
less heavy-handed, perhaps one’s “calling”) has obvious conceptual
symmetry to this notion – as, after all, the mode of one’s
contributionary duty being ‘allotted’ and apportioned to one is fairly
exactly what the ‘Moira’ in question is also intended to encompass. We
are simply taking the broader view and extrapolating it from ‘just’ the
ultimate outcome to also the processes via which said outcome may be
reached and entailed. Something quite reasonably in concordancy with
what the Greeks had actually understood via the concept.

All things considered, while it is evident that we are dealing with
multiple terms in the Ancient Greek lexicon of considerable coterminity
to what we are meaning by “Dharma” and “Rta” in various ways – I have
little doubt that the same \*ultimate\* underpinning Indo-European
understandings – that of an overarching Divine Law / Cosmic Order with
an array of in-universe, in-community, and indeed \*in-person\* tangible
expressions and pathway-guides for virtuous action in congruence thereto
– are being communicated in each cultural context. Enough so that,
historically speaking at least, some degree of simple direct translation
was even evidently viable between them.

**The Lexical Language of the Latins – Piety Made Manifest Amongst
Men  
**  
There are, similarly, multiple terms, concepts, and theistic embodiments
of each which are relevant for us from the Romans. However, for reasons
of space (because I have perhaps waxed over-lyrical in my preceding
comparanda) … as well as the fact that the ‘proper’ Latin cognate is
quite direct – mean that I shall focus upon only the one.

That is ‘Pietas’ (also known via its adjectival form – ‘Pius’); and its
definitional ambit matches up strikingly well with what we comprehend
via ‘Dharma’. Whereas ‘Dharma’ we may approach as being the duty-bound
adherence to the Divine Law – and consequent conduct in support of the
proper immanency of same here in this reality-sphere of ours … Pietas
connotes the congruence of the individual, their deeds and direction in
life, with the Ius Divinum (the Divine Law). It is also, absolutely
uncoincidentally, the root for modern English – “Piety”. Although again,
the terms have shifted in scope down the ages … so whereas once, “Piety”
and “Duty” were effectively the same (or at least strongly coterminous
and therefore overlapping) conceptry – in the modern age, the two are
seen as quite significantly separate, at least in the secular, civic
sphere.

The scope of Roman ‘Pietas’ was not merely confined to what we, with
modern eyes, might have thought to be the realm of the more overtly
divine – but also found itself capaciously exercised with relation to
various other spheres of human society, activity, values, and endeavour.
One could express pietas in one’s proper conduct toward one’s Parents,
for instance – and quite prominently, in one’s relationship to the
State. These are, in truth, also very much ‘Divine’ relevant actions and
engagements – it is only that we fail to see, these days, our
interactions with our forebears (whether the immediate ones – our
parents; or the ones of far further back – our Ancestors, Pitrs, etc.)
or with the nation around us in such breathtakingly luminous terms.

The Hindu understandings of Dharma have, as should be entirely
unsurprising to us by now, directly comparable comprehensions. For us,
the highest act of piety is the devotion to and service of one’s Parents
(as beautifully explicated via the myth of Skanda & Ganesha having a
race around the world – and little Ganesha beating His Brother , as
whilst Skanda had rushed off to circumambulate the globe … Ganesha had
instead simply marched around His Parents – for to Him, They were His
World); and in a suitably paired maxim we also state that – “जननी
जन्मभूमिश्च स्वर्गादपि गरीयसी” : “Mother & Motherland Are Superior Even
To Heaven” \[and see my analysis in “‘Mother And Motherland Are Higher
Than Heaven’ – An Arya Akasha Analysis Of A Beauteous Maxim”; as well
as, perhaps, the Bharat Mata (A)Arti-cle I had penned for Indian
Independence Day 2018, for further explication upon these Maters\].

Again, we could if we wished go into much more expansively expressive
elocution upon the subjects of the metaphysical, reputational, and
ethical fundaments of the life of the Roman in antiquity which would
further flesh out our Latin comparanda to the Hindu concepts of Dharma &
Rita – but for now, it is enough.

**Orlog & Orloglausa Amongst The Old Norse  
**  
One of the most revealing – and revealingly direct – expressions for the
understanding we are after, amidst any Indo-European people … occurs in
the Nordic scriptural canon, in the Voluspa. I have written upon the
passage it is from, detailing the ‘creation’ and investiture of
Humankind elsewhere \[see my earlier work : “On The Indo-European
Symbolism Of The Ash Tree – And The Ensuing Origins Of The Spear-Race Of
Man”\] , however it is mos definitely worth zeroing in upon this
particular element … this one word, which so succinctly encapsulates
what we are on about here.

That word ? ‘Orloglausa’ \[or, contingent upon which version of the text
we are using –ørlǫglausa ,örlöglausa , etc.\].

What does it mean ? Well, the more usually encountered translation for
it is not a bad one – although it is perhaps somewhat ‘incomplete’; as
is inevitably the case with most translations from just about any
liturgical language into modern English. You shall frequently find it
written as “Fateless”. Lacking in ‘Wyrd’ / Urðr.

What does it mean in context? At this point in the Voluspa, Odin,Hönir,
andLóðurr have encountered two barely-alive beings – the primogenitor
pairing of Askr & Embla. They are described as being barely alive –
wood, prior to its shaping and sculpting by the master craftsman to
speak somewhat figuratively. More literally, we are given a list of
characteristics emblematic of living, sentient beings which the Pair at
that stage so lack; and, correspondingly, a list of qualities imparted
into them by the attendant Gods. There are a few intriguing elements to
these – and I’ve considered a number of those elsewhere (such as the
‘investiture of Breath’ \[Önd – also translated, aptly enough, as Soul ;
c.f the Vyomakesha conceptry\] by Odin, resonating with the similar
Vedic understanding); however what is relevant for our purposes is a
more implicit understanding – between the concluding lines of verse 17
and those of verse 20.

There we see that along with the explicit list of characteristics imbued
into the ancestors of the race of mankind, there is another element. The
one that takes us from the status of “Orloglausa”to \[having\] “örlög
seggja” – the latter meaning something akin to the Orlog of Men;
although with ‘Seggja’ (which I am presuming to be a genitive indicative
plural for Seggr) actually having a slightly more nuanced set of
meanings contingent upon the era – in more modern Nordic speech,
frequently referring to a hero or soldier; in Old Norse itself, to a
man, in in its Proto-Germanic antecedent (‘Sagjaz’) to a warrior or a
retainer, and hailing ultimately from Proto-Indo-European ‘Sekw’,
meaning “to follow”. It would be tempting, therefore, to presume that
something quite archaic had been preserved via the Voluspa’s particular,
piquant choice of phrasing – notionally, that which makes a man (or, for
that matter, a woman) is his (or her) ‘following’ of their connexion to
the Orlog, their Wyrd. And this is something which must be adhered to
with the duty-bound allegiancy and stirling protectiveness of the
soldier – just as a warrior of the high Germanic age would have
zealously protected his Lord of whose household he was a part. Or
perhaps it is merely a poetic means to say ‘man’ in this context, and I
am over-reading things wildly.

However, what we \*can\* say – is that the dominant theme of the final
third of of verse 20 is also the provision of ‘life’ to Mankind by the
Ash-Maidens of Yggdrasil … something done not only via the unfurling of
the general sphere of Law out from that radiating central Axis Mundi –
but also via the specific ‘spark’ of connexion to the general Orlog
which is imbued therefrom to each of us.

For you see – that is just what the Axis Mundi represents in the
Indo-European cosmological schema. It is the immanency of Cosmic Law
from Above and Beyond the universe, running through our universe, and
about which our Universe rotates according to its rhythm and regulating
regimen \[indeed, there is an archaic Vedic understanding of this Post
as being the Axle of a mighty chariot-wheel revolving in just such a
manner\]. This is why we find such pointed remarks in, say, the
Grimnismal about the demonic dragons which gnaw upon the Tree that is
Yggdrasil – for the forces of chaos ever strive to undermine, usurp, and
ultimately to destroy this saliency of the Law within our worlds; and it
is also why, elsewhere in the Germanic canon, we find otherwise cryptic
mentions for the oblations and applications of the white liquid of the
Well of Urdr \*to\* the limbs of the Tree – because, in a manner akin to
the usage of Milk / Panchamrut in ShivLingPuja \[the ritual offerings
upon the ShivLing – itself a miniature Axis Mundi resonant, to the same
God as that of the Irminsul\], it represents the nourishment and
revitalization of this Tree of Law … the re-application of something
from the wellspring of light and life and law that is directly
comparable to this symbolic pouring of the Amrit-allegorical – so as to
help to repair and stabilize the damage from the ongoing demonic-chaotic
attack.

And that is why I say that the Nordic presentation-preservation of these
concepts is both succinct and seriously profound. For within it, we see
the essential truths – that what makes us human is, in fact, not merely
the possession of the relevant DNA nor even the ability to speak : but
our essence-tial imbued spark of Duty, the Cosmic Order conduit which is
within us; and with that Duty also entailing the protection,
maintenance, and serving of the Cosmic Law which makes life within this
universe of ours possible in the first instance – through the tangible
applications of Piety and following our Fate … which may also
incorporate that more actively militant understanding of “Seggr” , as
applies dealing to those malefic forces of chaos and iniquity which
would seek the ruination of Same, the casting down of the Tree and the
DevaRajya which stands thereupon. Hence why I made such a point of
noting the relevant linguistics and previous and post formulations for
“Seggr” above – because the relationship of a Lord to his (although
really, this is a case of a Queen to \*Her\*) warriors, that is the
situation of Orlog, Cosmic Order, to Mankind.

\*If\* we choose to take up this responsibility. And if we do not –
well, then we are not really, in that Germanic sense, living up to the
standards set down for us of what it is which constitutes “Mankind”.

**The Log-ical Labelling Of Lore And The Evanescence of Essence  
**  
I began this (A)Arti-cle by noting that it had been sparked through a
series of conversations slash conflagrations I had been party to over
the past few days. One of them, was with a presumably well-meaning
Indian man who appeared to wish to argue that as ‘Dharma’ itself was
only directly found in the Hindusphere – that this meant that Dharma
\*itself\* \[i.e. the core concept, rather than the ‘mere’ labelling –
although we are, as ever, acutely conscious that words have power,
nominative determinism is a thing, and as my associate Aldo Rapace just
pithily observed – that means that “Linguistics \*Is\* Theology”\], was
similarly something effectively exclusive to those environs.

We have, I think, reasonably conclusively demonstrated that whilst the
precise \*shapings\* and applications of some of the understandings of
this core element \*do\* vary amidst the different descendant
Indo-European peoples … the most important components, the seed, the
root, the bough, the lifeblood of the Tree are very much shared amongst
us all. Even though up here amidst the branches and the leaves of
letterings, it can occasionally be a bit easy to lose sight of the wood
\*and\* the tree amidst the squabblings of sparrows nor squirrel(s)
seated amidst the twiggery. The labels are different – but these are
exterior flowerings and blossomings from this central and incredibly
ancient Same. Samrajya, indeed – “Same Rule, Everywhere” – as the Divine
Imperium , the Empire of Eternity , is known. And where the ‘Essence’
runs True – the ‘Expression’ can indeed be permitted some necessary
leeway in how it is put across in order to protect and preserve it in
amidst different lands, times, and circumstances.

However, I also mentioned \*another\* encounter I had had which played
significant role in stirring my thoughts to action upon this score – one
of an occasional unpleasantness of having to deal with a Zoroastrian who
purported to place their own faith above ours … snidely deriding
Hinduism for purportedly engaging in dereliction of Rta in favour of a
more exclusive exaltation of Dharma. As if these were two different
concepts! And then adding insult to earlier insult (I hesitate to call
it “injury” – except perhaps to my patiency) by proclaiming that the
Zoroastrians had the greater and the grander still-living emphasis upon
Rta (via a cognate Avestan term) in their religion – as if this somehow
meant, I suppose, they were the ‘true’ (post-Andronovo, indeed downright
post-PIE) Indo-Iranian ‘orthodox continuance’ religion.

Perish the thought !

I mention this particular incident here not simply in passing – but
because it illuminates something quite substantively important, that
also goes back toward responding to my Indian interlocutor from this
other exchange.

In the Zoroastrian case, I have little doubt that – as with various of
their religious terminology – they do indeed have the \*words\*
maintained … but what of the actual concepts they are supposed to
represent?

Well, to approach the matter directly – I absolutely refuse to believe
that a creed which, at its foundational stages, sought to have Priests
\*of\* the old Indo-Iranic (and therefore, Indo-European) faith killed
and slandered where they were not slain outright, which overtly
demonized The Gods and otherwise sought to disrupt various of the
fundaments of the Indo-European man’s relationship with the Divine (i.e.
prime vectors via which Cosmic Order is immanentized out into us and out
into the worlds under our dominion and stewardship) … I refuse to
believe that simply because they may so happen to have ‘borrowed’ the
linguistically cognate phrasing for “Rta” etc., that this therefore
means that they, too, have the ‘essence’ to go with the ‘labelling’.

In fact, their use for it – I would contend to be something more akin to
the Sanskrit द्रुह् (‘Druh’; in their language it is ‘Druj’ – cognate,
as it happens, with Old Norse ‘Draugr’) : a term which, at once, means a
demon and an enemy, an injury and an infliction, violence and more
pointedly a \*violation\*. It also means a “lie”, a “falsehood” – a
sense that the Zoroastrians have latched on to as the major
understanding to the term (and in truth, this is indeed effectively what
its Proto-Indo-European origin – PIE ‘Dhrewgh’ – refers to); although
which is somewhat less prominent in Sanskrit – and instead, for us, more
implicit. We understand that the demon, via its actions against Cosmic
Law, is against truth and continuously undermining same. But that is a
rant for another time.

The point is – it is easy to focus only upon labels and lose sight of
what is actually contained within them. And therefore, to end up in a
situation wherein because Ancient Greek or Latin or Old Norse doesn’t
use a suitably obvious \*direct linguistic\* cognate for ‘Dharma’, one
presumes that these Indo-European peoples had no such concept amongst
themselves likewise. Or to presume that Dharma and Rta are somehow
separate things, one supplanting the other – rather than the former
being the active engagement with and continuous re-immanentization of
the (a-priori, in truth) latter.

Each Indo-European perspective upon this similar underlying concept is
somewhat different – in how it is expressed, and some piquant details of
its interpretation and lived relationship of understanding, no doubt.
Just as each Indo-European religion and each Indo-European language are
similarly distinctive in their flavouring and the native earth they have
come to call Home.

Yet we are all, also, united and bonded – not merely by chains of
descent running back to the Urheimat in linguistic nor even genetic and
cultural senses.

But by something far more fundamental – both to us, to ourselves
(indeed, our ‘sense of self’, likewise), and to the Universe Entire.

We are brought back together, by the sense of connection we all share –
to that which we are all , foundationally, connected \*to\*.

Cosmic Order – Rta , Orlog , Dikaiosune , and still other terms
besides.

However one chooses to phrase it, and via whichever of the multitude of
intermediary meta-forms one chooses to engage with its notion through,
\*that’s\* what we’re here for … and here \*from\*, as well.

For to be Indo-European – in this case, Aryan in the actual, proper
sense \[not an ethnonym, a race-adjective – but something which instead
means to know and to do the proper thing, to uphold the heritage and
perform the pious rites\] – is to be a Defender of Cosmic Order.

As we would say in Sanskrit –

धर्मो रक्षति रक्षितः !
