+++
title = "Tryambaka Triophthalmos Triformis – The Three Eyes Of The Indo-European Sky Father As Seen Through Vedic & Hellenicxa0Perspective"
date = "March 12, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/personagensconhecidosemilustracoesconceituais_joshuasummana_dcriativo_25.jpg?w=723)

Tonight \[the 11th of March 2021 at time of writing\] marks the
observance of MahaShivRatri – a Night dedicated to the worship of that
Great God, Lord Shiva – the Indo-European Sky Father. Known to the
Hindus as Rudra Shiva, the Norse as Odin, the Greeks as Zeus – and by
half a hundred other names and Masques to half a hundred other
Indo-European peoples besides.

As has become our custom, we present to you (and to Him) an (A)Arti-cle
written in His Honour, extolling some feature of the Deific – one that
is most prominent still amidst the Hindu understanding, yet which was
once known more broadly. And which, properly considered, provides vital
illumination for otherwise hidden aspects of the Sky Father deific in
not only Hindu, but also Greek, Roman, and Nordic, perspectives ‘pon
He.

In 2019, our offering was the immensely well-received GHOST DIVISION
piece – which looked at the Revenant Retinues of Rudra and Odin and the
implications of these phantom-warriors (and Their Lord) for our
relationship to, our situation ‘midst the Myth. In 2020, we took as our
theme the Manyu – a term which simultaneously refers to the most
formidable of the Vedic War Gods, as well as to the divinely inspired
‘Active Mind’ state (also known as Odr, Furor, Menos) bestowed upon the
Indo-European man alike in emulation of He.

One of the more intriguing revelations propounded in the course of that
latter work was the apparent presence within Greek mythology of a
directly cognate understanding to what we would, in Hinduism, think of
as the Third Eye. I shall not go through the detailed points made in
that previous work here, but suffice to say that key features of the
(Third) Eye of Shiva were also attested not only for Zeus, but also for
other figures of myth such as Diomedes when acting under the
enlightening influence of Goddess Athena (indeed, the Emanation or Birth
of Athena (Minerva) from Zeus’ Forehead is an intrinsic part of this –
directly mirroring the manner in which The Manyu comes forth from the
forehead of Prajapati in the Shatapatha Brahmana, or various Avenger /
Destroyer Aspects are projected out by Lord Shiva in the later Hindu
mythology).

This seemed quite remarkable – as I had generally previously presumed
that the Third Eye was a specifically Hindu development. Something
which, while it did have certain obvious points of very loosely cognate
understanding in the other and more westerly Indo-European mythic
schemas (such as the Flaring/Flashing ‘Bale Eye’ of Odin), was
nevertheless unique to us and a development which could only have
occurred somewhere between Central Asia and Aryavarta Prime.

Yet in truth, it was the opposite. The Hindu perception had preserved
something incredibly archaic – something which had once been prominent
elsewhere, plausibly running right the way back to the
Proto-Indo-European Urheimat … yet had largely faded from view over the
ages. But was still very much in evidence – if only one knew where and
how to look.

And which, as is so often the case, concealed a far deeper series of
reservoirs of meaning to it of far broader saliency than one would first
have presumed about something so deceptively simple as merely having a
Third Eye.

Now in order to make our non-Hindu brethren feel perhaps a little more
comfortable – we shall start with the Greek (and, as it happens,
potentially Luwian – more upon that in due course) expressions of the
typology.

**The Triple Dominion Of Three Eyed Zeus**

Pausanias in his Tour of Greece makes reference to there being a
‘Three-Eyed’ (Triophthalmos) Zeus at the height of the Citadel of Argos,
to Whom he ascribes an ultimately Trojan origin. Indeed, more than just
a geographical provenancy – per Pausanias, this wooden sculpture was
purported to be King Priam’s own paternal-patron deific; this
representation of which having been taken as war-bounty by the
victorious Greeks from Priam’s own court \[that is to say, the Herkeios
form of the God – the Protector of Hearth and Home\]. The Trojan
ascribing of the statue is rather curious, as by the time Pausanias was
writing (the 2nd century A.D.), the Trojan War would have lain perhaps a
millennium and a half toward the past. It is not impossible that the
wooden statue was of Anatolian origins – however, it would be quite
remarkable for it to truly be of antebellum Troy.

Pausanias then goes on to venture an entirely plausible explication as
to just why this Larissaean Zeus had a third eye in the first place. To
put it directly – Pausanias suggests that the Three Eyes are in fact
indicative of Zeus’ Triple Aspect as Zeus, Hades, and Poseidon (which he
justifies in part via referencing previous generations of Greek
materials by the likes of Homer and Aeschylus, to show that Hades and
Poseidon, too, are Zeus) … and that what is connoted by the Eyes is, in
fact, ultimate rulership over all via regency throughout the Three
Realms which comprise the Universe (the Heavens, Underworld, and the
Oceans). Hence, presumably, why the Zeus of Argos is also hailed as
‘Panoptes’ – “All-Seeing”; for no World is beyond His Rule – no Enemy
beyond His Wrath.

Now before moving on to actually discuss the symbolism of the Eye in the
Indo-European conceptual schema which confirms Pausanias’ view here – I
should just like to take a moment to briefly address some of the
surrounding context to this Zeus of the Larissa. Namely, that en route
to the site in question, Pausanias encounters a Temple to Apollo which
houses an Oracle \[i.e. a Seer\], and a directly adjoining Temple to
AthenaOxyderkes \[‘the Sharp Sighted’\]. The latter situation is of
great interest to us in terms of the original evidence advanced in the
Manyu article from last year – for this Temple was commissioned by the
heroic Diomedes, in recognition of Athena’s bestowing of the potency of
the True-Sight (via the imbuing of the Menos) to Her Chosen upon the
field of war afore Troy. Something which enabled the human hero to
contend even with the Gods Themselves – routing first Aphrodite and then
mighty Ares, the Lord of War Himself. This potency is described by
Athena as being an ‘ancestral’ quality (i.e. possessed also by Tydeus,
Diomedes’ father and another Favourite of Athena), and manifests in
particular via the coruscation of flame from the brow of Diomedes’ helm
– ‘discerning truth from illusion’ and a beam of fire from the forehead,
as some readers shall no doubt be aware, being exactly the
characterizations of Lord Shiva’s Third Eye when Open. The investiture
of this Menos by Athena also directly mirrors the situation of Vak
Saraswati imbuing Her Chosen with the Ugra – a term usually utilized to
refer to berserk fury, but in-context in RV X 125 5, also to the potency
of the true-seeing Vedic Rsi to produce soaring insight in poesy; but I
digress.

The point is – it would seem that there is quite some association of the
environs of Argos’ Citadel with this especial espying and escrying
capacity for Vision. Perhaps also reflected in the noteworthy
characteristic of the eponymous Argos of myth – who himself was hailed
as Panoptes. I have my suspicions that Argos Panoptes \[‘The Bright’
‘All-Seeing’\] may in fact be yet another instance of the Indo-European
Sky Father in mis-remembered form (and then given an elaborate
‘backstory’ to endeavour to ‘justify’ the confusion) – which would
plausibly explicate not only the etymology of the name in question, and
the iconographic associations of the figure (the ‘Thousand Eyed’ – this
being quite a prominent Sky Father characteristic in the Vedas), but
also the linkage with Hera. But that is an excursion for another time.

As a further point of interest before we move on – it is useful to note
that Zeus Triophthalmos is not the only occurrence of Three-Eyed
conceptry (Or, indeed, the term ‘Triophthalmos’) within the Greek canon.
Apollodorus in his ‘Library’ makes reference to a seer’s direction for
Temenus (himself a future King of Argos) to follow the guidance of a
‘Three-Eyed one’ … who, as it happened, turned out to be a man (Oxylus)
riding a one-eyed horse. Pausanias himself also makes mention of another
very similar occurrence in his Tour of Greece – this time, featuring a
two-eyed man riding a cart pulled by a one-eyed mule aiding and availing
the Doric army to victory. There is something odd going on here, which I
may look at in a future piece – but suffice to say, I have reason to
doubt that the original forms of these legends featured a human with a
one-eyed steed or cart-pulling beast of burden; but rather, would have
instead entailed a Three Eyed One in the sense that we are more directly
accustomed to in the Hindu sphere. Indeed, it would be intriguing to
speculate that the Three Eyed figure would actually be the Seer Himself
in one or both cases – or, perhaps, a *One Eyed* figure riding a horse
or bovine … but that is, as I say, speculation for another time. What we
can say is that there was a certain trend of ‘rationalization’ and
almost euhemericre-working of Indo-European myth going on at some
junctures of the Classical Age – hence Herakles going from a Vajra
(Lightning/Thunder) wielding Deity to a club-wielding pre-Apotheosis
demigod when He slays the Hydra, for instance … an occurrence which
Pausanias, to demonstrate this tendency in action, overtly expresses
doubts about various of the characteristics of the major antagonist
involved therein – turning the multi-headed and otherwise mythic monster
into, as he puts it, a single-headed (although admittedly rather large)
serpent, because that is what he is “ready to believe”. He insists that
the more memorable – indeed downright iconic – mythically resonant
elements to even that well-known tale (which, as we can demonstrate via
our Vedic comparanda, are most definitely the archaic, underpinning, and
*true* form to the Myth) are merely the result of poetic license and
exaggeration by a poet endeavouring to ensure “his poetry might be more
remarkable”. With that in mind – it is not hard to see how the same
figure or those of the similar mindset might ‘reduce’ something
obviously supernatural such as a Three-Eyed Seer … into a poetically
phrased riddle for a man with a one-eyed conveyancy. Perhaps this
‘planing away’ approach also underpins the fading from view in the Greek
sphere elsewhere of the Three Eyes of the Sky Father.

And perhaps – just perhaps – Pausanias’ speculation that the Zeus murti
in question being of Luwian (Trojan) provenancyis also relevant here –
as the Anatolians, a relatively early branching off from the PIE sphere
may have managed to preserve some of this archaic Indo-European
conceptry in better shape than various of the Achaeans had done. It is
true that certain of the major Anatolian Indo-European groups wound up
hybridizing their religions with non-IE elements in a much more overt
way than various other IE peoples as the Bronze Age bore on – yet that
does not mean that there is no scope for these fossilized early IE
concepts to survive; especially in the case of the Luwians, who were
quite notably less enthusiastic in the syncretic sphere than the more
prominently thought of Hittites. Certainly, there are an array of
situations wherein seemingly Western Anatolian Indo-European elements
occurrent in later Greek mythology do accord quite well with what we
know from the Vedas. So we should not find ourselves unduly surprised to
find the Three Eyed Sky Father to be potentially a further instance of
same.

But let us move on.

In order to explicate just why it is that I believe Pausanias’ inferency
concerning the Three Eyes connoting the Three Worlds to be accurate, it
is necessary to bring the Eye back into focus. And delve into some
comparative Indo-European linguistics to more properly illuminate the
subject in earnest.

**Tri-Loka , Tri-Lochana , Tryambaka – The Archaic Attestations For The
Three-Eyed One**

As I am sure I have mentioned in previous works, one of my favourite
Sanskrit words-and-concepts is “Loka” (and “Lochana”), derived from PIE
“Lewk” (another firm(ament) favourite). These all form a closely
interconnected nexus of meaning. PIE Lewk refers to Light and the
ability to See \[‘Look’\]. Sanskrit Lochana refers to the Eye, to
something which *can* be Seen, and also to a source of Illumination.
Sanskrit Loka also connotes both the faculty of sight – as well as, in a
more specific sense, that which is seen: it is most frequently
encountered in this latter context in reference to a ‘world’ or ‘plane
\[of existence\]’, a ‘kingdom’ or ‘realm’, and potentially the
inhabitants (particularly a race) of same.

Lokalochana, therefore, refers to the Illumination (Lochana) of the
World(s) (Loka) – the Sun, frequently conceived of in the Indo-European
mythoi and cosmology as being the ‘Eye’ (Lochana) of the Sky Father
\[c.f the direct statements of this in both Greek and Hindu canonical
materials; as well as the rather strong implication that Odin’s Golden
Throne of Hlidskjalf (which is both ‘Lidded’ and ‘All-Seeing’) is
likewise\].

And to but briefly address the concept of TriLochana afore we head for
TriLoka – the Three Eyes we find attested for Lord Shiva are the same
but also slightly different to the Two Eyes found spoken of for Zeus.
Where Zeus has the Sun and the Moon, Shiva has Surya, Soma, and Agni.
That is to say – the Sun, the Moon (but relating also to that other
quality connoted by ‘Soma’), and Fire. Sun and Fire are directly
referenced in the Vedic conceptual schema for the Descent of this
Radiant Energy – as the Sun in the High Heavens, Lightning ‘midst the
Atmosphere, and Fire down on Earth. Which would naturally imply that in
this Tri-Lochana approach, the Moon / Soma is intended to represent the
Middle Realm and Mid-Atmosphere – although I am unaware of any direct
statement upon that matter (the closest I had come across was statement
of the placement of Soma upon the High Mountain – an area which would
potentially accord with the Mid-Atmosphere layering ; although other
interpretations of the passages in question are certainy possible).

Interestingly, the Shatapatha Brahmana \[a ritual and commentary
compendium compiled some centuries after the era of the RigVeda\] also
makes reference to Prajapati having as His Eyes the Sun and Moon – thus
showing that the Sky Father Deific having *two* rather than *three* eyes
was also an understanding retained in the Vedic sphere; which, like the
Greek, seems to have had little issue simultaneously conceiving the
deity in question as having two or three eyes contingent upon the
symbolic requirements of the representation. Although even in the
Shatapatha Brahmana, we find the veiled reference to the Third Eye
conceptry – the emanation of the Manyu from the Brow of Prajapati,
itself a suite of one-for-one cognate elements to the Birth of Athena /
Minerva from the forehead of Zeus, is continually referenced in later
Hindu materials as a typology featuring fierce
Avenger/Destroyer/Warrior/Executioner Aspects of both Mahadeva & Devi
coming forth from Their Third Eyes. In other words – even where the
Third Eye of the Sky Father is not explicit, it remains there
implicitly.

As well it should – for if we examine the Vedic exegesis, we find that
the earliest mentions for the Third Eye occur in the oldest layers of
the Vedas. The major instance – and also an integral thread of
continuance for the ancient Vedic core of our religion on into the
present day – is contained within RV VII 59 12. It is commonly referred
to these days as the MahaMrityunjaya \[‘Great Death-Conquering’\] Mantra
\[for a more in-depth discussion of it, please see my earlier work – ‘Of
Mrityunjaya and Modern Hinduism – The Deathless And Unceasing Glory Of
The Three-Eyed One’; written, as it would happen, as a follow-up piece
inspired by an observation at my Mandir’s MahaShivRatri observances last
year\]; and hails a being referred to as Tryambaka. Who is ‘Tryambaka’?
Why, Rudra of course !

Except that is almost the wrong question – the *right* one is … *what*
is Tryambaka? What does this theonym mean? And that, my friends, is
where things get … interesting.

**Tryambaka To Triformis –The Three Eyes OfThe Three MothersOfThe
Three Worlds**

The conventional rendering of Tryambakam is that it means ‘The
Three-Eyed One’. You shall find this in most of the major commentaries
upon the subject. Except linguistically, it does not *quite* make sense.
“Try” as in “Three” is logical enough – except “Ambaka”, this is rather
peculiar to directly mean “Eye”. I do not dispute that the God in
question is the Three-Eyed one, and that in a *figurative* sense it most
definitely *does* mean Eye (effectively as the ‘reverse’ of how the
literal ‘Eye’ in ZeusTriophthalmos effectively means “World”) … but we
shall see just why that is in due course.

There are two alternate proposals for unpacking its meaning. The first,
a ‘folk etymology’ of sorts, links the ‘Ambaka’ of ‘Tryambaka’ with the
‘Ambara’ and ‘Ambhas’ that mean ‘Space/Atmosphere’ and ‘Water(s)’
respectively. The implicit idea is that the Sanskrit root presumably
underpinning all three is one referring to the notion of “to go” – and
therefore, that what is meant by “Ambaka” is, effectively, a space
within which one *can* go … a “dimension”, an expanse, a plane. It is
not at all hard to see how this would quite directly link to and support
Pausanias’ reasoning for the Three Eyes of Zeus connoting Zeus’ Dominion
over the Three Worlds / divisions of the Universe.

The second is rather more interesting – and if properly considered is
not actually mutually exclusive with the first. Amba is also quite
frequently encountered as part of terms for a Mother. Tryambaka would,
therefore, implicate Rudra to be The One With Three Mothers. Why do I
say that this is a non-exclusive rendering with the Three Dimensions?
Because there is a broad (indeed, were this Old Norse – ‘Jord’)
Indo-European understanding of the Mother Goddess as being just exactly
that. You have heard of Mother Earth? Well, it is the similar
understanding – except applied not only to Earth, but also to Sky … and
to That Which Lies Beyond Even Heaven (i.e. The Waters – or, were this
the ‘derivation’ in later Greek cosmology, the more terrestrial Ocean
with which it shares substantive coterminity). We find this directly
expressed in a number of Vedic verses and ritual phrasings wherein the
Goddess in question is quite expressly spoken of *as* the Earth, *as*
the Sky, *as* the Infinite, the Waters. A good example of this is
provided for us via RV X 63 2 – “Ye who were born from Waters, and from
Aditi, and from the Earth, do Ye here listen to my call.” This is a bit
different from various other ritual invocations which instead present
Aditi as being above the Earth and Heavens (i.e. as the Waters – or, if
you like, the ‘Astral’, indeed as Brahman Herself also, as we should
expect with a name like “Infinite”, “Undivided”, “Unbound”), and also
from those wherein Aditi is instead directly identified with/as the
Earth. However, the fact that Aditi is identified without difficulty
with all three of these planes only serves to confirm my rendering. The
next line of that aforementioned Hymnal (RV X 63 3), dependant upon how
one reads it either identifies Aditi again with the Heavens … or Dyaus
(Pitar) is linked closely to Aditi. It is quite probable that *both*
rather than *either* are, as per usual, intended to be read. As, after
all, Aditi is the Wife of the Sky Father – as Earth, Heavens, and Above
still further. Hence, Tryambaka would plausibly be understood in the
same manner – as referring to the Sky Father via His Wife’s saliency.
Something which is less odd and uncommon than it first sounds. We have,
after all, the Old Norse theonymics for Odin which hinge around His
relationship with Frigg (for example – “Angan Friggjar”, “Frumverr
Friggjar”, and of course, “Faðmbyggvir Friggjar”); and for that matter,
recurrent Hindu expressions of same – Shiva being hailed as
UmaPataye\[‘Husband of Uma’\], AmbikaPataye\[‘Ambika’ as in ‘Mother’,
as we have seen – ‘Pataye’ as in ‘Husband’\] inter many alia.

The association of the Goddess with these Three Realms is not exclusive
to the Vedic understanding, either – with the Serpent, Dove, and Dolphin
triple-symbol of Greek Demeter similarly representation Her Dominion
over Earth, Air, and Sea \[see my various previous works looking at
Demeter for more upon this oft-less well understood Goddess, especially
in Her proper Indo-European context\]; and in Hesiod’s Theogony, the
eminent Anatolian-Greek theologian in question places significant
emphasis upon the irreducible linkage of Hekate to Earth, Sea, and
Heaven. I declare that it is “irreducible”, because that is,
effectively, as Hesiod himself places it – stating that the dominion in
question was in place “from the beginning”, and unaltered by Zeus (Who,
it is noted, holds Her in most highest regard – resonant with the manner
in which Aditi Vak Saraswati is hailed as the Goddess of Gods in the
Vedic realm … and later, especially Shakta, scriptural canon of ours).

It would also be quite plausible, I suspect, to link in the Roman
concept of the Diva Triformis – the Triple-Form Goddess. This is a
complex figure, and a full consideration of Her is perhaps beyond the
sufficient scope of this piece; however suffice to say that “Diana” is
etymologically a female rendering of the same “Shining / Heavenly”
Indo-European root which informs “Dyaus”, “Jupiter”, “Zeus”, etc.
\[compare Dion & Dione in Ancient Greek\]. This is plausibly similar
also to what we find expressed in the “Ju-” of “Juno” relative to
“Jupiter”, and the “De-” of “Demeter” per my speculative
re-interpretation of the linguistics of the figure in Light of the
underlying comparative theology; Hera, too, should likely fit into this
schema, albeit with a more synonymic approach to producing the
‘(Day)Light’ element to the theonym (see my recent work – “Hera As
Indo-European Goddess – A Preliminary Investigation”). The common thread
of male and female counterpart deifics having strongly resemblant names
bearing the same core elemental theme is also well attested – Varuna &
Varuni, Rudra & Rudrani, Kaal & Kali, Bhairava & Bhairavi, for instance;
or, in Old Norse –Fjörgyn and Fjörgynn.

To bring things back to Diana Herselves – the understanding being
communicated via the Diva Triformis conceptry is one of a multilayered
multifacity, just as we should expect via the dual notions of the Three
Eyes (wherein the same Eyes are at once, Radiances and also
Planes/Worlds). There is, therefore, no inherent contradiction between
those Classical authors who ascribed the identity and essences of the
Diva Triformis upon the basis of what we might term the Tri-Loka (Three
Worlds) (i.e. ‘planetological’) model; and those who instead appeared to
approach the Goddess more via the Tri-Lochana (Three Illuminators)
understanding.

To illustrate that which I mean by this – there are multiple figures and
figurative understandings for this Diva Triformis schema. Some held that
the correct trio was Diana on Earth, Luna in the Sky, and Proserpine in
the Underworld. Others instead had the schema as being Hekate in the
Underworld (which is interesting as – strictly speaking – Hekate
*should* be a Solar Goddess per the original Anatolian IE conceptry as
well as the direct correlate elements with Vedic Aditi – more upon this
in a moment). These two perspectives are broadly correlate as the
Tri-Loka model – each Goddess-facing is identified with one of the Three
Worlds / Divisions of the Cosmos. Except implicit within the linguistics
is the *other* model – the Tri-Lochana model of the Three Radiances,
Three Illuminators, Three Celestial Bodies.

By which I mean – Diana is not, per the linguistics, “On Earth” … but
rather, “Illuminating the Earth” as the *Daytime Sky* – the Sun, in just
the same manner as Dyaus and Dyaus’ Solar Eye. Luna (Selene), meanwhile,
*is* in the Sky, most certainly – however this is the Night-Time Sky;
illuminating the Night just as the Moon does – the Lunar Eye of the Sky
Father. And as for Persephone and/or Hekate ? Well, this is the
“Underworld Sun” – or, as it happens, the far removed Highest (Outer)
Heaven where the Realm of the Glorious/Ancestral Dead is to be found.
This comes directly under the Reign of Aditi in the Vedic sphere (in
addition to, of course, Varuna (the Sky Father – as is Hades , Dis
Pater) and Lord Yama (Remus, in the Romanic conceptry)), with the Night
both Gulf and Veil between the Daylit Realm of the Living Earth and the
Ultra-Solar realm in question.

Said Highest Heaven, of course, is quite directly proximate to The
Waters in the Vedic understanding – indeed, per one’s reading of RV X
125 \[the famed Devi Sukta\], the position of Devi Aditi is
*within/beyond* these Waters (as liminal sphere of the Universe),
breathing Life into our universe from the World’s Summit where the Realm
of the (Fore)Father(s) is to be found. I have previously explored in
quite some other works the process of ‘derivation” whereby the Sky
Afterlife/Underworld of the more archaic Indo-European cosmology has
‘migrated’ to be an Underworld beneath the Earth’s surface and our feet
\[‘Patala-Loka’\]; as well as the corresponding ‘shift’ whereby the Sea
of Stars and Ocean of Suns has similarly ‘descended’ to become moored
(indeed, meer’ed– and this is a double-service PIE pun due to the
relevant ‘Mer’ and ‘Mer’ meaning ‘To Die’ (or Disappear) and Sea / Body
of Water, respectively) in the more terrestrial oceans of our world.
Hence the otherwise quite curious conceptry of the Sun and Solar Energy
coming from the Sea still being somewhat preserved via the Horse
association of Poseidon – despite this making less sense if the Seas are
felt to be around one and on roughly similar level to the land , as
compared to the more archaic situation of the Sea up in the Sky (which
also more sensibly renders the Solar expression into our universe as
being congealed emanation of the Absolute, the Undivided – Brahman
Aditi; as with the Vajra and Soma for exactly the same reasoning … but
more upon those points can be found in my other works).

Hence, even though the astute reader may have mentally noted that there
is no *overt* ‘Sea’ division in the Diva Triformis conceptry – this does
not mean that there lacks an *implicit* point of resonancy therein for
same.

And thus, we may also handily reconcile two otherwise rather difficult
and different ‘Three Worlds’ conceptual-cosmological schemas – the
predominant Greek division of Heavens, Underworld, Sea ; and the major
archaic Vedic ‘Three Worlds’ understanding of the Earth, Mid-Atmosphere,
and (Higher) Heavens. Although as we have earlier demonstrated via the
citation for RV X 63 2 – the Vedic Rsis were also quite well acquainted
with an alternative Tri-Loka of the Earth, the Heavens, and the Waters.

**The Concordancy Of The Triluminate Planes**

Although what must be constantly kept in mind with these sorts of
rubrics is that we are not expecting the precise concordancy between
Indo-European cultures of the cosmo-religious co-ordinates in question –
as there is not even such concordancy between the co-ordinatesinvolved
even *within* a given Indo-European descendant mytho-religious sphere.
As we have seen, the Vedas know several ways to phrase the notion of
“The Three Worlds”; the Classical canons cannot agree upon which Three
‘Facings’ make up the appropriate perspective upon Diva Triformis; and
endeavouring to link up the relevant data-points either within or
between these mytho-cultural complexes via necessity requires taking the
proverbial (three) steps back in order to more properly appreciate the
glorious broader and underlying true picture.

And what is that ? Well, let us put it this way:

We have the Sky Father Deific – represented with Three Eyes. These Three
Eyes are, simultaneously, Three Worlds or Divisions of the Universe –
and the Three Illuminations also found therein. Which Illumination
corresponds to which World is, itself, rather “up in the air”, however –
at least partially because just *what* these Three Divisions actually
are is likewise convoluted.

It would be therefore quite easy to either tie ourselves up hopelessly
in knots attempting to hammer out perfect underlying concordancies – or
to disregard the prospect entirely in favour of suggesting that these
obviously interrelated understandings should be considered separately,
if at all. Except that would be – to my mind, at any rate – almost to
miss the point.

There *is* just such an underlying unity to be had here – if one knows
how to look.

Consider the Shaivite symbolism of the Tripundra – the forehead marking
supposed to recall that of Lord Shiva Himself. It is comprised of a red
line or shorter marking running vertical, and three horizontal lines of
greyish white Vibhuti (Holy Ash). The former, this is applied to the
brow in the approximate space of a powerful Third Eye – where the Fire
Eye of Lord Shiva is upon His Face; the latter, they run across the same
space and intersect. What do these three plus one lines represent? Well,
one understanding is that the three are correlate with the Three Worlds
– the TriLoka; and the Red is, as we should find, the Third Eye of the
TriLochana. Except these are not the only understandings for the three
lines – there are quite an array of other symbolic connexions which can
and have been made for them. Because in truth, what the Three stand for
is, as with the Three Points of the Trishula \[literally what it means
-‘Three Points’ – the Weapon of Mahadev in English we would call a
‘Trident”; and ascribe to it the potency of not only Poseidon’s Trident,
but also Hades’ Bident, Zeus’ Thunderbolt-Javelin, etc. – see my earlier
work WORLDSPEAR for more\] – is dominion over the Universe (and all is
energies, realms, processes) entire.

It is such a simple thing – and yet it contains all within a set of
three lines and one more , a *far* vaster conceptual array. How? By
being keyed to , by being applied in emulation of – that of the Sky
Father, Lord Shiva, Himself.

So when I emphatically state that there is an essential underlying unity
to all of these Tri-schemas even despite various appearances to the
contrary … that is exactly what I mean. The Unity in question is as the
Sovereign Dominion of this Divinity. Whether we wish to take Pausanias’
own perspective of the Three Worlds in question being the Sky,
Underworld, and Ocean; or whether we prefer the Vedic Tri-Loka of Earth,
Mid-Atmosphere, and Higher Heaven (or, for that matter, the other Vedic
perspective of the Waters, Heaven, and Earth) – the Point, singular,
remains the same:

The Sky Father, particularly as Axis Mundi, has Three Eyes (plus a
thousand – there for other reasons as the All-Seeing and potentially the
wealth of Stars at Night).

Why? Because His is the Samrajya – a term we could translate as
“Imperium” or ‘Empire”, but in fact means something closer to “Same
Rule” … as in “Same Rule – Everywhere”.

The Three Eyes connote exactly this – that in all divisions of the
Universe, He Reigns. And whether as Sun or Moon or Fire – the sources of
Light and Life and Law within our great, vast, omnisphere of the Cosmos
\[a term itself connoting a ‘realm’, and a realm under law in the proper
Ancient Greek\] … all these are His Dominion.

We know these things elsewhere in the Indo-European sphere as well, too,
of course – yet it is only among the Hindus that the tradition of the
Three Eyed, Triluminate, and Three-Realmed Sky Father has truly been
preserved. And therefore, it is only *from* the Hindu preserved
Perspective that we are once more able to *re-*illuminate these great
Three Fires of the Worlds – and Their Transcendent Upholder-Imperator.

Hail to the Indo-European Sky Father – Whether we know Him as Rudra,
Odin, Zeus (and, of course, as we have Seen – Hades, Poseidon), Jupiter,
Dyaus Pitar, alongside other more exotic theonyms besides such as
Tryambaka and Triophthalmos … Or, indeed, simply as Shiva – to Whom this
(A)Arti-cle as with this Night is owed.

The Triple-Eyed, Triple-Throned, Triple-Crowned-With-Radiance Ishvara .

नमस्तेअस्तुभगवन् विश्वेश्वराय महादेवाय त्र्यंबकाय त्रिपुरान्तकाय
त्रिकाग्नि-कालाय  
कालाग्निरुद्राय नीलकण्ठाय म्रुत्युंजयाय सर्वेश्वराय सदाशिवाय
श्रीमन्महादेवाय नमः॥

Worlds-Sovereign Emperor in the Past – Uncovered, the Present – Upheld,
and the Future – Restored !

ॐ नमः शिवाय !
