+++
title = "Against The Notion Of Gautama Buddha As A “Scythianxa0Sage”"
date = "March 19, 2021"

+++
I recently happened across somebody sharing an excerpt from an article
which claimed the Gautama Buddha to be a “Scythian Sage”.  
  
There’s something of a cottage industry in propounding that Buddha was
Scythian – and while I don’t disagree that Buddhism wound up having a
lot to *do* with the Scythians … there’s something else going on there.
I’ll post the article excerpt I’m responding to here:  
  

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/162909807_3512845798838029_7634341568840153472_n.jpg?w=360)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/162434286_3512846035504672_1678255552034401024_n.jpg?w=360)

  
  
Anyway, response begins:  
  
No, no Buddha’s title was not literally Scythian Sage.

There’s academic debate and dispute over whether the Shakya in question
is supposed to be Saka, or whether it’s *another* Sanskrit word meaning
“adroit, capable”.

“The Clever Sage”. Hardly a controversial element of nomenclature.

The position that it’s supposed to connote a Scythian-esque ethnonym is,
if memory serves, something of a minority – although it does have some
influential supporters.

In my experience, many of the people pushing the line online that that
Buddha was Scythian – are doing so because they don’t like the idea of a
guy they like being Indian.

The work you have posted an excerpt from, is effectively attempting to
argue that a Scythian ethnonym waas affixed to the figure ina period
several hundred years after the figure is supposed to have lived
\[subject to dating issues for said figure, as it acknowledges\].

It is a hypothesis, lacking in solid evidence, presented as hard and
incontrovertible fact. This is simply not the case.

Now there *is* plausible linkage to *an* ethnonym .. well, more of a
caste community. But also, yes, to a polity …

… except the polity in question is to the *east* of the major
Brahminical zone.

In order for one to accept that this was a Scythian grouping , one would
have to believe that a Scythian group, calling themselves Scythians (but
not the usual “Saka” Scythians) had managed to migrate their way through
the actual Hindu zone (plus all the other points between the more usual
Scythian sphere to the west and up beyond Gandhara, etc.) … and done so
without leaving an Iranic linguistic trace or historical attestation on
their way through.

The extract – and I appreciate there may be more to it than this that
you have not included which makes a better case – appears to suggest
that it can get around this by suggesting it’s a post-facto formulation,
a retroactive thing several hundred years after the guy in question by
Indo-Scythians looking to stamp their mark upon the man.

If that were the case – then that would *not* suggest that that Buddha
was a Scythian .. that would suggest that some Scythians wanted to claim
that Buddha.

The other point to be made is that the Buddhist tradition this sage is
supposed to have been party to – is effectively a continuance of a
Sramana milieu \[in contrast to the ‘Orthodoxy’ – Srauta\] that was , as
far as we can tell, pretty well establilshed – broadly speaking – within
that portion of India for much of a millennium prior to the later
datings for the Buddha that we are supposed ot be talking about here.

So, the purported “Scythian” nature of the doctrine in question … it
does not make any sense – because there is no Scythian group turning up
to bear it – as far as we know, anyway. It’s already there with its
foundations *many centuries* prior to any such thing.

If one wants to torturously endeavour to re-write the known history of
Indo-Iranian migrations into the Indian sphere so as to have an Iranic
group calling themselves “Scythians” showing up on the wrong side of
Vedic Aryans, much of a millennium prior to substantive Scythian
presence being recorded to the west of said Vedic Aryan sphere … the
question I have to ask is *why* one wishes to do that.

AND ANOTHER THING

you see that bit at the end of the excerpt you have posted, wherein a
claim is made about there being some lack of wandering ascetic -ism
going on in India pre-Buddha and that it’s “quite likely” these were
introduced *by* the figure in question ?

That’s fairly directly contradicted by quite an array of Vedic evidence
from, again, perhaps a *thousand years* before.

The most prominent example of this being the *rather prominent* Keshin
hymnal of the RV.

As I have said – this article excerpt you have posted is just .. making
some bizarre claims in pursuit of its agenda that are not really
supported by the facts.
