+++
title = "Techno-Theology For MahaShivRatri – An Exegesis Of A Psytrancexa0Track"
date = "March 11, 2021"

+++


# An error occurred.

[Try watching this video on
www.youtube.com](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ofQ9nY7oq4c), or enable
JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser.

I wrote what follows just under four years ago – so our understandings
have, of course, grown quite significantly in the interim. As it is
#MahaShivRatri – and as Shiva is, of course, Nataraja \[‘Lord of the
Dance’\] … it seemed fittingly appropriate to post the exegesis of the
samples used in this psytrance track. Techno-theology, indeed.  
  
Anyway, the (major) samples used \[I’ve capitalized the starts of the
particles involved so as to make it easier to follow\]:  
Aum namo HiranyaBahavey HiranyaVarnaaya HiranyaRoopaya HiranyaPataye
AmbikaaPataya UmaaPataye PashuPataye namo namaha  
  
Namaste AstuBhagavan Vishveshvaraya MahaDevaya TryAmbakaya
TriPurAntakaya TrikAgni-Kalaya KalAgniRudraya NilaKaṇṭhaya MrityunJayaya
Sarveshvaraya SadaSivaya SrimanMahadevaya namah  
  
And, in terms of the commentary and the conceptual explication of what
these mean … I’ll let 2017 me take over \[and you can *tell* it’s 2017
me because these days I could and probably would write multiple
paragraphs about almost every word involved … but I’ve left this almost
completely unaltered despite some areas which could perhaps have
benefitted from greater depth\]:  
  
“The samples in this track come from an Uma Mohan rendition; and whilst
I’m a pretty great fan of what she’s done, it’s worth noting that her
“Namaskarantha Mantra” is, in fact, *itself* a composite from two *far
older* sources…  
  
The first part comes from a Shaivite hymn found in the Mahanarayana
Upanishad \[itself about two and a half thousand years old – and often
considered of sufficient import to be appended to the Vedas themselves
\[update-from-2021 note: actually, every Veda has Upanishads as part of
Them – it’s part of what makes Upanishads Upanishads\] which offers
salutations to Lord Shiva; and talks in quite literally glowing terms of
some of His attributes \[using a consistent system of “Golden” – Hiran
metaphors; viz: ‘Hiranyabahu’ – ‘Golden Armed’; ‘Hiranyavarna’ –
‘Golden-coloured’ \[although I have also used the term used in reference
to the origination of the Vedas\]; ‘Hiranyarupa’ – ‘Gold-like’;
‘Hiranyapati’ – ‘Lord of Gold’ … although probably worth noting that
‘Gold’ doesn’t simply mean literal gold, but also carries symbolism one
might perhaps think of as ‘Alchemical’ – imperishability, for
instance\], as well as citing His Consort, Mother Parvati, twice \[once
in the context of Her aspect as ‘Mother of the World’; and once as Uma –
more directly regarded as the Wife of Mahadeva\], before closing with
the invocation of Lord Shiva as Pashupati – Lord of Creatures.  
  
ॐ नमोहिरण्यबाहवेहिरण्यवर्णाय हिरण्यरूपाय हिरण्यपतये।  
अम्बिकापतय उमापतयेपशुपतयेनमोनमः ॥  
  
The second part comes from the concluding lines of the first chapter of
the Sri Rudram hymn found in the YajurVeda. This is one of the oldest
and most sacred/important Shaivite hymns – being somewhere in the
vicinity of at least three *millennia* old; and also forming the source
for many elements of what have become conventional Shaivite worship
\[including the name ‘Shiva’ for Rudra \[referring to an ‘Auspicious’
side to the Deity\]; and the “Aum Namah Shivaya” Mantra – which is
probably amongst the most-known and recited in all of Hinduism\].  
  
The first lines are composed of salutations to Shiva as Lord, Great God,
and Lord of the Universe; whilst the next couplet refers to traditional
epithets of Mahadev – Tryambakaaya \[‘Three Eyed’ – see, for instance,
the occurrence in the MahaMritunjaya Mantra\], and Tripurantakaya
\[‘Destroyer of the Three Cities’ – referring to an important myth in
which Lord Shiva destroys three otherwise unassailable demon
fortresses\]. The verse then moves from three-based symbolism to that of
fire and time – viz. ‘TrikAgniKalaya’ \[referring to an occasion of the
sacral manifestation of the Three Fires\], and ‘KalAgniRudraya’
\[Rudra-as-the-Fire-At-The-End-Of-Time which consumes the world\];
before moving through further well-known Names of Lord Shiva –
Nilakanthaya \[‘The Blue-Throated One’, referring to Lord Shiva’s
swallowing of the Halahala Poison produced as a by-product of the
extraction of the Amrit \[‘Nectar of Immortality’ from the primordial
ocean of milk\], which turned His throat blue, without killing Him –
according to some tellings, thanks to intervention from His Wife\],
Mritunjayaya \[‘Conqueror of Death’ – c.f the aforementioned
MahaMritunjaya Mantra, a power occasionally exercised on behalf of the
Devotee\]; and then titles – Sarveshvaraya \[‘Lord of All’\],
Saadashivaya \[‘The Ever-Auspicious One’\], concluding with salutations
to SrimanMahaDevaya \[‘The Great and Respected God’\].  
  
नमस्तेअस्तुभगवन् विश्वेश्वराय महादेवाय त्र्यंबकाय त्रिपुरान्तकाय
त्रिकाग्नि-कालाय  
कालाग्निरुद्राय नीलकण्ठाय म्रुत्युंजयाय सर्वेश्वराय सदाशिवाय
श्रीमन्महादेवाय नमः  
  
So there we go 😃 The meaning and provenance of the Sanskrit samples used
in a modern psytrance track traced back through three thousand years,
two Hymns, and one Supreme Deity’s mythic corpus 😃  
  
ॐ नमः शिवाय “
