+++
title = "On “Thor Mantras” Proposed Byxa0DharmaNation"
date = "March 21, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/thor-hallows-runes.png?w=580)

It has come to my attentionthat the chap who does “DharmaNation”, is
once again pushing his “Thor Mantras” effort. Now with all the
appropriate respect that is due to the gentleman in question … there are
some issues with what he has presented. I won’t get into his attempted
co-identification of Odin with Indra (if you’re interested in that – I
have quite voluminous works demonstrating that Odin is, in fact, Dyaus
Pitar, Rudra in the Vedic/Hindu comparanda) – except to note that it is
interesting that he has chosen to use an Indra mantra as the basis for
his “Thor Mantra”, considering his opposition to the identification of
Indra with Thor.

The following is something I had written analyzing his proposed “Thor
Mantras” last year, edited slightly to enhance clarity upon some points.
I present it here as it also touches upon some quite important
cautionary points in our general field of resurrecting Indo-European
theology & religion. And also because it always helps our audience to
take a walk-through of some of the elements we are drawing upon – in
this case, a little bit upon how the relevant actual Gayatri Mantra
works.

The two “Thor Mantras” which the figure known as ‘Sri Dharma Pravartaka’
has presented are as follows:

“Thor Mantra: Om Odinputraya namaha

Thor Gayatri Mantra: Om Odinputraya vidmahe vajrahastaya dhimahi tanno
donnar prachodayat”

Now, the first one is basically just an incredibly standard almost
sentence. You might as well just say “Hail Odinson”. \[there’s a bit
more going on in terms of the phraseology, but more on that some other
time\].

But the second one … what the man’s done, is he’s taken a particular
form of mantra – a Gayatri Mantra – and he’s swapped some words out from
a semi-prominent version of same.

The Indra Gayatri Mantra in question being –

“Om Sahasranetraya Vidmahe  
Vajrahastaya Dhimahi  
Tanno Indra Prachodayat”

Except in place of ‘Sahasranetraya’ \[an epithet that may usually refer
to Indra – or to Vishnu\], he has put “Odinputraya’.

And instead of ‘Indra’, he has put ‘Donnar’

Now, as it happens, my issues with this are … perhaps not quite what you
would think.

I *do* think that simply swapping words out from a Mantra is … something
to be cautious about, because the deep and interleavened meanings of
various of the words, mean that changing one can disrupt patterns that
one might not even have appreciated at the time.

In this case, Sahasranetraya would mean ‘Thousand Eyed’ – or,
occasionally, ‘Thousand-Limbed’. It is something that goes, in part,
with the Solar underpinnings of the Gayatri Mantra class … and also with
the intended meaning of the formulation all up – which is to awaken the
mind and intellect

So … taking that particle out to replace with a dual-language “Odinson”
… is something to be a bit careful about. I would have thought it’d
disrupt the intended energy flow from the opening of the Mantra and its
empowerment \[which is, after all, at least partially Solar – and hence,
also, the well-attested Solar Deity Arms(Rays)/Eyes(Beams) mentions in
the Vedas\] … but then, that is just me.

Meanwhile, “Indra” is a complex term , to say the least. I’ve written
more about the etymology etc. elsewhere – but suffice to say that,
again, simply swapping in a German word for “Thunder” is .. quite a
shift in some ways.

You are going from a term that connotes the Leadership and
Warrior-Chieftainship in a crisis – and also the bright, illuminating
descending empowerment from Heaven \[via a closely related particle that
is semi-intrinsic in the term – “Indu”\] … to a word that means a noise.

Now, all of this is why I am habitually rather .. sketchy about various
attempts at ‘integrationalism’ between different Indo-European
traditions that are not done pretty carefully.

It is not to say that it is impossible. It is just to say that if you
don’t *really* know what you’re doing, you are liable to cut out
essential arteries in things, so to speak.

Indeed, it can get worse – you can unintentionally invert the meanings
of some things , by swapping in words that sound really close to
Sanskrit \[or whichever other liturgical language we are talking of\]
terms that you do *not* want in the liturgy in question.

So, with that in mind … what I would suggest is that the *better*
approach is one that makes use of the toolset we have available. *IN*
the language in question rather than patchwork jobs drawing from outside
it, unless you’re really sure that is what is right.

As a side-note … I look kind of sidesways at using both “Odin” and
“Donnar” \[i.e. a Nordic and a German(ic) term each\] in the same thing,
but side-issue.

What I mean by this … is that as Thor is clearly Indra/Hanuman (same
deity – c.f RV X 86; also note the obscure Nordic scriptural reference
to Thor as an “Ape” in the Grimnismal) … why go through the extra steps
that lead you in curious directions. Why not just use an Indra mantra, a
Hanuman mantra as already extant. We already *know* these work in the
canon in question – although I do appreciate that there may be some
issues using it *outside* of that canon ; or bringing something else
into that canon, etc.

Another point that I should perhaps raise, is that yes, you *can* use
various terms that are cognate/resonant with the Nordic/Germanic ones in
Sanskrit if making something .. bespoke, you might say … and it will
probably lead to better results.

So, in terms of the example of that “Thor Gayatri Mantra” … if you were
going to take out the Thousand-Eyed One in favour of “Odinson” …

Yes, that is actually fair enough in some ways. And I would simply have
gone with Vataputraya … or, perhaps, Vayuputraya – because Vata, in
particular, has cognate/coterminous derivation with “Odin”.

It’s .. complex, to be sure, because Odin mainly derives from ‘Weht’ ,
but there is unquestionably also a ‘Va-‘ particle synergy that means the
‘Wind’ element, and what that represents – including ‘Word’ – is also
preserved therein .. .after all, the ‘excited state’, in question, the
Odr, is one that lends itself well to the swift-moving of the wind, the
life-force of breathing, and the intellect (of the mind), the *speech*
of words … and we are here taking advantage of the fact that there are
*two* “Vata”terms in Sanskrit – which are complete homophones despite
having nominally separate derivations; one which we have aforementioned,
from ‘Weht’, the other which means ‘Upper Atmosphere’ – where the Wind
meets the Akasha.

The idea with ‘VataPutraya” – would not be to literally conote the “Son
of Vata \[Deva\]” … but rather, a figurative descending from this deity
and this metaphysical/cosmological zone. That sending of ‘wit’, ‘words’,
and ‘wisdom’ which we know from our comparative theology that the
Divinity in question mediates and mandates to us.

OdinPutraya therefore actually *does* work rather well in some ways for
the purpose of that portion of the Mantra, but it is amusing to me
because it also resonates therefore with a Shaivite position that the
Vaishnava who has proposed this mantra … would not like. So he is
correct in some ways .. it is just that he is *accidentally* correct.

But to bring this back to tin-tacs … you would not be attempting to have
a drawing of the power of ‘Odr’ in a Thor Mantra – I would have thought,
anyway. It is a useful thing to be drawing , this is true … but just as
we would probably not expect *Solar* energy in association with Thor …
so too would it seem that this perhaps would be under another aegis.

Meanwhile, Vata- as in, the upper atmospheric layer but also a somewhat
archaic Vayu theonym \[indeed Vayu-Vata is directly attested, and Vata
is maintained in oddly enough the Iranic reading of the figure\] ,
*would* be an apt source to be drawing the desired energy from , whence
the Vajra energy would somewhat hail from. And would also connote the
descent of the Breath in the Lungs – a *vital* investiture ! and most
definitely an empowering one, also good for clarity of the mind by
blowing out some of the more moribund and ‘tamasik’ delusions- although
at the potential expense of, like Odr, being ‘in motion’, rather than
easily ‘settled’; even if the upper atmospheric layer may appear quite
‘serene’ from afar. It is, almost, the Akasha , the Akasha mixed with
Air.

\[Although I should *also* make mention of the … well, there is another
meaning to “Vata” – to assault, to injure … which uh … well, this may be
not so good ; same (sounding) word a lot of the time, but yee; although
on the other hand, it does accord somewhat with the ‘To Seize’ ,
Ergreiffen concept as applies Odin. And ‘Son of the Assault’ would also
have a potential utility to it for our context and purposes\]

For a comparative of what I am getting at … the relevant Hanuman
equivalent Gayatri Mantra instead has ‘Anjaniye’ in this place … and
while on one level, it is saying Anjani’s Son … on another level, it is
referencing अञ्जना – that is ‘Fire’, and the power of illuminating
clarification.

I suppose what I am getting at … is that:

a\) the proper way to approach these matters, is to use the material
from the other Indo-European mythoreligious canons to help you to
understand the one that you are in and adhere to.

This may occasionally be a quite extreme thing – like, given the state
of the Nordic/Germanic religious canon, we are going to have to use
quite some Vedic elements to fill in the ‘gaps’ in what has come down to
us. And if you’ve followed my work on Classical (Greek & Roman)
mythology of late, you can see me doing something similar to undo
‘Mess-O-Potamia’.

And you can also see it in what I have just done with the commentary on
that ‘Thor Gayatri Mantra’ attempt – wherein I have utilized my
understanding of both Nordic mythology and my own Hindu home(a), to
mutually reinforce things; to facilitate a greater understanding of
scriptural and cosmological elements particularly as applies the latter
\[or, we may say, the Vata\].

b\) in situations wherein we attempt to rather hastily bring together
stuff from different traditions, this can lead to confusion and
misunderstanding ; and even occasionally some counterproductive results.

So, for instance, we had a guy not so long ago who was insisting that
Indra was the Sky Father \[Dyaus Pitar\] , on the basis of , largely,
some stuff around Zeus, and some not quite properly understood Vedic
materials. He also said that Thor was the Sky Father on a similar basis.

And yes, as it happens, the Romans \[or, rather,
thepost-Christianization Romans who had forgotten much of the truth of
their heritage and its respective theology\] made just such an assertion
– it is why we have ‘Thursday’ for the Day of Jupiter, for example.

But this does not make it right, it just means that things get confused.

And when we are using *prayers* and the Sacred Speech … confusion can
quite literally be *deadly*.

There is a famous example of this, as it happens, in the Hindu corpus –
wherein Vritra is attempting a spell to grant himself immortality …

.. he mispronounces a single syllable, it changes the meaning, and he
fates himself to be killed , particularly by Indra.

Now, if you are just blithely ‘injecting’ terms from other languages
into your Sanskrit, or your Old Norse … well, one ought be *careful*
about this , for obvious reasons. Who knows *what* bilingual translation
errors / puns you are inviting.

NoteI: I said “careful” not “opposed to”.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

That concludes what I had penned upon this subject more than half a year
ago, when I first became aware of the matter.

Now I do wish to emphasize here that I am not attempting to take some
sort of shot at the gentleman calling himself ‘Sri Dharma Pravartaka’.
He is a Vaishnava Acharya, and as far as I am aware he is in fact a
properly initiated one of a reputable lineage. However, comparative
Indo-European religion is not, perhaps, his forte – and for whatever
reason he has made some curious choices as applies this particular
effort of his.

In fact, I would go so far as to suggest that it is precisely his
competency *within* the specific field he is acclaimed in – that of the
modern Vaishnava tradition – that may have meant he is less in his
element when dealing with some other spheres. There is no shame in that.

And I must confess – even though I am perhaps a bit bemused by various
of the results and postulations he has come up with – I do acknowledge
his enthusiasm. And if it helps to get some of the people who like what
he does, to see the world in the more pervasive Indo-European terms that
are the fundament and the foundation of our view here at Arya Akasha …
well, that is something, then.

Although I *do* prefer that people – whomever they may be – engage with
*a* tradition … and approach the *blending* of traditions with caution
and with care. We are dealing with a three dimensional (well, more than
three dimensional) conceptual framework when it comes to Indo-European
comparative theology. That is how I have come to view the scenario we
find ourselves in – wherein we can simultaneously understand that Odin
is the Father of Thor, Dyaus Pitar is the Father of Indra, Vayu is (a)
Father of Hanuman, Zeus is the Father of Herakles, etc. (i.e. these are
all expressions of the same Indo-European Sky Father begetting the
Striker/Thunderer) … but also recognize and appreciate that there are
subtle, yet important differences to each particular understanding. Some
of which are incredibly intricate in the underlying meaning actually
being conveyed. Unity – yet nuance, depth, and refraction giving greater
resonancy to the overarching whole.

The issue with these “Thor Mantras”, is that they are in part collapsing
down this multi-dimensional space to a single and rather two-dimensional
and linear approach (which would, in fact, be *one-dimensional*).
Instead of parallel and mutually reinforcing understandings – we have
key elements of the main understanding stripped out, and replaced
somewhat awkwardly with decontextualized elements from these other
dimensions. With little regard for how these might impact upon the
overarching formula – other than that it fit the right number of
syllables for the appropriate Vedic metre. As I have said – glorious,
multifarious and multi-dimensional complexity of perspective reduced
down to something more simplistic than it is simple … and smooshed
together rather than truly made ‘single’, with limited regard for the
vitally important detail thusly stubbed out in consequence.

It is possible to speak – as I have often done, in fact – about various
of the august figures and understandings of the Indo-European
mythic-religious sphere in more than one language at a time. Part of
that is a necessity – many of us speak English, fewer of us Sanskrit,
and even fewer still of us, Old Norse. So in order to even speak *about*
the comparative theology to one another, we are already blending
speeches in order to do so.

But that is discussion – it is speaking *about* the figures, *about* the
understandings in question. It is quite different from speaking *to* the
Figures (i.e. The Gods); and it is also quite different to those
occurrences wherein the *speech itself* *is* the ‘understanding’ – and,
as is the case with the ‘Empowered Speech’ that is Sanskrit, those cases
wherein changing the word most definitely changes the understanding for
it changes the underlying *reality itself* and how we interact with
same.

In closing, I should like to quote a line of Vedic verse which is of
considerably ancient provenancy.

The hymnal it is from is one dedicated to a Vajra-wielder – although not
*that* Vajra-wielder of Whom you may be thinking. Rather, it is to Rudra
– the Lord of the World and Most Mighty.

In Sanskrit, it would read –मा त्वा रुद्र चुक्रुधामा नमोभिर्मा दुष्टुती
वृषभ मा सहूती । (Ma Tva Rudra Cukrudhama Namobhirma Dustuti Vrsabha Ma
Sahuti)

It is a cautionary injunction to the human hearer, even as it is a
reverent (indeed, directly ‘Eusebian’ – in the sense of doing something
whilst affeared of the awesome Power of a God) prayer to the Divine
Listener. The invoker is being pointedly polite with his etiquette (lest
he become ‘pointed at’ in another sense, through dereliction of same),
and emphasizing that the petitioners do not wish to offend the God –
whether through worship, or through ‘Dustuti’ or ‘Sahuti’. These last
two terms are in large measure why I have chosen to quote this verse –
for they mean “ill-formed/executed prayers”and “mingled
calling/invocation”, respectively.

These “Thor Mantras” may be addressed to, ostensibly, Thor – and may
indeed, in the case of the “Thor Gayatri mantra”, make use of a valid
and viable Vedic formulation oriented most usually to Indra … but I
would be hesitant in the extreme to actually utilize them in a
devotional context. For to me they do indeed seem to be , in various
senses broader than the Vedic context I have originally drawn those
designators from … “Dustuti” & “Sahuti”.

Your mileage, as ever, may vary.

\[-C.A.R.\]
