+++
title = "Against Spurious “Pre-Indo-European-Ization” Of Indo-Europeanxa0Elements"
date = "March 19, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/arya-akasha-non-ie-meme-expanding-brain.png?w=800)

This happens remarkably frequently – both in terms of the linguistics,
but also in terms of the mythology and theology.

There’s quite a number of spaces wherein some academic or other
commentator with a personal theory (or, worse, an agenda) has latched on
to something and gone “well this seems like it shouldn’t be
Indo-European – therefore it MUST be non-/pre- IE! And incorporated by
the advancing Indo-Europeans as they came into contact with the prior
inhabitants of \[wherever it is they wound up\].”

For obvious reasons, this happens a fair bit with Hinduism; and the
logic really does appear to be “well, this makes me uncomfortable as a
19th century European Christian, therefore my own far-distant ancestors
can’t *possibly* have believed something like this themselves … so it
must be an Indus Valley incorporation – unknown to the Aryans before
they got to India.”

However, it also happens quite frequently with the Ancient Greek
mythology and linguistics. Partially, to be sure, spurred by various
points wherein some ancient writer may have suggested something was
derived from a Mesopotamian or other non-IE source. But also because,
again, something which seems strange to a 19th century Christian
Englishman must be mentally ‘partitioned off’ from the ‘good’ Greek
civilizational elements with which he is keen to identify his own
heritage and present-day cultural sphere.

Declaring the element in question to be “Pelasgian” means not really
having to worry about integrating it into one’s cultural analysis of the
Ancient Greeks (let alone one’s perception of the even more archaic
Indo-Europeans) … because it’s “not true Greek”.

It enables the comfortable feelings of “Familiarity” with the Classical
civilizations to continue uninterrupted – seeing them as “just like us”,
but in togas or tunics. Rather than – as they actually were – peoples
who existed entirely independently of the modern gaze, and could have
some downright peculiar-seeming practices and beliefs from the
perspective of the ‘sanitized’ perception of their glories which had
filtered down even into more recent times.

Of course, it’s not all 19th century scholars who are to blame for all
of this. Often-times, they were genuinely putting forward what they had
honestly surmised to be the truth upon the basis of the limited evidence
available to them and an incomplete comparative understanding of
multiple fields.

This then became the ‘received wisdom’ – and permeated its way through
to subsequent academia … wherein successive generations of academics may
have built entire careers upon some of the presumptions involved, and
were therefore eminently unlikely to truly challenge and critique things
now part of the ‘intellectual foundation’ of their respective fields.

The situation got even worse when certain writers began to actively
build entire oeuvres of work and reputation upon wholesale extensions of
some of these uncritically accepted wrongful presumptions.

So you have Gimbutas attempting to declare that Goddess worship to be
somehow non-IE but instead a residual suffusion of colonized and
subjugated pre-IE ‘matriarchal’ belief – a position now taken up by
several generations of certain sorts of feminist and certain sorts of
misogynist … because neither group feels comfortable recognizing an
Indo-European War Goddess, Queen of the Gods etc. : because that would
imply that females in the archaic IE view are not incapable of violence
and imperialism.

Or you have Beekes and Furnee running about the place proposing
non-Indo-European etymologies for all sorts of Ancient Greek terms –
building quite the impressive stock of journal publishings through an
apparent rubric of “if we can’t immediately explain it, or we think it
looks like it should be non-IE … it must be ‘Pre-Greek'”.

Except as soon as one starts to seriously look at various of the more
prominent terms they’ve proposed, it becomes abundantly apparent that
they’ve had to outright ignore perfectly plausible if not downright
obvious (endogenous) Indo-European etymologies and cognates in order to
furnish their conclusions! (The two streams seem to ‘merge’, as it
happens, with some of these – the presumption being that if a given
element is one of those ones felt to be “strange”, “Pelasgian” by some
of the academics of a hundred, a hundred and fifty years ago … then
‘surely’ that means that the word *for* the concept in question cannot
be Indo-European – and never mind the very similar sounding Sanskrit
term for the very similar looking thing over there!)

Fortunately, in more recent years this sort of approach has begun to
come in for the critical scrutiny and rejection that it so richly
deserves – although given how influential these previous prevarications
have been in their respective fields, it is proving *mightily* hard to
make progress at shifting mass perceptions out there in the
not-specialist-but-still-interested audience.

Although not all recent developments have been so positive.

Speaking back to the Indo-Iranic sphere … the discovery of the BMAC
\[Bactria Margiana Archaeological Complex\] has unleashed entirely new
waves of this kind of career-building “let’s ascribe anything we feel is
out of place to the non-IE group” enthusiasm.

This has joined forces with another current in Indo-Iranian academia
which seeks to exalt Zoroastrian accounts as being pretty good windows
in on archaic I-I belief (rather than you know, in many ways literally
the opposite) – leading to bizarre pronouncements that elements found in
the Vedic religion but not the Zoroastrian one therefore “must” be BMAC
in origin.

Never mind that the evidence we have rather strongly suggests that the
Zoroastrians had *far* more to do with, and were far more positively
engaged with the BMAC than did the Indo-Aryans.

Or, as applies one of the most prominent of these postulations – that
Indra “must” somehow be a BMAC inclusion – you look at the “proof”, and
it’s anything but.

“Oh, there’s a Trita in both Vedic and Zoroastrian mythology carrying
out some dragon-slaying .. but only the Vedic has Indra – must mean that
Indra’s a later development!” Rather than the rather obvious situation
of the Zoroastrians having *removed* Indra from this role \[c.f the
“Indar” that occurs in their demonology\]; Indra being closely cognate
with Thor, Herakles, etc. (and therefore quite *foundationally*
Indo-European), and Indra & Trita finding comparative expression amidst
the Greeks as Herakles & Iolaus (so, again, being fundamentally
Indo-European).

“But there’s no Indo-European etymology for ‘Indra’ – “  
Yes, yes there is … here’s six.

“- which means that the Vedic Aryans *must* have borrowed this figure
from an as-yet unattested BMAC deity”. Yeah man, because that’s
something that happens – just casually wholesale incorporating as one of
your most important deities, a figure from a foreign culture … despite
an appreciable swathe of the broadly contemporaneous conceptry of the
religion being about the opposite of that; the *incredibly strong*
coterminities of the deity in question with the Indo-European
mythological elements expected of Him; and the fact that there is
*literally no evidence* for there being such a BMAC deific to
appropriate in the first place.

Although the one that absolutely infuriates me is the bizarre and
obsessive series of campaigns on the part of all manner of people to try
and portray Lord Shiva as somehow being “non-Indo-European” \[or, in
this case, “non-Aryan”\]. It’s – again – blatantly false, repeatedly
disproven upon the basis of the comparative theology and linguistics ….
but it *keeps* *coming* *up* ; as some kind of singular point of
agreement between certain academics, certain entirely unacademic pedants
upon the internet, white supremacists, Indian OITers, and people who
read Danielou (who, it must be appended *made up* a whole swathe of his
Sanskrit “Translations” in order to present a sensationalized and
exoticized … indeed, outright “eroticized” construct to his Western
audience, effectively as a (hijacked/co-opted) vehicle for his own
ideas).

The situation of Shiva really gets to the heart of the matter, I feel –
because, once again, we have a God Who does not conform in various ways
to what various people want to believe their own ancestors regarded as …
well .. divine.

And I have devoted a huge effort to countering these views and
demonstrating how yes, yes Lord Shiva is *most definitely*
foundationally Indo-European.

Three Eyes, Storm-Cloud Complexion, Wilderness Hunter/Barbarian
appearing, Lingam-worshipped-via, Empowering-Elixir-bestowing,
Furor-bringing, Hurricane-Haired, Wolf-Accompanying, Ghost-Leading,
Shape-Shifting, Horse(Headed)Twins Begetting, etc. etc. etc. all most
*definitely* encompassed in that.

Ultimately, neither (contemporary, supernal) Divinity nor the archaic
beliefs of Indo-European man and myth are so easily dismissed for what
They truly are –

Indo-European.

Your comfort with this is not required.
