+++
title = "Reincarnation Amidst The Ruins ‚Äì The Still-Living Shaivite Saliency At Prambanan, An Eastern Bastion Of The Hindu Faith [Incredible Indo-European Holy Sites Series Partxa0IV]"
date = "March 24, 2021"

+++


![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/162347763_10164953486805574_6811000596897711695_o.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/161871826_10164953480470574_7636562295545727394_n.jpg)

It is Wednesday ‚Äì Woden‚Äôs Day ‚Ä¶ and therefore, a suitably impressive
Shaivite Temple !

Now, this is from Prambanan in Indonesia ‚Äì a place we today think of as
the world‚Äôs largest Muslim-majority country. And yet, 1200 years ago
when this impressive site was being constructed, it was quite different;
the polity in question being under Shaivite dominion (I am ‚Ä¶
oversimplifying here ‚Äì the King who built it was a Shaivite ‚Äì although
interestingly, his Queen, who purportedly provided the likeness for the
fine Durga Murti also at the site, was a Buddhist).

![(The aforementioned Durga
Murti)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/161745719_10164953504690574_106105647638720864_o.jpg?w=679)

In other words ‚Äì the Eastern Frontier of the Indo-European
mytho-religious sphere was not India ‚Ä¶ but Indonesia. A recognizable
continuity and contiguity of belief running right the way from Indonesia
through to Iceland in that age. Not *quite* a domain that the Sun would
never set on ‚Äì although in time rather than space it still remains
incredibly strong!

Today, most of what remains of the Hindusphere in Indonesia is largely
confined to Bali ‚Äì and it is intriguing to note that some Balinese Hindu
elements seem to record quite archaic Vedic elements that have since
become less prominent in the ‚Äòmainstream‚Äô Hinduism much further to the
West.

But to speak more directly of Prambanan ‚Äì it is difficult to overstate
just how impressive this complex is. There are *two hundred and forty*
Temples and smaller shrines upon the site; and an entire river was
diverted in order to provide a large enough area to construct them upon.
Construction continued through the reigns of two Hindu Kings ‚Ä¶ and then
recommenced via *reconstruction* in the 1930s under Colonial rule nearly
a thousand years later ‚Äì a process which continues to this day due to
the sheer scope of the project involved.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/163372719_10164953502115574_6585470543084832016_o.jpg?w=1024)

The main Shiva Temple is ‚Ä¶ immense. 47 meters tall by 36 meters wide;
and constructed, as is the frequent occurrence, as a sort of map of the
Cosmos. Hence it is divided into three layers to correlate to the Three
Worlds (and the names may be familiar to some from certain Mantras we
have been posting ‚Ä¶ ), arranged around the form of the Mountain as Axis
Mundi ‚Äì with Lord Shiva Himself at the Heart of (it) All! Just as He
Dances at the Heart of the Universe *as* the Axis Mundi Himself.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/162809021_10164953487955574_1088445085487406690_o.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/164362070_10164953501215574_622595617776279379_o.jpg)

![(reconstruction of how the site would have looked, in
miniature)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/163230855_10164953506525574_2444656147549418858_o.jpg?w=1024)

Recently, in late 2019, Hindu Rites of Shaivite devotion started being
performed once more at the site ‚Äì with a three day long Abhishek
conducted in order to re-consecrate the complex and begin the move from
‚Äúarchaeological relic‚Äù to ‚Äúliving bastion of the tradition‚Äù.

It has been said that in Modernity, we are men living amidst Ruins of
the greater glories of the past. I do not necessarily disagree with that
assessment ‚Äì but the key thing, I suspect, is how one chooses to regard
and interact or otherwise engage with the elements in question.

It would be easy, indeed, to simply abandon them ‚Äì not in the sense,
perhaps, of merely moving away ‚Ä¶ but just not really noticing them,
demolishing their saliency and their significance within our minds and
our lives so they are ‚Äújust another part of the scenery‚Äù, less thought
about than the pavement immediately in front of one‚Äôs feet. \[Indeed, as
had been seen with Rome ‚Ä¶ some of the masonry from the Temples of the
Past might even *be* the pavement immediately in front of one‚Äôs feet ..
üò¶ \]

Except ‚Ä¶ just as the Stone has endured ‚Äì even despite a great number,
here, of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, religious transitions,
dynastic shifts and Dutch colonial occupations ‚Ä¶ so too, can that
*other* essential endurance ‚Äì the ability of men to perceive the sheer
*gravitas* \[in Sanskrit we would perhaps say ‚ÄòGraha‚Äô quality\] of
places like these. Not merely because the stonework is pretty or looming
‚Äì but because we feel the sustained *weight* of significance; that these
sites are *important*, indeed downright *sacred* to us.

That they are, in short, not temporal ‚Äì not in the traditional sense,
anyway ‚Äì but places where the Eternal intersects with the present day.

And therefore with a grandeur which is most *truly* undying. Not least
rendered immortal through the worshipful, reverent ‚Äì Eusebian, we must
say, per the Ancient Greek! ‚Äì regard of mortal men.

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/162366218_10164953502800574_9031214970664479967_o.jpg?w=1024)

If Shaivite rites in the ancient Hindu manner can be conducted after an
interregnum of more than a millennium at this site even in the world‚Äôs
most Muslim country by population, well outside of the ‚Äòusual‚Äô
Indo-European sphere ‚Ä¶ what is your excuse for not being able to engage
with the religious traditions of your ‚Äì our ‚Äì Indo-European Ancestors ?

The ruins which stand about you are those of your mind and culture. It
is upon you to rebuild and re-hallow them through your mind and deeds.

And help us to reconstruct a religious edifice even more impressive than
that wrought in stone and masonry at Prambanan ‚Äì the resurrection of the
Indo-European Religious World; all the way from Indonesia to Iceland !

JAI ISHVARA !

‡•ê ‡§®‡§Æ‡§É ‡§∂‡§ø‡§µ‡§æ‡§Ø !!!
