+++
title = "A Really Brief Synopsis Of Various Odin – Shiva – Dyaus Pitarxa0Comparanda"
date = "March 13, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/tumblr_mc0vxiljxl1rejj4to1_1280.jpg?w=717)

I try to make a point of responding to questions, queries, and
criticisms in relation to my work. Sometimes these are … peculiar.

For example, earlier this morning, somebody commented on a post of our
MahaShivRatri tribute piece that “Odin is a wind God, not a sky god. He
has no relation to Shiva.” …

So here’s a really really brief run-through of various points of
coterminity between Odin and Rudra Shiva. Not everything is here … and
what *is* here is seriously succinct and lacking in my customary depth
of analysis (for which you can check out my full-length articles). But I
figured that it might be of use for a broader audience even so.

Response begins:

I am not sure where you want me to start with that one. Odin is quite
clearly the Nordic expression of the Sky Father deific. And is very
strongly cognate to Shiva.

Where would you like me to begin ? The Fathering of the
Striker/Thunderer deific ? \[Thor / Indra / Herakles / Hanuman etc.\] ?
The relationship with the Earth Mother / Mountain Queen deific ?
\[Parvati / Prithvi / Frigg / Jord etc.\] The Fathering via the Multiple
Mothers of the Charter/Skewerer defic \[Kumara / Skanda / Heimdallr\] ?
The paternal linkage to the Horse Twins \[the Asvins / Dioscuri /
Hengist & Horsa\] ? \[Accompanied by Two Wolves, also\]

Or , perhaps some of the mythic and ritual roles are more useful – like
the bringing of the empowering elixir \[Soma / Mead of Poetry\] in
Raptor form ; the going in disguise to test the Sacred Hospitality \[c.f
for instance the Grimnismal , or Shiva as AdiVratya ; or Zeus doing
exactly this .. \] ; and, related to this, the presiding over the Furor
quality \[‘Odr’ / ‘Ugra’ / ‘Manyu’ / ‘Menos’\] which pertains to both
battle rage \[Furor Teutonicus\] but also poetic inspiration \[Furor
Poeticus\] – and with these being also under domain of His Consort
\[Freyja / Vak\] … hence why He is the Lord of the empowered speech/song
\[Brihaspati / Galdrafodr\] … a regular Shake Spear \[well, Spear
Wielder, Spear God, anyway – and yes, there are quite an array of both
Old Norse and Sanskrit theonymics for this\] \[And let us not forget
ShivLings & IrminSuls\]

Or the situation with regard to the Glorious/Ancestral Dead , in upper
regions \[Valhalla / Valskjalf / Varuna’s situation in Pitrloka\] and
with said Glorious / Ancestral Dead providing a Retinue \[the Einherjar
– Odin’s ‘Household’; Shiva’s (Bhuta)Gana\] ;

Or, for that matter, the All-Seeing Solar Eye \[the Golden Throne of
Hlidskjalf / the Sun Eye of Dyaus / the Sun Eye of Shiva / the Sun Eye
of Zeus\]

Or perhaps you would prefer something more ‘Atmospheric’ – like the
Odinic theonyms of Thundr (Thunderer) and Vidrir (Stormer); and various
understandings of the theonym of Hrjodr \[which, funnily enough, may
actually be a Solar theonym likewise\].

All up, I am not sure why you would presume that a Wind association is
mutually exclusive with a Sky one. After all – there tends to be quite a
lot of wind in the Sky ; hence why we find mention of, say , Vata in
Sanskrit in relation to the upper atmosphere but also to mean Wind .
