+++
title = "Sons Of The Sky Father – A Typological Preliminary [ Arya Akasha Arkaxa0]"
date = "March 25, 2021"

+++
![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/arya-akasha-sons-of-the-sky-father-typology-diagram.png?w=1024)

In the Heavens as it is upon Earth, Family is at the heart of
everything. And, given the centrality of the Divine Family to the
Indo-European mythology – an Arka \[‘essence’, ‘distillation’\] post of
this nature seemed a decent way to demonstrate the coterminities of a
number of the salient figures involved.

Now I stress that this is both preliminary and incomplete – I do not
mean any disrespect to Deities nor Devotees with some of the omissions
from the diagram; and am working upon a more comprehensive ‘Family Tree’
style chart which should draw together (as well as placing within mythic
context) a number of Siblings of these Sons, as well as Their Mother(s),
and of course the particular relevant Masques of the Sky Father involved
in Each’s conception.

But we had to start somewhere … and not least because the above
schematic currently has extreme difficulty existing outside of three (or
more) dimensions in its draft form(s) – this rather simple diagram
seemed an acceptable initiation of the foundation.

Although speaking of ‘foundations’ – much of this chart is in fact but
briefly summarizing various of my previous (A)Arti-cles.

The ‘Progenitor Twins’ typology can be found in my ongoing SONS OF THE
SUN series (which also utilizes our comparative approach to identify
various potentially politically minded .. discrepancies in the Roman
renditions of the myth); although I have made one slight adjustment –
rendering the name of the Dead/Ancestral Shade Twin as ‘Echo’ rather
than the more directly accurate ‘Image'(‘Death’), as ‘Echo’ seemed the
better way to convey the connotation. I have also provisionally
incorporated Deucalion as a Greek expression of the Man(n)u(s) Twin, for
reasons I may detail in a future piece; although it should be noted that
there are quite an array of potential Greek mythic figures Who may bear
*suspiciously* similar names to the eponymous First Man(n)(u)(s) and
occupy similar local-mythological roles – more upon that some other
time.

The Horse Twins / Helping Hero Twins / Sons of the Bright Sky can be
found in the unsurprisingly named ON THE HORSE TWINS series – although I
have not managed to write the planned third installment looking at the
Greek Dioscuri as yet.

The Star-Mothered Charger/Skewerer typology is looked at in, inter alia,
‘Skanda , Heimdall , Kumara – The Star-Borne Son Of The Sky Father’. The
Star-Mothers in question referring to the Pleiades (the Krittikas) –
although in the case of Heimdallr, this is somewhat speculative.

The Striker/Thunderer typology, I have not – that I can recall –
directly addressed in a single piece or series; although the ‘Subtype’
mentioned upon the chart can be found in ‘Perseus , Krishna , Karna –
Three Perspectives Upon The Origin Myth Of The Indo-European
Striker/Thunderer’, and I have produced various further works which
touch upon the situation of Lord Hanuman being a Striker/Thunderer
expression.

Now as I have said – this chart is NOT by any means complete. Even
leaving aside those areas wherein further research must be undertaken in
order to properly identify a cognate … or, for that matter, those areas
wherein this may prove sadly improbable due to the relevant myths of a
given IE people simply not having come down to us to preserve their
iteration of the figure(s) in question –

there are several other seriously salient Sons (and at least two
Daughters) Who *could* have been included, as we are reasonably
confident that They also represent fundamental and archaic Indo-European
typologies as well.

But for now, I suspect, this is enough.

And not least because while it does not (and probably, *cannot*)
adequately encapsulate *all* the Sons of the Sky Father – through the
typological analysis *of* various of the more immediately mythically
prominent Sons of He … we *can* use these as a constellation of evidence
to help us to *identify* the Sky Father deific in each of the relevant
Indo-European descendent culture mythologies.

Particularly when this approach is brought to bear amidst the rather
significant weight of evidentiary materials addeuced from other
approaches in the course of our earlier work upon *that* series of
subjects.

Phrased another way – if you know Who Thor’s Father is, and you know Who
Herakles’ Father is, and you know Who Indra’s Father is … and there’s a
directly coterminous pattern for the Paternal status of the Horse Twins,
etc. …

Well, it would appear that the familial linkages and relationships in
question have provided quite the anchor for one’s means for viewing the
(Indo-European, mythic) World.

As it should be!

Hail to the Divine Family ! The Sky Father & His Sons !
