+++
title = "Ape and monkey"

+++
\*For the purposes of this note the word ape means all animals closer to
or within the clade containing the gibbon and man than to the clade
containing the langur and the macaque. Monkey means all animals closer
to or within the clade containing the langur and the macaque than to the
clade containing the gibbon and man. Any animal closer to the monkeys
and apes to the exclusion of the New World platyrrhines, but not a
monkey or an ape as defined above, is termed a stem catarrhine.

New fossils from the Rukwa Rift in the Tanzanian part of Rift Valley
described by Stevens et al are of interest with respect to the timing of
the split between apes and monkeys. One of the most basal catarrhines,
Catopithecus, was found in Fayum, Egypt, dating to about 34 Mya, i.e.,
the beginning of the Oligocene. Molecular evidence strongly suggests
that the divergence between apes and monkeys happened sometime between
30-25 Mya. However, between 34 Mya, which is the age of the one of the
earliest stem catarrhines, down to the earliest fossil monkey,
Prohylobates (18 Mya), and the extremely archaic ape, Kalepithecus (\~20
Mya), there are no fossils of clear cut apes or monkeys. Thus, we have
lacked fossil from the critical period around the time when the
molecular evidence suggests they diverged. This does not mean that there
are no catarrhine fossils from the 34-20 Mya time window. We have basal
catarrhines from the Fayum beds in Egypt such as Aegyptopithecus from
around 30 Mya. We also have an enigmatic radiation of basal catarrhines
that appears to have begun around 22 Mya, the pliopithecoids, and
persisted till at least 7.5 Mya. The earliest member of this clade is
Lomorupithecus from Uganda and the latest is Laccopithecus from Lufeng,
China dating to the late Miocene. This suggests that the pliopithecoid
radiation of catarrhines migrated to Asia and persisted alongside other
more derived catarrhines including apes and monkeys. Closer to the crown
group comprised of apes and monkeys are two fossils namely Saadanius,
from what is today the hellhole of Saudi Arabia (\~28 Mya), and
Kamoyapithecus from Kenya (\~25 Mya). Then there are two clades that
cannot be specifically placed as being closer to or earlier branching
than either monkeys or apes. These are Limnopithecus evansi and the
dendropithecid clade comprised of Dendropithecus, Micropithecus and
Simiolus and Limnopithecus legetet. Better fossils would probably be
required to tell whether they are apes or monkeys or fall just outside
of both of them. While they preserve anatomical features that might have
been close in certain respects to the common ancestor of the apes and
monkeys, all of these are from around 20-17 Mya, so they are not
temporally very close to the branch point of the crown clades.

Phylogenetic tree of selected apes, monkeys and related primates by
Stevens et al  
[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-ZdUfhQPitOo/UZh1CnbXXPI/AAAAAAAACr4/RbS2V7l95xk/s640/Ape_monkey_trees.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/KkGZKdFJf8Vl8l_qeF_Z4tMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

If these proposed affinities of Nsungwepithecus and Rukwapithecus are
true then it would mean that the ape-monkey split happened before 25.2
Mya, pushing the paleontological evidence for this split within the
range estimated from the molecular evidence. In our opinion Stevens et
al convincing demonstrate anatomical similarity between Nsungwepithecus
and the basal monkeys of the victoriapithecid clade (which includes
forms like Victoriapithecus and Zaltanpithecus). Of these
Victoriapithecus is known from well-preserved remains from around 15 Mya
and it a mid-sized monkey. Nsungwepithecus is clearly larger than
Victoriapithecus and suggests that such a lineage of monkeys had
persisted for more than 10 Myr. Likewise there are distinct similarities
between Rukwapithecus and Rangwapithecus thus pulling it into the
Nyanzapithecine/Mabokopithecine clade. Given that Rangwapithecus is from
about 20 Mya, the discovery of Rukwapithecus suggests that a such a
clade of basal apes was more than 5 Myr older. Given that the latest
member of this clade Nyanzapithecus harrisoni is from around 13 Mya,
this clade was rather long-lived (more than 12 Myr). Thus, at their
upper end they overlapped temporally with more derived apes such as
Morotopithecus and Afropithecus which are closer to the crown formed by
extant lesser and great apes.

*The first panel compares lower jaw M3s of various basal monkeys and
catarrhines. The second panel compares the lower jaw P4-M3 series of
various monkeys, apes and pliopithecids.*

[![](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-rsTzrruemmk/UZXTQuR0f7I/AAAAAAAACrY/3SHC5PztaXM/s800/primate_molars.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/sCVzersEJ0q-YCOamv1CFdMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

The pushing back of the Rangwapithecine apes to before 25 Myr also
indirectly suggests that a major initial radiation of apes predated that
period. This radiation in all likelihood gave rise to the lineages
prototyped by Kalepithecus, Equatorius and the Proconsulines. Of these
Proconsulines were one of the best known yet poorly understood in terms
of phylogeny. A tentative phylogenetic statement is provided below based
on Begun’s work. Unlike what is shown below it is possible that
Equatorius forms a separate more primitive clade.

Begun’s phylogenetic scenario for apes  
[![](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-Nu_Ax-QV2FA/UZhxaHYoB5I/AAAAAAAACro/jooSe5QUJYQ/s640/Apetree.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/X8f-9Bpsf5__WxizCPdD4tMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

Also missing in the picture is the remarkable and enigmatic
Ugandapithecus. Many paleoanthropologists considered it a species of
Proconsul, the French researchers Pickford and Senut have been
vehemently defending its distinctness. Recently, they have found a skull
of this ape in Uganda and it awaits a detailed description. However, in
press statements they have claimed that it might be closer to the great
apes than other apes. If this really holds then we have a member of the
great ape lineage going back to at least a little before 20 Mya. Close
to great apes or not Ugandapithecus certainly promises to be a rather
interesting branch of the ape lineage if nothing else due it is size –
it appears to have attained the size of a fully grown male gorilla well
before any other ape attained such proportions. However, its brain is
still primitive being no greater in size than that of a baboon, a member
of the monkey clade. This would suggest that even before 20 Mya apes
were already attain great sizes, though they perhaps acquired their
larger brains only sometime later. This indeed raises questions
regarding the relationship between Ugandapithecus and Proconsul – the
latter if defined to exclude the large remains (i.e. those now placed in
Ugandapithecus) presents a smaller arboreal primate. Its teeth also
point to a fruit-eating primate that was likely arboreal. In contrast,
the large Ugandapithecus probably spent more time on the ground. On the
other hand Proconsul, like Ugandapithecus had a rather modest brain,
again at best comparable to a baboon. As per the phylogenetic opinion
Begun these primitive apes lingered on until at least 9.5 Mya in the
form of the poorly preserved ape Samburupithecus from Kenya. This ape
too is moderately sized ape about as large as a female gorilla. Thus,
while the fossil record of the ape lineage has been pushed back we still
are unclear about the earlier radiations of our clade and whether the
great apes first emerged in Africa or in Asia and then moved back to
Africa. Indeed, forms like the highly derived European Oreopithecus show
that there was much evolutionary “experimentation” among the apes in the
last 25 Myr.
