+++
title = "BHARAT MATA AND THE INDO-EUROPEAN DEIFIC OF NATIONALxa0IDENTITY"
date = "August 15, 2018"

+++
![18320612_10158660040905574_1319203457793066901_o](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/08/18320612_10158660040905574_1319203457793066901_o.jpg?w=676)  
August 15th is India’s National Day – the hallowed anniversary of
Independence. And for that, we have prepared something a little bit
different for publication here at AA.

Now, you may be wondering why we are posting to mark a civic, political
observance rather than something which is prima facie a religious one of
ancient or common Indo-European heritage. Yet as we are about to see,
what is celebrated and commemorated on the 15th of this month is
actually very much bound up with both traditionally relevant conceptions
of identity and polity, as well as a pattern of Divine manifestation for
these which was once common to many of the Indo-European peoples.
Perhaps more remarkably, even despite the Christianization – and yes,
secularization – of most of these toward the European end of the
spectrum, it is something which has \*persisted\* here in the West, as
well.

Turn your gaze to the photograph of the Murti of Bharat Mata shown
below. Now, perhaps you are aware that “Bharat” is another (more
ancient, self-derived) name for India; and it should come as absolutely
no surprise even for those without any background in academic
comparative linguistics to find that “Mata” is “Mother”.

But you might, perhaps, be forgiven for presuming that “Murti” refers to
a “Map”.

And, in a sense, with that old (French?) philosophic maxim about “the
map is not the territory” (or c’nest pas une pipe) , it kinda does. A
better translation would be an “image”, or a “representation”.

Yet this is not simply a ‘map’ of India, a representation of the
‘Motherland’, so to speak.

Instead, for us, a Murti of a Deity is a ‘living representation’; and in
this instance, the Murti in question is of Aspect of Devi, Bharat Mata –
Mother India.

And as applies the first and most prominent connexion between the
‘civic’ and the ‘sacral’ for the purposes of this post – we could very
well think of August 15th as being something of a (re-)birth day for the
august Aspect in question.

Now this is not necessarily to suggest that Bharat Mata was not
‘in-being’ prior to that particular midnight in mid-1947. Far from it.
Apart from the concept’s ‘modern’ history being easily traceable back to
the late 1800s (most notably identified as Banga Mata – ‘Mother Bengal’
– in political literature of the period opposing the British division of
Bengal into East (today known as Bangladesh) and West components; and as
an aside, it should be entirely unsurprising for Bengal to be home to
this formulation, given the seriously strong Durga worship which has and
continues to characterize the area); in both a ‘supernal’ and a mere
‘academic’ sense, we do not have to get into notions of ‘Mythic Time’ or
non-linearity therein as compared to the conventional march of days to
plainly see that this is not a ‘new’ deity, so much as a concept finally
immanentized – which very much develops from very ancient precedences
that have gone before.

Confused? Right. we shall start at the beginning. Or at least, as near
to it as we are yet able to trace back through the fields of comparative
mythography, ethnography, and linguistics, etc.

At the fundament, foundational core of the Indo-European pantheon –
figures common in the ‘bedrock’ if you like to pretty much every
‘archaic’ Indo-European mythology and religion I can think of offhand
(although subject to some seriously weird revisions with subsequent
developments, occasionally – e.g. the Zoroastrians .. who appear to fall
some-ways between our ‘Cultural Protestants’ and our straight-out
Mormons) – there stand two beings:

Dyaus Pitar, we have already briefly touched upon in previous
commentaries – the \[literally translated\] “Sky Father”; and His Wife,
a figure we might feasibly identify via the archetypal shorthand, “Earth
Mother”.

Now this is where things may potentially get a little bit complex.

From this singular feminine archetype, we have traced ’emanation’ if you
like, or ‘refraction’, potentially, out in a number of key directions –
many of which are common to a multiplicity of ancient Indo-European
pantheons.

One path of derivation is, of course, the reasonably direct ‘carrying
forward’ of the “Earth Mother” concept. And certainly, we can see this
with the Vedic attestations for Ma Prithvi, as well as the Greek
notations for Rhea, the Jord/Fjorgyn of the Nordic peoples, and so on
and so forth.

But another path of derivation, which is perhaps a little more
‘innovative’, and arguably more important for the purposes of this post
and resultant analysis of Bharat Mata , is that which leads to an
archetypal figure I have taken to terming “Mountain Queen”.

It is not necessarily hard to see how we might have gotten from “Earth”
to “Mountain” – after all, what is a ‘mountain’ , other than an
agglomeration of rock and soil rising above yet more earth? \[the
answer, of course, is : “a defensible position”, but more on that in a
moment\]

Yet as applies the figurative ‘transition’ from “Mother” to “Queen”,
what is key difference THERE is the element, the affixion of
Sovereignty. And, alongside this, the way in which, I suppose you might
say, we go from a more ‘universalized’ Mother figure \[Mother, arguably,
of All, dependent upon how broad you wish to run your cosmology –
certainly, the Shakta schools of Hinduism effectively run something not
entirely dissimilar to this … \], through to the rather more tightly
defined “Mother of the Nation”, or maternal forebear of a \*particular\*
people.

Now, the ‘standard’ academic path for talking about development of
figures like Bharat Mata, is that it is logical development of talking
about “Earth Mother”, and then making hte next leap to “\*this\* earth,
this expanse of area which \*we\* control\*”, and taking it onwards from
there. Thus arriving at a ‘metaphysical’ and somewhat anthropomorphized
’embodiment’ of a polity, a people, a tribe, a nation.

But I do not necessarily think that’s right. Or, at least, it is almost
definitely nowhere near the ‘full’ story.

Instead, turn back a moment to that connexion between “Earth” and
“Mountain” – and, more especially, what I said about “Mountain”, and
“Defensive Position” \[as an perhaps interesting aside, “Durga”, has one
translation of “the inaccessible”, which prima facie may refer to a
well-situated and (nigh-) indomitable fortress!\], followed up by how
“Defensive Position” works out very handily for “place we should be
settling in”.

I hardly need to run the comparative etymology on this, but anybody who
has considered the similarities between “Berg” and “Burg”, or noticed
the part of “Nagara” which contains “Giri”, will have realized, for a
warlike people or a people otherwise under constant threat, a raised
area of earth – a hill, or better yet, a mountain bounded by
escarpments, represents a pretty decent place upon which to build an
enduring settlement with accompanying fortification.

It should therefore come as absolutely no surprise whatsoever, then,
that the ‘Mother of the Nation’ figure would be commensurate with the
‘Seat of Power’ of a fledgling state. A site, a repository of
sovereignty, (a capitol?) which would \*itself\* most likely be situated
in such a ‘rocky’ defensive position, of and from ‘earth’; and from
whence, the people of that nation, ‘array out’, and ‘descend’ (in, come
to think of it, both a physical – and a metaphorical or outright
genealogical – sense).

The frequency of Mountains as, if not “Axis Mundi” in the direct sense,
at the very least the ‘corridors of power’ and ‘Mansion of the Gods’
\[i.e. the ‘political’ “centre of the Divine Realm”\] represented by
Olympus or Kailash thus makes an inordinate amount of sense. As it is a
Supernal rendering by the Gods of an arrangement which is also very
common here on Earth amongst those who worship them.

The attestations for Divine Queens in rather direct connexion with these
‘mountain fastness’ locales is not hard to find in the mythography. I am
not simply speaking of the idea of an Olympus having a Hera; but rather,
the far more forthright elements wherein the Queen in question is
(almost) identified \*as\* the Mountain.

Consider, as the foremost example, Lady Parvati – Wife of Shiva
\[Mahadev fairly clearly fulfilling the role of Sky-Father within the
relevant theological complex\]. Her Name quite literally means ‘of the
Mountain’ \[Parvat, in Sanskrit\] , in partial reference to Her
prominent identification with the mountain kingdom of Himavat
\[situated, as one would presume, in the Himalayas\] (although as a
point of interest, She is also customarily identified, through Durga,
with the Vindhya range to the southern border of ‘traditional’
Aryavarta).

Or, for that matter, the tantalizing hints around Hittite deity “Pirwa”
/ “Peruwa” – referred to as “Queen”, and with a name \*very\* close to
the “Peruna” of the relevant linguistic corpus, which means “Cliff” or
escarpment. (There is a separate article to be written up at some point
about the potential nexion between “Stone” and “Storm Lord” as traced
through both Slavic – Perun and such – as well as the myths around
Brhaspati’s utilization of what appears to have been a meteorite – a
stone-from-the-sky – to slay a demon-serpent-dragon).

There is also the material around the Phrygian deity Cybele – known in
their own tongue as “Matar Kubeleya”, or “Mother Mountain”;a ‘patron’
and ’empowering’ figure :identified in various sources as Mother of the
Gods, Daughter of the Mountain, linked to both rulership, and a
warrior’s ferocity, as well as being accompanied by the lion – often in
plural and pulling a chariot. Now, these are materials from the first
millennium BC, yet they ought be instantly familiar to any modern Hindu.
For these are all names and characteristics of Mother Durga, Parvati !
Albeit with the notion of a chariot pulled by great feline(s) having
rather more direct resonance with the Nordic Freyja, Whose Chariot is
pulled by the great cats of the Nordic wilderness; as instead Durga
\*rides\* the Tiger/Lion as a cavalryman rides a horse.

Yet while it might be tempting to suggest that the Nordic Freyja does
not necessarily fit with the above rubric, recent linguistic and
(mytho)poetic analysis which I have been made aware of (and for which I
thank Mr W. P. Reaves for his stirling work in this area !) instead
shows very much the pattern ‘continuing’ among the Nordic folk.

To be clear about this, there are a number of (not necessarily
exclusionary) pathways of derivation for theonym “Freyja” (alongside, of
course, the standard ‘feminine form of Freyr – Lord’). One of which,
arguably the most common, traces back a series of terms for ‘woman’ and
perhaps ‘attachment/love’ in a manner that posits it as the Nordic
cognate to Sanskrit term “Priya”. Although even here, there is very much
‘political’ subtext – “Freyja” and “Frigg” having connection to notion
of “Free” , and very potentially, in both the ‘affectionate’ and
‘demarcative’ senses, to a term \[‘Frijaz’ in reconstructed
Proto-Germanic\] referring to a member of one’s own clan, tribe, folk …
hence why, of course, they were “free” (rather than subjugated) in the
first place 😛

This is a pretty good place to start with sketching out Freyja’s place
within the constellation of the Indo-European Mountain Queen as a figure
of Sovereignty (of Freedom, one might potentially note – for such is at
least one dimension of the notion of Sovereignty in the first place; and
yes, there are, now that I think about it, an array of Devi epithets in
Sanskrit which would similarly support this notion of ‘Unfettered’ –
which would also connect in, potentially, to the ‘Wild” element common
to so many Indo-European Goddesses, not least of which in relation to
the occasional demands of Their Menfolk; and, further, a line from the
Lokasenna delivered by Tyr affixing this female ‘unfettering’
characteristic to Freyr and therefore Freyja via the equivalency of the
divine twins); and, from there, as an effective ’embodiment’ of the
Ethnos – the tribe, the people, the Nation.

Further elements of relevancy here (and I shall consider these but
briefly, as we must get back to the most important subject at hand! For
it is Her – the Aspect in question – Whose Birthday we are supposed to
be celebrating!) ; would include not only the aforementioned theonyms of
Freyja/Frigg as “Jord” and “Fjorgyn” \[both of which work out as “earth”
; \], but also an array of kenning material further seeking to compare
this Goddess to a Mountain. One of these is the epithet “Haglfaldini”
cited in the Sexstefja of Thjodolfr Arnorsson, meaning “hail-hooded”
\[comparable to the modern English idiom “snow-capped”\], with the
‘hood’ in question, the Faldr, being a word for a woman’s head-covering.
Another, “Hlin”, referring to “ground” – but also relating to ‘refuge’
and ‘protection’ particularly via the related form “Hleina”, and with
the three sides of this ‘triangulation’ (also the shape of the
archetypal ‘mountain’ 😛 ) being buttressed/completed with the addition
of “Hlein” , which means a rock projection, and in particular one out
into the sea in the manner of a pier (you know, the sort of structure
one might use to disembark when coming home ).

But what \*really\* brings this ‘home’, (and helpfully, will lead us to
the next section …), is the theonym of “Fjorgyn”; as rather than simply
being plain unadorned “earth”, this in fact quite likely derives from
the cluster of words in Germanic language which have given us “Furrow”
or “Fell” in modern English – as well as, of course, Fjall in the Nordic
tongues \[‘Mountain’\].

What are the Proto-Indo-European roots of these terms? Well, you see
this is where it gets quite interesting – there are \*two\* speculated
origin-points here, both of which are phonetically highly similar to the
point of shared initial conception. “Pel”, relating to a ‘skin’ \[seen
even today in the modern-familiar word “Pelt”\], and flowing from
thence, the notions of both a ‘covering’, as well as, as a verb, to
“fold” \[this, itself, being ultimately derived from the same
Proto-Indo-European root – and you can plainly observe the phonetic
sound-shift between the P- and F- as well as the D- and T- here\]. It
should not be hard to see how the idea of “folding” relates rather well
to emergent projections of earth – whether in the sense aforementioned
of a furrow, or in the much more modern-ish connotation of the Fold
Mountain formation found when we consider plate tectonics.

It may also relate back to our archaic fortress-builders due to the
utilization of hides to manufacture walls \[compare the modern
‘Palisade’; as well as the Latin ‘Palus’ (‘Stake’/\[fence\]post) – which
may lie at the root of “Palace” via the “Palatinate” Hill\] … and, as we
shall see in a moment, to \*shields\* as well.

The second sense of “Pel” – which ultimately gives us the reconstructed
Falisaz, meaning a ‘rock’, or ‘cliff’, is certainly within striking
distance of the “Per” \[‘perwr’\] root \[whence Sanskrit ‘Parvat’, the
Hittite ‘Peru’, and that ‘Pirwa’ we have just met earlier; all of which
mean likewise\]; as well as the “Peh” stem referring to “protection”,
(and which ultimately gives us “Pati” \[lord\] in Sanskrit – a clear
element of Sovereignty); and even, indeed, the Pelh root which has given
us ‘Pale’ in modern English, and refers to a greyish colour of the sort
one would expect from the stereotypical mountain (or, for that matter,
storm-sky).

Either and both presumably lie at the basis of “Plh” (“Stronghold”),
which give us both the Greek “Polis” and the Sanskrit “Pura”.

But it is back to that former sense of “Pel” meaning a skin or a hide or
other covering that we must go. For there is one most important
Goddess, in the constellation of my argument, Who has not yet been given
proper mention.

Who bears the Epithet “Pallas”, referring (amongst other things) to Her
wearing of the flayed skin of a defeated foe as a cloak – and/or
potentially utilized to form the covering of Her Shield \[Despite the
common pop-culture image of Classical Greeks and therefore Their Gods
advancing (where thusly equipped) with bronze shields, the older archaic
layer of Greek civilization very much made use of ox-hide shields; and
even into later antiquity, lighter infantry employed in a more
skirmisher/swifter role would make use of hide shields due to the
necesities of their unencumbered function. The notion of the ‘older’
layer of the relevant mythology, as having a skin-shield, therefore,
ought be entirely unsurprising – even leaving aside the idea of the
affixion of the Gorgon-head upon same\]. \[The Aegis, intriguingly, when
invoked in the course of the Iliad, is depicted as causing clouds to
cover a nearby mountain – make of that what you will 😛 \]

Who am I speaking of? Athena. Patron deity of a city \[hence, no doubt,
the epithet “Polias” – closely related to the more familiar “Polis”,
which does not simply mean “city” but something closer to “Nation”\],
built upon an outcropping of rock \[the ‘acropolis’ – acros being the
highest point\], which to this day bears Her Name.

Now, I have chosen to ‘end’ the ‘pre-modern’ phase of this piece with
‘the Athenian Example’, as this handily brings together the various
‘strands’ of ‘origin’ for this concept in a manner that is also more
than familiar to the average modern reader.

Here we have a Goddess, a patron of a people, Whose direct presence and
sanctuary was to be found on a high crag – the same place, and highly
defensible position, wherein the core and the ancient genesis of the
city in question (and thus the folk who were of there, as a people) lay.
It should come as no surprise, then, that they came to share a name – as
well as a certain array of the qualities aspired to by its citizens and
reputed to be found in its national character \*also\* being those of
its Goddess … that is to say, its National Character.

Yet before turning back to Bharat Mata directly, there are two other
elements I feel I need to cover.

The first of these is a rather curious figure from post-Christianization
Iceland, called Fjallkona – the Lady of the Mountain. Now, this
personification does not appear well attested prior to roughly two and a
half centuries ago; and can certainly be situated within the general
(pre-) ‘Romantic’ trend toward majestic female figures acting as
’embodiments’, anthropomorphized ‘avatars’ if you like \[now THERE’S a
mixed metaphor!\] of the Nation. Yet while She may have arrived on the
scene some decades after Mother Svea, and even further following
Britannia (a figure whose customary iconography may be rather more than
subconsciously imitating the earlier Athena for reasons which ought be
patently obvious; yet, intriguingly enough, who appears to date from the
Roman conquest of Britain rather than being a simple ‘creation’ of the
16th/17th century – still much less the British Empire’s thalassocratic
pretensions of being a genuine successor-state of ancient Athens); what
I find most intriguing about this ‘Fjallkona” is the ways in which this
figure is, in some ways, much \*closer\*to the original Divine Archetype
that these National Personifications are apparently running off –
insofar, particularly, as the identification with the Mountain is made
‘front and center’ of the ‘character’ via direct incorporation into the
frontspiece of the name. And, more intriguingly still, the fact that
this element is not easily found amidst the “stereotypical Viking” and
“Nordic Warrior Maiden of Myth” trope-sets which may perhaps have
informed some other contemporaneous and subsequent efforts at
nationalist myth-making in this area. As it is quite plainly something
which had fallen out of ‘prominence’ (while still being there, if you
knew where to look – and could understand the poetry and symbolism
involved – in the background) with Icelandic/Nordic ‘supernal’ \[I
hesitate to use the adjective ‘divine’ here – at least directly\] female
representations; and which, further, would have been rather unlikely
(although admittedly, not \*entirely\* impossible – in some form of
proto-pre-modern #NASlepathy/#NASlepati) to have been reintroduced from
where this ‘Mountain’ element was still very much contemporary and
alive, in the East.

Perhaps the Icelandic ‘myth-makers’ of the day were much more immersed
in their own ancestral traditions than I am, perhaps, giving them credit
for – it is certainly possible that we have lost a few things, and
perhaps irrecoverably \[at least in ‘verifiable’ terms\] over the last
quarter millennium which they might have had access to, and which would
have made far more plain and explicit some of the connections we are
only now able to rediscover with the aid of modern linguistics and other
academic disciplines.

But there is another possibility; and one downright less Euhemeristic in
ambit.

Jung’s “Wotan” essay argued that – whether one wished to approach this
as elements in the ‘collective unconscious’ of the relevant (Germanic)
people, or rather as an actual instance of the Divine ‘reaching back’ to
‘walk’ amoung us here in the then-present day \[although ‘walk’ is the
wrong verb entirely .. not even “wander” will do – the actual German
verb, Ergreifen, to “seize”, is \*far\* closer to the mark!\] – there
nevertheless remained the very real probability of \*other\* such
figures Who may not yet lie dormant turning up within our contemporary
political life. I read a rather excellent piece (of semi-serious nature)
some years ago now arguing that Trump might be a similar manifestation
of Loki, for instance.

With that in mind, this “Lady of the Mountain” ‘character’ could very
well, then, represent a relatively recent Indo-European psyche
\*itself\* ‘reaching back’ to something vaguely remembered from its own
past – and going rather beyond the perhaps initially intended “Late
Viking Age” garbing to a point some several centuries or even millennia
before.

I have my own suspicions that on some level, a lot of what we see and
feel ‘resonant’ towards here in our 21st century ‘pop-culture’ and which
‘fires our imagination’ as a result, is functioning on something very
much like this. Hence, comic-book characters in particular (including
those not named “Thor”), as well as certain wildly successful political
personas (I shall not name names, but I can almost instantly think of
one female political leader worthy of mention who came to embody, in her
respective country, the ‘warrior queen national embodiment’ archetype –
as well as one other, rather more familiar to the Anglosphere, whom I
would \*not\* consider deserving of mention in this regard) – they
endure not necessarily due to the ‘power’ of their own stories, ‘in and
of themselves’ \[as remarkable and morally worthwhile as they might
perhaps be\], but rather because we ‘recognize’ in them something far
older, more ‘ancient’, and ‘True’ \[in the sense, to borrow a metaphor
without meaning it er .. literallly, that a Platonic Archetype is more
“Real” even than the real reifications/refractions of its ‘Form’ out
here on the Material Plane\]; and which would have, very much, felt
‘familiar’ to our ancestral forebears of those millennia ago.

Anyway, the ‘Modern’ phase above is something of a side-journey, a
tangent. They are perhaps regardable as somewhat ‘cargo-cult’-ish
endeavours to not so much “recover” something long ago lost, as to
desperately conjure up a simulacrum which may or may not run on some
vaguely similar blue-prints … yet due to a combination of a lack of/lost
knowledge, as well as the insistent abhorrence of the truly Divine here
in our contemporary society, is nevertheless only “two dimensional” and
almost invariably not actually/really \*genuinely\* believed in, itself.
Rather like, now that I come to think about it, so many “nationalisms”
which have run their course and burned out their fire here in the
Post-Modern, Post-Meaning, “post-politics”, indeed “post-Nation-State”,
apparently, Neoliberal Age. \[There’s a Sanskrit phrase for this, too –
and as applies the Yuga in question, it is most apt to note which
\*particular\* Divinity has the supreme honour of the lead role in
fighting back against same and eventually re-establishing Truth\]

But I digress.

Bharat Mata is the strongest opposite of this. Part of that is because
Sheis a \*literal Deity\*, and worshipped as one (rather than being a
vague political allegory ‘dressed up’ in hand-me-down plenipotentiary
panoply ransacked and rifled through from some previous culture of the
same general area and imagined temperament). And this is, in and of
itself, an inestimably important difference!

But the other part, rather more germane for the purposes of this
article, perhaps, is that in direct contrast to the European examples –
wherein the ‘National Personifications’ have been hastily
(re-)constructed following quite substantial periods of ‘nothing’ – ;
Bharat Mata is very much a ‘continuation’ of a long tradition of Durga
and Her Aspects being regarded in this role of national patrons and
protectors.

![18423854_10158693624075574_5846205713600940998_n](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/08/18423854_10158693624075574_5846205713600940998_n.jpg?w=676)

A grand example of which, which also happens to be roughly
contemporaneous with the (re-)popularization (in \*decidedly\* different
orientation – from conquered to conqueror) of ‘Britannia’, being the
relationship of the Bhavani Aspect of Mata JI with the Marathas. I
intend to consider this mythography in greater detail elsewhere at a
subsequent date (perhaps timed to coincide with ShivaJi Jayanti); but
suffice to say that Bhavani is regarded as having provided ShivaJi, the
builder of the Maratha Empire, with both his Sword, as well as the
accompanying Divine Mission to (re-)build Hindu Rashtra on the
Subcontinent, at some point in the early-mid 1600s AD. And, following on
from that, as an active force impelling the Marathas to victory over the
Mughals and their lackeys.

Still, it is interesting to consider the perhaps ‘broader’ \[this is
also a theonymic pun\] connotations replete in Sri Aurobindo Ghose’s
words:

“Do you see this map? It is not a map, but the portrait of Bharat-Mata:
its cities and mountains, its rivers and jungles form her physical body.
All her children are her nerves, large and small. … Concentrate on
Bharat as a Living Mother, worship Her with nine-fold Bhakti.”

Now, Aurobindo was not referring, as a point of interest, to this most
beautiful Murti with which I have chosen to illustrate this article. The
eponymous Mandir in Varanasi which houses that depiction of Bharat Mata
would not be built for another thirty one years at the time he said
this; with the “map” in question simply being one hanging on a
class-room wall where he happened to be at the time. \[Interestingly, at
this point Aurobindo was \*also\* pointedly referring to the deified
national personification of India as “Bhavani” – a name, indeed a
theonym, you may recall from a few lines earlier in Maratha company 😀 \]

I suppose, in a certain sense, this conception advanced so eloquently by
Aurobindo , may bear resemblance not just to the ‘organicist’
conceptions of state (and ‘corporatist’ ideals of Nation) which we find
in a number of political philosophies – but also to the operational
ambit of “Gaia” in some strands of ‘deep ecology’ and the like.

Which handily brings this article back almost ‘full circle’, as it were,
to the initial Indo-European conception of ‘Earth Mother’ with which we
began.

Although at that point, I feel almost compelled to quote another heroic
figure of the Swaraj Struggle – Bipin Chandra Pal, who pointedly noted
“this geographical habitat of ours is only the outer body of the Mother.
The earth that we tread on is not a mere bit of geological structure.
It is the physical embodiment of the Mother. Behind this physical and
geographical body, there is a Being, a Personality.”

The imputation of actual conscious \*agency\*, in addition – obviously –
to Divinity, is what sets these conceptions of National Identity \[that
is to say, an Identity, \*the\* Identity, Who is also the Nation\] apart
from the ‘mere abstractions’ we might see in political-editorial
cartoons and militarist recruitment posters. (Although I would be
entirely unsurprised to find out that somebody, somewhere, in America
had set up a Temple to Uncle Sam – after all, there is a shrine to
deified George Washington in a Shinto temple in Hawaii, if I recall\]

Yet there is one final element of incredible importance which separates
Bharat Mata JI (and other, comparable, figures of authentic
Indo-European mythology and religious belief) from those aforementioned
‘cargo-cult’-ish efforts at artificially post-facto ‘filling in’ a
‘National Character’ (that is, again, to say, a Character who is also
supposed to be the Nation) .

Some ways earlier in this piece (or, if not here, then certainly in my
work elsewhere – I have been up literally through the night writing,
with Dawn about to break; excellent metaphor for Independence aside, it
is not the easiest to keep track of such details); I may have pointed
out that there are two (and a half) commonly promulgated ‘derivation
chains’ for the linguistics and mythography associated with these
‘Mountain Queen’ deities.

The first (and a half) of which, of course, I have put quite some
fulsome effort into elaborating upon – that of the “Mountain” component,
the “Earth” from whence it (un)Folds … and as an effective contingent
upon this (hence why it is, perhaps, a “half”) , the Protective, the
Defensive elements derived from same.

I shall not re-run the linguistics here.

Yet there is \*another\* side – again, non-exclusive, by my estimation
.. at least in ‘all’ instances – which instead hinges around not just
the ‘Female’ nature of the Goddess, but also the “emotive” (and, truth
be told, such a depth of feeling, of perception, of essence – hardly
seems appropriately encapsulated by a word more commonly utilized to
describe our more day-to-day “human” and mundane-situative emotions; a
‘physical force’ , as well as a ‘metaphysical’ one is almost certainly
more apt) gravity which this brings. Particularly, it has to be said, as
applies the relationship between a man and his mother (not for nothing
are the safest neighbourhoods in various parts of Southern Italy those
in which the Mafia bosses’ Mothers live. And not for nothing do the
customary exchanges of insults based around the denigration of another
man’s Mother provoke the most vicious responses from those whom they so
righteously enrage) – but also, that existent between a Mother and Her
Son … which can see otherwise ordinary women suddenly and spontaneously
develop the strength which puts Olympic weightlifters to shame thanks to
the adrenal-surge resultant from seeing Their progeny in danger.

The “protective” elements of these relationships, going both ways, are
very much in evidence here (hence the \*other\* reason why it’s a “half”
element – linguistics aside, it is near evenly split conceptually
between both ‘standard’ chains of derivation); motivated, in each case,
by a deep and primeval Love.

Now technically speaking, a number of the post-Proto-Indo-European words
which spring instantly to mind here – ‘Priya’, and ‘Freyja’ being the
foremost ones \[no doubt due to #NAS\] carry connotations of ‘love’ in a
sense that is ‘romantic’ rather than ‘maternal’.

Yet however one chooses to look at it – whether emphasizing the Mother
nature of the ‘Mountain Queen’ deities in question as context, and thus
the mutually reinforcing bonds of familial, filial loyalty, nurturing,
and protection existing therein; or, rather, take the different view
which instead posits the ‘kernel’ as being more akin to a wife – a
‘beloved’ partner in an endeavour of life, with whom, and of whom, one
is still fiercely protective of (and vice versa – seriously, it may not
fit particularly well with some of the more chauvinistically inclined
conceptions of such things, but the annals of Indo-European myth do not
at all lack for ‘deadly’ wives fully capable of protecting their
husbands and families) …

At the very core of our conception of Nation, and of National Deity,
Goddess – is “love”.

“Patriotism”, some might call it – yet with the sure acknowledgement
that the Nation, too, cares about us.

One final thought, though: for the devoted man in a relationship, and
more especially for the ‘family man’ at all times, anyway – these female
figures can very easily become the center of our lives. Indeed, it is
not at all coincidental that we can find mythic ‘inferences’ for same –
in cultures where the Axis Mundi of the universe (or of the Realm) is a
Mountain (such as Olympus or Meru), we see these female deities
identified with, and as, Mountains. In Nordic culture, meanwhile,
leaving aside the no doubt fascinating discursion I could write-up on
the coterminous (arguable) origins of both Freyja/Frigg, various
‘mountainous’ terms, and also particularly \*coniferous\* trees \[for
the moment, the visual and slight phonetic similarity of the Fir Tree
will have to do…\], we should therefore find it absolutely unsurprising
that the religion of the “World Tree” has numerous attestations for the
Goddess in question \*as\* a “tree”.

In fact, I suppose you might say – with the often (deliberately) VERY
hazy distinction between (the) ‘Earth’ and ‘Earth Mother’ (seriously –
it’s literally the same word, Bhumi, in Sanskrit; a similar case can be
made, if I recall, for “Jord” in Old Norse) , that these women can
become “our whole world” (in a rather literal sense, come to think of
it, as applies those aforementioned ‘Earth Mother’ archetypes).

And as relates to the Nation, a similar dynamic of course presents
itself.

After all – what is more beloved or dear to a traditional man, other
than his family (and wife), of course, than his Nation, his People, his
Ethnos.(that which we have earlier correlated with his ‘settlement’, his
‘place to stand’)

So you see, these ‘two’ (and a half) dynamics – they are actually,
really one …

Happy (Re-)Birth Day, (Adoptive) Ma!

भारत माता की जय

![20914185_10159208554045574_4595144019386681288_n
(1)](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2018/08/20914185_10159208554045574_4595144019386681288_n-1.jpg?w=676)
