---
title: III

---
<div>

[←](twentieth_century_club.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Questions and
Answers](questions_and_answers_contents.htm)
/ [→](selections_from_the_math_diary.htm)

  

## III

(*At the Brooklyn Ethical Society, Brooklyn, U. S. A.*)

*Q*. — How can you reconcile your optimistic views with the existence of
evil, with the universal prevalence of sorrow and pain?

*A*. — I can only answer the question if the existence of evil be first
proved; but this the Vedantic religion does not admit. Eternal pain
unmixed with pleasure would be a positive evil; but temporal pain and
sorrow, if they have contributed an element of tenderness and nobility
tending towards eternal bliss, are not evils: on the contrary, they may
be supreme good. We cannot assert that anything is evil until we have
traced its sequence into the realm of eternity.

Devil worship is not a part of the Hindu religion. The human race is in
process of development; all have not reached the same altitude.
Therefore some are nobler and purer in their earthly lives than others.
Every one has an opportunity within the limits of the sphere of his
present development of making himself better. We cannot unmake
ourselves; we cannot destroy or impair the vital force within us, but we
have the freedom to give it different directions.

*Q*. — Is not the reality of cosmic matter simply the imagining of our
own minds?

*A*. — In my opinion the external world is certainly an entity and has
an existence outside of our mental conceptions. All creation is moving
onwards and upwards, obedient to the great law of spirit evolution,
which is different from the evolution of matter. The latter is
symbolical of, but does not explain, the process of the former. We are
not individuals now, in our present earthly environment. We shall not
have reached individuality until we shall have ascended to the higher
state, when the divine spirit within us will have a perfect medium for
the expression of its attributes.

*Q*. — What is your explanation of the problem presented to Christ, as
to whether it was the infant itself or its parents that had sinned, that
it was born blind?

*A*. — While the question of sin does not enter into the problem, I am
convinced that the blindness was due to some act on the part of the
spirit of the child in a previous incarnation. In my opinion such
problems are only explicable on the hypothesis of a prior earthly
existence.

*Q*. — Do our spirits pass at death into a state of happiness?

*A*. — Death is only a change of condition: time and space are in you,
you are not in time and space. It is enough to know that as we make our
lives purer and nobler, either in the seen or the unseen world, the
nearer we approach God, who is the centre of all spiritual beauty and
eternal joy.

*Q*. — What is the Hindu theory of the transmigration of souls?

*A*. — It is on the same basis as the theory of conservation is to the
scientist. This theory was first produced by a philosopher of my
country. The ancient sages did not believe in a creation. A creation
implies producing something out of nothing. That is impossible. There
was no beginning of creation as there was no beginning of time. God and
creation are as two lines without end, without beginning, and parallel.
Our theory of creation is "It is, it was, and is to be". All punishment
is but reaction. People of the West should learn one thing from India
and that is toleration. All the religions are good, since the essentials
are the same.

*Q*. — Why are the women of India not much elevated?

*A*. — It is in a great degree owing to the barbarous invaders through
different ages; it is partly due to the people of India themselves.

When it was pointed out to Swamiji in America that Hinduism is not a
proselytising religion, he replied:

"I have a message to the West as Buddha had a message to the East."

*Q*. — Do you intend to introduce the practices and rituals of the Hindu
religion into this country (America)?

*A*. — I am preaching simply philosophy.

*Q*. — Do you not think if the fear of future hell-fire were taken from
man there would be no controlling him?

*A*. — No! On the contrary, I think he is made far better through love
and hope than through fear.

</div>
