---
title: VI

---
<div>

[←](yoga_vairagya.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
5](../volume_5_contents.htm) / [Questions and
Answers](questions_and_answers_contents.htm) / [→](guru_avatara.htm)

  

## VI

IN ANSWER TO NIVEDITA

(In answer to a few questions put by Sister Nivedita, Swamiji jotted
down the replies on May 24, 1900 at San Francisco.)

*Q*. — I cannot remember what parts Prithvi Rai and Chând disguised
themselves to play, when they determined to attend the Svayamvara at
Kanauj.

*A*. — Both went as minstrels.

*Q*. — Also did Prithvi Rai determine to marry Samyuktâ partly because
she was the daughter of his rival and partly for the fame of her great
beauty? Did he then send a woman-servant to obtain the post of her maid?
And did this old nurse set herself to make the princess fall in love
with Prithvi Rai?

*A*. — They had fallen in love with each other, hearing deeds and beauty
and seeing portraits. Falling in love through portraits is an old Indian
game.

*Q*. — How did Krishna come to be brought up amongst the shepherds?

*A*. — His father had to flee with the baby to save it from the tyrant
Kamsa, who ordered all the babes (male) from that year to be killed, as
(through prophecy) he was afraid one of them would be Krishna and
dethrone him. He kept Krishna's father and mother in prison (who were
his cousins) for fear of that prophecy.

*Q*. — How did this part of his life terminate?

*A*. — He came with his brother Baladeva and Nanda, his foster-father,
invited by the tyrant to a festival. (The tyrant had plotted his
destruction.) He killed the tyrant and instead of taking the throne
placed the nearest heir on it. Himself he never took any fruit of
action.

*Q*. — Can you give me any dramatic incident of this period?

*A*. — This period is full of miracles. He as a baby was once naughty
and the cowherd-mother tried to tie him with her churning string and
found she could not bind him with all the strings she had. Then her eyes
opened and she saw that she was going to bind him who had the whole
universe in his body. She began to pray and tremble. Immediately the
Lord touched her with his Maya and she saw only the child.

Brahmâ, the chief of gods, disbelieving that the Lord had become a
cowherd, stole one day all the cows and cowherd boys and put them to
sleep in a cave. When he came back, he found the same boys and cows
round Krishna. Again he stole the new lot and hid them away. He came
back and saw there the same again. Then his eyes opened and began to see
numerous worlds and heavens and Brahmans by the thousands, one greater
than the preceding, in the body of the Lord.

He danced on the serpent Kâliya who had been poisoning the water of the
Yamunâ, and he held up the mount Govardhana in defiance of Indra whose
worship he had forbidden and who in revenge wanted to kill all the
people of Vraja by deluge of rain. They were all sheltered by Krishna
under the hill Govardhana which he upheld with a finger on their head.

He from his childhood was against snake-worship and Indra-worship.
Indra-worship is a Vedic ritual. Throughout the Gita he is not
favourable to Vedic ritual.

This is the period of his love to Gopis. He was eleven years of age.

</div>
