---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_iii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_v.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

IV  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_15e7_04.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The rented Math Premises at Belur*. Year: *1898, November*.\]

It is two or three days since Swamiji has returned from Kashmir. His
health is indifferent. When the disciple came to the Math, Swami
Brahmananda said, "Since returning from Kashmir, Swamiji does not speak
to anybody, he sits in one place rapt in thought; you go to him and by
conversation try to draw his mind a little towards worldly objects."

The disciple coming to Swamiji's room in the upper storey found him
sitting as if immersed in deep mediation. There was no smile on his
face, his brilliant eyes had no outward look, as if intent on seeing
something within. Seeing the disciple, he only said, "You have come, my
son? Please take your seat", and lapsed into silence. The disciple
seeing the inside of his left eye reddened asked, "How is it that your
eye is red?" "That is nothing", said Swamiji and was again silent. When
even after along time Swamiji did not speak, the disciple was a little
troubled at heart and touching his feet said, "Won't you relate to me
what things you have seen at Amarnath?" By the disciple's touching his
feet, the tensity of his mood was broken a little, as if his attention
was diverted a little outwards. He said, "Since visiting Amarnath, I
feel as if Shiva is sitting on my head for twenty-four hours and would
not come down." The disciple heard it with speechless wonder.

Swamiji: I underwent great religious austerities at Amarnath and then in
the temple of Kshir Bhavâni. Go and prepare me some tobacco, I will
relate everything to you.

The disciple joyfully obeyed the order. Swamiji slowly smoking began to
say, "On the way to Amarnath, I made a very steep ascent on the
mountain. Pilgrims do not generally travel by that path. But the
determination came upon me that I must go by that path, and so I did.
The labour of the strenuous ascent has told on my body. The cold there
is so biting that you feel it like pin-pricks."

Disciple: I have heard that it is the custom to visit the image of
Amarnath naked; is it so?

Swamiji: Yes, I entered the cave with only my Kaupina on and my body
smeared with holy ash; I did not then feel any cold or heat. But when I
came out of the temple, I was benumbed by the cold.

Disciple: Did you see the holy pigeons? I have heard, in that cold no
living creatures are found to live, but a flight of pigeons from some
unknown place frequents the place occasionally.

Swamiji: Yes, I saw three or four white pigeons; whether they live in
the cave or the neighboring hills, I could not ascertain.

Disciple: Sir, I have heard people say that the sight of pigeons on
coming out of the temple indicates that one has really been blessed with
the vision of Shiva.

Swamiji: I have heard that the sight of the pigeons brings to fruition
whatever desires one may have.

Then Swamiji said that on the way back he returned to Srinagar by the
common route by which the pilgrims return. A few days after returning to
Srinagar, he went to visit Kshir Bhavani Devi and staying there for
seven days worshipped the Devi and made Homa to her with offerings of
Kshira (condensed milk). Every day he used to worship the Devi with a
maund of Kshira as offering. One day, while worshipping, the thought
arose in Swamiji's mind: "Mother Bhavani has been manifesting Her
Presence here for untold years. The Mohammedans came and destroyed her
temple, yet the people of the place did nothing to protect Her. Alas, if
I were then living I could never have borne it silently." When, thinking
in this strain, his mind was much oppressed with sorrow and anguish, he
distinctly heard the voice of the Mother saying, "It was according to My
desire that the Mohammedans destroyed this temple. It is My desire that
I should live in a dilapidated temple, otherwise, can I not immediately
erect a seven-storeyed temple of gold here if I like? What can you do?
Shall I protect you or shall you protect me!" Swamiji said, "Since
hearing that divine voice, I cherish no more plans. The idea of building
Maths etc. I have given up; as Mother wills, so it will be." The
disciple, speechless with wonder, began to think, "Did he not one day
tell me that whatever I saw and heard was but the echo of the Atman
within me, that there was nothing outside?" — and fearlessly spoke it
out also — "Sir, you used to say that Divine Voices are the echo of our
inward thoughts and feelings." Swamiji gravely said, "Whether it be
internal or external, if you actually hear with your ears such a
disembodied voice, as I have done, can you deny it and call it false?
Divine Voices are actually heard, just as you and I are talking."

The disciple, without controverting accepted Swamiji's words, for his
words always carried conviction.

He then brought up the subject of departed spirits, and said, "Sir,
these ghosts and departed spirits we hear about — which the Shastras
also amply corroborate — are all these true or not?

Swamiji: Certainly they are true. Whatever you don't see, are they all
false for that? Beyond your sight, millions of universes are revolving
at great distances. Because you do not see them, are they non-existent
for that? But then, do not put your mind on these subjects of ghosts and
spirits. Your mental attitude towards them should be one of
indifference. You duty is to realise the Atman within this body. When
you realise the Atman, ghosts and spirits will be your slaves.

Disciple: But sir, I think that, if one sees them, it strengthens one's
belief in the hereafter, and dispels all doubts about it.

Swamiji: You are heroes; do you mean to say that even you shall have to
strengthen your belief in the hereafter by seeing ghosts and spirits!
You have read so many sciences and scriptures — have mastered so many
secrets of this infinite universe — even with such knowledge, you have
to acquire the knowledge of the Atman by seeing ghosts and spirits! What
a shame!

Disciple: Well, sir, have you ever seen ghosts and spirits?

Swamiji narrated that a certain deceased relative of his used to come to
him as a disembodied spirit. Sometimes it used to bring him information
about distant events. But on verification, some of its information was
not found to be correct. Afterwards at a certain place of pilgrimage
Swamiji prayed for it mentally, wishing it might be released — since
then he did not see it again.

The disciple then questioned Swamiji if Shrâddha or other obsequial
ceremonies appeased the departed spirits in any way. Swamiji replied,
"That is not impossible." On the disciple's asking for the grounds of
that belief Swamiji said, "I will explain the subject to you at length
some day. There are irrefutable arguments to prove that the Shrâddha
ceremony appeases the departed beings. Today I don't feel well. I shall
explain it to you another day." But the disciple did not get another
opportunity to ask that question to Swamiji.

</div>
