---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_ix.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xi.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

X  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_31e7_10.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The rented Math premises at Belur*. Year: *1899*.\]

The Bengali fortnightly magazine, *Udbodhan*, was just started by Swami
Trigunatita under the direction of Swamiji for spreading the religious
views of Shri Ramakrishna among the general public. After the first
number came out the disciple came to the Math at Nilambar Babu's garden
one day. Swamiji started the following conversation with him about the
*Udbodhan*.

Swamiji: (Humorously caricaturing the name of the magazine) Have you
seen the *Udbandhana*? (The word means "suicide by hanging".)

Disciple: Yes, sir; it is a good number.

Swamiji: We must mould the ideas, language, and everything of this
magazine in a new fashion.

Disciple: How?

Swamiji: Not only must we give out Shri Ramakrishna's ideas to all, but
we must also introduce a new vigour into the Bengali language. For
instance, the frequent use of verbs diminishes the force of a language.
We must restrict the use of verbs by the use of adjectives. Begin to
write articles in that way, and show them to me before you give them to
print in the Udbodhan.

Disciple: Sir, it is impossible for any other man to labour for this
magazine in the way Swami Trigunatita does.

Swamiji: Do you think these Sannyasin children of Shri Ramakrishna are
born simply to sit under trees lighting Dhuni-fires? Whenever any of
them will take up some work, people will be astonished to see their
energy. Learn from them how to work. Here, for instance, Trigunatita has
given up his spiritual practices, his meditation and everything, to
carry out my orders, and has set himself to work. Is this a matter of
small sacrifice? What an amount of love for me is at the back of this
spirit of work, do you see? He will not stop short of success! Have you
householders such determination?

Disciple: But, sir, it looks rather odd in our eyes that Sannyasins in
ochre robe should go about from door to door as the Swami is doing.

Swamiji: Why? The circulation of the magazine is only for the good of
the householders. By the spread of new ideas within the country the
public at large will be benefited. Do you think this unselfish work is
any way inferior to devotional practices? Our object is to do good to
humanity. We have no idea of making money from the income of this paper.
We have renounced everything and have no wives or children to provide
for after our death. If the paper be a success, the whole of its income
will be spent in the service of humanity. Its surplus money will be
profitably spent in the opening of monasteries and homes of service in
different places and all sorts of work of public utility. We are not
certainly working like householders with the plan of filling our own
pockets. Know for certain that all our movements are for the good of
others.

Disciple: Even then, all will not be able to appreciate this spirit.

Swamiji: What if they cannot? It neither adds nor takes away anything
from us. We do not take up any work with an eye to criticism.

Disciple: So this magazine will be a fortnightly. We should like it to
be a weekly.

Swamiji: Yes, but where are the funds? If through the grace of Shri
Ramakrishna funds are raised, it can be made into a daily even, in
future. A hundred thousand copies may be struck off daily and
distributed free in every street and lane of Calcutta.

Disciple: This idea of yours is a capital one.

Swamiji: I have a mind to make the paper self-supporting first, and then
set you up as its editor. You have not yet got the capacity to make any
enterprise stand on its legs. That is reserved only for these
all-renouncing Sannyasins to do. They will work themselves to death, but
never yield. Whereas a little resistance or just a trifle of criticism
is bewildering to you.

Disciple: Sir, the other day I saw that Swami Trigunatita worshipped the
photograph of Sri Ramakrishna in the Press before opening the work and
asked for your blessings for the success of the work.

Swamiji: Well, Shri Ramakrishna is our centre. Each one of us is a ray
of that light-centre. So Trigunatita worshipped Shri Ramakrishna before
beginning the work, did he? It was excellently done. But he told me
nothing of it.

Disciple: Sir, he fears you and yesterday he told me to come to you and
ask your opinion of the first issue of the magazine, after which, he
said, he would see you.

Swamiji: Tell him when you go that I am exceedingly delighted with his
work. Give him my loving blessings. And all of you help him as far as
you can. You will be doing Shri Ramakrishna's work by that.

Immediately after saying these words Swamiji called Swami Brahmananda to
him and directed him to give Swami Trigunatita more money for the
*Udbodhan* if it was needed.

The same evening, after supper, Swamiji again referred to the topic of
*Udbodhan* in the following words:

"In the *Udbodhan* we must give the public only positive ideas. Negative
thoughts weaken men. Do you not find that where parents are constantly
taxing their sons to read and write, telling them they will never learn
anything, and calling them fools and so forth, the latter do actually
turn out to be so in many cases? If you speak kind words to boys and
encourage them, they are bound to improve in time. What holds good of
children, also holds good of children in the region of higher thoughts.
If you can give them positive ideas, people will grow up to be men and
learn to stand on their own legs. In language and literature, in poetry
and the arts, in everything we must point out not the mistakes that
people are making in their thoughts and actions, but the way in which
they will gradually be able to do these things better. Pointing out
mistakes wounds a man's feelings. We have seen how Shri Ramakrishna
would encourage even those whom we considered as worthless and change
the very course of their lives thereby! His very method of teaching was
a unique phenomenon."

After a short pause, Swamiji continued, "Never take the preaching of
religion to mean the turning up of one's nose at everything and at
everybody. In matters physical, mental, and spiritual — in everything we
must give men positive ideas and never hate anybody. It is your hatred
of one another that has brought about your degradation. Now we shall
have to raise men by scattering broadcast only positive thoughts. First
we must raise the whole Hindu race in this way and then the whole world.
That is why Shri Ramakrishna incarnated. He never destroyed a single
man's special inclinations. He gave words of hope and encouragement even
to the most degraded of persons and lifted them up. We too must follow
in his footsteps and lift all up, and rouse them. Do you understand?

"Your history, literature, mythology, and all other Shastras are simply
frightening people. They are only telling them, 'You will go to hell,
you are doomed!' Therefore has this lethargy crept into the very vitals
of India. Hence we must explain to men in simple words the highest ideas
of the Vedas and the Vedanta. Through the imparting of moral principles,
good behaviour, and education we must make the Chandâla come up to the
level of the Brahmana. Come, write out all these things in the
*Udbodhan* and awaken everyone, young and old, man and woman. Then only
shall I know that your study of the Vedas and Vedanta has been a
success. What do you say? Will you be able to do this?"

Disciple: Through your blessings and command I think I shall succeed in
everything.

Swamiji: Another thing. You must learn to make the physique very strong
and teach the same to others. Don't you find me exercising every day
with dumb-bells even now? Walk in the morning and evenings and do
physical labour. Body and mind must run parallel. It won't do to depend
on others in everything. When the necessity of strengthening the
physique is brought home to people, they will exert themselves of their
own accord. It is to make them feel this need that education is
necessary at the present moment.

</div>
