---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_xiii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xv.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XIV  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_30e7_14.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur Math. Beginning of 1899*.\]

The disciple has today come to the Math with Nag Mahashaya in company.

Swamiji to Nag Mahashaya (saluting him): You are all right, I hope?

Nag Mahashaya: I have come today to visit you. Glory to Shankara! Glory
to Shankara! I am blessed today verily with the sight of Shiva!

Saying these words, Nag Mahashaya out of reverence stood with joined
hands before him.

Swamiji: How is your health?

Nag Mahashaya: Why are you asking about this trifling body — this cage
of flesh and bones? Verily I am blessed today to see you.

Saying these words, Nag Mahashaya prostrated before Swamiji.

Swamiji (lifting him up): Why are you doing that to me?

Nag Mahashaya: I see with my inner eye that today I am blessed with the
vision of Shiva Himself. Glory to Ramakrishna!

Swamiji (addressing the disciple): Do you see? How real Bhakti
transforms human nature! Nag Mahashaya has lost himself in the Divine,
his body-consciousness has vanished altogether. (To Swami Premananda)
Get some Prasada for Nag Mahashaya.

Nag Mahashaya: Prasada! (To Swamiji with folded hands) Seeing you, all
my earthly hunger has vanished today.

The Brahmacharins and Sannyasins of the Math were studying the
Upanishads. Swamiji said to them, "Today a great devotee of Shri
Ramakrishna has come amongst us. Let it be a holiday in honour of Nag
Mahashaya's visit to the Math." So all closed their books and sat in a
circle round Nag Mahashaya; Swamiji also sat in front of him.

Swamiji (addressing all): Do you see? Look at Nag Mahashaya; he is a
householder, yet he has no knowledge of the mundane existence; he always
lives lost in Divine consciousness. (To Nag Mahashaya) Please tell us
and these Brahmacharins something about Shri Ramakrishna.

Nag Mahashaya (in reverence): What do you say, sir? What shall I say? I
have come to see you — the hero, the helper in the divine play of Shri
Ramakrishna. Now will people appreciate his message and teachings. Glory
to Ramakrishna!

Swamiji: It is you who have really appreciated and understood Shri
Ramakrishna. We are only spent in useless wanderings.

Nag Mahashaya: What do you say, sir? You are the image of Shri
Ramakrishna — the obverse and reverse of the same coin. Those who have
eyes, let them see.

Swamiji: Is the starting of these Maths and Ashramas etc. a step in the
right direction?

Nag Mahashaya: I am an insignificant being, what do I understand?
Whatever you do, I know for a certainty, will conduce to the well-being
of the world — ay, of the world.

Many out of reverence proceeded to take the dust of Nag Mahashaya's
feet, which made him much agitated. Swamiji, addressing all, said,
"Don't act so as to cause pain to Nag Mahashaya; he feels
uncomfortable." Hearing this everybody desisted.

Swamiji: Do please come and stay at the Math. You will be an
object-lesson to the boys here.

Nag Mahashaya: I once asked Shri Ramakrishna about that, to which he
replied, "Stay as a householder as you are doing." Therefore I am
continuing in that life. I see you all occasionally and feel myself
blessed.

Swamiji: I will go to your place once.

Nag Mahashaya, mad with joy, said, "Shall such a day dawn? My place will
be made holy by your visit, like Varanasi. Shall I be so fortunate as
that!"

Swamiji: Well, I have the desire. Now it depends on "Mother" to take me
there.

Nag Mahashaya: Who will understand you? Unless the inner vision opens,
nobody can understand you. Only Shri Ramakrishna understood you; all
else have simply put faith in his words, but none has understood you
really.

Swamiji: Now my one desire is to rouse the country — the sleeping
leviathan that has lost all faith in his power and makes no response. If
I can wake it up to a sense of the Eternal Religion then I shall know
that Shri Ramakrishna's advent and our birth are fruitful. That is the
one desire in my heart: Mukti and all else appear of no consequence to
me. Please give me your blessings that I may succeed.

Nag Mahashaya: Shri Ramakrishna will bless! who can turn the course of
your will? Whatever you will, shall come to pass.

Swamiji: Well, nothing comes to pass without his will behind it.

Nag Mahashaya: Your will and his have become one. Whatever is your will
is his. Glory to Shri Ramakrishna!

Swamiji: To work one requires a strong body; since coming to this
country, I am not doing well; in the West I was in very good health.

Nag Mahashaya: "Whenever one is born in a body," Shri Ramakrishna used
to say, "one has to pay the house tax." Disease and sorrow are the tax.
But your body is a box of gold *mohurs*, and very great care should be
taken of it. But who will do it? Who will understand? Only Shri
Ramakrishna understood. Glory to Ramakrishna!

Swamiji: All at the Math take great care of me.

Nag Mahashaya: It will be to their good if they do it, whether they know
it or not. If proper attention is not paid to your body, then the
chances are that it will fall off.

Swamiji: Nag Mahashaya, I do not fully understand whether what I am
doing is right or not. At particular times I feel a great inclination to
work in a certain direction, and I work according to that. Whether it is
for good or evil, I cannot understand.

Nag Mahashaya: Well, Shri Ramakrishna said, "The treasure is now
locked." — Therefore he does not let you know fully. The moment you know
it, your play of human life will be at an end.

Swamiji was pondering something with steadfast gaze. Then Swami
Premananda brought some Prasada for Nag Mahashaya who was ecstatic with
joy. Shortly after Nag Mahashaya found Swamiji slowly digging the ground
with a spade near the pond, and held him by the hand saying, "When we
are present, why should you do that?" Swamiji leaving the spade walked
about the garden talking the while, and began to narrate to a disciple,
"After Shri Ramakrishna's passing away we heard one day that Nag
Mahashaya lay fasting in his humbled tiled lodgings in Calcutta. Myself,
Swami Turiyananda, and another went together and appeared at Nag
Mahashaya's cottage. Seeing us he rose from his bed. We said, 'We shall
have our Bhikshâ (food) here today.' At once Nag Mahashaya brought rice,
cooking pot, fuel, etc. from the bazaar and began to cook. We thought
that we would eat and make Nag Mahashaya also eat. Cooking over, he gave
the food to us; we set apart something for him and then sat down to eat.
After this, we requested him to take food; he at once broke the pot of
rice and striking his forehead began to say: 'Shall I give food to the
body in which God has not been realised?' Seeing this we were struck
with amazement. Later on after much persuasion we induced him to take
some food and then returned."

Swamiji: Will Nag Mahashaya stay in the Math tonight?

Disciple: No, he has some work; he must return today.

Swamiji: Then look for a boat. It is getting dark.

When the boat came, the disciple and Nag Mahashaya saluted Swamiji and
started for Calcutta.

</div>
