---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_xviii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xx.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XIX  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_36e7_19.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur Math*. Year: *1901*.\]

Swamiji is in indifferent health. At the earnest request of Swami
Niranjanananda he has been taking Ayurvedic medicines for six or seven
days. According to this treatment, the drinking of water is strictly
forbidden. He has to appease his thirst with milk.

The disciple has come to the Math early in the day. Swamiji on seeing
him spoke with affection, "Oh, you have come? Well done, I was thinking
of you."

Disciple: I hear that you are living on milk for the last six or seven
days.

Swamiji: Yes, at the earnest entreaty of Niranjan, I had to take to this
medicine! I cannot disregard their request.

Disciple: You were in the habit of taking water very frequently. How
could you give it up altogether?

Swamiji: When I heard that according to this treatment water had to be
given up, I made a firm resolve immediately not to take water. Now the
idea of drinking water does not even occur to the mind.

Disciple: The treatment is doing you good I hope?

Swamiji: That I don't know. I am simply obeying the orders of my
brother-disciples.

Disciple: I think that indigenous drugs such as the Vaidyas use, are
very well-suited to our constitution.

Swamiji: My idea is that it is better even to die under the treatment of
a scientific doctor than expect recovery from the treatment of laymen
who know nothing of modern science, but blindly go by the ancient books,
without gaining a mastery of the subject — even though they may have
cured a few cases.

Swamiji cooked certain dishes, one of which was prepared with
vermicelli. When the disciple, who partook of it, asked Swamiji what it
was, he replied, "It is a few English earthworms which I have brought
dried from London." This created laughter among those present at the
expense of the disciple. Despite his spare food and scanty sleep,
Swamiji is very active. A few days ago, a new set of the *Encyclopaedia
Britannica* had been bought for the Math. Seeing the new shining
volumes, the disciple said to Swamiji, "It is almost impossible to read
all these books in a single lifetime." He was unaware that Swamiji had
already finished ten volumes and had begun the eleventh.

Swamiji: What do you say? Ask me anything you like from these ten
volumes, and I will answer you all.

The disciple asked in wonder, "Have you read all these books?"

Swamiji: Why should I ask you to question me otherwise?

Being examined, Swamiji not only reproduced the sense, but at places the
very language of the difficult topics selected from each volume. The
disciple, astonished, put aside the books, saying, "This is not within
human power!"

Swamiji: Do you see, simply by the observance of strict Brahmacharya
(continence) all learning can be mastered in a very short time — one has
an unfailing memory of what one hears or knows but once. It is owing to
this want of continence that everything is on the brink of ruin in our
country.

Disciple: Whatever you may say, sir, the manifestation of such
superhuman power cannot be the result of mere Brahmacharya, something
else there must be.

Swamiji did not say anything in reply.

Then Swamiji began to explain lucidly to the disciple the arguments and
conclusions about the difficult points in all philosophies. In course of
the conversation Swami Brahmananda entered the room and said to the
disciple, "You are a nice man! Swamiji is unwell, and instead of trying
to keep his mind cheerful by light talk, you are making him talk
incessantly, raising the most abstruse subjects!" The disciple was
abashed. But Swamiji said to Swami Brahmananda, "Keep your regulation of
Ayurvedic treatment aside. These are my children; and if my body goes in
teaching them, I don't care." After this, some light talk followed. Then
arose the topic of the place of Bhâratchandra in Bengali literature.
From the beginning Swamiji began to ridicule Bharatchandra in various
ways and satirised the life, manners, marriage-customs, and other usages
of society at the time of Bharatchandra, who was an advocate of
child-marriage. He expressed the opinion that the poems of
Bharatchandra, being full of bad taste and obscenities, had not found
acceptance in any cultured society except in Bengal, and he said, "Care
should be taken that such books do not come into the hands of boys."
Then raising the topic of Michael Madhusudan Dutt, he added, "That was a
wonderful genius born in your province. There is not another epic in
Bengali literature like the *Meghnâdbadh*, no mistake in that; and it is
difficult to come across a poem like that in the whole of modern
European literature."

Disciple: But, sir, I think Michael was very fond of a bombastic style.

Swamiji: Well, if anybody in your country does anything new, you at once
hoot him. First examine well what he is saying, but instead of that, the
people of the country will chase after anything which is not quite after
the old modes. For example, in order to bring to ridicule this
*Meghnabadh Kâvya*, which is the gem of Bengali literature, the parody
of *Chhuchhundaribadh Kâvya* (The Death of a Mole) was written. They may
caricature as much as they like, it does not matter. But the
*Meghnadbadh Kavya* still stands unshaken in its reputation like the
Himalayas while the opinions and writings of carping critics who are
busy picking holes in it have been washed away into oblivion. What will
the vulgar public understand of this epic Michael has written in such a
vigorous diction and an original metre? And at the present time Girish
Babu is writing wonderful books in a new metre which your overwise
Pundits are criticising and finding fault with. But does G.C. care for
that? People will appreciate the book afterwards.

Thus speaking on the subject of Michael he said, "Go and get the
*Meghnadbadh Kavya* from the library downstairs." On the disciple's
bringing it he said, "Now read, let me see how you can read it."

The disciple read a portion, but the reading not being to the liking of
Swamiji, he took the book and showed him how to read and asked him to
read again. Then he asked him, "Now, can you say which portion of the
Kavya is best?" The disciple failing to answer, Swamiji said, "That
portion of the book which describes how Indrajit has been killed in
battle and Mandodari, beside herself with grief, is dissuading Râvana
from the battle — but Ravana casting off forcibly from his mind the
grief for his son is firmly resolved on battle like a great hero, and
forgetting in a fury of rage and vengeance all about his wife and
children, is ready to rush out for battle — that is the most finely
conceived portion of the book. Come what may, I shall not forget my
duty, whether the world remains or dissolves-these are the words of a
great hero. Inspired by such feelings, Michael has written that
portion."

Saying this, Swamiji opened the particular passage and began to read it
in the most impressive manner.

</div>
