---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_xxii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xxiv.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XXIII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_40e7_23.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The Math, Belur*. Year: *1902*.\]

Today is the anniversary celebration of Shri Ramakrishna — the last that
Swamiji ever saw. The disciple presented an invocatory hymn on Shri
Ramakrishna to Swamiji. He then proceeded to rub Swamiji's feet gently.
Before starting to read the poem, Swamiji spoke to him: "Do it very
gently as the feet have become very tender."

After reading the poem Swamiji said, "It is well done."

Swamiji's illness had increased so much that the disciple, observing it,
felt sore at heart. Understanding his inner feeling, Swamiji said, "What
are you thinking? This body is born and it will die. If I have been able
to instil a few of my ideas into you all, then I shall know that my
birth has not been in vain."

Disciple: Are we fit objects of your mercy? If you bless me, without
taking my fitness into consideration, then I will consider myself
fortunate.

Swamiji: Always remember that renunciation is the root idea. Unless one
is initiated into this idea, not even Brahmâ and the World-Gods have the
power to attain Mukti.

Disciple: It is a matter of deep regret that even hearing this from you
almost every day, I have not been able to realise it.

Swamiji: Renunciation must come, but in the fulness of time.
"कालेनात्मनि विन्दति — In the fulness of time one attains to knowledge
within himself." When the few Samskâras (tendencies) of the previous
life are spent, then renunciation sprouts up in the heart.

After some time he said, "Why should you go outside and see the big
concourse of people? Stay with me now. And ask Niranjan to sit at the
door, so that nobody may disturb me today."

Then the following conversation took place between Swamiji and the
disciple:

Swamiji: I think that it will be better if from now the anniversary is
celebrated in a different way. The celebration should extend to four or
five days instead of one. On the first day, there may be study and
interpretation of scriptures; on the second, discussion on the Vedas and
the Vedanta and the solution of the problems in connection with them; on
the third day, there may be a question class. The fourth day may be
fixed for lectures. On the last day, there will be a festival on the
present lines. This will be like the Durga Puja extending over four or
five days. Of course, if the celebration is on the above lines, none but
the devotees of Shri Ramakrishna will be able to attend on the other
days except the last. But that does not matter. A large promiscuous
crowd of people does not mean a great propagation of the message of Shri
Ramakrishna.

Disciple: Sir, it is a beautiful idea. Next time it will be done
according to your wishes.

Swamiji: Now, my son, you all will carry them out. I have no more
inclination for these things.

Disciple: Sir, this year many Kirtana parties have come.

Hearing these words Swamiji stood up holding the iron bars of the window
and looked at the assembled crowd of devotees. After some time he sat
down.

Swamiji: You are the actors in the Divine Lilâ (play) of Shri
Ramakrishna. After this, not to speak of ours, people will take your
names also. These hymns which you are writing will afterwards be read by
people for the acquirement of love and knowledge. Know that the
attainment of the knowledge of the Atman is the highest object of life.
If you have devotion for the Avataras who are the world-teachers, that
knowledge will manifest of itself in time.

Disciple: Sir, shall I attain to such knowledge?

Swamiji: By the blessings of Shri Ramakrishna you shall attain to divine
love and knowledge. You will not find much happiness in the worldly
life.

Disciple: Sir, if you condescend to destroy the weakness of my mind,
then only there is hope for me.

Swamiji: What fear! When you have chanced to come here, you shall be
free.

Disciple (with great entreaty): You must save me and lift me from
ignorance in this very life.

Swamiji: Say, who can save anybody? The Guru can only take away some
covering veils. When these veils are removed, the Atman shines in Its
own glory and manifests like the sun.

Disciple: Then why do we find mention of grace in the scriptures?

Swamiji: Grace means this. He who has realised the Atman becomes a
storehouse of great power. Making him the centre and with a certain
radius a circle is formed, and whoever comes within the circle becomes
animated with the ideas of that saint, i.e. they are overwhelmed by his
ideas. Thus without much religious striving, they inherit the results of
his wonderful spirituality. If you call this grace, you may do so.

Disciple: Is there no other grace than this?

Swamiji: Yes, there is. When the Avatara comes, then with him are born
liberated persons as helpers in his world-play. Only Avataras have the
power to dispel the darkness of a million souls and give them salvation
in one life. This is known as grace. Do you understand?

Disciple: Yes, sir. But what is the way for those who have not been
blessed with the sight of him?

Swamiji: The way for them is to call on him. Calling on him, many are
blessed with his vision — can see him in human form just like ours and
obtain his grace.

Disciple: Have you ever had a vision of Shri Ramakrishna after his
passing away?

Swamiji: After his leaving the body, I associated for some time with
Pavhâri Bâbâ of Ghazipur. There was a garden not far distant from his
Âshrama where I lived. People used to say it was a haunted garden, but
as you know, I am a sort of demon myself and have not much fear of
ghosts. In the garden there were many lemon trees which bore numerous
fruits. At that time I was suffering from diarrhoea, and there no food
could be had except bread. So, to increase the digestive powers, I used
to take plenty of lemons. Mixing with Pavhari Baba, I liked him very
much, and he also came to love me deeply. One day I thought that I did
not learn any art for making this weak body strong, even though I lived
with Shri Ramakrishna for so many years. I had heard that Pavhari Baba
knew the science of Hatha-Yoga. So I thought I would learn the practices
of Hatha-Yoga from him, and through them strengthen the body. You know,
I have a dogged resolution, and whatever I set my heart on, I always
carry out. On the eve of the day on which I was to take initiation, I
was lying on a cot thinking; and just then I saw the form of Sri
Ramakrishna standing on my right side, looking steadfastly at me, as if
very much grieved. I had dedicated myself to him, and at the thought
that I was taking another Guru I was much ashamed and kept looking at
him. Thus perhaps two or three hours passed, but no words escaped from
my mouth. Then he disappeared all on a sudden. My mind became upset
seeing Shri Ramakrishna that night, so I postponed the idea of
initiation from Pavhari Baba for the day. After a day or two again the
idea of initiation from Pavhari Baba arose in the mind — and again in
the night there was the appearance of Shri Ramakrishna as on the
previous occasion. Thus when for several nights in succession I had the
vision of Shri Ramakrishna, I gave up the idea of initiation altogether,
thinking that as every time I resolved on it, I was getting such a
vision, then no good but harm would come from it.

After some time he addressed the disciple, saying, "Those who have seen
Shri Ramakrishna are really blessed. Their family and birth have become
purified by it. All of you will also get his vision. The very fact that
you have come here, shows that you are very near to him. Nobody has been
able to understand who came on earth as Sri Ramakrishna. Even his own
nearest devotees have got no real clue to it. Only some have got a
little inkling of it. All will understand it afterwards."

The conversation was thus going on when Swami Niranjanananda knocked at
the door. The disciple rose and inquired, "Who has come?" Swami
Niranjanananda replied, "Sister Nivedita and some other English ladies."
They were admitted into the room, sat on the floor and inquired about
the health of Swamiji. After a few more words they went away. Then
Swamiji said to the disciple, "See how cultured they are! If they were
Bengalis, they would have made me talk at least for half an hour, even
though they found me unwell."

It is about half past two now, and there is a great gathering of people
outside. Understanding the disciple's mind, Swamiji said, "Just go and
have a look round — but come back soon."

</div>
