---
title: CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

---
<div>

[←](scc_xxv.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xxvii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XXVI  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_43e7_26.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The Math*, *Belur*. Year: *1902*.\]

The disciple passed the preceding night in Swamiji's room. At 4 a.m.
Swamiji roused him and said "Go and knock up the Sadhus and
Brahmacharins from sleep with the bell." In pursuance of the order, the
disciple rang the bell near the Sadhus who slept. The monastic inmates
hastened to go to the worship-room for meditation.

According to Swamiji's instructions, the disciple rang the bell lustily
near Swami Brahmananda's bed, which made the latter exclaim, "Good
heavens! The Bângâl (Meaning an East Bengal man, used as a term of
endearing reproach for the disciple.) has made it too hot for us to stay
in the Math!" On the disciple's communicating this to Swamiji, he burst
out into a hearty laugh, saying, "Well done!"

Then Swamiji, too, washed his face and entered the chapel accompanied by
the disciple.

The Sannyasins — Swami Brahmananda and others — were already seated for
meditation. A separate seat was kept for Swamiji, on which he sat facing
the east, and pointing to a seat in front to the disciple, said, "Go and
meditate, sitting there."

Shortly after taking his seat, Swamiji became perfectly calm and
motionless, like a statue, and his breathing became very slow. Everyone
else kept his seat.

After about an hour and a half, Swamiji rose from meditation with the
words "Shiva, Shiva". His eyes were flushed, the expression placid,
calm, and grave. Bowing before Shri Ramakrishna he came downstairs and
paced the courtyard of the Math. After a while he said to the disciple.
"Do you see how the Sadhus are practising meditation etc. nowadays? When
the meditation is deep, one sees many wonderful things. While meditating
at the Baranagore Math, one day I saw the nerves Idâ and Pingalâ. One
can see them with a little effort. Then, when one has a vision of the
Shushumnâ, one can see anything one likes. If a man has unflinching
devotion to the Guru, spiritual practices — meditation, Japa, and so
forth — come quite naturally; one need not struggle for them. 'The Guru
is Brahmâ, the Guru is Vishnu, and the Guru is Shiva Himself.'"

Then the disciple prepared tobacco for Swamiji and when he returned with
it, Swamiji spoke as he puffed at it, "Within there is the lion — the
eternally pure, illumined, and ever free Atman; and directly one
realises Him through meditation and concentration, this world of Maya
vanishes. He is equally present in all; and the more one practises, the
quicker does the Kundalini (the 'coiled-up' power) awaken in him. When
this power reaches the head, one's vision is unobstructed — one realises
the Atman."

Disciple: Sir, I have only read of these things in the scriptures, but
nothing has been realised as yet.

Swamiji: कालेनात्मनि विन्दति — is bound to come in time. But some attain
this early, and others are a little late. One must stick to it —
determined never to let it go. This is true manliness. You must keep the
mind fixed on one object, like an unbroken stream of oil. The ordinary
man's mind is scattered on different objects, and at the time of
meditation, too, the mind is at first apt to wander. But let any desire
whatever arise in the mind, you must sit calmly and watch what sort of
ideas are coming. By continuing to watch in that way, the mind becomes
calm, and there are no more thought-waves in it. These waves represent
the thought-activity of the mind. Those things that you have previously
thought deeply, have transformed themselves into a subconscious current,
and therefore these come up in the mind in meditation. The rise of these
waves, or thoughts, during meditation is an evidence that your mind is
tending towards concentration. Sometimes the mind is concentrated on a
set of ideas — this is called meditation with Vikalpa or oscillation.
But when the mind becomes almost free from all activities, it melts in
the inner Self, which is the essence of infinite Knowledge, One, and
Itself Its own support. This is what is called Nirvikalpa Samâdhi, free
from all activities. In Shri Ramakrishna we have again and again noticed
both these forms of Samadhi. He had not to struggle to get these states.
They came to him spontaneously, then and there. It was a wonderful
phenomenon. It was by seeing him that we could rightly understand these
things. Meditate every day alone. Everything will open up of itself. Now
the Divine Mother — the embodiment of illumination — is sleeping within,
hence you do not understand this. She is the Kundalini. When, before
meditating, you proceed to "purify the nerves", you must mentally strike
hard on the Kundalini in the Mulâdhâra (sacral plexus), and repeat,
"Arise, Mother, arise!" One must practise these slowly. During
meditation, suppress the emotional side altogether. This is a great
source of danger. Those that are very emotional no doubt have their
Kundalini rushing quickly upwards, but it is as quick to come down as to
go up. And when it does come down, it leaves the devotee in a state of
utter ruin. It is for this reason that Kirtanas and other auxiliaries to
emotional development have a great drawback. It is true that by dancing
and jumping, etc. through a momentary impulse, that power is made to
course upwards, but it is never enduring. On the contrary when it traces
back its course, it rouses violent lust in the individual. Listening to
my lectures in America, through temporary excitement many among the
audience used to get into an ecstatic state, and some would even become
motionless like statues. But on inquiry I afterwards found that many of
them had an excess of the carnal instinct immediately after that state.
But this happens simply owing to a lack of steady practice in meditation
and concentration.

Disciple: Sir, in no scriptures have I ever read these secrets of
spiritual practice. Today I have heard quite new things.

Swamiji: Do you think the scriptures contain all the secrets of
spiritual practice? These are being handed down secretly through a
succession of Gurus and disciples. Practise meditation and concentration
with the utmost care. Place fragrant flowers in front and burn incense.
At the outset take such external help as will make the mind pure. As you
repeat the name of your Guru and Ishta, say, "Peace be to all creatures
and the universe!" First send impulses of these good wishes to the
north, south, east, west, above, below — in all directions, and then sit
down to meditate. One has to do this during the early stages. Then
sitting still (you may face in any direction), meditate in the way I
have taught you while initiating. Don't leave out a single day. If you
have too much pressing work, go through the spiritual exercises for at
least a quarter of an hour. Can you reach the goal without steadfast
devotion, my son?

Now Swamiji went upstairs, and as he did so, he said, "You people will
have your spiritual insight opened without much trouble. Now that you
have chanced to come here, you have liberation and all under your thumb.
Besides practising meditation, etc., set yourselves heart and soul to
remove to a certain extent the miseries of the world, so full of wails.
Through hard austerities I have almost ruined this body. There is hardly
any energy left in this pack of bones and flesh. You set yourselves to
work now, and let me rest a while. If you fail to do anything else,
well, you can tell the world at large about the scriptural truths you
have studied so long. There is no higher gift than this, for the gift of
knowledge is the highest gift in the world."

</div>
