---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_xxvi.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](scc_xxviii.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XXVII  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_44e7_27.pdf)* )

\[Place: *The Math*, *Belur*. Year: *1902*.\]

Swamiji was now staying at the Math. The disciple came to the Math and
towards the evening accompanied Swamiji and Swami Premananda for a walk.
Finding Swamiji absorbed in thought, the disciple entered into a
conversation with Swami Premananda on what Shri Ramakrishna used to say
of Swamiji's greatness. After walking some distance Swamiji turned to go
back to the Math. Seeing Swami Premananda and the disciple near by, he
said, "Well, what were you talking?" The disciple said, "We were talking
about Shri Ramakrishna and his words." Swamiji only heard the reply, but
again lapsed into thought and walking along the road returned to the
Math. He sat on the camp-cot placed under the mango-tree and, resting
there some time, washed his face and then, pacing the upper verandah,
spoke to the disciple thus: "Why do you not set about propagating
Vedanta in your part of the country? There Tântrikism prevails to a
fearful extent. Rouse and agitate the country with the lion-roar of
Advaitavâda (monism). Then I shall know you to be a Vedantist. First
open a Sanskrit school there and teach the Upanishads and the
*Brahma-Sutras*. Teach the boys the system of Brahmacharya. I have heard
that in your country there is much logic-chopping of the Nyâya school.
What is there in it? Only Vyâpti (pervasiveness) and Anumâna (inference)
— on these subjects the Pandits of the Nyaya school discuss for months!
What does it help towards the Knowledge of the Atman? Either in your
village or Nag Mahashaya's, open a Chatushpâthi (indigenous school) in
which the scriptures will be studied and also the life and teachings of
Shri Ramakrishna. In this way you will advance your own good as well as
the good of the people, and your fame will endure.

Disciple: Sir, I cherish no desire for name or fame. Only, sometimes I
feel to do as you are saying. But by marriage I have got so entangled in
the world that I fear my desire will always remain in the mind only.

Swamiji: What if you have married? As you are maintaining your parents
and brothers with food and clothing, so do for your wife likewise; and
by giving her religious instruction draw her to your path. Think her to
be a partner and helper in the living of your religious life. At other
times look upon her with an even eye with others. Thinking thus all the
unsteadiness of the mind will die out. What fear?

The disciple felt assured by these words. After his meal, Swamiji sat on
his own bed, and the disciple had an opportunity of doing some personal
service for him.

Swamiji began to speak to the disciple, enjoining him to be reverential
to the Math members: "These children of Shri Ramakrishna whom you see,
are wonderful Tyâgis (selfless souls), and by service to them you will
attain to the purification of mind and be blessed with the vision of the
Atman. You remember the words of the Gita: 'By interrogation and service
to the great soul'. Therefore you must serve them, by which you will
attain your goal; and you know how much they love you."

Disciple: But I find it very difficult to understand them. Each one
seems to be of a different type.

Swamiji: Shri Ramakrishna was a wonderful gardener. Therefore he has
made a bouquet of different flowers and formed his Order. All different
types and ideas have come into it, and many more will come. Shri
Ramakrishna used to say, "Whoever has prayed to God sincerely for one
day, must come here." Know each of those who are here to be of great
spiritual power. Because they remain shrivelled before me, do not think
them to be ordinary souls. When they will go out, they will be the cause
of the awakening of spirituality in people. Know them to be part of the
spiritual body of Shri Ramakrishna, who was the embodiment of infinite
religious ideas. I look upon them with that eye. See, for instance,
Brahmananda, who is here — even I have not the spirituality which he
has. Shri Ramakrishna looked upon him as his mind-born son; and he lived
and walked, ate and slept with him. He is the ornament of our Math — our
king. Similarly Premananda, Turiyananda, Trigunatitananda, Akhandananda,
Saradananda, Ramakrishnananda, Subodhananda, and others; you may go
round the world, but it is doubtful if you will find men of such
spirituality and faith in God like them. They are each a centre of
religious power, and in time that power will manifest.

The disciple listened in wonder, and Swamiji said again: "But from your
part of the country, except Nag Mahashaya none came to Shri Ramakrishna.
A few others who saw Shri Ramakrishna could not appreciate him." At the
thought of Nag Mahashaya, Swamiji kept silent for some time. It was only
four or five months since he had passed away. Swamiji had heard that on
one occasion a spring of Ganga water rose in the house of Nag Mahashaya,
and recollecting this he asked the disciple, "Well, how did that event
take place? Tell me about it."

Disciple: I only heard about it, but did not see it with my own eyes. I
heard that in a Mahâvâruni Yoga Nag Mahashaya started with his father
for Calcutta. But not getting any accommodation in the railway train he
stayed for three or four days in Narayangunge in vain and returned home.
Then Nag Mahashaya said to his father, "If the mind is pure, then the
Mother Ganga will appear here." Then at the auspicious hour of the holy
bath, a jet of water rose, piercing the ground of his courtyard. Many of
those who saw it are living today. But that was many years before I met
him.

Swamiji: There was nothing strange in it. He was a saint of unfalsified
determination. I do not consider such a phenomenon at all strange in his
case.

Saying this, Swamiji, feeling sleepy, lay on his side. At this the
disciple came down to take his supper.

</div>
