---
title: 'CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES '

---
<div>

[←](scc_xxviii.htm) [Home](../../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
7](../../volume_7_contents.htm) / [Conversations and
Dialogues](../conversations_and_dialogues_contents.htm) / [From the
Diary of a Disciple](from_the_diary_of_a_disciple_contents.htm)
/ [→](../priya_nath_sinha/pns_xxx.htm)

  

## CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES

(From the Diary of a Disciple (Shri Sharat Chandra Chakravarty, B.A.))

XXIX  
(*Translated from [Bengali](swami_shishya_46e7_29.pdf)* )

\[Place: *Belur Math*. Year: *1902*.\]

Today is the first of Âshârh (June-July). The disciple has come to the
Math before dusk from Bally, with his office-dress on, as he has not
found time to change it. Coming to the Math, he prostrated himself at
the feet of Swamiji and inquired about his health. Swamiji replied that
he was well, but looking at his dress, he said, "You put on coat and
trousers, why don't you put on collars?" Saying this, he called Swami
Saradananda who was near and said, "Give him tomorrow two collars from
my stock." Swami Saradananda bowed assent to his order.

The disciple then changed his office-dress and came to Swamiji, who,
addressing him, said, "By giving up one's national costume and ways of
eating and living, one gets denationalised. One can learn from all, but
that learning which leads to denationalisation does not help one's
uplift but becomes the cause of degradation."

Disciple: Sir, one cannot do without putting on dress approved by
superior European officers in official quarters.

Swamiji: No one prevents that. In the interests of your service, you put
on official dress in official quarters. But on returning home you should
be a regular Bengali Babu — with flowing cloth, a native shirt, and with
the Chudder on the shoulder. Do you understand?

Disciple: Yes, sir.

Swamiji: You go about from house to house only with the European shirt
on. In the West, to go about visiting people with simply the shirt on is
ungentlemanly — one is considered naked. Without putting on a coat over
the shirt, you will not be welcomed in a gentleman's house. What
nonsense have you learnt to imitate in the matter of dress! Boys and
young men nowadays adopt a peculiar manner of dress which is neither
Indian nor Western, but a queer combination.

After such talk Swamiji began to pace the bank of the river, and the
disciple was alone with him. He was hesitating to ask Swamiji a question
about religious practices.

Swamiji: What are you thinking? Out with it.

The disciple with great delicacy said, "Sir, I have been thinking that
if you can teach me some method by which the mind becomes calm within a
short time, by which I may be immersed in meditation quickly, I shall
feel much benefited. In the round of worldly duties, I feel it difficult
to make the mind steady in meditation at the time of spiritual
practice."

Swamiji seemed delighted at this humility and earnestness of the
disciple. In reply he affectionately said, "After some time come to me
when I am alone upstairs, I will talk to you about it."

Coming up shortly after, the disciple found that Swamiji was sitting in
meditation, facing the west. His face wore a wonderful expression, and
his whole body was completely motionless. The disciple stood by, looking
with speechless wonder on the figure of Swamiji in meditation, and when
even after standing long he found no sign of external consciousness in
Swamiji, he sat noiselessly by. After half an hour, Swamiji seemed to
show signs of a return to external consciousness. The disciple found
that his folded hands began to quiver, and a few minutes later Swamiji
opened his eyes and looking at the disciple said, "When did you come?"

Disciple: A short while ago.

Swamiji: Very well, get me a glass of water.

The disciple hurriedly brought a glass of water and Swamiji drinking a
little, asked the disciple to put the glass back in its proper place.
The disciple did so and again sat by Swamiji.

Swamiji: Today I had a very deep meditation.

Disciple: Sir, please teach me so that my mind also may get absorbed in
meditation.

Swamiji: I have already told you all the methods. Meditate every day
accordingly, and in the fulness of time you will feel like that. Now
tell me what form of Sadhana appeals to you most.

Disciple: Sir, I practise every day as you have told me, still I don't
get a deep meditation. Sometimes I think it is useless for me to
practise meditation. So I feel that I shall not fare well in it, and
therefore now desire only eternal companionship with you.

Swamiji: Those are weaknesses of the mind. Always try to get absorbed in
the eternally present Atman. If you once get the vision of the Atman,
you will get everything — the bonds of birth and death will be broken.

Disciple: You bless me to attain to it. You asked me, still I don't get
a deep meditation. By some means, do please make my mind steady.

Swamiji: Meditate whenever you get time. If the mind once enters the
path of Sushumna, everything will get right. You will not have to do
much after that.

Disciple: You encourage me in many ways. But shall I be blessed with a
vision of the Truth? Shall I get freedom by attaining true knowledge?

Swamiji: Yes, of course. Everybody will attain Mukti, from a worm up to
Brahmâ, and shall you alone fail? These are weaknesses of the mind;
never think of such things.

After this, he said again: "Be possessed of Shraddhâ (faith), of Virya
(courage), attain to the knowledge of the Atman, and sacrifice your life
for the good of others — this is my wish and blessing."

The bell for the meal ringing at this moment, Swamiji asked the disciple
to go and partake of it. The disciple, prostrating himself at the feet
of Swamiji, prayed for his blessings. Swamiji putting his hand on his
head blessed him and said, "If my blessings be of any good to you, I say
— may Bhagavân Shri Ramakrishna give you his grace! I know of no
blessing higher than this." After meals, the disciple did not go
upstairs to Swamiji, who had retired early that night. Next morning the
disciple, having to return to Calcutta in the interests of his business
appeared before Swamiji upstairs.

Swamiji: Will you go immediately?

Disciple: Yes, sir.

Swamiji: Come again next Sunday, won't you?

Disciple: Yes, certainly.

Swamiji: All right, there is a boat coming.

The disciple took leave of Swamiji. He did not know that this was to be
his last meeting with his Ishtadeva (chosen Ideal) in the physical body.
Swamiji with a glad heart bade him farewell and said, "Come on Sunday."
The disciple replied, "Yes, I will," and got downstairs.

The boatmen were calling for him, so he ran for the boat. Boarding it,
he saw Swamiji pacing the upper verandah, and saluting him he entered
the boat.

Seven days after this, Swamiji passed away from mortal life. The
disciple had no knowledge of the impending catastrophe. Getting the news
on the second day of Swamiji's passing away, he came to the Math, and
therefore he had not the good fortune to see his physical form again!

</div>
