+++
title = "Some points regarding the Rewa stone inscription of malayasiMha"

+++
The inscription was made for malaya-siMha, a general of the Tripuri
kalachuri king vijaya-siMha-deva and several of his officials like a
certain hari-sImha. The Sanskrit looks pretty strange to me in some
places but it has some interesting information. It was most likely made
on 30th July 1193 CE, even as the rampage of the army of Islam was
occurring further north and east – around the very same time Bhaktiar
ud-din Khalji was destroying Nalanda and slaughtering its community. But
malaya-siMha launches into a long celebration of his great deeds of
archery and the achievements of his ministers. It seems to appear that
malaya-siMha and his panegyrist were blissfully unaware of the coming
storm that was to end his all too familiar world. Earlier,
vijaya-siMha’s father jaya-siMha defeated Shihab-ud-din Ghori in
around 1180 CE during one of his early incursion towards the Indian
heartland. But squandered his power in battles with the chandellas and
other kalachuris where he was badly beaten despite his fiery archery. It
was during that invasion of the turuShka that the saiddhAntika
vimala-shiva had supposedly performed abhichArika rites for his victory.

There is evidence from medieval manuals of mantra-s that ma\~njugoSha
was worshipped by the Astika-s. The Rewa inscription provides one clear
cut example in this regard from central India. It is clear the composer
was an Astika because he declares himself to be a vaidIka in rather
immodest terms:  
tarke j\~nAta matIva yasya chatura shabdArtha shAstre tathA
mImAmsAdhigato vipashchid-abhavad vedAnta-yogAdi dhI |  
vedAbhyAsarata sadA suviduShAM mUrdhni prabaddhaa\~njalir vipra shrI
puruShottamo bhuvi mahAn buddhyA cha vAchaspati ||  
Here, he states that he is well-versed in logic, grammar and language,
mImAmsa, vedAnta, yoga and devotes himself to vedic study. It is
interesting that he terms himself vAchaspati – could it be an allusion
to ma\~njugoSha the deity with which he opens the inscription and feels
some personal connection?

The invocation of ma\~njughoSha runs thus:  
aSTaara-chakraakR^iti pUrNachandra padmAsanastha hima-shaila-gauram |  
savyetarA pANiga \[or savyetarapaNiga?\] khaDga pusta vakShyAmi natvA
khalu ma\~njughoSham ||  
Here, ma\~njughoSha is described as being white as the himAlaya, seated
in the lotus seat of the full moon of the form of a wheel with 8 spokes.
He bears a sword in right and book in his left hand. While bauddha-s
were extensively patronized by the kalachuri-s, malayasiMha and his men
seem to be predominantly Astika-s. In fact vedAnta is described as being
upheld with great fervor in intellectual debates in his city. This
suggests that by end of the 1100s an integration of the nAstika
pantheon, which was once so virulently anti-Astika, into the larger
unified Hindu fold was well underway.

Further, understanding of this assimilation of ma\~njughoSha
(ma\~njushrI) in the Astika mantra-shAstra might be obtained by
comparing his iconography in the bauddha and Astika realms. It is
well-known that the early development of ma\~njushrI in the nAstika
realm was highly influenced by the now faded kaumAra shAsana (one may
look at our earlier note on the ma\~njushrI-mUla-kalpa and its
acquisition of kaumAra mantra-s). But this is not the issue we are
considering here. We are looking at his later development, well after he
had evolved beyond the ma\~njushrI mUla-kalpa. In the
historical/archeological sense we observe such developments relatively
late, especially in the kalachuri and adjoining chAlukya realms. Beyond
the Rewa inscription we find another striking illustration of the Hindu
ma\~njushrI in the form of an utsava mUrti in the Baroda museum –
possibly from the kalachuri realm of king karNa. Here the central figure
of ma\~njushrI is flanked on either side by vinAyaka and viShNu. In the
south in Karnataka we find temples of ma\~njughoSha termed ma\~njunAtha
(also in Nepal, e.g. Kathmandu ma\~njunAtha), which are associated with
the chAlukya-s, coastal pANDya-s and southern kalachuri-s in their
origin. We see that the ma\~njughoSha of Rewa inscription does not
closely match the iconography of ma\~njughosha as represented in his
sAdhana-s in the popular bauddha Tantric compendium the sAdhana mAlA.
Here we find that ma\~njughoSha is golden in color and holding a lotus
and vyAkhyAna mudra and may be depicted as riding a line. Again in the
description of the dharma-dhAtu-vAgIShvara maNDala where he is
prominent, he is depicted as having attributes like the sword and book,
but with 8 hands and 4 multi-colored heads. Instead, we find that the
ma\~njughoSha of the Rewa inscription has elements closer to the
dhyAna-s of other forms of ma\~njushrI in the bauddha tantra-s, namely
that of dharma-dhAtu-vAgIshvara, ma\~njuvajra and arapachana. With all
of them Rewa ma\~njugoSha shares the lotus-moon seat and usually tend to
hold a book and sword, though they may have multiple heads or differ in
color.

However, when we turn to the Astika tantra-s we find a close match to
Rewa ma\~njughoSha in their dhyAna shloka-s of ma\~njughoSha. We find
two major references to ma\~njughoSha in the medieval tantric manuals:
the shrIvidyArNava of vidyAraNya yati and the tantra sAra of
AgamavAgIsha from the va\~nga country. Here the ma\~njughoSha mantra-s
are variants of the famous nAstika mantra rAja: arapachana dhIH || It is
cited as being derived from older lost tantra-s known as the
bhairava-tantra (possibly a general reference to the bhairava-tantras?),
Agamottara and the kukkuteshvara tantra \[Though R1’s father informs me
that kukkuteshvara manuscripts were possibly extant in Nepal\]. In these
Astika tantra-s we find two dhyAna-s.  
The shrIvidyArNava dhyAna 1:  
saMpUrNa-mANdala-tuShara-marIchi-madhye bAlaM vichintya dhavalaM
vara-khaDga-hastam |  
uddAma-kesha-nivahaM \[ka\~NkaNa-vahaM\] vara-pustakAdhyaM prauDhaM
\[nagnaM\] japet kShataja-padma-dalAyatAkSham ||  
In this dhyAna we note he is seated on a full moon, holds the book and
the sword and is white in complexion, thus largely matching the form in
the inscription.

The second dhyAna is interestingly is related to the ma\~njughoSha
mentioned in a single arapachana sAdhana composed by the nAstika Tantric
ajita-mitra and also inserted into a ma\~njuvajra stotra of another
nAstika adept named ma\~njugarbha.  
Astika version:  
shashadharam iva shubhraM khaDga-pustA\~Nka-pANiM suruchiram ati-shAntaM
pa\~ncha-chUDaM kumAram |  
pR^ithu-tara-vara-mukhyaM padma-patrAyatAkShaM kumati-dahana-dakShaM
ma\~njughoShaM namAmi ||

bauddha form:  
shashadharaM ive shubhraM khaDga-pustA\~nka-pANim suruchiram ati-shAntaM
pa\~nchachIraM kumAram |  
pR^ithu-rati \[tara\]-vara-mokShaM padma-patrAyatAkShaM
kumati-dahana-dakShaM ma\~njughoShaM praNamya ||

While parts of this dhyAna are unclear (e.g. what does
pR^ithu-tara-vara-mukhyaM mean?) this form too largely resembles the one
in the inscription, although he is not explicitly stated as sitting on
the moon. Finally, Lokesh Chandra shows that in Tibet we have a
depiction of such a form of ma\~njushrI associated with the arapachana
mantra. Thus, even though the traditional bauddha iconography of
ma\~njughoSha surviving in texts like the ma\~njughoSha sAdhana-s of the
sAdhana mAlA does not match the Astika version, it appears from the
above bauddha dhyAna-s related to the Astika versions that other forms
of ma\~njushrI, namely arapachana and ma\~njuvajra also tended to be
identified as ma\~njughoSha. It appears that the Astika tradition
conception of ma\~njughoSha evolved from such a system of
identification. Hence, it adopted derivatives of the arapachana mantra
as the mantra of ma\~njughoSha rather than using traditional bauddha
mantra of ma\~njughoSha, i.e.: OM vAgIshvara mUH || What the Rewa
inscription suggests is that the iconography of ma\~njughoSha followed
by the medieval mantra-shAstra manuals and its sources like the
kukkuTeshvara tantra was indeed the one prevalent amongst Astika-s.

Finally, it may be noted that the variants of the arapachana mantra in
the shrIvidyArNava are: aravachanadhIM, aravachana dhIH and
aravaMchaladhI  
The pa-\>va transform seen in these forms is suggestive of a possible
drAviDa influence in the transformation. drAviDi Prakrits tend to
conflate internal pa with va (e.g. Skt pApa -\> pAva). Also in the
Grantha script these two letters are similar in shape leading to
potential confusion.
