---
title: SPIRIT AND NATURE

---
<div>

[←](the_design_theory.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](the_practice_of_religion.htm)

  

## SPIRIT AND NATURE

Religion is the realisation of Spirit as Spirit; not Spirit as matter.

Religion is a growth. Each one must experience it himself. The
Christians believe that Jesus Christ died to save man. With you it is
belief in a doctrine, and this belief constitutes your salvation. With
us doctrine has nothing whatever to do with salvation. Each one may
believe in whatever doctrine he likes; or in no doctrine. What
difference does it make to you whether Jesus Christ lived at a certain
time or not? What has it to do with you that Moses saw God in the
burning bush? The fact that Moses saw God in the burning bush does not
constitute your seeing Him, does it? If it does, then the fact that
Moses ate is enough for you; you ought to stop eating. One is just as
sensible as the other. Records of great spiritual men of the past do us
no good whatever except that they urge us onward to do the same, to
experience religion ourselves. Whatever Christ or Moses or anybody else
did does not help us in the least, except to urge us on.

Each one has a special nature peculiar to himself which he must follow
and through which he will find his way to freedom. Your teacher should
be able to tell you what your particular path in nature is and to put
you in it. He should know by your face where you belong and should be
able to indicate it to you. You should never try to follow another's
path, for that is his way, not yours. When that path is found, you have
nothing to do but fold your arms, and the tide will carry you to
freedom. Therefore when you find it, never swerve from it. Your way is
the best for you, but that is no sign that it is the best for others.

The truly spiritual see Spirit as Spirit, not as matter. It is Spirit
that makes nature move; It is the reality in nature. So action is in
nature; not in the Spirit. Spirit is always the same, changeless,
eternal. Spirit and matter are in reality the same; but Spirit, as such,
never becomes matter; and matter, as such, never becomes Spirit.

The Spirit never acts. Why should it? It merely is, and that is
sufficient. It is pure existence absolute and has no need of action.

You are not bound by law. That is in your nature. The mind is in nature
and is bound by law. All nature is bound by law, the law of its own
action; and this law can never be broken. If you could break a law of
nature, all nature would come to an end in an instant. There would be no
more nature. He who attains freedom breaks the law of nature, and for
him nature fades away and has no more power over him. Each one will
break the law but once and for ever; and that will end his trouble with
nature.

Governments, societies, etc. are comparative evils. All societies are
based on bad generalization. The moment you form yourselves into an
organization, you begin to hate everybody outside of that organization.
When you join an organisation, you are putting bounds upon yourself, you
are limiting your own freedom. The greatest goodness is the highest
freedom. Our aim should be to allow the individual to move towards this
freedom. More of goodness, less of artificial laws. Such laws are not
laws at all. If it were a law, it could not be broken. The fact that
these so-called laws are broken, shows clearly that they are not laws. A
law is that which cannot be broken.

Whenever you suppress a thought, it is simply pressed down out of sight,
in a coil like a spring, only to spring out again at a moment's notice,
with all the pent-up force resulting from the suppression, and do in a
few moments what it would have done in a much longer period.

Every ounce of pleasure brings its pound of pain. It is the same energy
that at one time manifests itself as pleasure, at another time as pain.
As soon as one set of sensations stops, another begins. But in some
cases, in more advanced persons, one may have two, yea, even a hundred
different thoughts entering into active operation at the same time.

Mind is action of its own nature. Mind-activity means creation. The
thought is followed by the word, and the word by the form. All of this
creating will have to stop, both mental and physical, before the mind
can reflect the soul.

</div>
