---
title: MOTHER-WORSHIP

---
<div>

[←](lessons_on_bhakti-yoga.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
6](../volume_6_contents.htm) / [Notes of Class Talks and
Lectures](notes_of_class_talks_and_lectures_contents.htm)
/ [→](narada-bhakti-sutras.htm)

  

## MOTHER-WORSHIP

(Based on fragmentary notes of a class talk by Swami Vivekananda in New
York.)

The two conjoint facts of perception we can never get rid of are
happiness and unhappiness — things which bring us pain also bring
pleasure. Our world is made up of these two. We cannot get rid of them;
with every pulsation of life they are present. The world is busy trying
to reconcile these opposites, sages trying to find solution of this
commingling of the opposites. The burning heat of pain is intermitted by
flashes of rest, the gleam of light breaking the darkness in
intermittent flashes only to make the gloom deeper.

Children are born optimists, but the rest of life is a continuous
disillusionment; not one ideal can be fully attained, not one thirst can
be quenched. So on they go trying to solve the riddle, and religion has
taken up the task.

In religions of dualism, among the Persians, there was a God and a
Satan. This through the Jews has gone all over Europe and America. It
was a working hypothesis thousands of years ago; but now we know, that
is not tenable. There is nothing absolutely good or evil; it is good to
one and evil to another, evil today, good tomorrow, and vice versa. . .
.

God was first of course a clan-god, then He became God of gods. With
ancient Egyptians and Babylonians, this idea (of a dual God and Satan)
was very practically carried out. Their Moloch became God of gods and
the captured gods were forced to do homage in His temple.

Yet the riddle remains: Who presides over this Evil? Many are hoping
against hope that all is good and that we do not understand. We are
clutching at a straw, burying our heads in the sand. Yet we all follow
morality and the gist of morality is sacrifice — not I but thou. Yet how
it clashes with the great good God of the universe! He is so selfish,
the most vengeful person that we know, with plagues, famines, war!

We all have to get experiences in this life. We may try to fly bitter
experiences, but sooner or later they catch us. And I pity the man who
does not face the whole.

Manu Deva of the Vedas, was transformed in Persia as Ahriman. So the
mythological explanation of the question was dead; but the question
remained, and there was no reply, no solution.

But there was the other idea in the old Vedic hymn to the Goddess: "I am
the light. I am the light of the sun and moon; I am the air which
animates all beings." This is the germ which afterwards develops into
Mother-worship. By Mother-worship is not meant difference between father
and mother. The first idea connoted by it is that of energy — I am the
power that is in all beings.

The baby is a man of nerves. He goes on and on till he is a man of
power. The idea of good and evil was not at first differentiated and
developed. An advancing consciousness showed power as the primal idea.
Resistance and struggle at every step is the law. We are the resultant
of the two — energy and resistance, internal and external power. Every
atom is working and resisting every thought in the mind. Everything we
see and know is but the resultant of these two forces.

This idea of God is something new. In the Vedic hymns Varuna and Indra
shower the choicest gifts and blessings on devotees, a very human idea,
more human than man himself.

This is the new principle. There is one power behind all phenomena.
Power is power everywhere, whether in the form of evil or as Saviour of
the world. So this is the new idea; the old idea was man-God. Here is
the first opening out of the idea of one universal power.

"I stretch the bows of Rudra when He desires to destroy evil" (Rig-Veda,
X. 125, *Devi-Sukta*).

Very soon in the Gitâ (IX. 19, also X. 4-5) we find, "O Arjuna, I am the
Sat and I am the Asat, I am the good and I am the bad, I am the power of
saints, I am the power of the wicked." But soon the speaker patches up
truth, and the idea goes to sleep. I am power in good so long as it is
doing good works.

In the religion of Persia, there was the idea of Satan, but in India, no
conception of Satan. Later books began to realise this new idea. Evil
exists, and there is no shirking the fact. The universe is a fact; and
if a fact, it is a huge composite of good and evil. Whoever rules must
rule over good and evil. If that power makes us live, the same makes us
die. Laughter and tears are kin, and there are more tears than laughter
in this world. Who made flowers, who made the Himalayas? — a very good
God. Who made my sins and weaknesses? — Karma, Satan, self. The result
is a lame, one-legged universe, and naturally the God of the universe, a
one-legged God.

The view of the absolute separation of good and evil, two cut and dried
and separate existences, makes us brutes of unsympathetic hearts. The
good woman jumps aside from the streetwalker. Why? She may be infinitely
better than you in some respects. This view brings eternal jealousy and
hatred in the world, eternal barrier between man and man, between the
good man and the comparatively less good or evil man. Such brutal view
is pure evil, more evil than evil itself. Good and evil are not separate
existences, but there is an evolution of good, and what is less good we
call evil.

Some are saints and some sinners. The sun shines on good and evil alike.
Does he make any distinction?

The old idea of the fatherhood of God is connected with the sweet notion
of God presiding over happiness. We want to deny facts. Evil is
non-existent, is zero. The "I" is evil. And the "I" exists only too
much. Am I zero? Every day I try to find myself so and fail.

All these ideas are attempts to fly evil. But we have to face it. Face
the whole! Am I under contract to anyone to offer partial love to God
only in happiness and good, not in misery and evil?

The lamp by the light of which one forges a name and another writes a
cheque for a thousand dollars for famine, shines on both, knows no
difference. Light knows no evil; you and I make it good or evil.

This idea must have a new name. It is called Mother, because in a
literal sense it began long ago with a feminine writer elevated to a
goddess. Then came Sânkhya, and with it all energy is female. The magnet
is still, the iron filings are active.

The highest of all feminine types in India is mother, higher than wife.
Wife and children may desert a man, but his mother never. Mother is the
same or loves her child perhaps a little more. Mother represents
colourless love that knows no barter, love that never dies. Who can have
such love? — only mother, not son, nor daughter, nor wife.

"I am the Power that manifests everywhere", says the Mother — She who is
bringing out this universe, and She who is bringing forth the following
destruction. No need to say that destruction is only the beginning of
creation. The top of a hill is only the beginning of a valley.

Be bold, face facts as facts. Do not be chased about the universe by
evil. Evils are evils. What of that?

After all, it is only Mother's play. Nothing serious after all. What
could move the Almighty? What made Mother create the universe? She could
have no goal. Why? Because the goal is something that is not yet
attained. What is this creation for? Just fun. We forget this and begin
to quarrel and endure misery. We are the playmates of the Mother.

Look at the torture the mother bears in bringing up the baby. Does she
enjoy it? Surely. Fasting and praying and watching. She loves it better
than anything else. Why? Because there is no selfishness.

Pleasure will come — good: who forbids? Pain will come: welcome that
too. A mosquito was sitting on a bull's horn; then his conscience
troubled him and he said, "Mr. Bull, I have been sitting here along
time. Perhaps I annoy you. I am sorry, I will go away." But the bull
replied, "Oh, no, not at all! Bring your whole family and live on my
horn; what can you do to me?"

Why can we not say that to misery? To be brave is to have faith in the
Mother!

"I am Life, I am Death." She it is whose shadow is life and death. She
is the pleasure in all pleasure. She is the misery in all misery. If
life comes, it is the Mother; if death comes, it is the Mother. If
heaven comes, She is. If hell comes, there is the Mother; plunge in. We
have not faith, we have not patience to see this. We trust the man in
the street; but there is one being in the universe we never trust and
that is God. We trust Him when He works just our way. But the time will
come when, getting blow after blow, the self-sufficient mind will die.
In everything we do, the serpent ego is rising up. We are glad that
there are so many thorns on the path. They strike the hood of the cobra.

Last of all will come self-surrender. Then we shall be able to give
ourselves up to the Mother. If misery comes, welcome; if happiness
comes, welcome. Then, when we come up to this love, all crooked things
shall be straight. There will be the same sight for the Brahmin, the
Pariah, and the dog. Until we love the universe with same-sightedness,
with impartial, undying love, we are missing again and again. But then
all will have vanished, and we shall see in all the same infinite
eternal Mother.

</div>
