---
title: PREFACE

---
<div>

[←](../karma-yoga/the_ideal.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](introductory.htm)

  

RAJA-YOGA

## PREFACE

Since the dawn of history, various extraordinary phenomena have been
recorded as happening amongst human beings. Witnesses are not wanting in
modern times to attest to the fact of such events, even in societies
living under the full blaze of modern science. The vast mass of such
evidence is unreliable, as coming from ignorant, superstitious, or
fraudulent persons. In many instances the so-called miracles are
imitations. But what do they imitate? It is not the sign of a candid and
scientific mind to throw overboard anything without proper
investigation. Surface scientists, unable to explain the various
extraordinary mental phenomena, strive to ignore their very existence.
They are, therefore, more culpable than those who think that their
prayers are answered by a being, or beings, above the clouds, or than
those who believe that their petitions will make such beings change the
course of the universe. The latter have the excuse of ignorance, or at
least of a defective system of education, which has taught them
dependence upon such beings, a dependence which has become a part of
their degenerate nature. The former have no such excuse.

For thousands of years such phenomena have been studied, investigated,
and generalised, the whole ground of the religious faculties of man has
been analysed, and the practical result is the science of Râja-Yoga.
Raja-Yoga does not, after the unpardonable manner of some modern
scientists, deny the existence of facts which are difficult to explain;
on the other hand, it gently yet in no uncertain terms tells the
superstitious that miracles, and answers to prayers, and powers of
faith, though true as facts, are not rendered comprehensible through the
superstitious explanation of attributing them to the agency of a being,
or beings, above the clouds. It declares that each man is only a conduit
for the infinite ocean of knowledge and power that lies behind mankind.
It teaches that desires and wants are in man, that the power of supply
is also in man; and that wherever and whenever a desire, a want, a
prayer has been fulfilled, it was out of this infinite magazine that the
supply came, and not from any supernatural being. The idea of
supernatural beings may rouse to a certain extent the power of action in
man, but it also brings spiritual decay. It brings dependence; it brings
fear; it brings superstition. It degenerates into a horrible belief in
the natural weakness of man. There is no supernatural, says the Yogi,
but there are in nature gross manifestations and subtle manifestations.
The subtle are the causes, the gross the effects. The gross can be
easily perceived by the senses; not so the subtle. The practice of
Raja-Yoga will lead to the acquisition of the more subtle perceptions.

All the orthodox systems of Indian philosophy have one goal in view, the
liberation of the soul through perfection. The method is by Yoga. The
word Yoga covers an immense ground, but both the Sânkhya and the Vedanta
Schools point to Yoga in some form or other.

The subject of the present book is that form of Yoga known as Raja-Yoga.
The aphorisms of Patanjali are the highest authority on Raja-Yoga, and
form its textbook. The other philosophers, though occasionally differing
from Patanjali in some philosophical points, have, as a rule, acceded to
his method of practice a decided consent. The first part of this book
comprises several lectures to classes delivered by the present writer in
New York. The second part is a rather free translation of the aphorisms
(Sutras) of Patanjali, with a running commentary. Effort has been made
to avoid technicalities as far as possible, and to keep to the free and
easy style of conversation. In the first part some simple and specific
directions are given for the student who wants to practice, *but all
such are especially and earnestly reminded that, with few exceptions,
Yoga can only be safely learnt by direct contact with a teacher*. If
these conversations succeed in awakening a desire for further
information on the subject, the teacher will not be wanting.

The system of Patanjali is based upon the system of the Sankhyas, the
points of difference being very few. The two most important differences
are, first, that Patanjali admits a Personal God in the form of a first
teacher, while the only God the Sankhyas admit is a nearly perfected
being, temporarily in charge of a cycle of creation. Second, the Yogis
hold the mind to be equally all-pervading with the soul, or Purusha, and
the Sankhyas do not.

THE AUTHOR

Each soul is potentially divine.

The goal is to manifest this Divinity within by controlling nature,
external and internal.

Do this either by work, or worship, or psychic control, or philosophy —
by one, or more, or all of these — and be free.

This is the whole of religion. Doctrines, or dogmas, or rituals, or
books, or temples, or forms, are but secondary details.

</div>
