---
title: INTRODUCTORY

---
<div>

[←](preface.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](the_first_steps.htm)

  

CHAPTER I

## INTRODUCTORY

All our knowledge is based upon experience. What we call inferential
knowledge, in which we go from the less to the more general, or from the
general to the particular, has experience as its basis. In what are
called the exact sciences, people easily find the truth, because it
appeals to the particular experiences of every human being. The
scientist does not tell you to believe in anything, but he has certain
results which come from his own experiences, and reasoning on them when
he asks us to believe in his conclusions, he appeals to some universal
experience of humanity. In every exact science there is a basis which is
common to all humanity, so that we can at once see the truth or the
fallacy of the conclusions drawn therefrom. Now, the question is: Has
religion any such basis or not? I shall have to answer the question both
in the affirmative and in the negative.

Religion, as it is generally taught all over the world, is said to be
based upon faith and belief, and, in most cases, consists only of
different sets of theories, and that is the reason why we find all
religions quarrelling with one another. These theories, again, are based
upon belief. One man says there is a great Being sitting above the
clouds and governing the whole universe, and he asks me to believe that
solely on the authority of his assertion. In the same way, I may have my
own ideas, which I am asking others to believe, and if they ask a
reason, I cannot give them any. This is why religion and metaphysical
philosophy have a bad name nowadays. Every educated man seems to say,
"Oh, these religions are only bundles of theories without any standard
to judge them by, each man preaching his own pet ideas." Nevertheless,
there is a basis of universal belief in religion, governing all the
different theories and all the varying ideas of different sects in
different countries. Going to their basis we find that they also are
based upon universal experiences.

In the first place, if you analyse all the various religions of the
world, you will find that these are divided into two classes, those with
a book and those without a book. Those with a book are the strongest,
and have the largest number of followers. Those without books have
mostly died out, and the few new ones have very small following. Yet, in
all of them we find one consensus of opinion, that the truths they teach
are the results of the experiences of particular persons. The Christian
asks you to believe in his religion, to believe in Christ and to believe
in him as the incarnation of God, to believe in a God, in a soul, and in
a better state of that soul. If I ask him for reason, he says he
believes in them. But if you go to the fountain-head of Christianity,
you will find that it is based upon experience. Christ said he saw God;
the disciples said they felt God; and so forth. Similarly, in Buddhism,
it is Buddha's experience. He experienced certain truths, saw them, came
in contact with them, and preached them to the world. So with the
Hindus. In their books the writers, who are called Rishis, or sages,
declare they experienced certain truths, and these they preach. Thus it
is clear that all the religions of the world have been built upon that
one universal and adamantine foundation of all our knowledge — direct
experience. The teachers all saw God; they all saw their own souls, they
saw their future, they saw their eternity, and what they saw they
preached. Only there is this difference that by most of these religions
especially in modern times, a peculiar claim is made, namely, that these
experiences are impossible at the present day; they were only possible
with a few men, who were the first founders of the religions that
subsequently bore their names. At the present time these experiences
have become obsolete, and, therefore, we have now to take religion on
belief. This I entirely deny. If there has been one experience in this
world in any particular branch of knowledge, it absolutely follows that
that experience has been possible millions of times before, and will be
repeated eternally. Uniformity is the rigorous law of nature; what once
happened can happen always.

The teachers of the science of Yoga, therefore, declare that religion is
not only based upon the experience of ancient times, but that no man can
be religious until he has the same perceptions himself. Yoga is the
science which teaches us how to get these perceptions. It is not much
use to talk about religion until one has felt it. Why is there so much
disturbance, so much fighting and quarrelling in the name of God? There
has been more bloodshed in the name of God than for any other cause,
because people never went to the fountain-head; they were content only
to give a mental assent to the customs of their forefathers, and wanted
others to do the same. What right has a man to say he has a soul if he
does not feel it, or that there is a God if he does not see Him? If
there is a God we must see Him, if there is a soul we must perceive it;
otherwise it is better not to believe. It is better to be an outspoken
atheist than a hypocrite. The modern idea, on the one hand, with the
"learned" is that religion and metaphysics and all search after a
Supreme Being are futile; on the other hand, with the semi-educated, the
idea seems to be that these things really have no basis; their only
value consists in the fact that they furnish strong motive powers for
doing good to the world. If men believe in a God, they may become good,
and moral, and so make good citizens. We cannot blame them for holding
such ideas, seeing that all the teaching these men get is simply to
believe in an eternal rigmarole of words, without any substance behind
them. They are asked to live upon words; can they do it? If they could,
I should not have the least regard for human nature. Man wants truth,
wants to experience truth for himself; when he has grasped it, realised
it, felt it within his heart of hearts, then alone, declare the Vedas,
would all doubts vanish, all darkness be scattered, and all crookedness
be made straight. "Ye children of immortality, even those who live in
the highest sphere, the way is found; there is a way out of all this
darkness, and that is by perceiving Him who is beyond all darkness;
there is no other way."

The science of Râja-Yoga proposes to put before humanity a practical and
scientifically worked out method of reaching this truth. In the first
place, every science must have its own method of investigation. If you
want to become an astronomer and sit down and cry "Astronomy!
Astronomy!" it will never come to you. The same with chemistry. A
certain method must be followed. You must go to a laboratory, take
different substances, mix them up, compound them, experiment with them,
and out of that will come a knowledge of chemistry. If you want to be an
astronomer, you must go to an observatory, take a telescope, study the
stars and planets, and then you will become an astronomer. Each science
must have its own methods. I could preach you thousands of sermons, but
they would not make you religious, until you practiced the method. These
are the truths of the sages of all countries, of all ages, of men pure
and unselfish, who had no motive but to do good to the world. They all
declare that they have found some truth higher than what the senses can
bring to us, and they invite verification. They ask us to take up the
method and practice honestly, and then, if we do not find this higher
truth, we will have the right to say there is no truth in the claim, but
before we have done that, we are not rational in denying the truth of
their assertions. So we must work faithfully using the prescribed
methods, and light will come.

In acquiring knowledge we make use of generalisations, and
generalisation is based upon observation. We first observe facts, then
generalise, and then draw conclusions or principles. The knowledge of
the mind, of the internal nature of man, of thought, can never be had
until we have first the power of observing the facts that are going on
within. It is comparatively easy to observe facts in the external world,
for many instruments have been invented for the purpose, but in the
internal world we have no instrument to help us. Yet we know we must
observe in order to have a real science. Without a proper analysis, any
science will be hopeless — mere theorising. And that is why all the
psychologists have been quarrelling among themselves since the beginning
of time, except those few who found out the means of observation.

The science of Raja-Yoga, in the first place, proposes to give us such a
means of observing the internal states. The instrument is the mind
itself. The power of attention, when properly guided, and directed
towards the internal world, will analyse the mind, and illumine facts
for us. The powers of the mind are like rays of light dissipated; when
they are concentrated, they illumine. This is our only means of
knowledge. Everyone is using it, both in the external and the internal
world; but, for the psychologist, the same minute observation has to be
directed to the internal world, which the scientific man directs to the
external; and this requires a great deal of practice. From our childhood
upwards we have been taught only to pay attention to things external,
but never to things internal; hence most of us have nearly lost the
faculty of observing the internal mechanism. To turn the mind as it
were, inside, stop it from going outside, and then to concentrate all
its powers, and throw them upon the mind itself, in order that it may
know its own nature, analyse itself, is very hard work. Yet that is the
only way to anything which will be a scientific approach to the subject.

What is the use of such knowledge? In the first place, knowledge itself
is the highest reward of knowledge, and secondly, there is also utility
in it. It will take away all our misery. When by analysing his own mind,
man comes face to face, as it were, with something which is never
destroyed, something which is, by its own nature, eternally pure and
perfect, he will no more be miserable, no more unhappy. All misery comes
from fear, from unsatisfied desire. Man will find that he never dies,
and then he will have no more fear of death. When he knows that he is
perfect, he will have no more vain desires, and both these causes being
absent, there will be no more misery — there will be perfect bliss, even
while in this body.

There is only one method by which to attain this knowledge, that which
is called concentration. The chemist in his laboratory concentrates all
the energies of his mind into one focus, and throws them upon the
materials he is analysing, and so finds out their secrets. The
astronomer concentrates all the energies of his mind and projects them
through his telescope upon the skies; and the stars, the sun, and the
moon, give up their secrets to him. The more I can concentrate my
thoughts on the matter on which I am talking to you, the more light I
can throw upon you. You are listening to me, and the more you
concentrate your thoughts, the more clearly you will grasp what I have
to say.

How has all the knowledge in the world been gained but by the
concentration of the powers of the mind? The world is ready to give up
its secrets if we only know how to knock, how to give it the necessary
blow. The strength and force of the blow come through concentration.
There is no limit to the power of the human mind. The more concentrated
it is, the more power is brought to bear on one point; that is the
secret.

It is easy to concentrate the mind on external things, the mind
naturally goes outwards; but not so in the case of religion, or
psychology, or metaphysics, where the subject and the object, are one.
The object is internal, the mind itself is the object, and it is
necessary to study the mind itself — mind studying mind. We know that
there is the power of the mind called reflection. I am talking to you.
At the same time I am standing aside, as it were, a second person, and
knowing and hearing what I am talking. You work and think at the same
time, while a portion of your mind stands by and sees what you are
thinking. The powers of the mind should be concentrated and turned back
upon itself, and as the darkest places reveal their secrets before the
penetrating rays of the sun, so will this concentrated mind penetrate
its own innermost secrets. Thus will we come to the basis of belief, the
real genuine religion. We will perceive for ourselves whether we have
souls, whether life is of five minutes or of eternity, whether there is
a God in the universe or more. It will all be revealed to us. This is
what Raja-Yoga proposes to teach. The goal of all its teaching is how to
concentrate the minds, then, how to discover the innermost recesses of
our own minds, then, how to generalise their contents and form our own
conclusions from them. It, therefore, never asks the question what our
religion is, whether we are Deists or Atheists, whether Christians,
Jews, or Buddhists. We are human beings; that is sufficient. Every human
being has the right and the power to seek for religion. Every human
being has the right to ask the reason, why, and to have his question
answered by himself, if he only takes the trouble.

So far, then, we see that in the study of this Raja-Yoga no faith or
belief is necessary. Believe nothing until you find it out for yourself;
that is what it teaches us. Truth requires no prop to make it stand. Do
you mean to say that the facts of our awakened state require any dreams
or imaginings to prove them? Certainly not. This study of Raja-Yoga
takes a long time and constant practice. A part of this practice is
physical, but in the main it is mental. As we proceed we shall find how
intimately the mind is connected with the body. If we believe that the
mind is simply a finer part of the body, and that mind acts upon the
body, then it stands to reason that the body must react upon the mind.
If the body is sick, the mind becomes sick also. If the body is healthy,
the mind remains healthy and strong. When one is angry, the mind becomes
disturbed. Similarly when the mind is disturbed, the body also becomes
disturbed. With the majority of mankind the mind is greatly under the
control of the body, their mind being very little developed. The vast
mass of humanity is very little removed from the animals. Not only so,
but in many instances, the power of control in them is little higher
than that of the lower animals. We have very little command of our
minds. Therefore to bring that command about, to get that control over
body and mind, we must take certain physical helps. When the body is
sufficiently controlled, we can attempt the manipulation of the mind. By
manipulating the mind, we shall be able to bring it under our control,
make it work as we like, and compel it to concentrate its powers as we
desire.

According to the Raja-Yogi, the external world is but the gross form of
the internal, or subtle. The finer is always the cause, the grosser the
effect. So the external world is the effect, the internal the cause. In
the same way external forces are simply the grosser parts, of which the
internal forces are the finer. The man who has discovered and learned
how to manipulate the internal forces will get the whole of nature under
his control. The Yogi proposes to himself no less a task than to master
the whole universe, to control the whole of nature. He wants to arrive
at the point where what we call "nature's laws" will have no influence
over him, where he will be able to get beyond them all. He will be
master of the whole of nature, internal and external. The progress and
civilisation of the human race simply mean controlling this nature.

Different races take to different processes of controlling nature. Just
as in the same society some individuals want to control the external
nature, and others the internal, so, among races, some want to control
the external nature, and others the internal. Some say that by
controlling internal nature we control everything. Others that by
controlling external nature we control everything. Carried to the
extreme both are right, because in nature there is no such division as
internal or external. These are fictitious limitations that never
existed. The externalists and the internalists are destined to meet at
the same point, when both reach the extreme of their knowledge. Just as
a physicist, when he pushes his knowledge to its limits, finds it
melting away into metaphysics, so a metaphysician will find that what he
calls mind and matter are but apparent distinctions, the reality being
One.

The end and aim of all science is to find the unity, the One out of
which the manifold is being manufactured, that One existing as many.
Raja-Yoga proposes to start from the internal world, to study internal
nature, and through that, control the whole — both internal and
external. It is a very old attempt. India has been its special
stronghold, but it was also attempted by other nations. In Western
countries it was regarded as mysticism and people who wanted to practice
it were either burned or killed as witches and sorcerers. In India, for
various reasons, it fell into the hands of persons who destroyed ninety
per cent of the knowledge, and tried to make a great secret of the
remainder. In modern times many so-called teachers have arisen in the
West worse than those of India, because the latter knew something, while
these modern exponents know nothing.

Anything that is secret and mysterious in these systems of Yoga should
be at once rejected. The best guide in life is strength. In religion, as
in all other matters, discard everything that weakens you, have nothing
to do with it. Mystery-mongering weakens the human brain. It has
well-nigh destroyed Yoga — one of the grandest of sciences. From the
time it was discovered, more than four thousand years ago, Yoga was
perfectly delineated, formulated, and preached in India. It is a
striking fact that the more modern the commentator the greater the
mistakes he makes, while the more ancient the writer the more rational
he is. Most of the modern writers talk of all sorts of mystery. Thus
Yoga fell into the hands of a few persons who made it a secret, instead
of letting the full blaze of daylight and reason fall upon it. They did
so that they might have the powers to themselves.

In the first place, there is no mystery in what I teach. What little I
know I will tell you. So far as I can reason it out I will do so, but as
to what I do not know I will simply tell you what the books say. It is
wrong to believe blindly. You must exercise your own reason and
judgment; you must practice, and see whether these things happen or not.
Just as you would take up any other science, exactly in the same manner
you should take up this science for study. There is neither mystery nor
danger in it. So far as it is true, it ought to be preached in the
public streets, in broad daylight. Any attempt to mystify these things
is productive of great danger.

Before proceeding further, I will tell you a little of the Sânkhya
philosophy, upon which the whole of Raja-Yoga is based. According to the
Sankhya philosophy, the genesis of perception is as follows: the
affections of external objects are carried by the outer instruments to
their respective brain centres or organs, the organs carry the
affections to the mind, the mind to the determinative faculty, from this
the Purusha (the soul) receives them, when perception results. Next he
gives the order back, as it were, to the motor centres to do the
needful. With the exception of the Purusha all of these are material,
but the mind is much finer matter than the external instruments. That
material of which the mind is composed goes also to form the subtle
matter called the Tanmâtras. These become gross and make the external
matter. That is the psychology of the Sankhya. So that between the
intellect and the grosser matter outside there is only a difference in
degree. The Purusha is the only thing which is immaterial. The mind is
an instrument, as it were, in the hands of the soul, through which the
soul catches external objects. The mind is constantly changing and
vacillating, and can, when perfected, either attach itself to several
organs, to one, or to none. For instance, if I hear the clock with great
attention, I will not, perhaps, see anything although my eyes may be
open, showing that the mind was not attached to the seeing organ, while
it was to the hearing organ. But the perfected mind can be attached to
all the organs simultaneously. It has the reflexive power of looking
back into its own depths. This reflexive power is what the Yogi wants to
attain; by concentrating the powers of the mind, and turning them
inward, he seeks to know what is happening inside. There is in this no
question of mere belief; it is the analysis arrived at by certain
philosophers. Modern physiologists tell us that the eyes are not the
organ of vision, but that the organ is in one of the nerve centres of
the brain, and so with all the senses; they also tell us that these
centres are formed of the same material as the brain itself. The
Sankhyas also tell us the same thing. The former is a statement on the
physical side, and the latter on the psychological side; yet both are
the same. Our field of research lies beyond this.

The Yogi proposes to attain that fine state of perception in which he
can perceive all the different mental states. There must be mental
perception of all of them. One can perceive how the sensation is
travelling, how the mind is receiving it, how it is going to the
determinative faculty, and how this gives it to the Purusha. As each
science requires certain preparations and has its own method, which must
be followed before it could be understood, even so in Raja-Yoga.

Certain regulations as to food are necessary; we must use that food
which brings us the purest mind. If you go into a menagerie, you will
find this demonstrated at once. You see the elephants, huge animals, but
calm and gentle; and if you go towards the cages of the lions and
tigers, you find them restless, showing how much difference has been
made by food. All the forces that are working in this body have been
produced out of food; we see that every day. If you begin to fast, first
your body will get weak, the physical forces will suffer; then after a
few days, the mental forces will suffer also. First, memory will fail.
Then comes a point, when you are not able to think, much less to pursue
any course of reasoning. We have, therefore, to take care what sort of
food we eat at the beginning, and when we have got strength enough, when
our practice is well advanced, we need not be so careful in this
respect. While the plant is growing it must be hedged round, lest it be
injured; but when it becomes a tree, the hedges are taken away. It is
strong enough to withstand all assaults.

A Yogi must avoid the two extremes of luxury and austerity. He must not
fast, nor torture his flesh. He who does so, says the Gita, cannot be a
Yogi: He who fasts, he who keeps awake, he who sleeps much, he who works
too much, he who does no work, none of these can be a Yogi (Gita, VI,
16).

</div>
