---
title: THE FIRST STEPS

---
<div>

[←](introductory.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) /
[Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](prana.htm)

  

CHAPTER II

## THE FIRST STEPS

Râja-Yoga is divided into eight steps. The first is Yama — non-killing,
truthfulness, non-stealing, continence, and non-receiving of any gifts.
Next is Niyama — cleanliness, contentment, austerity, study, and
self-surrender to God. Then comes Âsana, or posture; Prânâyâma, or
control of Prâna; Pratyâhâra, or restraint of the senses from their
objects; Dhâranâ, or fixing the mind on a spot; Dhyâna, or meditation;
and Samâdhi, or superconsciousness. The Yama and Niyama, as we see, are
moral trainings; without these as the basis no practice of Yoga will
succeed. As these two become established, the Yogi will begin to realise
the fruits of his practice; without these it will never bear fruit. A
Yogi must not think of injuring anyone, by thought, word, or deed. Mercy
shall not be for men alone, but shall go beyond, and embrace the whole
world.

The next step is Asana, posture. A series of exercises, physical and
mental, is to be gone through every day, until certain higher states are
reached. Therefore it is quite necessary that we should find a posture
in which we can remain long. That posture which is the easiest for one
should be the one chosen. For thinking, a certain posture may be very
easy for one man, while to another it may be very difficult. We will
find later on that during the study of these psychological matters a
good deal of activity goes on in the body. Nerve currents will have to
be displaced and given a new channel. New sorts of vibrations will
begin, the whole constitution will be remodelled as it were. But the
main part of the activity will lie along the spinal column, so that the
one thing necessary for the posture is to hold the spinal column free,
sitting erect, holding the three parts — the chest, neck, and head — in
a straight line. Let the whole weight of the body be supported by the
ribs, and then you have an easy natural postures with the spine
straight. You will easily see that you cannot think very high thoughts
with the chest in. This portion of the Yoga is a little similar to the
Hatha-Yoga which deals entirely with the physical body, its aim being to
make the physical body very strong. We have nothing to do with it here,
because its practices are very difficult, and cannot be learned in a
day, and, after all, do not lead to much spiritual growth. Many of these
practices you will find in Delsarte and other teachers, such as placing
the body in different postures, but the object in these is physical, not
psychological. There is not one muscle in the body over which a man
cannot establish a perfect control. The heart can be made to stop or go
on at his bidding, and each part of the organism can be similarly
controlled.

The result of this branch of Yoga is to make men live long; health is
the chief idea, the one goal of the Hatha-Yogi. He is determined not to
fall sick, and he never does. He lives long; a hundred years is nothing
to him; he is quite young and fresh when he is 150, without one hair
turned grey. But that is all. A banyan tree lives sometimes 5000 years,
but it is a banyan tree and nothing more. So, if a man lives long, he is
only a healthy animal. One or two ordinary lessons of the Hatha-Yogis
are very useful. For instance, some of you will find it a good thing for
headaches to drink cold water through the nose as soon as you get up in
the morning; the whole day your brain will be nice and cool, and you
will never catch cold. It is very easy to do; put your nose into the
water, draw it up through the nostrils and make a pump action in the
throat.

After one has learned to have a firm erect seat, one has to perform,
according to certain schools, a practice called the purifying of the
nerves. This part has been rejected by some as not belonging to
Raja-Yoga, but as so great an authority as the commentator
Shankarâchârya advises it, I think fit that it should be mentioned, and
I will quote his own directions from his commentary on the
Shvetâshvatara Upanishad: "The mind whose dross has been cleared away by
Pranayama, becomes fixed in Brahman; therefore Pranayama is declared.
First the nerves are to be purified, then comes the power to practice
Pranayama. Stopping the right nostril with the thumb, through the left
nostril fill in air, according to capacity; then, without any interval,
throw the air out through the right nostril, closing the left one. Again
inhaling through the right nostril eject through the left, according to
capacity; practicing this three or five times at four hours of the day,
before dawn, during midday, in the evening, and at midnight, in fifteen
days or a month purity of the nerves is attained; then begins
Pranayama."

Practice is absolutely necessary. You may sit down and listen to me by
the hour every day, but if you do not practice, you will not get one
step further. It all depends on practice. We never understand these
things until we experience them. We will have to see and feel them for
ourselves. Simply listening to explanations and theories will not do.
There are several obstructions to practice. The first obstruction is an
unhealthy body: if the body is not in a fit state, the practice will be
obstructed. Therefore we have to keep the body in good health; we have
to take care of what we eat and drink, and what we do. Always use a
mental effort, what is usually called "Christian Science," to keep the
body strong. That is all — nothing further of the body. We must not
forget that health is only a means to an end. If health were the end, we
would be like animals; animals rarely become unhealthy.

The second obstruction is doubt; we always feel doubtful about things we
do not see. Man cannot live upon words, however he may try. So, doubt
comes to us as to whether there is any truth in these things or not;
even the best of us will doubt sometimes: With practice, within a few
days, a little glimpse will come, enough to give one encouragement and
hope. As a certain commentator on Yoga philosophy says, "When one proof
is obtained, however little that may be, it will give us faith in the
whole teaching of Yoga." For instance, after the first few months of
practice, you will begin to find you can read another's thoughts; they
will come to you in picture form. Perhaps you will hear something
happening at a long distance, when you concentrate your mind with a wish
to hear. These glimpses will come, by little bits at first, but enough
to give you faith, and strength, and hope. For instance, if you
concentrate your thoughts on the tip of your nose, in a few days you
will begin to smell most beautiful fragrance, which will be enough to
show you that there are certain mental perceptions that can be made
obvious without the contact of physical objects. But we must always
remember that these are only the means; the aim, the end, the goal, of
all this training is liberation of the soul. Absolute control of nature,
and nothing short of it, must be the goal. We must be the masters, and
not the slaves of nature; neither body nor mind must be our master, nor
must we forget that the body is mine, and not I the body's.

A god and a demon went to learn about the Self from a great sage. They
studied with him for a long time. At last the sage told them, "You
yourselves are the Being you are seeking." Both of them thought that
their bodies were the Self. They went back to their people quite
satisfied and said, "We have learned everything that was to be learned;
eat, drink, and be merry; we are the Self; there is nothing beyond us."
The nature of the demon was ignorant, clouded; so he never inquired any
further, but was perfectly contented with the idea that he was God, that
by the Self was meant the body. The god had a purer nature. He at first
committed the mistake of thinking: I, this body, am Brahman: so keep it
strong and in health, and well dressed, and give it all sorts of
enjoyments. But, in a few days, he found out that that could not be the
meaning of the sage, their master; there must be something higher. So he
came back and said, "Sir, did you teach me that this body was the Self?
If so, I see all bodies die; the Self cannot die." The sage said, "Find
it out; thou art That." Then the god thought that the vital forces which
work the body were what the sage meant. But after a time, he found that
if he ate, these vital forces remained strong, but, if he starved, they
became weak. The god then went back to the sage and said, "Sir, do you
mean that the vital forces are the Self?" The sage said, "Find out for
yourself; thou art That." The god returned home once more, thinking that
it was the mind, perhaps, that was the Self. But in a short while he saw
that thoughts were so various, now good, again bad; the mind was too
changeable to be the Self. He went back to the sage and said, "Sir, I do
not think that the mind is the Self; did you mean that?" "No," replied
the sage, "thou art That; find out for yourself." The god went home, and
at last found that he was the Self, beyond all thought, one without
birth or death, whom the sword cannot pierce or the fire burn, whom the
air cannot dry or the water melt, the beginningless and endless, the
immovable, the intangible, the omniscient, the omnipotent Being; that It
was neither the body nor the mind, but beyond them all. So he was
satisfied; but the poor demon did not get the truth, owing to his
fondness for the body.

This world has a good many of these demoniac natures, but there are some
gods too. If one proposes to teach any science to increase the power of
sense-enjoyment, one finds multitudes ready for it. If one undertakes to
show the supreme goal, one finds few to listen to him. Very few have the
power to grasp the higher, fewer still the patience to attain to it. But
there are a few also who know that even if the body can be made to live
for a thousand years, the result in the end will be the same. When the
forces that hold it together go away, the body must fall. No man was
ever born who could stop his body one moment from changing. Body is the
name of a series of changes. "As in a river the masses of water are
changing before you every moment, and new masses are coming, yet taking
similar form, so is it with this body." Yet the body must be kept strong
and healthy. It is the best instrument we have.

This human body is the greatest body in the universe, and a human being
the greatest being. Man is higher than all animals, than all angels;
none is greater than man. Even the Devas (gods) will have to come down
again and attain to salvation through a human body. Man alone attains to
perfection, not even the Devas. According to the Jews and Mohammedans,
God created man after creating the angels and everything else, and after
creating man He asked the angels to come and salute him, and all did so
except Iblis; so God cursed him and he became Satan. Behind this
allegory is the great truth that this human birth is the greatest birth
we can have. The lower creation, the animal, is dull, and manufactured
mostly out of Tamas. Animals cannot have any high thoughts; nor can the
angels, or Devas, attain to direct freedom without human birth. In human
society, in the same way, too much wealth or too much poverty is a great
impediment to the higher development of the soul. It is from the middle
classes that the great ones of the world come. Here the forces are very
equally adjusted and balanced.

Returning to our subject, we come next to Pranayarna, controlling the
breathing. What has that to do with concentrating the powers of the
mind? Breath is like the fly-wheel of this machine, the body. In a big
engine you find the fly-wheel first moving, and that motion is conveyed
to finer and finer machinery until the most delicate and finest
mechanism in the machine is in motion. The breath is that fly-wheel,
supplying and regulating the motive power to everything in this body.

There was once a minister to a great king. He fell into disgrace. The
king, as a punishment, ordered him to be shut up in the top of a very
high tower. This was done, and the minister was left there to perish. He
had a faithful wife, however, who came to the tower at night and called
to her husband at the top to know what she could do to help him. He told
her to return to the tower the following night and bring with her a long
rope, some stout twine, pack thread, silken thread, a beetle, and a
little honey. Wondering much, the good wife obeyed her husband, and
brought him the desired articles. The husband directed her to attach the
silken thread firmly to the beetle, then to smear its horns with a drop
of honey, and to set it free on the wall of the tower, with its head
pointing upwards. She obeyed all these instructions, and the beetle
started on its long journey. Smelling the honey ahead it slowly crept
onwards, in the hope of reaching the honey, until at last it reached the
top of the tower, when the minister grasped the beetle, and got
possession of the silken thread. He told his wife to tie the other end
to the pack thread, and after he had drawn up the pack thread, he
repeated the process with the stout twine, and lastly with the rope.
Then the rest was easy. The minister descended from the tower by means
of the rope, and made his escape. In this body of ours the breath motion
is the "silken thread"; by laying hold of and learning to control it we
grasp the pack thread of the nerve currents, and from these the stout
twine of our thoughts, and lastly the rope of Prana, controlling which
we reach freedom.

We do not know anything about our own bodies; we cannot know. At best we
can take a dead body, and cut it in pieces, and there are some who can
take a live animal and cut it in pieces in order to see what is inside
the body. Still, that has nothing to do with our own bodies. We know
very little about them. Why do we not? Because our attention is not
discriminating enough to catch the very fine movements that are going on
within. We can know of them only when the mind becomes more subtle and
enters, as it were, deeper into the body. To get the subtle perception
we have to begin with the grosser perceptions. We have to get hold of
that which is setting the whole engine in motion. That is the Prana, the
most obvious manifestation of which is the breath. Then, along with the
breath, we shall slowly enter the body, which will enable us to find out
about the subtle forces, the nerve currents that are moving all over the
body. As soon as we perceive and learn to feel them, we shall begin to
get control over them, and over the body. The mind is also set in
motion: by these different nerve currents, so at last we shall reach the
state of perfect control over the body and the mind, making both our
servants. Knowledge is power. We have to get this power. So we must
begin at the beginning, with Pranayama, restraining the Prana. This
Pranayama is a long subject, and will take several lessons to illustrate
it thoroughly. We shall take it part by part.

We shall gradually see the reasons for each exercise and what forces in
the body are set in motion. All these things will come to us, but it
requires constant practice, and the proof will come by practice. No
amount of reasoning which I can give you will be proof to you, until you
have demonstrated it for yourselves. As soon as you begin to feel these
currents in motion all over you, doubts will vanish, but it requires
hard practice every day. You must practice at least twice every day, and
the best times are towards the morning and the evening. When night
passes into day, and day into night, a state of relative calmness
ensues. The early morning and the early evening are the two periods of
calmness. Your body will have a like tendency to become calm at those
times. We should take advantage of that natural condition and begin then
to practice. Make it a rule not to eat until you have practiced; if you
do this, the sheer force of hunger will break your laziness. In India
they teach children never to eat until they have practiced or
worshipped, and it becomes natural to them after a time; a boy will not
feel hungry until he has bathed and practiced.

Those of you who can afford it will do better to have a room for this
practice alone. Do not sleep in that room, it must be kept holy. You
must not enter the room until you have bathed, and are perfectly clean
in body and mind. Place flowers in that room always; they are the best
surroundings for a Yogi; also pictures that are pleasing. Burn incense
morning and evening. Have no quarrelling, nor anger, nor unholy thought
in that room. Only allow those persons to enter it who are of the same
thought as you. Then gradually there will be an atmosphere of holiness
in the room, so that when you are miserable, sorrowful, doubtful, or
your mind is disturbed, the very fact of entering that room will make
you calm. This was the idea of the temple and the church, and in some
temples and churches you will find it even now, but in the majority of
them the very idea has been lost. The idea is that by keeping holy
vibrations there the place becomes and remains illumined. Those who
cannot afford to have a room set apart can practice anywhere they like.
Sit in a straight posture, and the first thing to do is to send a
current of holy thought to all creation. Mentally repeat, "Let all
beings be happy; let all beings be peaceful; let all beings be
blissful." So do to the east, south, north and west. The more you do
that the better you will feel yourself. You will find at last that the
easiest way to make ourselves healthy is to see that others are healthy,
and the easiest way to make ourselves happy is to see that others are
happy. After doing that, those who believe in God should pray — not for
money, not for health, nor for heaven; pray for knowledge and light;
every other prayer is selfish. Then the next thing to do is to think of
your own body, and see that it is strong and healthy; it is the best
instrument you have. Think of it as being as strong as adamant, and that
with the help of this body you will cross the ocean of life. Freedom is
never to be reached by the weak. Throw away all weakness. Tell your body
that it is strong, tell your mind that it is strong, and have unbounded
faith and hope in yourself.

</div>
