---
title: PRANA

---
<div>

[←](the_first_steps.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](the_psychic_prana.htm)

  

CHAPTER III

## PRANA

Prânâyâma is not, as many think, something about breath; breath indeed
has very little to do with it, if anything. Breathing is only one of the
many exercises through which we get to the real Pranayama. Pranayama
means the control of Prâna. According to the philosophers of India, the
whole universe is composed of two materials, one of which they call
Âkâsha. It is the omnipresent, all-penetrating existence. Everything
that has form, everything that is the result of combination, is evolved
out of this Akasha. It is the Akasha that becomes the air, that becomes
the liquids, that becomes the solids; it is the Akasha that becomes the
sun, the earth, the moon, the stars, the comets; it is the Akasha that
becomes the human body, the animal body, the plants, every form that we
see, everything that can be sensed, everything that exists. It cannot be
perceived; it is so subtle that it is beyond all ordinary perception; it
can only be seen when it has become gross, has taken form. At the
beginning of creation there is only this Akasha. At the end of the cycle
the solids, the liquids, and the gases all melt into the Akasha again,
and the next creation similarly proceeds out of this Akasha.

By what power is this Akasha manufactured into this universe? By the
power of Prana. Just as Akasha is the infinite, omnipresent material of
this universe, so is this Prana the infinite, omnipresent manifesting
power of this universe. At the beginning and at the end of a cycle
everything becomes Akasha, and all the forces that are in the universe
resolve back into the Prana; in the next cycle, out of this Prana is
evolved everything that we call energy, everything that we call force.
It is the Prana that is manifesting as motion; it is the Prana that is
manifesting as gravitation, as magnetism. It is the Prana that is
manifesting as the actions of the body, as the nerve currents, as
thought force. From thought down to the lowest force, everything is but
the manifestation of Prana. The sum total of all forces in the universe,
mental or physical, when resolved back to their original state, is
called Prana. "When there was neither aught nor naught, when darkness
was covering darkness, what existed then? That Akasha existed without
motion." The physical motion of the Prana was stopped, but it existed
all the same.

At the end of a cycle the energies now displayed in the universe quiet
down and become potential. At the beginning of the next cycle they start
up, strike upon the Akasha, and out of the Akasha evolve these various
forms, and as the Akasha changes, this Prana changes also into all these
manifestations of energy. The knowledge and control of this Prana is
really what is meant by Pranayama.

This opens to us the door to almost unlimited power. Suppose, for
instance, a man understood the Prana perfectly, and could control it,
what power on earth would not be his? He would be able to move the sun
and stars out of their places, to control everything in the universe,
from the atoms to the biggest suns, because he would control the Prana.
This is the end and aim of Pranayama. When the Yogi becomes perfect,
there will be nothing in nature not under his control. If he orders the
gods or the souls of the departed to come, they will come at his
bidding. All the forces of nature will obey him as slaves. When the
ignorant see these powers of the Yogi, they call them the miracles. One
peculiarity of the Hindu mind is that it always inquires for the last
possible generalisation, leaving the details to be worked out
afterwards. The question is raised in the Vedas, "What is that, knowing
which, we shall know everything?" Thus, all books, and all philosophies
that have been written, have been only to prove that by knowing which
everything is known. If a man wants to know this universe bit by bit he
must know every individual grain of sand, which means infinite time; he
cannot know all of them. Then how can knowledge be? How is it possible
for a man to be all-knowing through particulars? The Yogis say that
behind this particular manifestation there is a generalisation. Behind
all particular ideas stands a generalised, an abstract principle; grasp
it, and you have grasped everything. Just as this whole universe has
been generalised in the Vedas into that One Absolute Existence, and he
who has grasped that Existence has grasped the whole universe, so all
forces have been generalised into this Prana, and he who has grasped the
Prana has grasped all the forces of the universe, mental or physical. He
who has controlled the Prana has controlled his own mind, and all the
minds that exist. He who has controlled the Prana has controlled his
body, and all the bodies that exist, because the Prana is the
generalised manifestation of force.

How to control the Prana is the one idea of Pranayama. All the trainings
and exercises in this regard are for that one end. Each man must begin
where he stands, must learn how to control the things that are nearest
to him. This body is very near to us, nearer than anything in the
external universe, and this mind is the nearest of all. The Prana which
is working this mind and body is the nearest to us of all the Prana in
this universe. This little wave of the Prana which represents our own
energies, mental and physical, is the nearest to us of all the waves of
the infinite ocean of Prana. If we can succeed in controlling that
little wave, then alone we can hope to control the whole of Prana. The
Yogi who has done this gains perfection; no longer is he under any
power. He becomes almost almighty, almost all-knowing. We see sects in
every country who have attempted this control of Prana. In this country
there are Mind-healers, Faith-healers, Spiritualists, Christian
Scientists, Hypnotists, etc., and if we examine these different bodies,
we shall find at the back of each this control of the Prana, whether
they know it or not. If you boil all their theories down, the residuum
will be that. It is the one and the same force they are manipulating,
only unknowingly. They have stumbled on the discovery of a force and are
using it unconsciously without knowing its nature, but it is the same as
the Yogi uses, and which comes from Prana.

The Prana is the vital force in every being. Thought is the finest and
highest action of Prana. Thought, again, as we see, is not all. There is
also what we call instinct or unconscious thought, the lowest plane of
action. If a mosquito stings us, our hand will strike it automatically,
instinctively. This is one expression of thought. All reflex actions of
the body belong to this plane of thought. There is again the other plane
of thought, the conscious. I reason, I judge, I think, I see the pros
and cons of certain things, yet that is not all. We know that reason is
limited. Reason can go only to a certain extent, beyond that it cannot
reach. The circle within which it runs is very very limited indeed. Yet
at the same time, we find facts rush into this circle. Like the coming
of comets certain things come into this circle; it is certain they come
from outside the limit, although our reason cannot go beyond. The causes
of the phenomena intruding themselves in this small limit are outside of
this limit. The mind can exist on a still higher plane, the
superconscious. When the mind has attained to that state, which is
called Samâdhi — perfect concentration, superconsciousness — it goes
beyond the limits of reason, and comes face to face with facts which no
instinct or reason can ever know. All manipulations of the subtle forces
of the body, the different manifestations of Prana, if trained, give a
push to the mind, help it to go up higher, and become superconscious,
from where it acts.

In this universe there is one continuous substance on every plane of
existence. Physically this universe is one: there is no difference
between the sun and you. The scientist will tell you it is only a
fiction to say the contrary. There is no real difference between the
table and me; the table is one point in the mass of matter, and I
another point. Each form represents, as it were, one whirlpool in the
infinite ocean of matter, of which not one is constant. Just as in a
rushing stream there may be millions of whirlpools, the water in each of
which is different every moment, turning round and round for a few
seconds, and then passing out, replaced by a fresh quantity, so the
whole universe is one constantly changing mass of matter, in which all
forms of existence are so many whirlpools. A mass of matter enters into
one whirlpool, say a human body, stays there for a period, becomes
changed, and goes out into another, say an animal body this time, from
which again after a few years, it enters into another whirlpool, called
a lump of mineral. It is a constant change. Not one body is constant.
There is no such thing as my body, or your body, except in words. Of the
one huge mass of matter, one point is called a moon, another a sun,
another a man, another the earth, another a plant, another a mineral.
Not one is constant, but everything is changing, matter eternally
concreting and disintegrating. So it is with the mind. Matter is
represented by the ether; when the action of Prana is most subtle, this
very ether, in the finer state of vibration, will represent the mind and
there it will be still one unbroken mass. If you can simply get to that
subtle vibration, you will see and feel that the whole universe is
composed of subtle vibrations. Sometimes certain drugs have the power to
take us, while as yet in the senses, to that condition. Many of you may
remember the celebrated experiment of Sir Humphrey Davy, when the
laughing gas overpowered him — how, during the lecture, he remained
motionless, stupefied and after that, he said that the whole universe
was made up of ideas. For, the time being, as it were, the gross
vibrations had ceased, and only the subtle vibrations which he called
ideas, were present to him. He could only see the subtle vibrations
round him; everything had become thought; the whole universe was an
ocean of thought, he and everyone else had become little thought
whirlpools.

Thus, even in the universe of thought we find unity, and at last, when
we get to the Self, we know that that Self can only be One. Beyond the
vibrations of matter in its gross and subtle aspects, beyond motion
there is but One. Even in manifested motion there is only unity. These
facts can no more be denied. Modern physics also has demonstrated that
the sum total of the energies in the universe is the same throughout. It
has also been proved that this sum total of energy exists in two forms.
It becomes potential, toned down, and calmed, and next it comes out
manifested as all these various forces; again it goes back to the quiet
state, and again it manifests. Thus it goes on evolving and involving
through eternity. The control of this Prana, as before stated, is what
is called Pranayama.

The most obvious manifestation of this Prana in the human body is the
motion of the lungs. If that stops, as a rule all the other
manifestations of force in the body will immediately stop. But there are
persons who can train themselves in such a manner that the body will
live on, even when this motion has stopped. There are some persons who
can bury themselves for days, and yet live without breathing. To reach
the subtle we must take the help of the grosser, and so, slowly travel
towards the most subtle until we gain our point. Pranayama really means
controlling this motion of the lungs and this motion is associated with
the breath. Not that breath is producing it; on the contrary it is
producing breath. This motion draws in the air by pump action. The Prana
is moving the lungs, the movement of the lungs draws in the air. So
Pranayama is not breathing, but controlling that muscular power which
moves the lungs. That muscular power which goes out through the nerves
to the muscles and from them to the lungs, making them move in a certain
manner, is the Prana, which we have to control in the practice of
Pranayama. When the Prana has become controlled, then we shall
immediately find that all the other actions of the Prana in the body
will slowly come under control. I myself have seen men who have
controlled almost every muscle of the body; and why not? If I have
control over certain muscles, why not over every muscle and nerve of the
body? What impossibility is there? At present the control is lost, and
the motion has become automatic. We cannot move our ears at will, but we
know that animals can. We have not that power because we do not exercise
it. This is what is called atavism.

Again, we know that motion which has become latent can be brought back
to manifestation. By hard work and practice certain motions of the body
which are most dormant can be brought back under perfect control.
Reasoning thus we find there is no impossibility, but, on the other
hand. every probability that each part of the body can be brought under
perfect control. This the Yogi does through Pranayama. Perhaps some of
you have read that in Pranayama, when drawing in the breath, you must
fill your whole body with Prana. In the English translations Prana is
given as breath, and you are inclined to ask how that is to be done. The
fault is with the translator. Every part of the body can be filled with
Prana, this vital force, and when you are able to do that, you can
control the whole body. All the sickness and misery felt in the body
will be perfectly controlled; not only so, you will be able to control
another's body. Everything is infectious in this world, good or bad. If
your body be in a certain state of tension, it will have a tendency to
produce the same tension in others. If you are strong and healthy, those
that live near you will also have the tendency to become strong and
healthy, but if you are sick and weak, those around you will have the
tendency to become the same. In the case of one man trying to heal
another, the first idea is simply transferring his own health to the
other. This is the primitive sort of healing. Consciously or
unconsciously, health can be transmitted. A very strong man, living with
a weak man, will make him a little stronger, whether he knows it or not.
When consciously done, it becomes quicker and better in its action. Next
come those cases in which a man may not be very healthy himself, yet we
know that he can bring health to another. The first man, in such a case,
has a little more control over the Prana, and can rouse, for the time
being, his Prana, as it were, to a certain state of vibration, and
transmit it to another person.

There have been cases where this process has been carried on at a
distance, but in reality there is no distance in the sense of a break.
Where is the distance that has a break? Is there any break between you
and the sun? It is a continuous mass of matter, the sun being one part,
and you another. Is there a break between one part of a river and
another? Then why cannot any force travel? There is no reason against
it. Cases of healing from a distance are perfectly true. The Prana can
be transmitted to a very great distance; but to one genuine case, there
are hundreds of frauds. This process of healing is not so easy as it is
thought to be. In the most ordinary cases of such healing you will find
that the healers simply take advantage of the naturally healthy state of
the human body. An allopath comes and treats cholera patients, and gives
them his medicines. The homoeopath comes and gives his medicines, and
cures perhaps more than the allopath does, because the homoeopath does
not disturb his patients, but allows nature to deal with them. The
Faith-healer cures more still, because he brings the strength of his
mind to bear, and rouses, through faith, the dormant Prana of the
patient.

There is a mistake constantly made by Faith-healers: they think that
faith directly heals a man. But faith alone does not cover all the
ground. There are diseases where the worst symptoms are that the patient
never thinks that he has that disease. That tremendous faith of the
patient is itself one symptom of the disease, and usually indicates that
he will die quickly. In such cases the principle that faith cures does
not apply. If it were faith alone that cured, these patients also would
be cured. It is by the Prana that real curing comes. The pure man, who
has controlled the Prana, has the power of bringing it into a certain
state of vibration, which can be conveyed to others, arousing in them a
similar vibration. You see that in everyday actions. I am talking to
you. What am I trying to do? I am, so to say, bringing my mind to a
certain state of vibration, and the more I succeed in bringing it to
that state, the more you will be affected by what I say. All of you know
that the day I am more enthusiastic, the more you enjoy the lecture; and
when I am less enthusiastic, you feel lack of interest.

The gigantic will-powers of the world, the world-movers, can bring their
Prana into a high state of vibration, and it is so great and powerful
that it catches others in a moment, and thousands are drawn towards
them, and half the world think as they do. Great prophets of the world
had the most wonderful control of the Prana, which gave them tremendous
will-power; they had brought their Prana to the highest state of motion,
and this is what gave them power to sway the world. All manifestations
of power arise from this control. Men may not know the secret, but this
is the one explanation. Sometimes in your own body the supply of Prana
gravitates more or less to one part; the balance is disturbed, and when
the balance of Prana is disturbed, what we call disease is produced. To
take away the superfluous Prana, or to supply the Prana that is wanting,
will be curing the disease. That again is Pranayama — to learn when
there is more or less Prana in one part of the body than there should
be. The feelings will become so subtle that the mind will feel that
there is less Prana in the toe or the finger than there should be, and
will possess the power to supply it. These are among the various
functions of Pranayama. They have to be learned slowly and gradually,
and as you see, the whole scope of Raja-Yoga is really to teach the
control and direction in different planes of the Prana. When a man has
concentrated his energies, he masters the Prana that is in his body.
When a man is meditating, he is also concentrating the Prana.

In an ocean there are huge waves, like mountains, then smaller waves,
and still smaller, down to little bubbles, but back of all these is the
infinite ocean. The bubble is connected with the infinite ocean at one
end, and the huge wave at the other end. So, one may be a gigantic man,
and another a little bubble, but each is connected with that infinite
ocean of energy, which is the common birthright of every animal that
exists. Wherever there is life, the storehouse of infinite energy is
behind it. Starting as some fungus, some very minute, microscopic
bubble, and all the time drawing from that infinite store-house of
energy, a form is changed slowly and steadily until in course of time it
becomes a plant, then an animal, then man, ultimately God. This is
attained through millions of aeons, but what is time? An increase of
speed, an increase of struggle, is able to bridge the gulf of time. That
which naturally takes a long time to accomplish can be shortened by the
intensity of the action, says the Yogi. A man may go on slowly drawing
in this energy from the infinite mass that exists in the universe, and,
perhaps, he will require a hundred thousand years to become a Deva, and
then, perhaps, five hundred thousand years to become still higher, and,
perhaps, five millions of years to become perfect. Given rapid growth,
the time will be lessened. Why is it not possible, with sufficient
effort, to reach this very perfection in six months or six years? There
is no limit. Reason shows that. If an engine, with a certain amount of
coal, runs two miles an hour, it will run the distance in less time with
a greater supply of coal. Similarly, why shall not the soul, by
intensifying its action, attain perfection in this very life? All beings
will at last attain to that goal, we know. But who cares to wait all
these millions of aeons? Why not reach it immediately, in this body
even, in this human form? Why shall I not get that infinite knowledge,
infinite power, now?

The ideal of the Yogi, the whole science of Yoga, is directed to the end
of teaching men how, by intensifying the power of assimilation, to
shorten the time for reaching perfection, instead of slowly advancing
from point to point and waiting until the whole human race has become
perfect. All the great prophets, saints, and seers of the world — what
did they do? In one span of life they lived the whole life of humanity,
traversed the whole length of time that it takes ordinary humanity to
come to perfection. In one life they perfect themselves; they have no
thought for anything else, never live a moment for any other idea, and
thus the way is shortened for them. This is what is meant by
concentration, intensifying the power of assimilation, thus shortening
the time. Raja-Yoga is the science which teaches us how to gain the
power of concentration.

What has Pranayama to do with spiritualism? Spiritualism is also a
manifestation of Pranayama. If it be true that the departed spirits
exist, only we cannot see them, it is quite probable that there may be
hundreds and millions of them about us we can neither see, feel, nor
touch. We may be continually passing and repassing through their bodies,
and they do not see or feel us. It is a circle within a circle, universe
within universe. We have five senses, and we represent Prana in a
certain state of vibration. All beings in the same state of vibration
will see one another, but if there are beings who represent Prana in a
higher state of vibration, they will not be seen. We may increase the
intensity of a light until we cannot see it at all, but there may be
beings with eyes so powerful that they can see such light. Again, if its
vibrations are very low, we do not see a light, but there are animals
that may see it, as cats and owls. Our range of vision is only one plane
of the vibrations of this Prana. Take this atmosphere, for instance; it
is piled up layer on layer, but the layers nearer to the earth are
denser than those above, and as you go higher the atmosphere becomes
finer and finer. Or take the case of the ocean; as you go deeper and
deeper the pressure of the water increases, and animals which live at
the bottom of the sea can never come up, or they will be broken into
pieces.

Think of the universe as an ocean of ether, consisting of layer after
layer of varying degrees of vibration under the action of Prana; away
from the centre the vibrations are less, nearer to it they become
quicker and quicker; one order of vibration makes one plane. Then
suppose these ranges of vibrations are cut into planes, so many millions
of miles one set of vibration, and then so many millions of miles
another still higher set of vibration, and so on. It is, therefore,
probable, that those who live on the plane of a certain state of
vibration will have the power of recognising one another, but will not
recognise those above them. Yet, just as by the telescope and the
microscope we can increase the scope of our vision, similarly we can by
Yoga bring ourselves to the state of vibration of another plane, and
thus enable ourselves to see what is going on there. Suppose this room
is full of beings whom we do not see. They represent Prana in a certain
state of vibration while we represent another. Suppose they represent a
quick one, and we the opposite. Prana is the material of which they are
composed, as well as we. All are parts of the same ocean of Prana, they
differ only in their rate of vibration. If I can bring myself to the
quick vibration, this plane will immediately change for me: I shall not
see you any more; you vanish and they appear. Some of you, perhaps, know
this to be true. All this bringing of the mind into a higher state of
vibration is included in one word in Yoga — Samadhi. All these states of
higher vibration, superconscious vibrations of the mind, are grouped in
that one word, Samadhi, and the lower states of Samadhi give us visions
of these beings. The highest grade of Samadhi is when we see the real
thing, when we see the material out of which the whole of these grades
of beings are composed, and that one lump of clay being known, we know
all the clay in the universe.

Thus we see that Pranayama includes all that is true of spiritualism
even. Similarly, you will find that wherever any sect or body of people
is trying to search out anything occult and mystical, or hidden, what
they are doing is really this Yoga, this attempt to control the Prana.
You will find that wherever there is any extraordinary display of power,
it is the manifestation of this Prana. Even the physical sciences can be
included in Pranayama. What moves the steam engine? Prana, acting
through the steam. What are all these phenomena of electricity and so
forth but Prana? What is physical science? The science of Pranayama, by
external means. Prana, manifesting itself as mental power, can only be
controlled by mental means. That part of Pranayama which attempts to
control the physical manifestations of the Prana by physical means is
called physical science, and that part which tries to control the
manifestations of the Prana as mental force by mental means is called
Raja-Yoga.

</div>
