---
title: PRATYAHARA AND DHARANA

---
<div>

[←](the_control_of_psychic_prana.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) /
[Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](dhyana_and_samadhi.htm)

  

CHAPTER VI

## PRATYAHARA AND DHARANA

The next step is called Pratyâhâra. What is this? You know how
perceptions come. First of all there are the external instruments, then
the internal organs acting in the body through the brain centres, and
there is the mind. When these come together and attach themselves to
some external object, then we perceive it. At the same time it is a very
difficult thing to concentrate the mind and attach it to one organ only;
the mind is a slave.

We hear "Be good," and "Be good," and "Be good," taught all over the
world. There is hardly a child, born in any country in the world, who
has not been told, "Do not steal," "Do not tell a lie," but nobody tells
the child how he can help doing them. Talking will not help him. Why
should he not become a thief? We do not teach him how not to steal; we
simply tell him, "Do not steal." Only when we teach him to control his
mind do we really help him. All actions, internal and external, occur
when the mind joins itself to certain centres, called the organs.
Willingly or unwillingly it is drawn to join itself to the centres, and
that is why people do foolish deeds and feel miserable, which, if the
mind were under control, they would not do. What would be the result of
controlling the mind? It then would not join itself to the centres of
perception, and, naturally, feeling and willing would be under control.
It is clear so far. Is it possible? It is perfectly possible. You see it
in modern times; the faith-healers teach people to deny misery and pain
and evil. Their philosophy is rather roundabout, but it is a part of
Yoga upon which they have somehow stumbled. Where they succeed in making
a person throw off suffering by denying it, they really use a part of
Pratyahara, as they make the mind of the person strong enough to ignore
the senses. The hypnotists in a similar manner, by their suggestion,
excite in the patient a sort of morbid Pratyahara for the time being.
The so-called hypnotic suggestion can only act upon a weak mind. And
until the operator, by means of fixed gaze or otherwise, has succeeded
in putting the mind of the subject in a sort of passive, morbid
condition, his suggestions never work.

Now the control of the centres which is established in a hypnotic
patient or the patient of faith-healing, by the operator, for a time, is
reprehensible, because it leads to ultimate ruin. It is not really
controlling the brain centres by the power of one's own will, but is, as
it were, stunning the patient's mind for a time by sudden blows which
another's will delivers to it. It is not checking by means of reins and
muscular strength the mad career of a fiery team, but rather by asking
another to deliver heavy blows on the heads of the horses, to stun them
for a time into gentleness. At each one of these processes the man
operated upon loses a part of his mental energies, till at last, the
mind, instead of gaining the power of perfect control, becomes a
shapeless, powerless mass, and the only goal of the patient is the
lunatic asylum.

Every attempt at control which is not voluntary, not with the
controller's own mind, is not only disastrous, but it defeats the end.
The goal of each soul is freedom, mastery — freedom from the slavery of
matter and thought, mastery of external and internal nature. Instead of
leading towards that, every will-current from another, in whatever form
it comes, either as direct control of organs, or as forcing to control
them while under a morbid condition, only rivets one link more to the
already existing heavy chain of bondage of past thoughts, past
superstitions. Therefore, beware how you allow yourselves to be acted
upon by others. Beware how you unknowingly bring another to ruin. True,
some succeed in doing good to many for a time, by giving a new trend to
their propensities, but at the same time, they bring ruin to millions by
the unconscious suggestions they throw around, rousing in men and women
that morbid, passive, hypnotic condition which makes them almost
soulless at last. Whosoever, therefore, asks any one to believe blindly,
or drags people behind him by the controlling power of his superior
will, does an injury to humanity, though he may not intend it.

Therefore use your own minds, control body and mind yourselves, remember
that until you are a diseased person, no extraneous will can work upon
you; avoid everyone, however great and good he may be, who asks you to
believe blindly. All over the world there have been dancing and jumping
and howling sects, who spread like infection when they begin to sing and
dance and preach; they also are a sort of hypnotists. They exercise a
singular control for the time being over sensitive persons, alas! often,
in the long run, to degenerate whole races. Ay, it is healthier for the
individual or the race to remain wicked than be made apparently good by
such morbid extraneous control. One's heart sinks to think of the amount
of injury done to humanity by such irresponsible yet well-meaning
religious fanatics. They little know that the minds which attain to
sudden spiritual upheaval under their suggestions, with music and
prayers, are simply making themselves passive, morbid, and powerless,
and opening themselves to any other suggestion, be it ever so evil.
Little do these ignorant, deluded persons dream that whilst they are
congratulating themselves upon their miraculous power to transform human
hearts, which power they think was poured upon them by some Being above
the clouds, they are sowing the seeds of future decay, of crime, of
lunacy, and of death. Therefore, beware of everything that takes away
your freedom. Know that it is dangerous, and avoid it by all the means
in your power.

He who has succeeded in attaching or detaching his mind to or from the
centres at will has succeeded in Pratyahara, which means, "gathering
towards," checking the outgoing powers of the mind, freeing it from the
thraldom of the senses. When we can do this, we shall really possess
character; then alone we shall have taken a long step towards freedom;
before that we are mere machines.

How hard it is to control the mind! Well has it been compared to the
maddened monkey. There was a monkey, restless by his own nature, as all
monkeys are. As if that were not enough some one made him drink freely
of wine, so that he became still more restless. Then a scorpion stung
him. When a man is stung by a scorpion, he jumps about for a whole day;
so the poor monkey found his condition worse than ever. To complete his
misery a demon entered into him. What language can describe the
uncontrollable restlessness of that monkey? The human mind is like that
monkey, incessantly active by its own nature; then it becomes drunk with
the wine of desire, thus increasing its turbulence. After desire takes
possession comes the sting of the scorpion of jealousy at the success of
others, and last of all the demon of pride enters the mind, making it
think itself of all importance. How hard to control such a mind!

The first lesson, then, is to sit for some time and let the mind run on.
The mind is bubbling up all the time. It is like that monkey jumping
about. Let the monkey jump as much as he can; you simply wait and watch.
Knowledge is power, says the proverb, and that is true. Until you know
what the mind is doing you cannot control it. Give it the rein; many
hideous thoughts may come into it; you will be astonished that it was
possible for you to think such thoughts. But you will find that each day
the mind's vagaries are becoming less and less violent, that each day it
is becoming calmer. In the first few months you will find that the mind
will have a great many thoughts, later you will find that they have
somewhat decreased, and in a few more months they will be fewer and
fewer, until at last the mind will be under perfect control; but we must
patiently practice every day. As soon as the steam is turned on, the
engine must run; as soon as things are before us we must perceive; so a
man, to prove that he is not a machine, must demonstrate that he is
under the control of nothing. This controlling of the mind, and not
allowing it to join itself to the centres, is Pratyahara. How is this
practised? It is a tremendous work, not to be done in a day. Only after
a patient, continuous struggle for years can we succeed.

After you have practised Pratyahara for a time, take the next step, the
Dhâranâ, holding the mind to certain points. What is meant by holding
the mind to certain points? Forcing the mind to feel certain parts of
the body to the exclusion of others. For instance, try to feel only the
hand, to the exclusion of other parts of the body. When the Chitta, or
mind-stuff, is confined and limited to a certain place it is Dharana.
This Dharana is of various sorts, and along with it, it is better to
have a little play of the imagination. For instance, the mind should be
made to think of one point in the heart. That is very difficult; an
easier way is to imagine a lotus there. That lotus is full of light,
effulgent light. Put the mind there. Or think of the lotus in the brain
as full of light, or of the different centres in the Sushumna mentioned
before.

The Yogi must always practice. He should try to live alone; the
companionship of different sorts of people distracts the mind; he should
not speak much, because to speak distracts the mind; not work much,
because too much work distracts the mind; the mind cannot be controlled
after a whole day's hard work. One observing the above rules becomes a
Yogi. Such is the power of Yoga that even the least of it will bring a
great amount of benefit. It will not hurt anyone, but will benefit
everyone. First of all, it will tone down nervous excitement, bring
calmness, enable us to see things more clearly. The temperament will be
better, and the health will be better. Sound health will be one of the
first signs, and a beautiful voice. Defects in the voice will be
changed. This will be among the first of the many effects that will
come. Those who practise hard will get many other signs. Sometimes there
will be sounds, as a peal of bells heard at a distance, commingling, and
falling on the ear as one continuous sound. Sometimes things will be
seen, little specks of light floating and becoming bigger and bigger;
and when these things come, know that you are progressing fast.

Those who want to be Yogis, and practice hard, must take care of their
diet at first. But for those who want only a little practice for
everyday business sort of life, let them not eat too much; otherwise
they may eat whatever they please. For those who want to make rapid
progress, and to practice hard, a strict diet is absolutely necessary.
They will find it advantageous to live only on milk and cereals for some
months. As the organisation becomes finer and finer, it will be found in
the beginning that the least irregularity throws one out of balance. One
bit of food more or less will disturb the whole system, until one gets
perfect control, and then one will be able to eat whatever one likes.

When one begins to concentrate, the dropping of a pin will seem like a
thunderbolt going through the brain. As the organs get finer, the
perceptions get finer. These are the stages through which we have to
pass, and all those who persevere will succeed. Give up all
argumentation and other distractions. Is there anything in dry
intellectual jargon? It only throws the mind off its balance and
disturbs it. Things of subtler planes have to be realised. Will talking
do that? So give up all vain talk. Read only those books which have been
written by persons who have had realisation.

Be like the pearl oyster. There is a pretty Indian fable to the effect
that if it rains when the star Svâti is in the ascendant, and a drop of
rain falls into an oyster, that drop becomes a pearl. The oysters know
this, so they come to the surface when that star shines, and wait to
catch the precious raindrop. When a drop falls into them, quickly the
oysters close their shells and dive down to the bottom of the sea, there
to patiently develop the drop into the pearl. We should be like that.
First hear, then understand, and then, leaving all distractions, shut
your minds to outside influences, and devote yourselves to developing
the truth within you. There is the danger of frittering away your
energies by taking up an idea only for its novelty, and then giving it
up for another that is newer. Take one thing up and do it, and see the
end of it, and before you have seen the end, do not give it up. He who
can become mad with an idea, he alone sees light. Those that only take a
nibble here and a nibble there will never attain anything. They may
titillate their nerves for a moment, but there it will end. They will be
slaves in the hands of nature, and will never get beyond the senses.

Those who really want to be Yogis must give up, once for all, this
nibbling at things. Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life —
think of it, dream of it, live on that idea. Let the brain, muscles,
nerves, every part of your body, be full of that idea, and just leave
every other idea alone. This is the way to success, and this is the way
great spiritual giants are produced. Others are mere talking machines.
If we really want to be blessed, and make others blessed, we must go
deeper. The first step is not to disturb the mind, not to associate with
persons whose ideas are disturbing. All of you know that certain
persons, certain places, certain foods, repel you. Avoid them; and those
who want to go to the highest, must avoid all company, good or bad.
Practise hard; whether you live or die does not matter. You have to
plunge in and work, without thinking of the result. If you are brave
enough, in six months you will be a perfect Yogi. But those who take up
just a bit of it and a little of everything else make no progress. It is
of no use simply to take a course of lessons. To those who are full of
Tamas, ignorant and dull — those whose minds never get fixed on any
idea, who only crave for something to amuse them — religion and
philosophy are simply objects of entertainment. These are the
unpersevering. They hear a talk, think it very nice, and then go home
and forget all about it. To succeed, you must have tremendous
perseverance, tremendous will. "I will drink the ocean," says the
persevering soul, "at my will mountains will crumble up." Have that sort
of energy, that sort of will, work hard, and you will reach the goal.

</div>
