---
title: DHYANA AND SAMADHI

---
<div>

[←](pratyahara_and_dharana.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](raja-yoga_in_brief.htm)

  

CHAPTER VII

## DHYANA AND SAMADHI

We have taken a cursory view of the different steps in Râja-Yoga, except
the finer ones, the training in concentration, which is the goal to
which Raja-Yoga will lead us. We see, as human beings, that all our
knowledge which is called rational is referred to consciousness. My
consciousness of this table, and of your presence, makes me know that
the table and you are here. At the same time, there is a very great part
of my existence of which I am not conscious. All the different organs
inside the body, the different parts of the brain — nobody is conscious
of these.

When I eat food, I do it consciously; when I assimilate it, I do it
unconsciously. When the food is manufactured into blood, it is done
unconsciously. When out of the blood all the different parts of my body
are strengthened, it is done unconsciously. And yet it is I who am doing
all this; there cannot be twenty people in this one body. How do I know
that I do it, and nobody else? It may be urged that my business is only
in eating and assimilating the food, and that strengthening the body by
the food is done for me by somebody else. That cannot be, because it can
be demonstrated that almost every action of which we are now unconscious
can be brought up to the plane of consciousness. The heart is beating
apparently without our control. None of us here can control the heart;
it goes on its own way. But by practice men can bring even the heart
under control, until it will just beat at will, slowly, or quickly, or
almost stop. Nearly every part of the body can be brought under control.
What does this show? That the functions which are beneath consciousness
are also performed by us, only we are doing it unconsciously. We have,
then, two planes in which the human mind works. First is the conscious
plane, in which all work is always accompanied with the feeling of
egoism. Next comes the unconscious plane, where all work is
unaccompanied by the feeling of egoism. That part of mind-work which is
unaccompanied with the feeling of egoism is unconscious work, and that
part which is accompanied with the feeling of egoism is conscious work.
In the lower animals this unconscious work is called instinct. In higher
animals, and in the highest of all animals, man, what is called
conscious work prevails.

But it does not end here. There is a still higher plane upon which the
mind can work. It can go beyond consciousness. Just as unconscious work
is beneath consciousness, so there is another work which is above
consciousness, and which also is not accompanied with the feeling of
egoism. The feeling of egoism is only on the middle plane. When the mind
is above or below that line, there is no feeling of "I", and yet the
mind works. When the mind goes beyond this line of self-consciousness,
it is called Samâdhi or superconsciousness. How, for instance, do we
know that a man in Samadhi has not gone below consciousness, has not
degenerated instead of going higher? In both cases the works are
unaccompanied with egoism. The answer is, by the effects, by the results
of the work, we know that which is below, and that which is above. When
a man goes into deep sleep, he enters a plane beneath consciousness. He
works the body all the time, he breathes, he moves the body, perhaps, in
his sleep, without any accompanying feeling of ego; he is unconscious,
and when he returns from his sleep, he is the same man who went into it.
The sum total of the knowledge which he had before he went into the
sleep remains the same; it does not increase at all. No enlightenment
comes. But when a man goes into Samadhi, if he goes into it a fool, he
comes out a sage.

What makes the difference? From one state a man comes out the very same
man that he went in, and from another state the man comes out
enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character changed,
his life changed, illumined. These are the two effects. Now the effects
being different, the causes must be different. As this illumination with
which a man comes back from Samadhi is much higher than can be got from
unconsciousness, or much higher than can be got by reasoning in a
conscious state, it must, therefore, be superconsciousness, and Samadhi
is called the superconscious state.

This, in short, is the idea of Samadhi. What is its application? The
application is here. The field of reason, or of the conscious workings
of the mind, is narrow and limited. There is a little circle within
which human reason must move. It cannot go beyond. Every attempt to go
beyond is impossible, yet it is beyond this circle of reason that there
lies all that humanity holds most dear. All these questions, whether
there is an immortal soul, whether there is a God, whether there is any
supreme intelligence guiding this universe or not, are beyond the field
of reason. Reason can never answer these questions. What does reason
say? It says, "I am agnostic; I do not know either yea or nay." Yet
these questions are so important to us. Without a proper answer to them,
human life will be purposeless. All our ethical theories, all our moral
attitudes, all that is good and great in human nature, have been moulded
upon answers that have come from beyond the circle. It is very
important, therefore, that we should have answers to these questions. If
life is only a short play, if the universe is only a "fortuitous
combination of atoms," then why should I do good to another? Why should
there be mercy, justice, or fellow-feeling? The best thing for this
world would be to make hay while the sun shines, each man for himself.
If there is no hope, why should I love my brother, and not cut his
throat? If there is nothing beyond, if there is no freedom, but only
rigorous dead laws, I should only try to make myself happy here. You
will find people saying nowadays that they have utilitarian grounds as
the basis of morality. What is this basis? Procuring the greatest amount
of happiness to the greatest number. Why should I do this? Why should I
not produce the greatest unhappiness to the greatest number, if that
serves my purpose? How will utilitarians answer this question? How do
you know what is right, or what is wrong? I am impelled by my desire for
happiness, and I fulfil it, and it is in my nature; I know nothing
beyond. I have these desires, and must fulfil them; why should you
complain? Whence come all these truths about human life, about morality,
about the immortal soul, about God, about love and sympathy, about being
good, and, above all, about being unselfish?

All ethics, all human action and all human thought, hang upon this one
idea of unselfishness. The whole idea of human life can be put into that
one word, unselfishness. Why should we be unselfish? Where is the
necessity, the force, the power, of my being unselfish? You call
yourself a rational man, a utilitarian; but if you do not show me a
reason for utility, I say you are irrational. Show me the reason why I
should not be selfish. To ask one to be unselfish may be good as poetry,
but poetry is not reason. Show me a reason. Why shall I be unselfish,
and why be good? Because Mr. and Mrs. So-and-so say so does not weigh
with me. Where is the utility of my being unselfish? My utility is to be
selfish if utility means the greatest amount of happiness. What is the
answer? The utilitarian can never give it. The answer is that this world
is only one drop in an infinite ocean, one link in an infinite chain.
Where did those that preached unselfishness, and taught it to the human
race, get this idea? We know it is not instinctive; the animals, which
have instinct, do not know it. Neither is it reason; reason does not
know anything about these ideas. Whence then did they come?

We find, in studying history, one fact held in common by all the great
teachers of religion the world ever had. They all claim to have got
their truths from beyond, only many of them did not know where they got
them from. For instance, one would say that an angel came down in the
form of a human being, with wings, and said to him, "Hear, O man, this
is the message." Another says that a Deva, a bright being, appeared to
him. A third says he dreamed that his ancestor came and told him certain
things. He did not know anything beyond that. But this is common that
all claim that this knowledge has come to them from beyond, not through
their reasoning power. What does the science of Yoga teach? It teaches
that they were right in claiming that all this knowledge came to them
from beyond reasoning, but that it came from within themselves.

The Yogi teaches that the mind itself has a higher state of existence,
beyond reason, a superconscious state, and when the mind gets to that
higher state, then this knowledge, beyond reasoning, comes to man.
Metaphysical and transcendental knowledge comes to that man. This state
of going beyond reason, transcending ordinary human nature, may
sometimes come by chance to a man who does not understand its science;
he, as it were, stumbles upon it. When he stumbles upon it, he generally
interprets it as coming from outside. So this explains why an
inspiration, or transcendental knowledge, may be the same in different
countries, but in one country it will seem to come through an angel, and
in another through a Deva, and in a third through God. What does it
mean? It means that the mind brought the knowledge by its own nature,
and that the finding of the knowledge was interpreted according to the
belief and education of the person through whom it came. The real fact
is that these various men, as it were, stumbled upon this superconscious
state.

The Yogi says there is a great danger in stumbling upon this state. In a
good many cases there is the danger of the brain being deranged, and, as
a rule, you will find that all those men, however great they were, who
had stumbled upon this superconscious state without understanding it,
groped in the dark, and generally had, along with their knowledge, some
quaint superstition. They opened themselves to hallucinations. Mohammed
claimed that the Angel Gabriel came to him in a cave one day and took
him on the heavenly horse, Harak, and he visited the heavens. But with
all that, Mohammed spoke some wonderful truths. If you read the Koran,
you find the most wonderful truths mixed with superstitions. How will
you explain it? That man was inspired, no doubt, but that inspiration
was, as it were, stumbled upon. He was not a trained Yogi, and did not
know the reason of what he was doing. Think of the good Mohammed did to
the world, and think of the great evil that has been done through his
fanaticism! Think of the millions massacred through his teachings,
mothers bereft of their children, children made orphans, whole countries
destroyed, millions upon millions of people killed!

So we see this danger by studying the lives of great teachers like
Mohammed and others. Yet we find, at the same time, that they were all
inspired. Whenever a prophet got into the superconscious state by
heightening his emotional nature, he brought away from it not only some
truths, but some fanaticism also, some superstition which injured the
world as much as the greatness of the teaching helped. To get any reason
out of the mass of incongruity we call human life, we have to transcend
our reason, but we must do it scientifically, slowly, by regular
practice, and we must cast off all superstition. We must take up the
study of the superconscious state just as any other science. On reason
we must have to lay our foundation, we must follow reason as far as it
leads, and when reason fails, reason itself will show us the way to the
highest plane. When you hear a man say, "I am inspired," and then talk
irrationally, reject it. Why? Because these three states — instinct,
reason, and superconsciousness, or the unconscious, conscious, and
superconscious states — belong to one and the same mind. There are not
three minds in one man, but one state of it develops into the others.
Instinct develops into reason, and reason into the transcendental
consciousness; therefore, not one of the states contradicts the others.
Real inspiration never contradicts reason, but fulfils it. Just as you
find the great prophets saying, "I come not to destroy but to fulfil,"
so inspiration always comes to fulfil reason, and is in harmony with it.

All the different steps in Yoga are intended to bring us scientifically
to the superconscious state, or Samadhi. Furthermore, this is a most
vital point to understand, that inspiration is as much in every man's
nature as it was in that of the ancient prophets. These prophets were
not unique; they were men as you or I. They were great Yogis. They had
gained this superconsciousness, and you and I can get the same. They
were not peculiar people. The very fact that one man ever reached that
state, proves that it is possible for every man to do so. Not only is it
possible, but every man must, eventually, get to that state, and that is
religion. Experience is the only teacher we have. We may talk and reason
all our lives, but we shall not understand a word of truth, until we
experience it ourselves. You cannot hope to make a man a surgeon by
simply giving him a few books. You cannot satisfy my curiosity to see a
country by showing me a map; I must have actual experience. Maps can
only create curiosity in us to get more perfect knowledge. Beyond that,
they have no value whatever. Clinging to books only degenerates the
human mind. Was there ever a more horrible blasphemy than the statement
that all the knowledge of God is confined to this or that book? How dare
men call God infinite, and yet try to compress Him within the covers of
a little book! Millions of people have been killed because they did not
believe what the books said, because they would not see all the
knowledge of God within the covers of a book. Of course this killing and
murdering has gone by, but the world is still tremendously bound up in a
belief in books.

In order to reach the superconscious state in a scientific manner it is
necessary to pass through the various steps of Raja-Yoga I have been
teaching. After Pratyâhâra and Dhâranâ, we come to Dhyâna, meditation.
When the mind has been trained to remain fixed on a certain internal or
external location, there comes to it the power of flowing in an unbroken
current, as it were, towards that point. This state is called Dhyana.
When one has so intensified the power of Dhyana as to be able to reject
the external part of perception and remain meditating only on the
internal part, the meaning, that state is called Samadhi. The three —
Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi — together, are called Samyama. That is, if
the mind can first concentrate upon an object, and then is able to
continue in that concentration for a length of time, and then, by
continued concentration, to dwell only on the internal part of the
perception of which the object was the effect, everything comes under
the control of such a mind.

This meditative state is the highest state of existence. So long as
there is desire, no real happiness can come. It is only the
contemplative, witness-like study of objects that brings to us real
enjoyment and happiness. The animal has its happiness in the senses, the
man in his intellect, and the god in spiritual contemplation. It is only
to the soul that has attained to this contemplative state that the world
really becomes beautiful. To him who desires nothing, and does not mix
himself up with them, the manifold changes of nature are one panorama of
beauty and sublimity.

These ideas have to be understood in Dhyana, or meditation. We hear a
sound. First, there is the external vibration; second, the nerve motion
that carries it to the mind; third, the reaction from the mind, along
with which flashes the knowledge of the object which was the external
cause of these different changes from the ethereal vibrations to the
mental reactions. These three are called in Yoga, Shabda (sound), Artha
(meaning), and Jnâna (knowledge). In the language of physics and
physiology they are called the ethereal vibration, the motion in the
nerve and brain, and the mental reaction. Now these, though distinct
processes, have become mixed up in such a fashion as to become quite
indistinct. In fact, we cannot now perceive any of these, we only
perceive their combined effect, what we call the external object. Every
act of perception includes these three, and there is no reason why we
should not be able to distinguish them.

When, by the previous preparations, it becomes strong and controlled,
and has the power of finer perception, the mind should be employed in
meditation. This meditation must begin with gross objects and slowly
rise to finer and finer, until it becomes objectless. The mind should
first be employed in perceiving the external causes of sensations, then
the internal motions, and then its own reaction. When it has succeeded
in perceiving the external causes of sensations by themselves, the mind
will acquire the power of perceiving all fine material existences, all
fine bodies and forms. When it can succeed in perceiving the motions
inside by themselves, it will gain the control of all mental waves, in
itself or in others, even before they have translated themselves into
physical energy; and when he will be able to perceive the mental
reaction by itself, the Yogi will acquire the knowledge of everything,
as every sensible object, and every thought is the result of this
reaction. Then will he have seen the very foundations of his mind, and
it will be under his perfect control. Different powers will come to the
Yogi, and if he yields to the temptations of any one of these, the road
to his further progress will be barred. Such is the evil of running
after enjoyments. But if he is strong enough to reject even these
miraculous powers, he will attain to the goal of Yoga, the complete
suppression of the waves in the ocean of the mind. Then the glory of the
soul, undisturbed by the distractions of the mind, or motions of the
body, will shine in its full effulgence; and the Yogi will find himself
as he is and as he always was, the essence of knowledge, the immortal,
the all-pervading.

Samadhi is the property of every human being — nay, every animal. From
the lowest animal to the highest angel, some time or other, each one
will have to come to that state, and then, and then alone, will real
religion begin for him. Until then we only struggle towards that stage.
There is no difference now between us and those who have no religion,
because we have no experience. What is concentration good for, save to
bring us to this experience? Each one of the steps to attain Samadhi has
been reasoned out, properly adjusted, scientifically organised, and,
when faithfully practiced, will surely lead us to the desired end. Then
will all sorrows cease, all miseries vanish; the seeds for actions will
be burnt, and the soul will be free for ever.

</div>
