---
title: RAJA-YOGA IN BRIEF

---
<div>

[←](dhyana_and_samadhi.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](introduction.htm)

  

CHAPTER VIII

## RAJA-YOGA IN BRIEF

The following is a summary of Râja-Yoga freely translated from the
Kurma-Purâna.

The fire of Yoga burns the cage of sin that is around a man. Knowledge
becomes purified and Nirvâna is directly obtained. From Yoga comes
knowledge; knowledge again helps the Yogi. He who combines in himself
both Yoga and knowledge, with him the Lord is pleased. Those that
practice Mahâyoga, either once a day, or twice a day, or thrice, or
always, know them to be gods. Yoga is divided into two parts. One is
called Abhâva, and the other, Mahayoga. Where one's self is meditated
upon as zero, and bereft of quality, that is called Abhava. That in
which one sees the self as full of bliss and bereft of all impurities,
and one with God, is called Mahayoga. The Yogi, by each one, realises
his Self. The other Yogas that we read and hear of, do not deserve to be
ranked with the excellent Mahayoga in which the Yogi finds himself and
the whole universe as God. This is the highest of all Yogas.

Yama, Niyama, Âsana, Prânâyâma, Pratyâhâra, Dhârâna, Dhyâna, and Samâdhi
are the steps in Raja-Yoga, of which non-injury, truthfulness,
non-covetousness, chastity, not receiving anything from another are
called Yama. This purifies the mind, the Chitta. Never producing pain by
thought, word, and deed, in any living being, is what is called Ahimsâ,
non-injury. There is no virtue higher than non-injury. There is no
happiness higher than what a man obtains by this attitude of
non-offensiveness, to all creation. By truth we attain fruits of work.
Through truth everything is attained. In truth everything is
established. Relating facts as they are — this is truth. Not taking
others' goods by stealth or by force, is called Asteya,
non-covetousness. Chastity in thought, word, and deed, always, and in
all conditions, is what is called Brahmacharya. Not receiving any
present from anybody, even when one is suffering terribly, is what is
called Aparigraha. The idea is, when a man receives a gift from another,
his heart becomes impure, he becomes low, he loses his independence, he
becomes bound and attached.

The following are helps to success in Yoga and are called Niyama or
regular habits and observances; Tapas, austerity; Svâdhyâya, study;
Santosha, contentment; Shaucha, purity; Ishvara-pranidhâna, worshipping
God. Fasting, or in other ways controlling the body, is called physical
Tapas. Repeating the Vedas and other Mantras, by which the Sattva
material in the body is purified, is called study, Svadhyaya. There are
three sorts of repetitions of these Mantras. One is called the verbal,
another semi-verbal, and the third mental. The verbal or audible is the
lowest, and the inaudible is the highest of all. The repetition which is
loud is the verbal; the next one is where only the lips move, but no
sound is heard. The inaudible repetition of the Mantra, accompanied with
the thinking of its meaning, is called the "mental repetition," and is
the highest. The sages have said that there are two sorts of
purification, external and internal. The purification of the body by
water, earth, or other materials is the external purification, as
bathing etc. Purification of the mind by truth, and by all the other
virtues, is what is called internal purification. Both are necessary. It
is not sufficient that a man should be internally pure and externally
dirty. When both are not attainable the internal purity is the better,
but no one will be a Yogi until he has both. Worship of God is by
praise, by thought, by devotion.

We have spoken about Yama and Niyama. The next is Asana (posture). The
only thing to understand about it is leaving the body free, holding the
chest, shoulders, and head straight. Then comes Pranayama. Prana means
the vital forces in one's own body, Âyâma means controlling them. There
are three sorts of Pranayama, the very simple, the middle, and the very
high. Pranayama is divided into three parts: filling, restraining, and
emptying. When you begin with twelve seconds it is the lowest Pranayama;
when you begin with twenty-four seconds it is the middle Pranayama; that
Pranayama is the best which begins with thirty-six seconds. In the
lowest kind of Pranayama there is perspiration, in the medium kind,
quivering of the body, and in the highest Pranayama levitation of the
body and influx of great bliss. There is a Mantra called the Gâyatri. It
is a very holy verse of the Vedas. "We meditate on the glory of that
Being who has produced this universe; may He enlighten our minds." Om is
joined to it at the beginning and the end. In one Pranayama repeat three
Gayatris. In all books they speak of Pranayama being divided into
Rechaka (rejecting or exhaling), Puraka (inhaling), and Kurnbhaka
(restraining, stationary). The Indriyas, the organs of the senses, are
acting outwards and coming in contact with external objects. Bringing
them under the control of the will is what is called Pratyahara or
gathering towards oneself. Fixing the mind on the lotus of the heart, or
on the centre of the head, is what is called Dharana. Limited to one
spot, making that spot the base, a particular kind of mental waves
rises; these are not swallowed up by other kinds of waves, but by
degrees become prominent, while all the others recede and finally
disappear. Next the multiplicity of these waves gives place to unity and
one wave only is left in the mind. This is Dhyana, meditation. When no
basis is necessary, when the whole of the mind has become one wave,
one-formedness, it is called Samadhi. Bereft of all help from places and
centres, only the meaning of the thought is present. If the mind can be
fixed on the centre for twelve seconds it will be a Dharana, twelve such
Dharanas will be a Dhyana, and twelve such Dhyanas will be a Samadhi.

Where there is fire, or in water or on ground which is strewn with dry
leaves, where there are many ant-hills, where there are wild animals, or
danger, where four streets meet, where there is too much noise, where
there are many wicked persons, Yoga must not be practiced. This applies
more particularly to India. Do not practice when the body feels very
lazy or ill, or when the mind is very miserable and sorrowful. Go to a
place which is well hidden, and where people do not come to disturb you.
Do not choose dirty places. Rather choose beautiful scenery, or a room
in your own house which is beautiful. When you practice, first salute
all the ancient Yogis, and your own Guru, and God, and then begin.

Dhyana is spoken of, and a few examples are given of what to meditate
upon. Sit straight, and look at the tip of your nose. Later on we shall
come to know how that concentrates the mind, how by controlling the two
optic nerves one advances a long way towards the control of the arc of
reaction, and so to the control of the will. Here are a few specimens of
meditation. Imagine a lotus upon the top of the head, several inches up,
with virtue as its centre, and knowledge as its stalk. The eight petals
of the lotus are the eight powers of the Yogi. Inside, the stamens and
pistils are renunciation. If the Yogi refuses the external powers he
will come to salvation. So the eight petals of the lotus are the eight
powers, but the internal stamens and pistils are extreme renunciation,
the renunciation of all these powers. Inside of that lotus think of the
Golden One, the Almighty, the Intangible, He whose name is Om, the
Inexpressible, surrounded with effulgent light. Meditate on that.
Another meditation is given. Think of a space in your heart, and in the
midst of that space think that a flame is burning. Think of that flame
as your own soul and inside the flame is another effulgent light, and
that is the Soul of your soul, God. Meditate upon that in the heart.
Chastity, non-injury, forgiving even the greatest enemy, truth, faith in
the Lord, these are all different Vrittis. Be not afraid if you are not
perfect in all of these; work, they will come. He who has given up all
attachment, all fear, and all anger, he whose whole soul has gone unto
the Lord, he who has taken refuge in the Lord, whose heart has become
purified, with whatsoever desire he comes to the Lord, He will grant
that to him. Therefore worship Him through knowledge, love, or
renunciation.

"He who hates none, who is the friend of all, who is merciful to all,
who has nothing of his own, who is free from egoism, who is even-minded
in pain and pleasure, who is forbearing, who is always satisfied, who
works always in Yoga, whose self has become controlled, whose will is
firm, whose mind and intellect are given up unto Me, such a one is My
beloved Bhakta. From whom comes no disturbance, who cannot be disturbed
by others, who is free from joy, anger, fear, and anxiety, such a one is
My beloved. He who does not depend on anything, who is pure and active,
who does not care whether good comes or evil, and never becomes
miserable, who has given up all efforts for himself; who is the same in
praise or in blame, with a silent, thoughtful mind, blessed with what
little comes in his way, homeless, for the whole world is his home, and
who is steady in his ideas, such a one is My beloved Bhakta." Such alone
become Yogis.

\*          \*          \*         \*

There was a great god-sage called Nârada. Just as there are sages among
mankind, great Yogis, so there are great Yogis among the gods. Narada
was a good Yogi, and very great. He travelled everywhere. One day he was
passing through a forest, and saw a man who had been meditating until
the white ants had built a huge mound round his body — so long had he
been sitting in that position. He said to Narada, "Where are you going?"
Narada replied, "I am going to heaven." "Then ask God when He will be
merciful to me; when I shall attain freedom." Further on Narada saw
another man. He was jumping about, singing, dancing, and said, "Oh,
Narada, where are you going?" His voice and his gestures were wild.
Narada said, "I am going to heaven." "Then, ask when I shall be free."
Narada went on. In the course of time he came again by the same road,
and there was the man who had been meditating with the ant-hill round
him. He said, "Oh, Narada, did you ask the Lord about me?" "Oh, yes."
"What did He say?" "The Lord told me that you would attain freedom in
four more births." Then the man began to weep and wail, and said, "I
have meditated until an ant-hill has grown around me, and I have four
more births yet!" Narada went to the other man. "Did you ask my
question?" "Oh, yes. Do you see this tamarind tree? I have to tell you
that as many leaves as there are on that tree, so many times, you shall
be born, and then you shall attain freedom." The man began to dance for
joy, and said, "I shall have freedom after such a short time!" A voice
came, "My child, you will have freedom this minute." That was the reward
for his perseverance. He was ready to work through all those births,
nothing discouraged him. But the first man felt that even four more
births were too long. Only perseverance, like that of the man who was
willing to wait aeons brings about the highest result.

</div>
