---
title: INTRODUCTION

---
<div>

[←](raja-yoga_in_brief.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm) /
[Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm)
/ [→](concentration_its_spiritual_uses.htm)

  

PATANJALI'S YOGA APHORISMS

## INTRODUCTION

Before going into the Yoga aphorisms I shall try to discuss one great
question, upon which rests the whole theory of religion for the Yogis.
It seems the consensus of opinion of the great minds of the world, and
it has been nearly demonstrated by researches into physical nature, that
we are the outcome and manifestation of an absolute condition, back of
our present relative condition, and are going forward, to return to that
absolute. This being granted, the question is: Which is better, the
absolute or this state? There are not wanting people who think that this
manifested state is the highest state of man. Thinkers of great calibre
are of the opinion that we are manifestations of undifferentiated being
and the differentiated state is higher than the absolute. They imagine
that in the absolute there cannot be any quality; that it must be
insensate, dull, and lifeless; that only this life can be enjoyed, and,
therefore, we must cling to it. First of all we want to inquire into
other solutions of life. There was an old solution that man after death
remained the same; that all his good sides, minus his evil sides,
remained for ever. Logically stated, this means that man's goal is the
world; this world carried a stage higher, and eliminated of its evils,
is the state they call heaven. This theory, on the face of it, is absurd
and puerile, because it cannot be. There cannot be good without evil,
nor evil without good. To live in a world where it is all good and no
evil is what Sanskrit logicians call a "dream in the air". Another
theory in modern times has been presented by several schools, that man's
destiny is to go on always improving, always struggling towards, but
never reaching the goal. This statement, though apparently very nice, is
also absurd, because there is no such thing as motion in a straight
line. Every motion is in a circle. If you can take up a stone, and
project it into space, and then live long enough, that stone, if it
meets with no obstruction, will come back exactly to your hand. A
straight line, infinitely projected must end in a circle. Therefore,
this idea that the destiny of man is progressing ever forward and
forward, and never stopping, is absurd. Although extraneous to the
subject, I may remark that this idea explains the ethical theory that
you must not hate, and must love. Because, just as in the case of
electricity the modern theory is that the power leaves the dynamo and
completes the circle back to the dynamo, so with hate and love; they
must come back to the source. Therefore do not hate anybody, because
that hatred which comes out from you, must, in the long run, come back
to you. If you love, that love will come back to you, completing the
circle. It is as certain as can be, that every bit of hatred that goes
out of the heart of a man comes back to him in full force, nothing can
stop it; similarly every impulse of love comes back to him.

On other and practical grounds we see that the theory of eternal
progression is untenable, for destruction is the goal of everything
earthly. All our struggles and hopes and fears and joys, what will they
lead to? We shall all end in death. Nothing is so certain as this.
Where, then, is this motion in a straight line — this infinite
progression? It is only going out to a distance, and coming back to the
centre from which it started. See how, from nebulae, the sun, moon, and
stars are produced; then they dissolve and go back to nebulae. The same
is being done everywhere. The plant takes material from the earth,
dissolves, and gives it back. Every form in this world is taken out of
surrounding atoms and goes back to these atoms. It cannot be that the
same law acts differently in different places. Law is uniform. Nothing
is more certain than that. If this is the law of nature, it also applies
to thought. Thought will dissolve and go back to its origin. Whether we
will it or not, we shall have to return to our origin which is called
God or Absolute. We all came from God, and we are all bound to go back
to God. Call that by any name you like, God, Absolute, or Nature, the
fact remains the same. "From whom all this universe comes out, in whom
all that is born lives, and to whom all returns." This is one fact that
is certain. Nature works on the same plan; what is being worked out in
one sphere is repeated in millions of spheres. What you see with the
planets, the same will it be with this earth, with men, and with all.
The huge wave is a mighty compound of small waves, it may be of
millions; the life of the whole world is a compound of millions of
little lives, and the death of the whole world is the compound of the
deaths of these millions of little beings.

Now the question arises: Is going back to God the higher state, or not?
The philosophers of the Yoga school emphatically answer that it is. They
say that man's present state is a degeneration. There is not one
religion on the face of the earth which says that man is an improvement.
The idea is that his beginning is perfect and pure, that he degenerates
until he cannot degenerate further, and that there must come a time when
he shoots upward again to complete the circle. The circle must be
described. However low he may go, he must ultimately take the upward
bend and go back to the original source, which is God. Man comes from
God in the beginning, in the middle he becomes man, and in the end he
goes back to God. This is the method of putting it in the dualistic
form. The monistic form is that man is God, and goes back to Him again.
If our present state is the higher one, then why is there so much horror
and misery, and why is there an end to it? If this is the higher state,
why does it end? That which corrupts and degenerates cannot be the
highest state. Why should it be so diabolical, so unsatisfying? It is
only excusable, inasmuch as through it we are taking a higher groove; we
have to pass through it in order to become regenerate again. Put a seed
into the ground and it disintegrates, dissolves after a time, and out of
that dissolution comes the splendid tree. Every soul must disintegrate
to become God. So it follows that the sooner we get out of this state we
call "man" the better for us. Is it by committing suicide that we get
out of this state? Not at all. That will be making it worse. Torturing
ourselves, or condemning the world, is not the way to get out. We have
to pass through the Slough of Despond, and the sooner we are through,
the better. It must always be remembered that man-state is not the
highest state.

The really difficult part to understand is that this state, the
Absolute, which has been called the highest, is not, as some fear, that
of the zoophyte or of the stone. According to them, there are only two
states of existence, one of the stone, and the other of thought. What
right have they to limit existence to these two? Is there not something
infinitely superior to thought? The vibrations of light, when they are
very low, we do not see; when they become a little more intense, they
become light to us; when they become still more intense, we do not see
them — it is dark to us. Is the darkness in the end the same darkness as
in the beginning? Certainly not; they are different as the two poles. Is
the thoughtlessness of the stone the same as the thoughtlessness of God?
Certainly not. God does not think; He does not reason. Why should He? Is
anything unknown to Him, that He should reason? The stone cannot reason;
God does not. Such is the difference. These philosophers think it is
awful if we go beyond thought; they find nothing beyond thought.

There are much higher states of existence beyond reasoning. It is really
beyond the intellect that the first state of religious life is to be
found. When you step beyond thought and intellect and all reasoning,
then you have made the first step towards God; and that is the beginning
of life. What is commonly called life is but an embryo state.

The next question will be: What proof is there that the state beyond
thought and reasoning is the highest state? In the first place, all the
great men of the world, much greater than those that only talk, men who
moved the world, men who never thought of any selfish ends whatever,
have declared that this life is but a little stage on the way towards
Infinity which is beyond. In the second place, they not only say so, but
show the way to every one, explain their methods, that all can follow in
their steps. In the third place, there is no other way left. There is no
other explanation. Taking for granted that there is no higher state, why
are we going through this circle all the time; what reason can explain
the world? The sensible world will be the limit to our knowledge if we
cannot go farther, if we must not ask for anything more. This is what is
called agnosticism. But what reason is there to believe in the testimony
of the senses? I would call that man a true agnostic who would stand
still in the street and die. If reason is all in all, it leaves us no
place to stand on this side of nihilism. If a man is agnostic of
everything but money, fame, and name, he is only a fraud. Kant has
proved beyond all doubt that we cannot penetrate beyond the tremendous
dead wall called reason. But that is the very first idea upon which all
Indian thought takes its stand, and dares to seek, and succeeds in
finding something higher than reason, where alone the explanation of the
present state is to be found. This is the value of the study of
something that will take us beyond the world. "Thou art our father, and
wilt take us to the other shore of this ocean of ignorance." That is the
science of religion, nothing else.

</div>
