---
title: INDEPENDENCE

---
<div>

[←](powers.htm) [Home](../../../index.htm) /
[Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm) / [Volume
1](../complete_works_v1_contents.htm)
/ [Raja-Yoga](raja-yoga_contents.htm) / [→](appendix.htm)

  

PATANJALI'S YOGA APHORISMS

CHAPTER IV

## INDEPENDENCE

जन्मौषधि-मन्त्र-तपः-समाधिजाः सिद्धयः ॥१॥

1\. The Siddhis (powers) are attained by birth, chemical means, power of
words, mortification, or concentration.

Sometimes a man is born with the Siddhis, powers, of course, those he
had earned in his previous incarnation. This time he is born, as it
were, to enjoy the fruits of them. It is said of Kapila, the great
father of the Sânkhya philosophy, that he was a born Siddha, which means
literally a man who has attained to success.

The Yogis claim that these powers can be gained by chemical means. All
of you know that chemistry originally began as alchemy; men went in
search of the philosopher's stone and elixirs of life, and so forth. In
India there was a sect called the Râsâyanas. Their idea was that
ideality, knowledge, spirituality, and religion were all very right, but
that the body was the only instrument by which to attain to all these.
If the body came to an end every now and again, it would take so much
more time to attain to the goal. For instance, a man wants to practice
Yoga, or wants to become spiritual. Before he has advanced very far he
dies. Then he takes another body and begins again, then dies, and so on.
In this way much time will be lost in dying and being born again. If the
body could be made strong and perfect, so that it would get rid of birth
and death, we should have so much more time to become spiritual. So
these Rasayanas say, first make the body very strong. They claim that
this body can be made immortal. Their idea is that if the mind
manufactures the body, and if it be true that each mind is only one
outlet to the infinite energy, there should be no limit to each outlet
getting any amount of power from outside. Why is it impossible to keep
our bodies all the time? We have to manufacture all the bodies that we
ever have. As soon as this body dies, we shall have to manufacture
another. If we can do that, why cannot we do it just here and now,
without getting out of the present body? The theory is perfectly
correct. If it is possible that we live after death, and make other
bodies, why is it impossible that we should have the power of making
bodies here, without entirely dissolving this body, simply changing it
continually? They also thought that in mercury and in sulphur was hidden
the most wonderful power, and that by certain preparations of these a
man could keep the body as long as he liked. Others believed that
certain drugs could bring powers, such as flying through the air. Many
of the most wonderful medicines of the present day we owe to the
Rasayanas, notably the use of metals in medicine. Certain sects of Yogis
claim that many of their principal teachers are still living in their
old bodies. Patanjali, the great authority on Yoga, does not deny this.

*The power of words*. There are certain sacred words called Mantras,
which have power, when repeated under proper conditions, produce these
extraordinary powers. We are living in the midst of such a mass of
miracles, day and night, that we do not think anything of them. There is
no limit to man's power, the power of words and the power of mind.

*Mortification*. You find that in every religion mortification and
asceticisms have been practised. In these religious conceptions the
Hindus always go to the extremes. You will find men with their hands up
all their lives, until their hands wither and die. Men keep standing,
day and night, until their feet swell, and if they live, the legs become
so stiff in this position that they can no more bend them, but have to
stand all their lives. I once saw a man who had kept his hands raised in
this way, and I asked him how it felt when he did it first. He said it
was awful torture. It was such torture that he had to go to a river and
put himself in water, and that allayed the pain for a little while.
After a month he did not suffer much. Through such practices powers
(Siddhis) can be attained.

*Concentration*. Concentration is Samâdhi, and that is Yoga proper; that
is the principal theme of this science, and it is the highest means. The
preceding ones are only secondary, and we cannot attain to the highest
through them. Samadhi is the means through which we can gain anything
and everything, mental, moral, or spiritual.

जात्यन्तरपरिणामः प्रकृत्यापूरात् ॥२॥

2\. The change into another species is by the filling in of nature.

Patanjali has advanced the proposition that these powers come by birth,
sometimes by chemical means, or through mortification. He also admits
that this body can be kept for any length of time. Now he goes on to
state what is the cause of the change of the body into another species.
He says this is done by the filling in of nature, which he explains in
the next aphorism.

निमित्तमप्रयोजकं प्रकृतीनां वरणभेदस्तु ततः क्षेत्रिकवत् ॥३॥

3\. Good and bad deeds are not the direct causes in the transformations
of nature, but they act as breakers of obstacles to the evolutions of
nature: as a farmer breaks the obstacles to the course of water, which
then runs down by its own nature.

The water for irrigation of fields is already in the canal, only shut in
by gates. The farmer opens these gates, and the water flows in by
itself, by the law of gravitation. So all progress and power are already
in every man; perfection is man's nature, only it is barred in and
prevented from taking its proper course. If anyone can take the bar off,
in rushes nature. Then the man attains the powers which are his already.
Those we call wicked become saints, as soon as the bar is broken and
nature rushes in. It is nature that is driving us towards perfection,
and eventually she will bring everyone there. All these practices and
struggles to become religious are only negative work, to take off the
bars, and open the doors to that perfection which is our birthright, our
nature.

Today the evolution theory of the ancient Yogis will be better
understood in the light of modern research. And yet the theory of the
Yogis is a better explanation. The two causes of evolution advanced by
the moderns, viz sexual selection and survival of the fittest, are
inadequate. Suppose human knowledge to have advanced so much as to
eliminate competition, both from the function of acquiring physical
sustenance and of acquiring a mate. Then, according to the moderns,
human progress will stop and the race will die. The result of this
theory is to furnish every oppressor with an argument to calm the qualms
of conscience. Men are not lacking, who, posing as philosophers, want to
kill out all wicked and incompetent persons (they are, of course, the
only judges of competency) and thus preserve the human race! But the
great ancient evolutionist, Patanjali, declares that the true secret of
evolution is the manifestation of the perfection which is already in
every being; that this perfection has been barred and the infinite tide
behind is struggling to express itself. These struggles and competitions
are but the results of our ignorance, because we do not know the proper
way to unlock the gate and let the water in. This infinite tide behind
must express itself; it is the cause of all manifestation. Competitions
for life or sex-gratification are only momentary, unnecessary,
extraneous effects, caused by ignorance. Even when all competition has
ceased, this perfect nature behind will make us go forward until
everyone has become perfect. Therefore there is no reason to believe
that competition is necessary to progress. In the animal the man was
suppressed, but as soon as the door was opened, out rushed man. So in
man there is the potential god, kept in by the locks and bars of
ignorance. When knowledge breaks these bars, the god becomes manifest.

निर्माणचित्तान्यस्मितामात्रात् ॥४॥

4\. From egoism alone proceed the created minds.

The theory of Karma is that we suffer for our good or bad deeds, and the
whole scope of philosophy is to reach the glory of man. All the
scriptures sing the glory of man, of the soul, and then, in the same
breath, they preach Karma. A good deed brings such a result, and a bad
deed such another, but if the soul can be acted upon by a good or a bad
deed, the soul amounts to nothing. Bad deeds put a bar to the
manifestation of the nature of the Purusha; good deeds take the
obstacles off, and the glory of the Purusha becomes manifest. The
Purusha itself is never changed. Whatever you do never destroys your own
glory, your own nature, because the soul cannot be acted upon by
anything, only a veil is spread before it, hiding its perfection.

With a view to exhausting their Karma quickly, Yogis create Kâya-vyuha,
or groups of bodies, in which to work it out. For all these bodies they
create minds from egoism. These are called "created minds", in
contradistinction to their original minds.

प्रवृत्तिभेदे प्रयोजकं चित्तमेकमनेकेषाम् ॥५॥

5\. Though the activities of the different created minds are various,
the one original mind is the controller of them all.

These different minds, which act in these different bodies are called
made-minds, and the bodies, made-bodies; that is, manufactured bodies
and minds. Matter and mind are like two inexhaustible storehouses. When
you become a Yogi, you learn the secret of their control. It was yours
all the time, but you had forgotten it. When you become a Yogi, you
recollect it. Then you can do anything with it, manipulate it in every
way you like. The material out of which a manufactured mind is created
is the very same material which is used for the macrocosm. It is not
that mind is one thing and matter another, they are different aspects of
the same thing. Asmitâ, egoism, is the material, the fine state of
existence out of which these made-minds and made-bodies of the Yogi are
manufactured. Therefore, when the Yogi has found the secret of these
energies of nature, he can manufacture any number of bodies or minds out
of the substance known as egoism.

तत्र ध्यानजमनाशयम् ॥६॥

6\. Among the various Chittas, that which is attained by Samadhi is
desireless.

Among all the various minds that we see in various men, only that mind
which has attained to Samadhi, perfect concentration, is the highest. A
man who has attained certain powers through medicines, or through words,
or through mortifications, still has desires, but that man who has
attained to Samadhi through concentration is alone free from all
desires.

कर्माशुक्लाकृष्णं योगिनस्त्रिविधमितरेषाम् ॥७॥

7\. Works are neither black nor white for the Yogis; for others they are
threefold — black, white, and mixed.

When the Yogi has attained perfection, his actions, and the Karma
produced by those actions, do not bind him, because he did not desire
them. He just works on; he works to do good, and he does good, but does
not care for the result, and it will not come to him. But, for ordinary
men, who have not attained to the highest state, works are of three
kinds, black (evil actions), white (good actions), and mixed.

ततस्तद्विपाकानुगुणानामेवाभिव्यक्तिर्वासनानाम् ॥८॥

8\. From these threefold works are manifested in each state only those
desires (which are) fitting to that state alone. (The others are held in
abeyance for the time being.)

Suppose I have made the three kinds of Karma, good, bad, and mixed, and
suppose I die and become a god in heaven. The desires in a god body are
not the same as the desires in a human body; the god body neither eats
nor drinks. What becomes of my past unworked Karmas which produce as
their effect the desire to eat and drink? Where would these Karmas go
when I become a god? The answer is that desires can only manifest
themselves in proper environments. Only those desires will come out for
which the environment is fitted; the rest will remain stored up. In this
life we have many godly desires, many human desires, many animal
desires. If I take a god body, only the good desires will come up,
because for them the environments are suitable. And if I take an animal
body, only the animal desires will come up, and the good desires will
wait. What does this show? That by means of environment we can check
these desires. Only that Karma which is suited to and fitted for the
environments will come out. This shows that the power of environment is
the great check to control even Karma itself.

जाति-देश-काल-व्यवहितानामप्यानन्तर्यं स्मृतिसंस्कारयोरेकरूपत्वात् ॥९॥

9\. There is consecutiveness in desires, even though separated by
species, space, and time, there being identification of memory and
impressions.

Experiences becoming fine become impressions; impressions revivified
become memory. The word memory here includes unconscious co-ordination
of past experiences, reduced to impressions, with present conscious
action. In each body, the group of impressions acquired in a similar
body only becomes the cause of action in that body. The experiences of a
dissimilar body are held in abeyance. Each body acts as if it were a
descendant of a series of bodies of that species only; thus,
consecutiveness of desires is not to be broken.

तासामनादित्वं चाशिषो नित्यत्वात् ॥१०॥

l0. Thirst for happiness being eternal, desires are without beginning.

All experience is preceded by desire for happiness. There was no
beginning of experience, as each fresh experience is built upon the
tendency generated by past experience; therefore desire is without
beginning.

हेतुफलाश्रयालम्बनैः संगृहीतत्वादेषामभावे तदभावः ॥११॥

11\. Being held together by cause, effect, support, and objects, in the
absence of these is its absence.

Desires are held together by cause and effect; (The causes are the
"pain-bearing obstructions" ([II.
3](concentration_its_practice.htm#ii_3)) and actions ([IV.
7](independence.htm#iv_7)), and the effects are "species, life, and
experience of pleasure and pain" ([II.
13](concentration_its_practice.htm#ii_13)). — Ed.) if a desire has been
raised, it does not die without producing its effect. Then, again, the
mind-stuff is the great storehouse, the support of all past desires
reduced to Samskara form; until they have worked themselves out, they
will not die. Moreover, so long as the senses receive the external
objects, fresh desires will arise. If it be possible to get rid of the
cause, effect, support, and objects of desire, then alone it will
vanish.

अतीतानागतं स्वरूपतोऽस्त्यध्वभेदाद्धर्माणाम् ॥१२॥

12\. The past and future exist in their own nature, qualities having
different ways.

The idea is that existence never comes out of nonexistence. The past and
future, though not existing in a manifested form, yet exist in a fine
form.

ते व्यक्त-सूक्ष्मा गुणात्मानः ॥१३॥

13\. They are manifested or fine, being of the nature of the Gunas.

The Gunas are the three substances, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, whose
gross state is the sensible universe. Past and future arise from the
different modes of manifestation of these Gunas.

परिणामैकत्वाद्वस्तुतत्त्वम् ॥१४॥

14\. The unity in things is from the unity in changes.

Though there are three substances, their changes being co-ordinated, all
objects have their unity.

वस्तुसाम्ये चित्तभेदात्तयोर्विभक्तः पन्थाः ॥१५॥

15\. Since perception and desire vary with regard to the same object,
mind and object are of different nature.

That is, there is an objective world independent of our minds. This is a
refutation of Buddhistic Idealism. Since different people look at the
same thing differently, it cannot be a mere imagination of any
particular individual.

(There is an additional aphorism here in some editions:

न चैकचित्ततन्त्रं वस्तु तदप्रमाणकं तदा किं स्यात् ॥

"The object cannot be said to be dependent on a single mind. There being
no proof of its existence, it would then become nonexistent."

If the perception of an object were the only criterion of its existence,
then when the mind is absorbed in anything or is in Samadhi, it would
not be perceived by anybody and might as well be said to be
non-existent. This is an undesirable conclusion. — Ed.)

तदुपरागापेक्षित्वाच्चित्तस्य वस्तु ज्ञाताज्ञातम् ॥१६॥

16\. Things are known on unknown to the mind, being dependent on the
colouring which they give to the mind.

सदा ज्ञाताश्चित्तवृत्तयस्तत्प्रभोः पुरुषस्यापरिणामित्वात् ॥१७॥

17\. The states of the mind are always known, because the lord of the
mind, the Purusha, is unchangeable.

The whole gist of this theory is that the universe is both mental and
material. Both of these are in a continuous state of flux. What is this
book? It is a combination of molecules in constant change. One lot is
going out, and another coming in; it is a whirlpool, but what makes the
unity? What makes it the same book? The changes are rhythmical; in
harmonious order they are sending impressions to my mind, and these
pieced together make a continuous picture, although the parts are
continuously changing. Mind itself is continuously changing. The mind
and body are like two layers in the same substance, moving at different
rates of speed. Relatively, one being slower and the other quicker, we
can distinguish between the two motions. For instance, a train is in
motion, and a carriage is moving alongside it. It is possible to find
the motion of both these to a certain extent. But still something else
is necessary. Motion can only be perceived when there is something else
which is not moving. But when two or three things are relatively moving,
we first perceive the motion of the faster one, and then that of the
slower ones. How is the mind to perceive? It is also in a flux.
Therefore another thing is necessary which moves more slowly, then you
must get to something in which the motion is still slower, and so on,
and you will find no end. Therefore logic compels you to stop somewhere.
You must complete the series by knowing something which never changes.
Behind this never-ending chain of motion is the Purusha, the changeless,
the colourless, the pure. All these impressions are merely reflected
upon it, as a magic lantern throws images upon a screen, without in any
way tarnishing it.

न तत् स्वाभासं दृश्यत्वात् ॥१८॥

18\. The mind is not self-luminous, being an object.

Tremendous power is manifested everywhere in nature, but it is not
self-luminous, not essentially intelligent. The Purusha alone is
self-luminous, and gives its light to everything. It is the power of the
Purusha that is percolating through all matter and force.

एकसमये चोभयानवधारणम् ॥१९॥

19\. From its being unable to cognise both at the same time.

If the mind were self-luminous it would be able to cognise itself and
its objects at the same time, which it cannot. When it cognises the
object, it cannot reflect on itself. Therefore the Purusha is
self-luminous, and the mind is not.

चित्तान्तरदृश्ये बुद्धिबुद्धेरतिप्रसङ्गः स्मृतिसङ्करश्च ॥२०॥

20\. Another cognising mind being assumed, there will be no end to such
assumptions, and confusion of memory will be the result.

Let us suppose there is another mind which cognises the ordinary mind,
then there will have to be still another to cognise the former, and so
there will be no end to it. It will result in confusion of memory, there
will be no storehouse of memory.

चितेरप्रतिसंक्रमायास्तदाकारापत्तौ स्वबुद्धि-संवेदनम् ॥२१॥

21\. The essence of knowledge (the Purusha) being unchangeable, when the
mind takes its form, it becomes conscious.

Patanjali says this to make it more clear that knowledge is not a
quality of the Purusha. When the mind comes near the Purusha it is
reflected, as it were, upon the mind, and the mind, for the time being,
becomes knowing and seems as if it were itself the Purusha.

द्रष्टृदृश्योपरक्तं चित्तं सर्वार्थम् ॥२२॥

22\. Coloured by the seer and the seen the mind is able to understand
everything.

On one side of the mind the external world, the seen, is being
reflected, and on the other, the seer is being reflected. Thus comes the
power of all knowledge to the mind.

तदसंख्येयवासनाभिश्चित्रमपि परार्थं संहत्यकारित्वात् ॥२३॥

23\. The mind, though variegated by innumerable desires, acts for
another (the Purusha), because it acts in combination.

The mind is a compound of various things and therefore it cannot work
for itself. Everything that is a combination in this world has some
object for that combination, some third thing for which this combination
is going on. So this combination of the mind is for the Purusha.

विशेषदर्शिन आत्मभाव-भावनाविनिवृत्तिः ॥२४॥

24\. For the discriminating, the perception of the mind as Atman ceases.

Through discrimination the Yogi knows that the Purusha is not mind.

तदा विवेकनिम्नं कैवल्यप्राग्भावं चित्तम् ॥२५॥

25\. Then, bent on discriminating, the mind attains the previous state
of Kaivalya (isolation). (There is another reading —
कैवल्यप्राग्भारं।  The meaning then would be: "Then the mind becomes
deep in discrimination and gravitates towards Kaivalya." — Ed.)

Thus the practice of Yoga leads to discriminating power, to clearness of
vision. The veil drops from the eyes, and we see things as they are. We
find that nature is a compound, and is showing the panorama for the
Purusha, who is the witness; that nature is not the Lord, that all the
combinations of nature are simply for the sake of showing these
phenomena to the Purusha, the enthroned king within. When discrimination
comes by long practice, fear ceases, and the mind attains isolation.

तच्छिद्रेषु प्रत्ययान्तराणि संस्कारेभ्यः ॥२६॥

26\. The thoughts that arise as obstructions to that are from
impressions.

All the various ideas that arise, making us believe that we require
something external to make us happy, are obstructions to that
perfection. The Purusha is happiness and blessedness by its own nature.
But that knowledge is covered over by past impressions. These
impressions have to work themselves out.

हानमेषां क्लेशवदुक्तम् ॥२७॥

27\. Their destruction is in the same manner as of ignorance, egoism,
etc., as said before ([II. 10](concentration_its_practice.htm#ii_10)).

प्रसंख्यानेऽप्यकुसीदस्य सर्वथा विवेकख्यातेर्धर्ममेघः समाधिः ॥२८॥

28\. Even when arriving at the right discriminating knowledge of the
essences, he who gives up the fruits, unto him comes, as the result of
perfect domination, the Samadhi called the cloud of virtue.

When the Yogi has attained to this discrimination, all the powers
mentioned in the last chapter come to him, but the true Yogi rejects
them all. Unto him comes a peculiar knowledge, a particular light,
called the Dharma-megha, the cloud of virtue. All the great prophets of
the world whom history has recorded had this. They had found the whole
foundation of knowledge within themselves. Truth to them had become
real. Peace and calmness, and perfect purity became their own nature,
after they had given up the vanities of powers.

ततः क्लेशकर्मनिवृत्तिः ॥२९॥

29\. From that comes cessation of pain and works.

When that cloud of virtue has come, then no more is there fear of
falling, nothing can drag the Yogi down. No more will there be evils for
him. No more pains.

तदा सर्वावरणमलापेतस्य ज्ञानस्याऽनन्त्याज्ज्ञेयमल्पम् ॥३०॥

30\. The knowledge, bereft of covering and impurities, becoming
infinite, the knowable becomes small.

Knowledge itself is there; its covering is gone. One of the Buddhistic
scriptures defines what is meant by the Buddha (which is the name of a
state) as infinite knowledge, infinite as the sky. Jesus attained to
that and became the Christ. All of you will attain to that state.
Knowledge becoming infinite, the knowable becomes small. The whole
universe, with all its objects of knowledge, becomes as nothing before
the Purusha. The ordinary man thinks himself very small, because to him
the knowable seems to be infinite.

ततः कृतार्थानां परिणामक्रमसमाप्तिर्गुणानाम् ॥३१॥

31\. Then are finished the successive transformations of the qualities,
they having attained the end.

Then all these various transformations of the qualities, which change
from species to species, cease for ever.

क्षणप्रतियोगी परिणामापरान्तनिर्ग्राह्यः क्रमः ॥३२॥

32\. The changes that exist in relation to moments and which are
perceived at the other end (at the end of a series) are succession.

Patanjali here defines the word succession, the changes that exist in
relation to moments. While I think, many moments pass, and with each
moment there is a change of idea, but I only perceive these changes at
the end of a series. This is called succession, but for the mind that
has realised omnipresence there is no succession. Everything has become
present for it; to it the present alone exists, the past and future are
lost. Time stands controlled, all knowledge is there in one second.
Everything is known like a flash.

पुरुषार्थशून्यानां गुणानां प्रतिप्रसवः कैवल्यं स्वरूपप्रतिष्ठा वा
चितिशक्तेरिति ॥३३॥

33\. The resolution in the inverse order of the qualities, bereft of any
motive of action for the Purusha, is Kaivalya, or it is the
establishment of the power of knowledge in its own nature.

Nature's task is done, this unselfish task which our sweet nurse,
nature, had imposed upon herself. She gently took the self-forgetting
soul by the hand, as it were, and showed him all the experiences in the
universe, all manifestations, bringing him higher and higher through
various bodies, till his lost glory came back, and he remembered his own
nature. Then the kind mother went back the same way she came, for others
who also have lost their way in the trackless desert of life. And thus
is she working, without beginning and without end. And thus through
pleasure and pain, through good and evil, the infinite river of souls is
flowing into the ocean of perfection, of self-realisation.

Glory unto those who have realised their own nature. May their blessings
be on us all!

</div>
