---
title: THE WOMEN OF INDIA

---
<div>

[Home](../../../index.htm) / [Complete-Works](../../complete_works.htm)
/ [Volume 9](../volume_9_contents.htm) / [Lectures and
Discourses](lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm) /

[←](../letters_fifth_series/227_christine.htm)

## THE WOMEN OF INDIA

(*New Discoveries*, Vol. 2, pp. 411-26.)

*The following lecture was delivered at Cambridge, December 17, 1894,
and recorded by Miss Frances Willard’s stenographer.*

*Swami Vivekananda faced bigotry in America on several issues of Indian
culture — one was the Indian woman. Naturally he sought to correct
Western misconceptions. When he lectured in his own country, however,
there was no greater advocate for improving the life of Indian women
than the Swami.*

In speaking about the women of India, ladies and gentlemen, I feel that
I am going to talk about my mothers and sisters in India to the women of
another race, many of whom have been like mothers and sisters to me. But
though, unfortunately, within very recent times there have been mouths
only to curse the women of our country, I have found that there are some
who bless them too. I have found such noble souls in this nation as Mrs.
\[Ole\] Bull and Miss \[Sarah\] Farmer and Miss \[Frances\] Willard, and
that wonderful representative of the highest aristocracy of the world,
whose life reminds me of that man of India, six hundred years before the
birth of Christ, who gave up his throne to mix with the people. Lady
Henry Somerset has been a revelation to me. I become bold when I find
such noble souls who will not curse, whose mouths are full of blessing
for me, my country, our men and women, and whose hands and hearts are
ever ready to do service to humanity.

I first intend to take a glimpse into times past of Indian history, and
we will find something unique. All of you are aware, perhaps, that you
Americans and we Hindus and this lady from Iceland \[Mrs. Sigrid
Magnusson\] are the descendants of one common ancestry known as Aryans.
Above all, we find three ideas wherever the Aryans go: the village
community, the rights of women and a joyful religion.[1](#fn1)

The first \[idea\] is the system of village communities — as we have
just heard from Mrs. Bull concerning the North. Each man was his own
\[lord?\] and owned the land. All these political institutions of the
world we now see, are the developments of those village systems. As the
Aryans went over to different countries and settled, certain
circumstances developed this institution, others that.

The next idea of the Aryans is the freedom of women. It is in the Aryan
literature that we find women in ancient times taking the same share as
men, and in no other literature of the world.

Going back to our Vedas — they are the oldest literature the world
possesses and are composed by your and my common ancestors (they were
not written in India — perhaps on the coast of the Baltic, perhaps in
Central Asia — we do not know).

Their oldest portion is composed of hymns, and these hymns are to the
gods whom the Aryans worshipped. I may be pardoned for using the word
*gods*; the literal translation is "the bright ones". These hymns are
dedicated to Fire, to the Sun, to Varuna and other deities. The titles
run: "such-and-such a sage composed this verse, dedicated to
such-and-such a deity".

In the tenth chapter comes a peculiar hymn — for the sage is a woman —
and it is dedicated to the one God who is at the background of all these
gods. All the previous hymns are spoken in the third person, as if
someone were addressing the deities. But this hymn takes a departure:
God \[as the Devi\] is speaking for herself. The pronoun used is "I". "I
am the Empress of the Universe, the Fulfiller of all prayers." (*Vide*
“Devi Sukta”, Rig-Veda 10.125)

This is the first glimpse of women's work in the Vedas. As we go on, we
find them taking a greater share — even officiating as priests. There is
not one passage throughout the whole mass of literature of the Vedas
which can be construed even indirectly as signifying that woman could
never be a priest. In fact, there are many examples of women officiating
as priests.

Then we come to the last portion of these Vedas — which is really the
religion of India — the concentrated wisdom of which has not been
surpassed even in this century. There, too, we find women preeminent. A
large portion of these books are words which have proceeded from the
mouths of women. It is there — recorded with their names and teachings.

There is that beautiful story of the great sage Yâjnavalkya, the one who
visited the kingdom of the great king Janaka. And there in that assembly
of the learned, people came to ask him questions. One man asked him,
"How am I to perform this sacrifice?" Another asked him, "How am I to
perform the other sacrifice?" And after he had answered them, there
arose a woman who said, "These are childish questions. Now, have a care:
I take these two arrows, my two questions. Answer them if you can, and
we will then call you a sage. The first is: What is the soul? The second
is: What is God?" ( Brihadâranyaka Upanishad 3.8.1.-12.)

Thus arose in India the great questions about the soul and God, and
these came from the mouth of a woman. The sage had to pass an
examination before her, and he passed well.

Coming to the next stratum of literature, our epics, we find that
education has not degenerated. Especially in the caste of princes this
ideal was most wonderfully held.

In the Vedas we find this idea of marrying — the girls chose for
themselves; so the boys. In the next stratum they are married by their
parents, except in one caste.

Even here I would ask you to look at another side. Whatever may be said
of the Hindus, they are one of the most learned races the world has ever
produced. The Hindu is the metaphysician; he applies everything to his
intellect. Everything has to be settled by astrological calculation.

The idea was that the stars govern the fate of every man and woman. Even
today when a child is born, a horoscope is cast. That determines the
character of the child. One child is born of a divine nature, another of
a human, others of lower character.

The difficulty was: If a child who was of a monster-character was united
with a child of a god-character, would they not have a tendency to
degenerate each other?

The next difficulty was: Our laws did not allow marriage within the same
clans. Not only may one not marry within his own family — or even one of
his cousins — but one must not marry into the clan of his father or even
of his mother.

A third difficulty was: If there had been leprosy or phthisis or any
such incurable disease within six generations of either bride or
bridegroom, then there must not be a marriage.

Now taking \[into account\] these three difficulties, the Brahmin says:
"If I leave it to the choice of the boy or girl to marry, the boy or
girl will be fascinated with a beautiful face. And then very likely all
these circumstances will bring ruin to the family". This is the primary
idea that governs our marriage laws, as you will find. Whether right or
wrong, there is this philosophy at the background. Prevention is better
than cure.

That misery exists in this world is because we give birth to misery. So
the whole question is how to prevent the birth of miserable children.
How far the rights of a society should extend over the individual is an
open question. But the Hindus say that the choice of marriage should not
be left in the hands of the boy or girl.

I do not mean to say that this is the best thing to do. Nor do I see
that leaving it in their hands is at all a perfect solution. I have not
found a solution yet in my own mind; nor do I see that any country has
one.

We come next to another picture. I told you that there was another
peculiar form of marriage (generally among the royalty) where the father
of the girl invited different princes and noblemen and they had an
assembly. The young lady, the daughter of the king, was borne on a sort
of chair before each one of the princes in turn. And the herald would
repeat: "This is Prince So-and-so, and these are his qualifications".
The young girl would either wait or say, "Move on". And before the next
prince, the crier would also give a description, and the girl would say,
"Move on". (All this would be arranged beforehand; she already had the
liking for somebody before this.) Then at last she would ask one of the
servants to throw the garland over the head of the man, and it would be
thrown to show he was accepted. (The last of these marriages was the
cause of the Mohammedan invasion of India.) (*Vide* [later this
chapter](#story) for the story of Samjuktâ, daughter of a Rajput prince,
who became the Queen of Delhi.) These marriages were specially reserved
for the prince caste.

The oldest Sanskrit poem in existence, the Râmâyana, has embodied the
loftiest Hindu ideal of a woman in the character of Sitâ. We have not
time to go through her life of infinite patience and goodness. We
worship her as God incarnate, and she is named before her husband, Râma.
We say not "Mr. and Mrs.", but "Mrs. and Mr." and so on, with all the
gods and goddesses, naming the woman first.

There is another peculiar conception of the Hindu. Those who have been
studying with me are aware that the central conception of Hindu
philosophy is of the Absolute; that is the background of the universe.
This Absolute Being, of whom we can predicate nothing, has Its *powers*
spoken of as *She* — that is, the real personal God in India is She.
This Shakti of the Brahman is always in the feminine gender.

Rama is considered the type of the Absolute, and Sita that of Power. We
have no time to go over all the life of Sita, but I will quote a passage
from her life that is very much suited to the ladies of this country.

The picture opens when she was in the forest with her husband, whither
they were banished. There was a female sage whom they both went to see.
Her fasts and devotions had emaciated her body.

Sita approached this sage and bowed down before her. The sage placed her
hand on the head of Sita and said: "It is a great blessing to possess a
beautiful body; you have that. It is a greater blessing to have a noble
husband; you have that. It is the greatest blessing to be perfectly
obedient to such a husband; you are that. You must be happy".

Sita replied, "Mother, I am glad that God has given me a beautiful body
and that I have so devoted a husband. But as to the third blessing, I do
not know whether I obey him or he obeys me. One thing alone I remember,
that when he took me by the hand before the sacrificial fire — whether
it was a reflec tion of the fire or whether God himself made it appear
to me — I found that I was his and he was mine. And since then, I have
found that I am the complement of his life, and he of mine".

Portions of this poem have been translated into the English language.
Sita is the ideal of a woman in India and worshipped as God incarnate.

We come now to Manu the great lawgiver. Now, in this book there is an
elaborate description of how a child should be educated. We must
remember that it was compulsory with the Aryans that a child be
educated, whatever his caste. After describing how a child should be
educated, Manu adds: "Along the same lines, the daughters are to be
educated — exactly as the boys".[2](#fn2)

I have often heard that there are other passages where women are
condemned. I admit that in our sacred books there are many passages
which condemn women as offering temptation; you can see that for
yourselves. But there are also passages that glorify women as the power
of God. And there are other passages which state that in that house
where one drop of a woman's tear falls, the gods are never pleased and
the house goes to ruin. Drinking wine, killing a woman and killing a
Brahmin are the highest crimes in the Hindu religion. I admit there are
condemnatory sentences \[in some of our books\]; but here I claim the
superiority of these Hindu books, for in the books of other races there
is only condemnation and no good word for a woman.

Next, I will come to our old dramas. Whatever the books say, the dramas
are the perfect representation of society as it then existed. In these,
which were written from four hundred years before Christ onward, we find
even universities full of both boys and girls. We would not \[now\] find
Hindu women, as they have since become cut off from higher
education.[3](#fn3) But \[at that time\], they were everywhere pretty
much the same as they are in this country — going out to the gardens and
parks to take promenades.

There is another point which I bring before you and where the Hindu
woman is still superior to all other women in the world —her rights. The
right to possess property is as absolute for women in India as for men —
and has been for thousands and thousands of years.

If you have any lawyer friend and can take up commentaries on the Hindu
law, you will find it all for yourselves. A girl may bring a million
dollars to her husband, but every dollar of that is hers. Nobody has any
right to touch one dollar of that. If the husband dies without issue,
the whole property of the husband goes to her, even if his father or
mother is living. And that has been the law from the past to the present
time. That is something which the Hindu woman has had beyond that of the
women of other countries.

The older books — or even newer books — do not prohibit the Hindu widows
from being married; it is a mistake to think so. They give them their
choice, and that is given to both men and women. The idea in our
religion is that marriage is for the weak, and I don't see any reason to
give up that idea today. They who find themselves complete — what is the
use of their marrying? And those that marry — they are given one chance.
When that chance is over, both men and women are looked down upon if
they marry again; but it is not that they are prohibited. It is nowhere
said that a widow is not to marry. The widow and widower who do not
marry are considered more spiritual.

Men, of course, break through this law and go and marry; whereas women —
they being of a higher spiritual nature — keep to the law. For instance,
our books say that eating meat is bad and sinful, but you may still eat
such-and-such a meat —mutton, for instance. I have seen thousands of men
who eat mutton, and never in my life have I seen a woman of higher caste
who eats meat of any kind. This shows that their nature is to keep the
law — keeping more towards religion. But do not judge too harshly of
Hindu men. You must try to look at the Hindu law from my position too,
for I am a Hindu man.

This non-marriage of widows gradually grew into a custom. And whenever
in India a custom becomes rigid, it is almost impossible to break
through it — just as in your country, you will find how hard it is to
break through a five-day custom of fashion. In the lower castes, except
two, the widows remarry.

There is a passage in our later law books \[which states\] that a woman
shall not read the Vedas. But they are prohibited to even a weak
Brahmin. If a Brahmin boy is not strong-minded, the law is applied to
him also. But that does not show that education is prohibited to them,
for the Vedas are not all that the Hindus have. Every other book women
can read. All the mass of Sanskrit literature, that whole ocean of
literature — science, drama, poetry — is all for them. They can go there
and read everything, except the \[Vedic\] scriptures.[4](#fn4)

In later days the idea was that woman was not intended to be a priest;
so what is the use of her studying the Vedas? In that, the Hindus are
not so far behind other nations. When women give up the world and join
our Order, they are no longer considered either men or women. They have
no sex. The whole question of high or low caste, man or woman, dies out
entirely.

Whatever I know of religion I learned from my master, and he learned it
of a woman.

Coming back to the Rajput woman, I will try to bring to you a story from
some of our old books — how during the Mohammedan conquest, one of these
women was the cause of what led to the conquest of India.

A Rajput prince of Kanauj — a very ancient city — had a daughter
\[Samjukta\]. She had heard of the military fame of Prithvi Raj \[King
of Ajmere and Delhi\] and all his glory, and she was in love with him.

Now her father wanted to hold a Râjasuya sacrifice, so he invited all
the kings in the country. And in that sacrifice, they all had to render
menial service to him because he was superior over all; and with that
sacrifice he declared there would be a choice by his daughter.

But the daughter was already in love with Prithvi Raj. He was very
mighty and was not going to acknowledge loyalty to the king, her father,
so he refused the invitation. Then the king made a golden statue of
Prithvi Raj and put it near the door. He said that that was the duty he
had given him to perform — that of a porter.

The upshot of the whole affair was that Prithvi Raj, like a true knight,
came and took the lady behind him on his horse, and they both fled.

When the news came to her father, he gave chase with his army, and there
was a great battle in which the majority of both armies was killed. And
\[thus the Rajputs were so weakened that\] the Mohammedan empire in
India began.

When the Mohammedan empire was being established in northern India, the
Queen of Chitore \[Râni Padmini\] was famed for her beauty. And the
report of her beauty reached the sultan, and he wrote a letter for the
queen to be sent to his harem. The result was a terrible war between the
King of Chitore and the sultan. The Mohammedans invaded Chitore. And
when the Rajputs found they could not defend themselves any more, the
men all took sword in hand and killed and were killed, and the women
perished in the flames.

After the men had all perished, the conqueror entered the city. There in
the street was rising a horrible flame. He saw circles of women going
around it, led by the queen herself. When he approached near and asked
the queen to refrain from jumping into the flames, she said, "This is
how the Rajput woman treats you", and threw herself into the fire.

It is said that 74,500 women perished in the flames that day to save
their honour from the hands of the Mohammedans. Even today when we write
a letter, after sealing it we write "74½" upon it, meaning that if one
dares to open this letter, that sin of killing 74,500 women will be upon
his head.

I will tell you the story of another beautiful Rajput girl.[5](#fn5)
There is a peculiar custom in our country called "protection". Women can
send small bracelets of silken thread to men. And if a girl sends one of
these to a man, that man becomes her brother.

During the reign of the last of the Mogul emperors — the cruel man who
destroyed that most brilliant empire of India — he similarly heard of
the beauty of a Rajput chieftain's daughter. Orders were sent that she
should be brought to the Mogul harem.

Then a messenger came from the emperor to her with his picture, and he
showed it to her. In derision she stamped upon it with her feet and
said, "Thus the Rajput girl treats your Mogul emperor". As a result, the
imperial army was marched into Rajputana.

In despair the chieftain's daughter thought of a device. She took a
number of these bracelets and sent them to the Rajput princes with a
message: "Come and help us". All the Rajputs assembled, and so the
imperial forces had to go back again.

I will tell you a peculiar proverb in Rajputana. There is a caste in
India called the shop class, the traders. They are very intelligent —
some of them — but the Hindus think they are rather sharp. But it is a
peculiar fact that the women of that caste are not as intelligent as the
men. On the other hand, the Rajput man is not half as intelligent as the
Rajput woman.

The common proverb in Rajputana is: "The intelligent woman begets the
dull son, and the dull woman begets the sharp son". The fact is,
whenever any state or kingdom in Rajputana has been managed by a woman,
it has been managed wonderfully well.

We come to another class of women. This mild Hindu race produces
fighting women from time to time. Some of you may have heard of the
woman \[Lakshmi Bai, Queen of Jhansi\] who, during the Mutiny of 1857,
fought against the English soldiers and held her own ground for two
years — leading modern armies, managing batteries and always charging at
the head of her army. This queen was a Brahmin girl.

A man whom I know lost three of his sons in that war. When he talks of
them he is calm, but when he talks of this woman his voice becomes
animated. He used to say that she was a goddess — she was not a human
being. This old veteran thinks he never saw better generalship.

The story of Chand Bibi, or Chand Sultana \[1546 - 1599\], is well known
in India. She was the Queen of Golconda, where the diamond mines were.
For months she defended herself. At last, a breach was made in the
walls. When the imperial army tried to rush in there, she was in full
armour, and she forced the troops to go back.[6](#fn6)

In still later times, perhaps you will be astonished to know that a
great English general had once to face a Hindu girl of sixteen.

Women in statesmanship, managing territories, governing countries, even
making war, have proved themselves equal to men — if not superior. In
India I have no doubt of that. Whenever they have had the opportunity,
they have proved that they have as much ability as men, with this
advantage — that they seldom degenerate. They keep to the moral
standard, which is innate in their nature. And thus as governors and
rulers of their state, they prove — at least in India — far superior to
men. John Stuart Mill mentions this fact.

Even at the present day, we see women in India managing vast estates
with great ability. There were two ladies where I was born who were the
proprietors of large estates and patronesses of learning and art and who
managed these estates with their own brains and looked to every detail
of the business.

Each nation,beyond a general humanity, develops a certain peculiarity of
character — so in religion, so in politics, so in the physical body, so
in mental habitude, so in men and women, so in character. One nation
develops one peculiarity of character, another takes another
peculiarity. Within the last few years the world has begun to recognize
this.

The very peculiarity of Hindu women, which they have developed and which
is the idea of their life, is that of the *mother*. If you enter a
Hindu's home, you will not find the wife to be the same equal companion
of the husband as you find her here. But when you find the mother, she
is the very pillar of the Hindu home. The wife must wait to become the
mother, and then she will be everything.

If one becomes a monk, his father will have to salute him first because
he has become a monk and is therefore superior to him. But to his mother
he — monk or no monk — will have to go down on his knees and prostrate
himself before her. He will then put a little cup of water before her
feet, she will dip her toe in it, and he will have to drink of it. A
Hindu son gladly does this a thousand times over again![7](#fn7)

Where the Vedas teach morality, the first words are, “Let the mother be
your God" (Taittiriya Upanishad 1.11.) — and that she is. When we talk
of woman in India, our idea of woman is mother. The value of women
consists in their being mothers of the human race. That is the idea of
the Hindu.

I have seen my old master taking little girls by the hands, placing them
in a chair and actually worshipping them — placing flowers at their feet
and prostrating himself before these little children — because they
represented the mother God.

The mother is the God in our family. The idea is that the only real love
that we see in the world, the most unselfish love, is in the mother —
always suffering, always loving. And what love can represent the love of
God more than the love which we see in the mother? Thus the mother is
the incarnation of God on earth to the Hindu.

"That boy alone can understand God who has been first taught by his
mother." I have heard wild stories about the illiteracy of our women.
Till I was a boy of ten, I was taught by my mother. I saw my grandmother
living and my great-grandmother living, and I assure you that there
never was in my line a female ancestor who could not read or write, or
who had to put "her mark" on a paper. If there was a woman who could not
read or write, my birth would have been impossible. Caste laws make it
imperative.

So these are wild stories which I sometimes hear — such as the statement
that in the Middle Ages reading and writing were taken away from Hindu
women. I refer you to Sir William Hunter's *History of the English
People*, where he cited Indian women who could calculate a solar
eclipse.

I have been told that either too much worship of the mother makes the
mother selfish or too much love of the children for the mother makes
them selfish. But I do not believe that. The love which my mother gave
to me has made me what I am, and I owe a debt to her that I can never
repay.

Why should the Hindu mother be worshipped? Our philosophers try to find
a reason and they come to this definition: We call ourselves the Aryan
race. What is an Aryan? He is a man whose birth is through religion.
This is a peculiar subject, perhaps, in this country; but the idea is
that a man must be born through religion, through prayers. If you take
up our law books you will find chapters devoted to this — the prenatal
influence of a mother on the child.

I know that before I was born, my mother would fast and pray and do
hundreds of things which I could not even do for five minutes. She did
that for two years. I believe that whatever religious culture I have, I
owe to that. It was consciously that my mother brought me into the world
to be what I am. Whatever good impulse I have was given to me by my
mother — and consciously, not unconsciously.

"A child materially born is not an Aryan; the child born in spirituality
is an Aryan." For all this trouble — because she has to make herself so
pure and holy in order to have pure children — she has a peculiar claim
on the Hindu child. And the rest \[of her traits\] is the same with all
other nations: she is so unselfish. But the mother has to suffer most in
our families.

The mother has to eat last. I have been asked many times in your country
why the \[Hindu\] husband does not sit with his wife to eat — if the
idea is, perhaps, that the husband thinks she is too low a being. This
explanation is not at all right. You know, a hog's hair is thought to be
very unclean. A Hindu cannot brush his teeth with the brushes made of
it, so he uses the fibre of plants. Some traveller saw one Hindu
brushing his teeth with that and then wrote that "a Hindu gets up early
in the morning and gets a plant and chews it and swallows it!"
Similarly, some have seen the husband and wife not eating together and
have made their own explanation. There are so many explainers in this
world, and so few observers — as if the world is dying for their
explanations! That is why I sometimes think the invention of printing
was not an unmixed blessing. The real fact is: just as in your country
many things must not be done by ladies before men, so in our country the
fact is that it is very indecorous to munch and munch before men. If a
lady is eating, she may eat before her brothers. But if the husband
comes in, she stops immediately and the husband walks out quickly. We
have no tables to sit at, and whenever a man is hungry he comes in and
takes his meal and goes out. Do not believe that a Hindu husband does
not allow his wife to sit at the table with him. He has no table at all.

The first part of the food — when it is ready — belongs to the guests
and the poor, the second to the lower animals, the third to the
children, the fourth to the husband, and last comes the mother. How many
times I have seen my mother going to take her first meal when it was two
o'clock. We took ours at ten and she at two because she had so many
things to attend to. \[For example\], someone knocks at the door and
says, "Guest", and there is no food except what was for my mother. She
would give that to him willingly and then wait for her own. That was her
life and she liked it. And that is why we worship mothers as gods.

I wish you would like less to be merely petted and patronized and more
to be worshipped! \[You\], a member of the human race! — the poor Hindu
does not understand that \[inclination of yours\]. But when you say, "We
are mothers and we command", he bows down. This is the side then that
the Hindus have developed.

Going back to our theories — people in the West came about one hundred
years ago to the point that they must tolerate other religions. But we
know now that toleration is not sufficient toward another religion; we
must accept it. Thus it is not a question of subtraction, it is a
question of addition. The truth is the result of all these different
sides added together. Each of all these religions represents one side,
the fullness being the addition of all these. And so in every science,
it is addition that is the law.

Now the Hindu has developed this side. But will this side be enough? Let
the Hindu woman who is the mother become the worthy wife also, but do
not try to destroy the mother. That is the best thing you can do. Thus
you get a better view of the universe instead of going about all over
the world, rushing into different nations and criticizing them and
saying, "The horrid wretches — all fit to be barbecued for eternity!"

If we take our stand on this position — that each nation under the
Lord's will is developing one part of human nature — no nation is a
failure. So far they have done well, now they must do better!
\[Applause\]

Instead of calling the Hindus "heathens", "wretches", "slaves", go to
India and say, "So far your work is wonderful, but that is not all. You
have much more to do. God bless you that you have developed this side of
woman as a mother. Now help the other side — the wife of men".

And similarly, I think (I tell it with the best spirit) that you had
better add to your national character a little more of the mother side
of the Hindu nature! This was the first verse that I was taught in my
life, the first day I went to school: "He indeed is a learned man who
looks upon all women as his mother, who looks upon every man's property
as so much dust, and looks upon every being as his own soul".

There is the other idea of the woman working with the man. It is not
that the Hindus had not those ideals, but they could not develop them.

It is alone in the Sanskrit language that we find four words meaning
husband and wife together. It is only in our marriage that they \[both\]
promise, "What has been my heart now may be thine". It is there that we
see that the husband is made to look at the Pole-star, touching the hand
of his wife and saying, "As the Pole-star is fixed in the heavens, so
may I be fixed in my affection to thee". And the wife does the same.

Even a woman who is vile enough to go into the streets can sue her
husband and have a maintenance. We find the germs of these ideas in all
our books throughout our nation, but we were not able to develop that
side of the character.

We must go far beyond sentiment when we want to judge. We know it is not
emotion alone that governs the world, but there is something behind
emotion. Economic causes, surrounding circumstances and other
considerations enter into the development of nations. (It is not in my
present plan to go into the causes that develop woman as wife.)

So in this world, as each nation is placed under peculiar circumstances
and is developing its own type, the day is coming when all these
different types will be mixed up — when that vile sort of patriotism
which means "rob everybody and give to me" will vanish. Then there will
be no more one-sided development in the whole world, and each one of
these \[nations\] will see that they had done right.

Let us now go to work and mix the nations up together and let the new
nation come.

Will you let me tell you my conviction? Much of the civilization that
comprises the world today has come from that one peculiar race of
mankind — the Aryans.[8](#fn8)

\[Aryan\] civilization has been of three types: the Roman, the Greek,
the Hindu. The Roman type is the type of organization, conquest,
steadiness — but lacking in emotional nature, appreciation of beauty and
the higher emotions. Its defect is cruelty. The Greek is essentially
enthusiastic for the beautiful, but frivolous and has a tendency to
become immoral. The Hindu type is essentially metaphysical and
religious, but lacking in all the elements of organization and work.

The Roman type is now represented by the Anglo-Saxon; the Greek type
more by the French than by any other nation; and the old Hindus do not
die! Each type has its advantage in this new land of promise. They have
the Roman's organization, the power of the Greek's wonderful love for
the beautiful, and the Hindu's backbone of religion and love of God. Mix
these up together and bring in the new civilization.

And let me tell you, this should be done by women. There are some of our
books which say that the next incarnation, and the last (we believe in
ten), is to come in the form of a woman.

We see resources in the world yet remaining because all the forces that
are in the world have not come into use. The hand was acting all this
time while other parts of the body were remaining silent. Let the other
parts of the body be awakened and perhaps in harmonious action all the
misery will be cured. Perhaps, in this new land, with this new blood in
your veins, you may bring in that new civilization — and, perhaps,
through American women.

As to that ever blessed land which gave me this body, I look back with
great veneration and bless the merciful being who permitted me to take
birth in that holiest spot on earth. When the whole world is trying to
trace its ancestry from men distinguished in arms or wealth, the Hindus
alone are proud to trace their descent from *saints*.

That wonderful vessel which has been carrying for ages men and women
across this ocean of life may have sprung small leaks here and there.
And of that, too, the Lord alone knows how much is owing to themselves
and how much to those who look down with contempt upon the Hindus.

But if such leaks there are, I, the meanest of her children, think it my
duty to stop her from sinking even if I have to do it with my life. And
if I find that all my struggles are in vain, still, as the Lord is my
witness, I will tell them with my heartfelt benediction: "My brethren,
you have done well — nay, better than any other race could have done
under the same circumstances. You have given me all that I have. Grant
me the privilege of being at your side to the last and let us all sink
together".

[→](the_first_step_towards_jnana.htm)

</div>

1.  [^](#fn1_1)Since Swami Vivekananda's time there has been more
    research on the spread of the Aryan culture.
2.  [^](#fn2_1)Note: The text of this sentence is not found in the
    extant Manu Samhitâ. Vide Mahânirvâna Tantra 8.47.
3.  [^](#fn3_1)Since Swami Vivekananda's time, higher education among
    women in India has spread rapidly.
4.  [^](#fn4_1)Today Indian women are no longer barred from reading any
    scriptures — Vedic or non-Vedic.  
5.  [^](#fn5_1)Chârumati, or Rupamati, daughter of Vikram Singh, King of
    Kishangarh, in Rajasthan. Charumati is the heroine of Râjasimha, a
    Bengali historical novel written by Bankim Chandra Chatterjee.
6.  [^](#fn6_1)The soldiers were so impressed with Chand Bibi's military
    prowess and courage that they referred to her as Chand Sultana,
    which means "Chand — the Empress".
7.  [^](#fn7_1)This custom is a gesture meant to acknowledge the mother
    not only as the first teacher and preceptor in one's life, but also
    as an embodiment of the all-loving God.
8.  [^](#fn8_1)It may be noted here that today many historians and
    anthropologists would describe the Aryans as a linguistic group
    rather than a race. — Publisher.
