+++
title = "The doctor and the speech at the right-wing think-tank"

+++
It was a late Friday afternoon and Vidrum had returned home early from
the hospital. He spent some time in his garden making a ball from the
paste of rain-tree pods, a messy but immensely meditative activity,
which his friend Somakhya had introduced him to. Having completed the
ball he glanced at its rotundity with an inner feeling of accomplishment
and pride. Then placing it to dry in the path of the rays of the setting
sun, he went back into his home to clean his hands. Thereafter he sat in
his study, browsing the journals he checked every week. He downloaded a
few articles for later reading and went on to check the scores of a
one-day match that was going on. Ensnared by the interestingly poised
game, he kept watching for some time, till he suddenly realized that the
time of arrival of his visitors was drawing close. He got up hurriedly,
tidied his study and hall, and checked with his caterer to ensure that
dinner will arrive on time. Keeping an eye on the match, he basked in
the pleasant warmth of the excitement and expectation he felt regarding
these relatively rare social occasions that punctuated his otherwise
monotonous existence. As he waited he wondered if he might ever
experience the state his friend Somakhya had talked about: “True
pleasurable experience does not always need an external, palpable
object. It can arise from reflection, manipulation and realization of
objects that purely lie in the mind or a computing device. After all
even with Lootika of pretty smiles, the ullāsa of maithuna lasts for
only a small fraction for our total existence. But our more continuous
pleasures are not from externals but from the resonance we feel from the
contemplation on inner objects.”

Soon he heard his bell ring and he went to the door to let in his
visitors, Vrishchika and Indrasena. Even as they came in, Vidrum asked
Vrishchika: “Where you able to figure out what was the deal with that
patient \#49?” Vrishchika: “Bad news, he died couple of hours ago. The
autopsy has been arranged and we will know more soon but the preliminary
indications are that it was *Nocardia*.” Vidrum: “What? *Nocardia*\!”
Vrishchika: “Indeed\! We should have called that out earlier: It was a
pretty gruesome end for the guy.” Indrasena was by now accustomed to his
wife’s propensity for lapsing into talking morbidity whenever she was
with her father or ran into others of her ilk. He had gone through it
all in course of dinners at his in-laws place, where the forbidding
descriptions of human taphonomy and pathologies ranging from those
caused by *Actinomadura* to *Malassezia* had often ruined his bowl of
hintāla pāsaya. He would say to himself that it was perhaps training to
be a mahāvratin but today he did not hold back and said: “Hopefully you
guys won’t continue this over dinner.” Vrishchika putting her hand
around Indrasena’s shoulder: “No, then we will talk of something
interesting to you, that gargantuan wonder of a protein from
*Nocardia*\!” Indrasena chuckled – “Ah that one” – and realizing that
all this talk probably had a cathartic effect on his wife left her to it
and silently picked up a magazine that lay on Vidrum’s coffee table.

The magazine went by the name “Svatantratā” and was produced by the
federation of right-wing think-tanks. As he leafed through it an article
by Dr. Ahmed al-Zaman and Prof. Adityo Sen caught his eye. It was
titled: “triśūla-dīkṣa to nālīka-dīkṣa: down the slippery path”. Therein
he read:  
“We stand with the right-wing in their call for making economic progress
and women’s rights a priority. They certainly need to sternly objurgate
their obscurantist fellow travelers from the Deva-dharma-dala with
regard to the push for making fire-arms more widely available. While
their earlier triśūla-dīkṣa was a condemnable move, the chances of
large-scale, serious injury to life and property from the short-handled
tridents was limited. However, this new nālīka-dīkṣa movement has the
potential to unleash immense danger to human life in India. We would
soon see our homes, schools and work-places turn red with every petty
squabble being settled via the business-end of a smoking barrel.
Moreover, these obscurantist elements of the D-cubed would threaten the
very lives of minorities in India if the nālīka-dīkṣa is not nipped in
the bud…

Moreover, D-cubed spokesman Ravi Madhav Pandit’s call for Hindu-only
housing and turning women into mindless baby-popping machines reeks of
unspeakable retrogression. It not only threatens to shred the secular
fabric of our nation but also endangers the lives of our women. Hence,
going forward, we call upon our friends from the right-wing to come out
explicitly in condemning the regressive attitudes and activities of the
Hindutva Brigade. Let the peace-loving Hindus make it clear that they
are Hindu and not Hindutvādin, thereby sending a strong message to both
the D-cubed and the minorities that they reject the atmosphere of fear
and violence.”

By the time Indrasena snapped out of the magazine Vrishchika and Vidrum
had exhausted their share of morbidity for the day. The conversation
moved to brighter matters and eventually segued into dinner.

◊◊◊◊

As they were chatting after dinner, Vidrum remarked: “I have been
sitting in on the advanced course you two put together with the
forensics experts. It is really great – Indrasena, your former student
Devarshabha is doing a great job in explaining the genes to phenotypes
stuff.”  
Indrasena: “Glad to hear that. Which reminds me that I should try to
finish up one of the papers on the work with him and Lootika.”  
Vidrum: “I found an old skeleton in the storage of the trauma lab and
brought it for the course. The guys have now completed a reconstruction
of the deceased individual. It was just stupendous to see how from the
skeleton we went all the way to piecing together the individual in life:
his eye color, his hair-type, if his skin was prone to dryness or not
and many other things – all of it came out so clearly.” Vidrum then
sauntered to the drawer beneath his desk and brought a 3D printout of
the individual’s skull and his reconstructed face. Vidrum: “They found a
SNP in his Pax6 gene that was deemed informative.”  
Indrasena: “Yes, this is a dominant one, likely he had one eye smaller
than the other one.”  
Vidrum: “Indeed, see that is how they have reconstructed it.”  
Glancing at the report Indrasena further added: “Seems like he had
potential to have had an IQ of around 140 and look at this. These
alleles associated with his olfactory receptors suggest he would have
been of a conservative type in his political leanings.”  
Vrishchika: “Look at his skull – he seems to have suffered a massive
trauma to his parietal lobe\!”  
Vidrum: “Yes, it appears his head was struck by a sword. We also noted
the sectioning of one of his cervicals by the same instrument. Ain’t
that sort of odd – this skeleton is of relatively recent provenance –
how come we are seeing a fatal sword injury?”  
Vrishchika: “Well, we would possibly never know for that skeleton was
lying in the closet with not a smidgen of documentation to go with it.
Did anyone check if there were any police records?”  
Vidrum: “I do not know. But hey you guys are real vipra-s, somayājin-s
or whatever you all are supposed to be. Are you all not the kind who are
supposed to know all kinds of secret magic. May be you could find out?
May be you all have some trick up your sleeve like that skull-tapping
brāhmaṇa Vaṅgīśa one of you guys told me about.”  
Indrasena: “All that is stuff from legend. Why not be happy with how
much we have been able to glean using our knowledge of genetics.”  
Vidrum persisted: “That is alright, we know how he lived but we would
also want to know how he died. Indrasena I am sure you know more than
what you show.”  
Vrishchika: “Would you be willing to bear the force of śrī Kubera’s
agent?”  
Indrasena: “Let us not even go there.”  
Vidrum: “I am ready for it. Vrishchika, do you think I have forgotten
about your gang trying out your prayoga-s in the cemetery? Indrasena, I
am pretty sure if Vrishchika has married you, you must be quite bit of
wizard in these issues yourself.”  
Indrasena: “Since you so blithely persist I think we must give you a
taste of Vaiśravaṇa’s agents. Sit down, relax, and close you eyes.”

Indrasena thought of the words of Somakhya when he had revealed to him
the Kauberī-pārṣadī-vidyā \[Footnote 1\] and deployed it. Vidrum
instantaneously dropped as though dead on his carpet and lay sprawled
like a copper-hoard anthropomorph. He started saying: “I am valśa. I am
valśa”.

◊◊◊◊

The triangle of the Swan, the Eagle and the bright-eyed vulture had
mounted the inky heavens. Seeing that it was late valśa decided to lay
himself to rest on his litter. His body was racked with all manner of
aches. The day that followed was not one to worry much about, so he
unhurriedly lapsed into the hypnogogic state. Most unexpectedly a
beautiful woman appeared before him. She was not anyone whom he had ever
seen in wakeful life. Nor had anyone like her ever manifested in a dream
nor in hypnogogia before. She had long flowing black tresses in dense
masses like the great bee-hive on the vast ashvattha tree near the
pāṣaṇḍa-gṛha. Her eyes had a sparkle to them like heads of the
asterism of the Twins. Her body was slim and shapely and wonderfully
sculpted with breasts like the vessels that lustrate viṣṇupatnī. But she
had upward pointed ears like that of a shepherd dog. valśa was even more
surprised when he heard her speak – it was in the gīrvāṇa bhāṣā. valśa
realized that in this tongue even the mundane sounded poetic. She
introduced herself: “aham asmi pāṣupatānāṃ pātāla-rudrasya gahvare vāsā
kukkuravati । asau gahvarasya samīpe eka uddhataḥ kedāro ‘sti । asmin
kedāre viśālo vaṭa-vṛkṣo’sti । tasyādho’sti mama pīṭhikā ।” Hearing her
he wondered if she was a yakṣiṇī or a piśācī or perhaps a shape-shifting
rākṣasī. Neither her name nor her form was like any yakṣiṇī or apsaras
he had encountered before. Finally she directed him: “śayāyā uttiṣṭha,
etasmin caṣake saṃnihitaṃ rasaṃ piba, mama aṅgulyā mandaṃ cumba, mama
upānahau gāḍhaṃ gṛhṇa\! tvayā saha akāśe uḍḍayiṣyamy ahaṃ hā hā\! paśya
paśya\! prakṛtes sarvānāṃ niyamānāṃ ati-laṅghanaṃ kariṣyāmi । mama
patham na jñātuṃ śaknoṣi ।”

She flew carrying valśa at a dizzying pace. Finally they landed in a
place that looked strangely familiar to valśa; yet he was unable to
precisely identify it. It was a school building with an adjacent ground
that looked like a rat-nibbled roṭikā. In the mid-1930s the Vatican had
financed a bunch of German missionaries to go forth to the holy land of
bhāratavarṣa and convert the heathens. Uwe Christian led the operation
with his fellow brothers and fathers. He was also a double agent,
working for Das dritte Reich. He tried hard to entice some brāhmaṇa-s to
the fold of the preta, hoping that if he converted the brāhmaṇa-s then
he would gain easy control over the “superstitious lay”. With this
intention he started a school named after one of the many dead
pretācarin-s, who had been proclaimed to be a saint by the Vatican
rulers due to performance of an even lamer miracle than those that the
unwashed Hindus were supposed to believe in. In this school he offered a
proper western education that brāhmaṇa parents were supposed to seek
like a good bride for their dear sons. In 1958 Christian was
assassinated by an Israeli letter bomb. Shortly thereafter his school
was bought by a Portuguese missionary group from Goa, who continued
their operations in the service of the long decomposed corpse of
Nazareth. But not long after that Goa was finally reconquered by the
Hindus restoring the continuity of peninsular Bhāratavarṣa, whose
coastline their old poet kālidāsa had likened to a drawn bowstring. With
that the school and the associated church declined into disuse. A few
years later in a great monsoon storm the spire of the church was knocked
down reminding the Hindus of might of the devaheti that strikes from
above. The people in that part of the city were growing prosperous again
after the dismal years that followed independence and felt the need for
more schools for their children. So they decided to use the old school’s
infrastructure for a new one. Having renovated it, they reinitiated
education in those premises in the form of a secular institution.

There, in the 9th class were studying students who went by the names
saṃpadā durnāmikā, satyo daridrasaṃdhaḥ, harir babhruḥ and mahāmada
aghomado marusaṃbhavaḥ. At that point kukkuravati briefly possessed
their teacher. Their teacher then addressed the class indicating the
topic for a small essay: “rāṣṭrīya dhvajasya pradhanaṃ arthavattvaṃ
kiṃ?”  
Then valśa and kukkuravati unseen by the rest went to look at what those
four students wrote.

saṃpadā durnāmikā wrote: The national flag is symbol of India’s freedom.
The length of the flag is 1.5 times that of its width. It is to be
respected by all and never hoisted in peoples homes. No one should trod
on it, burn it or defile it in any other way. It should be made by hand
using cloth spun by the Gandhian wheel. If it is made using any other
material then the person is liable to be interred in a jail for 3 years
\[Pointing to this sentence kukkuravati laughed and tapped valśa on his
shoulder. valśa wondered if that was the real fate that awaited him for
having flown a paper flag on some national day\! saṃpadā saw no one but
heard the laugh of a woman. She wondered “who that could be? May be it
is my mind saying all this is so funny”\]. A real Indian flag is only to
be made in the state of Karṇāṭaka. People have to stand erect and sing
the national anthem composed by śrī ravīndranātha when the flag is being
hoisted.

satyo daridrasaṃdhaḥ wrote: The flag was made by some Telugu guy \[He
had forgotten the guy’s name. So he made it up: If there could be a
Gandhi of the frontier in Afghanistan, why could we not have yet another
Gandhi in Andhra. So let us call him the Andhra Gandhi\]. At first B.G.
Tilak had suggested a saffron flag with the picture of gaṇeśa. Aurobindo
and Vankimchandra wanted the image to be that of a fierce Kālī with an
upraised scimitar. Some other Hindu leaders wanted a cow on it. But the
secularists wanted none of this. Eventually a flag was made to
incorporate Gandhi’s wheel, a sign that the technology invented in the
Indus valley civilization was still in unmodified use, the saffron color
of the Hindus, the green color of the Mohammedans and the white for
whatever other religions existed in the land.

mahāmada aghomado marusaṃbhavaḥ wrote: \[Hearing the topic of the essay
he had an angry flash back: A while back along with the rest of his male
classmates he had enrolled in the National Cadet Corps, hoping to have
some fun in the wild. On a certain national day he assembled with the
rest of the cadets for a parade after which they were to have an
excursion into the wild. Their leader regaled them with a tale from the
past to boost their national sense. He spoke of the great invasion
launched by the marūnmatta-s from the neighboring country into the
fertile lands of the pāñcanada. Facing fierce resistance from the Hindu
forces they decided to deploy an elite force of airborne commandos
behind the Hindu lines. In this great saṃgrāma even the NCCs had been
meagerly armed and called up to do their duty for the defense of
bhāratavarṣa. Their leader who was giving the speech was one of the
cadets called for this action. He was armed with a mere WW2 era rifle
and a knife but was brimming with courage to face the ākrānta-s. The
famed marūnmatta paratroopers were finally dropped by their aircraft and
they floated down from the realm of the great, pitiless vāyu who was
praised in the days of yore by abhipratāriṇa kākṣasenī in the same
lands. In their minds they were thinking that each one of them,
supposedly tall, fair, ram-gulping central Asian warriors, were capable
of slaughtering at least ten short, dark, taṇḍulāmbu sipping hīndūka-s
in one go. But they were in for a rude surprise. Upon landing, the mere
NCCs aided by local farmers armed with just daṇḍa-s and curikā-s made
short work of the vaunted warriors of the old mahāmado marusaṃbhavaḥ and
sent to them to meet their legendary 72 girls and 28 boys. Then the NCC
leader said they were going to hoist the national flag and in a ritual
imitating the ways of the English during their occupation of the country
shouted: “Raising pole\! By order of height\! Eee-rect\!” Then the
tricolored dhvaja went up even as the cadets stood taut and serenaded it
with the anthem composed by the vaṅga poet ravīndra. But the mahāmada
was already blazing with anger of the tale of the rout of his
coreligionists that the leader had narrated and instead muttered the cry
asserting ekarākṣasatvaṃ and AoA. The bewitching kukkuravati made his
mind readable as print on paper and saying “paśya valśa\! vastuto
rāṣṭrīya dhvajasyocchrayeṇa asya marūnmattasya dhvajabhaṅga āsīt
|”, she gave a canine bark. mahāmada wondered; “what is that noise of
a dirty cur; may all of them be killed. Truly, those infidels praising
their flag sounded like one”. With that he came out of his reverie and
realized he had to write something about the flag.\]

The primary significance of the national flag is it being a visible
symbol of the oppression of minorities. At one point our just rulers
like Alla-ad-din and Awrangzeb had brought this whole land under our
rule. Hence, it belongs to us rightfully. But these infidels overthrew
our great Silsila-e-Khandan-Timuriya and now trod over us building
gold-decked idol-houses, with all their inequality towards the poor, in
places where the muezzin’s cry rang out asserting that all are equal
before God. That flag has their orange right on top and our green right
at the bottom. With them riding roughshod with the wheel on it
symbolizing them crushing us beneath it into undignified poverty. Truly
one day as prophesied by the brilliant Karl Marx the class struggle will
take place and we the oppressed will overthrow these infidel oppressors.

harir babhruḥ wrote: The wheel was what made the Indo-Europeans. It was
by the wheel the Arya-s attained sovereignty. Hence, they celebrated it
in their ritual known as the vājapeya by which the king announced his
sovereignty. It was the symbol of power that lasts through the cycles of
time. Hence, it is held in the hand of the great god of time, the
triple-striding viṣṇu; likewise it adorns the king whose might earns him
a place in history – the cakravartin. It was indeed seen as the symbol
of the great cakravartin-s of history who unified bhārata, like
Candragupta Maurya or Candragupta Vikramāditya. Hence, it is indeed
fitting that it sits in the middle of the flag, representing the ancient
roots and latent power of the nation, which becomes manifest when
unified and led by a cakravartin. The saffron band is the traditional
color of the Hindu flag, which fluttered when clashing with the armies
of Islam and Isa. The green represents the pasture on which the
ratha-cakra first rolled forth and the cultivated field where the plow
was first plied. Thus, it represents our deep roots in pastoralism and
agriculture. Truly our flag is deep with meaning and connected to our
ancient roots like none other.

kukkuravati howled like a bitch and said: “sa dṛḍho rāṣṭra-uttambhī kiṃ
tu tasya pāṇau śuṣmi śastraṃ nāsti । etataḥ kāraṇāt sa vaṅga-deśīyānāṃ
hindūkānāṃ samūha iva mṛtyum āpsyati | valśa wondered what that meant
but he did not have to wait long to find out.

School was over; hari and satya walked towards their home via a forested
patch that covered a basaltic elevation. In front of them at some
distance walked aghomada. Unexpectedly, a pangolin scurried across their
path as they were in the midst of the thick forest path. Seeing it
aghomada excitedly ran after it to kill it with his upraised
hockey-stick. However, before he could strike hari and satya raced up to
him with their own hockey-sticks and prevented him from killing it. Then
they caught him and dragged him to the forest officer’s quarters and
delivered him to the rangers. The forest officer on noting his name
feared that it might blow up into a communal issue and let him go with a
lecture. The next day when hari and satya were walking back the same
way, they were suddenly ambushed in the forest by aghomada and his
friends who were armed with swords. Their hockey-sticks were not
sufficient to hold out against this marūnmatta gang whose members
belonged to an organization known as the Peoples-Progressive-Assembly.
Before they could escape, the PPA men cornered hari and struck him two
blows. One on his head and another slicing through his neck. Then satya
fell to another blow and they left him there taking him to be dead.
Luckily for him, he was soon sighted and rescued by a forest ranger. The
aghomada and his friends quickly ran to the tank of the vināyaka temple
that lay just beyond the forest patch, washed their swords, and made
away. valśa was shaken by what he saw. kukkuravati said to him:
“triśūla-saṃkhyā-mānuṣa-yugānantaraṃ kṛṣṇa-śilā-nāma-nagare
so’ghomadas tava jīvane luṇṭhanāya veṣṭā । ”

With a violent jolt Vidrum snapped out of his possession yelling: “I am
Vidrum not valśa”.

**◊◊◊◊**

Vidrum: “That aghomada looked familiar. Who was he?”  
Indrasena: “Did you not read that Svatantrā magazine on your table?”  
Vidrum: “Why? It just came in today and am yet to look at it in
detail.”  
Indrasena: “Certainly do so\!”  
Vrishchika: “Vidrum, thank you for the wonderful dinner and we are sorry
you were hit by much more than you asked for. But this might help you
bring some things to a closure.”  
Indrasena: “Yes, it may be rough but don’t worry we will be there for
you. Thank you indeed for the great evening. I think we better be going
– though our kid won’t mind spending all night with his cousins, I am
sure they are causing Somakhya and Lootika a lot a of trouble\!”

**◊◊◊◊**

Vrishchika and Indrasena were at Somakhya and Lootika’s place to finish
up the paper on the gargantuan Nocardia protein and its relatives from
other actinobacteria. They were taking a break in the writing when
Lootika checking the news remarked: “Vrishchika, it appears like you
will be seeing your colleague Dr. Ahmed al-Zaman again.”  
Vrishchika: “What? How could that be I thought he was all set to play
out a long innings behind the bars\!”  
Indrasena: “I am sure Vidrum would be disappointed to hear that.”  
Somakhya: “Not just that; Vidrum’s life itself is in danger if the
senior surgeon were to return to our city, which he well might.”  
Lootika: “What is deal with him and Vidrum? The news article says he was
arrested on espionage charges.”  
Vrishchika: “There is probably much more than just espionage charges. He
was the one who killed your classmate Meghana.”  
Lootika: “Really?”

Somakhya: “As you may remember our friend Vidrum was emotionally
entangled with Meghana. But she had was subsequently seduced by the much
older al-Zaman when Vidrum was still a student at med-school and was
drawn away from him. Some time later she was mysteriously found dead
with her throat slit at the Madanamañjuka-udyāna. The cops had
questioned Vidrum and al-Zaman then. Vidrum had a good alibi and the DNA
evidence was in his favor. Though the DNA evidence clearly implicated
Dr. al-Zaman, he was almost immediately released and the cops made an
about-turn on the matter. Dr. al-Zaman is member of the PPA, which as
you are aware passes off as an organization of progressives, while in
reality it is a well-trained ghāzi force. He is probably a double agent
at the hub of the mleccha-marūnmattābhisaṃdhi.”

Indrasena: “I believe we clued Vidrum on al-Zaman’s case with our
kauberī prayoga. Vrishchika the aghomada whom he encountered in the
āveśa was none other than the surgeon in his earlier days.”  
Vrishchika: “Indeed – Vidrum had not believed that al-Zaman was behind
the murder of his friend. But piqued by his experience, he went back to
the records and found that the police commissioner at that time was śrī
Kurmure, whom you might might vaguely remember as being big on Hindu
terror.” Lootika: “Ha\! He was the guy who called the PPA a
character-building organization, which will be the beacon of secularism
in the nation.”

Vrishchika: “Yes, śrī Kurmure was the one who absolved al-Zaman.
However, now we have a patriotic commissioner who had been picked by
none other than the national security adviser śrī Uniyal, who himself
has some intelligence background. As the commissioner’s son is Vidrum’s
patient, he was able use that connection to put the cops back on
al-Zaman’s scent. While they could not conclusively close the Meghana
case as śrī Kurmure had destroyed all the evidence, some new stuff came
up. One day al-Zaman walked into my office and asked help with a project
he was doing that was funded by the Tīrtha Foundation. I politely
refused citing my genuinely packed schedule. I slipped this information
to Vidrum, as Indrasena had informed me that the Tīrtha Foundation is a
front end of a mleccha funding agency, which funds anti-national
individuals and organizations to cause subversion in Bhārata. The cops
latching on to it were able figure out that using hardware and software
from the foundation al-Zaman had opened a very sophisticated backdoor on
all our hospital computers. Incidentally, our little sis Jhilleeka gave
me the means of stymieing it and protecting myself. They finally
arrested al-Zaman on the charges of trying to relay health information
of the governor to the mleccha-s. They were also able to obtain some
data on his links to the Khalifa to whom he was poised to send a bottle
of dimethylmercury.”  
Somakhya: “We need to be absolutely beware of that dimethylmercury when
Dr. al-Zaman resurfaces.”

Vrishchika: “Shortly after his arrest there were aggressive protests by
the Mārjanidhvaja-dala along with the PPA volunteers outside our
hospital. I recall moving my stambhaka-śaṅku from my backpack to my
mekhalā that day.”  
Indrasena: “Remember the regular articles in the newspapers and that
Svatantratā journal decrying Dr. al-Zaman’s arrest as an appalling
failure of justice and deliberate targeting of minorities?”  
Vrishchika: “Not only that, while in jail, he was awarded the Edmond
Glympton Global Initiative prize and the mleccha physicians’ council
prize for his selfless service.”  
Lootika: “Listen to this.” She then read from the news item: “In passing
his judgment overturning the high court conviction the Chief Justice
Mashanand Kukroo said that by arresting a blameless surgeon with a
brilliant record on the slimmest evidence the government was sending an
unacceptable message to the minorities. Such actions threatened to
create an atmosphere of fear, which might then be exploited for
political gains. By this judgment he hoped to stall the downward slide
of the Indian polity towards the divisive Hindu nationalist agenda.” She
continued: “Now in other news we have: Ramesh Pandeya and svāmin
Kalananda to remain in jail for Islampur riots. Then there is this one:
Pictures in temple vandalized…”  
Indrasena: “All this with what people call a Hindu government in power
and both the rākṣasonmatta-s and pretonmatta-s clearly stating their
intentions.”

Somakhya: “Lootika, do you have a transcript of Varoli’s infamous speech
at the right-wing think-tank.”  
Lootika: “Yes; Varoli was asked by one of her right-wing colleagues to
speak at one of those Svatantratā think-tanks known as “India-Future”.
It resulted in her being unceremoniously shunted off the stage and the
question-answer session being called off. I’ll send the transcript of
her speech around to you all.”

**◊◊◊◊**

***The transcript of Varoli’s talk:***  
Hindus should realize they stand at a critical fork in the road of their
history. Their linguistic and cultural cousins the Greeks, the Romans
and the Iranians have all been consigned to perdition and their
intellectual treasures and achievements are now being enjoyed by their
Abrahamistic destroyers. We survived only because they lay ahead of us
in the path of the hurricanes of Abrahamism. Now that they are gone the
storm has begun blowing into our lands. Imagine the fate of the Gangetic
Doab without the Himalayas to stanch the howl of Boreas from the Altaic
heartland.

Let us face it, our situation is not good. Why is this the case? I am
trained as both a chemist and a molecular biologist. Hence, I can tell
you with some certainty that the biochemist who has done things the hard
way achieves greater success when the real challenges hit her than one
who has merely learned to do things as per the protocol accompanying a
commercial kit. You might also agree with me that you would prefer to
have a physician who has high tally in terms of the number of humans he
has closely observed, dead or alive, than one who merely reads the
diagnosis from the results of the tests. Likewise, only when you have
real hands-on experience with your tradition and it’s significance, you
are better equipped to adapt allo-cultural elements for your own
effective use. In the old days at the height of Hindu power we were good
at it. But when Hindu power was blasted away by the unmadita-s we lost
not only the link to our own culture but with it the ability of our
ancestors at allo-cultural adaptation. Thus, when by some luck the
mleccha tyrants left our land due their hammering at the hands of the
Germans and the Japanese, we adopted democracy without the proper
wherewithal to handle this allo-cultural construct – it had no
connection to our endogenous democracy enshrined in the śruti of the
Bhṛgu-s and Añgirasa-s. Our ignorant peoples prided themselves over
their success with this construct without realizing that it would bring
their ruin unless they outlawed the preta-rākṣasa-mārgau. This negative
externality was seen only be few of the Hindu leaders of the
independence movement and was completely masked from public sight by the
action of the men planted by the vengeful mleccha-s as they left our
nation.

Since we had no hands-on experience with creating “systems-robustness”
for the negative externalities of democracy, it has become a potent tool
for the mleccha-s, aided by the marūnmatta-s, to get us to join the
earlier-named civilizations. This will be felt even more as the Hindus
decline in numbers and the Abrahamist occupy that space. I know many of
you all, unlike me, like to call yourselves cultural Hindus and the
like, distancing yourselves from the practice of the religion. By this
you are only endangering the existence of your posterity even more.
Hence, I posit that rather than patting ourselves on our backs and
serenading our democracy, we resort to some really radical questioning.
How many here would like to ask questions such as: Is democracy as it is
practiced really doing us good? Are there religions that need to be
outlawed in order to make it work? Is power of the people a good thing
when the people are zombies? I know each of you all here are great
analysts of politics and the media in the nation but have you asked if
that nuanced dissection is of any avail when the whole structure has a
foundation in quick-sand

If you think all this was radical, have you given thought to the actions
of the judiciary? You know well that the judiciary plays a key role in
this type of democratic set up. But is there not a logical paradox in a
judiciary that places itself above the law itself? Especially so when
there is really no one to check the integrity and patriotism of the
judiciary. When you think more closely of this you will realize why I
insist that no one other than a practicing Hindu well-versed in mīmāṃsā
and nyāya should occupy a judicial position. The rāṣṭra is taken one
step closer to the cremation ground when you appoint an Abrahamist as a
judge at any level in the nation.

Since I would rather not relive Hypatia’s experience, I would like to
suggest to you all that instead of delicately measuring our position on
the left-right spectrum we start preparations to strike first and strike
hard against our foes. This is what our tradition says – when the
ātatāyin has come before us it is incumbent on us to dispatch him for
an appointment with Citragupta.

indro viśvasya rājatoṃ ।  
::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: The Bhṛgu-s of yore had invoked Agni who dwells within
water. That mighty deva who bears the oblations appeared at their
ritual, and he transmogrified into a dreadful archer. This god was the
terrible sharva with many death-dealing shafts; hence, they called out
to him: “śivo bhava tuṃburo rudra jalāṣa-bheṣaja”. Then sa devaḥ emitted
a mighty being known as the yakṣa-pati Kubera who appeared before them
holding an axe and a mongoose. The Bhṛgu-s extolled him and offered him
a caru. Then the mighty yakṣa revealed to them the secret vidyā-s which
generations of Bhṛgu-s had built upon. It was those vidyā-s that
Somakhya and transmitted to Indrasena in the mysterious shrine housing
Mahādeva, Kubera, Skanda and Viśākha. Now he was a siddha in them like
the legendary Naravāhanadatta.
