+++
title = "Śakadhūma: Possible parallels in a meteorological tradition from India and South America"

+++
This is an updated version of our earlier study: published first at
[IndiaFacts](http://indiafacts.co.in/possible-parallels-in-a-meteorological-tradition-from-india-and-south-america/)  
Research by Orlove, Cane and Chiang on the native weather forecasters in
mountains of Peru and Bolivia has brought to light an interesting tidbit
of traditional knowledge \[Footnote 1\]. The traditional crop of these
regions is the potato, from where it has spread the world over to become
a major source of nutrition, a delight to the tongue, and, more
perversely, a cause of obesity and related troubles among the well-fed.
However, to farmers in this region a successful potato crop is crucial
for their sustenance. Hence, these farmers forecast the auspicious time
for planting potatoes by means of a unusual meteorological/astronomical
observation. For a week around the summer solstice they start intently
observing the skies. At midnight they climb up to the peaks and start
observing the Pleiades (M45 open cluster; Sanskrit: Kṛttikāḥ) a few
hours before dawn, noting the apparent brightness and “sizes” of the
stars in the cluster. Dimmer the Pleiades the less will be the rain in
the area during winter. Hence, if the forecast is dry then the farmers
delay planting their potatoes to reduce losses. The fluctuation in local
rainfall is attributable to El Niño Southern Oscillation, a
meteorological phenomenon associated with a cyclical pattern of warm and
cold temperatures in the tropical Pacific. What the researchers found
was that if an El Niño phase with low rainfall was to happen later in
winter then it was accompanied by high cirrus clouds in the earlier
summer. This in turn caused a dimming of the Pleiades when observed
around the summer solstice. This use of the Pleiades as meteorological
predictor is an interesting twist to its more general use, in many
ancient traditions, as a calendrical marker to determine various
seasonal phenomena and agricultural activities.

This research leads us to a new insight regarding the basis for an
ancient tradition recorded in the Veda of the Atharvāṅgirasa-s in a
ritual incantation known as the śakadhūma sūktaṃ, which to date has been
poorly understood. In the vulgate Atharvaveda (AV) text (considered to
be the Śaunaka śākhā ) the sūktaṃ occurs as 6.128, while in AV
Paippalāda śākhā (AV-P) the relevant mantra-s are AV-P 19.24.16-19. The
Paippalāda version is also appended at the end of the Nakṣatra-kalpa
(AV-pariśiṣṭa-1) under the title: “kṛttikā-rohiṇī-madhye paippalādā
mantrāḥ”. In both texts there are 4 ṛk-s, though they differ somewhat
between them. The Kṛttikā-s (Pleiades) have been known in Vedic
tradition to possess watery names, which are individually spelled out in
the Yajurveda for oblations made during the ritual known as the
Nakṣatreṣṭi: Ambā (watery), Dulā (shimmering), Nitatnī (showering),
Abhrayantī (clouding), Meghayantī (clouding) \[Stanayantī, i.e.
thundering in the Maitrāyaṇīya saṃhitā\], Varṣayantī (raining) and
Cupuṇīkā (bubbling). It has long been suspected that these names are
indicative of their connection with the arrival of monsoons. But were
the Pleiades specifically used in weather prognostication in Hindu
tradition? Here is where the evidence from the śakadhūma sūktaṃ comes
in. The word śakadhūma is interpreted as smoke (dhūma) from a dung-pat
(śaka) fire. But paradoxically we find the AV tradition remembering
shakadhUma as a weather-predictor. Indeed, this is how the late medieval
Atharvavedins seem to have understood the word in ritual context as
indicated in their paddhati-s. The word has also been rendered as a
human weatherman by modern white translators such as Whitney and
Bloomfield.

However, an examination of the word shows that the AV tradition
originally hardly implied an earthly weatherman in the term śakadhūma.
The sūktaṃ it self opens by explicitly mentioning śakadhūma as being
made the king of the nakṣatra-s (AV-vulgate: “śakadhūmaṃ nakṣatrāṇi yad
rājānam akurvata |” AV-P: “yad rājānaṃ śakadhūmaṃ nakṣatrāṇy akṛṇvata
|”). The purpose of him being chosen as the king was to ensure
prognostication of fair weather (“bhadrāham asmai prāyachan”). The
presence of the Paippalāda form of the text in the Nakṣatra-kalpa, a
text with a slant towards prognostication, also reiterates the close
connection of the weather-predictor śakadhūma with the nakṣatras.
Realizing that a celestial entity is implied, some people have
interpreted śakadhūma to mean the moon (as rājā of the nakṣatra-s) or
the Milky Way (due to the “smoky” allegory). However, in no Hindu text
known to date the term śakadhūma has been used to describe the moon, nor
is the Milky Way ever described as the leader of nakṣatra-s. The
original meaning of śakadhūma becomes clear from the ṛk found only in
the AV-P version:  
“yad āhuś śakadhūmaṃ mahānakṣatrāṇāṃ prathamajaṃ jyotir agre |  
tan nas satīṃ madhumatīṃ kṛṇotu rayiṃ ca sarvavīraṃ ni yacchatām ||”  
Here śakadhūma is plainly termed the first born of the great nakṣatra-s
and as being at forefront of the celestial lights. This shows that
śakadhūma was a constellation and the first in the list. In the AV
nakṣatra sūktaṃ (AV-vulgate 19.7.2) the first in the list is Kṛttikā.
The AV Nakṣatra-kalpa also explicitly states that Kṛttikā is the first
of the nakṣatra-s with whom Agni blazes forth: “sa nakṣatrāṇāṃ
prathamena pāvakaḥ kṛttikābhir jvalano no ‘nuśāmyatām |”.  
So it is likely that the nakṣatra implied by śakadhūma was none other
than Kṛttikā. This is further confirmed by Charpentier’s finding that in
the medieval deśa-bhāṣā lexicon of the Jaina polymath Hemacandra-sūrī
(the Deśī-nāma-mālā) he gives dhūma as a synonym for Kṛttikā:
dhūmad-dhaya-mahisīo kṛttikāḥ | DN-5.63

This leads to one other reference to śakadhūma which is found in the
great brahmodya sūktaṃ in the Ṛgveda (RV 1.164):  
“śaka-mayaṃ dhūmam ārād apaśyaṃ viṣūvatā para enāvareṇa |  
ukṣāṇaṃ pṛśnim apacanta vīrās tāni dharmāṇi prathamāny āsan || (RV
1.164.43)”

Based on its deployment in the pravargya ritual some have commented that
the śaka-dhūma here refers to the smoke from the fire on which the
mahāvīra pot is being fumigated. This external interpretation is of
course for the “un-enlightened”, for the rahasya-s are concealed beneath
the ritual actions described in the mantra. That is exactly what this
whole sūktaṃ is about – rahasya-s, including several astronomical ones.
This becomes very clear from use of a technical astronomical term –
viṣūvat. In Hindu tradition viṣūvat meant equinox \[Footnote 2\] and
in this context clearly means the vernal equinox which formed one of the
central days of the yearly sattra. Thus, the ṛk means:  
*“From far I saw the śaka-dhūma at the equinoctial point further off
from this lower one.*  
*The heroes cooked the speckled bullock; these were the first
stations.”*  
Here, the constellation at the vernal equinox (viṣūvān) is being
described as śakadhūma. The lower one, the speckled bullock, the first
(previous) stations appear to stand for Taurus. Taurus being the prior
station stands for the position where the equinox lay prior to
śakadhūma, which is being described as currently being at the viśuvān
\[Footnote 3\]. Here too śakadhūma implies the Pleiades. This would also
suggest that the brahmodya belongs to the same period as the core AV
composition during which the Pleiades lay at the vernal equinox. Not
surprisingly, a variant of RV 1.164 also occurs in the AV-vulgate as
sūktaṃ 19.10

***Finally it leads to the issue why the name śakadhūma for the
Pleiades?***  
In the AV context the term śakadhūma is specifically applied in the
context of predicting good weather. With high cirrus clouds it is quite
likely that the Pleiades appeared as a smoky patch in the sky, which was
then used for weather prognostication. Under this interpretation the AV
śakadhūma tradition is likely to be the earliest surviving record of
weather prognostication based on the appearance of the Pleiades. Now,
given the South American tradition we suspect that indeed a smoky
Pleiades was also, a prognosticator in India. Unfortunately, the
original AV tradition is completely dead, hence only experimental
verification can test the effectiveness of the method.

While the original AV tradition does not survive, we know from the much
later meteorological traditions recorded in the Kṛṣi-parāśara (KP), a
Hindu manual on farming, that knowledge derived from such observations
did survive in some form. For example, the KP23 gives a rough formula to
determine the nature of the El Niño effects. KP24-25 describes clouds
associated with the cycle and mentions the puṣkara (cirrus) clouds that
appear to prognosticate droughts. KP33 indicates that the predictions
were refined using wind-vanes to measure wind direction/speed and
predict rain several months later.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnotes  
Footnote 1: An account of Orlove, Cane and Chiang’ work:  
<http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Study/StarsCloudsCrops/>

Footnote 2: In his Kārikā on Īśvara-pratyabhijñā the Kashmirian
tāntrika, Utpala-deva, makes the following statement:  
prāṇa-apāna-mayaḥ prāṇaḥ pratyekaṃ sūpta-jāgratoḥ |  
tac-ched-ātmā samāna-akhyaḥ sauṣupta viṣuvatsv-iva ||  
*The metabolism in both the sleeping and waking states is comprised of
prāṇa and apāna processes. Both are suspended in the deep sleep state
when the samāna process functions, like what happens on the equinox.*

Here the word viṣuvan (equinox) is used metaphorically to explain that
state of equality or balance (samāna) when the prāṇa and apāna are
suspended in the deep sleep state.

Footnote 3: The memory of older equinoctial positions in Taurus and
beyond where first proposed by the great patriot Lokamanya Tilak in his
work: “*The Orion or the antiquity of the Vedas*”.
