+++
title = "Some mysteries of uchChiShTa"

+++
In extant atharvavedic shrauta practice the uchChiShTa sUkta (AV-vulgate
11.7; AV-P 16.82) is not deployed. However, sAyaNa correctly understands
its deployment in the old AV-based shrauta ritual. He cites the
taittirIya brAhmaNa 1.1.9 and states that this is the uchChiShTa of the
offering to the goddess aditi made of rice. In the TB its stated that
the uchChiShTa was assigned to aditi; earlier in the AV (AV-vulgate
11.3) there is a long recitation of yajuSh-s and 4 embedded R^iks that
is used in the celebrated ritual of the bR^ihaspati sava in offering of
odana or the rice dish. In this recitation itself the uchChiShTa is
mentioned (AV-vul 11.3.21) and described in terms that are expanded in
this sUkta. Thus in the old atharvavedic sava it is likely that the
odana recitation mainly of yajuSh-s was first deployed while the odana
was taken up and offered and its uchChiShTa was then used along with the
eponymous sUkta.  
Recently a discussion of a word nya, probably a hapax legomenon in the
AV, which is found in this sUkta came to my attention.  
*dR^iDho dR^iMha sthiro nyo brahma vishva-dR^isho* \[\[AV-vul: sR^ijo\]
*dasha |*  
* nAbhim iva sarvatash chakram uchChiShTe devatA AhitAH* \[AV-vul:
shritAH\] *||*  
What does the word nya/nyas in this R^ik mean?  
At this stage I am unable to fully grasp this mantra. sAyaNa tells us
that it is “netAras tatratyAH prANinaH”. So he derives it from the root
nI. But is it actually derived from the root nyas in the sense of
deposited. This might fight in well with the other constructs like
dR^imha=firm up; sthira=fix and hence nya=deposit. If so this might give
some clarity about the mantra.
