+++
title = "The arrow of vilAsinI"

+++
It was just before dashAnta. We were on the brink of shaking off the
shackles that had constrained us for several years. We were happy that
rather than wasting our efforts on the mundane, which attracted our
fellow travelers, we had spent some time studying the purANa-s and even
as the battle had just begun the sUkta-s of the veda. We decided to set
out on one great wandering that resembled the course of a comet. We got
out of the kArAgR^iha and accompanied by two chaturtha-s and rode up to
a rasashAlA some distance away. There the 3 of us ordered ikShu-rasa,
the spinach bhR^ijjika and took our seats under a sprawling chi\~nchiNI
tree, where we were to be favored by the devI vakreshvarI. For about
half an hour we savored the food and drink talking of the past years
that had flown past us like the great suparNa in the quest for soma. I
was the bhArgava, whose ancestors saw time, for the shruti says: “kAle
.ayam a\~NgirA devo atharvA cAdhi tiShThataH ||”. Hence, I saw the great
Chidra that opened in the 4th dimension that my shUdra companions did
not perceive. After that session at the rasashAlA we rose to depart. We
all moved to our ashva-s when I saw the shUdra durmukha vanishing for
ever into the Chidra that was opening up. Knowing the nature of kAla we
smiled: “kAlo ha vishvA bhUtAni kAle cakShur vi pashyati |”.

We then crossed the shrine of The god and having worshiped his li\~Nga
proceeded to the udyAna. There we espied her of yakShiNI-like form with
her thick kesha enveloping her skandha, stana-dvaya, marble-like
pR^iShTha, even as the monsoon nebulosity spreading from the ko\~NkaNa.
The sight of her stanau made one attain brahmaikya for on seeing them
one said I am indra and you are viliste\~NgA. Her nAsa shone like a fair
svaru of polished khadira wood attached to the yUpa at an yAga and her
eyes sparkled like the kR^ittikA-s on a winter night. The sight of her
nitamba-bimba made one lose the concept of time as thought eternally
stationed in the vishuvAn. We had the saubhAgya of the rati emerging
from her klinnavoru-dvaya. In her ali\~Ngana and chumbanadAna we felt
that we were invincible. If only the grasp of the kAlAjagara were as
pleasurable as her bhujabandhana-s then who would verily fear kAla at
all? We had thus had a brush with the bhoga which few ever get to enjoy.
In the end the wide snarling mouth of kAla swallowed even this bhoga,
verily like the invincible droNa, sUtaputra and bhIShma entering the
mouth of the all consuming kAla in the vision of savyasachi. At that
moment we saw the two flows of rati – the lower stream and the higher
stream. We rushed by natural tendency to the lower stream but the
intense pleasure of rati suddenly turned into the very fire of the wrath
of rudra. Then looking up from the stream of pain we saw the aperture of
the higher flow. But by what upAya where we to get there? Was there a
yAna? Or were we to perish in the wrath of sharva emanating at the
destruction of the dakShAdhvara?
