+++
title = "Charlotte’s tale"

+++
Charlotte narrated me a strange incidence as we were recuperating from a
session in the wild observing local fungal genera. Normally I do not
suffer such tales lightly, but on this occasion I found some strange
connection with certain imprints from my own past, and accordingly
listened to her in rapt attention. At that time Charlotte had just
arrived from her native land and preceded me by an year to the big city
where I was to later live. In its suburbs she rented the basement of the
sprawling house of an elderly sullen gentleman who was trying to make
some money to meet his ends me. It suited her graduate student’s salary
fine, and despite the queerness of the man, she chose to hold out at
that outpost. The man was courteous but had laid certain injunctions.
Least queer of these was the demand that she pay rent in cash when ever
he asked for it, once in course of the month. Thus one month he may ask
her to pay it on the 10th, while another month it may be on the 29th.
Another noteworthy issue was that he would periodically change the lock
and give her a new set of keys to her door. I must say that Charlotte
was pretty intrepid to take all this quite lightly in her stride. She
was having a very successful academic phase and hardly spent more time
beyond sleeping in her peculiar den. In course of one such sleep she
heard a pattering noise on her roof. She was annoyed but let it pass.
Another day she hear low moan from the room she use as a kitchen. Not
knowing much fear, she drew a knife and stealthily advanced to the
kitchen only to see in bare and dark. Another night she heard the
washing machine start off on it own, while yet another night she noticed
the same old pattering noise.

So the next time she paid her rent she brought the matter with her
morose landlord. He, it seems calmly said that was an inherent aspect of
their dwelling and the phantasms were out to get him and not her. She
politely advised him to meet up with a shrink, but he laughed it off
saying that here disbelief might only cause the entities to turn their
attention to her. On the 10th of Jan 1998, Charlotte returned home from
an exciting day at work, carefree and happy, and as she came in she
heard some strange moans from the upper level where her landlord lived.
Suddenly, he opened her door unannounced and barged in. She was a bit
put off, but soon realized that the man in front of her had probably
lost his wits. He appeared to be in time warp believing that he was in
1944 seeing sights that were only pertinent to that bygone era.
Charlotte called in the ambulance thinking that he might have serious
problem. The emergency came and suspected that a stroke had made him
lose his senses, but he insisted that he was possessed and needed to be
taken to a certain cemetery. He returned after a couple of days away
from home and claimed to have lost all memories on the intervening
period.

August 4th 1998 Charlotte woke up one night to crackling noise above her
bed. To her disbelief she felt a presence but could see nothing. All of
sudden she was seared on her thigh as though by a branding rod. Shaken,
she sprung up and wanted to call the police to get her landlord, but she
could see no one. The sore from that phantom branding did not heal for 5
months despite some treatment, until she left that place and took up a
new residence. Between the time she was attacked in August and her
departure she says she was punched hard for 4 nights in a row by an
unseen entity.

She says she remains fearless as ever, but only more cautious.
