+++
title = "Indians:a bunch ofxa0idiots?"

+++
A gentleman called Pingree and his lackey called Plofker would like us
to believe that the Indians were a bunch of idiots till the benign rule
of the white man brought them to light. In essence what they tell us by
means of writing several prolix papers and using sophisticated jargon is
the same as what Mr. Macaulay briskly delivered in his minute. “The vast
accumulations of Indian literature is worth less than a shelf of books
in a good European library.”  
Why is this the case? The learned Pingree tells us that till Alexander’s
invasion circa 300-400 BC the Indians did not even recognize the planets
in the sky. The around the 200 AD the Indians with liberal help from the
Greeks, Babylonians and assorted Middle Easterners came up with their
first model of the universe where the earth was a vast square flat piece
of existence above which were situated various planets in concentric
spheres. This whole phantasm was supported by a menagerie of oversized
turtles, serpents and elephants. The Indians believed that this was
shAstra and could not give up these terrible concepts till the 19th
century. The piercing intellect of the Moslems showed the Indians that
they were talking bullshit, but they insisted on sticking to their
dogmas. The benign rule of the Moslem tyrants only aided them to pursue
these dogmas without change. They wrote texts called virodhas that tried
to prove that the earth was flat and a new sun shone every month of the
year. Finally the sight of the awe-inspiring European gadgets made the
old fashioned pandits give up their stupidity and accept the truth.

It is a necessary and important aspect of sub-altern studies that one
study the stupidity of Indians with sympathy and write reams about it
rather than flippantly tossing it into the trashcan as Ol’ sir
Blabberington had done more than a century ago.
