+++
title = "Bow-making in Hinduxa0lore"

+++
The making of the bow is discussed in dhanurveda.  
  
It states that a bow should have 3 material: iron, horn and wood and
should be 4 cubits in length. The Bow string is supposed to be made of
bamboo fiber, hide or bark fiber. The middle part is recommended to have
grip for the hand. The shape should be that of the “eye brows of a
beautiful damsel” . A good bow is supposed to be made of a composite of
horn, metal and wood. The good horns for a bow were said to be those of
the buffalo, the rohisha deer and the recommended trees for the wood are
the sAl, chandana, cane, dhavala or kakubha.. The tips of the bow termed
Artni were made from horn reinforced with iron. The body was made with a
combination of wood and horn or iron and horn. Additionally, Hindus also
made an all iron or all bronze bow. From the hymns of the atharva veda
one may infer that a composite bow was being refered to. So it is likely
that the composite bow goes back to the early Aryan period. Thus the
composite bow is unlikely to have been introduced to India by the hUnas,
chInas, mlecchas or pahAlavans. The all metal bow could be perpetually
kept strung and used a ready weapon for assault like a pistol. The
Hindus also appear to have wielded the bow with a thumb ring and used a
leather guard to protect agains the bow string abrading the hand.

As many other Hindu traditions the traditional practice of archery had
its last hold out in Thanjavur. The Maharatta king, Thulajendra Raja
Bhonsle Chatrapathy ex-Raja of Thanjavur, a descendent of Chatrapati
Shivaji, is said to have been trained well in the use of the bow by
hindu traditions.
