+++
title = "The annihilation ofxa0Iraq"

+++
Iraq and Azerbaijan had towards the end of the 1300s came under the rule
of the Islamized Mongol Chiefs of the Jelair clan who had descended from
Jelme, the great general of Chingiz Ka’khan. The Jelair converts to
Islam, Ahmed Jelair ibn Uweis and his brother Husain were engaged in a
deadly struggle in which Ahmed, described as a vicious despot, brave
warrior and protector of scholars triumphed. He executed his brothers
and moved victoriously to Sultaniyeh one of the principal cities of
Iraq, when Timur-i-lang, who had just smothered Iran marched against
him. Timur easily captured Sultaniyeh and Ahmed fled to Tabriz. Timur
decided not to campaign any further and returned to Samarqand to rest
for about a year. In 1386 he suddenly flared up on the pious urge of
chastising the Luristanis who had raided a caravan to Macca. Having
crushed the Lursitanis, he had them catapulted from mountain tops. Then
he moved swiftly into Azerbaijan and captured Tabriz, with Ahmed Jelair
running away to Baghdad at the very news of Timur’s coming. Timur then
conquered the outpost of Nakhichevan and declared a Jihad on the
Christians of Georgia. He first invaded Kars and destroyed the city
completely in 1386. Then he assailed Tiflis the capital of Georgia with
his cavalry divisions. Shaken by the assault in winter, when supplies
were low and the cold biting, the Georgian cavalry was easily defeated
by the Timurid forces. The Georgian king Bagrat V was captured and
converted to Islam at sword point. Timur was triumphantly returning to
Iraq when Khan Toqtamaish, the supreme ruler of the Mongolian Kipachak
horde moved through the Derbent pass on the West shore of the Caspian
Sea and attacked Timur. A fierce dispute broke out over the possession
of Azerbaijan and the Mongol horsemen crushed the Timurid frontline
corps causing his troops to panic. However, Timur’s son, Miran Shah
delivered a large reinforcement of cavalry archers to relieve his
father’s corps. He then lead a charge of the heavy cavalry on the
Mongol center and overwhelmed it causing Toqtamaish to retreat north of
the Derbent pass.

Then Timur held a grand Quriltai and review of his troops with the
intention invading Armenia. Having made it clear that the Turkoman Amirs
of Armenia where not observing Islam properly he declared a Jihad on
them. He first attacked the Turkoman cities of Erzerum and Erzincan and
defeated the Amir Taheren in a campaign that lasted just a single day.
Having made the Amir kiss his shoe, he marched on the city of Mus to
crush the remaining Turkomans and sent his son Miran Shah to Kurdistan
to destroy Qara Mehmet Turmush, the lord of the Qara-Qoyunlu Turks.
Timur then sacked Van and hurled its inhabitants off crags and headed to
destroy the Muzzafarid sultans. It was here that the greatest massacres
of Timur were conducted. The Malik of Ispahan, Muzzafar-i-Kashi
surrendered to Timur, but his troops killed Timur’s tax collectors at
night. Timur immediately ordered a general depopulation of the whole
city with his whole army being called to participate in the slaughter.
Ibn Arab Shah states that the scenes of horror far exceeded those of
Chingiz Ka’Khan’s invasions. 70000 heads were piled to erect minarets of
heads in various parts of the city. The ramparts of city were decorated
by a continuous line of severed heads and the remaining were heaped in
layers around the city. Thus having crushed the Muzzafarids he returned
to Samarqand as Khan Toqtamaish had invaded it. He returned to the Iraqi
campaign for his famed 5 years war in 1392. He opened operations, south
of the Caspian and killed some local Maliks claiming to be the
descendants of Mohammed the founder of Islam. He then burnt down the
forests of Meshed-i-Sar declaring that he wanted to make them into
steppes, but only succeeded in desertifying the region. Then he marched
on the Shiites moving towards the Iran-Iraq boundary and slew them for
infidelity. The Muzaffarid prince Shah Mansur killed his brothers and
became the sole lord of the Muzaffarids and challenged Timur,
overconfident over the possession of the impregnable fort of
Qala-i-Sefid that protected his capital of Shiraz. Timur decided to
blood his 17 year old son, Shah Rukh in this campaign and directed him
to take Qala-i-Sefid even as Timur himself blockaded Shiraz. Shah Rukh
performed brilliantly capturing Shustar after fording the Tigris and its
tributaries and moving along the Persian Gulf, deflecting a little East,
to set up a savage bombardment on Q-i-Sefid. At night a group of crack
troops took the fort by escalade under the cover of massed firing from
Shah Rukh ground defense corps. The fort door was opened and the
garrison was massacred. Timur-i-lang immediately attacked Shiraz forcing
Shah Mansur, the Muzaffarid, to face him in open battle. Through his
sheer valor Mansur broke through the Timurid ranks and appeared right
before Timur and struck his sword off his hand. He then delivered two
blows with his sword on Timur’s head, whose massive helmet saved him
from certain death. Shah Rukh interceded and cut off Mansur’s head and
threw it at Timur’s feet. Timur seized Shiraz and thoroughly looted it
taking all wealth and the best women from the city for himself. He put
to death all the Muzaffarids, once and for all ending this Arab dynasty
in 1393. The he moved on Baghdad, from where Ahmed Jelair fled in terror
to Egypt to seek aid of the Mamluqs. Timur’s son Miran Shah crushed the
Jelairid army at Karbala and the Timurids ravaged the countryside: in
his own words “as locusts and ants speeding in all directions”. Then he
sent his son Umar Shaikh on the Kurds. He himself conquered the
impregnable fort of Tekrit from the Kurds, and besieged the powerful
citadels of Mardin and Amid. Umar Shaikh, his second son was slain by an
arrow shot by the Kurds. He held on grimly and finally liquidated the
Kurds in 1394 after fierce fighting. He got the news that his son Miran
Shah had faced a crushing defeat at the hands of the new Georgian King
Jorgi VI while trying to take the Caucasus fort of Alinjaq. Miran Shah
fell from his horse while retreating and broke his skull, resulting in
madness. Timur moved back in fury to destroy Georgia once and for all.
He describes himself as destroying and depopulating 700 towns and
villages to lay waste to the whole land. He killed the Christian ruler
and destroyed every church in Georgia, before returning.

Timur finally ended the conquest of Iraq with the bloody sacking of
Baghdad. The Mongol former Sultan, Ahmed Jelair and the Turkish
Qara-Qoyunlu Amir, Qara Yusuf formed an alliance in Egypt and with the
aid of the Mamluq sultan, Barquq recaptured Baghdad. The city had
earlier surrendered to Timur after Ahmed and Yusuf had fled to Egypt.
Furious over its recapture Timur invaded Baghdad with a large force in
June of 1401. Timur launched seven sorties on the city each time using a
different division of his army and from a different direction on each
occasion. On the seventh sortie Timur ordered all his divisions to
pounce on Yusuf and Ahmed’s corps. The opponents were badly beaten, and
in the confusion Yusuf and Ahmed left their troops to fend for
themselves and started fleeing to Egypt. The Turk, Arab and Mongol
divisions defended Baghdad with great courage but were no match to
Timur’s men who had already breached the fortifications and poured
into the city. Timur ordered that every soldier should return with at
least two severed human heads to show. Ibn Arab Shah declares that a few
lakhs were slain around July 10th 1401. Timur spared the lives of
scholars and the Ulema and presented them with green cloaks. Amongst
these the astronomers he sent to his observatory in Samarqand where his
son Shah Rukh and grandson Ulugh Beg, were to cause a great
efflorescence of science in Central Asia. He demolished and burnt down
all the buildings in Baghdad, except for the Masjids and his horsemen
rode around to flatten the ground. With the rivers turning red with
blood and the heaped corpses rotting in the July heat, diseases swept
through the land in a big way forcing Timur to retreat rapidly leaving
the whole place in utter perdition. Ironically in the midst of all this
destruction the cowardly Yusuf and Ahmed found safety in Egypt and lived
there till Timur’s death. Latter on while Shah Rukh and his clansmen
were fighting over their inheritance the two quietly returned to
Baghdad.
