+++
title = "The struggle against the Khan Toqtamish"

+++
The land North of the Syr Darya delta and the Little Aral Sea was the
domain of the White Horde Khanate. In 1373 the powerful Urus Khan, a
descendant of Chingiz Khan, through his eldest son Jöchi, was crowned
ruler of the Horde. He was sixth in line from Orda the son of Jöchi and
the brother of Batu. His nephew Toqtamish was in conflict with him and
fled to Samarqand to seek aid from Timur-i-lang in 1376. Timur was
delighted beyond words to have a descendant of Chingiz as a client and
gifted him the territory around the cities of Utrar, Sabran and
Sighnakhi, which his ancestor Jöchi had conquered in course of the
westward thrust of the Kha’Khan. Toqtamish was attacked twice in his new
ulus by Urus Khan, beaten badly and driven to Samarqand. However,
Timur-i-lang reinstated him on each occasion. In 1377 Urus Khan demanded
the extradition of Toqtamish and threatened to attack Timur-i-lang if he
failed to do so. Timur routed Urus in battle on Syr Darya and drove him
back to the steppes. Urus then sent his son Qutlugh Buga to slay
Toqtamish. Qutlugh scored a major victory, but even as he closed in on
Toqtamish, the latter’s personal guard shot Qutlugh through his throat
and he fell dead. Urus too died shortly after that defeat and the White
Horde passed in to his next son, Toqtaqiya. Toqtaqiya continued the war
on his cousin Toqtamish and defeated him and drove him from Sabran.
Shortly thereafter Toqtaqiya passed away and his brother Timur-Maliq
ascended the throne. He too invaded the domain of Toqtamish again and
routed him. However, Timur-i-lang with his troops reinstated him again
as the supreme Mongol Khan at Sighnakhi in mid-1377. After this string
of crushing defeats, suddenly, the weak Toqtamish’s military talents
blossomed. By the end of 1377 he had fattened his horses and gathered a
large horde of Mongols. At the height of the severe winter in early
1378, when Timur-Maliq was penned in by the snow near Qara-Tal (shore of
the little Aral), Toqtamish marched with his cavalry across the frigid
steppes and fell upon the former. Timur-Maliq was killed in the
encounter and Toqtamish scored a massive victory. He ascended the throne
as the supreme Khan of the White Horde with the sprinkling of Qumis
before the 9 Yak tailed banner of the Mongols.

Shortly after this, he built his cavalry over the coming spring and
marched on Mamai Khan, the ruler of the Golden horde or the Russian
Khanate. He forded the Volga and passing south of Moscow crushed the
Russian army sent by Dimitri. Toqtamish then advanced towards the north
of the Black Sea and near the Sea of Azov smashed the army of Mamai
Khan, killed him, and seized the Golden horde in 1380. He set his
capital at Sarai on the lower Volga, where he held a Quriltai to mark
his re-unification of the great Ulus of Jöchi from Khazakhstan to the
gates of Kiev. Toqtamish Khan was acknowledged as the greatest ruler of
his times and was said to be renowned for his justice amidst the
Mongols. He then decided to re-enact the great conquests of Russia by
his ancestors like Orda, Berke and Batu. Accordingly, he assembled a
mighty cavalry force in 1382 to invade Christian Russia and conquer
Moscow. After the Russian Grand Duke Dimitri’s victory in 1380 against
Mamai Khan after a long drawn, fierce battle at Kulikovo, the Russians
had taken the Mongol threat lightly. This was to cost the Russians
dearly as they were completely unprepared for the invasion of Toqtamish.
Toqtamish Khan attacked the cities of Vladimir and Suzdal, and destroyed
the them completely. In August of 1382, he suddenly besieged Moscow, and
routed the Russian army at the outskirts of the city. The Mongols then
fell upon the city with utmost savagery, slaughtered all the inhabitants
of the city and looted it completely. Then the buildings were demolished
and Moscow was burnt down completely. The swarming Mongol armies next
uprooted the city of Yuriel in a campaign conducted at the height of
winter and then “turned the city of Mozhaisk into grassland”. Numerous
other Russian towns were looted and destroyed. Muscovy was returned to
another 100 years of Mongol yoke. Toqtamish then sent a reconnaissance
force northwards check out the Lithuanians and destroy them if they were
easy targets.

The pagan King of Lithuania, Kestutis, who had just relieved himself of
the Christians on one flank, saw the danger of the approaching Mongols
and took preemptive action by defeating the reconnaissance picket that
was advancing towards him. Enraged at this, Toqtamish marched on towards
Poltava up to which the Lithuanians had advanced. The Mongol army
inflicted a crushing blow on the Lithuanians and forced their the way
deep into Lithuanian home territory. This rout of the Lithuanians
contributed to their eventual submergence under Christianity. Toqtamish
then threatened the Polish ruler with an invasion and forced him to pay
up a heavy annual tribute and accept the titular overlordship of the
Mongols.

These grand successes led Toqtamish into believing that he might be able
to relive the deeds of Chingiz Kha’Khan himself. Accordingly, he tried
to seize Azerbaijan and choosing the winter of 1385-86 he secured the
Shirvan route to attack Tabriz. A mighty Mongol invasionary force beat
the army of Ahmed Jelair and seized Tabriz from the Sultan. After
looting Tabriz and other provinces in Azerbaijan the Khan returned to
the steppes. At this point Sultan Jelair came back, but Timur-i-lang
annexed Azerbaijan promptly to his kingdom. This immediately sparked off
a conflict between Toqtamish and his former ally Timur. Timur advanced
to Qarabakh and stationed himself there in the winter of 1386-87, when
Toqtamish took the Derbent pass through the Caucasus Mountains to
directly reach Timur in his winter station. Timur sent a force to ford
the Kura River, which flows into the Caspian, and take on the Mongol
Khan. But this army was crushed by Toqtamish and Timur risked
encirclement. However, Timur’s son Miranshah Mirza charged ahead with
massive reinforcement and fought the Mongol army with great fury. After
a long drawn fight with no clear results Toqtamish decided to drawn back
into the steppes. Timur sent a letter to the Khan addressing him as his
son and asked him to behave himself.

The Khan however, ignored these letters and decided to seize the domains
of Timur himself. Later in 1387 as Timur was subjugating Iran, Toqtamish
crossed Utrar and invaded the heart of Timur’s realm in Transoxiana.
Timur’s son Umar Sheikh Mirza rushed to fight off the Khan but was
routed in the battle and encircled. However, Umar Sheikh barely escaped
with life as the Mongol guard delayed its final assault. Toqtamish then
started plundering Timur’s domains by razing down cities in Transoxiana.
He attacked Timur’s center of gravity by bombarding Bukhara with
ballistas and devastated the city of Qarshi in southern Uzbekistan,
close to Timur’s capital, Samarqand. The final boundary of his conquests
are supposed to have been marked by Amu Darya River between Uzbekistan
and Afghanistan. Alarmed at this Timur returned rapidly from Iran to
save his home front with a large force of about 80,000 horsemen. Seeing
the larger army of Timur, Toqtamish withdrew and in late 1388 launched a
surprise attack from the East on Transoxiana by taking Khozend, to the
south of Tashkent. The Khan had expected the winter to pin down Timur,
but on the contrary the unexpectedly heavy snow and cold that winter
forced Toqtamish himself to retreat to the steppes. Timur realized that
if had to truly be the lord of Central Asia he first needed to defeat
the Mongol Khan and annex his territory. Without this he could not
pursue any conquests in the Middle East or India either. Thus the
ultimate showdown between the two mighty Mongol potentates wishing to
act out Chingiz was inevitable. Toqtamish assembled an army of 75000
horsemen, but Timur assembled over a 100,000 in Samarqand, and held a
grand review of his divisions in 1391. He then set out to Tashkent with
his grand army to invade and conquer Mogholistan. Realizing the might of
Timur’s horde, Toqtamish tried to buy peace. His ambassadors reached
Timur in Tashkent and gave him gifts of horses and falcons. Timur
received a falcon on his wrist and then returned it to the Khan’s
ambassadors without uttering a word. It was clear that the war was on.
Toqtamish realizing that he possessed a smaller army decided to retreat
and draw Timur into an ambush in Siberia over a period of months. He
realized that Timur would run out of food in the Taiga and then he could
fall upon Timur and destroy him. For 4 months the Toqtamish drew Timur
from Tashkent deeper and deeper into the steppes. River after River was
forded but Timur could not make contact with the Khan. Around May as the
cold abated Timur held a grand review of troops to raise their moral and
organized a giant hunt for food. But time was running out, and Timur was
taken into the cold , unfamiliar empty territory around the Tobol river
by the Mongol retreat tactic. Here he sent out patrols in all
directions, one of whom captured a straggler of the Khan’s army. This
gave him the information that the Khan was in Ural region, near Samara
(Kuibyshev) on the River Volga. Timur rapidly moved there and trapped
the army of Toqtamish between his army and the Volga. On June 9th 1391 a
battle of immense ferocity was fought by the two Central Asian armies.
The Khan arranged his army as south facing crescent, while the Timurid
army was arranged symmetrically with 3 separate divisions on either side
of a central division where Timur was stationed with his principle
Amirs. The Khan charged through the left divisions of the Timurid ranks
and wrought much havoc forcing them to retreat. When, Timur to inspire
his troops personally led a counter attack with his division on
Toqtamish’s stretching line to the center. Timur’s amirs took the field
and thrashed the Khan’s army. Toqtamish’s men panicked and were
slaughtered in large numbers on the bank of the Volga, after much fierce
fighting. Some fled to the islands on the Volga, but were pursued by
Timur’s patrols and put to death. However, Toqtamish managed to escape
with a part of his army intact. This part was the seat of the Empire of
Jöchi, and Timur took great pleasure by ascending the throne of the
great Mongol Khans. The most beautiful women of the Orda were captured
and distributed amidst Timur’s Amirs and he kept the best for himself.
In their company the horde of Timur celebrated their victory by heavy
drinking and feasting for 26 days. He placed a descendent of Urus Khan,
Timur Qutlugh, as the puppet Khan of the Golden Horde. Timur then
returned to Samarqand after sacking Aktyubinsk. Another puppet Khan
called Idiqu and Timur Qutlugh parceled the Golden horde and retreated
to lead a nomadic life on the steppes.

Soon Toqtamish showed great energy to recover a part of his horde and
formed an alliance with the Mamluq sultan of Egypt, Barquq, against
Timur. Toqtamish then crossed the Derbent pass and tried to seize
Shirvan from Timur in 1394, when Timur forced him to retreat after a
swift campaign. In spring of 1395 Timur decided to destroy the Golden
horde. He decided the take the Caucasus road and destroy capitals of the
Orda. He rejected the Khan’s offer for peace and took Toqtamish in a
frontal attack on April 15, 1395 on the banks of the Terek river. In the
fierce battle which followed Timur was surrounded by a picket of Mongols
who showered arrows on him, but Timur returned the volley and kept them
at bay till his arrows were exhausted. He then fought with his spear and
shield, warding of the darts hurled at him. But one attacker broke his
spear with a blow from an axe and nearly killed him. But, he drew his
sword and with great skill fending the arrows raining on him, cut down
his attackers and broke through their cordon. His feats in the thick of
battle at the age of 61 inspired his troops to fight with great fury and
destroy Toqtamish’s army again. Toqtamish barely escaped with life and
fled to Kazan before Timur’s vanguard could take him. The Golden horde
was thoroughly looted and large quantities of rubies, furs, gold,
silver, slaves and girls of great beauty were seized by Timur. He then
raided the provinces of Muscovy similarly collecting booty. Timur then
advanced to mouth of the Don and attacked the Venetian Christian trading
colony of Azov. He fell of upon the Christians to wage a Jihad and
destroyed their churches, shops, banks and the whole infrastructure set
up by the Mongol Khans for trade with Europe. What remained was handed
over to the Moslem warlords, who acted as his agents. He then advanced
to the Caucasus and devastated the Alyani, a surviving Indo-Iranian
people, smoking them out of forests and gorges in this region. Then he
marched to the mouth of the Volga and attacked Sarai in winter of
1395-96. He took the city after a brief siege and decimated it with
utmost ferocity. The inhabitants were driven out of the city into the
appalling cold, and then their hands and legs were cut off and left to
die. Russian archaeologists have recovered the skeletal remains of these
victims of Timur’s atrocities. Timur satisfied with the conquests
returned to Persia to continue his wars there. Toqtamish made yet
another attempt to revive himself by seizing Crimea in late 1397. Then,
he was beaten in the tripartite struggle with his cousins, the puppet
Khans Idiqu and Timur Qutlugh and fled to his old enemies the
Lithuanians. The pagan lord of Lithuania, Vitautas tried to support him
to stave off an Islamic Jihad on pagan lands, but was beaten by Timur
Qutlugh on the behalf of Timur-i-lang. Finally, in 1405 Toqtamish when
made a final attempt to recover the Golden Horde, he was captured by his
cousin, Khan Shadibeq brother of Timur Qutlugh, in course of a battle in
Siberia and suffocated him to death.
