+++
title = "Orang-utan behavior"

+++
The great ape of East , the Orang was until recently thought to be
rather limited in its behavioral complexity. The lineage of the
Orangutan is an ancient one, including Sivapithecus, which inhabited the
subcontinent under 16 Million years. Given its time of divergence from
the rest of the anthropoid apes the matter of its behavioral complexity
has been one of great interest. In captivity the orang shows much
dexterity and capability of tool use, much like the chimp or Bonobo
which are closer to Homo. The summation of several years of work has
shown that the Orang has many of the behavioral traits that are commonly
associated with Homo and Pan. One striking example is how orangs use
organized hunting to kill the slow loris for food. This is very
reminiscent of the chimps hunting the colobus monkeys. Orangs also make
noises using leaf whistles and sexually stimulate themselves with sticks
(reminiscent of bonobos). So their behavioral complexity in captivity is
indeed mirrored in nature. Thus, most of the basic habits of human
behavior were already in place before 16 Million years in the common
ancestor of the Sivapithecusâ€“ Ouranopithecus clade.

Amidst the apes, I see human behavior as being close to the primitive
behavioral state of the ancestral anthropoid ape. This primitive state
is exaggerated in some apes while muted in the others. Thus for example
social interactions are somewhat muted in the orangs, while aggression
is exaggerated in the chimps, while sexuality is exaggerated in the
bonobos. The increase in brain size in apes of the human lineage (Homo,
Paranthropus, Australopithecus) does not appear to have interfered with
the basic behavioral repertoire. The persistance of these ancient
behavioral characters in the orang mean that we are hardly going to lose
them anytime soon, even though some people may want to erase them.
