+++
title = "Warrior on the steppe"

+++
Toqta Qiya had won many great battles and captured much territory. He
was a better archer and a better swordsman than Urus Khan. Yet Urus Khan
dominated the steppes due to his larger force and more reliable
warriors. Toqta Qiya had earlier collaborated with Urus Khan, but he
then broke off to establish his on Khanate. Now he was in a struggle
with Urus in a low level conflict, but they still occassionally got
together to raid the Russians. The fortress of Kesh was a long standing
desire of Toqta Qiya. He had seen Urus and many other lesser warriors
including some of his ex-naukers storm it and carry away heavy booty
from the Chinese merchants. Yet, he had attempted to storm it on four
occassions in four years and met with a crushing defeat on each
occassion. On one occassion he thought he had taken the fort when his
horse was shot under him and he barely escaped with life. On another
occassion he tried a bold assault in winter and was flipped on his back
by a blow from a club and nearly died on the snow. In the most recent
attempt he had carefully sapped the fort for nearly 2 months and having
picked up heavy booty from the Chinas was trying to get out when he was
knocked over by a horse-shoe-headed arrow and fell badly wounded to the
ground. He barely got out with his life. Now Toqta Qiya was offered a
lesser province of Shadman, by Urus if he gave up his designs on Kesh
for good. Alternatively, he faced a direct invasion from Urus and his
allies like Suyurghatmish. Should he settle for Shadman or fight the
battle of his life and hold his dignity. He could even lose his life in
the latter option while he would at least have Shadman in the former. He
was unable to decide. As though to mock him, fate had it that just then
his lowly ex-nauker Narikeyan sacked Kesh and annexed to the Oezbeg
Horde. For a winner of so many great the little stronghold of Kesh held
the scales between a petty transient chief and a great Khan who
transcended time.
