+++
title = "American theory of operation Iraqixa0flypaper"

+++
Many Americans are very satisfied with the conquest of Iraq, or at least
they made to feel so by the government. They explain that the conquest
of a vast stretch of land like Eye-rack has cost them very little in
terms of men (probably even the great conquerors of yore like Timur and
Huelegue may have lost a few more, but they conquered larger swaths of
land). Halliburton or whoever has already gotten to go ahead with the
pumping. Odai and Qosai have been given their subterranean resting
places. But somehow the “peaceful, prosperous, secular Iraq” with the
Iraqis singing paens of Pax Americana is not yet there. To add to this
Emperor Bush adds that all is fine and he just asked the Moslems “to
bring ’em on”. Taking the que from this our cheerful American
interlocutors, inform us that the Iraqi strategy is one of the “fly
paper”. Iraq is the flypaper where assorted Ghazis churned out by the
Madarsas of the of the world will come and stick and can consequently be
massacred by the valorous American warriors lying in wait for them. As a
consequence the US (and also the World, they tell us) will be rid of
this plague that has devasted the world for 1400 years. And Emperor Bush
and his viziers ask for more money to put into this brilliant plan. Some
complain that the Soviets of yore had tried the same flypaper trick
during their great Panjshir operations (7 being the biggest of them),
but that hardly made a dent in the Ghazi populations in the land of the
arch-Ghazi Abdali. To this the friendly neo-con answers that the Ghazis
were then fueled by the US, but now that the whole world is fighting
terrorism, the technologically deficient Ghazis have no one to help
them. A little do they realize that the assembly line for Ghazi
production begins in the backyard of the dear friend of the Americans,
CEO Musharaff, whom they readily provide with goodies from time to time.

The one short-coming the otherwise brilliant Americans have is their
profound ignorance of history. Students of history (not the Habib-Thapar
kind) learn a rule pretty early in their studies- Rule \# 5: Do not let
the ghazis wage irregular warfare with you. Many countries have learnt
this the hard way: 1) France in Algeria (a fiery Ghazi Abdal Qadir led
the Jihad against them) 2) Russia in Chechnya (the Jihad of Imam
Shamil). These Jihads were before the oil money came to the aid of the
Jihad and before considerations like human rights were widely
acknowledged by the West. The outcome was not exactly one of peace and
prosperity. The result was festering sores like what Algeria and
Chechnya still are. India too has been unwittingly trapped in such a
situation in Kashmir.

So the American flypaper plan in the least seems to be a history-defying
one. Not many history defying plans have broken past the force of
historical repetition. So despite what Emperor Bush, or Vizier Wolfowitz
may tell us, the most likely prognosis for Iraq is one of sepsis. Even I
have come around to this view. In the mean time what is going on
Af’stan, we do not hear much these days? But the Americans need not
worry, in the least least the Ghazis will be busy in Eye-Rack to come
and bother Terra Americana proper.
