+++
title = "The fall of brahmins"

+++
The Brahmins, the metaphorical head of the Indo-Aryan society are now
facing a major crisis. They have always contributed to Hindu society,
way more than what it suggested by their numbers. Their main pioneering
areas of activity included the sciences, philosophy and grammar. Even,
in the times of national crises like the Macedonian invasion and the
blood-curdling Mohammedan violence they contributed as demanded by the
occassion by taking to arms or inciting the kshatriyas to defend the
land. However, the Mohammedans systematically decimated their
strongholds and weakened their power to a certain extant. Finally, the
British takeover of Bharata resulted in the first frontal assault on the
Brahmins. The British correctly realized that for the Union Jack to be
firmly planted they needed to storm the fortress of Brahminism. They
first lured the Brahmin away from upholding the tradition of the
country. By this the Brahmin who had acted as the receptacle for both
the core Indo-Aryan culture as well as its tribal offshoots was taken
away from his avocations. Then the Indian masses were subverted so that
they stop looking up to the leadership of the Brahmins and instead start
despising the Brahmins as their oppressors.

The result was peculiar. It saw the brahmins making their last stand by
temporarily dominating many secular spheres of life at the expense of
the socio-religious maintanence job they did. But in the process they
diverged so completely from their midpoint that they lost their
traditional ‘values’ that made them great leaders and a force to reckon
with. Thus they became a spent force and with them many of India’s
traditions are in the verge of dying. This is particular interesting
given that they could infiltrate and attenuate past subversionist
movements like Bauddha, Jaina and chArvAka. But against the British they
appear to have been beaten.  
If the brahmin is really beaten, the effects of this on India and the
Hindus will be felt heavily in the future.
