+++
title = "The invasion of Afghanistan andxa0Iran"

+++
Timur-i-lang had campaigned in Afghanistan and Eastern Iran with Mir
Hussain in his earlier days and subsequently Timur had wrested Balkh and
the neighboring regions of Ghor from Hussain. However the rest of
Afghanistan with the surrounding regions of Iran were far from being
under the conqueror’s control. Hussain before him, and even before Amir
Qazaghan had failed in the total conquest of these regions. Timur felt
his glory lay in the conquest of these regions just has Chingiz and his
grandson Hulegu had done. He conducted his famous campaign of Iran in
between the last Qamar-ad Din wars but is considered here for due
geographic coherence in the narrative. This region lying between Hamadan
and Kabul was earlier ruled by the famed Mohammed Khawarizm Shah whom
Chingiz Khan had destroyed in a breath-taking campaign. The Assassins
and the Ghor Kart Afghans then took over the region only be smashed by
Hulegu the grandson of Chingiz. After the disintegration of Hulegu’s
empire the region had been divided into 4 extremely violent Islamic
powers- the Arab dynasty of the Muzzafarids in Fars, the Sunni Afghan
Maliks of Herat, the Sarabdars, who were the Shite Moslems of Sabzewar
and the partly Islamized Jalairid Mongols of Tabriz and Baghdad. They
were expending their energies in a spate of arson and assassinations
over very petty territorial and religious issues when Timur felt the
need to put the fear of his wrath into these people in 1380. He
assembled a vast force of horsemen, in seven divisions, for a quriltai
on the Oxus steppes. He asked the Malik of Herat, whose prized fighter
had maimed him leading to his lameness, to come humbly and kiss his
shoe. The malik sent a messenger stating his surrender but failed to
appear himself as he was busy punishing the Shias for their apostasy at
Nishapur. As soon as the horses had been rejuvenated following the
winter of 1380 Timur marched straight towards Herat. The malik’s brother
shaken by Timur’s arrival surrendered the fort of Sarakhs to the south
of Herat and kissed Timur’s shoe to mark submission.

Malik Giyath al Pir Ali decided to resist and strengthened garrison of
Bushang to the north of Herat and sent his son to the impregnable
fortress of Ishkalcha that had once even shaken Alexander. Timur
assailed Bushang and easily captured it slaying its defenders. The Ghor
Afghans made a sortie on Timur and were cut down by his heavily armed
elite cavalry and in a short but fierce encounter. Timur had the
satisfaction of capturing the man who had shot him with crescent headed
arrows in his youth and had him executed by a firing squad of archers.
Malik Pir Ali took fright as the fortifications of Herat were demolished
by Timur and surrendered meekly to Timur who arrested him a used him as
a hostage to force even his son to surrender. His family was sent o
Samarkand to live as hostages after he had kissed the boot of the
Conqueror. The next year in 1382 Timur found that Herat was buzzing in
rebellion with the Ghor Afghans secretly incited by the Malik and his
son. Timur, immediately executed his entire family by trampling them
under horses in sacks and sent his son Miran Shah with a large force of
Amirs with simple orders of depopulating Herat. In true Timurid style,
they entered Herat and after a fierce fight annihilated the Afghans and
having slain every living being in the city erected Minars of severed
human heads. Arabshah writes: as we pass through Herat we only see
whitening human remains and an occasional carrion bird.

Timur then menacingly marched on the sarabdar Ali Miaadad of Sabzewar
and Mazandaran that once belonged to the ancient Ahura worshiping
Iranians. Miaadad humbly capitulated and joined Timur as a soldier in
his ranks and together with him waged a jihad of extermination on the
surviving Iranian fire worshipers of the region. Sarabdar Ali Beg
however resisted Timur from the fort of Kelat in Eastern Iran. Timur
spread the rumor of resting in the winter of 1382, but taking advantage
of the milder conditions in Iran marched furiously on Beg and caught him
unaware by scaling the fort through a difficult rocky overhang. The
elite fighters held Beg at bay as the main gate was thrown open for more
timuric forces to rush in and captured Ali Beg. Beg was sent to
Samarkand and crushed to death by a camel. Next Timur attacked the fort
of Isfarain ruled by Sarabdar Amir Wali and destroyed it completely by
mining it with explosive pots. Wali initially capitulated but incited a
great uprising in Seistan and Sabzewar. Timur reacted with appalling
ferocity in 1383 with a sudden journey all the way from Samarkand to
Iran with his divisions of horsemen, light raiders and fire pots. He
overcame the defenders of Sabzewar by the sheer fury of his charge and
having divested the city of it is entire defending garrison, proceeded
to slaughter all the inhabitants. He did this by piling the citizens one
on top of the other and bricking them alive into minars that “proclaimed
the glory of the world conqueror”. These towers with people bricked to
them were seen far and wide he states. Then he entered the Seistan
country side and overwhelmed the local defenders completely and put them
to sword building, as he states “artificial mountains with their
headless bodies and minars with their skulls”.

He demonstrated the might of Allah to all in the city of Zaranj in
Seistan; as he proudly states in his biography: “and then we slew every
person from the infants in the cradle to the centenarians”. The ancient
fire worshiping Iranians under Ardashir (Artaxerxes) and Shapur had
built an extensive irrigation system and the mighty ‘dam of Rustam’ on
the Helmand river that had supported their mighty empires in Iran. Timur
on realizing they were built by the kafirs of yore decided to destroy
them completely and demolished both the dam and the irrigation channels
and their locks. With this completely changed the character of the
region, turning it into a barren desert, that it is to this date. From
there Timur moved on to Kandahar (the glorious Gandhara seat of the
kAnva R^ishis and the capital of shakuni). The city was numbed by the
happenings in Seistan and failed to even defend itself but they could
flee nowhere before the Timuric squadrons that hunted them down. In the
process Timur vented his ire even on the ancient gardens built by the
Indians and the Zoroastrians by drying out the plants and uprooting
trees. He then returned to Samarkand to rest for a while. His spies
reported that Sarabdar Amir Wali was still up to mischief in he regions
of Asterabad. He even surprised Timur by a night attack on his camp, but
Timur recovering mounted his horse and fought him off with great valor.
His troops soon arrayed themselves and they defeated Wali and entered
Asterabad. Here again we hear the sickening litany of the Timur’s
torture and massacre of all living beings in the city. He then burnt
down the empty city after looting in the name of the prophet and marched
towards Iraq.
