+++
title = "Dream interrupted"

+++
We moved up the hill rapidly (remember the hill which came in the
dreams\!). It was the brief pleasure sent by the gods. It was like that,
which had visited the four kings, namely divodAsa, uShinAra, vishvAmitra
etc in the form of yayAti’s daughter mAdhavi. But it was the shorter and
wholly empty unlike that briefly enjoyed by those great kshatriyas of
yore. Coursing freely in a rapid ratha we reached the paravata. Before
dismounting from the ratha, I acted in the most atypical manner
deviating significantly from the norms that exist. Yet nothing
happened\! I took it as sign of victory. On reaching the parvata we
freely moved in the manner of vishvAmitra on the slopes of the
himapArvata, brushing aside the dark nishAdas and dAsas who infested the
mountain strongholds. Having reached the upper reaches we beheld the
yonder territory, like videgha mAthava beholding the expanses of mithila
ripe for conquest. I did not realize at that time that I lacked the
equivalent of the son of rAhUgaNa beside me. Then we descended. The
solitude allowed some images to hang motionlessly. This was a sign that
indicated a total victory. After all it was ordained that those
pleasures were even destined for me in the very kshetra, where I had
observed the vratas. Then having moved amidst the settlements of the
nishadas and dasyus we returned to my place. The black bitch signalled
that the noose of karma could not be escaped, even as the great viShNu
could not escape his 10 incarnations. I returned like yayAti after a
stroll in shakra’s garden. Then, just as yayAti having exhausted his
stay in svargo loka fell head-long back to the midst of mortals, my
karma having been exhausted I descended to the lower worlds. When my
descent was complete and my feet hit the ground, I looked around.
Unfortunately, unlike yayAti, there was no pratardana, vasumanA, aShTaka
or shivi to revive me and remained trapped in the dark lower loka\!
