+++
title = "Masi Reddi"

+++
Masi Reddi and his wife Nilamama lived in the eastern ghats selling wood
with their 6 sons. They invoked mahAdeva, who appeared in their house in
the form of a jangama. He gave Nilamma some ashes and said they would
become rich when another son was born. This son was Undala Padmanna.
Soon they became prosperous by acquiring agriculture. However Padmanna
never did any work. So his brothers decided to kill him. They asked him
to burn a termite hill hoping that a cobra that lived in it would emerge
and bite him. He did so an instead a herd of black bleating sheep
emerged. He was frightened by them, but rudra appeared and asked him to
rear them and live by their milk. rudra taught how to milk the sheep and
boil their milk. He then sent him to a distant place where rAkshas lived
and obtain fire from there. The rAkshas had captured and chained a
ravishingly beautiful fair-skinned brAhmaNa girl. Though of collyrium
complexion Undala Padmanna seduced the brAhmaNa girl and managed to
release her. As they were running away the rAkshas started chasing them.
The brahmin girl asked the Reddi to run ahead to attract the rAkshas
attention. As they chased him, she made her escape and used a Sanskrit
spell to turn the Reddi into a *Varanus* lizard. The rAkshas were
confused and returned. She then made him back into a man and they
returned to their flock with the fire. He married her giving her a
woollen bracelet. Then he married a tribal woman of his own ethnicity
and gave her a cotton bracelet. The descendents of the brahmin woman
founded a higher semi-sanskritized caste amidst the herders.
