+++
title = "gaNapati-The god"

+++
gaNapati while being one of the most widely worshiped deities of the
Hindu pantheon is one of the most poorly understood ones in terms of
origins and history. The sectarian worship of gaNapati and kumAra unlike
the vibrant and well-preserved shaiva, shakta and vaiShNava systems are
largely extinct or facing extinction. The literature of the gaNapatyas
is also largely neglected or unknown to most Hindus (A consequence of
this is their inability to properly circumvent weak western productions
like that of Courtright).

The ancient origins of gaNapati as can be gleaned from the manu’s
gR^ihya sUtras and yAGNyavalkya’s smR^itis. With my old home situated
just some distance from the greatest gaNapatya kshetras I have always
been fascinated with the evolution of the gaNapatya sect and its hidden
mysteries. The one of the main Acharyas of the gaNapatya sect was
girijAsuta who propounded the tantrik worship of mahAgaNapati. Here
gaNapati is concieved as being embraced by his Shakti with one tusk and
an elephant face. This mahAgaNapati gives rise to emanations namely,
brahmA, viShNu and rudra. From these emanantions the other devas headed
by indra then emerge. The meditation of this gaNapati with the esoteric
ulka gAyatri is supposed to lead to the path of moksha for these
gaNapatyas.

The next great gaNapatya Acharya was gaNapatikumAra. He founded the cult
of haridrAgaNapati. In its most basic form this gaNapati is worshiped in
a lump of turmeric. The mUlamantra of this sect is that of gR^itasamda
shunahotra shaunaka bhArgava which begins as gaNAnAntva gaNapatiM
havamahe… They worship gaNapati in a yellow form with yellow silken
clothing, yellow yaGNyopavIta and having 4 arms, 3 eyes and a club, a
pAsha and an ankusha. They also use the emanation imagery where the
other devas directly emerge from gaNapati and then form the universe.
The followers of this cult brand themselves with an image of gaNapati,
just as the vaiShNavas with the discus and conch of viShNu.

The next great Acharya of the sect was herambasuta, who founded the
heterodox vAmAchara cult of gaNapati worship. They worship the form of
gaNapati termed ucchiShTa gaNapati. He is mediated in a form, which may
be viewed by many uninitiated modern Hindus and others as being very
obscene. The votaries wear red clothes, smear a red tilak on their
forehead and are not bound by norms like marriage. They activate the
great gaNanAtha in the mUlAdhara after stilling themselves with wine,
eating modakas with their left hand and then performing sexual
intercourse to kick start the upward ascent of gaNanAtha’s shakti.

The three Acharyas navanIta, svarNa and saMtAna founded other sects of
gaNapati that are poorly studied. They follow a pantheistic view with
the whole world being concieved as the parts of the great gaNanAtha.They
use mantras termed the gaNapati atharvashiras to perform their rites.
They also perform the great rite of the gaNapati kalpa as laid out in
the dharma shAstras. They also use vedic hymns to the maruts and rudra
in their rites.
