+++
title = "The Malhotran theory ofxa0U-turns"

+++
Malhotra, proposed a theory that the Westerners or members of the
Anglosphere, and its more extended fraternity, the Leukosphere,
appropriate Hindu ideas through a process, which he terms the U-turn. We
shall consider Malhotra’s shyness towards the “H” word and eagerness to
work within the system later. In its basic form the U-turn theory states
that a Leukospherite (roughly a White man or woman) first whole
heartedly delves into the Hindu lore. Then he or she on attaining
maturity starts seeing the knowledge gained from the Hindu world in
his/her own culture. And the next thing you know they claim that it was
always an integral part of their culture and start demonizing the parent
Hindu lore and Hindus.

If we look at this carefully we can see that Malhotra’s basic
observations hold water. In the 60s and 70s there was indeed a huge move
in the West to move towards ideas of Hindu origin. Various orders of
Hindu teachers, ranging from the saintly advaitins like Swami Dayananda,
fanatic vaishnavas like Prabhu Pada, diverse Yogis like Swami Rama and
Mahesh, apparent “vAmAchArIs” like Muktananda, pop speakers like Chopra,
in addition to a plethora of astrologers and ayurvedists reached the
shores of the US and started implanting Hindu ideas. However, over the
late 80s and 90s the Americans started making their U-turns in large
numbers. Of course there were some like David Frawley and the Shanti
Shanti Group that embraced the Hindu world and triggered off a secondary
wave of propagation, albeit riddled with their with their own peculiar
(mis)understanding of the source texts.

Why did the U-turn happen? The Malhotran theory does not deeply analyze
this point. We believe that the diagnosis of this may be critical in
studying Indo-Leukosphere interactions. However pluralistic the
Leukosphere may claim to be, its modern fundament rests atop a Christian
Weltanschauung. A subtle unstated skein of Christian thinking, morals
and ethics lie at the heart of the Western judiciary system, parenting,
war- and love- making and education systems. Hence, when the Hindu ideas
were invading the West, they threatened to subvert the Christian
undergirding of their civilization. Having made a quick assessment of
the “covert Hindu operation” and knowing fully well how China, and other
Asian potentates had been overwhelmed by it in the past, the powers of
the Leukosphere swung into action. They easily dealt with movements like
those of Muktananda and Hare Krishna, which were rather open to or
dependent on sexual activity. Drawing on the over-abundance of female
beauty available in the Leukosphere, they were able to literally seduce
some of these movements out of the way. Others were attacked more
indirectly and neutered; the chief weapon being propaganda to paint
Hindus, Hindu thought and India in negative light. In this latter
project they coopted the Hindu traitors (secularists, progressives etc),
Mohammedans and other enemies of Hindus. The symbols of Hindu India’s
historic dominance were down-played through academic means and those of
Hindus’ enemies built up.

These efforts restored the solid Christian basis of the Western
civlization and attenuated the Hindu influence on the West. It is very
likely that this deliberate process is what lies behind the modern
U-turns. In the American system of things there is strong pressure to
conform to the average state; this in itself is a part of subtle
propaganda by controling powers of the Leukosphere. So to sell your
wares you need to “fit in”, and this played a major role in catalyzing
the U-turns as a means of conformity.

While Hindus made a attempt, their typical neglect of history prevented
them from reading the wind correctly. So, now the tables have been
turned on the Hindus and they are not sure how they could fight back.
