+++
title = "Possession by gaNapati"

+++
The sUta asked “O great kshatriya narrate to me the effects of
displeasing the the fierce god gaNapati.”

The descendent of the great manu, the law giver, said ” The displeasure
of vinAyaka is of terrible consequence. The 6 ferocious vinAyakas,
namely shAla, kaTa\~nkaTa, kUShmANDa, rAjaputra, sammita and devayajana
can seize a person at anytime. The person immediately shows a variety of
strange behaviors- he or she may start pounding clumps of soil with the
hand, cutting grass, writing on ones own body and dreaming of waters,
men with shaved heads, camels, pigs and asses. They may feel that they
are floating in air and feel the constant sensation of being pursued by
someone while walking. A women, even if of great beauty will simply not
be looked at by any man, when possessed by the vinAyakas. Men even if
rich or handsome will simply fail to get a woman. Married women will go
sterile and children will die. A kshatriya will lose his post or kingdom
even if he has good qualifications. A good teacher will fail to get any
students and students will repeatedly pull the plug in their studies.
vaishyas’ fields will lie fallow and they will sink in their trade.
Death may strike the victims without warning and their crops or vehicles
may be crushed by rampaging elephants. Rats will devastate their
granaries and snakes may kill them or their children. They will
tormented by bites of insects, spiders and scorpions”

The sUta asked “pray tell me, Oh mighty rAjanya, of some examples of
such a curse.”

The mAnava said “On the banks of the mUlaka lived the brahmin woman
gomati. She failed to immerse an idol of the fierce gaNanAtha after the
festival in the month of ashADha. She failed to make due offerings to
the idol which had been consecrated during the festival after that. An
year later she died from the possession by the agents of rudra.

Likewise, kiraNa kAshyapa on the banks of the tAmralipta had consecrated
an idol of gaNapati in a little shrine. After having done that he and
his friends observed unclean practices in the shrine. They were all
struck by terrible possessions by the agents of rudra that tormented
them for an year till they purified themselves with the vighna shAnti
rite”

“we invoke rudra, vighna, skanda and their awful agents and humbly
beseech them to keep their missiles and agents away from us instead send
them over to those who hate us or we hate.”
