+++
title = "End of the Maharattas – I"

+++
An important lesson is there to be learnt from what happened between
1795 to 1818 vis-a-vis the Maharattas. Bajirao II handed himself up to
British protection as he was in conflict with Daulatrao Shinde. Shinde
was in turn in locked in enemity with Yashvant and Vithoji Holkar and
the other major Maharatta chiefs like Gaikwad in Gujarat and Bhosle of
Nagpur. Vithoji Holkar was given to banditry and he began large scale
thievery and raiding along with his Pendharis north of the Krishna
river. Vithoji was captured by Bajirao with the help of the British and
crushed under an elephant in Pune. Yashvant Holkar was enraged by the
Peshva killing his half brother Vithoji and prepared to attack the
Peshva. But Daulat Shinde attacked him with his division in North India
and inflicted heavy damages. Yashvant however escaped and returned to
take Khandesh and plundered the city of Ahmadnagar and the surroundings
where he demolished all the palaces of Shinde and burnt the townships.
Daulat Shinde then sent his forces to attack Yashvant Holkar. Bajirao
tried to parley with Holkar, but the Konkanasta Brahmin- Maharatta
rivalry came in the way and the brahmin chief Purandare decided to lead
the Peshva’s army to attack Holkar. Holkar smashed Purandhare’s troops
at Baramati and started advancing towards Pune. The Peshva now appealed
to the Neo-Maharatta Daulat Shinde to aid him. Shinde sent Sadashiv
Bhaskar, his chief general to aid the Peshva and set out to corner
Holkar. The Holkar and Shinde armies clashed in the vicinity of Pune in
fierce fight in which the two Neo-Maharattas exhausted their resources
in the midst of heavy killing. Bajirao fled from Pune and placed himself
in British custody at Bassein. Holkar took Pune and place Amritrao, the
brother of Bajirao, as Peshva. Holkar tried to unite the other Maharatta
chiefs for a show down with the Britons, but they paid a deaf ear and so
he left Pune. In 1803 the Britons marched in to Pune and placed Bajirao
on the gaddi as their puppet.

Daulat Shinde and Raghuji Bhosle formed an alliance to attack the Nizam
and the British. They invaded the Nizam domains in 1803 and seized the
northern districts. The British generals Sir Hyslop, Wellesley and Smith
sent the Maharattas a notice that they should retreat from the Nizam’s
territory or the British army would attack Ahmednagar. At this point
Yashvant Holkar lead a plundering operation through Aurangabad and its
environs and laid waste to the land. The Maharattas held parleys with
him to join hands with Daulat and Raghuji against the Britons. However,
Yashvant and Daulat had a fight and the former moved up to Malva with
his loot.

The looting and depredations of Holkar triggered famine in the land.
There was also a band of Arabs that was raiding in the vicinity and
holed in the Ahmad fort to escape the English advance. The English army
under Wellesley attacked the Ahmadnagar fort with heavy artillery
bombardment in May 1803. The fierce fire demolished one of the walls and
the Arab bands and Shinde’s army dropped the fort and fled after losing
a short but fierce fight to the Britons. Wellesley remarks that the
supplies in the fort were in large quantities and the powder was much
better than what the Brits had. He quickly replaced his magazines with
the powder obtained from the fort. Under these circumstance, one wonders
why the Hindus forsook the fort and retreated. Shinde was humiliated and
asked to disarm by the Britons. Amritrao was banished to Varanasi.

With this any semblance of law and order completely collapsed around
Aurangabad and Ahmednagar and bands of Marathi hill tribes took to
plundering, thieving and murdering in the entire region. Some of
Holkar’s agents were also still plundering every inhabitation they
could locate. Syed Sultan Ali along with a large band of marauding Arabs
commited numerous atrocities in course of a Jihad cum thieving operation
he initiated along the Godavari river. The English let this anarchy run
its course for they knew it would erase all opportunity for the land to
support a Maharatta revival. The Peshva in Pune decided to restore law
and asked Balaji Lakshman to slaughter the marauding tribals. Tryambak
Dengle sent another large body of troops to massacre another advancing
mass of over 15000 tribals. The famine decimated most urban centers and
the Peshva failed to restore law as he handed the control to brutal
Patils who came down heavily on farmers. This broke the back of
Maharastra resulting in the route of the Maharatta armies by the Britons
15 years later.
