+++
title = "Islamism and the West"

+++
One point to notice is that Islam, in part derives its modern strength
from the West. The western commentators gleefully point out that Islam
was defeated as a military force before the advent of the “modern era”
by the western armies. The failure of the Turks before Vienna is oft
cited as the turning point for this event. What we are not often told is
that Islam was being rolled back by the Hindus too in the subcontinent.
When Bajirao reached Delhi the Mogul power had ceased to be. There were
of course two major Islamic incursions from central Asia- Nadir Shah and
his successor Ahmed Shah, and terorrists like Tipu Sultan. But it was
clear that the Hindus would have eventually cleared these Islamic
pestilences had they gone ahead they way they were going.  
Unfortunately, the Hindus had a few serious deficiencies that made them
falter before an even greater adversary, the West, especially given that
they were worn out in their long struggle to roll back Islam. But in the
20th century, the defeated Islam was coopted by the West for their own
purposes:1) The oil finds resulted in the legitimization of brutish
tyrants giving Islam immense monetary resources and a free hand to
remain medieaval as long as they kept the pumping going. 2) Islam was
used as an ally in the Cold War as a bulwark against India and the
Soviets. 3) Islam was appeased in a “trade off” game by the
Clinton-Albright clique by helping the Islamists against Serbia. The net
result was an Islam awash with Geld and Gewaffe free to renew the
Ummahian ambitions.

It is my theory that the bulwark of the West rests on a variety of
Abrahamic constructs: 1) The Judeo-Christian thought (As Huntington has
admitted) 2) Socialism in academic discourse. Both these are deep down
at the axiomatic level are very compatible with Islam. This prevents a
fundamental doctrinal attack on Islam in the West unless the West drops
Abrahamism and returns to pre-Abrahamistic paganism. Thus the west
allows this ambivalence about Islam- it is considered the black sheep of
the Abrahamic family, but still within the family. And, they are all
united in their visceral enemity to polytheism. The only hope for reform
in Islam is the west cutting off support for Islam and allowing it to
dismantle from within. The Hindus hence need to be beware, but being
polytheistic, they typically fail to parse the Abrahamistic thought and
often fall prey to its sword arm or its mind games. Indeed, the Hindus
need to develop their sword arm vigorously, but cleansing themselves of
the mental lensing by Ibrahimiya is equally important.  
A prominent cleric, Sheik Saleh bin Abdullah al-Humaid, explained that
“killing a soul without justification is one of the gravest sins under
Islam; it is as bad as polytheism.”  
Let Hindus be under no delusion\!
