+++
title = "Towards the battle ofxa0kAla-nirNaya"

+++
Our spies provided us with speculative intelligence that the hostile
forces may be preparing a trap for us. However, we were not able to
confirm it based on other reports. The princess of Hayastan, with calves
like the quivers of kAma, gave us one of those Mona Lisa smiles and
drove away on her ratha. As ever, if one meets her the right way one is
transported to the shores of the ocean of bliss. She expressed deep
Schadenfreude that R had been plunged into her current condition. She
laughed like chAmuNDA as she said: “Imagine if R were not reduced to
certifying pesticides, we might have had nothing left to do.” But she
added: ” I would be happy if my daughter turned out be half as her.” I
told she was not the first or even the second who had wished secretly or
even openly that R plunge into shit, very literally, like the
dharmashAstras pronounce for certain unfortunate souls.

\#Flashback\#

She then seemed to console me over my current state. Our primary allies
asked to hold a major sabha. Several suggestions flew, though none
seemed meaningful. Finally, I told the sabha where exactly we stood as
per my suggestion. There were some expressions of despair and anger. One
of our primary courtiers spoke the great humiliations our allies had
faced at the hands of our foes. Why were the gods not favoring us? Had
indra gone over to the druhyus forsaking the pUrus? This courtier
suggested a complicated plan for a battle. I rapidly thought through the
plan and saw that it was infeasible, though if events went badly in the
immediate future we (especially, if the speculative intelligence were
true) a version of it could be used for the worst case scenario. Our
amAtya then spoke and said we need to act decisively in a matter of
days, which ever way the battle went. Our amAtya proposed a plan that
seemed reasonable. We decided to consider it seriously.

I then lead a solo expedition and sighted my old foe, Pande of the
broken bottle, and near him my accquaintence the trustworthy kAyastha
from lakShmaNapura. Both were now omens. I realized that there was a
glimmer of hope. Both smiled and put on airs of friendship- one false
and the other real. But they also reminded me of the mistakes that had
weakened me on front \#2.

The hostile force suddenly made a peculiar move- They rapidly projected
a wedge of troops on front \#1. The picket was too small to really
compete against our firepower. We decided not respond and remained
firmly behind fort walls. But we saw certain signs, a decisive encouter
is on the cards. Our ever-optimistic amAtya agreed.
