+++
title = "Akbar’s self-glorification"

+++
No Hindu should forget the deaths of the valiant Rai Jaimal Rathore and
Pratap Sisodia (Patta). A comparison of the Hindu chronicles of the
Rathores of Badnor and Akbar’s Fathnamah reveals a discrepancy that I
believe is a creation of Akbar. Of course the secularists who have
penned the modern Indian history texts have whole-heartedly accepted
Akbar’s narrative as they fall in the line of providing an Islamic
narrative for Indian history.

Briefly: Rai Jaimal was the brother of the bhakti poetess Mirabai and
was entrusted the defence of Chittor when it was assaulted by the army
of Islam, led by Akbar. Jaimal was a victor of many battles is well
remembered as the hero of Badnor who placed a wall of steel against the
advance of the Mogols and other Moslem marauders like the Turkic clans
of Afghanistan that were lashing against the land. Given his victorious
track record he was entrusted the defence of Chittor along with the
relative of the Rana Udaisingh, the chief of Salumbar. His son was the
16 year old Udayabhanu Pratap (Patta) who, along with his young bride
died fighting the Mogols.

Akbar himself declares in his Fathnamah “…Since the thoughts of war-like
Jihad dominated the enlightened mind, the Rana’s behaviour made the King
angry and increased his zeal for the divine Islam… Sahidas Jaimal and
Udiban Patta who are renowned for their valor among the infidels, may
Allah forsake them and lead them to the abode of Hell, and who are
considered to be equal to a thousand horsemen in intrepidity and
prowess…”

He then adds ” The mountain traversing ghazis, who brave the
battlefields and seek Jihad with all their heart and soul and consider
becoming a Shahid to be the greatest reward in this as well as heaven,
sought permission to capture the towers and fortifications and putting
their trust in Allah and relying on his help, which is the source of
strength to the imperial authority, carry out brave assaults and bring
the fort under control by force. Since those ignoble Kaafrs had
collected such large quantities of weapons for defending the fort like
deg, zarbzan (both kinds of fire throwers), tofs (guns),
tufang(muskets), manjaniq (mangonels), jarr i saqil (triple cross bows),
naft (naphata) and nawak (heated sand) that would last for thirty years
even if continuously used, and since they had great confidence in these
weapons and in the strength of the fort as well as their own prowess, we
did not let the royal Mogols fight with a view of protecting the people
of Islam, may God preserve them till the day of resurrection, lest some
of them may get killed in rashness. We sent for the giant rads (guns),
mortars and other pieces of artillery which were left at the capital. We
also ordered the manufacture of cannons and mountain-breaking mortars in
the camp and decided that tunnels be dug and after the arrival of sarkob
(batteries) and sabat (shelters) an attack be launched… We sent another
army to plunder and sack Rampur. The troop returned with immense booty
after dispatching many of the worthless Hindus to the abode of Hell.
After the arrival of the topkhana and completion of the covered passage
Sabat, explosion of the mines causing conflagration and blowing up of
the towers and battlements, we directed the troops to establish
themselves at the foot of the rampart and surround the fort from every
side.

Finally “The brave warriors skilled in the use of deadly swords, set
against the enemy and drenched in blood, delivered concerted assault and
succeeded in removing the wooden planks with which those accursed Hindus
had blocked the breaches. Seeing this, Jaimal, one of the three chiefs,
who had taken the lead in the battle and was looking after the fort from
the beginning to the end advanced with a body of men to stop the breach.
In the meanwhile some artillery men belonging to that accursed infidels
fired their guns one after the other and in their flashes Jaimal, and
these accompanying him could be seen from afar. As for the last three
days and nights we have been present there often firing with muskets and
arrows and since it was destined for Jaimal that he should hasten to the
lowest parts of Hell at our own Allah‑worshipping hands. When he came in
view the tufang we were holding, was ready as it is said, “When God
wills anything, He provide its means.” No sooner he was seen and the gun
discharged then the worthless Hindu was struck in forehead. Hearing the
\[Quranic\] call, “where so ever you may be, death will overtake you,
even though you were in lofty towers,” proceeded to the abode of Hell.
This caused great consternation among the high and low of that
cattle-like kaffrs.”

He concludes by stating: “They should also pray in the auspicious
moments, when the prayers are more likely to be granted, for the long
life of our noble self, the perpetuity of the empire and for the grant
of greater competence to us for fulfilling obligation of Jihad, divine
worship and acts of piety.”

So much for the secular hero Akbar- he has clearly taken on himself the
claim that as a brave ghazi engaged in Jihad he himself shot down Jaimal
with his musket.

The Hindu chronicle of Badnor tell a different tale. Apparently Jaimal
was indeed wounded during the attempt to fill a breach created by the
Mogol mining. Due to this wound he was unable to mount a horse. So when
the Mogols started pouring in after breaking though one of the 7 gates
of Chittor he sat on the shoulders of a soldier and wielding swords in
both his hands fought bravely in the general throng till he fell
fighting. Given that right in the begining Akbar states that he tried to
shield his royal men from the infidel fire. Given the general range of
the smooth bore Mogol muskets (90m or so) it is unlikely that Akbar
struck a specific target from upclose. This suggests that the Fathnamah
narrative we are often fed with is a creation of Akbar as he had it
composed to celebrate his Jihad.

After the fall of Patta’s father near the Suraj gate of Chittor and that
of Jaimal, Patta, with his bride and mother taking up arms went against
the Mogols. It is said that single handed he cut a trail of destruction
through the Moslem ranks till an elephant was sent charging against him.
Struck by the charge he was killed, while his wife and mother had been
slain earlier.

The secular hero Akbar was no better than his ancestors or his
descendents in his conduct of the Jihad or hatred for Hindus. But the
secular historians have been more than eager to attribute heroic deed to
this tyrant, without questioning his own concoctions.
