+++
title = "datta, the atri"

+++
datta, the atri, was endowed with lasting youthfulness and was the
embodiment of all the 3 guNas. In his early life was a great warrior and
was the prime minister and priest of haihaya emperor, kArtavIrya arjuna.
He led the haihaya troops to many great victories and participated in
the rise of the emperor. The haihaya king was un-paralleled in the use
of arms and having conquered the entire known world was crowned as
saMrAT by dattAtreya. The haihaya, however, had a deep enemity with the
bhR^igus. He stole the cow of the bhArgava R^ishi jamadagni. In due
course arjuna was challenged by rAma the son of jamadgni and axed to
death by him. dattatreya was furious and carried out many abhichAra
rites to destroy the bhArgavas. Aided by his spells, the vitIhotras or
the sons of arjuna slew the bhArgava R^ishi jamadgni. However, rAmo
bhArgava over came the spells with their own deadly incantations of the
atharvaNa shruti and prepared for war with the vItahavyas. In the battle
that followed they were protected by the brahman of dattAtreya and the
bhArgava could not over come them. However, finally with the
atri-destroying charm of the atharvaNa shruti rAma overcame the brahman
of datta. After that he pierced the vitahavyas with his deadly astras
and slew each of them. With the vItihotras dead, datta renounced the
world and practiced the sattva guNa. He lead the life a celibate ascetic
for long, teaching the principles of renunciation. In the final stage of
he became and embodiment of the tamoguNa and picked a beautiful woman as
his companion and wandered around with her in carefree indulgence,
bearing a trident and a bow and guarded by 4 dogs. The were continually
lost in dalliance, loud laughter, merriment and imbibition of vAruNi
beer, when rAmo bhArgava chanced upon them. In this state the atri
enlightened him on the tantric lores.
