+++
title = "The death of Chingizxa0Kha’Khan"

+++
On the New moon day in August in 1227 AD the greatest of the military
leaders of all times Chingiz Kha’Khan died. Born Temujin, and elected
Kha’Khan- the Oceanic or mighty khan in 1206, destroyed in a span of 21
years the hegemony of China and Islam, two of the most dangerous powers
in human history. This was very often done by waging war on both the
fronts, something which, even superpowers like the United States today
cannot really sustain if it were pitted against these same powers.
Furthermore, this rise of Chingiz should be placed in the background of
his immediate ancestors like Yessugai, Kabul and Kutula who while noted
for their valor had no more an impact on the Central Asian history than
any of the other khans who came and went. The other Turko-Mongol
expansions such as the Huns of Motun-Tegin, the Uighurs of Tengri Bögü
Kha’Khan and Gök Turks of Kül-tegin and Qapaghan khan were nowhere near
Chingiz Khan in the organizational effort or result of their campaigns.

Chingiz died in final campaign on the Northern Chinese empire of the
Tangut or the Xia-Xia. The Tangut had failed to pay heed to the Khan’s
message to them to send forces to aid him in the great battle against
Muhammad Khwarazm Shah. But seeing the Khan caught up in the fierce
battles with Temür Malik in the sack of Samarkand, the two chIna empires
of the Chin and the Tangut became increasingly hostile to the Mongols.
They thought the Khan might never return from West. The Tangut who were
of Tibetan descent with the aid of the Chin were seeking to conquer
Tibet that Chingiz had sacked by sending his general Arslan Khan.
Chingiz watching these movements in the East sent his great general
Muqali against the Chinese Empires. Muqali and his son Boru cut of the
communication between the Chin and the Tangut and started and routed the
Chin armies in the battles of Shan Si and Pe chi li. In 1223 Muqali
passed away and Chin reestablished ties with Tangut and were trying to
recapture their lost empire. Chingiz sent Boru against the remnants of
the Chin and himself set out against the Tangut after returning from the
West in 1226. Li Hien the Tangut emperor tried to take the returning
Mongol army from the north in the city of Ling Chau. However Chingiz
waging a blitzkrieg got there before Li Hien and sacked the city and
destroyed it. Then he took on the Tangut army and completely destroyed.
Chronicles say there were no survivors of this Mongol assault. He chased
the reserve forces of the Tangut army southwards sacking the cities of
Si Ning, Lin Tao and Shen Si and erased them of the face of the earth.
He destroyed the reserve army of the Tangut of around 90,000 men in the
winter of that year and conquered the whole Tangut empire and laid siege
to its capital. Li Hien promised to surrender in a month. Pleased with
this Chingiz retreated to the Mountains of Liu Pan to spend the hot
summer. Here while hunting an ibex the Khan fell from his horse and fell
seriously ill in the aftermath of the fall \[One translation of the
Secret History says his horse collided with a wild horse resulting in a
fall; the Secret History records injury to his flesh followed by a high
fever just before his death suggesting septicemia from the wound\].
Knowing that his end had come, he called his men around him and gave
them his last lecture. He laid out for his sons and generals the grand
schemes of the future world conquest that was to encompass the rest of
China destroying all its empires, the Muslims, the Russians, the
Hungarians and the Poles. Then he called for an arrow and picking it up
with his ebbing strength broke it. Then he called for his quiver and
asked his sons and grandsons to break it but they failed. This he said
illustrated the importance of unity. Then he bestowed his empire on his
second son Ogodai saying that his temperament was best suited for
reigning the Mongols and added that his grandson the wise Qubilai would
be a great ruler one day. Having said this we are told that he asked his
old friend and scribe Kiluken to take care of his wife Börte, to be
faithful to his sons Ogodai and Tolui and record his mysterious last
words:

*“A jade stone is truly without crust, polished dagger has no dirt on
it, a man born to life is not deathless, he must go without home,
without a resting placing. The glory of a deed is in its completion.
Firm and unbending is he who keeps a plighted word faithfully. Follow
not the will of another and good will of many will be yours. It is clear
I must depart from you all. The words of the boy Qubilai are very
weighty, his words you shall note. He shall adorn my throne some day”*.

With this on August 18th of 1227 CE the Khan expired \[Year of the Pig
in their ShaShThi saMvatsara. My reckoning using astronomical software
suggests that the actual date was the New moon of August 13th, 1227 CE.
It is possible that this new moon is a retrofitting because a popular
Mongol tradition gives it as August 25, 12th day of the 7th Mongol lunar
month, which fits well with the astronomical evidence that Aug 13th was
New moon\]

His corpse was raised in a cart with 4 horses and was surrounded on all
sides on horse by his wife, sons, grandsons and generals, Ogodai, Tolui,
Batu, Shibhan, Kublai, Qubilai, Guyuk, Subedai and Kiluken and they
marched from the Tangut empire towards the Kentai Khan mountains in
upper Mongolia. I reproduce below the funeral chant composed by Kiluken
as they marched which was found on a parchment in a Mongolian monastery:

*“In the times gone thou swept like falcon before us; today a car bears
thee on as it rumbles; O you my khan\!  
Hast you indeed left us, wives and children and the Quriltai of thy
empire, O you my khan\!  
Sweeping forward as a golden eagle on its prey did you lead us in
strife,  
but now you have stumbled, and are down like a colt broken in its
charge, O you my khan\!  
O Lion of the great god Tengri, Boddhisatva on Earth, numerous clans of
your Mongol nation are wailing for you.  
The rivers, thy birth land all seem to be waiting for you,  
your commanders Bogorju and Muqali \[Footnote 1\] are waiting for you. O
you my Khan\!  
your standard of Yak tails (sülde), your drums and trumpets and thy
golden house are waiting for you, O you my Khan.”*

Reaching Kentei Khan, they dug a huge grave near a large conifer tree
which had greatly pleased Chingiz in his lifetime. He was interned with
enormous amount of wealth and the place was totally leveled and there
was not a stone to tell where the greatest character of medieval history
lay. Japanese and westerners continue to hunt for it to this day. The
vaiShNava informed us that the Mongols feel the grave of their Kha’Khan
should not be disturbed.

The Tangut emperor failed to surrender as promised and the Mongols in a
bloody offering to their dead leader, obliterated the entire Tangut
capital to the last man, emperor and all.

:::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: Bogorju, his childhood friend was killed an year before his
death during the less-known campaign of 1226 CE against the Tungoosids
North East of the Baikal lake.
