+++
title = "Sadness"

+++
The smart and ever-scheming GS had been my student some years ago. He
came from a sAma vedic family of bharadvAjas. His academic record had
been a long string of successes, like the victories of Alexander of
Macedon. I had lead him to a few glorious victories and he had paid me
suitable dakShiNa for that. He put to good use what he learned from me
as he landed one great job after another, making enormous fiduciary
killings on the way. He was always the typical Indian sincere kind,
working unbelievably hard at anything he did. His energy was not unlike
that of the **princess of Hayastan**, and he could go on at one meal a
day for long. He never really cared if his food tasted good or bad, he
never cared for entertainment nor those long-winding chatter sessions
with our chosen ones that the rest of us blithely gave ourselves to.

In his personal life too he was well endowed- he had furthered his genes
severally, owned large houses and horses, was in possession of an
adequately endowed woman. In short he compared very well to the “**eko
mAnuSha AnandaH**” that the vedic texts have defined. I was happy that
my student had made such exemplary progress and made good use of his
lesson and adopted their purport well. While some other disciples of
mine became my real friends, GS and me never really became friends,
though kept in good contact with each other after parting. We even
occasionally collaborated and speak to each other in positive and
pleasant ways. 

So when GS called me one fine day, I spoke to him at some
length. All of a sudden, I heard from this individual who may be
considered by others as the “**eko mAnuSha AnandaH**” that he was
profoundly sad. On asking why this was so, he answered that he felt
dejected that he was not living up to his ambitions. He wanted to be
greater, he wanted to be better known, and he wanted to be better
appreciated.

Ambitions I realized are a bad things, and cravings for attention even
worse. The lord of the heavens, the great god indra, is said to give
things in balance. You may have one good thing from him, but everything
else may be missing. While those very things may belong to someone
else\! As my progenitor would say, the devas gave the brAhmaNas many
things, but he made most of their women ugly. It may be better to live
to survive than to live for ones ambitions, I realized. But there is a
second part to this state that leads to true success in some.
