+++
title = "The early Post-Mahmudxa0struggle"

+++
One area where most Indian historians and writers of history text books
have remained woefully silent is the issue of what steps the Indians
took, if any, in the post-Mahmud period to counter the challenge of the
Islamic Jihad on Hind. Most accounts of history pass this period and go
on straight to the disastrous clash between the chAhamAna and
Shihabbudin Ghori. But understanding this period was most critical to
decipher the real dynamics of the events that from which the Hindu
civilization may never really recover. The most immediate effect of the
Ghaznavid invasions of Subuktegin and his successors was what we see
today in the form of the creation of the festering sore called Pakistan.
This was the direct result of the conquest of the Punjab by Mahmud in
1019. From this point till his death in 1030 it appears that the Hindus
were too shell-shocked for any action against the Muslim. It is well
known that his son Mas’ud who succeeded him continued the policy of
taking the Jihad deeper into India. Mas’ud was finally routed in the
Battle of Dandanqan against the Saljuq Turks. The Hindus made an attempt
to shake of the Ghaznavid rule at this point as marked by the bhoja rAja
coallition attack on the Muslim occupied territory.

However, even after this the ghaznavids continued to be effective in
India in many bloody Jihads including the extraction of turushka-daNda
(A turkish tax=jaziya?) in the gangetic Doab during Chandradeva’s reign.
He shamelessly called himself rAjAdhirAja… His son madanachandra failed
to pay the turushka-daNda and was attacked by the Ghaznavid Mas’ud III
and taken prisoner. He appears to have been freed by his son
Govindachandra, who scored a smashing victory over the Muslims. His son
Vijayachandra too crushed the Muslims repeatedly. But all these lines of
action by the Hindus was largely defensive and, unlike the Christian
crusades, and bhoja-deva’s attempt, none of the Hindus effectively
carried the war into the Moslem heartland.

Many people have claimed that India of this period was politically and
relgiously disunited and there was no national sense. This is a
completely biased and incorrect assumption. The fact that the North
Indian king Govindachandra and the Southern Cholas had close ties, or
earlier the chola vijayarAjendra had close ties with the chalukyan
someshvara and interactions with the northern RashtrakUTas (later called
rAthores) shows that the south-north connectivity of India was much more
than in the Moslem period. In religious terms too there is considerable
evidence of unity of the banners of the various branches of the Hindu
cultural stream brought together by the Vedic elite culture: the rulers
of both north and south adopted similar titles and performed similar
vedic sacrifices. The whole extant of India showed greater cultural
unity than in the Muslim period and the wars between the Hindu kings
were of a very different intensity and nature given that there was no
evidence for massive destruction of cultural and urban centers. The fact
that the Hindu kings could recover easily from the constant warfare
shows a strong economy and the very low damage of these wars. The fact
that they could crush the Moslems periodically shows that they were
easily upto the challenge of defense. Yet the fact that the Hindus
ultimately fell to the invaders shows that we do not understand a
critical aspect of the dynamics of the period.

This a chilling reminder of the fact that the Islamic presence emanating
from Pakistan still has its tentacles in all the major cities of India
and there is striking resemblance of modern India to the pre-Mahmud
period. If we fail to crush the Muslim power once and for all spectre of
history repeating itself looms large on us.
