+++
title = "Shambhajiâ€™s inaugural campaign"

+++
After Shambhaji had crowned himself Chatrapati, in Oct 1680 on theVijaya
Dashmi day decided to inaugurate his campaigns with strike against the
Mogols. He set off with 3 divisions of the Maharatta cavalry: One
division moved to attack the Mogol garrison at Surat via the parallel to
coast northwards along the Konkans. The second division of Maharatta
horse invaded Khandesh to strike a Mogol outpost there. Simultaneously a
3rd division moved to attempt a liberation of the Mogol outpost of
Aurangabad in Maharashtra. Awrangzeeb dispatched Khan-i-Jahan Bahadhur
Khan with the central Mogol army to counter the Maharastras. Shambhaji
led his division as though to attack Berar and then suddenly swerved and
attacked Burhanpur in Khandesh through a very rapid forced march. The
Maharattas destroyed the Mogol garrisons and captured the vasty booty of
the Mogol camps in Burhanpur and Hasanpur. The Maharattas demolished the
Masjids and in both the places and put the terrible Mussalmans invaders
to sword. Khan-i-Jahan tried to retrieve the cities but he was beaten by
the Maharatta army and they fell back to defend from the fort of Salhir.
Raj Singh of Chittor at that time destroyed a Mogol army in the battle
of Aravalli (a very less-described battle, that needs investigation\!).
Akbar II the son of Awarangzeeb went over to the Rajputs. But Awrangzeeb
through intrigue had him chased by his main army from Delhi. He fled and
took refuge with Shambhaji. This immediately shook the Padishaw and he
declared that he would lead the Jihad in Deccan personally.
