+++
title = "The dIpAvali vacation"

+++
Never before had I descended to such a low, especially given all the
show I had made. It was like Tendulkar scoring two zeroes in a row. All
around us were atirathis and mahArathis (mark that word for it is indeed
a pun) but still I was a mahArathi too, who had taken on the intense
heat of battle. Pricked quick by the defeats I had faced, but confident
about my abilities, I made a charge, even as Prataprao had done in the
fateful battle of Ahmednagar, and blew away our rival mahArathis in a
battle that knew no bounds in its fury. After launching myself into this
fiery battle and emerging victorious, I suddenly felt refreshed at the
prospect of enjoying a long dIpAvaLI vacation. We met in shady glade at
the appointed afternoon hour and proceeded to rove the sylvan slopes.
First there were the 3 bubbles of 65 million year old lava. There the
sacrificial cock had been butchered and its feathers billowed around.
Then came the arm chair of the demons; it was wrought in solid basalt.
Then came flat plateau where the motion of vAta surrounded his
precocious son. We then descended on the other side where the tower
arose beside the great basaltic depression of the snake. We saw some
rival dasyus, I defensively shielded my companion and showed them a sign
to get lost. We knew we were in control. Then we traversed the extremely
long path to its end. We peered down the second basaltic depression. We
saw the turtle again. She said “Batagur baska- We beheld it twice; you
will experience it at least once more in life. Mark those words and
think of me when they return to your mind many years later. We shall
make a profound telepathic connection long after the basaltic
depressions would have dried. Remember the Oviraptor prancing through
the Gobi wilderness. “The flash comes home”
