+++
title = "Deeds of the Bahmanidxa0Sultans-II"

+++
Continues from
[here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/12/13/some-deeds-of-bahmanid-sultans-i/)

Ahmad was a superstitious Moslem who supported all kinds of foreign
Islamists and fraudulent Sufi preachers in his court. He invited the
bigoted Islamist poet, Azari from Khorasan to his court and asked him to
composed paens on the Bahmanid dynasty. For this he endowed the poet
with a huge payment of gold. Ahmad had converted two of the young
Brahmin boys from Northern Tamil Nad he had captured and named them
Maliq Hasan and Fathullah Imad-al-Mulq.

\-1436 Ahmad was succeeded by his son Alla-ad-din II.

\-1437 he staged a Jihad on the Hindus of the Konkan, kidnapped the
Hindu princess of Samgameshvar and added her to his harem.

\-1443 The Hindu armies liberated Raichur, Bankapur and Mudgal.
Alla-ad-din launched a retaliatory strike in which he broke several
Hindu temples in North Karnataka with the help of his fanatic general,
Maliq-ut-Tujjar from Basra, Iraq. He rounded up 200,000 Hindus held them
in a concentration camp as hostages to extort a ransom from Devaraya of
Vijayanagara.

\-1446 The Army of Islam invaded the Konkan and was ravaging the region,
when the Raja of Samgameshvar defeated the army and by a ruse trapped
the Islamic fighters in the Chakan fort near Pune. With the help of some
Hindu mercenaries in the Bahmanid army a peace plan was negotiated. At
the time of the peace talks, the Hindu fighters took the Ghazis by
surprise and killed 1200 Arab Sayyids and 1000 Turkish officers.

\-1451 Azari the central Asian, the poet sent a message to the Sultan to
slay Hindus and give up wine. Alla banned his subjects from drinking
ferments, but he himself drank heavily and was constantly inebriated.

\-1454 He started recycling the Hindu temples he had broken to build
grandiose Mazars and Masjids.

\-1458 Alla died and was replaced by his son Humayun-i-Zaalim, who even
by Islamic standards was a savage tyrant.

\-1459 He tortured many courtiers to death with utmost brutality
suspecting that they were plotting against him.

\-1460 Routine torture and murder of Hindu subjects went on throughout
his capital.

\-1461 He was assasinated in drunken brawl with his courtiers and was
succeeded by his son Nizam. He was very young and his administration was
managed by the fanatic Turks, Mahmud Gavan from Iraq and the Khwaja
Jahan from Central Asia.

\-1463 The Sultan died and was succeed by his brother Muhammad III.
Mahmud Gavan killed Khwaja Jahan and became the sole control of the
young Sultan.

\-1467-1472 Mahmud Gavan’s savage Jihads in the Konkan have been
previously discussed.

\-1472 Maliq Hasan, the Brahmin convert, leads a fierce Jihad against
the Reddis of Rajamahendravaram and Kondavidu for the new Sultan. Maliq
Hasan was made governor of Telangana. Fathullah, the other Brahmin
convert, was also particular brutal on the Hindus and a great friend of
the Turks who loitered in the court. He became the governor of Berar
where he later founded a Sultanate of his own- the Imad Shahs.

\-1476 The Moslem governor of Kondavidu started torturing and murdering
Hindus in the area. The Hindus organized a resistance under the Orissan
chief Kumara Hamvira Mahapatra. Hamvira Mahapatra killed the Moslem
governor and liberated Kondavidu. He along with the Orissan King
Purushottama began the liberation of Telengana from the Moslems. Maliq
Hasan was defeated and besieged in Rajahmundry. But Mushmmad the Sultan
lead a terrible Jihad and repulsed the Orissans. He besieged Hamvira at
Kondavidu

\-1478 The Hamvira Mahapatra ran out of supplies and had escape for
life. Muhammad stormed the fort and killed the Hindus in the town. He
savagely demolished the great temple of Kondavidu built by the Orissans
and Reddis and slit the throats of all the brahmins in the town with his
own hands and took on the title Ghazi and annihilator of Hindus. In its
place he built a large Masjid.

\-1479 Muhmmad distracted the Vijayanagarans by sending Yusuf Adil Khan
and Mahmud Gavan on a terrible westward thrust. He took advantage of
this launched a surprise attack on Kanchipuram. He leveled the temples
in the city, plundered them, and slew all the Brahmins he could captured
and heaped their corpses in mounds in the city. But on the way back he
was defeated by the Vijayanagaran general Narasimha Nayaka and lost all
his booty, while escaping with life.

\-1481 He murdered fellow Ghazi and prime minister Mahmud Gavan in his
court suspecting he might have designs on the throne.

\-1482 Muhammad drank heavily and passed away in midst of a drunken
raving. He was succeeded by his son Mahmud.

\-1487 A terrible fight between the local Moslem converts (Deccanis),
some Hindu supporters of theirs, and Africans on one side and the
Turko-Mongols, Arabs and Afghans on the other broke out in which
Dilpasand Khan, a Turk murdered Maliq Hasan. The Sultan was lost in
drink and debauchery in his harem and hardly bothered what happened
outside. The Deccani and Black faction tried overthrow the Sultan, but
he called the Turkic faction for help which squashed the attempt and
massacred several thousands of Deccanis and Africans in 3 days.

\-1490 Fathullah Imad Shah, the Brahmin convert in Berar, Ahmad Nizam
Shah, the son of the Brahmin convert Maliq Hasan in Ahmadnagar, Qasim
Barid, a Turk from Azerbaijan in Berar, Yusuf Adil Khan, the brother of
the Ottoman Turkish Sultan Mehmed II (the destroyer of Constantinople)
in Bijapur, and Quli Qutb Shah, A Turk of the Shi’ite Qara Qoyunlu
Turkish tribe from Azerbaijan, in Golconda, declared themselves
independent Sultans. The Bahmanid sultan was kept as a puppet under the
Barid Shah in Bidar. Mahmud tried many times to escape but remained a
prisoner of the Barid Shah. He was followed by his 4 sons the first 3 of
whom were put to death for not toeing the line of the Barid Shah.

His last son Kalimullah made an attempt to contact the Mogol Babar in
Delhi to help him out. But Barid Shah got wind of his plot and Kalim had
to flee for life to Ahmadnagar where he died ending the dynasty.
