+++
title = "Hammira Deva’s last stand"

+++
[Continue reading from
Jalal-ud-din](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/06/20/jalal-ud-din/)  
After Alla murdered Jalal and took the throne of Delhi he decided to
exterminate the Chauhans once and for all. During the attack on the
Rajput stronghold of Jalor, a Mongol general Kehbru and his brothers
from the Northern alliance of the Chagadai Ulus, who were arch-enemies
of the Khaljis, had taken the side of the Hindus. In the fierce battle
of Jalor, Kehbru and his brothers had slain Kaaloo Maliq the nephew of
Sultan Alla-ud-din. After the fall of Jalor the Mongols fled to
Ranthambhor and took shelter of Maharana Hammira Deva Chahamana. Enraged
by this, and the recalcitrant nature of the great Rajput, Alla-ud-din
decided to destroy him.

Alla sent his brother il-Ghazi Ulugh Khan from Bayana, and his general
il-Ghazi Nusrat Khan from Qara each with regiments of 40,000 Turkish
cavalrymen and over 10,000 Kullar infantrymen (Indian equivalents of the
Ottoman Yenicheri; slaves and castratos converted to Islam). Seeing the
vast Islamic army making its way, the Rana of the clan of Prithiviraja
Chahamana, who had died fighting and earlier Moslem wave, decided to
resort to defensive warfare from the fort of Ranthambhor. Nusrat and
Ulugh converged at Jhain, a once flourishing Indian city and erased it
off the face of the Earth with its Hindu inhabitants. Historian KS Lal
has noticed some ruins in the National Park under the name Naigaon that
seem to be all that remain behind of the city after the Turkic arson and
rampage. Ulugh Khan sent a message to the Rana to humbly accept Islam
and hand over the Mongol chiefs whom he had sheltered. The Rana refused
and prepared to take on the Ghazis in battle. He had an elite Rajput
cavalry of 12,000 and 40,000 infantrymen. He erected several large stone
hurling cross-bows on the ramparts of Ranthambhor and devices that would
spray fine red hot sand and burning oil. Nusrat and Ulugh marched forth
fiercely and started advancing a wave of Arraadaas (trebuchets),
gargachs (seige engines) and Manjiqs (mangonels) to bombard the fort.
However, the Rajputs struck back fiercely demolishing the Moslem
siege-crafts with their missiles and caused havoc amidst the Moslem
armies. Nusrat Khan then sent a force of Kullar infantry to attempt an
escalade on the fort, but they were butchered by the Rajput archers.
Then, Nusrat with his cavalry tried a forced assault on the main gate of
Ranthambhor that was known as Naulakhi. The Rajputs having sighted him
early, aimed a rock from a giant cross-bow at his head and crushed him
to death. His division was then mowed down under a shower of ballistas
and arrows. Hammira Deva seeing that the Moslems where shaken by this
attack, despite his smaller army, boldly sallied forth and attacked
Ulugh Khan’s division with great fury. The Moslem army was smashed and
Ulugh retreated to the ruins of Jhain. Ulugh immediately called his
brother for aid, and Alla set out from Delhi to handle the campaign.
Hammira Deva, however, set strong defenses to ambush the Moslems and
block the march of Alla. Sadly, he soon thought he had repulsed the
invader, and lowered his guard.

Alla was waiting for this moment and set out with a large force of
90,000 cavalrymen. In a brisk raid he devastated the country around
Ranthambhor and destroyed all the farmlands, thereby preventing the fort
from getting any food supplies. He then cutoff all supply routes for
horses from Western Rajasthan and thus prevented the Rana from
replenishing his cavalry. The nephews of the Rana, Kahnaiya and Bala
Simha from Chittor cut through the cordon and brought some supplies and
horses for their uncle. Intent on the ultimate Jihad, Alla-ud-din
pressed hard on the fort by trying to fill the moat with logs. But the
Rajputs repulsed them with showers of burning arrows, oil and red hot
sand. Alla made it clear that he would either become a ghazi who slits
the throats of the Kaffirs, or would become a shaheed in the process.
Alla then tried to build a stone causeway to the fort but was repulsed
by a hail of ballistas. Alla then got a Buddhist traitor Sarjan Sah, who
for a price, pointed out the location of the granary. Alla with giant
trebuchets hurled rotting corpses and refuse into the granary to pollute
it. Soon the Rajputs were left without viable food and had no option but
to make their last stand. The Rana’s queen Rangaa-Devi immolated herself
with the other women. Wearing orange robes, the Rana, his younger
brother Viram Deva, his teenaged nephews, his three commanders, Rai
Ranadhira, Rai Gangadhara and Kshetra Singh Parmar and the four Mongol
brothers with Kehbru at their head advanced to take on the Sultan. The
Khullar Infantry was put to sword under the Rajput charge. Ulugh Khan
rushed at the Rajput cavalry, but he was wounded by an arrow from Viram
Deva. Viram rushed toward the Sultan himself, but the Turks rained blows
on him with their maces, slaying him. The Rana’s commanders, each
working great havoc in the Moslem ranks, fell dead. The Rana was ably
guarded by the Mongol brothers and fought fiercely along with his
nephews, who cut their way towards the division of Amir-i-Koh. The Amir
shot down Kahniya, but Bala Simha avenged his brother by slaying the
Amir with his spear. Maliq Azizuddin rushed at Bala Simha and struck him
with sword but even as the Chittor prince fell dead, he killed the Maliq
with a blow from his sword. The Sultan sent Maliq Noor Khan to take the
Rana The Maliq with 5000 horsemen surrounded the Rana who had only 600
men with him. The Rana is said to have worshiped Mahadeva, offering
himself as a sacrifice to Rudra, and pledged to die for his land and
religion. The battle is said to have raged so fierce that the Moslems
lost 4000 men while the Rana’s troops were whittled down to just 200.
The Rana’s horse was shot down and he continued fighting on foot. He
placed his arrows in front of him on the ground and started shooting
down the Moslems (The Hindu chronicles claim that with each shaft the
brought down a cavalier). Struck by his valor, Alla asked him to become
a Moslem and return to his kingdom. However, the Rana spurned the offer
and fought on till all his arrows were exhausted. Kehbru, the valiant
Mongol who was shielding him all the while, perished in that fight. His
brother Alaghu though badly wounded fought on till he fell unconscious.
Finding it impossible to take the Rana alive, the Moslems surrounded him
on all sides and pressed upon him with their sabers. Hammira Deva kept
them at bay for about an hour before his head was cut off.

Thus on Tuesday, July 11th 1301 Rana Hammira Deva Chahamana died
fighting at the age of 28. Ten beautifully painted Rajput miniatures
accompanying the Rajput chronicles Hammira Prabandha and Hammira
Mahakavya provide a very graphic depiction of scenes from this last
battle. The Turks captured the Mongol Alaghu and Alla offered him the
post of a general. Alaghu declared that after he had served the Sun of
the Hindus, he was not willing to serve a lowly Khalji, whose tribesmen
were once Naukers of Chingiz Kha’Khan. Alla had Alaghu crushed under an
elephant and his head was exhibited in Delhi as a trophy. The Buddhist
traitor Sarjan Sah, hoped a lavish reward from the Sultan, but he was
instead clubbed to death. The City of Ranthambhor was blotted out and
the Sultan devastated all the temples in the region. Thus ended the
power of the Chahamanas in Hindustan. The young Hammira Deva was not
just a warrior but a scholar of Hindu medicine. He composed a work on
therapeutic Ayurveda termed sadyogamuktAvalI that has survived to date
and presents a glimpse of the Hindu pharmacopeia on the eve of the
Islamic destruction of India. The library of saMskR^ita works at
Ranthambhor was burnt down by the Moslems; whatever material could be
salvaged was collated several years later as a collection of maxims and
poetic sketches by Sharngadhara the grandson of Raghavadeva the Brahmin
prime minister of Hammira Deva. The numerous untraceable verses in it
are a testimony to the loss of Hindu knowledge in North India.
