+++
title = "Al Qaeda revival andxa0India"

+++
Recently Americans have been making noise that the Al Qaeda has been
regrouping. It may be somewhat fair to state that the Americans only
partly understood Al Qaeda both before and after 9/11. Some people say
that this is due to the weakness of American intelligence. I personally
find that somewhat strange, especially given the close ties with the
formidable Mossad of the Israelis. But it is possible that the CIA was
deliberately ignoring intelligence from the Mossad due to closeness of
some American elite to the Arabs of Saudi and also the need to cultivate
the terrorist state of Pakistan to play the 0-sum game against India. It
is also possible that the Mossad did not communicate everything with the
US. What ever the case the US did not show much finesse in tackling
Islamism in the aftermath of the attacks, beyond defeating the Taliban.
The US fixation on Iraq has only strengthened the possibility that the
Islamic terrorists may regroup for major action. Al Qaeda is merely the
tip of the ice-berg of a larger pan-gaean Islamic movement and a symptom
of the deeper deviltry in the making.

**“At the same time it will likely continue attacking soft targets
encompassing Americans, Europeans and Israelis, and aiding the
insurgency in Iraq,”**  
  
This is what the Americans state, but the absence of an Islamic fleet
comparable to the armadas of Jihadi Barbarossa, makes it unlikely that
the Islamic army will establish a bridgehead on the western beaches of
the Atlantic. Hence the real fear in not for American in the US.

However, in the mean time some titanic event happened in our lands. The
BJP government has been replaced as result of the peculiar Indian
“democratic” process by a weak government of thiefs and traitors. A
number of factors become apparent:  
  
1\) This thugish government wants to scrap POTA and there by allow
internal terrorists to have a freer hand.  
  
2\) The opening of “soft borders” with Pakistan suggested by the new
rulers will allow Jihadis from TSP to join their brothers on this
side.  
  
3\) The aversion of Manmohan towards defence spending will have its
effects on building a massive and mighty military. “True greatness of a
nation is defined by its military might”  
  
4)Smothering of Hindu feelings in the name of communalism and free reign
for Christian moles will help in undermining the true inner unity of
India. The effects of this are already apparent in Tamil Nad and
Andra.  
  
5\) Indians will be distracted by rapid government changes and this may
weaken the economic strength, there by curtailing military development.

So from the point of view of CEO Musharraf the swine and other
abominable agents of the Army of Islam, India is ripe for a Ghazi
thrust. So it is not surprising if the eastern wing of the Army of Islam
launches itself towards India. While Iraq is indeed acting as flypaper
for such Islamists as described earlier, CEO Mushpig’s sights are not in
Iraq, even if his Mullahs may evince some interest in that direction.
With the American patrons of his ever willing to wink on his eastern
moves, we should not be surprised if the Puki Kamandu saheb is will seek
to redeem his dreams lost on the mountain strongholds of Kargil. Indians
with a weak memory might have forgotten all about the ghazi’s
misadventures and brutal murder of Hindu soldiers, with all the cricket
and Sehwag’s pyrotechnics in between.

Sambhaji Raje, the son Shivaji was embracing a new beauty every day and
documenting his erotic excursions in delicate Hindi verse with an
equally debauche poet friend, even as the Army of Islam was similarly
making a great thrust under the hero of the Momeen, Awrangzeeb. One
wonders if after all we are heading towards the worst case scenario.
