+++
title = "New moves in thexa0saMgrAma"

+++
We had beaten back the fierce thrust launched by our foes on our fort.
We knew that we could fend off their assault as long as we held the
fort. However, on realistically assessing the situation we realized that
this hardly meant that we had won the war. We had been greatly weakened
by the several years of constant war on the frontiers. For an empire to
remain in good health a lot actually depends on the internal conditions.
The years of war on the frontier had sapped our resources and even the
scaffold of the empire was stretched thin. We needed to take steps to
keep the empire running now and calque the fissures that were emerging.
The last year, since our terrible defeat in the Battle of the Bardâ€™s
hill had been like one of those yugas in downward cycle of the jaina
mythology, dominated by the prati-vAsudeva. We realized that our enemies
possessed enough resources to keep the war going. Now with even our
escape routes sealed by rudhira dhvaja and tiryagnetra, we were left
with little to no options but hold this fort as long as we can. With
these new considerations it has become clear that a defeat here will
essentially mean a severe dent to the empire. If we survive we may
retire from the helm and leave it to our successor to fight the future
wars with a much truncated kingdom.

The foes realized that we could not be beaten simply, especially because
of the mantra prayoga we had performed to strengthen our arms in this
mahAsaMgrAma. However, they have resorted to a long-draw attrition
strategy instead, hoping that our karma wears out eventually. We have to
learn patience, something we have had scanty reserves of.
