+++
title = "Some deeds of Bahmanidxa0Sultans-I"

+++
The Bahmanid sultans were amongst the most monstrous Islamic rulers in
world history. While people tend to talk of the massacres of
Timur-i-lang in Inner Asia, the violence of the Bahamanids is hardly
touched upon. We shall briefly outline some of the acts of these
Sultans, which represent one of the most blood stained phases on Indian
history. It is hardly surprising given the current political
proclivities in India that this period of history is not properly
described. We shall confine ourselves here to the core Bahmanid dynasty
and not the 5 successor Sultanates of the later period. As KAN Shastri
mentions, there were few among the line of 18 Sultans, who were not
drunkards or debauches and their courts were teeming with Islamic
adventurers from all over the Moslem world (compare with modern
terrorist havens in Pakistan and now Iraq) seeking fortune in Jihad and
pleasures derived from the riches of India. The condition of Hindus in
their reign was very pitiable as explicitly mentioned by the Russian
observer Athanasius Nikitin who visited during the late Sultanate
period.

\-The empire was founded by Alla-ad-din Bahman Shah, who crowned himself
Sultan in 1347. The caliph of Egypt declared him a great Sultan and
requested him to extend the sword of Islam.

\-1358, his son Muhammad I became sultan. He killed the Kamma chief
Vinayaka Deva, son of Kaapaya Nayaka the great Hindu freedom fighter of
the Telugu country in a fierce battle in 1362. The Bahmanid army
suffered heavy losses in the battle. In frustration, he devastated
Telengana during his retreat slaughtering 1000’s of Hindus.

\-1365: Muhammad I destroyed the Hindu population in all the villages
around Mudgal in a Jihad.

\-1367 Muhammad I launched a successful attack on Vijayanagara and
slaughters 400,000 Hindu civilians, including 10,000 Brahmins amongst
them, within a span of a week. Their corpses and piled as huge pyramids
“declaring the glory of the army of Islam”. Firishta has nothing but
praise for Muhammad for his religious treatment of the Kaffrs and waxes
on this. Nearly a million Hindus were killed in his reign.

\-1397 After a bloody intercine struggle amongst the Bahmanids, Firuz a
grandson of Alla-ad-din I ascended the throne. He is said to have lived
a pious Islamic life constantly copying out the Quran. Nevertheless he
was a drunkard and a debauche who had one of the largest harems
possessed by any Indian Islamist- 800 women. He had a particular taste
for European women and collected Hungarian, Polish and Serbian women for
his harem, captured with the help of his Osman allies from Turkey. The
800 were housed in the palace of Firuzabad on the Bhima river.

\-1398 Firuz exterminated the Hindu Shudra kingdom of the Kolis after
their brave resistance on the North Bank of the Krishna. He then
assasinated the son of Harihara II by sending a band of Hashishins and
then captured 10,000 Brahmins, whom he ransomed for a large sum from
Vijayanagara, and slaughtered 50,000 other Hindu civilians.

\-1399 Firuz seized the harvests from the Hindu farmers throughout the
farmlands in the Deccan and caused 1000’s of deaths due to famine
throughout the land.

\-1400 Firuz destroyed the Gond kingdom of Kherla and slaughtered over
20,000 Hindus and adds the daughter of the Gond kingdom to his harem

\-1401 Firuz sent a mission to Timur-i-lang of Samarqand expressing his
admiration for his Jihads on the Kaffrs and recognition of him as the
Exhalted Sultan of the World. Timur acknowledged Firuz as the supreme
Sultan of the “lower Hindustan” and issued a decree bestowing Gujarat
and Malwa on Firuz for his services to Islam.

\-1404 Firuz launched a Jihad into Bankapur killed the Hindu males in
the cities and took 1000’s of boys and girls for the harem.

\-1417 The great battle of Rajamahendravaram. The Hindu king Katayavema
Reddi died fighting in the battle and 30,000 Hindus were slain in the
city.

\-1422 Firuz’s brother Ahmad killed the former and made himself Sultan.

\-1423 Ahmad decides to erase the Kaffrs along the Tungabhadra river. He
starts systematic destruction of all temples in the region along with
large scale cow-slaughter to drive home his message to the Hindus. Upto
500,000 Hindus were killed in two months.

\-1424 Ahmad invaded Warrangal and killed the Hindu ruler of the kingdom
and masscred uncounted numbers of Hindus. He regularly employed foreign
Moslem adventurers- Turks, Arabs, Mongols and Persians, for all civil
and military positions.

Continues
[here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/12/18/deeds-of-the-bahmanid-sultans-ii/).
