+++
title = "The rite of the solsticialxa0day"

+++
The old solsticial rite of the Indo-Aryans is performed on the second
last-last day of the year (mahAvrata). The description of the oldest
version of the rite is seen in the pa\~nchavimsha, aitareya and
shA\~NkhAyana brAhmaNa. The clearest explanations of the ritual actions
are found in the shA\~NkhAyana shruti. It appears to preserve some of
the archaisms of the Proto-Indoeuropean form of the rite. It was
literally round the clock and one requires considerable energy to
perform it successfully.

1\) It begins in the morning with a bahiShpavamAna soma rite. The hotar
chants the Ajya (the chants composed by the kANva with one R^ik for
every month of the year:12 ; then the chants composed by vasiShTha with
one R^ik to agni for every moon cycle in the year + 1 R^ik (head of
prajapati) for the remaining days that add up to the solar year: 24+1=25
) and prayoga shastras (chants to indra, vAyu, mitra, varuNa, ashvins
and sarasvati) and the prashAsta, brAhmaNachChamsin, potar, neShTar,
agnIdhra and achChAvAka (the hotraka priests) chants the 3 Ajya
shAstras.

2\) In the midday pouring the mAdhyandinapavamAna and the pR^iSTha
pavamAna stotras and the marutvatIya (the nivids are recited in
ekashruti between the vasukra aindra chants in this shAstra) and
niShkevalya shastras (respectively to indra with maruts and indra) are
chanted

3\) In the evening the soma pouring is made with the ArbhavapavamAna
stotra, yaGYnAyaGYnIya sAman and the vaishvadeva and AgnimAruta
shastras.

5\) Then the performers rest for the night session as the sacrificial
place is swept and the various accessories are brought and set up.

\-A swing of udumbara fig wood is made for the hotar to sit on.

\-A seat for the udgAtar with a darbha grass cushion is made.

\-The adhvaryu stands on cushion of kusha grass while chanting the
yajuses.

\-The brahmA and other priests get reed mats.

\-A vANa with 100 strings, with the body made of udumbara and handle of
palAsha woods, covered with a brown ox hide is readied for the udgAtar
to accompany the sAma gAnaM. A reed bow decorated with leaves is used to
play it.

\-Following musical instruments to accompany the sAma ganaMs:
avaghaTarikA (a pot instrument), alAbuvINA (a vINA), ghATakarkari (the
pot-cymbals?), godhAvINAKA (vINA), kANDavINA (vINA) and picchorA (flute)
are readied.

\-6 mR^idanga drums are placed all around the saman singers

\-behind the AgnIdhra altar a hole is dug up in a hemispherical form and
covered with the hide of a sacrificed bull. This is the earth drum that
is played to accompany the sAma gAnaM.

\-a round piece of hide, held up by two posts is set up as an archery
target to the left of the AgnIdhra fire.

\-a chariot with a single horse with a bow and 3 arrows are readied for
the kShatriya to use.

\-pots filled with water are readied for the dancing maidens

6\) At night the prAtaranuvAka chant comprising of 1000 R^iks to indra
from the R^ig and atharvan is chanted by the priests. Then an animal or
a flour model of an animal is offered to indra and agni. The sacrificial
implements are then washed carefully outside the sacrificial area and
brought to the sacrificial hall, the sadas, where the guests and
witnesses are seated.

7\) Then the mAhendra cups are filled and soma offerings made with the
yajur vedic mantras to indra.

8\) Then the adhvaryu goes before the hotar’s fire altar. The hotar
utters the praiSha “adhvaryu, now stop”. The hotar then leaves the sadas
and goes around the AgnIdhra’s altar and bending his right knee, takes
with a sruk made of udumbara wood, and makes 8 offerings of ghee to the
devas. He then puts down the sruk and stands in front of the sadas,
north of the shruti altars, and faces east and in a low tone chants the
parimAd formulae.

\-The udgAtar sings the A\~ngirasa, bhuteChad, krosha, anukrosha, payas,
arka and arkapuShpa sAmans, with hotar in a low tone muttering the
parimAds.

\-He then invokes savitA in the sacrificial hut and returns to the sadas
and holds the swing from behind. He then instructs the adhvaryu as to
how to proceed and the prastotar regarding the stotriyas.

9\) The adhvaryu then initiates the mahAvrata sAman. The udgAtar mounts
his udumbara stool and the other brAhmaNas sit on their mats. The
udgAtar picks up the 100-stringed vANa and begins playing it, singing
the mahAvrata sAman. The wives start playing on the other instruments
that were brought in, while the drummers start beating the mR^idangas
and the earth drum. Maidens water pitchers on their heads dance thrice
to the left round the mArjAlIya altar singing the madhu gAnaM. Then they
dance thrice to the right in silence. The horse is then yoked to the
chariot and the kshatriya mounts it and taking the bow and three arrows
encircles the vedi and shoots the target even as he is riding (these are
stick to the target marking the 3 stars of Orion).

10\) The prastotar signals to the hotar with the formula ‘A velA’. The
hotar then pulls the swing towards him and performs prANAyAMa thrice and
chants some gAthas. He then holds the swing stretches his feet forward
and performs prANAyAMa once. He then sits on the swing and with his
right hand touches the back of the swing and chants the prathama
pratihAra and concludes with a prANAyAMa. The end of the chant all the
drums stop beating and the maidens put down their jars on the mArjAlIYa.

\-The prastotar then utters the formula ‘eShA’. The hotar then begins
chanting the niShkevalya shAstra to indra.

\-The chants corresponding to different set of bones of the body are
chanted

\-The 9 sets of 80 R^iks to different devas corresponding to the 720
days and nights of the normalized year are chanted.

\-Then he chants a 100 triShTub R^iks to indra, followed by the
hirANyastUpa chant and the yAtaUtIya chant. Then the procession of the
nakshatras in the sky is enacted by the combination of the sajanIya
chant (RV2.12) and RV2.14 which together constitute 27 verses, one for
each nakshatra. The adhvaryu chants the nakshatra hymn for the 27
nakshatras. This is followed by the sUkta of of vishvAmitra begining
with A yAhy arvA\~N…

\-finally the udubrahmIya hymn with viharaNa chandasaM permutation is
chanted.
