+++
title = "The scooter circuit"

+++
We performed our peculiar scooter circuit that year. Earlier it was the
cycle circuit. We were like the pAshupata, distanced from the plebian
world. We we passed in the midst of the plebians, we heard their
chatter, we saw them indulge in the pleasures of the world and suffer
from the pains of the world. They reflected in us, like a scenery in a
mirror. We moved right in their middle but they stuck not to us like
water on a oiled surface. There were fumes around us, but we did not
breathe them. Some performing huDDukAra, other aTTahAsa, and yet others
jumbaka nR^itya, came to us but we remained entirely silent. We existed
on crags of the “far away land”. There we roamed like an all-knowing
gandharva in the constant embrace of our dazzling apsarA. We spoke
endlessly with our apsarA on the Topics. We only stopped thrice a day
for food and drink. Rest of the time it was the non-stop discourse. We
slept in the highest realm of pleasure. We knew that we knew all. A
stone hit the lake surface. Ripples permeated through it. Our knowing
slipped through the troughs in the waves.

Our strange friend (should we call him that? may be he is actually an
enemy?) dharmadR^iDha vAtavyAdi keeps wanting to talk to us. Why does he
want to do that? We get no pleasure from talking to him; we send him
away. I do not see the ripples in his lake any more. They were once
there but are not seen anymore. Not being a gandharva, but firm in the
middle course, he is always in the embrace of a mAnavI. Still he is
perpetually restless, always asking something from us, and always
peddling his half-baked thoughts with a compulsive appetite. May be
there is a lesson to be learnt from the strange case of dharma dR^iDha
vAtavyAdi?
