+++
title = "The great bhAskararAyaxa0makhIndra"

+++
The redoubtable bhAskararAya was one of the greatest shrauta sacrificers
and exponents of the tantra of recent times. He would rank no less than
great savants of the mantra shAstra throughout bhArata, through the
ages, like amoghavajra and indrabodhi of Kanchipuram, vasugupta,
lakshmaNa deshikendra and abhinavagupta of Kashmir, sha\~nkara
bhagavatpAda of the Chera country, dIpAMkarashriGYAna of Kalinga,
mahIdhara dIkShita of Kashi and matsyendra of the icy Himalayas. He was
born in Hyderabad in \~1690 as the second son of gambhIraraya and
koNamAmbAL of the kaushika gotra \[several southerners claim that he
belonged to the vaDamA branch of smArtas, while Maharashtrians claim
that he was of the Deshasta branch of Maharatti Brahmins. The
distinctions amongst the pa\~ncha draviDa may have been less pronounced
then\]. gambhIraraya was an expert of the purANas and epics and had
studied the tantras from his uncle nArAyaNan paNditar of our lineage of
the bhArgava gotra. The tale goes that gambhIrarAya had fed his wife
with the brAhmI plant before his birth to ensure that he would be born
bright unlike his dull earlier sons. koNamAmbAL had observed a vrata of
sUrya before his birth and he was accordingly named bhAskara. At the age
of five he started learning the R^igveda and at seven he stunned the
paNdits at a discussion in kAshi with his exposition of the meanings of
the R^iks. bhAskararAya then attracted the attention of nR^isimha
shAstri, a notable adhvaryu of the taittirIya shAkha from Andhra, who
was also a scholar of gaNita and Ayurveda. He went to learn these
subjects from him. He also acquired knowledge of the nyAya darShaNa from
gangadhara vAjapeyI, a great sacrificer of the kANva branch of the
shukla yajurveda (from Thiruvalankadu, Tamil Nadu) and poetics from
rukamaNa paNDita. After learning these to revive the dying tradition of
the atharva veda he learnt it from his bhArgava uncle and imparted it
further to number of other Brahmins. At this point his father suggested
that he take up the job of the prime minister of the Turushka chief of
Golconda, but nR^isimha shAstri suggested that he rather engage himself
in the revival of the Hindu dharma than serve a Turushka. Then he moved
to the regions of Shrisailam and collaborated with nR^isimha shAstri’s
son svami shAstri to compose an exposition on the significance of the
shrauta sacrifice. He also wished to preserve the lore of the tantra,
and nR^isimha shAstri suggested that he learn the depths of tantra from
shivadatta, a Brahmin of the mAdhya\~ndina branch of the shukla
yajurveda, who resided at Surat, Gujarat. Impressed by bhAskara’s
intelligence, the Maharatta commander, dhanAji jAdhav, gave him a
scholarship for this purpose. bhAskararAya went to Gujarat and
shivadatta was delighted to impart to him the highest lore of shrividya,
in its pristine form as expounded in the great tantras of yore. At this
point he encountered a vaiShNava scholar of the mAdhva sect and routed
him in the debate. As a result of his victory the mAdhva offered his
daughter to bhAskararAya in marriage (then named pArvatI). He initiated
her into the tantra shAstra, providing her with the secret name of the
initiate.

He then went to Kashi and performed the great soma sacrifices like the
jyotiShToma and aindra saptaha. He then married a second wife named
Anandi of Thanjavur. He also decided to revive the temples destroyed by
the Turushkas in the regions conquered by the Maharattas. Firstly he
restored and built the chakrasvamI temple to viShNu in vArAnasi. At the
behest of the Maharattas he also consecrated the pANDuranga temple in
Maharashtra, while dhanAji jAdhav and his son chandrasenji jAdhav
restored the khaNdobA temple at Jejuri. bhAskararAya also built the
temple of gambhIranAtha in the Konkan and during the course of his
presence in Goa with the invading Maharatta army he composed his great
commentary on the vAmakeshvara tantra, known as the setubandha. He
constructed a temple in the shape of a 3D Shrichakra, for mahAdevI at
Sannati in Karnataka, which was wrested by chandrasenji jAdhav in the
second battle of Gulbarga, and restored temples in Chola Nadu. Then
sarfoji-I bhosle of Thanjavur offered him an agrahAraM near Kumbhakonam
on the upper banks of the Kaveri river. It was named after him as
Bhaskararajapuram and his first wife built a temple to rudra and umA in
this town while his second wife built a hall for charitable feeding in
the region. He also built the temple of vajreshvara at Rameshvaram. He
lived most of his remaining life in his agrahAraM and conducted his
shrauta sattra with great soma yAgas. chandrasen jAdhav whom
bhAskararAya had taught Sanskrit had great regard for him and he
bestowed him with great favors when he cured jAdhav’s son of infertility
with his herbs.

It is narrated that he used to sit in relaxed pose, with his legs
stretched out, as he lecture to his students in the porch of his house
on the way to the li\~ngasvami temple. A sannyAsi used to pass that way
to the temple, but bhAskararAya would not bother to draw his legs back
or fall at his feet. One day when bhAskara had gone to the li\~ngasvamI
temple to chant the rudra sUktaMs during the pradoShaM hour, the
sannyAsi yelled at him, and accused him in front of the crowd of
insolence in not showing proper respect to a sannyAsi. bhAskara asked
the sannyAsi to place his daNDa and kamaNDalu on the ground and he did a
namaskAraM before it. It is said that immediately the two objects
crumbled to powder, much to the shock of the sannyAsi and the crowd.
bhAskara explained that he was a hotar and brahmA, an offerer of soma to
indra, and a bearer of the saMhitas, the shrauta prayoga, and the dharma
sUtras, as also the tantra, and he was not bound by conventions of a
nominal Brahmin. Hence, even sannyAsis and such saints should not expect
to receive a namaskaraM from him unless he felt the need to do so.

bhAskara authored 40 books in course of his life, including the great
work on the correct tantric worship of gaNapati (with the commentary on
the gaNesha saharanAmaM, the text is called khadyota) and the worship of
lalitA. His method for drawing the shrichakra is the one commonly used
by tAntrics in Tamil Nadu. His works also covered Hindu law- the
bodhAyana dharma sUtras, three books of Sanskrit poems, Ayurveda and
exposition on vedAnta and nyAya philosophies.

jagannAtha paNDit, a Maharashtrian Brahmin, visited him at
Thiruvalankadu and became his student in the later part of his life.
bhAskara transmitted to him his great knowledge of the tantra.
jagannAtha returned to the Peshva’s court and summed up his master’s
teachings in the great Sanskrit work nityotsava. Here jagannAtha
provides a detailed account of shrI vidyA upAsana according to the
parashurAma kalpa sUtras, including the worship mahAgaNapati and his
shakti. His successors also revived the worship of gaNapati in
Maharashtra and restored the 8 great gaNapati kshetras. At the end of
his life bhAskararAya donated his agrahAraM to the students of the
R^igveda. He initiated his student nArAyana devan to continue his
teaching in Tamil Nadu, while he sent his son through his second wife to
Kashi to take over the teaching at the chakrasvami temple. He then went
to Thiruvidaimardur and took samAdhi after meditating on tripurasundari.
The bhosle of Thanjavur, the chiefs at Satara and the Peshva of Pune
paid their respect to the brahmin who had attained moksha.

NOTE: There are others stories and some variants to the above
hagiographic account floating around in Tamil Nadu, including those with
exaggerated narratives of his siddhis.
