+++
title = "lakShmI tantraM"

+++
One of the most lucid expositions of the foundational philosophy of
pA\~ncharatra is seen in the lecture given by lakShmI to indra in the
lakShmI-tantraM (chapter 4):

1\) Originally lakShmI and viShNu are conjoined in an undifferentiated
form termed the “pure space”. This combination of viShNu and shrI is
termed the homogeneous state which cannot be discerned and with out any
fluctuations in it.

2\) From time to time a minute particle comprising of a 10^-18
viShNu-shrI continuum state differentiates into action. Such emergent
particles are endowed with a set of rules (sisR^ikSha) that can cause
emergence of universes from them.

3\) lakShmI as that particle of her own substance instantaneously
develops into the primary emanation- the vishuddhAdhvA. This is filled
by the activity of lakShmI that manifests in the form of rays filling
it, vibrating with energy, and driving its evolution. Thus, this primary
emergent comes out of that still fluctuation free viShNu-lakShmI
continuum.

4\) 6 attributes are seen together in equal proportion in lakShmI
associated with the primary particle that stirs out of the primary
viShNu-shrI continuum: j\~nAna, shakti, bala, aishvarya, vIrya and
tejas. There is no fluctuation of these attributes in this initial state
of lakShmi and the results in a manifestion called vAsudeva. When only
 j\~nAna and bala become manifest emerges the form termed saMkarShaNa.
When only vIrya and aishvarya are manifest the form is pradyumna. When
only shakti and tejas are manifest the form is aniruddha. In all these
forms the remain tattvas of the 6 are present but unmanifest.

5\) These are the 4 vyUhas that further divide themselves into 3
resulting in 12 vyUhAntaras. The vAsudeva vyUhAntaras form the basis of
existance, the pradyumna the origin of activities, the aniruddha
consequences of the activities and everything is destroyed or merges
into saMkarShaNa.

6\) The above is considered the “non-phenomenal” or an ideal (in the
sense of Plato) emanation . Then there is the phenomenal emanation made
of 3 guNas. The  j\~nAna gives rise to sattva, aishvarya to rajas and
shakti to tamas. lakshmI drives the phenomenal universe’s emanation by
initiating a disequilibrium of the perfectly equilibriated 3 guNas. At
first the rajas manifests and drives the emanation of the universe. This
rajas is worshipped as mahAlakShmI also known as mahAshrI, chaNDa,
chaNDi and chaNDikA.

To fill this ’empty’ universe that has emerged as result of lakShmI’s
activity the tamoguNa comes to the forth. This form is worshiped as
tAmasI. The goddess tAmasI has mighty arms holding a sword, a pot of
beer, a severed head and a shield. She wears a garland of severed heads
and a diadem of snakes.

She is called mahAkAlI, mahAmAyA, mahAmArI, kShudhA, tR^ishA, nidrA,
tR^ishNa, ekavIrA, kAlarAtrI and duratyayA.

Then the universe is filled by the emanation of sattva. This is
worshiped as a goddess termed mahAvidyA holding in her mighty arms a
rosary, goad, a vINA and a book. She is also called mahAvANI, bhAratI,
vAk, sarasvatI, AryA, brAhmI, mahAdhenu, gIh, dIh and vedagarbhA.
