+++
title = "Americans in Iraq: how is thexa0going?"

+++
With Bush firmly in power, we need to see how things are going for the
Americans in Iraq. I recently heard from some Americans and also Hindus
that the events in Fallujah vindicate the famous “fly-paper” theory that
has been making rounds on the net. The Americans believe their victory
in Fallujah was a sign that it is working. They believe that Fallujah
attracted all the Shahids of the Dar-ul-Islam who poured in for action
and got extirpated like moths in the fire. The Hindus chimed in that the
lure of Fallujah might divert Ghazis from their usual pre-occupation of
Kaffr-Kush in Moslem-occupied territories of India and allow them to be
cleared by the Anglospheric hordes.

Did operation Fallujah really turn out to be as claimed? While the
American propaganda department has been selling it as a glorious
victory, I am not immediately sure of that. They seem to have misread
the attitude of the Moslem warriors. The important point to note is that
Moslems in Iraq have historically retreated far and wide when directly
attacked by a major conqueror. This was seen when the Chingizids stormed
these regions, and also when Timur did so. Then they slowly seep back in
and start fomenting trouble and and eventually take back their lands
when the conqueror retreats. Iraq itself was a country held together by
Saddam. Now with him gone, there is no way the country is going to stay
one. Sooner or later we will have to see a Kurdistan, a Shite and Sunni
states. Thus, to me it appears that the Americans have not created fly
paper for the Ghazis, but a swamp from which new Ghazis will emerge and
bide time till they can strike. That is what happened to Israel in
Lebanon over time. The Iraqis under Saddam were less Islamic than the
hell-holes like Saudi Arabia or Pakistan or Bangladesh. Now all of a
sudden it is only Islam and no Saddam and a dhimmi foe to keep arousing
it. I am hardly convinced that the Americans have achieved much for
pouring the money down the Iraq gutter.
