+++
title = "The new American crusade"

+++
As the crusades are raging in Irak, the discerning Americans are divided
as to whether the invasion was a good idea or not. This does not matter
too much because most American citizens are thoroughly misinformed by
their media and politicians and have an imperfect idea about what all
this is about. Firstly, the war in Irak was correctly parsed by the
Moslems as being a holy war waged by the Christians. With all the
Christian missionaries trying to save souls (including the Korean
mercenaries of the cross-planting division) there is no wonder that the
Momeen are getting so excited. As Huntington had elegantly explained
Islam is bloody within and without. So there is no surprise that Iraq
has turned into a real bloody mess.

As a discerning eye can see it, it is not about whether the Americans
will win or lose. Americans thought people will dancing on the streets
singing their praises on the fall of Saddam. Nothing of that sort
happended despite the attempts by CNN and others to make it up. Saddam
was secular tyrant who kept Islamism in check. But the Yanks with their
perpetual fervor to bestow democracy and freedom for all never paused to
think what the alternative for Saddam was. The alternative to Saddam is
Islam in all its flavors. Democracy and Islam do not coexist- unless of
course you want to call the “voting” under the benign eye of the
Ayotollah in Iran, or Algeria or Turkey where the Mullahaic fizz is
bottled under tremendous pressure by their armies as democracy. So all
the US has successfully achieved is to replace a tinpot dictator with a
bunch of fuming Ghazis. Can this really get bad for the US?

Not really, I feel. The US could do any of the following things. If
things get bad for their boys in there, they can call it quits and get
back to home base, coercing the UN to clean the crap or letting the
Islamists to enjoy the gladiatorial games themselves. Alternatively,
they could just shut off all news and take a leaf of Hulegu’s book. The
grandson of the good ol’ Khan Chingiz solved the problem when he took
Baghdad by putting to sword most of the Moslem population. The Yankee
cowboys could do the same and not let the news creep out. This strategy
is much harder but not impossible. Most importantly, after 9/11 the
Yanks have done one very important thing. By virtue of their geographic
isolation that have sealed off their border from the Islamists. The
Moslem simply cannot enter US easily these days and he is really
incapable of fighting real battles or striking from far away. The native
US Moslem population is also under Uncle’s unwinking vision, there by
nullifying their destructive potential. So the chances that the US can
be hit by the Moslems in a big way is relatively low. The biggest danger
for the Americans could be their own government doing something very
stupid. Otherwise they can simply pull out and let the Moslems stew in
their own juices.

But will the Momeen take this slap from Wolfowitz’s crusaders lying
down. They basically cannot do much so they will hit other targets. They
may go the way of Europe and we can expect to see more Madrid like
events happening over the next few years. The sizable Mohammedan
populations in England and France could cause headaches to those
countries. However, in the long run the Europeans are not going to
forget Charles Martel’s effort at Poitiers where he slew Abd-ar-Rahman
the leader of the Army of Islam. So we shall see Europe stand up against
the Islamic assault, unless they are done in by their own decadent
demography.

This finally leaves India that glorious bulwark of paganism, which
upholds the flag of the ancient religions against the storm of Abrahamic
intolerance. In the worst case scenario a messed up Iraq may offer a new
ground for Ghazis to train their guns to the land of Hind. Will the
spirit of Krishnadeva Raya who killed Adil Shah at Kovilkonda rise
again? Time will tell us.
