+++
title = "Indus iconography and itsxa0parallels"

+++
As Thomas McEvilley pointed out there are numerous connections between
Indus Valley (IVC) Iconography and those in the Middle East. The real
significance of these clear connections have hardly been understood.

1\) The Central strongman figure wrestling lions on either side
symmetrically.  
This is seen in period 2000-3000 BC in the Sumerian seals. There are two
IVC seals with the same image, one with the Indus script and one without
from around the same time. Much later around 500 BC it is seen amongst
the Achaemenid Iranians.

2\) The bull-head geared male and female figures. These figures commonly
known as the “Pashupati” figures are seen on numerous Indus seals and
pottery. There is one seal with the bull-headed male and female figures
and a tree with 7 subsidiary figures with sprout headgears and plaited
locks. A fairly reasonable parallel of these figures, including both the
sprout heads and the male and female figures is seen amongst the
Sumerian seals. The bull-headed female figure is also seen in an
Akkadian seal from 2000-3000 BC. Standing male bull-headed figure seen
in the Indus plaques is very similar to an ivory standing bull-headed
figure amongst the Sumerians.

3)The 3 headed bull. This figure is seen in at least two distinct Indus
seals with different Indus “script” markings on it. A similar 3-head
bull figure is seen amongst the Elamites.

4\) The svastika figure formed by 4 entwined human or animal figures are
seen in both IVC and a Syrian seal from around 1700 BC.

5\) The two goats prancing symmetrically towards a central plant figure.
Seen in both a Mohenjo Daro seal and one from the ancient Uruk period of
Sumer.

These no doubt suggests an interaction between Sumeria and the IVC. But
more than that it suggests a potential cultural congruence is certain
respects between these two civilizations. But the significance of it
remains very puzzling.

A western commentator who noted these similarities remarks: “Indeed, so
receptive to this material was the IVC that it seems to have taken the
position of the culture that feels less developed and hence borrows from
the one that seems more developed(Mespotamia)…”

However we see absolutely no reason to postulate such a one way
direction.

And what does all this have to do with the Aryans?
