+++
title = "An Aryan mortuary rite"

+++
The pitR^imedha is a relatively obscure Aryan mortuary rite done an year
or later after the death of an ancestor. It used to be performed in the
height of summer, a new moon day or in the month of magha, usually
choosing a nakShatra with a single star. The bones of the ancestor were
brought in an urn and placed on a couch. The urn was wrapped in an
unwashed cloth and the living descendents and their women folk go around
the urn 3 times as the vINA and other musical instruments are played.
They fan the urn with their upper garments as they go around. These
circumambulations are performed in the initial, middle and last part of
the night. The day the ritual is done also includes a **feast** and
distribution of food along with a **provision for dancing, singing and
and playing on musical instruments.** Some food is also dedicated to the
urn of the dead ancestor.

Final depositing of the bones occurs when the sun is just rising. By
dawn the adhvaryu, the yajamAna and his clansmen start walking towards
the south. The site for interment should be far away from a place of
habitation and roads. They should also be away from banyan, pipal
vibhIdaka and other fig trees. The place should be beautiful and should
have reeds. 

An isoceles trapezoidal shmashAna is measured out a man’s
length in height and the four corners are marked with pegs of palasha
wood (East), shami wood, varaNa wood and stone. The stone peg should
have an image of vR^itra on it and be placed in the southern quarter. A
rope is held taut around he marked area by the pegs. The place is swept
with a palasha twig with the formula ‘apeto yantu…’. The twig is then
thrown to the south and the yajamAna arranges the enclosing stones
around the shmashAna. With oxen he plows along the rope with the formula
‘vAyuH punAtu …” from north to west. Then the bullocks are released and
the plough placed at the south with the formula “vimuchyantAM …”. He
then sows all kinds of seeds in the furrow with the formula ashvatthe
vaH. Then the bones are deposited with the formula with ‘savitA te..’.
An assistant of the brahmin breaks the urn to the south while performing
a prANAyAma. When he returns the adhvaryu utters the formula ‘param
mR^ityo..’ 

The bones are then arranged in **anatomically correct**
articulation as a stretched out man, with the formula ‘shaM vAtA..’ and
a brick is placed in the middle. At each side of the trapezium 3 bricks
are placed, going east to west. Soil is then spread over the bricks. If
the dead one was not a great fire sacrificer then the grave is covered
with gravel. If the dead one was brahmin then the head part of the
smashAna is made tall. If it were a kshatriya then the chest region is
made high, if it were a vaishya the thighs are made high. If it were a
woman of any caste then the region corresponding to the pelvis is made
high. For a shudra the knee section is made high. Then the shmashAna is
covered with moss and kusha grass.

If the land was plowed nearby to get soil for the mound then barley is
sowed into the furrows. Then they dig two trenches in the south of the
shmashAna and 7 to the north from west to east. The two to the south are
filled with water and milk and those to the north with water. The
ritualists then throw 3 stones into each of the 9 trenches they then
return to their habitation after crossing over the trenches with
ashmnavatIH forumula. The yajamAna purifies himself by spraying an
extract of the apAmArga plant on himself with the formula ‘apA aghaM..’
and ritually bathes. Between the zone of habitation and the shmashAna
the yajamAna places a clod of earth with the formula imam jIvebhyAH…

The adhvaryu then gives the yajamAna ointments and perfumes to apply on
himself and spread grass around the household aupAsana fire. Then varaNa
wood is placed on the fire and offer ghee with the chant of agna
AyuguMShi… He then recites the protective formulae begining with pari
ime gaM aneShata… The adhvaryu then throws away the aupAsana fire
through an outlet other than the house door with the formula kravyAdaM…
and concludes with the formula iha eva ayam…

The fees for the rite is a chair with a cushion and a jowar sack or an
old ox.

It may have helped in the development of the knowledge of skeletal
anatomy in the early sacrificers.
