+++
title = "Box India"

+++
If we look at this carefully I see a pattern (may be I am a conspiracy
theorist, but I believe I am right):  
India:  
1\) BJP comes to power  
2\) Bombs are bursted and India finally shows its muscle.  
3\) Pakistan trashed at Kargil by Indian army followed by ignomious
retreat of TSP. Signal sent to the world that India is no longer
shackled by the terrorist state in the open battle field.  
4\) TSP steps up terrorism, Nepal plane hijacking etc  
5\) 9-11: USA learns first hand what terrorism is all about and losses
some enthusiasm in covertly supporting Islamic terrorism  
6\) Op-Parakram, India sends the signal to the world that it is not
afraid of nuclear war with Pakistan. Nuclear war unlikely destroy India,
but TSP will be gone.  
7\) Hindu consciousness rising in the Indian masses and historical
memories of Islamic atrocities are building up.  
8\) Indian economy shows some improvement, signaling additions to its
military muscle.

USA:  
1\) Issues sanctions for the bombs, but notes that they cannot curb
India.  
2)The complex of events mentioned above make Pakistan less likely to
balance India on its own on the battlefield. US 0-sum game is in peril
with India threatening to become a regional power.

US foreign policy  
1\) There has always been a gulf between the way American people act and
the way their governments’ foreign policy plays out.  
2\) The American people are largely inward-looking and prefer going
about their lives in a private way, often evincing little interest in
geopolitics  
3\) They can be easily swayed by the mass media and easily accept
demonizations of distant peoples by the mass media.

Observations:

USA will go to any length to protect Pakistan

1\) USA payed a deaf ear to India during the Mumbai blasts.  
2\) USA allowed BCCI to penetrate its banking systems and allowed CIA
aided drug-trafficking rings to pay the army of Islamists.  
3\) After 9-11 USA was talking of bombing Iraq, created the axes of
Evil, but overlooked the origin of evil where the 3 axes of evil
intersected. In essence it meant that the US was really casual about
9-11: see Rumsfeld’s statement that we can bomb Iraq because it is rich
in targets. Why not bomb Pakistan, which is also rich in targets?  
4\) USA overlooked the testing of bombs for North Korea by TSP.  
5\) USA censored those sections of the 9-11 report that contained
references to TSP.  
6\) USA overlooked the obvious Xerox Khan drama, while on the contrary
it claimed to invade Iraq for the non-existent weapons of mass
deception.  
7\) Finally, USA granted TSP, a specially ally status and monetary
support.

See:  
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/articleshow/559873.cms>

Why does USA act thus is an obvious question to any discerning observer?
We all know that they know the real truth about TSP.

Hypothesis 1: Top US officials across the political spectrum and CIA
have deep ties with Islamists and fear such information spilling to the
public.

Counter: While it true that they have such ties, there is no big fear of
this spilling out because the US public can be easily duped as noted
above. If they really could get away after 9-11 without much action
against the real perpetrators, then other matters like Xerox Khan’s
proliferation do not matter. In general the discerning part of the
American public anyhow knows that TSP is responsible for a lot of
trouble.

Hypothesis 2: The Anglosphere has still not forgotten the insult to its
supremacy arising from India’s freedom, survival and now growth. The
Anglosphere brooks no challenge from the teeming black masses of Asia.

So “contain India” is the name of the game and the steps are:

1: Make India dependent on the anglospheric economies: outsourcing.  
2: Denude Hindu culture that forms the identity of India: Call centers
and penetration of Hindu mind with American/western archetypes.  
3: Build up dalit, Moslem and socialist challenges to Hindu dharma  
4: Occupy Pakistan and make it a special ally. Now India cannot attack
Pakistan anymore because the US is right there, and it is a special
ally.  
5: Force Indian government to make the border porous in the guise of
people to people contact; allow Moslems to seep in, to instigate their
native brethern to conduct Jihadi activities.  
6: Christian missionary assault mainly on the north east but also in the
main land.

Thus with these pressure points the new round of colonialism is
underway, albeit in form distinct from the old one.
