+++
title = "Watch out! Democracy(Marxism) is forxa0all!"

+++
The West (in particular US of America) has endlessly spun tales of the
glory of democracy. One day they are calling for democracy amongst
Soviets, the next they want democracy in Latin America and on yet
another day they want to bring this golden democracy to the Moslems.
They bring the light of democracy and disperse the darkness of autocracy
via invasions (typically termed liberations) or subversions (catalyzed
by the omnipresent, omniscient CIA). Normally it comes tastefully
gift-wrapped under various covers, termed “human rights”, “equality of
humans”, “social justice” bla bla bla… To many individuals in the lands
the that are slated to receive this glorious form of governance the
whole thing hardly makes sense as they have never seen anything so
utterly discordant throughout their long histories. Several observers
(chief amongst them, Amy Chua) have also noted that the West tends to
make this gift of democracy along with another gift, usually termed
“globalization” and “free markets”. This gift is supposed to provide
wealth, whereas the former one the “Equality and Rights”. The end result
of this combination is a peculiar enactment of the words of Mr. Marx
(which both the West, China, and the in the past Soviets exported in
order to complete the subversion). As several theorists agree, the free
market/globalization usually allows a small minority with historical
experience as business middlemen to take control of much of a country’s
wealth and there by acquire power. The introduction of democracy however
shifts the political power away from them to the economically backward
masses. This anisotropy immediately results in the latter interpreting
the situation through the lens of the maxims of Marx. As a result a
bloody revolution that targets the “burgoise”, and sometimes destroys
them, plays out. The result is a disruption of the economy as its
engines are broken by the revolution occuring under Marxist paradigms.
Islam is an ideology that in many ways closely resembles Marxism; it may
even be termed proto-Marxism of the 600s. So in many cases the
revolution occurs not under aegis of Marxism but its older sister
Mohammedanism.

I would submit that India is a peculiar case that has not entirely gone
the way other nations targetted by the west. In pockets of India one may
notice the same trends as elsewhere, such as the anti-Brahminical wave
in Tamil Nadu. Here the preceived dominance of the resident North
Indians, namely the Tamil Nad Brahmins, led to a fierce attack on them
under the metaphors of “Dravidian upliftment” and atheism (given the
association of Brahmins with religious performance). Marxism provided an
underpining for the Dravidian movement on the whole. The same may be
said about the Marxist metaphors in Kerala being used against the
Nambuthiri Brahmin who held his sway in those regions. There were other
less major anti-upper caste movements throughout India. However, on the
whole the Western subversion in India did not proceed the usual way. Why
was this so? The issue was that India, unlike most of the other targets
of the West, had a continuous long civilization. Even though she had
been battered by Islam, she was on the verge of beating back the
Mohammedans when she fell to the British. Importantly, this long
civilization produced unity without actually destroying local diversity.
For example, the resident North Indians of South India noticeably mated
with the local populations and adopted local languages. Many tribal
populations were not destroyed (unlike the portrayal by certain Marxist
ideologues) but allowed to exist in their native state. Finally, the
varNa system (and its realizations like jAti) divided the shares of the
economy amongst a vast section of the population and allowed whole
populations to Aryanize gradually, as presented in the manu smR^iti.
This attenuated the Western attempts at breaking the local system
through their conventional means and actually democracy had a positive
effect on India unlike elsewhere. The importance of the strong varNa
system in allowing the transition to democracy can be seen when one
takes up the case of Shri Lanka, where it was never too strong. Here the
typical explosive mix of the free market-democracy combine in creating a
war between the economically dominant Tamils and the majority Lankans
can be seen.

Seeing the democracy was actually strengthening the Indians, the West
resorted to selecting for Marxism amongst the India elite. Thus in the
guise of the democrat Nehru the Chacha, we got a Marxist. So this
Marxist clique became the dominant “middleman” controlling the power and
denying it to the Indian masses, that were held together by the Hindu
Dharma. I would present that what we are now observing is the coming of
better approximations of democracy, wherein the masses are finally
getting more of a say. This is exactly what many observers (chief
amongst them Naipaul) see as the true basis of Hindutva. So the masses
are discarding the dominant Marxism and the Hindu dharma that
characterizes India is struggling to come to the fore. That it will be
successful cannot be taken for granted. It must also be ensured that in
does not get subverted by vested interests. Some trends like the
vandalism of Shiv Sena, cow extremism and misapprehension of the role of
sexuality in life are examples of how the Hindu resurgence is far from
perfect in its foundations (especially in terms of theoretical
frameworks). Yet the suppressed masses are having their say. As
viShNusharman stated in the pa\~nchatantra what worked for the merchant
maNibhadra does not work for the nApita (barber). So it is mistaken to
believe that facimiles of Western democracy along with its constructs
like “Equality” and “Human rights” will work everywhere.
