+++
title = "Hindu Armies: the forgotten struggle against thexa0Moslems"

+++
The Indian text books written by secular historians, have often
highlighted the fact that the Hindu armies crumbled like fresh cookies
against the armies of the Moslems, and the Moslems more or less easily
occupied India. What they fail to tell us is the valor of the Hindus in
their spirited struggle against the Moslems. We need to repeatedly
remember these great unsung heroes of the Hindu struggle. Our culture is
still alive today because of the brave sacrifices of these great Hindu
fighters who placed themselves in the path of the murderous Moslem
warriors. Often the only option to death on the battle field was death
by gory torture or forcible conversion to Islam. The saddest tragedy of
this is that many modern Hindus simply do not want to remember and learn
from the sacrifices of these predecessors of theirs because of the evil
of secularism.

One of the most forgotten aspects of the struggle is the fierce defence
of Hindustan by the Hindus after the Moslems first gained their
substantial foot hold in the Indian heartland under Shihab-ud-din Ghori.
At this point Dillika was taken by the Moslems and the murderous
Qutub-ud-din was placed as Sultan. From that point to the brave revolt
in Delhi by the Hindu slaves captured by Alla-ad-din Khalji we see a
desperate struggle for survival on the part of the Hindus. In 1320,
40,000 Hindu slaves brought by Khalji from Gujarat, decided to take
revenge against the Moslem vandalism of their land. They erupted in
revolt with the tacit consent of the ruler Kushrau, who was himself a
Hindu boy who had been captured in Gujarat and used as the homosexual
partner of Sultan Qutub-ud-din Mubaraq Khalji. One day he murdered his
lover and declared himself the ruler of Delhi. Soon the Gujarati
rebellion began in Delhi. The Hindu rebels killed the Mullahs of the
Jami Masjid and seized the Masjid. The masjid was converted into a
temple and idols of Hindu gods were placed in it and worshiped. Qurans
were confiscated and torn to pieces. Other Masjids in Delhi were also
captured and converted to temples and cow slaughter was banned. Any
Moslem seen killing cows was captured and executed. However this
spontaneous revolt was crushed by the Turkic Warrior Ghazi Baba Tughlaq,
who was invited from Afghanistan by Mullahs to save them from the Hindu
wrath. This brave struggle has unfortunately been hidden from public
view.

A point that should be kept in mind is that the Moslem armies of the
time were amidst the best in the world. Ghori, Iltutmish and
Nasir-ud-din Muhammad’s armies were easily in the best 3 armies of the
world. Hence it is commendable that the provincial Hindu armies fought
so well against them. The Hindu Khokar army’s performance against the
Ghori army was top-class and would have done the Mongol armies under
Tayanku proud. Alla-ad-din Khalji’s army was the best in the world at
that time. So it is no surprise that he devasted India so completely
that we are still to recover from its effects. Even then the struggle of
Hammira deva Chauhan against it was spectacular. Prataparudra in
Warangal also put up a brave struggle against the Mohammedans.

The Mohammedan threat is still very much alive, we can only hope that
the Hindu spirit of resistance is still alive in the people of India.
