+++
title = "On cicadas and their kin"

+++
Those were days when I was the local expert on hoppers and to lesser
extant on Hemipterans in general. They are all around and we had our
favorite haunts to pursue these insects. The lake-side-haunt and the
hill-of-ill-luck were the best locale to get these insects.  
Some of the more unusual ones were the rare Dictyopharids: *Dictyophara*
had a long nose and was usually found on grass the other was *Orthopagus
lunulifer* with a small and pudgy nose. The classic cicadellid hoppers
have a row of spine running down the powerful hindleg that is used in
jumping. Then there were the cercopidae which have a rim of spine around
the end of tibial segment of the hindleg. Then there are the membracids
with a sharp backward pointed notum that shields a part of the abdomen.

The two really pretty ones that we liked a lot were the cicadellids
*Tylozygus bifidus* which has a bright striped pattern and *Erythroneura
vitis* which has a brightly colored wings. *Mileewa dorsimaculata* is a
beauty with blue wings and a transparent patch on the forewing. We first
saw it in a peculiar patch of compositan plants in full bloom.
*Cicadella viridis* is the good old green guy who always visits the
lamps in the evenings: the famed indragopaka of the Aryans. This was the
first of the cicadellids I noticed in my life and got hooked to them. I
conducted an anatomical study of the same with my first microscope. Two
years later I introduced R to it and got her hooked to them too. It is a
sight that always delights me when in Bharat. More beautiful but less
frequent was the cicadellid *Bothrogonia ferruginea* with yellow wings
having a black patch at their extremities. The completely yellow
*Nirvana pallida* was also an occasional vistor at the household lamps.

The really dirty guys were the spittle bugs (cercopids): For long, when
R and I used to explore insects in our earliest forays we actually
mistook them for human spit. One day we were puzzled by its occurrence
in considerable abundance in a rather isolated spot rarely visited by
humans. We knew it had to be of non-human origin and began exploring it
rather carefully, and soon rediscovered the spittle bug, which is the
cercopid larva. The most common spittle bug in our regions was the
brownish *Eoscarta assimilis*.

Of the membracids the most facinating was the two horned *Butragulus
flavipes* that was abundant on the Zizyphus trees, where ants farmed
them like cows for their exudate. Similar to Butragulus but darker and
with more prominent horns was *Centrotus nitobei*. Then there was the
pudgy *Gargara katoi* which was like a brown dumpling on the same tree.
During the adventure of Naga Nayaka’s skull we saw the dramatic flatid:
*Mimophantia maritima* of creamish white color and a fluffy coating.  
The ricanids tend to imitate small moths. Once, R called me over to see
what she described as “a small fly imitating a moth”. On careful
examination I realized that it was my first sighting of a ricanid of the
Fulguromorpha lineage of Hemipterans: the steel grey *Pochazia
albomaculata*.

It was during one such exploration that R told me about the long-lived
giants of the cicadamorph world- the classic cicadas. I had longed to
see them since then. I first got see the regular cicads *Tibcen* and
*Oncotympana* that I duly dissected. But after all these days in mleccha
dvIpa I finally got to see the periodic *Magicicada septendecim* and
*Magicicada cassini* the great periodic cicada. They burst like tidal
wave at the appointed time and reached the peak even as the day of yama
dawned. The whole area was reverberating with their songs. The song of
cassini has a remarkable shrill and strident rasp while that of
septendecim comprises of a hollower whoop. Both sing the chorus as well
as the specific occilating courting call as they approach their females.
They are immense in numbers and when walks into their midst the
orchestra of is awe-inspiring. Some are being infected by the deadly
fungus *Massospora cicadina* that sterilizes them. The emergence of the
periodic cicadas has been a truely dramatic event.
