+++
title = "The drinking of poison"

+++
While the bhAgavataM is considered a vaiShNava text, it contains an
highly magnified stotra to rudra. The stotra contains yet another
example of the classical macrantropic motif that is so pervasive in
Hindu thought since the puruSha sUktaM and the ashvamedha brAhmaNaM. It
is full-fledged development was in India and not in Mesopotamia or
Egypt. I provide a translation of the stotra given that the available
ones are unsatisfactory.

shrI-prajApataya UchuH :/

The prajApatis said:

deva-deva mahA-deva bhUtAtman bhUta-bhAvana/  
trAhi naH sharaNApannAMs trailokya-dahanAd viShAt//

O god of the gods, the great god, the basis of the elements and origin
of the elements, we surrender at your lotus feet. Save us from this
poison, which is burning the three worlds.

tvam ekaH sarva-jagata Ishvaro bandha-mokShayoH/  
taM tvAm archanti kushalAH prapannArti-haraM gurum//

You are the one lord of all worlds; isvarah, cause of bondage and
liberation. We worship you seeking good fortune, who is the mitigator
all the distresses of the votary, and the preceptor.

guNa-mayyA sva-shaktyAsya sarga-sthity-apyayAn vibho/

dhatse yadA sva-dRig bhUman brahma-viShNu-shivAbhidhAm//

By your own energy you set the guNas in action; oh god you cause the
emergence, maintenance and annihilation of this world when you oh great
one manifest as brahmA, viShNu and shiva.

tvaM brahma paramaM guhyaM sad-asad-bhAva-bhAvanam/  
nAnA-shaktibhir AbhAtas tvam AtmA jagad-IshvaraH//

you are the brahman, the primal secret cause of the manifest and the
unmanifest \[states of the universe\] as well as cause and effect. With
diverse forms of energy you manifest; you are the consciousness {atman},
the lord of the universe.

tvaM shabda-yonir jagad-Adir AtmA prANendriya-dravya-guNaH svabhAvaH/  
kAlaH kratuH satyam RitaM cha dharmas tvayy akSharaM yat
tri-vRid-Amananti//

You are the source of sound, origin of the universe, consciouness,
living matter, sensory substances, the atoms, the guNas, propertied of
matter, time, action, and natural law (R^ita) comprised of satya
(inviolable laws) and dharma (the enforced laws). They say the syllable,
which comprises of the 3-fold form (a-u-m) is for you.

agnir mukhaM te .akhila-devatAtmA kShitiM vidur
loka-bhavA\~Nghri-pankajaM /  
kAlaM gatiM te .akhila-devatAtmAno dishash ca karNau rasanaM jaleshaM //

Fire is your mouth, the breath of all gods; the earth is known to be
your lotus feet the source of the worlds; time is your change of state,
the sum-total of the gods your and the directions are your ears and
water is you taste.

nAbhir nabhas te shvasanaM nabhasvAn sUryash cha chakShUMShi jalaM sma
retaH/  
parAvarAtmAshrayaNaM tavAtmA somo mano dyaur bhagavan shiras te//

The clouds are your navel, the atmosphere your breathing, the sun your
eyes and the \[celestial\] waters; verily your semen. Your self is the
shelter of all beings, primary and secondary, the moon your mind and the
heavens your head.

kukShiH samudrA girayo .asthi-sa\~NghA romANi sarvauShadhi-vIrudhas
te/  
ChandAMsi sAkShAt tava sapta dhAtavas trayI-mayAtman hRidayaM
sarva-dharmaH//

The oceans are your abdomen, the mountains your skeleton, and the plants
and trees are your hairs. The \[Vedic\] Meters are verily the seven
constituents of your body the three-fold vedic chants your metabolism,
and the laws your heart.

mukhAni pa\~nchopaniShadas tavesha yais
triMshad-aShTottara-mantra-vargaH/  
yat tach ChivAkhyaM paramAtma-tattvaM deva svayaM-jyotir avasthitis te//

Your \[five\] faces are the five mantras of the
\[mahAnArAyaNopaniShat\], oh lord, by which thirty-eight fold mantras\*
have merged. You are the one renowned as shiva, the self luminous one,
by whom the state of knowledge of the paramAtman is attained.

ChAyA tv adharmormiShu yair visargo netra-trayaM sattva-rajas-tamAMsi/  
sA\~NkhyAtmanaH shAstra-kRitas tavekShA Chandomayo deva RiShiH purANaH//

Your shadow is the wave of adharma, by which emerge \[many of its
manifestations\]; your three eyes are \[the three guNas\],sattva, rajas
and tamas, you are the foundation of sAMkhya thought, the shastras with
metrical verses are made by your glance. You are the ancient god and
seer.

na te giri-trAkhila-loka-pAla-viri\~ncha-vaikuNTha-surendra-gamyam/  
jyotiH paraM yatra rajas tamash cha sattvaM na yad brahma
nirasta-bhedam//

Oh mountain-dweller, neither the lords of the world, nor brahmA, nor
viShNu, nor the lord of the of the gods (indra) can perceive, you primal
brilliance, which is the brahman, in which sattva, rajas and tamas lose
their distinction.

kAmAdhvara-tripura-kAlagarAdy-aneka-bhUta-druhaH kShapayataH stutaye na
tat te/  
yas tv anta-kAla idam Atma-kRitaM sva-netra-vahni-sphuli\~Nga-shikhayA
bhasitaM na veda//

kAma, the sacrifice \[of dakSha\], the tripuras, the poison of time and
many other molestors of beings have been slain by you. We do not praise
those acts, because do we not know \[that\] at the end of time, by your
acts the \[whole universe itself\] is burned by the flashes of fire
emerging from your eye.

ye tv Atma-rAma-gurubhir hRidi chintitA\~Nghri-dvandvaM charantam umayA
tapasAbhitaptam/  
katthanta ugra-paruShaM nirataM shmashAne te nUnam Utim avidaMs tava
hATa-lajjAH//

Those gurus, who verily meditate on your two lotus feet within their
heart become self-realized; but those seeing you prancing with umA and
performing severe penances and deride you as being perpetually in the
graveyard, as being fierce and violent verily do not grasp your
\[apparently\] shameless ways.

tat tasya te sad-asatoH parataH parasya nA\~njaH svarUpa-gamane
prabhavanti bhUmnaH/  
brahmAdayaH kim uta saMstavane vayaM tu tat-sarga-sarga-viShayA api
shakti-mAtram//

There your primal form, beyond the manifest and unmanifest, is very
difficult \[to perceive\] nor is it possible to for even brahmA and
others to perceive your primal form; what to speak of others? Thus we
can offer worship to source of all existence only to best of our
limitations.

etat paraM prapashyAmo na paraM te maheshvara/  
mRiDanAya hi lokasya vyaktis te .avyakta-karmaNaH//

The primal state of yours that is beyond all this, oh great god, we
cannot see. For the mercy of the world you have manifested, you whose
\[all\] activities cannot be perceived by anyone.
