+++
title = "Rathva tribe: surprising survival of Vedicxa0traits"

+++
The Rathvas are a peculiar tribe in Gujarat whose art was studied by
Jyotirindra Jain. Most tribes of India preserve certain aboriginal
traits that have are often interlaced with Indo-Aryan tendencies. Most
commonly the rudra cult of the the Indo-Aryans and its various
ramifications has been used as a conduit for the assimilation of
aboriginal tribes. Hence, the most frequent Indo-Aryan elements are
associated with the worship of rudra and his entourage, and
syncretization of local goddess into the pan-Indo-Aryan transfunctional
goddess cult. This could have in the early stages involved the vrAtyas
and para-Vedic Indo-Aryans, who often existed at the periphery of the
orthodox Vedic Indo-Aryan world and often had special rites to the god
rudra mahadeva.  We see very few  pristine vedic elements in these
assimilated tribes of India.

However, the Rathva tribes of Gujarat appear to have been directly
assimilated into the core of the vedic  religion. Importantly, their
native religion and the religious paintings give a central place to the
**great god indra**. indra is worshiped by their shaman, the badva, as
the lord of heaven. The pictures of indra are painted on the wall and
worshiped with offerings of grains and occassionally animal sacrifices.
The main animal of the Indo-Aryans, the horse, figures prominently in
their paintings and their epithets of Indra is remniscent of the vedic
worship of Indra. Importantly, though the Rathvas have **gaNapati** and
**rANI kAjal**, a potential trans-functional goddess, they do not have
any memory of the other prominent deities of classical Hinduism.  Thus,
it would appear that the Rathvas were Aryanized by the mainstream vedic
cult, and after that largely isolated until modern times from the
mainstream. The acquisition of the late paurANic deity gaNapati could be
explained as a lateral transfer from the rudra peripheryof the classical
Indo-Aryan world.

This would require that the Rathvas were Aryanized very early on,
perhaps around 500 BC, or earlier, and then they diverged away rapidly.
A plausible hypothesis is that they represent a late survival of an
early branch of Vedic Indo-Aryans (most probably a kshatriya band) who
penetrated deep into the Bhilala territory and merged with them, thereby
giving rise to the Rathvas. Thus, they may have incorporated elements of
the archaic vedic religion into these tribes and also introduced
agriculture in their midst.  The possibility of the archaic Aryanization
is suggested by the finding of Rathva style paintings in the Navadatoli
pottery specimens.
