+++
title = "The Brave Pancholi"

+++
Ajayamerupura (known today as Ajmer) had always been a key center for
the dominance of Hindustan. It was the home of one of the most famous
Indian Vedic universities in north India during the reign of the
Chahamanas. It was also the center of the famous temple of Brahma near
the Pushkara Tirtha. After the death of Prithiviraja Chahamana at the
hands of Shihabuddin Ghori, Ajayamerupura was attacked by the
Mohammedans, and finally wrested by Qutub-ud-din. Having demolished the
Vedic university and a series of Hindu temples he erected a grotesque
structure termed the Adai Din Ka Jhopda- the shed constructed in 2 1/2
days. This was used as a mosque for the namaz of the Moslem conquerors.
Since then it remained under Mohammedan control.

The brief liberation of Ajmer was due to the valiant Pancholi, Kshema
Simha. The Rathod ruler Rao Chanda had been slain by Salim Shah, the
Sultan of Multan, in a Jihad at Nagor. Salim had then gone on a
pilgrimage to the Mazaar at Ajmer. Rao Chanda’ s son Rao Ran Mal
conferred with Pancholi Kshema Simha to take punitive action. Kshema
Simha thought out a brilliant plan to take the fort by commando action.
He chose a band of around couple of hundred elite Rathod warriors who
were extremely well-trained in the kshatriya lore of taking on a large
number of attackers single-handed. He then came up with the excuse of
conveying a daughter for marriage to a Rajput noble of Ajmer. Kshema
Simha and his Rathod commandos entered in the guise of being a marriage
party and then at night took aim at the Mohammedan garrison manning the
walls and shot them down in a concerted shower of arrows. Then the
Rajputs got into the inner defenses by escalade and butchered their
entire Moslem army after firing their quarters. Salim Shah tried to hide
in the Dargah and escape back to Multan with the help of some Mullahs.
But the Rajputs caught sight of him and cut his head off. Thus Kshema
Simha liberated Ajmer from Islamic rule. As reward for this brave deed
the Rao Ran Mal rewarded the Pancholi with Khatoo, that he had just
wrested from the Qara’unas Turk Khaim Khan. The Hindus allowed the
Mohammedans to remain behind in Ajmer but forbid any public displays of
Islamic practices.
