+++
title = "Brooding over Hinduxa0woes"

+++
Though I have no personal liking for Malhotra nor agree with him in
entirity, I appreciate his efforts in the recent efforts to raise the
awareness of the Hindus regarding the ongoing attempts by the
Anglosphere to subvert and demonize the Hindus. Sankrant Sanu, Narayanan
and Ramesh Raoâ€™s efforts in this direction are also commendable. Some
present well-reasoned critiques, while others humorous satires of these
Anglospheric attempts. Hindus are angry and that is a good sign. It is
unlikely they will take things lying down. But the question repeatedly
raises itself as to whether the Hindus will successfully counter the
newest assaults. Many Hindus take history for granted. They say we
defeated the British, we defeated the Moslems, so we will also over come
this most recent assault. Yes it is good to be optimistic but we need to
see if the case is really that water-tight.  
  
As I see it the Hindus do have a serious problem- their knowledge of
their own texts and culture is pretty shallow. The number of dvijas
learning the vedas these days has dwindled. They have to depend on the
same Indologist, about whom they have been warned, to understand the
veda. The knowledge of the purANas and itihAsas is likewise abyssmal.
The knowledge of the tantra is likewise dismal. Thus the Hindus while
alerted and angry have still not overcome the effects of Macaulayism.
This makes it easier for a Courtright or Doniger to make up fables about
the R^igveda or the jaiminIya brAhmaNa or the kAmasUtra, and the Hindus
may not be able to pick right from wrong. For example Malhotra had to
depend on Witzel, a well-known detractor of Hindus, rather than his own
knowledge of the R^igveda or jaiminIya brAhmaNa to pick out the flaws of
Doniger. This phenomenon put the Hindus in a relatively compromised
situation.  
  
The other problem is after Macaulayitis what?I feel that Macaulayitis is
not really reversible in full, so it has to be factored into any future
consideration. A corollary to this is that HIndus should have
translations of Sanskrit texts and expositions of the Sanskrit material
in English. Have Indian scholars contributed positively to this? One
heroic attempt comes to mind: the purANa translation effort. But why are
the vedic saMhitas like maitrAyaNi, kAThaka etc lying unattended? Why
are the ongoing efforts by Hindu scholars in translation not being
popularized. Instead we see proliferation of the highly distorted
translations of the Arya Samaj group.  
  
100 years ago Tilak rued the fact that Hindus had very poor access to
information. His words uttered then have full force even now. I believe
the Hindu upheaval has to go hand in hand with improved Hindu
education.
