+++
title = "The other side of the guillotine and otherxa0musings"

+++
What ever happened after we passed on to the other side of the
guillotine we were not sure. Evidentally at that point we did not know
if the guillotine had fallen or not. In reality the English encounter
was the begining of the troubles. We got past the deployer of the ghora
dUradR^iShTi vidyA and were resting silently. We then wandered on the
Deccan plains in the year 2002, when are our armies were still
unstoppable, and had a brief wandering with the muni who was declining
towards the abyss. The muni then saved himself and proceeded to the
central plains. After that the amAtya spotted what may be termed the
English agent S in the horizon. We encountered S in the context of a
SNF2/SWI2 proteins with a PHD finger. Agent S’s progress was remarkably
lackluster and took things very lightly. But soon S captured us with the
indrajAla and on Nov 6th 2001 around 6.30 PM we had a dramatic showdown.
We were using a ricketty old SUN workstation and the machine crashed
mysteriously 3 times when we were composing something important, yet we
failed to get the signal. In the bind of indrajAla we were neither
communicating with the muni nor R, so the message of the jAnashruteya
birds did not reach us. So we were taken by surprise and hit by the
tAmasa-dhUma at that time. For 6 days we did not known what had seized
us. Then gradually with atharvaNa hR^idaya we emerged out of the pAshas
of agent S and completely overcame S. We then wandered on the Deccan
plains in the year 2002, when are our armies were still unstoppable, and
had a brief wandering with the muni who was declining towards the abyss.
The muni then saved himself and proceeded to the central plains. We then
faced the duSTa rAkShasi in the battle of chaitya and were again pinned
down for 6 days in August of 2002, but wriggled our way out of the
trouble. We were advancing towards the great swell of the AAA+ ATPases
(codenamed project POSTBOX) when agent Auriga was sighted by the AmAtya
and shachIva. We wriggled out of the Auriga trap but were ambushed at
the most fierce battle of the pAShaNDa hill of which we have spoken many
times. At that point we mused about the fall of the guillotine.
Subsequent to that there was a period of silence as the shachIva and
amAtya were fooled by the dreadful grAhi. Then due to the fateful slip
we faced the dhumAvatI prayoga. In the mean time Jx had already been
shattered by the dhUmavatI and became unmatta. Mn of greatest power and
intelligence was subdued by the uchChuShma. The piShAchi was sucking us
dry, and it looked as though we were hanging as though from a spider’s
web.
