+++
title = "The wonder ofxa0Whippos-I"

+++
As we sat looking around the screen, in the warm interiors, debating
about the actual nature of the pleasures in indra’s svarga eventhough we
only had a fuzzy idea about them. Suddenly we were re-captured by old
mysteries that had tremendously interested us: The mystery of whippos.
We discoursed on this matter for 4 hours today and so I felt the need to
summarize some of this.

Our interest in artiodactyls really shot to the fore with two distinct
lines of studies establishing the artiodactyl origins of cetaceans. The
molecular studies, starting from the serological studies of Boyden et al
in the 1950s, have consistently shown that whales were highly unusual
artiodactyls and a sister group of hippopotami. Despite early insightful
anatomical studies of the pioneering mammalian anatomist Sir William
Flower, the anatomists were largely unreceptive to the idea of an
artiodactyl origin for Cetacea. They instead posited an origin for
whales amongst the more archaic ungulates of the condylarth group,
specifically the mesonychians. The fossils of ancient Tethyian whales
excavated in the Terrorist State and the Himalayas in the recent years
showed that the earliest whales, like Rhodocetus, with robust limbs had
the legendary “double pulley” astralagus that was indistinguishable from
that of Artiodactyls. This established beyond doubt the artiodactyl
origin of whales. Further, fossils of the several new primitive whales
like Artiocetus, Rhodocetus, Protocetus, Pakicetus, Ichthyolestes, as
well as the Basilosaurids like Dorudon, Basilosaurus, Saghacetus and
Basiloterus suggested that the closest sister group of the whales are
the hippos and that they are unified into the whippo clade. Thus,
anatomical and molecular records had finally come to agree upon the
basic point of the whale-hippo relationship.

But the big mystery was that the earliest whales are as early as 53
million years or earlier, but the earliest hippos are from the Middle
Miocene epoch and clearly younger than 20 million years. How can this
large temporal gap be accounted for. Recently, however, a large-scale
systematic anatomical analysis of the artiodactyls suggested that the
hippos are nested within an ancient fossil artiodactyl clade: the
anthracotheres ( a hypothesis proposed first by my childhood influence
EH Colbert). In particular the anthracotheres like Libycosaurus,
Merycopotamus and Elomeryx emerged as successive sister groups of the
Hippos. Thus, the hippos appear to be late branch of the long-lived
semi-aquatic anthracothere lineage. This anthracothere lineage in
addition appeared to be a sister group of the whales. The oldest
well-confirmed anthracotheres such as Anthracokeryx go back to earlier
than 40 million years greatly reducing the gap between the two
constituent lineages of the modern whippo clade.

However, the picture of this part of the artiodactyl tree may be yet far
from complete. The Helohyids are group of ‘suiform’ artiodactyls
including several early enigmatic genera: Helohyus itself and forms such
as Gobiohyus and Progenitohyus. These primitive Helohyid artiodactyls
appear to be particularly close to the origins of the earliest
anthracothere clade, with specific similarities to the basal
anthracothere the Siamotherium. Given that the earliest record of
Helohyus appears to at least 45 Myrs or older it is likely that they
were the precursors of the anthracothere and further reduce the temporal
gap between the whippo lineages.

Previously anatomical phylogenetic analysis have consistently recovered
the suinids (comprising of the basal entelodonts and the crown of boars
and peccaries) as a sister group of the whippo clade. The molecular data
does not however, provide clear resolution on this matter of the
relationship between whippos and suinids. Another enigmatic suiform
clade that appears close to the emergence of whippoclade are the
Raoellids, with forms such as Raoella, Indohyus and Khirtharia has also
been recovered on occasions as the sister group of the whippos in
phylogenetic analysis. This suggests that studies on this aspect of
artiodactyl evolution must focus on discovering new fossils of primitive
suiform groups such as Raoellids, Helohyids and entelodonts include them
in phylogenetic analysis with the whippos. We believe that before 55
million years there was a major radiation of the suiform artiodactyls,
with the suinids branching of first. This was followed by the branching
of the Raoellids and finally the split between the Helohyids and the
most primitive whales. The helohyids then spawned the anthracotheres of
which the hippos are the only living group. It is quite possible that
the common ancestor of this clade was already semi-aquatic, had reduced
hair, enlarged canines and suiform body plan.

The recent evidence on several entelodonts, which are the basal most
members of the suinid clade such Daeodon, Archaeotherium and Dinohyus
suggest that they were fast runners and large mammals with enlarged
canines. They are unlikely to have had any predators that could have
easily preyed on them. But their teeth marks are found on the bones of
several smaller mammals. It is hence quite possible that these Suinids
were actually facultatively predatory and took down mammalian prey. We
speculate that this predatory state of the basal suinids was inherited
from the ancestral artiodactyl of the suiform group. It is also quite
likely that the whales retained this ancestral predatory state from this
ancestor and initially radiated as aquatic predators.
