+++
title = "The mahAvidyA of karNamoTini"

+++
shrI karNamoTinI devI [![Posted by
Picasa](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/pbp.gif)](http://picasa.google.com/blogger/)

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/hello/133/1300/400/karNamoTini2.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/hello/133/1300/640/karNamoTini2.jpg)

Not far from the from the town of Tenali from where hailed the great
jester of Vijayanagaran court, in direction of the other little town of
Narasaraopetai, is the hamlet of Nandindla. It is here that my ancestors
through my maternal grandmother roamed, a clan graced with number of
notable shrauta sacrificers. One of that clan was a well-learned tantric
had attained siddhi of numerous mantras and was deeply proficient in the
mantra shAstra. In course of his secular duties he was wending his way
towards another town, when he came across the spot, where the choLa
governor of the Telugu country, known by the title, giripaschima-rAja,
had held his court. During the high reign of the reign of king
kullotu\~Nga, this governor had built a temple of the great deity
karNamoTini and planted an Acacia tree in the compound. He attained the
siddhi of the mantras of the deity. The place is now in ruins and in the
grip of the practioners of adharma. 

Yet those of the clan that think of
her see her fiery manifestation completely subduing all before them. The
learned vaiShNava with whom we conversed in our native city told us of
his remarkable journey to the most glorious Oddiyana Pitha, where he
realized that great Mongol adept of the chInAchAra tantras, shri jahana
vajra khaan had attained a siddhi of her mantra. Moving on to Mongolia
he saw the idol of shrI mahAdevI karNamoTini and having placed her image
in his heart he he retraced his path to Oddiyana. In the high sthala of
Oddiyana meditating on her in the midst of the mountain he attained the
siddhi of her mantra.

He told us that the mantra GYAna of her mantra is hardly easy. But then
he asked us to travel like the cloud of meghadUta beyond the Jalandhara
and shAradA pITha and coursing through the welkin to reach the lands of
Oddiyana in our minds eye. There the kiri-maNDala of daNDanAyikA shone
and having circumambulated it we came to the maNDala of kaumarI. Having
uttered her mantra we moved beyond and reached the AvarNa of
karNamoTini. We worshipped the devIs:  

chaNDA, ghaNDA, karAlI, sumukhI, durmukhI, revatI, prathamA and ghorA in
the vAyu chakra

Then we worshipped: saumyA, bhiShaNI, jayA, vijayA,
ajitA, aparAjitA, mahAkoTI and raudrI  

Then we worshipped: virUpAkShI, parA, divyA, the AkAshamAtA-s, samharI,
daMShTrAlA and shuShkarevatI.  

Then we worshipped pipIlikA, puShTiharA, mahApuShTipravardhanA,
bhadrakAlI, subhadrA, bhadrabhimA, subhadrikA, sthirA, niShThurA, divyA,
niSkaMpA and gadinI.  

Then we received the nectar of the sUrya and soma through the iDa and
pi\~Ngala. Out of the cup of our skull the goddess drank the nectar.
With that we entered the realm of karNamoTini.
