+++
title = "The evolving brain"

+++
R had called to enquire of the tragic situation. But mentioned that as a
Hindu I could calm myself by pointing out that life could be worse.
Imagine the fate of Revi I mentioned. Everything is bad for them but
then they have been given their set of rewards by the gods. But we
decided to overcome the dismal thoughts by talking about more cheery
topics. The recent developments regarding the determinants of human
brain size. Two genes implicated in microcephaly have recently been
shown to be major determinants of brain size. These are:  
1\) Microcephalin1: A twin BRCT domain protein that is required for S
and G2/M checkpoints. Its knockdown results in reduced expression of
BRCA1, which also contains two BRCT domains.  
2\) ASPM: An ancient protein seen in the plants, animals and some fungi,
with two calponin homology domains followed by a long coiled-coil
segment with the so called calmodulin binding IQ motifs. It is
associated with the centrosome during interphase and with the spindle
pole through prophase to telophase, suggesting that it might link the
microtubule cytoskeleton with the actin cytoskeleton via the calponin
homology domains. The knockdown of ASPM results in a similar phenotype
as microcephalin in terms of reducing the levels of BRCA1 protein.

This suggests that BRCA1 is also a member of this pathway that probably
regulates the rate of progression of the cell division. There is also
circumstantial evidence that alleles of the BRCA1 gene might have role
in increased intelligence.

The rise of human brain size through neoteny was elegantly described by
Desmond Morris to the lay public in his book the Naked Ape. The chimpâ€™s
brain is a large fraction of the adult size at birth more or less its
final size well before it reaches sexual maturity. The human brain
however is only a small fraction of the final brain size at birth and it
grows even a little after sexual maturity. This delayed timing of final
development as well as the achievement of much larger brain size was
obviously related to the rates of cell divisions in the neuronal and
glial precursors. This is precisely what the ASPM-MCPH1-BRCA1 pathway
seems to control by regulating the check points that allow passage
through S and G2/M transitions. So alleles that allowed increased brain
size development through this pathway are likely to have been selected
as humans were under intense selection for encephalization. It would
also be of interest to see how beta catenin and the wnt pathway variants
are distributed in primates lineages and if they control brain size.

Interestingly the MCPH1, ASPM and BRCA1 alleles are differentially
distributed in human populations. The a MCPH1 and ASPM allele each have
undergone explosive spread through the non-sub-Saharan population, which
most likely to have been due to positive selection. There seem to have
been two episodes to evolution of MCPH1 and ASPM. The first intense
period of positive selection as indicated by Kn/Ks ratios is seen in the
period between the branching off of the human lineage including the
sub-Saharan Africans from the chimps. This phase of evolution was
associated with increased brain size and probably what we tend to call
intelligence in some way. Subsequently MCPH1 and ASPM appear to have
acquired further selectively advantageous alleles after the rest of the
humans split away from the Africans. In the case of MCPH1 this allele
emerged around 35,000 years (14000\>60000 yrs) and in ASPM this allele
arose around 5000 years. These new alleles appear to have swept through
whole or parts of the Eurasian population due a selective advantage
conferred due an effect on brain function. There are likely to have been
cognitive adaptations that helped in surviving the Eurasiatic
environments. These population differences in encephalization or brain
function are not easily accepted by the American academia and its
political correctness vanguard. A good example is the idiot called
\<name withheld temporarily\> who made some asinine comments on these
recent studies. It is good to see that these studies are receiving the
attention the deserve and the people can judge for themselves and see
that people are born different.
