+++
title = "The Moslem rebellion inxa0France"

+++
The West often preaches solemnly to India about Moslem rioting. It is
almost a given that when Moslem fraction of a population under
consideration reaches 15-20% incidents of crime and abuse against
Dhimmis and Kaffrs begin to surface. As the Islamists near 25-30% of the
population we start to see violence emerging– there may be low intensity
riots or clashes triggered by religious activities of the Non-Moslems.
Of course the Western media like to give an impression that this is
nothing to do with Moslems, but everything about poverty, racial
discrimination and un-employment. Every non-White in the Leukosphere
knows that there are incidents of racial discrimination and racial
preference in social discourse. But the degree vastly varies. In the US
it exists, but is not so high as to exclude non-Whites so completely
that they cannot ascend the social ladder. This seems to be the case in
England too, while perhaps Germany and France may be more xenophobic. In
fact many types of non-Whites e.g. Hindus or pseudo-Whites, such as
Chinas and Jews (in the past) have shown average to excellent
performance in most of these relatively benign White states, despite
sporadic instances of discrimination and violence against them.

This brings us to the issue with Moslems. It is indeed true that the
Moslems are a racially diverse group, but on an average are not vastly
outside the basic diversity of other populations in basic human
tendencies. So why do they show the above-mentioned predictable
prelidiction for violence. The problem is the software — Islam — they
are provided with early in their existence. Islam and its favored
interpretation provides an insulation and the build up pressure for the
subsequent explosive release. For all the pontification from the pulpit,
the West is now witnessing Islam in action for itself. In France the
tinder keg has been lit and the Islamists are running berserk. French
opportunists alternatively aided or fought Islamists historically, but
never gained a proper understanding of Islam. Over time the French
declined both martially and demographically. Under these circumstances
they are witnessing what may play out again in the future in not just
France but other European states. Now is the chance for Hindus to tell
the Leukosphere to apply their own high-sounding advice to themselves
and see what happens.

While one can hardly talk of the future credibly, the following a
distinctly possible scenario:  
Many European states are demographically and culturally weak.
Christianity has destroyed the European mind and the facile ideals of
liberalism and socialism have weaked it further. Most of these European
states have notable Islamic populations which are demographically
robust. So it is quite likely that Europe reaches a state where Islamic
percentages reach those magic numbers where rioting is common place. The
only Europeans who are demographically vigorous are the Slavs from
places like Poland. Being well-educated, having requisite intelligence
to sustain a successful modern state in addition, these Slavs might
displace other White European tribes like the various Germanic peoples
and the Kelts and perhaps some of the Italics. They will then clash
directly with Islam. The outcome of these movements will be interesting
to watch. But they are sometime deep in the future of this century. I
fear India’s own Islamic problem many boil over before the European one.
But from the Indian view point it may be OK if Europe’s Islamic problem
is developing on course, because that reduces the chance of a
Europe-Islam alliance against India.

Ultimately as in evolutionary biology everything boils down to
demography. The Hindus face a very similar problem as the Leukosphere,
because the elite Hindus are facing a social, cultural and demographic
decay. The elite Hindus are failing to uphold the sanAtana dharma, but
are going after moha. The elite Hindu society, is disintegrating as
women especially, and men to some degree are corrupted by external
influences, thus ruining the Hindu family structure. The Hindu elite is
demographically weak relatively to their Moslem competitors and flotsam
plebians of their own fold. These dynamics in many ways remind one of
the warning of various Mongol rulers from Kultegin through Chingiz to
even the Manchus that indulgence in the pleasures China would ruin the
war machine of the Mongols. Certain indiscipline of modernity destroys a
dominant civilization.
