+++
title = "Founding fathers and otherxa0musings"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/niall.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/niall.jpg)

[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/nurhachi.0.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/nurhachi.0.jpg)[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/chingiz.2.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/chingiz.2.jpg)

The results of recent chromosomal studies point to an interesting
feature regarding the founding fathers of several nations. The biggest
impact that has been uncovered to date appears to be that of Chingiz
Kha’Khan, the founder of the great Mongol nation, who appears to have
left behind 16 million male descendents in the modern world. More
modestly the founder of the Manchu empire, the descendents of Chingiz
Khan’s arch rivals the Jurchen, appears to have left behind 1.6 million
descendents today. More recently it was noted that the legendary early
Irish king, Uí Néill appears to have fathered a whole bunch of Irishmen
such the McDonalds, McAlisters and McDougalls. The statistics of these
founding fathers suggests that the male contribution to the extant gene
pool may even follow the power law, with few hubs or power-houses who
have fathered large swathes of the world population and numerous males
who hardly have few living descendents. Of course this conjecture needs
much more testing. But even if it were approximately something like that
then it clearly shows that Kingship was a real evolutionary game. In
primates being the dominant male actually helps you further you genes–
being a King does not merely mean being a superdominant male in terms of
power of prestige but also contribution to the gene pool on a
large-scale. Of course there may be gay kings like Alexander of Macedon
or Alla-ad-din Khalji of accursed memory who do not get anything moving
beyond the futile conquest of territory. These, despite their possible
effects on the meme pool (that too usually negative), do not leave their
imprint on the gene pool.

Further the recent genetic studies also reveal that in the terrorist
State of Pakistan the overall genetic diversity is far reduced in
comparison to India and the affinities of males show a certain shift in
the direction of the Arab world. Thus, the verdict of genetics is that
the Islamic invaders did kill of males in parts where they became
dominant. We do not have much evidence if that happened with the earlier
invaders.
