+++
title = "Chinese policy ofxa0kushANas"

+++
Under the Kushanas, unlike in the days of later Indian rulers, the
Indians followed an active policy of supporting the central Asian oasis
civilization in the Tarim region. This forward policy was adopted by
Vima Taktu, furthered by Vima Khadphises and Kanishka. The most
important victory was that of Kanishka in central Asia was against the
Chinese, when he came to the aid of the Tarim chiefs, who had been
severely oppressed by the Chinese warriors like Pan Cha’o. Having routed
them, he brought four Chinese princes as hostages to India and detained
them in fort near what is now Amritsar. The village interesting bears
the name Chiniyari, as a distant echo of the long past days. These
Chinas are supposed to have introduced the pear to India. This is one of
the few defeats of the China army at the hands of the Indians that even
the chronicle of Huan Tsang records. Kanishka to convey his
international status to all concerned adopted 4 titles simultaneously:
mahArajAdhiraja (Emperor of India), Kaisara (for the romans),
Kshatriya-tama (for the Persians), and deva-putra (for the Chinese). So
firmly was Sogdiana, brought under the Indian sphere of influence that
the Chinas referred to it as utto-lo-pa-do: uttarApatha or the northern
frontier of India. Of course Kanishka’s entry in to Central Asia, other
that its economic benefits, resulted in a tremendous injection of
sanskrit literature into China many of whose original were lost in
India. This process to a certain extant actually improved Sino-Indian
relations and facilitated technological exchange between the then
superpowers: the Parthian empire, India and China. Kanishka’s domain
stretched from the Tarim regions to Central India. His southern capital
was Mathura where some statues of his vandalized by the Moslems can
still be found. From a Hindu standpoint the Kushana regime was critical
for the rise of Kaumarism in India.

It is perhaps very likely that, Western powers of today wish to curtail
India by propping up the encircling Moslem states. Because if these
Moslem potentates were smashed, India’s cultural and military influence
would flow to regain its natural extant in the direction of the Roof of
World.
