+++
title = "The hanumAn cult"

+++
The chief of the simians [![Posted by
Hello](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/pbh.gif)](http://www.hello.com/)

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/400/hanumat.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/640/hanumat.jpg)

The nilamata purANa indicates that the cult of hanumAn emerged
relatively early along with that of his master sugrIva. Soon, in the
core Tantro-Pauranic effloresence he developed a major cult of his own
and that sugrIva cult eventually became extinct. The tantric cult of
hanumAn developed as a para-Vaishnava cult and eventually metamorphosed
into a pan-Indian cult with considerably complexity. This full-blown
complexity was in place by the CE 1500, though hanumAn was a late
addition to the Hindu pantheon. He was actually subsuming within him the
aspect of the vedic vAyu and the maruts (which is linked to his
description as a son or manifestation of rudra). We discuss briefly
certain key aspects of ritualism pertaining to the hanumAn cult.

The first mahAmantra of A\~njaneya is:

hauM hsphreM khphreM hsrauM hskhphreM hsauM hanumate namaH //

hanumAn is worshipped in the middle of the eight-petalled lotus. In the
middle of each petal the vAnara is worshipped with the following
names:  
1\) rAmabhakta 2) mahAtejAH 3) kapirAja 4) mahAbala 5) droNadri hAraka
6) merupIThArchana kAraka 7) dakShiNAshAbhAskara 8) sarvavighna
nivAraka.

The on the tips of the lotus petals the following vAnaras are
worshipped:  
1\) sugrIva 2) a\~Ngada 3) nIla 4) jAmbavAn 5) nala 6) suSheNa 7)
dvivida 8) mainda.

\-If one makes 1000 oblations of the mantra with bananas, mangoes and
pomogranates, then feeds 22 brahmachArIs then one can overcome bhUtas,
taskaras and poisons.

\-If one recites the mantra 108 time holding a copper/silver pot with
water and drinks it one can over come the ill-effects of venomous
bites/stings.

\-If one recites the mantra 900 times at night for 10 nights then one
can ward of fear of enemies.

\-If abhichAra has caused fever to a victim then sprinkling water and
ashes (consecrated as above) vigorously on the victim provides relief in
3 days.

\-wounds from weapons, cuts, bruises and bites if smeared with clean ash
consecrated 3 times by the hanumat mantra will favor quick healing.

\-From dusk to sunrise a tantric will mutter the mantra with ashes and a
nail in his hand for a week. Then he will go an bury the ashes and nail
in his enemies area. They will flee the place in terror.

\-one shall make a proper idol of the money chief with the south-east
root of the bhUtA\~nkuSha tree and perform a prANApratiShTha to it. Then
it shall be smeared with saffron and buried in front of the house
chanting the hanumat mantra. This shall guard him from abhichAra,
bhUtas, thieves, fire, poison, kings and disease.

\-One shall make an image of one’s enemy in a crematorium at night from
clay and write the foe’s name on the heart. He shall do a
prANApratiShTha to it. Then chanting :  
hauM hsphreM khphreM hsrauM hskhphreM hsauM hanumate namaH / dviShantaM
bhrAtR^ivyaM\* Chindhi bhindhi mAraya \[\* or enemy’s name\] //  
and pierce the image with a spike. Then one shall bite his upper lip and
and with ones palms press down the image and go home. If he does this
for 7 days, mArutI will kill his enemy.

\-One shall repeat the mantra for 3 nights in a crematorium continuously
and then a vetAla will come up to him. He can then capture the vetAla
and make it carry out his behests.

Other mahAmantras of hanumAn are:  
oM aiM shrIM hrAM hrIM hrUM hsphreM khphreM hsrauM hskhphreM hsauM //

namo bhagavate A\~njaneyAya mahAbalAya svAhA //

oM yo yo hanumanta phalaphalita dhaga dhagita AyurAShaparudAha //

oM hrAM hrIM hrUM hraIM hrauM hraH oM //

om vajrakAya vajratuNDa kapila pi\~Ngala Urdhvakesha mahAbala raktamukha
taDijjihva mahAraudra daMShTrotkaTaka ha ha karAline mahAdR^iDha
prahArin lankeshvara vadhAya mahAsetubandha mahAshaila pravAha
gaganechara ehyehi bhagavan mahAbala parAkrama bhairava AGNYApaya
ehyehimahAraudra dIrgha puchChena veShTaya vairiNAM bha\~njaya
bha\~njaya hum phaT //
