+++
title = "The days ofxa0bhoga"

+++
A friend, in course of a yarning session, reminded me of the days of
bhoga. In a social situation with Marc, R and Hayastanika we were all
ganging to make fun of R. A person, who shall go un-named, remarked in
full auditory range of Marc that, if R is around, people stop paying
attention everyone else but her. This statement by that person could
have caused me enormous social damage in an as-it-is tense situation. So
I tried to do some talking to divert attention. I remembered our days of
bhoga (like that of yayAti when his puNya still lasted) and recalled the
college program which was being recorded for possible screening on local
TV. These college programs were really not places for the seeker of
brahman, but like the pAshupata, we were free from the pAshas of the
mundane, and we passed through the venue on our way to visit the shrine
of the simian emanation of the fiery bhairava. The TV camera, for
reasons pretty obvious to the pumAn, focussed on R (oo… I fear she may
demand removing this post, for I was supposed to be revealing only some
specifically triaged stuff here). Later my janani who saw the clip on TV
stated that R carries herself remarkably well and that her nose-ring and
tilaka looked good. She said: even R’s own prasU thinks she is
self-conscious, but I think she has the full confidence of always being
in command.

This confidence helped a lot. I would never forget that remarkable day
in the western classroom right at the foot-hill on our picturesque
campus, where our physics lectures occurred (16 yrs ago). Our enormous
physics lecturer droned on his substance-less presentation on sound and
standing waves. I sat in a daze with kR^iShNatvak beside me when on the
window I saw a rather good specimen of Myrmarachne. Since kR^iShNavarNa
was dead to the excitement of jumpers, I called over to R to show the
spider. R mentioned that she had seen a potential Abracadabrella on the
Eucalyptus tree and the funny name tickled kAlacharman immensely
resulting in his un-wanted laughter. Soon, we were picked up by the
bear-like lecturer and were the cynosure of the classroom. We were
condemned by the bug-bear to teach the reminder of the chapter on sound
to our fellow students or pay the non-attendence fee. Before I could say
anything R boldly agreed that we could teach- our classmates were aghast
and begged to the lecturer that he continue and them not be made to
suffer our ignorant lecture in physics. But since R had picked the betel
leaf on our behalf the lecturer insisted that we accept the sentence he
had pronounced. We anyhow decided that it was a much better evil to
teach a chapter of physics than paying any fine. We went over to R’s
home and and laid out our action plan, but soon got distracted and
decided to observe the stars. Some good sights of the clear winter sky
with Auriga in the ascent.

We lost track of time, were late, had some distressing brushes with our
ever-curious and over-interpretive parents, but finally pieced some
lectures together. So the next three lectures in sound were ours and at
least our psychophants say we did much better than the R^ikSha putra. To
give some special effects we went over to a famous Russian textbook
called Irudov and chose a particularly nasty problem from it, and
provided it as a numerical example for the class. I am sure we are still
hated by many those who remember this incident for our “ahaMkAra”. The
person who incited the above social gaffe also accused me of being the
worst conceited individual … Where we the pashu at the yUpa? Suddenly
our eyes opened. In some it is called confidence in others it is
conceit- but it all lies in the eyes of the beholder.

pashupati is that odd-eyed fellow who goes around in the graveyard
performing huDDukAra and aTTahAsa.

## 

##
