+++
title = "The pain of the cell phones"

+++
We saw the wonderous charms of Hayastanika fade behind the impenetrable
veils. We conjured memories of eating the wonderous superhot mango
pickle on a pleasant spring afternoon and talking of the “pancha-shara
mulapadhArta” with the wonderful Kappa on the wonderful summer day in
the high mountains – they were both similar. We were reminded of the
distant afternoon of the “curtain” where we experienced the pleasures of
R’s company. Our reverie, as the pleasures of existence, was broken by
the call from Jx. Everyone was talking about Jx’s wonderful cell phone,
but Jx insisted it never worked. They then looked at my one cell phone
which was purchased on last shelf of the last shop in Sadashiv Peth.
Unlike Jx’s they were not sure if mine would even work. I kept it to my
ear and went through the routines. It made some wierd noises. At night
it would ring without reason. We remembered our muni’s words: “It is a
two fold problem of both purchasing a cell phone for you and selling the
peculiar camera-cum-phone you have devised”. In the Sadashiv Peth
operation we had received our current cell phone in barter for the
peculiar camera-cum-phone we had made. The learned muni, wise beyond his
years, had warned us that in the desh nobody really wanted peculiar
devices of that type. pretabuddhI drAviDAchAryaputri had bought that
c-c-p we had made. On account of her perverse bent she was unable use
the phone. She wondered why such devices existed in the first place.
