+++
title = "The prelude toxa0Manas"

+++
From the time of the defeat of the Uighurs to the rise to the powerful
Mongol tribes of the Khitan, who founded the Qara Khitai empire in
Central Asia, the supreme rulers of “Imperial Mongolia” were the Kirghiz
taken to their zenith by Manas Kha’Khan and his valiant successors.
Imperial Mongolia was always the center of power of the Altaic peoples-
the Turks and the Mongols. The rulers of imperial Mongolia were the
supreme rulers of the steppes, and it became the power center of the
Altaic empires since the rise of the first Hun empire under the Khan
Motun-Tegin who destroyed the Shakas and the Kushanas and established
himself as the supreme lord of Central Asia. He was the first Central
Asian power to defeat the Han Chinese and illustrate the power of
mounted archery, which he had acquired from the Kushans. Then Anegue
Khan founded the second great Hun empire of the Juan-Juan, whose armies
widely invaded the states of outer Asia, including Iran and India. These
Hun empires were the first Mongol empires and even Chingiz Kha’Khan much
later acknowledged them as the first military and political successes of
the Mongols. Then the power passed to the earstwhile allies and vassals
of the Huns, the Blue Turks under the Khan Bumin. After a glorious reign
the Blue Turks were displaced by the Uighurs, another Turkic tribe as
the lords of central Asia. The next Turko-mongol tribe to gain control
were the Kirghiz, followed by the Mongol tribe of the Khitan and finally
the Chingizid Mongols.
