+++
title = "The rise and fall of Khan Abu’lxa0Khair"

+++
An instructive lesson is offered by the eventful life of the Khan Abu’l
Khair. The first son of Chingiz Kha’Khan was Jochi who founded the great
Western hordes of the Mongols. His principal son was Batu who led the
Mongol army during its great conquest of Europe. Batu and his brother
Berke founded the Golden and White hordes of Jochid Ulus. The Golden and
the White hordes were re-unified by the vigorous action of Khan
Toqtamish, who also invaded Lithuania and subjugated it. Jochi’s other
son Shayban had also distinguished himself in the great European
campaign. At the time of Chingiz Kha’Khan death Shayban was alloted an
Ulus (The Blue Horde) beside those of his above brothers East and
Southeast of the Ural river including the province of Aktyubinsk.
Shayban and his successors roamed in the territory bounded by the the
Ural mountains and the Rivers Ilek and Irgiz, a tributaries of the Ural
and wintered near the Sary Su river steppes. While the Shaybanids were
not a major and remained obscure till the mid-1300s they held their
territory against competing Mongol Khans from the White horde. In the
mid-1300, an energetic Khan Uzbek stabilized and unified the
disintegrating Ulus of Shayban. Subsequently, the other Jochid hordes
collapsed as result of the expansion of Timur-i-lang and the Chingizids
appeared to be receding into the background of the steppes. However, the
fecundity of Chingiz Kha’Khan line revived its fortunes. All of a sudden
the Shaybanids of the Blue Horde came to the fore. In 1428 at the age of
17, a young warrior Abu’l Khair was elected Khan of the Blue Horde in a
Quriltai held on the Tura, west of Tobolsk in Siberia. After bowing to
the Yak tail totem he proclaimed to restore the glory of Chingiz Khan.

Immediately there after he launched a swift campaign on the competing
Jochids and killed Khan Boraq of the Golden Horde and re-unified the
former Jochid Ulus bounded by the Ural and the Syr Darya rivers under
himself. This remarkable activity by the young Khan of the Blue Horde
inspired the Turko-Mongols chiefs who submitted to him on the steppes.
In 1430 he decided to restore the power of the Chingizids over the
Timurids and captured Khwarizm from them and went to sack Urgench as his
ancient ancestor had done. Over the several years that followed he
defeated Shah Rukh, the Timurid Sultan, and conquered the fortified
towns along the line of the Syr Darya from Sighnakhi to Uzgen. He placed
himself on the throne in Sighnakhi as his ancestor had done and declared
that he would revive the empire of Chingiz Khan. In 1451 he made the
Timurid ruler Abu Said take the throne of Samarqand and made him his
vassal.

By 1456 Abu’l Khair was dominating the western wing of the old Mongol
Ulus and was poised to expand into the next great empire of the Steppes.
However, he had a competitor in the form of the rising Oirat Mongols.
The Oirat emperor Esen Taiji, a great general, had defeated and captured
the Chinese Ming emperor some years ago, even as Abu’l Khair was
advancing. Esen Taiji was succeeded around 1456 by his equally capable
son Amasanji Taiji. This new Khan of the Oirats decided to turn his
attention westwards in his own quest to re-live the remarkable conquests
of Chingiz Khan, albeit at the expense of the latter’s descendents. Esen
and Amasanji had already amassed a vast territory in the East from
Dzungaria to the Baikal Lake, from the outskirts of Peking to Turkestan.
He decided to systematically corner and destroy the hordes of the
Chagadais and the Jochids. Abu’l Khair demanded that the pagan Oirat
Mongols submit to Islam as Abu’l Khair’s grandfather had done. Amasanji
scorned him and repudiated the Islamic mentality. In 1457, without any
warning, Amasanji Taiji led a cavalry of around 65,000 men straight
towards the territory of the Blue Horde. Abu’l Khair drunk with
continuous success since the age of 17 was confident that these pagan
Mongols will not stand his charge and decided take them lightly while he
was interfering with the Timurids. However, seeing their rapid advance
in taking towns along the north bank of Syr Darya he charged to meet
them with his entire force. In the great battle between the two Mongol
powers that followed Abu’l Khair was thoroughly smashed by Amasanji
Taiji and his horde broken up. He fled just in time to save his life and
holed up in the heavily fortified citadel of Sighnakhi. The Oirats
raided the surrounding countryside but then finally left due to lack of
fodder for their horses. In one blow the Abu’l Khair’s ambition was
reduced to dust. The other Jochids who were under him Qarai and Janibeg
now revolted and joined the Chagadai Khan Esen Bugha to found the
Kirghiz-Kazakh Horde. Many more Mongol clans under Abu’l Khair deserted
him to join Qarai and Janibeg. With desertion Abu’l Khair had lost much
of his territory that he had gained in the constant string of victories
over almost 30 years.

However Abu’l Khair made one last attempt. Over the next 10 years he
painstakingly assembled a large army on the steppes of the Sary-Su. In
1468 he tried to recapture the territories lost to the Kirghiz-Kazakh
and attacked Janibeg and Qarai. Janibeg remembering the killing of his
grandfather Boraq by the young Abu’l Khair decided to seek his revenge.
The Kirghiz-Kazakh Khans also recruited Khan Yunus of the Chagadai horde
and formed a triple alliance against Abu’l Khair. In the great conflict
that followed Abu’l Khair was overwhelmed, his army destroyed and
scattered as they were caught in a trap between the allies. Abu’l Khair
was attempting to retreat when an arrow hit him on his face and he fell
from his horse. Thus, he passed out unnoticed into grass of steppes from
which his ancestors had risen to glory. His son Budaq tried to rally the
troops around and hold fort. However, a month later Yunus surprised his
camp between Tashkent and Turkestan and beheaded him. Thus, father and
son passed beyond the veils of history. For every Chingiz Khan many an
Abu’l Khair rise to their great heights and pass unnoticed into the
grass.

One day you are the great Khan at the height of your power, and the next
day you are gone without a trace.
