+++
title = "The great cheraxa0magicians"

+++
The nambUthiri brahmins of the chera country are representatives of the
earliest great wave of brahminical settlers of the deep Dravida lands.
In the modern Tamil country their cousins, the choliars and the
dIkShitas of Chidambaram represent small pockets of this wave of the
early Aryans of South India. They are all members of the pUrvashikha
class of brahmins, who wear their shikha in the front, and separated
from the mainstream Aryan core anywhere around 500-300 BC and proceeded
southwards. In the Tamil country these brahmins have been largely
overrun by the two notable later brahminical migrations: the
bR^ihatcharaNa or the great sect that established itself under the
pallava patronage and subsequently the various lines of vaDamas or
Northerners who came in starting in the choLa period and through the
Reddi and Vijayanagaran regimes. Both of whom are also seen in the
Andhra and karNATa countries and are aparashikha brahmins wearing their
shikha at the back of the head. Amongst the nambUthiris there were great
exponents of three vedic saMhitas, shrauta sacrifices and the tantra.

While the tantric traditions of the chera country show remarkable
isolation and archaic preservation in certain directions, in the
medieval period the chera tantrics acquired a pan-Indian renown and were
part of the country-wide movement to systematize the shrikula tantric
material. An example of this was the great kaula tantric
puNyAnandanAtha, a nambuthiri of the lopAmudrA (or hAdimata) lineage of
shrividyA who migrated to Kashmir and founded a major school there. He
authored the famous text kAmakalA vilAsa which propounds one of the most
powerful forms of shrividyA worship based on the yonIrUpa. However, our
main objective here is to provide a brief account of the greatest
medieval tantrics of the chera country, on account of whose
systematization of the tantra the weakly educated smArtas of the Tamil
country have gained a great fear of the chera tantrics, whom they refer
to as the chera magicians.  

The greatest of the chera magicians, chennas narAyaNan nambUthiripAD, a
remarkable individual, was born in 1428 in the chennas household in the
modern Malappuram county. He was an extraordinarily versatile brahmin
who acquired knowledge on a variety of topics at a young age. Firstly,
he mastered the vedic and tantric lore, especially digesting an enormous
amount of tantric literature and prayogas of various streams, including
shAkta, pA\~ncharAtra, saptarAtra, bhUtatantras, kumArAgama and
shaivAgamas. nArayaNan also acquired mastery of sanskrit poetry and
composition and is noted as one the greatest 18 sanskrit poets of the
chera country. It is said that he was once visited by uddaNda shAstrI,
the famed smArta scholar from Kanchipuram, who asked him give him any
topic and he would compose two sholkas on the same. The tale goes that
nArayaNan gave uddaNDa an obscure astronomical topic on which uddaNDa
could compose only 1.5 sholkas and was thus discomfited. It is also said
that uddaNDa had defeated all the nambuthiris in sanskR^it debates and
thoroughly shamed them by stating the he the tiger from Kanchi had put
the nambuthiri elephants of bad poetry to flight. So the nambuthiris
took refuge with nArayaNan, who laid an abhichAra on uddaNDa and uddaNDa
was consequently defeated by his own young nambuthiri student.

In the 1440-50s nArayaNan carried out numerous detailed observations on
Mars, Saturn and Jupiter which was critical for other great nambuthiri
astronomer nIlakaNTha somayAjI to develop his planetary model. nArayaNan
next contributed to the development of Hindu calculus providing the
geometric form of the limit sin(x)/x=1: x-\>0. He used to show how the
formula of the area of the circle may be formal derived as the area of a
polygon n-\>infinity. He also extensively developed the use of a planar
coordinate system equivalent to the Cartesian system in solving
geometric problems. Here he was following the steps of vAchaspati
mishra, first seen in the latterâ€™s great work on vaisheShika explaining
atomic coordinates. He also provided solutions for several trigometric
problems concerning tantric yantra constructions and Agamic 3D
constructions. These problems include finding the length of the longest
diagonals of an octagon given its perimeter or constructing a regular
hexagon having the same area as a given square. He summed up his work on
pratical 3D geometry in a treatise the mAnava vAstulakShaNaM on
construction of temples.

He then wrote his elaborate compendium of the tantra, the tantra
sammuchaya, providing all details on tantric temple worship as well as
rites. He was succeeded by his illustrious son sha\~Nkaran nambUthiripAD
who wrote another tantric treatise sheSha sammuchaya that covered all
deities not covered by his father and the specialized rurujit shAkta
temple protocols. These together became the basic manual for all chera
magicians. In particular these renowned tantrics established highly
secret dhUmAvatI, bhadrakAlI and bagalAmukhI prayogas that are
transmitted only within their fold. Most poorly educated smArtas of the
Tamil and the Telugu countries have hardly any defense against these
prayogas and can be easily blown away. A chera tantric of the line of
nArAyaNan and sha\~Nkaran performed one of his mighty kaumAra prayogas
for me, which can be considerably efficacious.
