+++
title = "Chenchus, Lambadis and the L1 haplogroup"

+++
Analysis of some additional data from the Cordaux paper and the earlier
works of the group from Vanga reveals further interesting trends in the
distribution of the L1 haplogroup, which was seen to be predominant in
numerous Tamils-speaking populations, with a peak occurrence in the
Tamil Low and middle castes. Not unexpectedly the Kallars, a middle
level warrior Tamil caste, has up to 50% L1 markers. L1 haplogroup is
also found in the Yadava caste, a group of cowherds from from the Andhra
country (the clan of the famous cowherd hero kATaM rAju) show about 19%,
Kammas of Andhra 17%, so also the Sinhalese show about 17% of it. These
numbers suggest that indeed L1 is probably associated with the spread of
the spread of the Megalithic culture through peninsular India. The Tamil
cultural revolution, probably marking the first Dravidian
“civilization”, spread out northwards actively with a declining
gradient of influence. In the south it similarly influence Shri Lanka.
As a result of this spread of the Dravidians, who already possessed a
certain social standing, the L1 haplogroup bearing males were able to
enter the Indo-Aryan caste hierarchy at the middle level and show
further upward mobility. The later point is illustrated by the fact that
in Brahmins of Tamil Nad, Andhra and Maharashtra (the Konkanastha
Brahmins) the L1 haplogroup is seen in 10-13% frequency. Most
interestingly, the Saurashtrans who are an immigrant group into Tamil
Nad from the Gujarat-Maharastra zone show upto 25% frequency of the L1
marker. This is in fact in contrast to the overall level of L1 in
Gujarat being around 10% (Albeit a relatively small sample of 29 males),
and in general in Maharashtran upper and middle castes around 10-11%.
Thus, despite retaining their unique language of the Indo-Aryan family,
the Saurashtrans have acquired a considerable component from the Tamil
gene pool (lower bound of 15%). This suggests that even the rather
insulated Saurashtrian jAti was genetically porous to a certain degree.
Probably the Saurashtran jAti’s tight connection with certain
professional guilds strongly preserved its language while letting people
in.

The fascinating Lambadi tribe of Southern India is a nomadic tribe
moving around with horses and cattle. I had witnessed a few bands of
these nomads as a youth and was struck by their oral tradition. 40% of
the Lambadi males bear the M74 mutation that marks them of Northern
Asian affinities. The Lambadi’s also narrate tales of pR^ithivirAja
ChahamAna, other ChAhamAna and Rathod heroes. This suggests that they
actually migrated out of Rajasthan, and probably represent a South
Indian branch of the Gypsies migrating out of Rajasthan when the Hindu
kingdoms were assailed by the Army of Islam.

The Chenchus are a most remarkable tribe in Andhra. They are completely
adapted to the forest and live entirely as hunter-gatherers. They have
extraordinary stamina and eat only 1 time a day. They have special
position amongst the tribes of India: the caste Hindus consider them
completely pure for accepting food. They are also considered eaters and
makers of bhojya and bhakShya food, so a brahmin can eat from a Chenchu.
Chenchus have special privileges to perform rites in the Shrisailam,
Ahobilam and Bhramaramba temples and enter the garbha gR^iha normally
reserved for brahmins only. They have their own priests who invoke the
standard Hindu deities of whom they have good mythological knowledge
with elaborate unique rituals. Interestingly, they are the only tribal
population with a particular ratio of H1, R1a1 and L1 haplogroups
resembling several middle caste populations of India. It is possible
that they represent an ancient varNa population that degenerated to the
tribal condition. Alternatively their special symbiotic association with
the caste populations may have resulted in gene flow into them. This is
one of the unique tribal groups of India that is facing extinction in
modern India due to habitat loss and disease.
