+++
title = "The kAlAmukhas-I"

+++
One of the most enigmatic of the shaiva groups of India were the
kAlAmukhas. Their origins and the rise to power are shrouded in mystery.
An added mystery is their suddence disappearance despite their prominent
presence in the mideaval period. I stood before a great shrine of The
god once built by the kAlAmukhas in the city of my birth and wondered
about their origins. They were described as kAlAmukhas after the
practice of marking their foreheads with a black streak. There were two
great schools or councils (pariShads) kAlAmukhas. The siMha pariShad was
common in Andhra and the shakti pariShad was common in Karnataka. The
latter pariShad is most actively represented in epigraphic records
studied by Lorenzen. Though there is not much evidence for the
kAlAmukhas having any presence elsewhere in India, the South Indian
epigraphic records suggest that they were also present in Kashmir. We do
not find much connection between the kAlAmukhas and the much maligned
kApAlikas, and the siddhAnta shaiva streams. The main center of the
shakti parishad was the dakShiNa kedAreshvara temple in North Karnataka
from where the kAlAmukhas fanned out into the rest of the state. From
the inscriptions we get the following lineage of the kAlAmukhas.

The founding achArya was the learned kedArashakti. His first student was
rudrAbharaNa. His student was vAlmIki. kedArashakti’s second student was
shrikaNTha. His student was someshvara. His student was vidyAbharaNa. He
had 3 students vAmashakti, gautama and GYAnashakti-I. gautama’s student
was vAmashakti-II. His student was GYAnashakti-II. His student was
shrikaNTha-deva II. His student was vAmashakti-deva III. Another line
from GYAnashakti-I was started by his student chandrabhUShaNa. His
student was krIyAshakti. Thus from late 900s to 1225 the kAlAmukha
scholars dominated the scene in Karnataka.

The inscriptions suggest that the kAlAmukhas were the direct
representatives of the pAshupata stream. This is the tradition founded
by the ancient lAkulIsha, who described in the shiva purANa as the
promulgator of the pAshupata cult. The antecedents of the pAshupata
stream can be traced back the parishiShThas of the atharva veda which
describe the ancient version of the pAshupata vrata. For example the
AchArya rudrAbharaNa is mentioned as being “an ornament of the
lAkula-doctrine”. The modern orthodoxy, has tended to malign the
kAlAmukhas as a heterodox school that is to be shunned by the mainstream
brahmins. However, the inscriptions clearly show that the kAlAmukhas
were not heterodox followers of non-Aryan ways but a branch of brahmins.
For example the Kedareshvara inscription states that “the kAlAmukhas
study in the secluded and quiet maThas, the R^ik, yajur, sAman and
atharvan saMhitas with their auxiliary texts. A scholarly study is also
made of the kaumAra, pANinIya, shAkaTAyana shabdAnushAsana grammars.
They also are mentioned as studying: nyAya, vaisheShika, mImAmsa,
sAMkhyA and bauddha philosophy as well as pauraNic and secular saMskR^it
literature, in addition to the lAkulIsha tantras”. In particular many of
the kAlAmukhas were specialists in Hindu atomism of nyAya and
vaisheShika. One of them someshvara was a particular expert in these
schools as per one of the inscriptions. The kAlAmukha maTha is also
mentioned as feeding jaina and bauddha mendicants in addition to Hindu
brahmins and saMnyAsis.

Some kAlAmukha AchAryas of both pariShads in the Mysore region bear the
title: kAshmIra paNDita. More explicitly the Muttagi inscription from
Bijapur states that a certain kAlAmukha paNDita had migrate to Karnataka
from Kashmir. Thus, at least the kAlAmukha cult had a certain adherants
in Kashmir. The Ghaznavid invasion ravaged the two great pAshupata
centres: Mathura of the kaushika lineage and Somanatha of the gArgya
lineage. So it is quite likely that some of the North Indian scholars
migrated to Karnataka and Andhra which were relatively safe from Islamic
violence at that point. Thus, an understanding of the place and
distribution of the kAlAmukhas in the larger matrix of pAshupata cults
has been largely erased as their sister groups were destroyed in
Somanatha and Mathura by the Islamic ravages. Like Buddhism, the
eventual fall of the kAlAmukhas can be attributed to their highly
centralized monastic structure. When Islam struck, these centralized
vihAras or maThas that were entirely dependent on massive patronage and
solely devoted to scholarly pursuits were blown away resulting their
rapid extinction. In contrast the more amorphous Hindu groups dispersed
over the countryside survived and revitalized the Hindu world in face of
the Islamic assault.
