+++
title = "Man, the Troglodyte andxa0environment"

+++
Jared Diamond, a socialist American scientist wrote a book termed the
“Third chimpanzee”. Here he highlighted the similarities between us
and our cousins of the genus Pan, and the explosive spread of Homo in
the recent past. There have been some recent works that allow us to
exquisitely understand the transition from the ancestral condition,
still recapitulated in many ways by the troglodytes and the gorillas to
the derived condition seen in Homo. Homo is in many ways different from
the other related apes. He is naked, his canines are reduced, he walks
erect all the time in adulthood, having shed the undignified ambulation
on the knuckles. The females of his species sexually signal to him with
their inflated mammary glands and posteriors and he tends to observe
reasonably long term pair formation with his mates. His big toe in
unopposed, he is clumsy on trees compared to his cousins and much to his
great pride he sports an enormous brain, that is unrivalled in the
animal world. These changes appear to be quite a handful for a lineage
that has been relatively conservative in its ways since the days
Victoriapithecus that may be close to the ancestory of both the monkeys
and apes, and the early apes such as Afropithecus, Heliopithecus and
Otavipithecus.

Now the results of some recent genetic studies such as Nielsen R and
Bustamante CD et al come in to throw extraordinary light on the
transition from the troglodyte grade to that of Homo. These works
uncover a number of genes that have been subject to positive selection
after the separation of humans from their common ancestor with the
troglodytes. Some of these may directly explain the above stated
traits:  
For example, the chromatin protein of the Polycomb group, SCML1
(ortholog of Drosophila Sex comb on middle leg), with a special
C-terminal SAM domain of the class that I had studied, has 15
nonsynonymous substitutions in humans and no polymorphisms. This
suggests multiple strong selective sweeps driving divergence between
species, while eliminating variation within species. As it regulates the
expression of the Hox group of genes among others this protein is a
likely candidate to have favored the emergence of the vertical
orientation of the foramen magnum, critical for the erect gait and
probably also played a role in the development of the non-opposed thumb.

Some other genes like several cytoskeletal proteins (including myosins
and adducins), Gli3 involved in finger development amongst other things
and some neurally relevant proteins like Huntingtin and Syntaxin 11 show
much greater purifying selection between the troglodyte and Homo, but
considerable polymorphism in Homo. The sudden change in lifestyle within
Homo may have resulted in a relaxation of constraints on these genes.

The same Jared Diamond then wrote a book called Guns, Germs etc. It was
one hell of a politicallly correct book about equality of humans in face
of environmental differences. It was one piece of leftist sophistry
complete with the aspersions at Brahminism and fullsome praise for
Abrahamism in developing “scientific temper”. While Diamond laughed away
to the bank fooling the public with his “equal-equal” nonsense that is
so common amongst leftist American academics the public was fooled.
Luckily for us this bluff was exposed by a recent paper by Wang ET et al
that showed that in the last 40-10,000 years, i.e. the time frame in
which the humans emigrated out of Africa, we have undergone natural
selection in atleast 1800 genes. These genes include numerous genes
relating to immune response, reproduction and neural function. The
implication of this are explosive. Thus we are likely to expect
hardwired differences in disease resistance, intelligence/behavior and
reproductive behavior/strategies in different populations of the world
probably as local adaptations to their different environments.

Hence, unlike Diamond’s contention that the local enviroments acted on a
blank slate of human physiology, humans actually diversified through
local differentiation via natural selection to make most of the
environment. It is for this reason the trajectories of human populations
the world over was so different. Importantly, the populations left
behind in Africa, and to some extant the early populations of India and
Australia were not a part of many of the changes sweeping through
populations elsewhere. So contrary to Diamond’s assertions one must give
a careful though to the now increasingly clear possibility that the rise
of agriculture and pastoralism actually went hand in hand with natural
selection for particular behavioral, immunological and reproductive
changes that made the rise of things like urban civilization possible.

A superficial glance at the list of genes: ASPM (a brain size effector),
different glutamate and glycine receptors (GRM1, GRM3, GLRA2), synapse
associated E3 Ub-ligase RapSyn, serotonin transporter (SLC6A4), two
olfactory receptors OR4C13 and OR2B6 suggests that many aspects of human
behavior and intelligence are by default going to be different between
populations. Interestingly, the olfactory receptor diversification
suggests that there may be populations differences literally in the way
we smell things. This stark realization of human inequality make us
understand many things that otherwise mystify the PC social scientist.
