+++
title = "The cracks in thexa0edifice."

+++
In 1326 the Army of Islam had completed the conquest of Hind and almost
all of the old Hindu dynasties from the royal shishodias and ChAhamAnas
in the north, the yAdavas and hoyasalas of Middle India and the Cholas
and Pandyas of South India lay prostrate before the cresent banner. The
great edifice of India, starting from the kuru and the pA\~nchAla,
through the mauryans, shungas, guptas and their successor states was
destroyed. The last in this long line of India states in central India
was the yAdava state that gained control of central India from the
chAlukyas of mAnyakheta and kalyAni. They established their capital in
devagiri and were blessed with 4 notable rulers singhana, kR^ishNadeva,
mahAdeva and rAmadeva. Their long-lived brahmin minister was the
illustrious hemAdri from the karNATa country whose enormous breadth of
scholarship was illustrated in the encyclopaedic work chaturvarga
chintAmaNi and its colophons. He developed a special type of temple
architecture known as the hemadripantha style. He was a physician and
agriculturist who developed the cultivation of bajra as a nutrious food
for arid zones in Maharashtra. Above all he provided a legal and
administrative scaffold for the yAdava kingdom much as the brahmin
vij\~nAneshvara had done for the chAlukyas before them. Other great
scholars of the yAdava kingdom were keshava the physician, vopadeva the
grammarian and physician and bhAskara II the mathematician. There were
revolutions in Hindu medicine in the yAdava period, where the great
scholars developed diagnosis of disease considerably over the earlier
Hindu treatises. It also saw the rise of differential calculus in the
work of bhAskara II.

It was this well-administered Hindu state that suddenly collapsed under
the assault of the most terrible Islamic invader, Ala-ad-din Khalji. In
1296 ACE Ala-ad-din suddenly invaded Devagiri when the main army of the
yAdavas was away in the south near the border with the Hoysalas. First
the kR^iShNa a yAdava general attacked the invading Moslem force. The
kR^iShNa was ambushed by the fast-moving Moslem horsemen and killed. The
royal kShatriya women taking up arms fell upon the Moslem army. So
fierce was the charge the of the Hindu women that the Moslems were
beaten. But Nusrat Khan arrived with more reinforcements and the Moslems
finally destroyed the fighting women. The King rAmadeva was not aware of
the attack and was surprised by the Moslem force. He was forced to hole
himself in the impregnable fort of Devagiri, which was one of the
greatest military strongholds of India. But Ramadeva ironically could
not make use of this wonderful stronghold, because he was low on
supplies. But rAmadeva’ son singhana II returned with his army and
vigorously attacked Ala. Ala was in a perilous situation as his ranks
wavered under the Hindu counter-attack. But the wily Turk had cleverly
placed an army under Nusrat Khan to engage rAmadeva and to prevent him
from sandwiching the Moslem army between Devagiri fort and singhana’s
forces. Seeing Ala in trouble Nusrat Khan left his position and came to
reinforce the attack on singhana. Ala spread the rumor that Nusrat was
arriving with 20,000 horse even though he had only 2000 horsemen.
singhana’s men bought the rumor and disobeying their commander’s words
and scattered. The Moslem invader killed numerous brAhmaNas and rich
vaishyas spreading terror in the countryside. rAmadeva with his army and
state in utter disarray surrendered meekly, delivering his enormous
treasury to Ala-ad-din which comprised of 22 tons of gold, 260 kgs of
pearls, 37 tons of silver, 74 kgs of precious gems, 4000 rolls of silk
and numerous elephants. He also raped a daughter of rAmadeva and carried
her away.

Why did the famed Hindu kingdom of the yAdavas collapse so dismally
before the invading Moslems. It is the answer to this that reveals how
important varNa and the sanskrit language were for the stability of the
Hindu state and how disruption of it exposed the Hindus to external
assault.

The secret for this lay in the activities of the mAnabhAv (mahAnubhAva)
cult. A brahmin name haripaldeva came under the influence of a heterodox
saint govinda prabhu and was given dIkSha under the name chakradhara.
chakradhara toured througout Maharashtra and got many brahmins under his
control founding the mAnabhAv cult. His emotional oratory drew huge
crowds of disciples who soon started considering him a deity. He
promulgated many rules regulating the lives of his followers and began
by a series of attacks on advaita. But it soon broadened as he
propounded several heterodox ideas: 1) He rejected the authority of the
veda and vedic rituals, while accepting the upaniShads as having good
thoughts. 2) he vigorously attacked the varNa system and called for
non-recognition of jAtis. 3) He denounced the worship of many gods, and
believed that kR^iShNa was sufficient as a single supreme god and other
being irrelevant and not worthy of any worship. 4) He rejected the
concept of ritual purity and also attacked the tantrics vigorously as
practioners of “evil”. 5) They rejected the use Sanskrit and prohibited
its use in ritual and composition, instead favoring archaic Maharatti
and local dialects.

Seeing anti-varNa and brAhmaNa messages being propagated by the mAnabhAv
cult and winning over of several converts, the great minister hemAdri
intervened to block his influence during the early phase reign of
rAmadeva yAdava. But chakradhara’s many converts acquired considerable
influence on the royal elite and started replacing the brAhmin ministers
with his own agents. This widespread interference resulted in decay of
the administrative system so carefully developed by hemAdri and his
administrative council. Seeing the trouble hemadri sent his troops and
killed chakradhara. But rAmadeva was goaded by the many followers of
chakradhara, who raised the issue that hemadri was acting without the
king’s approval and was a threat. This resulted in rAmadeva charging
hemadri of murder and executing him by crushing him with an elephant and
dismissing hemadri’s appointees. The result of this was a break down of
the civil service and many regional intrigues and disrespect for
brahminical administration under mahAnabhAv instigation. More
dangerously the mahAnabhAvs leaked intelligence to various Moslem Sufis
and spies hoping that they could secure Moslem help against chiefs like
kR^iShNa who still stood by hemAdri’s strong orthodoxy.

We observe that the Hindu edifice has ever since been similarly attacked
by pernicious movements.
