+++
title = "Socio-genetic stratification ofxa0India"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/caste.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/caste.png)A
recent paper by Sengupta et al in AJHG caused much excitement in some
circles, because it was seen by some as providing evidence that the
Indo-Europeans/Aryans may not have invaded India after all. The paper
provides a wealth of Y-chromosome haplogroup data with extensive
sampling of several Indian communities. The conclusions of the paper
itself are a bit confused and it does not do full justice to the data it
analyzes. So we decided to reanalyze the data and reach some tentative
conclusions. A summary of the analysis is presented in the form of a
vector diagram showing the frequencies of individual haplogroups (rows).
Redder the box the more frequent is a haplogroup. The 3 main groups
(columns) are upper castes (brAhmaNas and rAjpUts= u), middle-lower
castes (Marathas, Mahishyas, Vellalar, Vanniyar, Pallar etc=m), and
scheduled or nomadic tribes/castes (Toda, Irula, Konda Reddi, Kota,
Santhal, Muria, Kammar etc=l). One thing that strikes you is that there
are clear frequency differences of Haplogroups that demarcate these
social strata (As was earlier suggested by Cordaux et al).

\-The R1a1, R2, J2a G2 (G2-P15) are clearly high in upper caste, and
decline in middle-lower castes and almost vanish in the lower castes.

\-The O2a, H1, F\* and H2 haplogroups are predominantly seen in the
mainland tribal population and decline in the middle-lower castes and
are low or almost absent in upper castes.

\-Not shown in this diagram is the O3e marker that is predominantly seen
in the Tibeto-Burman speaking eastern tribals (who also have some O2a),
and nearly absent elsewhere. The median joining analysis of the O2a
haplogroup shows that they are two distinct clusters, one with greater
diversity including the Austro-asiatic and Dravidian tribals and the
second the lower diversity one including the Tibeto-Burman tribals.

\-Interestingly J2b2 (first properly defined in the Sengupta study), L1
and H are dominant in the middle-low strata and decline in both the
upper and tribal groups.

The R1a1 marker is elsewhere seen in the Central Asians and Eastern
Europeans; J2a and G2-P15 appear to peak in the Middle East, Anatolia
and the Caucusus with some presence in Europe. G2-P15 is interestingly
found only in Iyer and Iyengars in this set at a high 10-12 %. Another
study interestingly showed a similar rare haplotype N1a to be present in
similar percentages in the Havik Brahmins of Karnataka. This marker is
found elsewhere in the regions bordering the Eurasian steppe zone and to
some extant in Iran. It was also found in the early European settlers
belonging to the Linearbandkeramik (Haak et al in Science Magazine) who
are supposed to have spread agriculture to Central and Northern Europe.

L1 marker is predominant in Tamils and to some extant in Marathas, with
the most prevalent presence in Tamil middle castes like Vellalars,
Vanniyars, Ambalavasis and the like. It is low or absent in most of the
Dravidian tribal groups outside Tamil Nad, though it is present in
Brahmins in the Tamil region. It is also peculiarly found in Balochistan
and Makran but low in the Brahui speakers.

The mainland tribal populations, both Dravidian and Austro-Asiatic are
rich in O2a or H1 or both.

To cut a long story short we provide an interpretation of this data: The
main problem with the interpretations offered by the authors are: 1)
their improper grouping of the jAtis and other populations and 2) their
steadfast adherence to a model that the IE invaders of India should have
come in only around 1500 BC. They also harp about frequency analysis
being inadequate but do not go beyond it to use the alternative methods
fruitfully. It would be simple to interpret the R1a1, J2a, G2-P15, N1a
and perhaps some R2 as being borne mainly by the Eurasian Indo-European
populations entering India. Of these J2a, N1a and G2-P15 is clearly
absent in non-upper caste populations, and shared with western Eurasian
populations. R1a and R2 is seen to have lower diversity in the caste
populations in contrast to tribals, which the authors suggest as meaning
that admixture did not cause their emergence in the tribals. This to say
the least is a very simplisitic explanation. One more consistent with
historical data is that R1a and perhaps R2 expanded in the
Central/Western Asian zone close to the boundary of the Eurasian steppes
somewhere between 10-15,000 years BP. These two seem to have then seeped
into India at a gradual rate seeding the indigenous tribal groups with
R1a1 males at some low rate. The main bulk of the less diverse R1a1
appears to have come from Western/Central Eurasia along with the other
above-mentioned Western Eurasian markers where it had already
differentiated into eastern and western branches. The time of divergence
with the central Asian R1a1 comes to around 6000-10000yrs bp. This along
with the early separation dates for J2a suggest that these are easily
explained by accounting for an early origin for Indo-Europeans of India.
This makes the possibility of an Indo-Aryan Indus civilization a
possibility. The early Kentum substratum in Bangani in India could also
be a part of earlier waves bearing similar haplogroups. Finally, the
cline of markers from Western Eurasian suggest a low angle Northwestern
early influx of Indo-Europeans into India. We wonder if this might
actually represent the Neolithic wave of Indo-Europeans preceeded by
some Mesolithic seepage.

In interior India we find an interesting effect: The O2a and the H1
markers. We believe that these two represent Y-chromosomes of indigenous
populations. The O2a marker is seen in all tribal groups but hardly in
any caste groups, suggesting that it was indeed one of the markers of
the earliest population. In contrast to O2a, H1 while highest in the
tribal populations is also seen in caste population in a declining
gradient. It was in this early population that probably Austro-Asiatic,
Nahali, Kusunda and possibly Indo-Pacific languages arose. Of these the
Austro-Asiatic and Dravidian languages showed an expansion.

O2a is present in Indian tribal populations speaking Dravidian,
Austro-Asiatic and Sino-Tibetan, as well as far Eastern populations in
China, Burma and the states of Indo-China in Indian. Both the frequency
and variance plots of the O2a haplogroup show an increasing Eastern
component. This would imply that its expansion was probably associated
with an Eastern population expansion and emigration. The expansion
probably corresponded with the Austro-Asiatic expansion. In the outer
zones these populations probably were incorporated into Dravidian
speaking and Sino-Tibetan populations which were also expanding.

H1 in contrast is hardly present in Sino-Tibetan and Eastern
populations. Its centre gravity in terms of frequency is the central
part of the country from where it appears to have expanded outwards. We
explain H1 expansion as an expansion of agricultural indigenous
population associated with Central and South Indian archaeological
cultures like Jorwe and Daimabad and these agricultural groups managed
ascend the ladder of the Indo-Aryan hierarchy coming in from the North.

L1 which is restricted to Tamil population but seen across caste
boundaries albeit with the greatest presence in the middle-low castes is
interpreted as not being spread by the Dravidians. As most Dravidian
tribals have it lower levels and it is absent in Dravidians outside
Tamilnad we specifically see at the haplogroup expanded by the
proto-Tamil cultural rennaisance, probably archaeologically
corresponding to the expansion of the Megalithic (neDukkal/vira-kal)
culture. This appears to have expanded from the middle of the peninsular
India somewhat Northwards to coastal Pakistan and Makran and of course
its main center was the Tamil country. This expansion possibly also bore
with it the H1 marker, further driving it up the caste hierarchy. We
suspect that the Tamil upper castes absorbed native priests as kurukals
and the like that resulted in the influx of L1 into their ranks.
