+++
title = "Kuriltai and otherxa0affairs"

+++
The ever querulous vAtavyAdi kept coming up with more of his ideas that
were often of little value. We appointed him vidUShaka, and asked him to
serve in that capacity without much further ado.

We were asked to hold a kuriltai with the circle of further clansmen and
allies. They first grumbled that we had not made any progress on front
\#2 in the great war. We bluntly told them that if they needed my
council they should serve me appropriately or just leave me alone. I
made it clear to them that they should come to me, like jAnashruti going
to raikva, and not the other way around. They grumbled as before, but
then resorted to serve me with due respect. The chief of the clan of the
lauhityas mentioned that stiffening front \#3 was important. Despite the
good weather we had surprising problems on front \#3 in the skirmishes
we had today, but we took advantage of the conditions and tided over the
attack on this front. The shyAvAshva spoke that he could provide
assistance on front \#2 after the stroke of mid-night. I thanked him for
his generous offer and took it up. He also supplied us with food. The
shAktya mentioned a novel escape route that our amAtya and shachiva had
failed to note. We were tempted but brought to notice the logistical
problems. The daughter of the lauhitya having already seen battle at a
young age and performed spectacularly was primed for a future glorious
role. But then the rudderless brahmins whose ancestors sacrificial
stakes had once stood tall and proud asked the bhArgava: Do you think
you will win this war as your clansman rAma had done so against the
vItihotras. We need you to lead us to a victory. We laid out our battle
plans to them.

……..  
It was past mid-night. We dismissed the Kuriltai. The clansmen were
making alternative plans to capture new forts that we believed were of
no value. We left them and proceeded our way. We were waiting in a weird
place. We encountered two weird characters, but shaken by the power of
our mantras they dispersed. We returned to our cave.
