+++
title = "skanda gaNas"

+++
Weighed down by the arrows showered by our foes, we call upon son of the
ranger of kailAsha. He who bears the bow in battle and showers arrows on
the dAnava horde. He who is called ugratamaa and bhImatama, who rushes
to battle with the the axe and spear, we worship him in the midst of the
six-fold maNDala. One who is dallying with sumukhi and biDAlAkShI, we
bow to him.

The brahmins asked the sUta: Now, pray tell us the awesome deeds of that
son of agni who is praised by the atharvaNa kalpa. The sUta continued:
having bowed to the destroyer of the andhaka and his pretty-hipped wife
I shall now narrate the deeds of the six-headed one. brahmA, the
lokapita, said:

Oh mahAsena, rudra combining with agni (as on the fifth day of the
piling of the altar in the agnichayana) and umA with svAhA has given
rise to you who was suckled by the kR^ittikas. A part of the blazing
semen of rudra bounced off the yoni of umA and fell on the mahAparvata
from where sprung the two terrible twin female and male gaNas mi\~NjikA
and mUjika. As one enters the AvarNa of kumAra one must duely offer
oblations to these gaNas as one does to viShvaksena while entering the
vaiShNava maNDala. Another part of the semen glancing off the yoni of
sushroNI fell in to the raktArNava. From it arose five terrifying bhUta
gaNas headed by vIrabAhU, who are the lords of the pishAchas. These
became the attendents of kumAra. From the heart kartikeya emerged the
ram-headed nejameSha, also known as bhadrashAka, who flies around with
great fury. He is worshipped with the secret R^iks of the R^igvidhAna.
From the left side of kumAra emerged the awful shAka who became the lord
of several fierce ganas. From the right side of kumAra emerged the
aweful vishAkha who terrified the universe by his piercing yell. From
agni emerged seven beautiful goddess named kakI, halimA, mAlinI with an
elephant face, brinhilA, AryadevI, palalA and vaimitrA. From them kumAra
generated a terrible, fiery eyed, ferocious son named shishu. He joined
the hordes of ShaNmukha as a general. These aweful emanations of the six
faced one are pacified with the tarpaNa indicated by sage bodhAyana in
his kalpa.

Then the eagle-headed goddess of immense violence, vinAtA also joined
the kumAra pArshada with her horde of violent goddess. She was
accompanied by the elegant smiling faced goddess chatushpatha-niketA who
arrived to aid kumAra with a band of horrible ghosts. From the body of
kumAra emerged a mighty blazing genius who dropped listlessly to the
ground. Agneya raised him up and made him band leader of some of his
bhUtagaNas, naming him skandApasmara. He is terrible and worshipped with
tarpaNas and invoked to cause the enemy to hallucinate. Then, the
snake-faced venomous goddess kadru whose hordes are invoked using the
secret R^iks known as the dR^itarAShTras came to kumAra. She was
followed by pretty goddess holding a skull in her hand, known as
lohitAyanI, who had suckled the young skanda. She is offered tarpaNas
under the kadaMba tree. With her comes two other pretty goddesses on
either side known as revatI and AryamAtA. revatI is accompanied by a
horde of nasty genii known as raivatas. They may be invoked to make an
enemy’s clan extinct. AryAmAtA wreaks havoc with her berserk ghost
troops, who joined kArtikeya’s ranks.

Then kumAra installed the goddesses saramA with the head of a bitch and
surabhI with the head of a cow. They were accompanied by their own bhUta
hordes. Then came AraNyAni with a her hordes and she is offered tarpaNas
under the kara\~nja tree. sIta pUtanA, in the form of a hideous lady,
the mistress of the piShachis also arrived to join guha’s party. All
these beings are invoked in the homas, tarpaNas and abhishekas in
connection with the worship of kArtikeya.

………  
We salute AraNyAni, who had saved our life when we were confronted with
death about this time last year. We shall go to her grove again and call
up the yakShini now.
