+++
title = "The last stretch"

+++
We stood at the last stretch of the passage. Hence, we wanted to comment
on somethings as they represent our very last comments in this phase of
existence. As we remarked before we do not know if we shall speak of the
face of the pishAchI. As our previous comments here, they shall be in
the saMdhyAbhASha with the same codes in place.

We marched to the edge of the great shmashAna. In the midst was seated
The god. He was khaDgarAvaNa, with 5 faces and a sword dripping in
blood. He was laughing awfully. vetAlas howled endlessly. I looked
around and I saw the corpses of Blackie, Horse-face, White beauty,
Sambhi, Palm-tree, Pygmy, Grey shudra, White shudrika, Yellow vaishyakA,
Black kikaTa, grAma maNDuka and bR^ihatsphig. Some were without heads,
some were without arms and of others only heads remained. There were
also those rAkshasas, namely dursachi, hrasvaroman, lambashiras,
kuTilaroman, ugrashmashru, viTshUla, puMshchalIpriya and sphigja who
were horribly howling and roaming around. There were the three fields
beside the shmashAna which were utterly empty- were one went in looking
for something and came back, usually losing what one had.

We had long sought “that thing” and in course of our wandering reached
this part. There we realized we had been seized by the pishAchI. She fed
on the blood of the above-mentioned fallen ones and rejoiced with the
awful rAkShasas. For 15 years we wandered after the dream in which the
vajrayoginI appeared when we slept in the shrine of the terrible nityA
and vilAsinI in search of “that thing”. But now it had culminated with
the seizure by the pishAchI. Will the dhUrta, the brAhmaNya deva come to
our aid?

    Sah ein Knab' ein Röslein stehn,
    Röslein auf der Heiden,
    War so jung und morgenschön,
    Lief er schnell, es nah zu sehn,
    Sah's mit vielen Freuden,
    Röslein, Röslein, Röslein rot,
    Röslein auf der Heiden.
    ...
    Und der wilde Knabe brach
    's Röslein auf der Heiden;
    Röslein wehrte sich und stach,
    Half ihm doch kein Weh und Ach,
    Mußt' es eben leiden.
    Röslein, Röslein, Röslein rot,
    Röslein auf der Heiden.

Johann Wolfgang von Göthe
