+++
title = "TU 1.11"

+++
vedamanuuchyaachaaryontevaasin

amanushaasti .  
After completion of vedic studies, the teacher admonishes his resident
student:

satyaM vada . dharmaM chara . svaadhyaayaanmaa pramadaH .  
Speak the truth; Follow your dharma; do not neglect your private  
recitation of the veda.

aachaaryaaya priyaM dhanamaahR^itya prajaatantuM maa vyavachchhetsiiH
.  
After you have you have given your teacher a decent fee, do not cut  
off your family line.

satyaanna pramaditavyam . dharmaanna pramaditavyam .  
Do not neglect the truth; do not neglect your dharma;

kushalaanna pramaditavyam . bhuutyai na pramaditavyam .  
do not neglect your health; do not neglect your property/wealth

svaadhyaayapravachanaabhyaaM na pramaditavyam .. 1..  
do not neglect your private and public recitation of the veda

devapitR^ikaaryaabhyaaM na pramaditavyam .  
do not neglect your rites to the gods and past ancestors

maatR^idevo bhava .pitR^idevo bhava . aachaaryadevo bhava . atithidevo
bhava .  
Treat your mother as a god; treat your father as a god; treat your  
teacher as a god; treat your guests as gods

yaanyanavadyaani karmaaNi . taani sevitavyaani . no itaraaNi .  
yaanyasmaaka{\\m+} sucharitaani . taani tvayopaasyaani .. 2.. no
itaraaNi .  
You should only perform those rites that are irreproachable, and never  
other types of rites. You should hold in high esteem only the good  
practices you have observed in me (the teacher) never the other
\[bad\]  
practices

ye ke chaarumachchhreyaa{\\m+}so braahmaNaaH .  
teshhaaM tvayaa.a.asanena prashvasitavyam .  
You should greet with honor any great/learned Brahmin who is superior  
to us \[in knowledge\] by offering him a seat

shraddhayaa deyam . ashraddhayaa.adeyam . shriyaa deyam . hriyaa deyam.
bhiyaa deyam . sa.nvidaa deyam .  
You should give \[donations\] with good faith and never without faith.  
You should give with dignity, you should give with modesty, you should  
give with trepidation, you should give with comprehension.

atha yadi te karmavichikitsaa vaa vR^ittavichikitsaa vaa syaat .. 3..  
Now if you have a doubt regarding \[performance of a\] rite or a legal
matter;

ye tatra braahmaNaaH saMmarshinaH . yuktaa aayuktaaH .  
aluuxaa dharmakaamaaH syuH .  
should there be experienced, qualified and considerate Brahmins  
devoted to dharma and who are learned to make a judgment in that  
matter;

yathaa te tatra varteran .tathaa tatra vartethaaH .  
You should observe how they act in that regard and act likewise.

athaabhyaakhyaateshhu .  
Similar with regard to practices which may be subject to criticism,

ye tatra braahmaNaaH saMmarshinaH . yuktaa aayuktaaH .  
aluuxaa dharmakaamaaH syuH .

should there be experienced, qualified and considerate Brahmins  
devoted to dharma and who are learned to make a judgment in that  
matter;

yathaa te teshhu varteran . tathaa teshhu vartethaaH .  
You should observe how they act in that regard and act likewise.

eshha aadeshaH . eshha upadeshaH .  
This is the rule; this is the teaching;  
  
eshhaa vedopanishhat . etadanushaasanam .  
This is the teaching of the upaniShad section of the veda; This is the  
admonition.

evamupaasitavyam .evamu chaitadupaasyam .. 4..

You should perform rites thus, thus indeed should you worship.

Notes:  
1\) After finishing his yajur vedic education (of the taittirIya  
school) the teacher imparts the taittirIya upaniShad at the end.  
Before the student leaves teacher reminds him of some basic issues.  
These are the dvija must pursue: the quest for truth; the observance  
of dharma and the maintenance of vedic recitation.

2\) Then the teacher reminds the student of his need to pay the
teacher  
the due fees, and take care of his own health, property, dharma,  
public and private vedic recitations and appropriate treatment of the  
parents, teacher and guests. He also instructs the student stick to  
correct rites of the veda and not false ones, to emulate only good  
practices of the teacher, proper treatment of learned Brahmins and  
right attitude while giving donations to others.

3\) Then the teacher provides the important rule regarding the  
situation of doubt about correct ritual and legal issues. If such a  
doubt were to arise the student is asked to emulate a considerate  
Brahmin who has full knowledge and understanding of the texts on the  
subject. Likewise if it were a matter that could arouse criticism the  
student is advised to follow such a Brahmin epitome.
