+++
title = "The AmnAyas of the chi~nchinI-mata-sAra-sammuchaya"

+++
We worship chi\~nchinI under the large tamrind tree from whom the sea of
spanda has emerged.

There are 4 AmnAyas:  
pUrvAmnAya: The mukhya shaktI, the great goddess of this AmnAya is
kuleshvarI who manifests as tribhuvaneshvarI along with
paramAndabhairava. From this face emerged the trika tantras with
khagendranAtha as the first of the kaula adept in this lineage. It was
temporarily destroyed by kArttikeya.

dakShinAmnAya: The great goddess of this stream is kAmeshvarI- she is
pleasing to the eye as the young sun, yet brilliant as hundred million
flashes of lightning that strike the consciousness of the adept as the
rahasyas of her mantras are realized. She is full of kAma and manifests
as kulayoginI with a slim waist and is conjoined with kaulesha. The 16
nityAs surround her. The great god kumAra born of her coitus with
kaulesha taught this divine vidyA to krodhamuni of the atri clan. The
shrI kula tantras emerged from this AmnAya.

uttarAmnAya: The great goddess of this AmnAyA is kAleshvarI. She emerges
as the sun- the bhAnavIkaulinI, which shines in the center of the
sacrificial hearth of the great suvar loka of the mahAsamudra of shiva.
The great mantra consisting of 64 bhairava yonis arises and dissolves in
the spanda of this ocean. This vidyA as it unfolds takes the siddha
through the incomparable bliss of experiencing the 12-fold dawning of
the kAlis on the “Sky of Consciousness”- this is the parollAsa. This was
first seen by krodharAja, the irrascible atri and through the lineage of
female teachers went down to the hoary tantric niShkriyAnanda. The
tantras of kAli kula emerge from this face.

Regarding this a tale is narrated: There was a muni named shIlAchiti in
the shivapITha of shrIshaila. His son was a siddha named vidyAnanda who
looked like a shAbara tribesman. He lived in shmashAna-s and performed
nightly vIrasAdhana by meditating on his chakras. He went to the
mountain range to the north of shrIshaila and there in a gold mine
\[\*\] dear to the gods he worshiped, desirous freedom. A tantric
niShkriyAnanda was pleased with him and initiated him into the kAli
krama (CMSS 7). He then transmitted the tradition of kAli krama in
bhAratavarSha.

\* “This cave of gold” might be identified as either one of 3 caverns
recognized today: dattAtreya cave, “Akkamahadevi” cave or umAmaheshvara
cave.

pashchimAmnAya: The great goddess of this stream is vakreshvarI. She
resides contracted and coiled as kuNDalinI. She is seen with her mate
mahAbhairava or kubjeshvara. From her seat in the mahAyonI she procedes
to through the three vertices of the triangle that contain pUrNagiri,
jAlandhara and kAmarUpa and finally arrives at the oDiyAnapITha at the
center. Here she resides in union with the li\~Nga whose nature is bliss
and whose bindu is the “Sky of consciousness”. From this face emerges
the chi\~nchinIshAstra or the kubjikA tantras that was first received by
the ancient tantric vR^ikShanAtha under the tamarind tree from the
founding teacher shrinAtha. In the form of the transmitter of the
chi\~nchinIshAstra she is worshiped as devI chi\~NchinI
