+++
title = "The vaiShNava mahAmantra"

+++
oM oM oM hrIM hrIM hrIM shrIM shrIM shrIM 0M aM aM aM hauM hauM hauM
haMsaH haMsaH haMsaH oM hrIM shrIM namo viShNave //

The mantra rahasyas:  
That great mantra encompasses a series of 3 praNavas. The 3 praNavas are
the AdhAra that is known as the brahman. This is followed by the 3
tArikAs and the 3 anutArikAs which are two wives of viShNu. They are the
supremre states with all things existing in these two shaktis of viShNu.
This sequence represents the primary reality which is the absolute
puruSha, the shAnta and the nAda that manisfest there after. shrI is an
intrinsic part of each stage in the form of time manifesting as nimeSha
and unmesSha.

The praNavas are the primary state of existence the absolute puruSha
subtle and with the shakti who is as yet motionless. This is base into
which the shakti tArA expands giving rise to the universe. The first
manifestation from the puruSha due to the shakti contains both the
existing substratum (bhavat) and the manifest existence (bhAva) and tArA
resides therein. That state which immediately precedes the expansion of
the universe is the inert condition characterized by anutArA; this is
state is called shAntA.

The praNava, the brahman, manifests the aprameya (a) the unfolding or
the evolution of the universe and after fully expanding the universe
becomes extinct into the vyomesha (M). Thus the triad of aM bijas.

In this universe the origin, stable existence and absorbtion is seen to
be sUrya, which continuously provides the activity in the universe,
which is the hakAra. This combines with the unfolding of the worlds the
aprameya (a). The knowers of this see the Ananda (A). This results
Ananda results in the udaya of viShNu (u) in the praGYna (U). All merges
again in the vyomesha on becoming extinct (M). Thus the bIja hauM
emanates.

The manifest universe is pervaded by the prANa hamsaH. Thus is the great
viShNu flanked by his two wives tArA and anutArA, paid obscience. Hence
it is said in the ancient words:  
“hrIsh-cha te lakShmIsh-cha patnyau /”

His head is dasha hotar (TA 3.7- prajapatir dasha hotA) ; his limbs are
chatur hotar (TA 3.7); his hair, flesh, bones, marrow and blood are
panchahotar (TA 3.7); his chest, genitalia and posterior are the ShaD
hotar (TA 3.7). His seven prANas regulated by his brain are the sapta
hotar (TA 3.7). His handsome glory are dakShiNA (TA 3.10) and the
shambhAras are his skeletal articulations (TA 5.2.11). The devapatnyas
(TA 3.9) are his blood vessels, the hotR^iNaM hR^idayaM (TA 3.11) is his
mind; the puruSha is his consciousness (RV 10.90) and the shrI sUktaM is
his shakti (RV Kh 5.87). praNava and tArA bIjas are his secret names,
while rudra (TA 4.5.7) and shukra (1.10.1) are is unconcealed names.
