+++
title = "The adaptive radiation of avian and para-avian clades"

+++
Adaptive diversification of avian and para-avian clades. [![Posted by
Hello](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/pbh.gif)](http://www.hello.com/)

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/400/early_dinobirds.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/640/early_dinobirds.jpg)

Left: Epidendrosaurus and Microraptor; Right: A sinornithosaur
(wonderful artwork of L.Rey).

The recent dinosaurian finds suggests how adaptive radiation in birds
and their closest sister clades of maniraptoran dinosaurs proceeded
along very distinctive lines. Of the maniraptoran dinosaurs we see
considerable ecological diversity in the most primitive members of the
avian clade. We have Archaeopteryx, which appears to be a generalized
primitive bird, Rahonavis, which was clearly a predator probably
retaining the ancestral life-style of the entire avian-paravian clade,
and finally Shenzhouraptor, which appears to have evolved a seed-eating
life-style. Another taxon which is a close sister-group of the basal
avians is the enigmatic Epidendrosaurus, which has a highly elongated
manual digit II in contrast to the elongation of manual digit III in
other related dinosaurs like Archaeopteryx and the deinonychosaurs.
Epidendrosaurus also displays many other adaptations for an arboreal
life style like elongate pedal digits for clutching branches. In
contrast to these groups their sister group the deinonychosaurs despite
their radiation in the Cretaceous, maintained relatively conservative
lifestyles as predators in the small to middle range. Some may have been
more arboreal predators with greater or lesser flight abilities such as
Microraptor and Sinornithosaurus, while others where small terrestrial
predators like Velociraptor, and yet others like Unenlagia, Achillobator
and Utahraptor were fully terrestrial middle range predators. It appears
that the pre-occupation of the large-bodied predator niches by the
larger tetanurans, ceratosaurs and abelisaurs may have kept the avian
and para-avian clades largely out of this niche.

From the distribution of features in the early avians, Epidendrosaurus,
and deinonychosaurs, one may conclude that the common ancestor of these
groups was definitely an arboreal maniraptoran with limited ability to
fly or glide using feathers. From such a base one lineage (the
Epidendrosaurus) probably specialized as brachiating tree-dwelling
micropredators and a consequence elongation of digit II. The flapping
hand movement used by the predatory ancestor was probably used in the
initial stages for wing-assisted climbing of inclines or trees. This was
then used for the beginings of flight. The avian lineage specialized in
flight and probably this favored smaller size and exploitation of much
wider ecological niches. The deinonychosaurs remained to a large-extant
in the ancestral state of this assemblage, with probable multiple
returns to terrestrial predatory niches.
