+++
title = "A Japanese gANApatya text"

+++
One of the unusual tantra inspired texts from Japan that shows the
origin of the Japanese gANapatya cult from the uchChiShTa gaNapati
stream is the kangiten kOshiki, which was composed by the Japanese sage
Kakuban, who lived between 1095-1143. gaNapati is called kangiten in the
Japanese pantheon. The great Japanese hero Sugawara Michizane was an
ardent worshiper of gaNapati and is said to have attained his “siddhis”
through the invocation of the Japanese equivalent of uchChiShTa
gaNapati. An annual grand abhishekam to kangi with thousand oil pourings
was performed by the imperial palace of Japan.

From Kakuban’s description of gaNapati (kangiten kOshiki=the ritual of
deva gaNapati):  
\-The merits of the Lord kangiten reach higher than the heavens, the
profit he gives is broader than the earth is wide. He defends dharma in
every direction.  
\-His root nature is that of the lord of universal and wondrous
enlightenment, rank that is concealed as if hidden in a spotless moon.  
\-The manifest form of kangi is that of a male and female deva.  
\-By performing the vow (from vrata in saMskR^ita ) of kangi, which
benefits all creatures, wealth, wisdom, courage and love can be
obtained. With it one can subjugate demons, dispel disease and extend
life.  
\-Lord kangiten is the root of yin and yang. From him the 10,000 objects
of the universe emerge. He is the Lord who has founded the teaching
lineage of the garbha and vajra maNDala from which all buddhas are
born.  
\-In the Mitsugon heaven he appears as vairochana  
\-The male deva is an emanation of the lord maheshvara. He drives away
celestial and earthly demons and distributes profit in this world and
next.  
\-The female devI is an emanation of the 11-headed form of
avalokiteshvara, and it is the most potent of her 33 forms.  
\-The two are standing in conjugal embrace representing the union of yin
and yang.  
\-That they have elephant heads and human bodies is to show the
co-penetration of all ten realms.

The accessible material of this text suggests a rather simple process by
which the uchChiShTa gaNapati from the mahAchInAchAra tantras was first
“colored” by Taoist material in the land of the chInas where it first
took root. From China it was then transmitted to Japan and presented in
canonical form by Kakuban.

The clear evidence for this incorporation into Taoist-Hindu fusion texts
that were inspired by the Sanskrit tantras in the chIna country is
provided by an obscure text of the chInAchArya Po-jo-je Chieh-lo. This
text dates to AD 861 and is found in both China as: Sheng Huan-hsi T’ien
shih-fa and in Japan as: shO kangiten shikihO (meaning the rituals of
gaNesha). This text describes the construction of the gaNesha maNDala
with gaNesha and his shakti in the center and idols of indra, agni, yama
and kubera placed around the dual gaNesha idols and then other devatas
in the AvarNas around this center square. Many special dhyAna-s are
given for attainment of wealth, vashikaraNa of women, and mAraNa of
enemies. The text also depicts two amulets that contain twelve squares
are are common in Taoism. This text provides evidence for how the Hindu
material penetrate the ritual setting in the far East by way of central
Asia.
