+++
title = "saura mata"

+++
In bR^ihatsamhita 60.19 varAhamihira states that sUrya should be
worshipped by installing idols of his and they should be worshipped by
specialized priests called magAchAryas. This is corroborated by the
bhavishya purANa chapter 139 that narrates the following tale (a
critical reconstruction of it):

kR^ishNa, the hero of the yadus married jAMbavati, the daughter of the
bear-king jAmbavAn. Their son was the valiant sAmba. He went to the
banks of the river chandrabhAga and constructed temple in the honor of
sUrya. No local brAhmaNa knew of the mysteries of his worship and hence
could not take up priesthood at the temple. So sAMba sought help of
gauramukha, the adviser of the yadu chief, ugrasena. gauramukha asked
him to go to shakadvipa and obtain a special class of priests called
magAchAryas to worship sUrya. saMba said:” pray, tell me Oh brAhmaNa
what are the antecedents of these worshippers of the sun. gauramukha
narrated: “The first of the brahmins amidst the shakhas was called
sujihva. He founded a gotra termed the mihira gotra. He had a daughter
of the name nikShubhA. sUrya was enamoured by her and impregnated her.
Thus she gave birth to jarashabda who was the founding father of all the
magachAryas. They are distinguished by the sacred girdle called the
avyanga that they wear around their waist”. saMba there upon called on
kR^ishNa to send him garuDa and flying on his back he landed in shaka
dvIpa. He collected the magAchAryas, brought them back to bhArata and
installed them as priests of his sUrya temple.

The Idol of sUrya should be constructed thusly: He should have a human
form with a solar corona placed behind him. He should be on a chariot
with the horses standing for the seven solar rays. He should hold a
discus and trident in two arms, and lotuses in the other two. His feet
should be covered by boots upto the knees. His waist should bear the
avyanga.

This temple on the chandrabhaga was situated in what is now the
terrorist state of Pakistan and was demolished by Awrangzeb (may piss be
upon him) in the 1600s. Earlier it was descrated by Mohd. bin Qasim and
the al-Qaramitah. The descriptions of the original idol mention that it
had knee-height boots made from Spanish leather and two rubies for the
eyes.

There is considerable epigraphic evidence for the prevalance of the
saura sect in India and definitely the cult was very popular at the time
shankara bhagavatpAda formalized the six sects of sectarian Hinduism
\[shaiva, shakta, vaiShNava, gANapatya, kaumAra, saura\] in the 700s of
CE. The earliest pieces of evidence clearly support the Iranian
connection. The coins of the kushaNas have an image of sUrya with the
inscription miiro. The GovindpUr inscription from the 1130s speaks of
the magas as being brought to the land by sAmba and 6 great poets who
were magAcharyas are mentioned. Mihira Kula, the Hephalite Hun ruler
sponsored the construction of another sUrya temple in Gwalior. This
suggests that the Iranian influences on the saura sect were continous
and over a long period of time. In Rajasthan and Northern Gujarat there
were a number of sUrya temples including the well known one at moDherA.
These contain idols of suryA with the boots up to the knees clearly
implying the Iranian connection. Most of these temples were destroyed in
the fine vandalistic traditions of the zealots of Allah. Priests with
the sirname maga are seen around the sun-temple in Osian in Rajasthan
suggesting that it was probably a famous center of the saura-s of
Iranian origin. So it is clear that original home of the magas was
indeed in the west and following the devastations of the al-Qaramitah
and the Ghaznavids their remnants fled to the east and are now found
there. Today the remnants of the magachAryas are the shakadvipI
brAhmaNas who are still present in Uttar Pradesh. While they are not
accorded the same status as the Arya brAhmaNas, they still observe basic
brahminical rites, such upanayanaM and shaucha rules.

Analysis of the names of the queens of the Karkota dynasty of Kashmir
shows that there were Iranians amidst them. They seem to have reinforced
the saura cult in kAshmIr as evidenced by the mArtANDa temple in kashmir
and a kashmirian idol of lalitAditya’s time with the classic Iranian
dress.

However, it should be noted that the Sun cult also existed in Southern
India. In Thanjavur there is the Suryanar temple with absolutely no
Iranian influence in the iconography. This suggests that while the
saura-mata itself spread widely across India, the maga priests and their
distinctive iconography did not physically move into the more interior
regions. I have heard that the sUrya temple in a hill temple complex
built in Pune by the Peshwas was also consecrated by maga priests as
late as 1750AD however, it is iconographically intermediate between the
northern and southern forms. Finally, the sauras also tried to provide a
“vedic tinge” for the sect via the composition of the sUryopaniShat and
the appropriation of the savitA gAyatrI.

The visible imprints of the saura mata that persist today are: 1) The
highly popular Aditya hR^idayaM, which is attributed to agastya and has
been inserted into the yuddha kANDa of the rAmAyaNa. This hymn appears
to be an early composition of the saura school. 2) The second well-known
saura contribution is the sUrya namaskAra vidhi which is a yogic/tantric
practice prescribe by saura tantras.
