+++
title = "The second attempt ofxa0kAma"

+++
The contest between shiva and kAma is much celebrated in Hindu
literature. The effects of kAma on shiva have been enshrined in the
highest poetry of saMskR^ita by kAlidAsa in poem on the birth of the
war-god. But the brahmANDa purANa is unique in providing a version of
the tale, where kAma has a second attempt to go at shiva and in this
attempt conquers him. It is one of those eternal pieces of decorative
prose in Hindu literature. The tale goes thus:

After ishAnI had through her side glance revived manmatha. She then said
by my boon your arrows will torment the living world. IshAna succumbing
to your darts will be unable to burn you now and will suffer the pangs
of kAma. bhava will even give half of his body to his wife to that he
can remain perpetually conjoined to her…

Having received the boon kAma set forth to complete his task. From his
hair pores emerged thousands of madanas who were of splendid appearance
and could enchant the universe. After deluding the world with his arrows
kAma again reached the Ashrama of the aweful rudra to conquer the
moon-crested deity. He was accompanied by vasanta, chandra, sweet
breezes of spring. The sounds of kokilas followed him, as he embraced by
rati, lifted his victorious bow and showered volleys of arrows on rudra.
Struck by these arrows, powered by kAmeshvarI’s assurance shiva as
overcome.

rudra abandoned all regular observances and became sick with longing,
frequently meditating on gaurI. His cheeks lost color and he heaved deep
sighs of frustration. He was shedding tears constantly and recollected
again and again umA haimavati. The fever raging in his frame was not
cooled by the ga\~Nga flowing from his head nor the cool rays of the
chandrakalA. The trident-bearer was thus tormented by the arrows of
manmatha. He rolled frequently in the flowery bed brought by his circle
of gaNas headed by nandin, bhR^ingin and kAlabhairava. Supported by
nandin he went restlessly from one flowery bed to another, rolling
restlessly on them. The soma exuding from the kalA did not cool his
frame. Desirous of suppressing he flames in him he applied snow on
himself and sat on slabs of ice. On the slabs of ice he drew the
pictures of umA with his nails. Looking at the pictures further enhanced
his pangs. He drew her picture standing coquettishly and casting side
glances on a slab of ice. He placed the slab all over his body and
experienced horripilations and distressing sexual emotions. He imagined
her to be around everywhere and conversed with them as though she was in
front of him in a mad delirium. Considering her his ultimate goal he
spents days and nights narrating her nectar-like anecdotes. He started
making garlands of flowers and wreathing her as though she was around.
Thus did the great pashupati suffer from the grip of kAma.  
…….  
The piece is not merely a narrative but the representation of the shAkta
view of the longing and ultimate merger with the shaktI.
