+++
title = "kAla Chidra"

+++
The last step had been reached. The powers of the mAnava had reached
their end. Only the powers of the devas were next recourse. It is also
called the setu- the bridge to the unknown loka. We had reached the end
of the bridge- we stood at the door stead of the loka hidden beyond the
impenetrable veil. Many fragments of thoughts crowded the brain- each
having its own significance to us- we record them here for we are
passing out that path, which the mAnava takes only once in his
existence.

1\) Dattaji Shinde, the Maharatta hero was seriously wounded in the
fated encounter again Qutb Khan and he fell into the hands of the
Mohammedan. The Turushka asked him would he ever fight the Green flag
again. Dattaji replied: “If I survive I shall fight again”. Qutb cut off
his head and kept it as trophy with himself. Dattaji’s life has
impressed me in many ways.

2\) We had fought many battles in our existence till now. The devas had
borne us aid in the most remarkable of these strifes- we had won many of
these amazing battles, and we lost some. The great trophies from these
campaigns of ours surrounded us- were we destined to take them with us
when we took last the step on the setu ?

3\) There was that peculiar dome with a shrine to ananta. There the shrI
vaiShNava yogI had attained his siddhis in haTha yoga. Beside it resided
the shudra who never worked but earned a lot of money. We being the
dvija was ever puzzled by the shudra’s way of living. But we understood
the 4th varNa. We passed by and saw a two more shudras we observed them
and learnt of their paths. The first of them accompanied us through
thick and thin in the second Great War. At the end of it he was ruined,
but we survived. Though R asked us not to help him we invoked the devas
that the good shudra may rise back from his ruins. We left behind Igul,
K, and many others like discarded vestures and performed the great
tapasya that was to give us the glimpse of the mantra hR^idaya.

4\) We gazed beyond and saw through our divya dR^iShTi the days of the
First Great War. Around us only stood traitors and mohanas, but we held
our own and coursed through.

5\) The greatest of our sakhIs was R: at some point we had transcended
the need to talk with words. But on that bright day during the revelry
after the Great War II (almost 15 years before today\!\!\!\!\!) we met
the wandering niShAda with his bhUtachakra. He declared our paths will
fork soon and then converge but we will fork again two years after I
cross the veil. When we thought of this time hung for a moment as though
indra had stopped the rotating chakra to deliver his death blow on
aurNavAbha. In our mind’s eye we saw the comets that had passed- the
great apparition of Halley- that marked our rise. The apparition of
Wilson, the apparition of Hayakutake, that of Hale-Bopp, and that
Macholz and many others. The supernova in Centaurus A and the apparition
in Magellanic cloud. After the revelry we went to the southern city of
the Pandian, even though were briefly held up by the Pandya Sena, and
acquired a glimpse of the great dhUrta, urdhvatANDava bhairava,
ugraviShNu, kulayoginI and daNDanAyikA, which led us to the secrets of
the tantrika perfection.

6\) We felt like Ramaraya on the eve of Talikota.

7\) We felt like arjuna the third pANDava on the night before the 14th
day.

8\) We had lived the life of the kShatriya, or more precisely like that
of rAmo bhArgava, always fighting at the front, with our bow knowing no
rest. We knew not the life of the the settled city dweller.

9\) Our enemies whose heads we forced to bow in submission with fiery
darts, and false friends were now laughing at us.

We saw kAla, as bhR^igu said: kAle .ayama\~NgirA devo .atharvA chAdhi
tiShThataH |

10\) We saw those corpses that we had alluded to in the past. They lay
beyond on the other side of the setu, from which we had walked away .
Some of those who lay dead there were our favored companions, others
were our enemies. By the arrow of kAla we had left them behind…

11\) Thus we were still enjoying the pAna from the chaShaka, when we
passed through the kAla Chidra. It was like shattered mirror: in the
pieces we saw clothing, vessels and other things …

Then I realized the transition of realms had happened- we were once
enjoyers and now we were the substratum.

Oh ashvinA, when our ancestor chyavAna sought your aid you brought it to
him. May now bear us aid. We have reached that last step of the setu
that a mAnava can- only daivya step can take one beyond…

\-iti parisamAptaM //
