+++
title = "The tale of the li~Nga"

+++
The tale of the li\~Nga as the phallus of shiva is found in several
purANas and is hence not a late concotion. It can be traced back to the
bhArgava redaction of the sauta literature. The following purANas state
the story:  
brahmANDa 1.2.27  
kUrma 2.37  
skanda 1.1.6, 7.1.187 and other references  
vAmana 22.6.65  
devIbhAgavata 4.20  
shiva 4.12

The critical version of the core tale as can be reconstructed from the
above sources goes thus:

The great god rudra, deep in sorrow over he loss of his consort sati at
the conflagration in daksha’s yAga wandered into the devadAru vR^iksha
vana. The bhArgavas and angiras, with their women and children had made
this forest their abode and performed their yAgas and tapasya. The
mighty sha\~Nkara, wandered naked in this forest with a skull bowl. He
performed aTTahAsa by prancing about, yelling and laughing aloud like a
madman. Seeing his naked form with erect phallus, the womenfolk of the
atharvans were filled with amorous passion and rushed towards him.
Seeing their wives thus excited the sages rushed out to discern the
cause and saw the form of shiva before them. Infuriated the bhArgavas
and the angiras cursed, the deva: “May your li\~Nga dettach itself and
fall”. Concomitant with the falling of mahAdeva’s li\~Nga there were
several catastrophic upheavals in the 3 worlds. brahmA alarmed at this
went to the lotus-eyed wielder of the drinker of jalandhara’s life.
madhusUdana told him the cause for these events and they set out with
the other devas to locate the phallus of nIlakaNTha. Unable to locate
it, they worshipped rudra, who told them that they would find it and the
cataclysms would cease if the worshipped the linga. They fould the
li\~Nga and brahmA and viShNu picked up the reddish-brown phallus but
were unable to install. So they invoked umA to bear it in the form of a
vagina. Thus the li\~Nga came into being as a symbol of rudra and the
gods worhipped it. viShNu initiated the four castes of men in the
worship of the linga mUrti and promulgated the shAstras required for
it.  
divya-lingaM namAmi| shriman mahAdevAya namaH|

It is of interest to note in this context that the veda of the bhR^igus
and the angiras has a couple of sUktas devoted to the un-maning of
people by surgical methods.
