+++
title = "The gaviShTi"

+++
O indra and viShNu come bear us aid as you had done to the ikShvAku in
the great gaviShTi for wealth and glory.  
None among men knows his own lifeâ€™s duration: bear us in safety over
these through these battles.

Our foemen trimitvAnt, biDAla-smashru and vyuptakesha assembing their
troops rushed towards us with their sword and upraised and spears
pointed forward. We who had seen many grim battles, with arrows having
lodged themselves in our armor, but having failed to slay us, marched
forward for the final the showdown. trimitvAnt approached us from the
side with his javelin aloft. We saw him through the corner of our eye
and moved ahead as though we did not see him. He was certain that we
were in his hand and hurled his javelin at us. We were just waiting for
this. We ducked and it flew over us and even missed out flankers and
hissed into the ground. We suddenly wheeled around and lassoed
trimitvAnt with our pAsha. He was unhorsed and reeled to the ground. Our
men struck him with their musalas and he was history. An arrow fired by
biDAla-smashru hit our helmet and glanced away. We shot back hitting him
on his chest and reeled under the impact though his armor saved him.
vyuptakesha shot our horse but its armor absorbed the shot. By then
biDAla-smashru had reached us with an upraised club. We dodged the heave
and leveled a massive sword-blow at him. He narrowly escaped it and fled
away with his co-conspirator, disappearing into the eastern forest.
