+++
title = "You cannot get away"

+++
GK had been a rival of R. R had genuine knowledge, but GK merely
absorbed everything she read without much analysis or understanding.
Otherwise they were quite equally matched. GK oozed arrogance, but R
emanated genuine mental superiority over most. GK always had the ethnic
advantage in both the lokas, but R was in the “foreigners” category.
Still R was victorious over GK till the fourth year, after which she
departed for the quest of “higher glory”. GK had unbridled success after
the departure of R and soon became a young physician. GK felt elated
being at the peak of glory, when it is speculated that in the thrill of
the arrogance of being the most glorious, GK killed a patient
accidentally. GK was given a severe reprimand, but continued after
retreating to a little village keeping a low profile. The khaNDavans
whom we had conquered after a battle last year had made acquaintence
with GK. GK had apparently forgotten us just as we had forgotten GK.

One day our amAtya was examining the fortification on the vayuputra hill
when the minister came across agent 1 and 2 of K. Having accousted them,
the amAtya asked them casually some details about their current state,
knowing well that K was a practioner of chakra-shambhara. They said that
they had received the AnandochChuShma from K. They then performed it and
attained the state of parvatAnanda. They recommended GK to learn it from
K. GK brought along the khANDavan to see K. K was dangerous and not easy
to approach without much effort. We had had an initial brush with K in
days long past. MJ, amAtya and shachiva had all warned us about K at
that point. We saw the destructive power of K in the encounter code
named the battle of Vectors. So, we sought the aid of the terrible rudra
and repulsed K. \[We did not know much about daNDayuddha or mallauddha
then but oSHadhi-vanaspati was at its height, so we feared little\]. So
when GK took the khANDavans to the lair of K the trouble began. K’s lair
had a large grassy lawn with Pandanus fronds decorating the pathway.
There were two large trees under which there were altars for the bhUta
prayogas. GK and the khANDavans went there on a Wednesday evening. K
asked them wait till K could complete preparing dinner. Then K came
there after finishing dinner and asked them the purposes of their visit.
When the khANDavans narrated their defeat at our hands and the need for
revenge, K’s langorous eyes sparkled: ” Now is the chance for our
revenge. I shall personally intercede on your behalf. ”

Sometime later the khANDavans returned to K. “Everything is alright with
the invading party” they said. You spells seem to have failed. K laughed
and said: ” Just wait and watch. This spell shall demolish that long
standing foe of ours. Here shall issue the charm named ‘the
undefinable’. dhumAvatI has favored us since childhood as our close
friend and no one escapes this duck messenger of the deity”.
