+++
title = "Things"

+++
Over and over the downward turn of the yuga was burning us. We were
reviewing the reports from the unfair battle with Shoi on the pAShaNDa
hill. We noticed that there were two major points that came up: 1) there
was a signal known as “daiva” that inexplicably came up at a time when
the troops thought all was hunky-dory. The shachiva was completely blind
to this signal but the amAtya saw it and moved troops in panic. 2) There
was the signal known as “oShadhi-vanaspati” which we received at around
the midday hour. We did not know whether to charge with out troops or to
negotiate. We decided to negotiate to buy time hoping the amAtya would
strike a blow with his division and the muni may arrive with his
reinforcements in the mean time. Our negotiations were very successful
on the mUlaka bridge and the bhutapati temple road. This gave us time to
move our troops closer with the muni’s reinforcements. But the amAtya
had panicked and we failed to complete the encircling move. We were just
preparing for a thrust when Shoi saw the breach in the amAtya’s section
and made a deadly thrust with the entire enemy decision. The amAtya was
wounded in the encounter. The shachIva and amAtya sustained injuries
when the turushkapura allies of Shoi made a surprise sally on their
camps. Me and the muni escaped in time though. But the losses to the
troops had greatly set us back.

But going back to the reports we are disappointed to see that we
repeated the mistake when confronted by a similar trap. It is almost a
Hindu aspect to commit the same military mistakes over and over again.
Now with our troops reduced we were not clear as to what strategy to
adopt.
