+++
title = "Destruction of the 4 central Asian Indicxa0garrisons"

+++
In 615 AD, the 3 Central Asian kingdoms of Kucha, Agni (later Qara
Shahar) and Khotan were islands of the Indic civilization in the Tarim
Basin. They were at the pinnacle of their power and prosperity and were
great centers of Sanksritic learning, producing a variety of texts on
buddhist and classical hindu philosophies. These regions were like
mini-India’s with Buddhism, Zoroastrianism and Hinduism being practiced
by its citizens and were actively maintained by the flourishing trade
along the Silk Road. Kucha’s rulers belonged to the suvarNa dynasty and
its ruler suvarNa puShpa had signed a treaty of non-aggression with the
Chinese emperor Yang-ti. In 630, the famous Chinese traveler, Hsuen
Tsang had passed through Kucha and Agni and was warmly welcomed by the
rulers. The new king of Kucha, suvarNadeva renewed the non-aggression
pact with Tai-tsung, the expansionist Chinese emperor. In all likelihood
Hsuen Tsang was also acting as a spy to the emperor and providing him
intelligence regarding these Indic Kingdoms. Shortly after Hsuen Tsang
passed through this region, Tai-tsung decided to swallow these kingdoms,
without much of a warning. In 632 he asked to Tarim kingdoms to humbly
accept his suzerainty- fearing an attack they sent token embassies to
please the Emperor. However, realizing that the Chinese were advancing a
vast army into the region in 640 AD, the king of Agni, formed an
alliance with the Turko-Mongol Khanate of the Tuchueh and prepared to
face the Chinese troops. Tai-tsung sent his general Kuo Hiao-ko to
invade Agni and destroy it. Seeing the Turks and the Agnians massing to
face the Chinese troops, Kuo cleverly marched towards Yulduz, causing
the defenders to lower their guard. Then at night, he made a lightning
march back to Agni and attacked the city from an undefended direction at
dawn. The king was killed in the battle and Agni was captured and placed
under the Chinese agent Lipo-chuen. However, in 644 the surviving prince
of Agni, with the help of the Tuchueh Khan and SuvarNadeva of Kucha slew
Lipo-chuen and re-conquered his kingdom from the Chinese.

Emperor, Tai-tsung, now decided to systematically destroy the Tarim
kigdoms and entrusted the task to his son-in-law and greatest general,
Ashina Shoyuel Khan. Ashina Shoyuel was a Turko-Mongol Khan from the
Gobi who had by marriage become the commander-in-chief of the imperial
Chinese troops and had the all the martial ruthlessness of his tribe. In
646 AD SuvarNadeva of Kucha passed away and was replaced by his brother
HaripuShpa. Taking advantage of this new King’s relative inexperience,
Ashina attacked right away with an army of nearly 100000 comprised of
Chinese regulars, Turko-Mongol mounted archer divisions and light
advance raiders comprising of Toelech Turks. He was accompanied by the
veteran Chinese general Kuo Hiao-ko who led the Chinese regulars. The
Tarim kingdoms had a frontline light cavalry comprised of the
Turko-Mongol hordes of the Chumi and Chuyuh Khans, the center comprised
of the heavy cavalry under Haripushpa and his general Narayana and the
rear guard of the Tuchueh Mongols. Ashina struck first by drawing the
Chumi and Chuyuh khans to attack near Kucheng and then retreating
drawing them into an ambush of the heavy Chinese divisions that
massacred them. Taking advantage of this head start he boldly attacked
Kucha in a frontal assault. Haripushpa tried to relieve the city by a
direct charge on the Chinese center after dispersing the Toelech Turks.
Ashina Shoyuel however, weighed in with his mounted archers and turned
the battle in his favor. NArAyaNa decided to save the king and led him
safely to the fort of Aksu. Ashina pursued him and layed siege to the
fort even as Kuo Hiao-ko occupied Kucha. NArAyaNa with the Tuchueh
Turko-Mongols and monetary aid from Indian vaishyas and Harshavardhana,
suddenly attacked Kucha and broke through the Chinese ranks slaying Kuo
Hiao-ko and took back the city. In the meantime Ashina stormed Aksu and
captured Haripushpa and decapitated all inhabitants of the city. He then
attacked Kucha and slaying nArAyaNa, depopulated the city and its
satellite towns and burnt them down. Ashina then marched on Agni that
had already been weakened by the defeats a Kucha, beheaded its king and
depopulated the city. He then sent his deputy Wan-pei to besiege Khotan
and devastate its surroundings the cavalry divisions of the Toelech
Turks. The King of Khotan of the maNgala clan, seeing the fate of Agni
and Kucha surrendered his kingdom to the Chinese. The Ashina Shoyuel
returned to China and dragged Haripushpa on the floor before Tai-Tsung
and placed him at his foot. He was later beheaded. Thus, the Tarim basin
passed from the Indian cultural zone to the yoke of the Chinese. All
traces of Indic civilization in this region were subsequently erased
with the conquest of this region from the Chinese by the Tibetan hordes,
followed by its conquest by the great Uighur Kha’khans of Mongolia.
