+++
title = "kAlAmukhas-II"

+++
Modern historians have seen the vIrashaivas as an organic evolute of the
kAlAmukhas. While their attachment to li\~Nga worship, shiva devotion
and monastic organization are indeed comparable, there are many
differences. The vIrashaiva cult, while found by a brahmin basava, had a
rather anti-brahminical streak. Firstly, it was vociferously critical of
the varNAshrama dharma and secondly sought to replace brahminical rites
with imitations. For example, they used the rudra gAyatrI in place of
the savitA gAyatrI for the saMdhya rite. The virashaiva cult, as
characterized by the vachanas of basava, was low on philosophy and high
on rhetoric, and associated, as per its own admission, with murder of
the ruling king, religious persecution and raising of private militias.

The inscriptions of the kAlAmukhas collected by Lorenzen clearly show
that the majority of their priests were highly erudite brahmins with
orthodox leanings. For example lAkulIshvara, a kAlAmukha priest in the
first half of the 1000s has made an inscription that states:  
“The god mahAdeva’s feet are worthy of worship by all the world. The
rules laid down in the veda for the varNas and Ashramas is dharma. Who
derides these two statements, on his head will I place my foot in the
king’s court.”

The philosophical leanings of the kAlAmukhas are again made very clear
in some of the inscriptions:  
“lAkulIshvara is the able supporter of nyAyA and vaisheShika, he is a
vADava fire to bauddha ocean, a thunderbolt of indra to the mImAmsaka
mountain, a saw for cutting down the lokAyata banyan tree, a great eagle
to the sAmkhya serpent, an axe for propounders of the advaita doctrine,
a noose of yama to hostile proud paNDitas, and a meteor to the naked
jains. “

Another inscription regarding a shiva temple of the kAlAmukhas made by
the chAlukyan chieftain rAchamalla states:  
“For the deva svyambhU’s personal gratification, theatrical
entertainment of the population, offerings of food, restoration of worn
out idols and temples, the chaitra and pavitra rites, vedic recitation,
lectures on vaisheShika philosophy, class readings from the shiva-dharma
purANa and feeding of the needy  “.

This suggests that the kAlAmukhas were primarily nyAya-vaisheShika
proponents, and this formed the scaffold of their philosophical
constructs. The sudden decline of nyAya-vaisheShika both in the south
and Kashmir appears to have coincided with the destruction of the
kAlAmukhas who appear to have been its last great expositors.

But at the same time the kAlAmukha paNDitas may be described as being
electic and using the various doctrines in their argumentation as seen
the inscription describing kAlabhairava tatpuruSha munipati, a kAlAmukha
priest who migrated to Karnataka from Kashmir:

“Through his intelligence that tat-puruSha munipati assumes the status
of a bhairava to his opponents in debate. His terrifying trident is the
mImAmsa. He agitates the hearts of his proud opponents with the sound of
his drum which the bauddha doctrine. He has the terrifying three eyes of
the atomic doctrine (vaisheShika), and the upraise skull brand of the
sAmkhya thought. He causes the interiors of the atmosphere and the sky
to be defeaned by the sound of this huge bell which is the nyAya
doctrine. “

But even here the main thrust is towards their favored doctrines with no
mention of advaita or others.

vIrashaivas appear to have merely adapted some of the prevalent
superficial aspects of the kAlAmukhas while actually revolting against
them in their declining years. The vIrashaiva attraction to the
superficial and rhetorical aspects of the older layer appears to have
acted as an impediment to any philosophical transmission from that
layer. However, they preserved the high level of organization of the
kAlAmukhas and as result were able to gain considerable political
mileage for their movement.

The lesson from the kAlAmukhas leads me to a conjuncture: Strongly
organized systems are best in propagating socially and politically
oriented doctrines. They generally fail to preserve intellectual
traditions over long periods, under volatile conditions, though they may
be excellent in over the sh0rt to medium range.
