+++
title = "The busy Abrahamists"

+++
I learned today on the web that a certain British satirist AE Housman
about whom I know hardly anything said: “In every American there is an
air of incorrigible innocence, which seems to conceal a diabolical
cunning.” I wonder what prompted him to make such a comment. Perhaps the
Indians thought the same of the British even as he was making such
comments about his cousins the Americans. We in our youth had a seen a
few Anglo-Australian subversionists who had deceptively entered our
school. They were like wasps trying to subvert an acorn into a gall and
used a certain innocence which seemed truely incorrigible and appeared
to innocently ask questions to deride Hindu deities and create doubts in
their regard in the minds of the young students. We however, saw through
this guise of the sUchin-s and after a protracted struggle had them
overthrown. It was great day when the vicious adventurer David was
finally sent packing. This white man, a good- for-nothing in his own
land, had wormed his way to our school as a teacher, taking advantage of
the Indian respect for the White Massas. He treated the Hindus like dirt
until our mini-freedom struggle sent him packing. This is just a sample
of one the Abrahmisms waging its war on the Hindus.

The other Abrahamism, that of the Allahmaniacs, is now engaged in war
with its sister Abrahamisms. We must note that the Soviets decided to
invade Afghanistan and place their puppet just as the Americans decided
to invade Irak. Initially, the Soviets cut through the Mohammedan armies
and met enormous success with the famous Panjshir operations. Finally,
the Russian army was unable to hold on any more and retreated in
disarray. Now the Americans thought that this was due the advanced
Stringer missiles they gave the Moslems. The Americans, likewise, cut
through the Islamic armies in Irak, ground Fallujah to the ground, and
gave a tremendous display of their technological intelligence gathering
methods. But despite all this they continue to lose men, though not as
regularly as the Soviets and hardly seem to repulse the Islamaniacs.
Here they say the Soviet weapons like the RPG and IEDs with Soviet made
charges are coming back to the Americans. Hindus call this kind of thing
Karma. The question is how long are the Americans going to be in Irak.
By removing Saddam and holding elections, they are erecting an edifice
in the form of a Jihadi minar in the land where it was relatively muted
in this regard. The day the Americans go back, I really wonder if the
Americans can talk of victories any more than the Soviets did. To me it
seems that for temporarily suppressing the venomous Taliban, the
Americans may end up gifting them a new land in the form of Irak, all
ready for Jihad with Zarqavi at the helm. This might boost Jihadi
confidence beyond limits.
