+++
title = "The tantric manual of the atharvan-a~Ngiras"

+++
A famed archaic tantric manual of the atharvans is glorious kubjikA
upaniShad. Its material is remarkable and worthy of detailed discussion
at some point. It was founded by the bhArgavas, who are supposed to have
obtained it directly from dhUrta kumAra in the manner in which
pata\~njala kApya’s daughter became the medium of the ancient bhArgava.
That tale goes thus:  
When the students of pata\~njala kApya, who had his school in the
kingdom of the mAdras, asked him for an ancient vidyA, he said that it
was only known to the long gone bhArgava kabandha AtharvaNa. The
daughter of pata\~njala kApya was a shamaness, who in a shamanic fit got
into herself the “disembodied spirit” of kabandha AtharvaNa in the form
of a gandharva. Then the students asked the gandharva to answer their
questions and through the daughter of their teacher the ancient bhArgava
spoke forth the high vidyA.

So also when paippalAda A\~Ngiras questioned the mahA-atharvan aurva
Agneya, dhUrta skanda entering him revealed to the former foundation of
the first manifestation (shiva and umA; viShNu and shri) tantra-mantra
shAstra. From the paippalAda it passed to the vasiShThas of the
parAshara branch.

The text reveals the high atharvanic mode installation of life
(jIvanyAsaM kuryAt) into the flour pratimas of shaktis. This mode of
installation provides the sAdhaka with a tremendous advantage over any
other mode of worship of flour pratimas. The root source of the bhAvanA,
and there by the emanation of rAjarAjeshvarI upAsana and shrividyA is
from the khANDa 14 of this text. The most guarded and efficacious
upAsana of dhUmAvatI that can hardly be overcome is mentioned in khANDa
18. In the 22nd is that exalted rite of shrI pratya\~NgirA-atharvaNa
bhadrakAlI-rudrakubjikA devI that is the highest of all prayogas of the
great leonine goddess.
