+++
title = "The puruSha and thexa0superorganism"

+++
yat puruṣaṃ vyadadhuḥ katidhā vyakalpayan |   
mukhaṃ kimasya kau bāhū kā ūrū pādā ucyete ||   
brāhmaṇo.asya mukhamāsīd bāhū rājanyaḥ kṛtaḥ |   
ūrūtadasya yad vaiśyaḥ padbhyāṃ śūdro ajāyata ||  
  
Recently the ecologists Wilson and Hoeldobler claimed that group
selection and not kin selection was the major force in the origin of
eusociality. Eusociality fascinates us because in many ways it parallels
our own societies though we are not eusocial ourselves. So when W and H
claimed that eusociality is more likely an outcome by group selection
rather than kin selection (as the standard model posits), I was puzzled
and wondered what its full implications were. In fact W and H go as far
as to suggest that the genetic relatedness seen in ant and bee colonies
is a consequence rather than cause of eusociality. They further mused
that kin selection may actually be disruptive rather than favorable to
the emergence of eusociality because it would result in the formation of
kin cliques that would war against other such cliques and reduce
cohesion. So eusociality is seen in terms of group selection with all
organisms of the eusocial group working as a superorganism and it is the
superorganism that propagates itself.

This group selection and the superorganism concepts got me wondering
about the theoretical social system that describes such scenarios.
Theoretically, genetic caste formation is central to origin of eusocial
behavior. Such a theoretical scheme that was conceived for human society
was the puruSha concept of the Hindus. The first great Indo-Aryan state
in India was that of the pUrus, led by their dominant tribe the
bhAratas. Upon founding their state they provide it with a constituition
and a theoretical frame work which was first expressed in the great
puruSha sUktaM (RV 10.90). This was expanded further by the authors of
the dharma shAstra who built upon the concept. While the macranthropic
puruSha motif is commonly used by Indo-Europeans and other bronze age
civilizations, in India we encounter it as an unique social theory:

1\) The great hymn describes the pUru state as a superorganism with the
head made of the brAhmaNa, the hands with the kShatriya, the middle body
by the vaishya and the feet by the shudra.

2\) The four varNas (castes) which comprise the superorganism the
puruSha are produced from a single “genetic blueprint” through
differential “expression” or particular guNas (as elucidated in the
bhR^igu smR^iti).

Thus one may posit that in deriving a social theory, the Indo-Aryans had
actually converged on a formulation that in its ideal formed resembled a
eusocial society derived through strong group cooperation. Kinship
actually is hardly mentioned in the descriptions of the puruSha. This I
find pretty remarkable- almost as though given a chance we would lapse
into a eusocial condition. I find the implications of this pretty
interesting in terms of the origin of eusociality.
