+++
title = "Neuquenraptor argentinus and thexa0deinonychosaurs"

+++
Neuquenraptor argentinus [![Posted by
Hello](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/pbh.gif)](http://www.hello.com/)

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/400/NEUQUEN.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/img/133/1300/640/NEUQUEN.jpg)

For a while the deinonychosaurs comprising two great clades: the
dromeosaurs and the troodontids were known only from the Late Cretaceous
of Northern hemisphere (Central Asia and North America\]. They were the
closest sister group of the birds, which were represented at that point
by solely by Archaeopteryx from the Jurassic \[This was the scenario
when I was young\]. This temporal gap between the birds and their
closest sister clade, the deinonychosaurs was considered mysterious by
some workers and used by idiots who denied that birds were dinosaurs.
However, the closeness of Archaeopteryx to the deinonychosaurs was
rather undeniable and this suggested a much earlier origin for the
deinonychosaurs. Beyond this basic temporal issue there were several
workers who even doubted the monophyly of the two major deinonychosaur
clades. The past decade had brought a remarkable closure on several
points concerning deinonychsaurus. Firstly, there was the discovery of
Rahonavis, a primitive bird from Late Cretaceous ** Madagascar that
showed a hyper-extendable pedal sickle-claw strengthening the theory
that amongst the maniraptoran dinosaurs the deinonychosaurs were the
closest to the birds. It also suggested that common ancestor of the
birds and the deinonychosaurs possessed a sickle-claw characteristic of
the later clade.

Then came the Chinese revolution in the form of the extraordinary
fossils from various Early Cretaceous beds of the Liaoning province. The
first two dromeosaurs from these beds Sinornithosaurus and Microraptor
provided the first dramatic glimpses of feathers in dromeosaurs.
Microraptor apparently had feathered fore- and hind-limb wings
suggesting that at least some deinonychosaurs were flight capable,
suggesting that at least limited flight adaptations may have even
emerged in the ancestor of the avian and deinonychosaur clades.
Subsequently the discovery of another dromeosaur, Graciliraptor provided
the earliest definitive example of a dromeosaur dating back to the Early
Cretaceous, thus minimizing the temporal gap between the earliest known
dromeosaurs and avians and suggesting that the diversification of
dromeosaurs was probably underway before the Cretaceous itself.

Meanwhile new data also emerged on the troodonitids. Byronosaurus from
Late Cretaceous of Mongolia provided a remarably well preserved
representative of this group adding to the previously known
Saurornithoides, Sinornithoides and Troodon. The Chinese revolution also
provided remarkable examples of troodontids, namely Sinovenator and Mei.
Sinovenator was a primitive troodontid that once and for all settled the
monophyly deinonychosaurs that was being doubted by some workers. Mei
was other primitive member of this clade that was found sleeping in a
pose very similar to modern birds, with a head tucked under the
fore-limb/ wing. This suggested that this sleeping behavior emerged
before the divergence of the avian and deinonychosaur clade, in the very
least.

The first hints that deinonychosaurs may have been found outside of the
Northern continents was hinted by the discovery of a pedal claw
resembling theirs from Sudan. However, this was hardly conclusive.
Subsequently the discovery of Unenlagia, a fragmentary large dromeosaur
from Argentina suggested a possible dromeosaur presence from the South.
Finally, this week Neuquenraptor argentinus was reported from Argentina.
While quite fragmentary it covers  
fragments of cervical vertebra, dorsal ribs, haemal arches, left
proximal radius, right femur and distal tibia, proximal tarsals, and
most of the left foot. This represents an unambiguous dromeosaur from a
Gondwanan continent for the first time. Phylogenetic analysis suggests
that it forms a basal clade amongst the dromeosaurs, just like
Unenlagia. Phylogenetic studies suggest that another clade in
dromeosaurs is formed by the Chinese forms Graciliraptor,
Sinornithosaurus and Microraptor. Then the crown is formed by the
dromaeosaurine clade (Dromaeosaurus, Utahraptor, Achillobator, and
Adasaurus) and velociraptorine (Velociraptor, Deinonychus, and an
unnamed Mongolian velociraptorine). This suggests that South America
might have inherited the dromeosaurs an ancestral dromeosaur lineage in
the Gondwanaland, prior to its break up. In the early Cretaceous of
China their sister lineage appear to have spawned a radiation of
Liaoning dromeosaurs and troodontids.

In conclusion, the deinonychosaurs were a remarkably long-lived group of
dinosaurs, and their closest sister group the birds entirely comprise
the only group of dinosaurs that survived the K-T extinction. Unlike the
birds, which occupied a wide range of niches the deinonychosaurs appear
to have mainly specialized as small gracile terrestrial or
arboreal/flying predators. A few forms like Achillobator, Utahraptor and
Unenlagia appear to have grown much large in size and assumed the role
of mid-sized predators.

``` 
```

``` 
```

**
