+++
title = "The rise of the Kirghiz Khaganate"

+++
The Kirghiz Khaganate came to the fore after Uighurs were destroyed by
the Kirghiz in the 840 AD. The rise of the Kirghiz was shrouded in
mystery. All we knew was that a Uighur general defected to the Kirghiz
with critical information. The Kirghiz were in rebellion to avenage the
Uighur campaign of 740 AD, where the latter had demolished the Kirghiz
completely and conquered their lands on the Ob and Yennesei. Before that
the Blue Turks had also suppressed the Kirghiz and subjugated them, in
course of the breath-taking campaigns of the great Blue Turk warriors
Kueltegin and Bilge Kha’Khan. Kirghiz suddenly rebounded in 840 AD and
having routed the Uighur Khaganate, seized the empire of Mongolia for
about a 100-120 year period. How did this happen?

This information was always around in the form the national epic of the
Kirghiz- their hero after whom they named places after the Soviet
retreat from their lands. We glean information of the great rise of the
Kirghiz from their national epic Manas by sifting through the mythic and
mideaval layers. The history begins with the first struggle of the
Kirghiz under their Khan Nogai followed by the disastrous defeat by the
Uighurs. This was followed by the rise of Khan Qoguedei Mergen, who
organized the Kirghiz tribes. He was followed by his sister’s son Khan
Manas who is the hero of the epic. This khan led the Kirghiz to the
great victory of 840 against the Uighurs and then he opened hostilities
with the Chinese. Manas was followed by his son Khan Semetei who
continued the expansion of the Kirghiz empire against the Chinas. The
final stabilization of the kingdom with the surrender of China was
achieved by his son Khan Seytek. For the Kirghiz Manas is their Chingiz
Khan. In many ways Manas is like a prelude to Chingiz Khan, a hero of
the steppes, have all the pre-adaptation that was one day going to spawn
the phenomenon called Chingiz, but not yet reaching his oceanic
proportions.
