+++
title = "Musings on the aponaptrIyaxa0rite"

+++
The aponaptrIya is an important rite associated with the somayAga and is
described in detail in the aitareya, the kaushItaki and chAgaleya
brAhmaNas. The rite seems to be associated with the deities sarasvatI
and apAM napAt and was probably instituted by kavaSha ailUsha, the
priest of the pUru king kurushravaNa. Simply told, it is said that the
other brAhmaNas, the madhymas questioned the legitimacy of kavaSha as a
brahmin, calling him a cheat and one born through a dAsa
\[proto-Iranian?\] mother. They drove kavaSha out in the desert and as
he departed he composed the hymn “pra devatra brahmaNe..\[RV 10.30\]”
and it is said that sarasvatI followed him surrounding him with her
waters. The madhyamas realizing that he was a great R^ishi favored by
sarasvati brought him back and had him institute the aponaptrIya rite.
With these hymns the hotA priest collects water in on the day before the
sacrifice and this is called the vasatIvarI water. The water collected
in the morning of the sacrifice is called the ekadhanaA water. The hotA
then pours these into a goblet with RV 1.83.2 and the adhvaryu mixes
honey and soma into these waters for the devas. This pouring is supposed
to aid crushing of the rivals through indra. Then with Rv 1.23.16-18,
the final pouring of the waters for the water goddess is performed.

One of the most important points garnered in support of the out of India
hypothesis of Aryan origins is the river Sarasvati. The river has been
physically linked with the Hakra- paleochannel on whose banks the
Harappan civilization flourished. The river is textually identified with
the aquatic deity of the Indo-Aryans, sarasvatI who is widely worshiped
in the R^igveda and persists to this date in the modern Hindu religions
as a consort of brahmA. An analysis of the goddess sarasvatI and her
Indo-European cognates could help to strengthen or weaken the OIT and
other Indo-centric Aryan hypotheses.

One of the important themes that emerges from the aponaptrIya ritual is
the intimate connection between sarasvati and Agni as worshipped as the
son of the waters or apAM napAta. This fiery entity hidden with the
water is of ancient IE provenance as is evidenced by the word naptha
meaning a fiery substance and the same time bearing a relationship to
the word naptar or relative, suggesting that it was essentially derived
from the ancestral state ApAM napAt. The connection between the water
deity and apAM napAt (who is described as being surrounded) by water
nymphs (another ancient IE concept) can be demonstrated in a number of
IE myths. A remarkable parallel of the link between sarasvatI and apAM
napAt and sarasvati as illustrated in the aponaptrIya rite can be seen
in the ABAN YASHT of the Iranians. The point to note here is that ardvi
sura anAhitA is a perfect cognate of sarasvati and not a physical river
as has been often claimed for the sarasvatI. She is generically as well
as specifically associated with several rivers: Vitanghuhaiti on whose
bank the Naotaras worshipped her, river Rangha homologous to R^igvedic
Rasa (also mentioned in the Jaiminiya brAhmaNa) or the great river
flowing down from Hukriya down to the Vouru kasha. Thus Anahita and
sarasvatI are archetypal water goddesses, who were worshiped with much
intensity by the IEans and who may get associated with physical rivers
as well as apAM napat. In this context it is important to note that the
concept of the fire within water is also connected with the Iranian
concept of Xwarena- a fiery luster that existed on the floor of the
Vouru kasha that Frangrasyan tried to obtain but failed but it followed
the Iranian kings emerging from takshma urupi and keresAspa. Apam napat
appears in a truncated form as Neptune in the religion of the Romans and
is a fiery deity associated with the waters. He is said to lead the
waves (so also his Keltic counter part Nachtan) as he moves along.
Similarly in the Keltic mythosphere we have the goddess Epona who is
said to have erupted from a spring of water and led a stream of it
riding a horse. Hence we see that Apam Napat as the fire concealed
within water and leading the erupting waters either himself or with a
Sarasvati like deity to be an old Indo-European theme. So it is clear
that in the Indo-Aryan composers of the brahminical explanation for the
aponaptrIya founded by kavasha ailusha, drew straight from their ancient
Indo-European mythosphere, They super-imposed the Apam NapAt myth right
on to kavasha with all the ‘scorching’ connotation being suggested by
the desert and his leading sarasvatI away very much like Neptune leading
the waves or Epona leading the stream away. Hence one may reason that
after all the sarasvatI talked about in the myth had nothing much to do
with the physical river. In general the high degree of conservation of
sarasvatI related mythology amidst the ancient IEans suggests that it
was not developed in connection to a particular river and makes the
identification of the R^igvedic Sarasvati with the Hakra channel
equivocal.
