+++
title = "Some musings on chimpanzeexa0hunting"

+++
Like the human ape the chimpanzee is a predatory great ape. We saw a
remarkable footage on the “Predators” documentary of a band of 5 chimps
hunt the colobus monkeys. It leaves a tremendous impact on any one who
watches it. Observations have shown that chimpanzee may hunt in bands
ranging from 1 to 35 individuals, but the most common tendency is to
hunt with about a handful of individuals. The most important point to
note is that most of the hunting bands are composed of adult and
adolescent males from and the majority of kills are registered by males
only, even if females and juveniles do participate in the hunt. While
the colobus monkey is the main prey for the chimpanzee, it also hunts
pigs, small antelopes and other small mammals and reptiles. Sometimes
chimps go on major hunting binges (especially with the climate is dry)
to kill many victims over a period of days or weeks.

During the hunt the males are clearly differentiated in their hunting
capacity. Some males are drivers that drive the prey to a trap. The
blockers set up ambushes. While the smartest, the ambusher typically
moves for the final kill. There were some males which were recorded as
being prolific hunters that eliminated prey very efficiently. These
observations mean that hunting as a male-centric activity evolved even
before the chimps and the humans diverged from their ancestor. The male
hunting activity requires remarkable navigational, and positional
extrapolation skills, as well as good communication skills between the
males. The females often receive meat in return for sex from the males
after a kill is made and infrequently make their own kills. The
implications of this for humans are profound: 1) Males have long been
selected to develop navigational and extrapolation skills due to better
hunting providing an actual fitness increase (chimp males often copulate
with females begging for meat even as they hold a freshly killed prey).
So male are likely to be better at mathematics and science on an average
because these abilities are directly expression of the more primitive
hunting skills. 2) Human group endeavours are not geared for people
being equal in skill and intelligence, but work best with the right mix
of skills while having a common goal. 3) Women are not likely to major
contributors of tasks that are direct evolutes of the ancient hunt, so
their role is more important in social and cheer-leading aspects of the
group activity.
