+++
title = "Sultans felled"

+++
A poet rAmarAja-bhuShaNa in the Vijayanagara court composed this
generous account for the Moslem tyrants who met their end at
kR^ishNadeva rAya’s hand:

“O kR^iShNa rAya, the foremost of heroes\! Some proud and mighty Moslem
kings killed by you in battle have arrived in svarga \[1\]. Here they
caused the devas to smile in amusement by their salaaming and addressing
bR^ihaspati as pIr, indra as suratrANa, and indrANi as bIbI.”

The events which led to this composition were as below:  
In 1501, the Bahmanid Sultan Mahmud Ghazi Mujahid passed a resolution in
his darbar to conduct an annual Jihad on Vijayanagara till its
extermination. He was able to gather a large army in Bidar which was led
by Fathullah (Nizam Shah), Qasim Barid (the first Sultan of Bidar), and
Yusuf Adil Shah, the Ottoman Turk and founder of the Adil Shahi kingdom
by 1509. It marched into Vijayanagaran territory with the hope of Jihad
and plunder, thinking that it was ripe for conquest after the death of
vIra narasiMha. But the young kR^iShNadeva was ready for the assault, he
assembled the Hindu armies and readied them for attack. The Hindu army
encountered the Army of Islam near the town of Diwani in Karnataka.
kR^iShNadeva moved very rapidly and twice evaded the Moslem attempt to
encircle his army. He then outflanked them and suddenly took them on the
rear. The Moslem army panicked, and kR^iShNadeva made a bold attack at
the center where Sultan Mahmud was exposed as his wings were stretched
in an attempt to turn back and encircle the Hindus. kR^iShNadeva
personally led the charge, and cutting their way through the elite
Turkish guard surrounding the Sultan the Hindu mounted archers and
musketmen attacked the Sultan directly. He tried to flee rapidly in the
opposite direction, but realized that he was actually moving deeper into
Vijayanagaran territory, where the able Vijayanagaran general nandyAla
nArasiMha had moved in to block any exit route. The Sultan then tried to
make a sideways exit, but came into the range of the Hindu gunners who
fired at him. Mahmud’s horse was killed by a shot, he was hit on his
hand and finally he was thrown off and fractured his skull. His guard at
the risk to their life lifted him and tried to save him. The brahmin
convert Fathullah, Qasim Barid and other Turks rushed reinforcements to
allow the Sultan to be saved. kR^iShNadeva then directed an attack on
the disorganized Mohammedan wings and decisively crushed the Bahmanid
army and forced them to retreat.

The Mohammedan armies beaten started retreating in separate divisions.
kR^iShNadeva was the first Hindu king in many centuries, who decided to
pursue the armies mercilessly hunting them down. Yusuf Adil Shah
receiving reinforcements decided fight kR^iShNadeva from the fort of
Kovilkonda. The Vijayanagaran army however marched rapidly and
intercepted the Adil Khan before he could take the protection of the
fort. An intense battle followed and the Adil Shah’s army was gripped
between two wings of the Hindu army and kR^iShNadeva again made a
vigorous direct attack on the Sultan’s personal division. The Sultan’s
guard was thoroughly beaten and he came into the range of the Hindu
shooters. Adil Shah was instantaneously struck by several arrows and
killed right away. With the Sultan dead the rest of the Moslem army
panicked and was completely destroyed. Thus, the fort of Kovilkonda was
finally wrested by Vijayanagara \[The great battle of Kovilkonda
1509-10\]. In the mean time kR^iShNadeva had dispatched his general
nandyAla nArasiMha against the Turk Quli Qutb Shah who was making a deep
thrust towards Kondavidu (The old reDDi capital). nArasiMha intercepted
him and in fiercely fought battle just outside the Kondavidu fort routed
the Mohammedan raiders and chased them back to Golkonda \[Battle of
Kondavidu\].

Thus, the Hindu struggle took the fight right back to the Army of Islam
and put it on the retreat.

\[1\] They attained svarga not naraka because they had met the death of
the brave by dying in battle. As per hindu lore even a sinful wretch
like a Mohammedan Sultan attains svarga if he dies bravely fighting in
battle. However, as per all Islamic accounts a Hindu dispatched by the
proselytizing sword of a Ghazi goes to a Hell where his burnt in a fire.
That in itself displays the utter gulf between monotheistic violent
Islamic thought and the generous pagan thought of the Hindus.
