+++
title = "The death of Timur-i-leng"

+++
This year marks the 600th anniversary of the death of the great Islamic
hero Timur-i-leng. I had long wanted to prepare a document regarding his
death, because it led to the most profound inequities of Asia. Many
people these days are in the business of comparing the old
civilizational powers of Asia: Iran, India and China. But they typically
forget the most important normalization factor in these comparisons.
Iran is the most decadent having borne the brunt of Islam’s violence
since the Arabs invaded the great Sassanian empire and has become a
slave of the dismal ideology of Islam. India, was seriously damaged by
Islam and to some extant by Christianity, but the Hindu core kept
fighting allowing it to attain moderate success in modern times. China
escaped the assault of Islam and was finally overrun only by most
concealed of all Abrahamistic ideologies i.e. communism. These
differences of history are crucially related to Timur-i-leng and
affected the course of Asia to the modern times.

Having routed the Ottomans and captured their sultan Bayazed Timur
dispatched his grandson Abu Bakr to enter Nicaea to spread the fear of
Allah. He marched on fiercely destroying and looting the towns and
settlements on the way. Timur himself decided to wage Jihad on the
Christians by taking Smyrna. Smyrna was ruled by the order of the
knights of Rhodes under governor Guillaume de Munte. The Ottoman Turks
had besieged Smyrna for seven years and yet failed to capture it due to
the spirited defense of the Christian knights. Timur now decided to show
the Christians the true might of real Central Asian armies. de Munte was
asked to submit and become a Mohammedan or else face action from Timur.
de Munte scornfully refused and was besieged by the armies of Ghazi
Timur on December 2, 1402. Two weeks later the Timurid armies heavily
assailed the city with mangonels and trebuchets and then stormed it by
breaking down the walls. Every knight including the governor was
beheaded and their heads were offered to Allah in thanks giving. The
general population was asked to convert to Islam, failing which they
were put to death. Thus, Timur achieved in two weeks what the Ottomans
had failed to achieve in 7 years.

Then Timur besieged Phocaea, but the city ransomed itself by paying a
heavy fine. The Byzantine regent John VII accepted Timur’s suzerainty
promptly thereafter. Then Timur ceremonial reinstalled various Turkic
Amirs under his control all over the Ottoman empire. Finally in 1404
Timur returned to Samarkand and installed himself as the exalted Sultan.
The Ming emperor of China had believed that as a successor of Chingiz
Kha’Khan empire he was entitled to tribute from Timur. He sent
ambassadors to Timur to demand tribute, but the ambassadors were
arrested in Samarkand and Timur did not sanction their release until the
Chinese had to beg for their return. Towards the end of 1404 Timur
decided to lead a Jihad on China and convert its population forcibly to
Islam. With this intention he started gathering a large army in Utrar.
To regale the army he ordered a month of continuous celebrations
beginning in 1405. A huge hunt was organized and the slain animals were
feasted upon.  It was said that Timur’s men laid down the lances of war
and plied their lances of love on women captured from all around Asia.
There was also tremendous drinking with the feast and Timur drank
voluminously. On the 21st day of the celebrations in the midst of the
drinking Timur took seriously ill and called his sons and grandsons and
gave each of them a fiefdom. He named his grandson Pir Muhammad bin
Jahangir the governor of Kandahar as his over-all successor. Then he
died on Jan 19th 1405 aged 71.

The results of his death were striking. Iran ruined by his campaigns,
lost all elements of true independence. However, its language Persian
was patronized by the Timurids and soon overtook Chagadai Turki in
central Asia. The reign of Shah Rukh in particular was a memorable in
strengthening the Islamic effloresence of the Timurids and subsequently
led to the Timurid re-invasion of India, which forced Persian
administrative constructs on the Hindus. India was serious damaged by
Timur and his successors starting from Babur. This resulted in the
reinstatement of Islam, which was at that point being put on the retreat
in India by the campaigns of Maharana Sanga. This delayed India’s
recovery from Islamic violence by another 300 years. China escaped and
was thus the least damaged of all Asian polities.
