+++
title = "Continued"

+++
\-Then we spoke of Messier and Mechain’s objects in the sky.  
We simple yarned of the good old day when we conquered every Messier
object with our small scope. Messier is supposed to have discovered 20
comets and 103 deep sky objects. Two of which are sort of spurious. He
seems to have sparked the great hunt of W. Herschel.  
\-Then we spoke on primate evolution  
First we spoke of the possibility of a primate-dermopteran-rodent
evolutionary link. Superficially the plesiadapiforms seem to confirm
such a link. But the jury is still out and we cannot be sure of this.
Clearly, the recent analysis of skulls of the plesiadapiforms Ignacius
and Carpolestes suggest that they were the most ancient precursors of
the primates. The opposable thumb appears to be a synapomorphy of the
euprimates. The basal most of the euprimate clade are the adapiforms, of
which the lemurs of Madagascar and lorises seem to be an aberrant late
surviving form. This followed by the the Omomyids from which arose the
Haplorrhines with basal the tarsioids, followed by the anthropoids which
split up into Platyrrhines (new world monkeys) and Catarrhines (old
world monkeys+ apes). There are many mysteries in the evolution of
catarrhines anthropoids alone. When did the ancestral Platyrrhines
resembling the basal anthropoids from the Al Fayum Beds of Egypt reach
South America Given that only they and the caviamorph rodents (which
spawned *Phoberomys*) reached South America they seem to have floated
across the narrower Paleo-Atlantic ocean, due to their small size on
washed away branches perhaps. An amazing journey to make\! What about
the earliest Anthropoids like Eosimias: did Anthropoids first emerge in
Asia or Africa What is the phylogenetic position of *Oreopithecus*. Did
it convergently evolve to an ape-like state? We also wondered if the
Platyrrhines and Catarrhines independently evolve larger brain sizes.
This may have a bearing on when the South American monkeys separated.

What was the issue with the gigantic *Gigantopithecus*– was it an
extra-large orang like ape? *Gigantopithecus* like one of those
legendary R^ikShas of the rAmAyaNa (jAmbavAn) was the largest primate.
It was probably over 10ft tall when it stood erect and weighed about
400kgs or more. Its over-engineered dentition suggests that it was the
only bamboo eating ape. We also spoke of the giant baboons and geladas,
Theropithecus oswaldi and Dinopithecus ingens, which appear to have been
large grass-eating monkeys that might have competed partly with the
coeaval human ancestors.

\-Then we talked about a far-fetched idea as to whether the idea of
praLayas and other doomsday scenarios are linked to the ancient
appreciation of the shortest Milankovitch cycle. As it is possible that
knowledge of precession is a very ancient issue, may be there was an
idea that the changing precessional position may be correlated with
climatic change. The shortest Milankovitch cycle happens because the
Earth may precess to the state where winter is closer an amphelion and
summer closer to perihelion. When it happens the winters and summers are
accentuated in their severity. This could have devastating climatic
consequences.

\-Then we spoke of various issues related to Arthropods: like the
chemical warfare by whip scorpions, bombardier beetles, cockroaches and
Polyxenid millipedes. All these arthropods are very accurate in
directing their spray the prey. We wondered about the ant Thaumatomyrmex
ferox that decimates polyxenid millipedes unlike other ants which are
repulsed or killed by these millipedes.
