+++
title = "Maharatti and Kannada and more musing on Indo-Aryan"

+++
Obivously, Indo-Aryan and Dravidian have been at the center of my
linguistic interests because they are the very basis of my cultural and
genetic heritage. During my peregrinations in the peninsula I made some
observations, and read a work of KM Munshi that the muni brought to my
attention, which resulted in a flash. This concerns the relationship
between Maharatti the Indo-Aryan language of the northern peninsula and
the Aryanized Dravidian language Kannada that is a bit further south.
The first great empire of this region was the Andhra empire of the
shatavAhana that held sway within the interval 2ooBCE-200 CE. The
principal language of this empire was a middle Indo-Aryan dialect, a
prakR^it, mahArAShTri prakR^it that was used fairly extensively as a
commercial, official and literary language. This contention is most
effectively confirmed by the literary work in this language, sattasai of
the andhra king hAla. We see its extensive effects in the Aryanization
of the peninsula, including the older IA superstrate on Tamil, Kannada
and Telugu. Its use an official language probably contributed to its use
in classical Sanskrit dramatics as the epitome of a barbarous prakR^it
spoken by the lower sections of society. For example, note its use as
the language of the crude characters in the play AgamaDambara, much
later in time, by the Kashimirian brAhmin jayanta bhaTTa. This prakR^it
clear shares some synapomorphies with modern Maharatti, suggesting that
it indeed directly contributed as an ancestor of the local IA language
of modern times.

At the same time we see that the andhra-s were also likely vehicles of
transmission of the Dravidian languages northwards as suggested by
Dravidian legends on their coins. Fast forward in time and you find that
the successors of the shatavAhana rulers, in the region the mighty
rAShTrakUTas (rAthoD-s of later IA) and the more regional yAdavas
extensively use kannaDa in their inscriptions (other than the official
classical Sanskrit). We find much more limited use of Maharatti phrases
and sentences, especially in the later of these inscriptions, and
suggests the survival of the descendent of the preceding mahArAShTri
prakR^it apparently over-shadowed by Dravidian Kannada. Then, we have
Munshi’s demonstration of the influence of Kannada on Gujarati, which is
consistent with a far more northern boundary for Kannada in the
historical period. The earliest Maharatti inscriptions are interestingly
seen in Sravana-Belgola, which is now an entirely Kannada region. Then
we have the Islamic invasion destroying the old Hindu kingdoms of the
region. As the curtain lifts and the Maharatta warriors are beginning to
appear as major power players, Maharatti is rampant and soon influence
the whole of India with the rise of the Maharatta empire (the last great
Hindu empire). As Maharatti evolved it showed a linguistic tendency,
pronounced in Tamil, and seen to a limited extent in Kannada and Telugu–
the caste-specific dialect. The brahmins speak a dialect extensively
influenced by a classical Sanskrit vocabulary, while the middle castes
adopt several technical NIA or MIA terms with only religious Sanskrit
vocabulary and the tribals and lower castes an un-sanskritized NIA
dialect. Amongst some branches of the smArta brahmins settled in the
Tamil country in the latest period the dialect is a hybrid of sanskrit
and tamil, deploying a Sanskrit vocabulary atop a basic dravidian
structural template. This situation is very parallel to the brahmin
nAstIkas of the bauddha cult, composing the neo-scriptures in a highly
sanskritized MIA dialect. These resulted in what are traditionally
termed maNi-pravAlas.

These observations of the fluctuations of Aryanized Dravidian and IA, as
well as caste specific dialect formation suggests that the spread of IA
in the peninsula was a complex phenomenon, poorly understood by most
white Indologists (other than Masica).
