+++
title = "The circle ofxa0mAtR^i-s"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/88.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/88.jpg)[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/mothers.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/mothers.jpg)

The mighty bhairava stands in the midst of the circle of eight mothers
(He is invoked by the formula: skhAM skhIM skhauM mahAbhairavAya
namaH||). On either side of the mothers are positioned the roaring
vIrabhadra who emerged from the hair of The god and the frightful
vinAyaka with a single tusk, both striking terror in the heart of the
beholders. vIrabhadra is surrounded by several awful pramathas
brandishing all manner of terrible weapons. The terrible vinAyaka is
dancing performing a loud aTTahAsa, holding a sharp axe in one of his
stout arms. He is surrounded by the fearful goblins armed with all kinds
of weapons. Each of the eight mothers is surrounded by her daughters.
Together they form the complete circle of mothers. They are-

brAhmI’s daughters: akShodyA; akShkarNI; rAkShasI; kShapaNakShayA;
pin\~NgAkShI; akShayA; kShemA.

raudrI’s daughters: iLA; R^ilAvatI; nIlA; la\~nkA; la\~nkeshvarI;
lAlasA; vimalA.

kaumArI’s daughters: hutAshanA; vishAlAkShI; hrU\~nkArI; vaDavAmukhI;
hAhAravA; krUrA; krodhA; bAlA; kharAnanA

vaiShNavI’s daughters: sarvaj\~nA; taralA; tArA; R^igvedA; hayAnanA;
sArA; sArasvayaMgrAhA; shAshavatI

vArAhI’s daughters: tAlujihvA; raktAkShI; vidyujjihvA; kapAlinI;
meghanAdA; pracha\~NdogrA; kAlakarNI; kalipriyA

indrAnI’s daughters: champA; champAvatI; prachampA; jvalitAnanA;
pishAchI; pichuvaktrA; lolupA;

chAmuNDA’s daughters: pAvanI, yAchanI; vAmanI; dAmanI; binduvelA;
bR^ihatkukShI; vidyutAnanA; vishvarUpiNI

mahAlakShmI’s daughters: yamajihvA; jayantI; durjayA; yamAntikA; biDAlI;
revatI; jayA; vijayA.

The hordes of mothers are all armed with deadly weapons like the gods
from whom they have emerged.

There is only a single surviving fragment of the icongraphic
representation of this circle of mothers from a now lost temple in
Madhya Pradesh. The yantra of the circle of mothers is a simple one.
