+++
title = "Oldest archaeological signs ofxa0ritual?"

+++
When did human rituals begin? As a ritualist and evolutionary explorer
this question has naturally attracted my attention. My own contention is
that the genetico-memetic complex of ritual probably goes back to our
common ancestor with the African Great Apes or even beyond to the common
ancestor of the Great Apes. In this context, the Bushmen of Africa are
of particular interest because they are the earliest branching line of
humans alive today. Sadly, the ritual and mythology of the Bushmen has
not been objectively studied by professionals of mythology and ritual,
and the Bushmen themselves are in a quite precarious situation in many
parts of southern Africa. There is a lot to be learnt from Bushmen of
which I will touch upon a fascinating sample towards the end.

Recently there was an announcement by a team from the Oslo University
that they had found the oldest signs of human ritual, which they dated
back to the Middle Stone Age, around 70,000 years ago. I am not sure how
they managed to get this date that they claim. Their central claim is
that the people there seem to have established a cult object in the form
of a python head with marking on it in a cave. Near this cult object
they are supposed to have deposited special stone tools (scrappers and
spear points) made from stones of different colors and specifically put
only those with one color into the fire. Yes, may be this is sign of a
ritual, but one can hardly be sure of the date given that Bushmen
apparently use the area in their religious practice to the current
epoch. Especially, the elephant and giraffe paintings they observe in
the cave may be of a later epoch.

Some time last year when I was being hammered by the kR^ityA, Elleberger
and Lockley uncovered a remarkable piece of ritual art of the Bushmen
from Lesotho. In a Lesotho cave the Bushmen made cave paintings of
ornithopod dinosaur tracks from the Jurassic as also their trackmakers.
These reconstructions are apparently reasonably accurate drawings of
bipedal dinosaur\! This is something the 18th and 19th century European
biologists failed to establish in their first attempt. This shows the
acute sense of relationship between tracks and the animals that the
Bushmen have developed over time. Interestingly, one of these
reconstucted dinosaurs appears to have inspired the form of a
mythological being termed //Khwai-hemm that appears in certain rituals.

As an aside, these dinosaur-inspired beings remind me of the devatA-s of
the akAsha bhairavaM in our tradition. From the behind mist, the
dinosaurine inspirations for forms of AkAsha bhairava, AshugaruDa,
sharabha and pakShirAja become apparent, [as R had earlier
speculated](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2006/05/arimaspas-dinosaurs-griffins-and.html).
