+++
title = "Hsuan Tsung divided by two : Please NO"

+++
We climbed up the turret there was a closely fought encounter going on
the plain. We had sent a division to protect the home ground under an
young and consentious captain, however, he was pretty inexperienced. The
formidable Kappa having strengthen her fort well, ventured out her lair
and gave me the code signal: “abhUri taila amla anya amla”. We saw that
our captain launched a scorching assault but was trapped by a shatru.
From our vantage point we noted that some mlechChas were covertly mining
us. We started sending reinforcements to seal that breach but realize
that still much fighting needs to be done on that front. We had sent a
small division with some good guns to aid GS, our old acquaintence, but
he was overwhelmed by an extraordinary attack by 5 mlechChas and our
reinforcements could do nothing at all. We were left wondering if we
could salvage any troops at all. We were concerned about the secret plan
termed “pa\~ncha-koNaM cha shulbAri eka-koNaM” falling into the hands of
the dasyus. Just then we saw that our mighty general kAmarAja, was
stopped by an enemy division close to where our young captain was being
pinned down in a saMkula yuddha. General kAmarAja broke through the
enemy ranks and was wreaking havoc, when he was suddenly attacked by a
second enemy division. We asked him to extricate himself and attack that
second division code named indra -jAla 1, and sent our able servants to
reinforce his ranks, as well as covered him with mantra prayogas. He
scored a spectacular victory on the front indra jAla 1 and returned to
tackle indra jAla 2 that he hopes control and then decimate it. We also
dispatched a division to prepare for the future battle of rajjvanta.

The messengers were coming in with victorious news that our flag was
flying over indra jAla 1 and that our troops were pressing hard on indra
jAla 2. We were travelling back by the path where the rAkShasI had first
gripped us during the terrible battle of khANDavaprastha. There on the
raNA\~NgaNa we saw the corpses of kR^ishNa tvacha, dva saumyau,
shvetaDambara, kShetragu, mayAchumbikA and sarva-madollAsa. As we walked
by each preta arose laughed and flew away. We placed the samid in the
fire and cast the oblation. The yakShiNis “OPJ”, “SGYA”, “LZ”, “ME” and
“LR” arose with each oblation. We kept sending them but each one
appeard to explode into pieces and run away. Then we saw the vairi send
the maraNAkShaNa– it gripped us, we were gripped by the terrible pasha
from which no one has emerged on the other side. They said the yakShiNis
have become phena.
