+++
title = "When chimps and men stoppedxa0mating"

+++
Chimps and humans are so close that I had wondered since my school days
when the ancestors of chimp and humans had stopped mating with each
other. There were several rumors of human-chimp hybrids but they were
just rumors. There was the long suffering chimp named Oliver that had
many behavioral peculiarities that apparently made him do many
human-like acts and walk bipedally routinely. Then there were the
reports of the giant chimpanzees from DR Congo which which had large
crests on their head and howled during full moons. These chimp
ssuggested that there are still extant,in the dwindling modern Chimp
population apes with a diversity of traits including those resembling
humans.

Recently, Patterson and colleagues produced a remarkable data collection
of sequence on chimps, humans, gorillas, orangs and macaques which
throws light on the speciation of chimps and humans. What their data
suggests is that human and chimp divergence across the genome varies
between 84% to 147% of the average. Given that species divergence will
be equal or less than minimal genome divergence once corrected for
multiple mutations, it becomes clear that the chimps and humans diverged
over a long period of time with some regions separating much earlier
than others. Based on this they proposed that human chimp species
divergence is definitely younger than 6.3 million years and most likely
younger. Further they show that the X chromosome is much more closer
between chimps and humans than autosomes and is close to the genome
minimum for divergence for most of its length. This is even after
accounting for the fact the X to autosome effective population is 0.75
(XX females + XY males=3/4 X).  
This raises two issues that Patterson et al appear to solve with their
data: 1) The low divergence time of chimp and human is at loggerheads
with the fossil evidence suggesting that apes of the human line like
Sahelanthropus, Ardipithecus and Orrorin (especially the former) are
likely to have been 6.5-7.1 million yr range. This is clearly older than
the maximum upper limit one can stretch the human chimp divergence under
molecular clock assumptions and calibration with Sivapithecus. 2) The X
chromosomes alone of chimps and humans are much closer than expected,
that too throughout their length, but not that of humans and gorillas or
chimps and gorillas. So there is something bringing their X-chromosomes
much closer in time rather than a general slow down of natural
selection.

The solution appears to lie in the basic possibility that after the
initial divergence human and chimpanzee ancestors started mating again
and exchanging genes. Importantly Haldane had long ago proposed a rule:
“If in hybrids of two species one sex is rare, missing or sterile then
it is the heterogametic sex.” Thus, after the initial chimp human
separation it is likely that they started mating again but the Haldane
rule kicked in and the males of such crosses were probably defective or
sterile. The females in contrast would have remained fertile and the
only way they could propagate the genes was by mating with males within
the previously diverged chimp or human lines. The products of such
matings will necessarily contain the contemporary shared X chromosome
there by allowing much younger versions of it compared to other regions
on autosomes that might have diverged earlier. Thus, all in all we may
say that human and chimp line ancestral populations were mating down to
between 4-5 million yrs BP at least.

Given the diversity of chimps we get a glimpse of today and the known
diversity of humans it is quite possible that there were diverse
sub-races, with differing behavioral and anatomical traits, with some
overlap in terms of gene exchange between the human and chimp lines
until relatively recently. Then Sahelanthropus and other apes might
represent the early divergent phase after which renewed mating mixed the
human and chimp lineages again.
