+++
title = "Hindus on the hard problem"

+++
We had earlier mentioned the interesting discussion we had with Marc and
kalashajA on what the western philosophers admit is the hard problem of
[consciousness](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2004/06/we-are-zombies.html).
Our other acquaintance of the clan of the kAshyapa-s, had asked me if
the Indians had contributed anything to the problem. He intuitively felt
they had done so, but could not place a finger on it. Marc, R and I had
some further discussion, and realized I knew less of it than I thought I
did. As a result it was not certain that I had a defensive argument for
all my original stances on the matter, and definitely consider it an
area of my thought that is still shaping. However, in answer to the
kAshyapa’s queries, and for some discussions with our friend graced by
the wife of mahArudra, I tried to represent the Hindu approach to this
problem. To me it appears that the Hindus have made a deep foray into
this matter exploring areas that are not chartered by modern western
philosophers. To describe this domain of thought of the archaic Hindus
and to certain extant their yavana cousins I resort to the term
ekAntika, adapting it from the early pA\~ncharAtrins of the sAttvata
region. ekAntika can be broadly said to include philosophical theories
such as: advaita, vishiShTAdvaita, samvit-prakAsha and allied
pA\~ncharAtric thought, pratyabhij\~na and the yavana monism. Here, I
seek not to discuss the entire history; at some point if we are alive,
time permitting, I will detail the history of Hindu philosophy from the
particular point of the action of mantra-tantra shAstra that is the
under-girding of the whole Hindu religious practice. Here we shall only
look at some Hindu ideas including advaita, which is one of the ekAntika
philosophical theories that is widely studied by hindus since its
expansive elucidation by sha\~Nkara bhagavatpAda and his successors. I
do not want to even pretend being anything close to an expert on this
system, but only dwell on points relevant to the issue of consciousness.

One might characterize advaitic thought and it is related vaiShNava
version of shri adishesha thus:  
1\) The universe is mAyA, which is unreal. adishesha calls it the mAyA
of viShNu. Yet viShNu is called the cause for origin, persistance and
destruction of the universe- so there is a contradiction here.
Traditional advaitins resolve this contradiction by creating a
distinction between: 1.1) the pure brahman that is in every way
unconnected to the diversity of existence, other than being the ultimate
reality behind it AND 1.2) the Ishvara or viShNu who seemingly generates
the world and after its course of evolution destroys it. This Ishvara or
viShNu and the world he emanates is real only to the extant that the
unchanging brahman due to the delusion caused by mAyA appears to be
Ishvara or viShNu.

2\) The specific entities of the world, like the atomic particles (aNu-s
and paramANu-s) ***appear*** to exist in the world because of the
limiting adjuncts -upAdhi-s produced by delusion. For this advaita uses
the analogy that the sun reflected in different pools of water appears
as many suns, some of which may move or change shape with the movement
of water. Thus, the single brahman appears in the diverse objects of the
world under all the boundary conditions that distinguish apparently
existing entities. Then the advaitins use the analogy of the serpent and
rope. Just as a rope is mistaken to be a serpent and may be destroyed,
but in reality there was neither origin nor destruction of the serpent.
Thus, the universe has no cause for origin and destruction; it is merely
an illusion- the result of mAyA.

3\) This brahman which is the only single ultimate reality is pure
***independently existing consciousness*** which is undivided and
indivisible. \[The key point to note here is that the whole
bhUta-chaitanya-vAda or “neural origin of consciousness” debate is
axiomatically eliminated in the advaita system because it begins with
the axiom that the only reality of existence is the independent
consciousness\]

4\) Consciousness of an individual, ***the Atman is the same as the
brahman***. It is the basis of first person experience of smell, sight,
taste, touch perception and the like. But because there is no reality to
existence there is nothing for the Atman to act upon and hence it does
not act. However, just as the sun reflected in water appears to be
distorted or moves the Atman \*seems\* to act due to the activity of the
mind (manas) and the intellect (buddhi). The Atman though omnipresent
becomes manifest in the buddhi/manas just as the rAhu (shadow of Earth)
while always present become visible only while “eating” the moon in an
eclipse. Thus, the Atman comes to be believed as the agent and
recipient, though it is not, because it is reflected in the manas and
buddhi which are the cause of action and reception.

5\) The delusion of mAyA operates in the projection of something from
our consciousness to the level of our expression as language. That which
is an undivided in consciousness emerges in divided state in linguistic
expression- by the very fact that this expression has the dual nature of
an object and subject.

6\) When the awareness is refreshed regarding the absence of
subject-object distinction. i.e. the Atman is not the agent and that
there is nothing to act upon, then the identity of Atman and brahman is
made and that is mokSha.

7\) The realization of Atman and its equation with brahman cannot be
done by knowing the Atman as an object. If this were so then the subject
perceiving the Atman will be greater than it and one need an entity
greater than that to perceive it. *Ad infinitum*. Thus, the brahman
cannot be realized as an ***object of the senses***. It does not mean
that the brahman is not known objectively– when it is thus perceived it
is seen as the things of the world other than Atman. To perceive brahman
by itself requires what is termed brahmavidyA that leads to mokSha.

From the summary of this Hindu ekAntika system one can see that Hindu
tackled some very important aspects of the “Hard problem”: 1) They
correctly realized it was a hard problem 2) While they produced a theory
that considered the consciousness as the independent reality, they had a
model for its specific connection to the neural process (buddhi, manas
ityAdi). This model was robust enough to stand the modern developments
in biological understanding. 3) They actually showed how linguistic
expression does not reproduce the unity that is in consciousness. 4)
They suggested an actual solution to the hard problem within their
Weltanschauung that cannot be attained by modern western thought due its
own limitations.

Yet, the advaita stream of Hindu ekAntika thought had its problematic
issues- the biggest being the non-reality of atomic particles and thus
the world. It was here the great tantrics of pA\~ncharAtra and kula
paths raised Hindu thought to its highest pinnacle since the veda (we
will continue the second part of this excursion by attempting to put
these concepts in words, though we might fail). The importance of the
tantras stems from the fact they actually represent a high point Hindu
philosophy. The unfolding of path the kaulika perfection …
