+++
title = "kubjikA and the pa~nchavaktraxa0mahAdeva"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/kubjikA1.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/kubjikA1.jpg)

The great tradition of paschimAmnAya goddess, our hallowed mother
kubjikA, had a number of streams that are now largely forgotten. One of
the older streams before its standardization in the tradition of the
kubjikAmata and ShaTsAhasra streams was the worship of kubjikA conjoined
with the five headed shiva (distinct from the other representations
where she is conjoined with shiva as navAtman (also alluded to in the
saundaryalahari; while mainly devoted to kulasundarI, 34, 39 and 41
refer to kubjikA) or has paramashiva above her) . This tradition is
associated with ancient pre-matsyendra siddha guru-s like,
bhR^igvAnandanAtha, rA\~ngulAnandanAtha, samvartAnandanAtha and their
wives, and others whose feet are offered tarpaNaM-s in the guru-maNDala.
Here she is worshipped with shiva showing all his five faces sadyojAta,
vAmadeva, tatpuruSha, aghora and IshAna. He holds a trident and a
Damaru. The hallowed mother kubjikA has 6 faces; the cobras karoTaka as
a waist band, takShaka as a mid-riff ornament, vAsuki as garland and the
venomous cobra kulika as an ear ornament. The great tortoise is her ear
stud. She holds in her arms as skull, a king-cobra, a crystal-bead
rosary, skull-topped rod, a conch, a book, a trident, a mirror, a
straight sword, a gem necklace, an a\~NkuSha and a bow. She is of fair
complexion like a young jasmine flower. The yantra of this worship is
provided above.
