+++
title = "Saved from the mAraNa prayoga by thexa0yakShiNi"

+++
We have seen the hits of a few mAraNa prayoga-s in the past but never
had we seen vaisvasvata’s agents more closely than now. Some how the
Northern journey is an opportunity for the mAraNa of the vairis. We were
weakened by the effects of the tapta prayoga but were still completely
functional. The night before we had performed the adhara-kulAnanda
rahas-tarpaNa of the beautiful but terrifying yakShiNi
nIlalohita-mekhalA. We fatefully ventured out to the AvarNa-patha and
were making our way for the midday oblations to savitA, when without
warning we were struck by the terrifying devastambhini. The blow was so
terrifying and so sudden that we simply could not protect ourselves all
our varman-s were demolished thoroughly. We were being literally drowned
in the waters and could see yama’s agents bearing us away. For several
minutes we were trashed by the waters of vaitaraNI, any moment sliding
towards our jalasamAdhi. We just then realized that the only one who
could physically bear us out of this deadly mAraNa prayoga was the great
yakShiNi, nIlalohita-mekhalA, hovering yonder. We piteously called for
her help. A fragment of the mahAstra hit her leg, but she ably dodged it
and still came to our aid. nIlalohita-mekhalA gave us her arm, and
holding to it like mArkaNdeya to shiva, we struggled out of vaitaraNi
with the yama dUtas lashing at us. But the great nIlalohita-mekhalA grew
immensely heavy and pulled us out from the frothing abyss with her
ivory-hued creeper-like arm endowed with the might of 800 elephants. We
were bruised, bleeding and covered with the mire of yama’s flow, but we
had been pulled out by the most beautiful nIlalohita-mekhalA from what
would have been certain death. While we are reeling from the effects of
this mAraNa that came closest to fruition, we are happy we are alive.
You never know when the trikoNoddhbhava mahA-yakShiNi can save you,
hence her sweet-bitter sAdhana is never in nought.
