+++
title = "Aunt Spring on the khANDavan front"

+++
With Jx liberated from the grahaNa, and Mn having stabilized his ratha,
and jyeShTa-tanu having recovered from his head-shattering blow, aunt
spring wanted to move ahead with operations on our front. The muni, a
stickler for etiquette, felt that Mn and aunt spring were not observing
the appropriate Achara and were hence out of his purview. We interceded
with the muni to tell him that the cloud of the attack had not passed
and we need to hold together rather than break apart in intercine
arguments. The virile taittirIyin was mellowed by the events, even as
the brusque shachIva of Mn and Jx was mellowed by the frightening direct
hit of the bhAirava arrow he had taken in kAshI. Aunt spring tried to
move rapidly on khANDava, even without consulting us, but the last of
the victims was struck by a simultaneous utsAdana and stambhana hit. The
virile taittirIyin interceded rapidly and controlled the damage limiting
it to a fixed duration stambhana. Aunt spring, who had been favored for
long by bAlA, immediately rapidly advanced seeing the opportunity on the
khANDava front. The khANDavans showed that they were not cowed down and
put up a strong attack. Soon the battle grew so intense that as expected
we were also drawn into it. Since the AchArya of the virile taittirIyin
and ours was the same, there was not much different we could do, beyond
deploying the atharvaNa shrutI. But the allies of the khANDavans made
sure that we are constantly occupied on our usual battle front to tie up
such a deployment.
