+++
title = "Mapusaurus roseae and the theropods of thexa0South"

+++
In my earliest youth I was fascinated by an obscure Late Cretaceous
dinosaur Carcharodontosaurus, which was known only from fragmentary
remains from the Sahara, described by the famous German paleontologist
Ernst Stromer. The few remains suggested that it was an enormous
predator and probably had links to the allosaurs of the Jurassic. In the
1990s some thing dramatic happened. First, a gigantic carnivore of the
tetanuran lineage, Giganotosaurus was described from the late Cretaceous
of Patagonia, Argentina. Shortly after this Paul Sereno recovered more
complete remains of Carcharodontosaurus from the Sahara. It became clear
that these two were unified into a single clade of large tetanuran
theropods, that had emerged out of the more primitive allosauroid stock
of the Jurassic. These were the first large predators from the
Cretaceous of the Southern Continents (the products of Gondwanaland
breakup). Over the years it has become clear the theropod faunas of the
South were were different from those of the North during the Cretaceous.

In both the South and the North, the middle to small predatory guilds
were prominently occupied by deinonychosaurs. It needs to be seen if
some of these might have actually dispersed using their limited flight
abilities like the Buiteraptor. In the north there were other major
coelurosaurian lineages like the oviraptorosaurs, therizinosaurs, and
ornithomimosaurs of which there is not much evidence in the South. The
top predatory guilds in the north were taken up the coelurosaurian clade
the tyrannosaurs. In contrast in the south across various predatory
guilds we had a prominent presence of the abelisauroids. For example in
the small range, we had Iloklesia, Noasaurus, fragmentary Ligabueino and
Masiakasaurus (an odd piscivorous or insectivorous abelisauroid). The
medium to large range was occupied by several abelisaurs such as
Carnotaurus, Abelisaurus and Aucasaurus (South America), Indosuchus,
Indosaurus and Rajasaurus (India), Majungatholus (Madagascar), Rugops
(Africa).

The largest theropod guilds are however, occupied by the
Carcharodontosaurs. Recently Coria and Currie have uncovered a new
carcharodontosaur that promises to through new light on the phylogeny of
these beasts. Importantly, it appears that the carcharodontosaurs are
distinct from Acrocanthosaurus of the North American Early-Middle
Cretaceous. The latter is closer to Allosaurus. This suggests that by
the middle to late Jurassic there was an explosive radiation of
Allosauroid lineages. Allosaurus proper, the Asian Siraptorids
(Sinraptor and Yangchuanosaurus), Monolophosaurus, and Neovenator. In
the Cretaceous the surivors of these lineages founded new clades. There
seems to be larger clade within allosauroid including the Sinraptorids
followed by a crown group of Neovenator and the Carcharodontosaurs. On
the other hand there was another clade with Allosaurus and
Acrocanthosaurus.
