+++
title = "Watongia"

+++
The varanopids are a lineage of synapsids whose distinctness and wide
distribution has come to light more recently, even though Romer
described Varanops elegantly in his early monographs. More recently
Reisz and Laurin, the experts on these topics, described a relatively
large varanopid, Watongia, from the Oklahoma Chickasha formation. This
synapsid was discovered by Olson in 1974 but was poorly understood until
a few years ago. Watongia appears to share a hallmark feature of two
other varanopids, namely the postorbital tuberosity if the authorsâ€™
interpretation of the skull is correct. The vertebra nevertheless are
very similar to Aerosaurus and Varanodon even if larger. The function of
this tuberosity in Watongia, Aerosaurus and Varanodon is unclear. It
could be a muscle attachment site, but I suspect that it might have had
a soft tissue decoration, like a spike or spine that played a role in
sexual selection. Watongia also has a distinct canine that is twice the
size of the maxillary teeth. This suggests that the presence of the
hypertrophied canine as a predatory device emerged relatively early in
synapsid evolution, and was repeatedly used in so many synapsids lineage
down to this day. The teeth were recurved strongly with anterior and
posterior unserrated cutting edges.

A linear relationship between the size of the largest centrum of the
vertebra and the body length has been postulated. Average body length in
mm vs maximum centrum length in mm:

[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger2/6438/855/320/synapsid_scaling.0.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger2/6438/855/1600/synapsid_scaling.0.jpg)

Smallest to largest: 1) Varanops 2) Aerosaurus 3) Varanodon 4)
Dimetrodon milleri 5) Watongia 6) Dimetrodon booneorum 7)
Titanophoneus  
Based on this scaling the length of Watongia is estimated as 2 meters.
This is pretty large by Varanopid standards. Given that there are only
large Caseids but no sphenacodontines in the Chickasha formation, it is
clear that here the varanopids like Watongia were the top predators.
Thus, in different middle Permian assemblages different synapside
lineage were top predators.  
In phylogenetic terms there is a clear monophyletic lineage within
varanopids in the form of Varanodon, Aerosaurus and Watongia. The poorly
studied Archaeovenator appears to be the most basal member of the clade
with Elliotsmithia, Mesenosaurus and Mycterosaurus falling in between it
and the varanodontines, but with no strong support for their grouping.
