+++
title = "Some notes on Shahji and Sambhaji the brother ofxa0Shivaji-III"

+++
Mustafa Khan’s invasions  
Shah Jahan called on Adil Shah and Qutb Shah to destroy the Hindus of
the South and bring the whole of Hind under Islam. First, Mustafa Khan
attacked the Vijayanagaran army lead by the Nayaka Shivappa who had
liberated Ikkeri (1645). The Hindus fought with great fury and inflicted
severe losses on the Moslems in the battle of Sagar. But Mustafa Khan
who greatly hated the Hindus was strengthened by reserves and he fell
back on Shivappa Nayaka, routing him in the second battle of Ikkeri. But
Shriranga III began his counter-operations right away and captured
Vellore. The Moslems were alarmed and the Qutb Shah and Adil Shah made a
common cause and dispatched a large army of Jihad against Shriranga.
Shahji refused to join this army eventhough he was asked to. At that
time his young son Shivaji in Maharashtra instead started making
preparations to take a critical fort of Kondana near Pune from the
Moslems. His other son Sambhaji started secret negotiations with Hindu
Palegars to look upto Shahji and not side the Moslem invasionary force.
Mustafa Khan struck rapidly and captured Vellore. But as soon as Mustafa
Khan returned to Bijapur, Shahji and Sambhaji secretly provided
intelligence and help to Shriranga and he was able to defeat the Moslems
and recapture Vellore. Furious, the Sultan sent Mustafa Khan along with
Afzal Khan and Asad Khan to destroy Shiranga. Shahji was ordered to help
the invasion and threatened with arrest if he sided with the Hindus.
Shriranga contacted Shahji and asked him to open negotiations for peace
with Mustafa. Shahji duely did so and was trying to buy time for the
Vijayanagarans, when Shriranga thought he might succeed by launching a
preemptive strike on the Moslems. However, he was mistaken– while
outwardly the Moslems seemed to be negotiating peace as per Shahji’s
moves, they were themselves preparing to strike. So Shriranga’s element
of surprise was completely blown off and the Moslems slaughtered his
forces in the battle and seized Vellore. However, Shahji helped him
escape with life. While the Adil Shahi army was tied with Shriranga,
Shahji’s son Shivaji captured the Kondana fort from the Moslems, while
his elder son Sambhaji quite deposed a Moslem palegar in the Raichur
Doab and was bringing territory under his control in contrivance with
the local Hindu population.

The brahmins met at the Tirupati temple and bank-rolled a Hindu army
using temple revenues under the surviving Nayakas to counter the Moslem
depredations. Alarmed at the growing Hindu counter-attack the Sultans
ordered a major offensive with two Jihadi armies under Mustafa Khan and
Afzal Khan from Bijapur and the zealous Mir Jumla from Hyderabad. The
Hindus at first fought the Moslem army at Virinchipuram, where despite
their defeat staved off the Moslem army by inflicting heavy losses on
them. The surviving Nayaka, Rupa Nayaka went over to Jinji and from this
excellent fort began operations against the Moslems with the Tirupati
funds. He kept hitting the Moslem armies repeatedly and kept retreating
to his fort. Sambhaji kept providing the Nayaka secretly with
intelligence and was thus coming of his own in conceiving a nationalist
Hindu cause, much as his brother was in Maharashtra. The brahmins at the
Tirupati meet also decided to take a second course of action and
selected a set of expert tantriks to perform a series of abhicAra rites
on the Sultan of Bijapur. The abhichAra had its due effect and the
Sultan’s limbs were paralyzed. Mustafa Khan and Mir Jumla enraged over
the developments launched a major attack on Jinji. Shahji and Sambhaji
were asked by Mustafa Khan to join him against the Nayaka at Jinji.
Shahji proved an obstructionist and kept interfering by shielding
various Nayakas and delaying encounters. Mustafa Khan furious over these
actions had him arrested with the help of Shahji’s treacherous relative
Baji Ghorpade when the former was offguard due to a wild party. Shahji
was put in chains by Afzal Khan and taken with him to Bijapur. Mustafa
himself was targetted by a mAraNa prayoga laid by the brahmins and is
said to have died in a week there after. But his successor Muhammad Khan
continued the siege and finally killed Rupa Nayaka and captured Gingi.

[Go to
part-IV](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/07/some-notes-on-shahji-and-sambhaji-the-brother-of-shivaji-iv/)
