+++
title = "Iran and the Terrorist state ofxa0Pakistan"

+++
The ascendency of USA came as a result of it literally being the “New
World”. The natives of the land stretching from the cold reaches of
Canada to the Southern tip of Patagonia, had only used up all the
megafauna of the land leaving behind much of the mineral, forest and
aqueous wealth for their White successors to plunder. Unlike Eurasia
which had been denuded by thousands of years of high intensity metal and
horse age human colonization, the Americas still had much to be used.
The intense conflict between the two Germanic sibs Germany and England
ensured the decline of England and Europe allowing the white colonists
of USA to take leadership of the Leukosphere. Spain had overdone its
colonial enterprise resulting in its decline. The distance of the
Americas from Eurasia allowed it to be insulated from the tumultous
convulsions that periodically rack Eurasia. While outwardly a strong
democracy, at its heart lay dictators like the famous Edgar Hoover who
ensured that the dissenting elements, both ideological and racial, which
might weaken the country were eliminated.

The effects all this are very apparent: USA became a superpower, but not
being a part of Eurasia in recent times it also never clearly understood
foreign policy. Applying its heavy arm it easily crushed the competition
possed by Southern Latin states and maintained sparse Canada as a buffer
zone. But Eurasia with its eternal conflicts was never its forte.

A result of this sum of vectors is the fascination for Iran and the
Terrorist state of Pakistan in an almost inverted sense.
