+++
title = "The mystery of thexa0pANDava-s"

+++
While the bhArata epic is a central to understanding the rise of the
Indian state and the very culture of the Indian people, there are some
mysterious issues associated with it which still leave a major gap in
understanding this historical period. At its heart the epic represents
the expansion of the kuru-pA\~nchAla realm over the whole of Northern
India, establish a unified administrative and cultural zone. The
sequence of events leading to this as painted in the mbh are thus: 1) We
have the rise of the bhAratas under their eponymous founder the great
conqueror bharata daushyanti who raises this line of the pUru kShatriya
clan to prominence and pre-eminent rulers amongst the Indo-Aryans. 2)
The dynastic successors of bharata daushyanti (not necessarily his
biological lineage descendent) split up into two powerful states
(subsequently the kuru and the pa\~nchala) at the time of the brothers
purumIDha and ajAmIDha. 3) The kuru and the pa\~nchala were the
pre-eminent rulers of much of north India jostling for territory with
each other, as well as other Indo-Aryan states. 4) The period of the
great bhArata war, where through marital alliances with pa\~nchala,
virATa, yAdava and other smaller Aryan states a younger branch of the
kuru-s, the pANDava-s, overthrew their older cousins the main-line
kaurava-s. In the bloody bhArata war most north Indian rulers were
annihilated, giving the surviving pA\~NDava-s total control of much of
this swath of land. Subsequently, their successor janamejaya pArIkShita
through a formal ashvamedha rite and the sarpa sattra marking the
destruction the nAga rivals made himself the emperor of the first
unified empire of India, marking the efflorescence of the formal shrauta
period of vedic culture.

Now in my investigations, the vedic saMhitA-s, brAhmaNa-s and shrauta
sUtras largely confirm this sequence of events but leave one very
mysterious gap vis-a-vis the bhArata. Firstly, in the core R^ig saMhitA
and the core parts of atharva saMhita there are no references the later
kings of the bhArata . Instead there are allusions to early pUru kings,
bhArata and his immediate successors purumIDha and ajAmiDha are seen.
This suggests that much of the samhitA period predated or overlapped
with early history of the pUru clan till the time of original, but not
yet formal kuru-pA\~nchala split. The brAhmaNas primarily talk of the
core kuru-pA\~nchala period, explicitly using this “hyphenated” term.
They also allude to the ancient historical gAthas praising king bharata
daushyAnti as hoary figure, while refering to others like janamejaya
pArIkShita as more immediate or contemporary. In particular they detail
the ashvamedha of janamejaya as a contemporary event and an epitome of
the formal shrauta performance (e.g. aitareya brAhmaNa 8.21.3,
shatapatha brAhmaNa 13.5.4.2 and some shrauta sUtras). These brAhmaNas
and shrauta sUtras also talk of several characters who figure in the
core events of the mahAbhArata. These include for example: dR^itarAShTra
vaichitravIrya , shikhaNDin yAGYasena, kR^iShNa devakIputra, vyAsa
kR^iShNa-dvaipAyana (consistently providing patro/matronymics as in the
epic) and parIkShit the kaurava. The gR^ihya sUtras also recall the
traditional narrators of the bhArata epic like vaiShaMpAyana and jaimini
explicitly in the context of the bhArata (e.g AshvalAyana gR^ihya sUtra
3.4). Thus, at the face of it, it may seem that the tradition in the
mahAbhArata is at least consistent with vedic tradition. Yet we see no
mention what so ever throughout the vast vedic literature to the
pANDavas. Their descendents parIkShit and janamejaya are prominent late
vedic figures, yet where are the pANDava-s in vedic literature? This is
especially strange, given that the great epic tries to paint the pANDava
rAjasUya and ashvamedha as key historical events and even models for
these shrauta performances. Yet, they are bypassed and those of their
descendents are detailed.

While the silence of the vedic texts regarding the pANDavas down to the
shrauta sUtras is striking, they are uniformly alluded to in all the
major purANas, aShTAdhyAyi and earliest mytho-historical works of the
nAstIka matas- jaina and bauddha. This pattern strikes me as odd and
requiring an explanation. The point is complicated by another
observation of some interest: Several later Indic dynasties have claimed
descent from the yAdavas of the bhArata period (e.g. chAlukyas, yadu
kula rAjpUts, yAdavas, abhiras so on). Yet, the number of Indic
dynasties claiming pANDava origin are very few. This is especially
strange given that their supposed descendents had such a prominent role
in formalizing the vedic shrauta ritual which was so closely associated
with royal prestige in ancient India. The only major dynasty with such a
claim is the pANDya of Madhurai, whose very name bears this sign.

Simple proposals for solving this conundrum have hardly explained all
the complicated issues associated with it. So, I will stop at this point
and present some possible theories later.
