+++
title = "gaNonmatta and tropanes"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/datura.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/datura.jpg)

We had heard of the tale of that medieval luminary of our community,
appayya dIkShita’s experiment with the tropane alkaloids. The story has
it that he was seized with the urge to enter that state of ecstatic
abandon, in which the hideous goblins of the retinue of rudra, prance
around, herded by the terrible elephant-headed one. appayya is supposed
to have drunk a decoction of the famed dhattura plant (One can learn
about them in this excellent [botany
site](http://waynesword.palomar.edu/ww0703.htm#Datura)) and gone into 13
days of gaNonmatta or the madness of the bhUta gaNas, where he pranced
around like an agent of The god, much to the horror of his wife. But
then he is supposed to have returned to normalcy there after.

While we had no urge whatsoever to emulate him, we were driven by our
chemical zeal to isolate the tropane alkaloids from dhattura (not for
use of course). We achieved this through multiple methods in the hey
days of our “practical chemistry”. We assembled our co-conspirators, the
muni, Mn (who was later to become a great experimental scientist but at
that point was somewhat inferior to us- the course of fate has been
strange indeed\!) and Mis-creant, who shared our interest in both
chemistry and the arcana of the rasAyana (probably we were only two who
saw ourselves as inheritors of the tradition of the tattva-shambhara
tantraM). We knew of a patch of deep purple dhatturas in the vicinity
and also for variety collected some Brugmansia or the tree dhattura that
grew in the vicinity of the vAnara parvata. We obtained a good load of
seeds of the former and flowers of the latter, but the most successful
isolations were from the former. The first technique was the rasAyana
one resembling the tantric methodology. Knowing that tropanes,
especially hyoscyamine which was dominant in our dhattura-s were soluble
in lipids we decided to use the ghee extraction technique. We made a
haridra impregnated ghee, in which the haridra served as our indicator
to show that the basic tertiary amine had been extracted. Having pounded
the seeds we poured our haridra-impregnated ghee and extracted for 3
days. The brow-red haridra indicated the extraction of the alkaloid into
the ghR^ita. The next technique which we used was a more direct and
better one for purification. In this we used something called the
dry-cleaning kerosene and extracted the alkaloids again for 3 days. Then
we filtered out the kerosene and dried it as the dry-cleaners do. This
gave us yellowish crystals of alkaloid. Mn then made a crude
electrophoresis apparatus and we found separation of some alkaloids from
our extracted crystals. We used the bromine decolorization test to check
for tertiary amine presence. Sadly there is no strong test like
ninhydrin for tertiary amines we were aware of.
