+++
title = "Notes on early pAncharAtra vaiShNavism"

+++
It is likely that in the later period the vaiShNavas were ignorant on
why the name pA\~ncharatra came into being. This ignorance of the
meaning of the name is plainly seen in the explanation provided by the
prashna saMhitA and padma saMhitA of pA\~ncharAtra, and the nAradIya
pA\~ncharAtra has only a vague memory regarding the cause of the name.
The kashmirAcharyas of mahAbala paNDitaâ€™s school and vidyAraNya yati
cite a number of formulae of pA\~ncharAtra vaiShNavism. But the
kashmirAcharyas clearly explain the etymology by citing the vihagendra
saMhitA and the sanatkumAra saMhitA. viShNu in course of the five night
rite, in which puruSha nArAyaNa was invoked, lectured details on the
pA\~ncharAtric mantra shAstra to various recipients. As per the holy
sanatkumAra saMhitA, which only survives in fragment the recipients of
the lectures on the 5 nights were rudra, prajApati, indra, the R^iShis
and bR^ihaspati. This knowledge was collected by the chitrashikhaNDins
and provided as the vaiShNavAgamas. The same text mentions that viShNu
also explained this knowledge (probably implying kR^iShNa) directly to
the sAttvata heroes like sAtyaki, akrUra and kR^itavarman which came to
be the sAttvata branch of pA\~ncharatra. The vihagendra saMhitA states
that the five recipients were ananta (=nAga), garuDa (=vihagendra),
viShvaksena, rudra and prajApati, of which the vihagendra saMhitA is the
collection of the lectures to garuDa. The Ishvara saMhitA mentions that
the five recipients (at least in the R^iShi class) were brAhmaNas of the
clans : shANDilya, aupagAyana, maunjAyana, kaushika and bhAradvAja. In
addition to pa\~ncharAtra the hayagrIva tantra remembers an independent
tradition of tantric vaiShNavism termed saptarAtra, which was parallel
to pA\~ncharAtra, and contained the trailokyamohana viShNu tantra and
hayagrIva tantra amongst others.

The sanatkumAra saMhitA is clearly divided into the 5 sections called
rAtras with ten-eleven chapters in each, with each corresponding to the
lecture of a night between viShNu and the recieving deity or sage (of
them the bR^ihaspati ratra is lost). While it has some very late
corruptions and extrapolations potentially attributable to the
shrIvaiShNavas or mAdhvas, the sanatkumAra saMhitA by its content and
memory of the actual origin of the term is close to the source. The
sanatkumAra saMhitA assumes the coeaval presence of a text called nArada
saMhitA (in part a potential precursor of the nAradIya pa\~ncharAtra),
mahendra saMhitA and padmodbhava saMhitA and the vihagendra saMhitA
suggesting that these were composed together as a unit. The middle two
could be internal citations to indra rAtra and prajApati rAtra (or more
complete versions thereof).

The contents of the sanatkumAra saMhitA fragment as we know it are
pretty remarkable. The first section, the rAtra of rudra: 1) yAgas to
deities: agnI yAga, brahma yAga, vaishravaNa yAga, yAga for pacifying
the vinAyaka and the uchChiShTa ulka, shrI/lakShmI oblations, the famed
yaga to worship dhUrta skanda, saura prayogaM, rudra yAga, yaga to
pacify various shaktis, sacrifice for yama, indra yAga, viShNu yAga,
yaga for ashvins, worship of kAmadeva, soma offering. gAyatrIs for these
deities and installation of their idols. 2) mantra-lakShaNaM 3) great
nArayaNa mantras and gAyatrI. mAhAsudarshana mantra prayoga, the
vaiShNava shmashAna prayogaM to capture and deploy yakShas and
yakShiNis, rAkShasa shmashAna prayoga for sending rAkShasas aided with
sudarshana, garuDa mantra prayogas, sarpa prayogas 4) invocation of 1008
gaNas of viShNu under viShvaksena, 5) harinivedana 6) flowers for viShNu
worship 7) leaves for viShNu worship 8) bathing rites for idols 9)
public festivals, balis and related rites 10) construction of yantras of
viShNu.

The detailed tantric agnimukhaM yAgas with 4 fires for nArAyaNa and his
vyUhas is provided in the brahma rAtra (this as far as my sources known
is only available with some vaiShNava brAhmaNas in shrIrangaM as a
manuscript).

Most interestingly the sanatkumAra saMhitA gives two forms of
upanayanaM, the vedic form for dvijas and tantric agnimukhaM version for
women and shUdras. On recieving that they may perform several rites, but
the pA\~ncharatric brahmin is still supposed to perform vaidika rites to
various deities in addition to the internal pA\~ncharatric sacrifices to
vedic deities given in the rudra rAtra.
