+++
title = "On some dAnas and utsargas of the mediaevalxa0Hindus"

+++
The dharma texts interminably dilate on the performance of a variety of
dAna-s and utsarga-s to deserving people or for public benefit which
ranged from elephants, cattle, horses, clothing, umbrellas, footware,
toothbrushes, gold, gems, grains, sugar etc. These have all been
discussed at length by the great scholar PV Kane in his voluminous
studies on the dharma literature. However, there were a few points that
we noted during our peregrinations through the laborious dharma
literature that are of some interest:

1\) ***grAntha dAnaM*** is described in a few texts and the mediaeval
authority hemAdri, the yAdava prime minister, dilates extensively on
this, in his enormous volume on Hindu charity. Typically volumes of
purANa-s, itihAsa-s and dharma manuals were gifted to deserving
individual or to maTha-s. In particular it was recommended that grantha
dAna-s be made to temples of rudra, viShNu or sUrya for the use of the
public and said to be as meritorious as the gift of gold, land or
cattle. This indicates the presence of Hindu public libraries associated
with temples. Astronomical texts, the siddhAnta-s were also recommended
as donations as per the agni-purANa (211.61; per Nag press prints).

2\) Both aparAditya, the shilahara king of Konkans (\~1120 CE) in his
legal tract built on yAj\~nyavalkya’s smR^iti and hemAdri also prescribe
a dAna known as the ***ArogyashAlA dAnaM***. This involved construction
of hospitals that supplied free medication, and the provision to support
a competent physician to man the ArogyashAlA-s. This dAna was considered
one of the highest dAna-s because it provided for everything by helping
in successful achievement of the 4 puruShArtha-s. The skandapurANa
provides an older presentation of the same point.

3\) Making public water-resources, ***kupAdi dAnaM***, are considered
amongst highest of meritorious activities. shabharasvamin mentions the
R^igvedic mantra RV10.4.1 to provide shruti’s authority on the matter.
The mantra mentions the water shed set up in a arid zone to provide for
way-farers. One is supposed to burn half of ones duShkarma when one
makes water resources for public use. The recommended water resources
are kUpa: wells, prapA: water-sheds in arid areas, apA-chakras:
water-wheels, vApI: a water-tank with steps leading to the water, hrada:
deep tank, pushkarinI: a pond and a taDAga: an artificial lake. There is
some debate amongst Hindu authorities as to whether the maker of the
water reservoir can use it as a member of the public. A water-shed may
also be built in the temple and a nominal brahmin appointed to
distribute drinking water to the general public.

After establishing the water-reservoir the donor should perform in the
least the following ancient vedic fire sacrifice on a sthaNDila altar.
He cooks barley in milk as an offering for deva varuNa. He then offers 8
oblations of this barley on the fire with the R^iks: RV 4.1.4-5,
1.24.14, 1.25.19, 1.24.15, 8.42.3 and a final two using the formula
known as “the greedy dog in the kennel” . These oblations are made
starting from the west in each 8 directions on the altar in the
anti-clockwise direction. Then in the middle of the altar he makes 2
oblations of milk with RV 10.81.3 and 1.22.17. Then he takes a bath (if
a tank and larger) in that water body with the formula RV 7.89.5 to
varuNa. If it is a pond or lake he then introduces fishes, terrapins and
water fowl mentally invoking deva varuNa. Then he gives fee to the
performing priests if he has employed them and feeds brAhmaNas.

4\) ***vR^ikShaM*:** Tree plantation is an extremely meritorious karma
as per Hindu authorities from the earliest times. The kaTha-s believed
that trees should be treated like sons, while the padma purANa gives a
long lecture on the benefits of tree-planting. hemAdri prescribes that
the ashvattha (Ficus religiosa), ashoka, chinchini (tamarind) and dADimi
(pomegranate) vR^ikSha-s should be planted. Others recommend the mango,
the banyan, kapittha (Jamun), bilva and amalaka (gooseberry) trees to be
planted. For vandalizing a fruit-tree the ruler should administer the
highest fine; for a flower tree the middle fine, for a bower a 100 coin
fine and for desecrating grass and shrubs a one coin fine. hemAdri also
recommends plantation of a garden as an act of highest merit.

In the plantation and gardening karma he performs a fire rite with 3
oblations of cooked rice with formulae:  
OM viShNave svAhA | OM indrAgnibhyAM svAhA | OM vishvakarmaNe svAhA ||  
Then he makes a series of oblations with the R^iks of vishvAmitra RV
3.8.6-10.  
then he goes watering the tree or garden with the formula of vishvAmitra
“vanaspate shatavalsho vi roha…” RV 3.8.6.
