+++
title = "The battle of the train and bus towns"

+++
As many issues remain still murky and we are still behind the haze we
cannot narrate much. It was wild ride is all we can say. We knew that
one of our greatest sapatna-s stood straight in our path. It was going
to be a fight like the one between karNa and arjuna. Just as only one
sword can reside in a scabbard, just as there can only be indra or
vR^itra or just as there can be only one rAja in rAShTra it had to be
one of us. The sapatna arranged things such that we had to attack from a
very unfavorable position. We had no choice but to charge. We could not
deploy anything at first. But we planned everything pretty well in terms
of timing of the attack, and then found a moment to invoke the secret
aid of the breaker of vala’s stronghold: ma\~njughoSha, combined plainly
with that great forgotten weapon: “the strike of shUlini”. The speed of
the maruts took us through the first attack scattering the
kR^iShNa-varNa-s and ekAntika-vAdin-s. Then we drove away ajadhADika,
viTshiras, biDAlashmashru and shuchiroman. Then our great shatru
repeatedly attacked trying to tie us with astras. We, however, invoked
the mahA-vajra to pierce him. That thunder which had burnt the the
enemies of trasadasyu, that might of indrAvaruNa bore us aid against
him. This round of the gaviShTi was ours. Then we were moving away after
having controlled the vile Damarushiras, when our old bhrAtR^ivya
attacked us violent with the rakta-ghAtaka. He could not bear the fall
of biDAlashmashru and mahA-shatru in the open field. (“mlechChas
horsemen are all around you.”). Four fierce weapons pursue us- the
raktaghAtaka, the bhaya nirR^iti (we remembered the old nairR^ita
attacks), rAkShasi and jvAlAmukha. We needed to obtain the yakShini-s
bAlachandrikA and suratama\~njari to save ourselves now.
