+++
title = "Lessons from the Mohammedan onslaught"

+++
The battle raging in the Middle East between the Jews and their
Mohammedan enemies has some important historical lessons. It may be a
relatively low-level conflict in a small part of the world but its
lessons are very clear. In recent history the Jews scored many
spectacular victories against the Mohammedans which are worth looking at
carefully:  
\-In 1948, shortly after the Jews declared independence, Mohammedan
hordes from Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and Iraq invaded Israel. After
a prolonged fight and loss of many of their lives the Jews repulsed
their Abrahamistic cousins and enemies. The parallel between this and
the Pakistani invasion of Bharata in Kashmir is close and needs to be
noted.  
\-In 1956 the Jews conquered Sinai in retaliation for the Mohammedan
blockade of the Suez and terrorists raids. But the soon returned the
land. Note the parallel with India not holding the land captured during
the counter-thrust into Pakistan.  
\-In 1967 the Jews struck the Mohammedan armies in the 6 day war in
retaliation for the blockade in the Red Sea straits and won spectacular
victories overthrowing the Moslem martial pride on fronts.  
\-In 1973 the Mohammedan armies from Syria and Egypt attacked the Jews
on their religious holiday but after a while the latter repulsed the
Islamic forces and struck deep in Syria and Egypt. They eventually gave
up most of the land captured from the Moslems in these operations.  
\-1976 saw the admirable raid by the Jewish commandos on Uganda to
rescue the plane hijacked by Moslem terrorists.  
\-In 1981 the Jewish airforce destroyed the Islamic nuclear plant in
Iraq.  
\-In 1982 the Jews defeated the Islamic forces of the PLO in the
invasion of Lebanon.

It is worth noting that the above history is a record that should make
any army proud. While the Hindu armyâ€™s records after independence in
comparison leaves much to be desired, we should observe that we have by
and large we been reasonably successful against the Islamic forces. In
the battle of Kashmir immediately after independence (1947), the Hindu
army repulsed the Islamic invaders from Kashmir. In the 1965 war the
Hindus made deep thrusts into the Islamic terrorist state but did not
fare particularly well in handling the Islamic counter-attack on the
Panjab front. Luckily, in this war USA, the ally of Pakistan, observed
neutrality and did not interfere on their behalf. In 1971 in the
Bangladesh war the Hindu armies inflicted the biggest rout of the
Islamic troops ever. In 1999 in the Kargil war the Moslems initially
occupied Indian territory but were repulsed by a fierce Hindu
retaliation and suffered heavy losses in the Northern light infantry.

But wind the tape forward in the Jewish-Mohammedan wars and note the
following:  
1\) Jewish armies withdrew from Lebanon in 2000. The Moslems did not see
that as peace but as a retreat unable to cope with their pressure.  
2\) The demographic warfare of the Moslems has eaten into the past gains
by the Jews and despite their military superiority.  
3\) The American Jews and Israeli Jews do not seem to have the same
vision of the defense of their nation. The former seem to be quite out
of touch with the ground realities and many of their sponsored moves in
the Middle East may not really benefit the Jewish nation.  
4\) The Jewish retreat from Gaza has only sparked a new more violent
round of counter-attacks from the Moslems rather than peace.

These points are the most important ones to note for the Hindus- despite
your past victories and military superiority you can still be unsettled.
Many have felt that the crown of Bharata- Kashmir, the land of our
Agamas, and many great siddhas, should be gifted to the Mohammedans
because they have any how occupied it demographically and we are losing
many Hindu youths in the process of holding it. But the Jewish example
should tell us that this is a disaster. If we do a Gaza on Kashmir the
results would be much worse than what Israel faces. Importantly, we
should note that at some point the US will cut its losses and come out
of Iraq where it has not been having much to show (other than jokes like
Zarqawi). This will inspire a new wave of triumphalism in the Momeen.
The US probably knows this too well and would take steps in the process
to wall its own distant shores. But the Momeen could then freely
redouble their efforts in Kashmir. In light of all this the message is
simple in the war against ghazis. Do not blink, keep on hammering them
and threatening them.
