+++
title = "On the name itself"

+++
We were passing noting the immersion of the folks in the pAsha of moha.
We were trying to take the upward passage when we encountered the
terrific kR^ityA. The kR^ityA was blocking our path even as the kR^ityA
of rudra that swallowed our ancient clansman ushanas. We evaded her
narrowly and moved past despite sustaining a blow from it. The flow of
internal surA from the brahmarAndhra quieted us even as a morbid
yajamAna who has been struck by the fury of soma is quieted by the
external surA. dhUmrachChAya asked us why this name?

Once in the halcyon days, we retired to our quiet haunt, having deftly
broken away from the plebeians given to their alpa bhogas. There we came
across a remarkable Sanskrit work, composed by the scholarly crest jewel
of the second varNa- the chAlukya king someshvara-deva III. While the
readings were difficult, we immediately felt a kinship with this rAjan.
In many ways he reminded me of his better known predecessor rAjA bhoja
the paramAra, who was also striking in his breadth of knowledge. The
kindred feeling that I felt towards the rAjA was because of encyclopedic
tendencies- he valued all branches of knowledge. More importantly, he
was an astute observer- for after all, all science is observation and
lively synthesizer. This was the intellectual Hindu spirit, which also
produced the brahminical legalistic encyclopedias or the ritualistic
encylopedias. The Hindu though often “self-absorbed” due making
consciousness the axiom rather than the outgrowth, on occasion rose
beyond to observe, accurately enumerate and systematize nature. In his
systematization he discovered the principles of homology and
“pariNAmaM“. His linguistic and intellectual cousin , the yavana
sophist applied it to geometry, but the Hindu elucidated in a more
general sense, when not in the inebriation of the axiom of Atman. This
period of someshvara deva III was the last efflorescence of Hindu
thought before the Mohammedan mayhem snuffed it out in tectonic rattles
that followed.

This text the mAnasollAsa (aka abhilaShitArthachintamaNi), has been much
talked about, but hardly known to the decadent modern Hindus who
epitomize the downward turn of the kAla-chakra in the fourth mAnuSha
yuga. While many have talked about it before, let me repeat some of this
as a praise to the meteor of the chAlukya firmament. The text as we have
it owes its existence ot the unflagging efforts of a maharAShtran
brahmin, Shirgondekar, who edited the thing over several decades. It
covers 100 chapters in 5 viMshati-s or 20 chapter divisions. A striking
variety of matters are described in the mAnasollAsa. Just to give a
flavor: 1) The lost wax procedure and metal casting. 2) Medicine and
preparation of drugs. (These come in the sections termed rasAyaNaM and
dhAtu-vAda-rasNyanaM) 3) Sex. 4) Elephants and horses and their
maintenance. 5) Fishes from the Indian ocean 6) Cooking including
recipes for dishes including the idli and the mAMsa bhajjis. Many of our
current favorites, like the dhosaka (dosai), mAsha vaTaka (the medu
vadai) and pUrika (the masala pUrI) and the amlaka pickle (AvakkAi
urgAi) are laid out clearly. 7) construction of houses and temples. 8)
sedentary games like cards and chess and physical games like water
sports (toya-krIDa). 9) Alcoholic revelry (madira-pAna-krIDa) 10) bed,
bath, footware, umbrellas and clothing. 11) deployment of mantras.

So in memory of the kShatriya’s great text we decided to name our much
lesser ramblings, expressing our continuity with the hindu intellectual
tradition that is all but submerged.  
****
