+++
title = "Gansus and the early ornithuromorph/euornithan evolution"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/gansus_yanornis.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/gansus_yanornis.jpg)

Several new specimens of the previously enigmatic bird Gansus throw
light on the evolution of early ornithuromorph birds. There appear to be
the following evolutionary grades and clades recognizable to different
degrees of clarity amongst the Mesozoic birds. The primitive radiation
of birds appear to have included the very
deinonychosaur/Epidendrosaur-like forms such Archaeopteryx, Rahonavis
and Jeholornis followed by the emergence of birds with shortened
pygostylic tails. Interestingly a pygostyle-like structure appears to
have also evolved in the Oviraptorosaur Nomingia. Subsequently the
pygostylians spawned two great radiations the enantiornithines and the
ornithuromorphs/euornithes which included the modern birds. The
enantiornithines spanned a wide ecological niche and were dominant birds
throughout the later Mesozoic, however for reasons unclear to us they
all became extinct in the great K/T event.

Feduccia, otherwise known for his senseless rants, proposed a model that
the early ornithuromorphs were aquatic or semi-aquatic– his shore birds.
The new fossils of Gansus combined with the phylogeny suggest that many
of the early clades of ornithuromorphs, such as Hongshanornis, the
Yanornis-Yixianornis-Songlingornis clade, the Hesperornithids,
Ichthyornithids and Gansus were all aquatic, whereas only Apsaravis is
convincingly terrestrial. One must also revisit the somewhat later
Vegavis from Antarctica in light of the aquatic early ornithuromorph
hypothesis. Examining the ornithuromorph radiation we note that the most
primitive member of this clade Patagopteryx appears to be a terrestrial
bird, even secondarily flightless. So together with Apsaravis we have at
least 3 major ecological niches amongst the better preserved members of
the early ornithuromorph radiation- a flightless land form (which might
have repeatedly happened in early avian evolution), a volant desert
living form and several aquatic forms with different degrees of aquatic
adaptation. When we go to the neornithes, we have the basal-most branch
of the ratites, which are largely flightless and clearly all terrestrial
cursorial forms. The next most basal branch, which are the earliest
branching, neognaths are the Galloanserae. In the latter clade we have
the late Cretaceous form Vegavis an aquatic form- the authors of that
bird even claim it is nested within Anseriforms or the ducks.

Further in the rest of the neornithine radiation we have several major
aquatic lineages such as :  
Gaviformes: Loons; Podicipediformes+Phoenicopteriformes: A potential
Grebe flamingo clade; A possible Procellariiformes +
Sphenisciformes(albatrosses+ petrels) and penguin clade; Ciconiiformes
(storks); Gruiformes (cranes); Charadriiformes (plovers). There is no
evidence that these forms are all monophyletic or were aquatic by virtue
of their common ancestor being aquatic. In fact many of the adaptations
in them seem to be convergent for aquatic life. Hence it is quite
possible that we have sampled only the proverbial tip of the more basal
ornithuromorph iceberg and there were multiple aquatic radiations in
them, just as in the neornithines. It is much easier to develop aquatic
adaptations, especially given that many birds translocate to food rich
shore zones than to lose them repeatedly and become terrestrial. So I
believe the ideas presented by Lamanna and colleagues in the Gansus
paper regarding an aquatic ancestor for the neornithine radiation is not
well-supported. But most workers seem to agree that reasons why the
neornithines were the only dinosaurs to survive the K-T event remain
still very unclear — did it have anything to do with the aquatic mode of
life?.

Another interesting feature is the presence of the unusual predentary
bone (otherwise seen in the Ornithischian dinosaurs) in the basal
aquatic ornithuromorph birds like Herperornis, Parahesperornis and
Ichthyornis (noted by Larry Martin) and the more primitive
Hongshanornis. This leads to the distinct, but unconfirmed, idea that
there were actually two basal aquatic ornithuromorph radiations. One of
predentary-containing forms such as the above and the other without
including Yanornis, Yixianornis and Songlingornis. The skulls of Gansus
and Ambiortus, if and when found might clarify this issue.
