+++
title = "The links in thexa0chain"

+++
Our ancestors went to the great asura medhira when they were in such a
state. But this time we went to deva indra. We extolled the great
vR^itrahan: you who gave the yati-s to hyaenas, you who smashed the
forts of the dAsas, you who slaughtered the arurmaghas, you who
extirpated prahlAda and the pulomas, we offer sacrifice to you. We wish
to know what happended after we moved beyond the battle pAShaNda
parvata. maghavan said you shall know thus:

The first of the battles actually occurred on vAnara parvata, but that
was an old story. If you wished to know about it ask your priya sakhI
about the “cool summer afternoon”. The battle between durga parvata and
pAShaNDa parvata was definitely hard fought. But you were forced to go
beyond the town of pot-graves after that battle. After battle that was
fought beyond the city of pot-graves, the amAtya and shachIva thought
they were seeing victory and wanted to press hard. But I bade you to
stop near the cow-stall. There when you dismounted the ratha you saw the
elusive Mercury close to the horizon. Then you composed this
[ditty](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2003/10/guillotines-fall.html). I
made sure you came out on the otherside of the blade. But then I measure
out things in different measures for all. The balance goes up and down.
So I took 2 wicks, and showed them to the loka of mAnuShas. You mAnuShas
however saw 8 wicks when there were only 2. Hence, they call me mAyin-
the wielder of indrajAla. I asked you all to chose one. You and those
who lived beyond the pot-graves, and the khANDavans chose one, while
those at the foot of pAShaNDa’s hill chose another. You all thought you
had chosen different wicks. But to those who offered me sacrifices I did
not yield up to mR^ityu right away, even though she was seeking them.
Those who lived beyond the pot graves did not know how to perform yAga-s
as you did. But they offered the gods whatever they could. I showed to
the AmAtya and shachIva that they lived firmly by dharma, despite being
un-educated and not worth the thread slung on their shoulders. Hence,
while the visitation of mR^ityu could not be avoided by them, we gave
them the new twig. The dwellers of pAShaNDa hill chose the wick well and
so they enjoyed its benefits. But they were limited by their own karma.
That man whom you saw sitting in the midst of bones and stones had in
times before chosen that wick and was rewarded with eko-mAnusha-AnandaH.

As those who lived beyond the pot-graves lived firmly by dharma, like
the poor man in kurukShetra, and was favored by the devas, we wished
them good.

….  
Then ST told me of the rAkShasa dwelling in asi-parvata, where the muni
and me had wandered in our days of youth. She said I wanted to tell you
to proceed to asi-parvata but on its foot sits a rAkShasa, on account of
which I have lapsed to in sorrow. Transmitting signal. “2 phantoms. 1
silver. 2 gold. gold sought. but phantom. take gold, trivikrama’s
daughter. Mn poked by crane again. AmAtya saves him with paste.”
