+++
title = "Flogging dead Germans"

+++
Recent events have exposed a peculiar bunch of Europeans- they appear on
face to be sincere students of Indic issues, but deep within are
Hindu-haters. This group is dominanted by people of Germanic origin, but
also includes a range of other Europeans, their well-mixed American
cousins, and Japanese and Lankan imitators. The list is a long one but
the some examples include Witzel, Wolpert, Kenoyer, Falk, Pollock,
Southworth, Ringe, Dreyer, Scharfe, Olivelle, Einoo, Marui, Zimmer,
Tosi, Nakatani and so on.

Many Hindus anguished by their anti-Hindu actions and have taken to
flogging Germans and their fellow travellers starting from Schopenhauer,
through Mueller down the above-mentioned modern disciples of theirs.
Like other Hindus, we are largely in agreement with the characterization
of these modern Indologists (not Schopehauer) as detractors of Hindus.
Despite being foreigners, and not practicing Hindus they interfere in
internal Hindu affairs (the textbook case), and Hindu politics taking
the side to the traditional Abrahamistic enemies of the Hindus. In some
cases their connections are open- inciting Isaist, Mohammedan and Dalit
operations against Hindus. In other cases they are more subtle, engaging
in denigrating Hindu systems (e.g. Goldman) or mis-representing Hindu
politics to create negative caricature of Hindus and their state (most
of this group of Indologists), or providing a biased forum for such
Hindu baiters (e.g. Wujastyk). These were studied by an otherwise
confused Hindu pamphleteer, Malhotra, who proposed the theory of
U-turns. As an operational theory this is fine but it misses the central
point. Or perhaps Malhotra is well aware of this but is fearful of its
deepest implications. Despite the framework offered by Malhotra, we are
disappointed to note that most of the Hindu elite that bothers to look
into these matters is flogging dead horses, or more precisely dead
Germans. Earlier they used to flog Mueller, and now even more
disappointingly Schopenhauer\! In this process the Hindus are being lost
in the sthUla, entirely missing the sUkShma.

These obssessions with the sthUla are making us flagrantly repeat our
old words here. Schopenhauer deserves a deep study– I did this several
years ago in secondary school, and it led to understand the most
important challenge faced by the Hindus from their vairi-s. Schopenhauer
by any stretch of imagination was one of Europe’s most important
intellectual figures. Karl Popper, whose clarity in scientific
philosophy is of highest standing, declared that there were more good
ideas in Schopenhauer than in any other philosopher except Plato. Plato
was a inseparable product of the heathen Greek system. But what were
Schopenhauer’s influences. He himself admits the following: “I owe what
is best in my own development to the impression made by Kant’s works,
the sacred writings of the Hindus, and Plato.” In another place he
remarks that the sacred Hindu texts were “the consolation of my life“.
Now, it is well known that Schopenhauer profoundly influenced the most
important of European intellectuals- good and bad- including Darwin,
Freud, Wittgenstein, Einstein and Popper. Given this start, why do we
have the modern Indologists so often profoundly anti-Hindu rather than
acknowledge the ultimate contribution of Hindu thought to modern
European thought. They try to explain it by claiming that they have a
better grasp of the subject now unlike the romantic ancestors of theirs
and can see the cul de sac that the Hindus really were. But the real
cause is far deeper- the monotheisitic Isaistic custodians of “Western
Civilization” feared the return to the heathen roots with the influences
of Plato and still worse the Hindus leaking back in. Hence they worked
behind the scenes to expunge such influences and the modern Indologists
are actually the foot soldiers of this Isaistic counter assault. It is a
small wonder they make common cause with the Marxist and Mohammedan
ideological cousins when it comes to Hindus.
