+++
title = "The rise ofxa0tyrannosaurs"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/guanlong.0.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/guanlong.0.jpg)[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/Dilong.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/Dilong.jpg)

In my youth I wondered about the emergence of tyrannosaurs, their
origins and relationship with other theropods. In those days the
tyrannosaurs we knew were few in number and all pretty similar. There
was the famed Tyrannosaurus rex, which was believed to be one of the
largest land predators of all times, which was the epitome of the
tyrannosaurs. Then there were smaller but essentially similar predators
from the late Cretaceous namely Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus. When I
first began studying theropod anatomy it became clear to me that the
osteology of these late Cretaceous tyrannosaurs was so distinctive that
they could not have been derived from the Late Jurassic predators such
as Allosaurus, Yangchuanosaurus or Sinraptor. I was puzzled and wondered
if their roots may lie elsewhere in Theropoda, perhaps in the
coelurosaurs- but a more detailed study was needed. There were a few
enigmatic earlier central Asian tyrannosaurs Alioramus and
Alectrosaurus, but they were described in old Russian journals and
little information was available to determine their affinities.
Chatterjee had earlier claimed that Indosaurus, a horned predatory
dinosaur was a tyrannosaur, but early on it became clear to me that it
was of the ceratosaurian lineage and definitely no tyrannosaur. Another
brief spike excitement was caused by the announcement of “Nanotyrannus”
a small tyrannosaur, but paleontological consensus regarded it merely a
juvenile T.rex. Then there was Siamotyrannus, a supposed earlier
tyrannosaur from Thailand. But the day I examined that paper in Nature,
I realized that these remains were no tyrannosaur but some scrappy
posterior of some tetanuran theropod.

Then came the key works of Currie, Holtz and co-workers who established
that tyrannosaurs were indeed coelurosaurs and were possibly located to
the base of the coelurosaur tree. But then most coelurosaurs were pretty
small and there was no clue as to how the tyrannosaurs came to be the
large top predators of the late Cretaceous ecosystems. Enigmatic
glimpses of early tyrannosaurus were offered by two fragmentary late
Jurassic forms Stokesosaurus from Utah and Aviatyrannus from the co-eval
beds in Portugal. Finally in the past 5 years a flurry of finds have
gone a long way in clarifying the secret of tyrannosaur origins, and
also coelurosaur evolution in general. The most recent in this spate of
finds is Guanlong wucaii, a Jurassic tyrannosaur from the Junggar basin.

Phylogenetic analysis using Guanlong suggests that the early
tyrannosaurs began their lives as smaller-sized predators. Guanlong
itself was 3 meters in length and lived in a world with other large
allosauroid tetanuran predators, like Monolophosaurus. The delicate
crest, probably for sexual signaling on the head of Guanlong, along with
its long arms, suggest that it hunted in the typical ancestral
coelurosaurian mode by catching prey with the arms and overpowering it
before biting it. Stokesosaurus and Aviatyrannus are likely to have
played a similar ecological role in comparison to the dominant large
predator of the time, Allosaurus. The small-sized tyrannosaurs remained
in place in the early Cretaceous as seen in the form the spectacularly
preserved Dilong paradoxus from the Liaoning beds– a 1.5 meter long
form. Slightly larger than Guanlong, was the form Eotyrannus from the
early Cretaceous Isle of Wight, which was still small compared to the
top predator of this ecosystem, the allosauroid Neovenator salerii.
Dilong and Eotyrannus form successive sister groups to the tyrannosaur
crown group, excluding the Jurassic forms and retain their long arms.
The fragmentary form Dryptosaurus suggests that there was probably a
long armed form persisting till the late Cretaceous. However, starting
Dryptosaurus, the tyrannosaurs started growing in size with several
medium-sized forms like the recently reported *Applachiosaurus* from the
late Cretaceous of Alabama, in addition to the Central Asian forms
Alectrosaurus and Alioramus.

It was only in the last epoch of the Cretaceous, the Maastrichtian, that
in a series, as postulated by Horner, the progressive larger
tyrannosaurs- Albertosaurus, Daspletosaurus and Tyrannosaurus rose to
being the top predators of the Asian and North American ecosystems.
Interestingly, in other continents the top predators seem to have been
the descendents of the allosauroids of the *Neovenator* line, like
Carcharodontosaurus and Giganotosaurus, or abelisaur theropods like
Abelisaurus, Aucasaurus, Carnotaurus, Majungasaurus, Indosaurus and
Rajasaurus. Even in the middle Cretaceous of North America the
allosauroids like the giant Acrocanthosaurus remained the chief
predators. Thus, a localized extinction even of the allosauroids in the
late Cretaceous North American and Asia seems to provided the
“ecological release” to allow the rise of the giant tyrannosaurs. The
giant tyrannosaurs adopted a wholly different predatory strategy- they
greatly reduced the use of their arms and instead developed huge heads
with which they probably lunged head first at their prey. Their arms
instead grew tiny and two fingered, but they still remained robust and
mobile suggesting that they had some unknown use which we poorly
understand, such as rising up perhaps, from a bird-like resting posture.
A convergent reduction of arms is seen in the large abelisaurs like
Carnotaurus and Aucasaurus. Interestingly, the most primitive
tyrannosaur Guanlong has the most elaborate pneumatic head ornamentation
in the form of the crest. In the Jurassic, this seems to have really
worked with dinosaurian females because we see it Monolophosaurus, the
allosauroid, Proceratosaurus, the primitive coelurosaur,
Cryolophosaurus, the basal tetanuran, and Ceratosaurus the archetypal
ceratosaur. This is not surprising given that this fashion is adopted by
many modern dinosaurs from the Cassowary to the Peacock. The
tyrannosaurs retained some type of head ornamentation on the nasal bones
throughout their career. Dilong had small medial ridge, Alioramus a low
row of horns, Appalchiosaurus a row of bumps, and others some type of
rugosity. This meant that recogizing signals on the head was an ancient
neural loop that was constantly subject to natural selection.

The basal most groups in coelurosauria where the Compsognathids formed
by Mirischia, Sinosauropteryx, Huxiagnathus, Compsognathus and
Scipionyx, and other distinctive basal forms such as Coelurus,
Tanycolagreus, Proceratosaurus and Ornitholestes, and the discovery of
Guanlong suggests that tyrannosaurs were more advanced than these.
Bagaraatan appears to be an even more advanced form (?).
