+++
title = "ekAnaMshA in nAstIka myth-making and implications for AstIka Paurano-Tantricxa0history"

+++
buddhagosha declared that the bauddha zealots should not listen to
public narratives of the rAmAyaNa or mahAbhArata that the Astikas
delight in. Yet, the nAstikas both jaina and bauddha have their own
versions of several core narratives and branching AkhyAnas found in the
canonical itihAsa and purANa literature of the Astikas. One striking
feature is that their versions differ strikingly from the Astika
versions. The bauddha ones, typically, are even more divergent than the
jaina ones. Examining them one gets the clear impression that some of
them were explicitly created in order to present their polemical view
point vis-a-vis the Astika-s. Others are not openly polemical, yet they
have subtle opposition to the Astika view point. Yet, the main point
that strikes one is their extreme divergence relative to the Astika
forms. Now, two theories can be proposed to explain this divergence:  
1\) It was a natural process of divergence that resulted in several
versions of the myth and the nAstikas and Astikas drew different
versions from this naturally diversified population for their purposes.
Here the striking uniformity of the Astika versions throughout
bhAratavarSha and beyond may be explained as a result of the brahminical
reinforcement of canonical forms.  
2\) The Astika versions are the originals and the nAstika-s purposefully
distorted Astika narratives for asserting their viewpoint.  
I favor the second viewpoint due a variety of reasons, the chief being:
1) the natural diversity postulated by the first theory is not recovered
to that extant in areas not under brahminical stricture 2) The nAstika
versions are often “stylized” forms that do not have the natural flow of
the Astika forms, suggesting that they were created from more detailed
pre-existing templates for purely illustrative purpose.  
Here we shall consider the narrative of the bauddha harivamsha from the
pAlI ghatajAtaka that supports the above theory and provides examples of
divergent and confused aspects of nAstika myth making. We shall use this
in comparison with Astika itihAsa purANa to trace the early interactions
between the shAkta and vaiShNava mata with respect to
[ekAnamshA](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/02/04/ekanamsha-a-deity-of-tantric-vaishnavism/).

King kaMsa of mathura had a sister named devagabbA, whom he married to
upasAgara. There was then a heavenly pronouncement that devagabbA’s son
will kill him. So he arrested upasAgara and devagabbA. They had 10 sons
including vAsudeva and baladeva and exchanged instead for the 10
daughters of devagabba’s maid nandagopA. Hence, they came to be known as
the sons of the maid’s husband who was called andhaka-veNhu. The
brothers names are instructive: 1) vAsudeva (eldest) 2) baladeva 3)
ghata-paNDita (the main nAstika hero) 4) aMkura (Astika: akrUra) 5)
chandadeva (chandra) 6) jayasuriya (surya deva) 7) aggideva (agni) 8)
varuNa deva 9) ajjuna (arjuna) 10) pajjunna (pradyumna) (It is very
clear that the bauddha-s are on purpose trying to fit in a good part of
the Astika pantheon along with the bhAgavata heroes into the tale). Then
they had a daughter named a\~njanA-devI (note the equivalence to
ekAnaMshA. According to the mahAbhArata ekAnamashA is the same as kuhu —
the new moon goddess. ekAnamsha means without having even a single
portion- which means the new moon. a\~njanadevI means the devI dark as
collyrium). The sons of devagabbA attack and raid kamsa’s kingdom led by
vAsudeva or kaNha. He realized that they are the sons of devagabbA and
invited them to a wrestling match to kill them. However, kaNha and
baladeva killed the wrestlers and then kamsa. The 10 brothers then
conquered the world and made dvaraka their capital. Then they divided
their conquests amongst themselves each getting his own share and
decided to live with what they got. It was then that they realized that
they had not provided a share for a\~njanadevI and wondered how they
might re-divide their conquests (again note the mythologized parallel to
the name ekAnamsha- one without any part). At this point one of the
brothers aMkura decided to give up his share to their sister
a\~njanadevI and he instead became a vaNija. Soon thereafter kaNha’s son
died and ghata, one of the ten brothers, consoles him by giving a
buddhistic lecture, which is the main teaching of the story. Thereafter
some youths of dvAraka decided to test the bodhisattva named
kaNhadipAyana (Astika: kR^iShNa-dvaipAyana) by tying a pillow to the
belly of a guy dressed as a girl. kaNhadipAyana decreed that he would
give birth to a pestle made of khadira wood that would kill them.
Enraged they jumped on the sage and killed him. This resulted in general
melee in which by way of the club delivered by the youth, kaNha, ghata
and baladeva are all killed. a\~njanAdevI alone survives and continues
to live on.

The ghata jAtaka myth while a confused version of the Astika harivaMsha
myth purposely adapted to accentuate a nAstika sermon, it provides
interesting corroboration regarding the evolutionary history of early
vaiShNava and shAkta elements. The jaina nAstikas also have adapted the
harivaMsha in their purANas and explicitly mention baladeva and
vAsudeva’s sister, ekAnaMsha, (corrupted there as ekanAsA) and
identify her with vana-durgA or vidhyAvAsinI, albeit in a virulent
anti-Astika polemic (she becomes a jaina sAdhvi in the tale). Some
prAkR^itic jaina ritual manuals also mention the worship of ekAnaMshA as
a dikpAla devI. What these features point to is that a form of the
vaiShNava-mata with a transfunctional goddess ekAnaMshA and elements of
the chaturvyUha was well in place by the time bauddha pAlI works like
niddesa and ghata-jAtaka was written. These pAlI works belong to a
time-slice that approximately corresponds to the visit of the yavana
ambassador Megasthenes to India (\~300BC). Megasthenes mentions the
active bhAgavata worship (Indian Heracles) in Kleisbora (kR^iShNapura)
and Methora (Mathura). These observations are consistent and suggest
that by that time the bhAgavata-mata with elements such as vyUha worship
and ekAnaMsha worship were already in place.

However, if we examine the Astika vaiShNava purANas and itihAsa sections
we observe a very distinctive feature: There is one class of texts that
prominently support ekAnaMshA worship. They include harivaMsha and
viShNudharmottara (also the much latter varAhamihira’s bR^ihatsaMhitA).
The other class of texts namely, the mahAbhArata, bhAgavata,
viShNupurANa do not mention ekAnaMshA worship or at best have a passing
mention of her. The classical pA\~ncharAtra tantra-s too fall in this
category, in that they have a prominent role for the male vyUhas but not
for ekAnaMshA. Of all of these the mahAbhArata is clearly the oldest and
has no ekAnaMshA worship though it identifies her with the goddess kuhu.
The mahAbhArata however has many elements of the early vaiShNava-mata
such as 1) the bhagavad-gItA 2) the ekAntika dharma of the nArAyaNIya
section 3) viShNusahasranAma. In the chatur-vyUha of pA\~ncharAtra is
incipient but hardly developed here, though the core elements of
bhAgavata religion are already developed. This suggests that there was
an early phase of bhAgavata vaiShNavism in which the ekAntika dharma and
the concepts of the bhagavad-gItA were dominant, but the chaturvyUha was
not. This was followed by the next phase where the identification of
balabhadra with saMkarShaNa (or deva rudra) as typified by the
ananta-section the bhAgavata was complete. This phase saw the rise of
baladeva as a mighty parallel deity (the rudra of the vaiShNavas).

After this point we see a bifurcation one stream of bhAgavata
vaiShNava-mata continued along these line maintaining some vague
allegiance to the ekAntika dharma (or ekAyana shAkhA) while developing a
full-fledged chaturvyUha theory that incorporated the kR^iShNa clan into
its scheme. The second stream in the bifurcation of bhAgavata-s followed
a similar course but they incorporated a goddess- ekAnaMshA in addition
to the core vyUhA structure. It is their tradition that is seen in the
harivaMsha and viShNudharmottara. While the mahAbhArata already has a
sister of kR^iShNa, subhadrA, as a central figure (the ancestor of
parIkShit and janamejaya), she was not deified as a goddess. Instead,
ekAnamshA, who is not at all mentioned as a sister of kR^iShNa in the
Mbh, is the primary goddess of these bhAgavatas. Her name as discussed
above clearly suggests that she was a goddess with lunar connections.
Thus, she was a distinct lunar deity brought secondarily into the
kR^iShNa family as a part of the incorporation of a shaktI into the
bhAgavata stream. The connection between the main (trans-functional)
Indo-Aryan goddess and the lunar digits is an ancient and persistent
one. We note even in the vedas are mentioned a series of lunar digit
goddesses (for example worshipped with a mantra of gR^itsamada
shaunahotra in the R^ig itself): gu\~Ngu or kuhu: new moon (=ekAnamshA
in the Mbh list); sinIvAlI: the shukla pratipAd goddess; anumati: shukla
chaturdashi; rAkA (full moon). This remarkably persistent theme of lunar
digit goddess is at the heart of chandrakAla in shrIvidyA. Thus,
ekAnamshA was the ancient gu\~NgU/kuhU who was brought in as a goddess
of one stream of bhAgavatas.

However, the harivaMsha mentions another connection that is hardly
unique to this stream of bhAgavatas. This is the equivalence of
ekAnaMshA with yoganidrA and vidhyavAsinI. vidhyavAsinI occurs
independently of the bhAgavata context in other purANas too. Her myth is
narrated in the mUla-skanda purANa, matsya-purANa, vAmana purANa and in
abridged form in shiva purANa. In these paurANic narratives, she is
mainly called vindhyavAsinI or kaushiki, though in the matysa purANa she
is also called ekAnaMshA. However, in this cycle she emerges from the
kosha of pArvatI who became white in color (gaurI) by shedding her black
skin (said to be given by rAtrI devI when she was in menA’s womb). This
shed skin became the goddess kaushikI who killed shumbha and nishumbha.
This motif of the shedding of black skin and the emergence of the white
gaurI is a clear mythic description of the same lunar phenomenon of the
shukla pakSha after the kuhU moon. Thus, the black kaushikI emerging
from the shed kosha was indeed the black new moon. This provides the
link between the lunar digit goddess and the origin of
vindhyavAsinI/[ekAnaMshA](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/02/04/ekanamsha-a-deity-of-tantric-vaishnavism/).

There are several mythological motifs that are shared by the harivaMsha
account and the versions from different pauraNas: 1) The dark new moon
(kuhU) motif either in the form of the name or as an allusion in the
kaushiki story (this element is even preserved by the confused bauddha
account) 2)The killing of shumbha and nishumbha 3) In most of these
accounts she is called indra’s sister, is given an abhisheka by the
devas, is appointed as the ruler of the vindhyas by indra. The
preservation of these elements across various accounts in texts with
very different sectarian leanings suggest that the vindhyavAsini devI
with a lunar digit symbolism and a sisterly connection to indra was a
distinct mythological module that was incorporated into independent
mythological narratives of very different origin- i.e. bhAgavata as well
as shaiva. Her connection to indra especially his role in appointing her
as the ruler of the vindhyas, while faithfully mentioned, is subservient
to the role of viShNu (harivaMsha) or pArvatI (purANa-s) almost to the
point of irrelevance. This suggests that the original mythological
module emerged very early, at a time when indra’s role was still
dominant, and upon it was superimposed the role of the later ascendant
viShNu and pArvatI.

To understand the early evolution of this module we need to examine the
ancient vedic precursors of the lunar digit goddesses. The lunar digit
goddesses are an ancestral feature of the Indo-Aryan world, and are
worshiped through a set of mantras that are used for oblations to the
devI-s in all the major saMhitA-s. These mantra-s are RV 2.32; YV
taittirIya saMhitA 3.1.11; AV-shaunaka 7.46-49. In all these there is
the common phrase “sinIvAli pR^ithuShTuke yA devAnAmasi svasA”: sinIvAli
with thick locks of hair, the \*sister\* of the deva-s. This shows that
the bauddha version of the ghata jAtaka, though confused is merely
preserving a really ancient concept of the lunar digit goddess as a
sister of the gods who are the 10 brothers of that tale. There is also
an allusion of sinIvalI being the sister of indra and wife of viShNu in
the atharvavedic mantra:

yA vishpatnIndram asi pratIchI sahasrastukSbhiyanti devI |  
viShNoH patni tubhyaM rAtA havIMShi patiM devi rAdhase codayasva ||  
Mistress of the people, indra’s sister, the goddess with a thousand
braids, come here. To you oblations are made, of wife of viShNu, stir up
thy husband to give us \[boons\].

This mantra points to the fact that the connections of the lunar digit
goddess to indra and viShNu were ancient. The possible implication of
“stirring up viShNu to favor the yajamAna, is reminiscent of nidrA
rising up from viShNu to stir him into action. kuhU is however called
wife of the gods, rather than sister in the next sUktaM: “kuhUr devAnAM
amR^itasya patni”: kuhU the wife of the immortal gods. Thus, the lunar
goddess could be both sister as well as wife of the gods- something
reminiscent of ambikA being called both the sister and wife of rudra.

The functional aspects of these goddesses include: 1) protection and
fertility of cattle: AV-S 2.26 and RV-khila have mantras to anumati and
sinIvAlI for this purpose. 2) more importantly all vedic saMhitA-s
preserve a second mantra to the lunar goddess sinIvAlI with the phrase
“garbhaM dehi sinIvAli”: O sinIvalI place the embryo. It is used in
the famous saMskAra of puMsavana, a fertility rite. Further, in the
atharva vedic marriage rite sinIvAlI and viShNu are made an oblation
using AV-S 14.2.15 where viShNu is invoked for the male’s fertility and
sinIvAlI to give the woman offspring. These features of the vedic
sinIvAlI mirror the role of ekAnaMsha in the harivaMsha, where she
places the dAnava embryos of hiraNyakashipu’s grandsons in devakI’s
womb.

Thus, we note that several key elements of the lunar digit goddess
ekAnaMshA/kaushikI were seen in the vedic lunar digit goddesses. This
suggests that in the late vedic and post-vedic period the lunar digit
goddesses evolved into the deity ekAnaMshA-kaushikI-vindhyavAsinI, the
new moon dark sister of indra. The goddess had wide distribution and was
acknowledged by different incipient sectarian groups in somewhat
different forms. Given her ancient connections with viShNu, a branch of
the bhAgavata-s associated with the redaction of the harivaMsha
incorporated her into their systems as a sister and shakti of viShNu.
Likewise, she was incorporated into the shaiva system as the shed skin
of pArvatI (kuhU) and thereby her emanation – with gaurI being the
actual sinIvalI. Interestingly, she was also incorporated into the
kaumAra sect as the wife or sister or kumAra. The mahAbhArata explicitly
mentions that kuhU and sinIvAlI are forms of ShaShThI or devasenA, the
wife of kumAra. On her own she evolved as the great of the mistress of
the vindhyas, the fierce warrior goddess, vana-durgA worshipped with
blood, wine and meat, the precursors of the left-handed shAkta path.
