+++
title = "Comet C/2006 M4xa0Swan"

+++
“On this day a fairly bright shikhI was seen coursing between the tail
of the R^ikSha and the pashupAla at the evening time a muhUrta after
sunset, on kR^iShNa navamI under puShya nakShatra”

[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger2/6438/855/320/comet_swan.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger2/6438/855/1600/comet_swan.jpg)

Yesterday, Mn as well as Marc and R mentioned their failure at picking
the new comet in the sky. However, today a friend and I sighted C/2006
M4 (Swan) that was just at the fringe of naked eye visibility, close to
the boundary of Canes Venatici. Using M92 and M13 as guides we estimated
the comet at around magnitude 6.3-6.5. It was easily seen withour 20\*70
binoculars and we were able to discern a tail with the 6″ reflector that
we were using. On the whole the sky was spectacular from our high
observing spot on the hill girt by dense forests and and a “haunted
house” in the vicinity. After many days we saw the entirel unimpeded arc
of the Milky Way that spanned a complete hemi-circular path in the sky.
In the South-Western quarter is spanned Sagittarius, passed through
zenith spanning the glorious Cygnus and ended in the North-eastern
horizon crossing through Cassiopeia and Perseus. In the South-west
dazzled with one of the finest of globular- M22, in the mid-sky on
either side of Beta Cygni were the Dumbell nebula and the Ring Nebula.
In the North East shone the Double Clusters and M34. M33 the Pinwheel
Galaxy and M31 Andromeda were particular good on either side of Gamma
Andromedae, the splendid double star, through the binoculars. We also
spied the faint companions of the Andromeda Galaxy in Cassiopeia.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger2/6438/855/320/swan_comet2.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger2/6438/855/1600/swan_comet2.gif)

The comet has typical hyperbolic orbit passing into the inner solar
system from below the plane of the ecliptic from its original home in
the distant Oort’s cloud.
