+++
title = "Some notes of the ShaTsAhasraxa0tradition"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/vAgIshvarI.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/vAgIshvarI.jpg)

When in gavalkuNDa, R1 and A saved us from the pangs of hunger. R1, A
and our clan had similar histories with peregrinations through the
length of jambudvIpa over time in the practice and quest of the
mantra-shAstra. R1’s clan had moved back recently to the Southern realms
after 2.5 centuries in the land of the malla rAjas. R1 who treated us as
son also opened our eyes to some remarkable matters- she us acquainted
with her father, who was one the last holders of the vidyA’s of the
ShaTsAhasra tradition (since R1 was cashing her brahminical check).
Thus, I learnt some of these rahasyas that I wish to record as they are
in danger of extinction.

\-Several forms of pratya\~NgirA are offered Ajya homas a combine
pUrNAhUtI, and tarpaNaM. The pratya\~NgirA-s invoked in this tradition
are: 1) siddhalakShmI (She dances on the hands of the hands of the
frightful ugratANDava bhairava who in turn stands on a preta. She smiles
with her four heads and wears a garland of 108 skulls. She has 10 arms
with a sword, mace, bell, varada mudra and wine cup and GYAna mudra,
bow, arrow, lasso and a severed head. Her mantra encompasses the vidyA
of bAlA, the daughter of kulasundarI). 2) mantramAtR^ikA. 3)
mantraDAmArikA 4) saptakoTeshvarI  
\-Several sarasvatI-s are also offered oblations:1) mAtR^ikAsarasvatI 2)
vidyAvidyeshvarI 3) vAgbhaveshvarI 4) vAgIshvarI (She has 4 arms and is
seated on a siMha in the lalitAsana pose. She holds a hala, a rod and
two spikes to spear the demons of tamas) 5) vaikharI (in the embrace of
prajApati).  
\-Then the oblations are made to the great chaNDakApAlini and
nityAkAlI  
\-The 4 kulasundarI-s are worshiped: kulavAgIshvarI, kAmeshvarI,
vajreshvarI and mahAtripurasundarI. They are worshiped with the
kulavagIshvarI, vajreshvarI rahasya mantra and pa\~nchadashi mantras  
\-The mighty kubjikA, the mistress of the paschimAmnAya, is worshipped
with the glorious 32 syllabled samayavidyA. She is mediated as seated on
the lap of her spouse, mahAdeva as navAtman. She is indescrible as one
can only experience her upon ‘seeing’ the flash of the mantra.

\-The most peculiar vidyA of mahAntArI of 15 syllables is used with fire
oblations in the Ajyahoma. The manifest form of mahAntArI for all those
who know the vidyA emerges directly out of the a\~Ngas of kArttikeya.
She has 6 heads and twelve arms as result.
