+++
title = "On Bajirao-I"

+++
The muni and me stood on the elevated wall of the plinth of the shanivAr
palace (Shaniwar palace) on a blazing Indian afternoon about an year
ago. That was all that was left of the palace built by the famed Peshwa,
who had raised the Maharattas to their greatest glory. The Peshva was a
Brahmin of the coastal community different from the interior brahmins of
Maharashtra. Some have believed that these Brahmins had origins
elsewhere in North India, but genetically they are not very different
from other “pa\~ncha-draviDa” brahmin groups. However, they were
probably isolated for long in the coastal zone. His Shaniwar palace is
now the haunt of vagabonds, so common in the Indian landscape, and a
truely desolate ruin, that one wonders what has happened to the sense of
history of the city’s residents.

Bajirao was a strikingly different man from his king, Shahu. Shahu
possibly suffered from an intense Stockholm syndrome. He felt an awe for
the Mogol throne and saw it as a revered relic of the great Chingis
Khan. In the process Shahu completely ignored the enormous damage the
Mogols had done to the country of the Hindus. Shahu similarly saw the
Nizam as a representative of the great Mogol power and never thought of
deposing him even when he had the chance. These were fatal mistakes that
came to haunt the Hindus later in history as the descendent of the Nizam
wanted to merge Hyderabad with Pakistan. I had visited the city of the
Nizam just before seeing the Shaniwar palace and it was clear that the
little Pakistan in it was still effervescent with beards. An irritating
acquaintance (a “forward”/fallen brahmin woman) told me it was a sign of
“composite culture”. I wonder what that creature would say when the
Ghazi’s blade kisses her neck…

Bajirao was only next to Shivaji in importance, a contemporary letter
states “Bajirao’s aim was to restore the Hindus with their eternal
dharma, to its former grandeur” It was his ambition to finally liberate
Kashi from the Turushkas and rebuild the temple of Vishveshvara. He
along with with his father had rebuilt Tryambakeshvara which was
shattered by the Turushkas. Bajirao wanted to destroy both the Nizam and
the Mogol Emperor and came close to doing both, but for the foolishness
of Shahu. He felt that a proper kShatriya ruler should ruler over Delhi
as the Emperor of the Hindus and the turushkas should be completely rid
of a pretense of military power. He also correctly recognized the danger
from Europeans and wanted to check their presence in India (just as
Shivaji had done). From his late teens for about 20 years he ceaselessly
battled without any stop moving from Shrirangapattanam in the south to
Delhi in the north, and from Ahmadabad to Hyderabad defeating Moslem
armies in his wake. He sent his brother Chimnaji to defeat the African
marauders and the fanatic Chrisitian Portuguese on the Konkan coast. He
defeated the French army, which was siding with the Moslems near Nashik.

It is said that indra gives things in even measure, good balanced with
bad. Thus, it was in Bajirao’s existence. He was caught up in an affair
with an interesting woman named Mastani. Tradition has it that she was
the product of a Hindu male and Moslem woman and was a public woman at
the Rajput chief Chattrashal’s court. She was skilled in riding, and
using the sword and spear and always accompanied Bajirao on his
campaigns. After her association with Bajirao she undoubtedly adopted a
pure Hindu way of life as far as we can see. Being adept at music she is
supposed to have given music performances annually during the
festivities of the autumnal chaturti of vinAyaka which was observed by
the Peshvas. I went to that temple of the frightful vinAyaka, still very
much in use albeit shorn of its historic glory. However, there are some
wierd facts: He named his son through her Shamsher Bahadur- hardly a
name one would give in an orthodox brahmin household like his. Bajirao’s
fascination with this woman led him to things that made him patanIya- he
began eating meat and swilling beer with her and occasionally even took
the puff. The thread ceremony of his second son and marriage of his
nephew was being arranged and a new temple of rudra was built for this
purpose. A priest who had learned under bhAskararAya makhin consecrated
the li\~Nga there in. But the brahmins wondered how the fallen brahmin
Bajirao could be allowed into the temple sanctum. So it was believed
that he should perform a kR^ichChra and other penances. He was luckily
away on a campaign against the Moslems but had asked his lover Mastani
to attend the events. This angered the orthodoxy who ordered her seized
her and imprisoned her in some distance from Pune in an out of the way
place.

Bajirao along with his brother routed the Nasir Jung, the Nizam’s son,
near Aurangabad and had forced him cede territory to the Maharattas. He
was occupying the Nizam’s territories on the south bank of the Narmada,
when he heard of the seizure of his lover and was taken by deep sorrow.
He drank heavily, and asked his brother Chimnaji to release her and
return her to him. He immediately sent a letter to Bajirao’s eldest son,
to do so, and feared how to handle the social issues of the great
warrior. But things got delayed over a month and he developed a severe
fever and died in a couple of days. Mastani commited suicide shortly
there after and as there was no brahmin ready to perform her last rites,
she was quitely buried near Pune with a tomb stone to mark the spot.

\~\*\~\*\~

We typically visited the temple of vinAyaka that was worshipped by
Bajirao before all but his last campaign. Like him we associated many of
our great victories with the visits. However, somewhat ironically we did
not visit it before “that campaign”. We sometimes think of the
consequences of it. We visited another shrine endowed by Bajirao- it is
an obscure shrine not known to many. It was originally a viShNu shrine
built by the yAdava ruler rAmadeva before the Mohammedan cataclysm. The
viShNu idol in it went missing and the shrine slightly damaged,
evidently due to the Islamic fervor. Bajirao restored it but installed a
3 headed gaNapati in the sanctum.
