+++
title = "The split forces and thexa0pralApa"

+++
The muni and me were in a sense like branches of the same tree. We
wondered what might have happened if only the muni and me could have
joined our forces on the battle field. Our coordination on the field was
unmatched. We saw eye-to-eye in the conduct of campaigns and the like.
The only difference was that we matured at different times. I grabbed
the vidyAs when they had to be acquired, but the muni ambulated in a
random walk for long before he achieved them. This phase-shifted me and
him and the locking of the vR^iShabha-shR^i\~Nga vyUha never happened.  
…o…o…o…

After the forces we despatched under the command of GS had conquered the
shulbArI daNDa and jIvamUliya pa\~nchakoNa, we went to examine the
spoils of the campaign. We examined it and were happy with it. Then we
deployed kUTanIti to beseige the subtle dvayaM daNDa and sUtrAnta and
acquire an opening. Then we attacked both fronts simultaneously and
captured them- both spectacular victories. Our young senAnI also marched
close to the fort of kAMsya vastra and acquired an advantageous
position. It appeared that we were in the midst of completing the great
conquests and were exultant in the sweet abhisheka of yasha. But at the
back of our mind we knew that the workings of fate were not going to let
us enjoy this too long. Suddenly, a new kR^ityA, trouble some as the one
which we had repulsed earlier with the mantras of the terrible vinAyaka
came out of the hiding. Our shachIva and amAtya told us that they were
eager to strike against our shatru but we told them that timing was
critical as they had botched up recent attempts. The kR^ityA came
through the open door like the very kR^ityA that had sucked the ancient
mighty clansman of ours into her yonI before he was destroyed by rudra.
Over the night the kR^ityA attacked us repeatedly and diminished our
strength. We did not whether to directly attack the kR^ityAkR^it-s or
not. We then decided that we had to embark on new prayoga-s.
