+++
title = "yarning on Anandavardhana"

+++
Anandavardhana was a remarkable figure. In my Sanskrit learning I gave
him the skip because the theory and practice of alaMkAra never struck a
chord in me in my youth (I also had a great excuse). My mother spoke of
a lot of theory and practice of alaMkAra literature but I realized soon
that her way of conveying it was not at all for me. In any case my then
AchArya found my excuse convincing and maintained that we could continue
with analysis of the yajur vedic prose when I returned. But I had some
vague knowledge of Anandavardhana from the other learned brAhmaNas who
were disciples of my original aged AchArya. My teacher only said I
should return to devIshataka when I got the chance. Mis-creant who had
taken Sanskrit formally in the college mentioned some terrifying text
called dhvanyAloka and said she had a copy of the devIshataka. But
shortly there after I had to observe a major niyamas of for acquisitions
of the rahasyas, and was totally cut off from all oral and even written
communitication with her and never got the examining the text.

The other day in the train due to those unusual combination of events
the mention of the devIshataka came up like a flashback from the past. I
understand from my sources, but have not really investigated it, that
Anandavardhana was in addition to his well-known commonly repeated
achievements a great kaula tantrik. He is supposed to have followed the
mantra of the hAdimata as was common to his regions. He also seems to
have simultaneously obtained siddhi of the formula of bhAnavi kaulini.
His shAkta disposition becomes clear in the little fragments of the
devIshataka that I obtained, which are truely a masterpiece of Sanskrit
poetry. On tasting the devIshataka I realized that for a groundling like
me this is enough to see the heights that alaMkAra and chitra kAvya
might have reached. I do not go to the kIrAtArjunIya or such, the
devIshakta and the mayurASTakaM are enough. No doubt it is said that it
was composed after Anandavardhana performed a svapnavArAhI prayoga.

natApanIta-kleshAyAH surArI-jana-tApanI |  
na tApanI tanur yasyAs tulyA nAdInatApanI ||

Of whom, removing the impurities of her votaries, burning the enemy folk
of the gods, the body is not unlike the sun, she grants success. This
shloka is a good example to the yamaka (actually a double of them) Note
the sound na-tA-pa-nI-ta \* 2 and na-tA-pa-nI \* 2
