+++
title = "Kosambi and numerical analysis of thexa0mahAbhArata"

+++
Various kinds of numerical analysis on the mahAbhArata need to be
carried out. The pioneers in this were the two unlikeable characters DD
Kosambi and E Kulkarni. The former was definitely a very learned man,
with whom I share intellectual and some what ascetic inclinations.
Ironically, his father was the mahA-nAstIka who had converted to the
bauddha heresy and studied none other than the archaic parama-pAShaNDa
buddhaghoSha at great length. buddhaghoSha had called upon bauddha-s to
not to attend narrations or recitals of the AkhyAna-s like the
mahAbhArata and the rAmAyaNa. DD Kosambi had inherited many of the
tendencies of his father like being a Marxist who saw Indian history
through the delusions of the red-book, in addition to the bauddha
heresy. Yet as an intellectual and Sanskrit scholar he was way ahead of
the rest. We went to the same college, though I was not born when he
died. He was thrown out of that college, where he was a mathematics
lecturer, because his intellectual leanings did not go well with the
plebeians around him (I can fully well appreciate that given the kind of
students who attend this well-known college). I recall sitting in the
lecture hall where he used to teach, when I was reading his statistical
analysis of the mahAbhArata. It was a pioneering work for its time,
using distribution of upa-parvan length and syllable statistics to study
the concordance between the critical edition initiated by Sukthankar and
the parvasaMgraha section. The implications of this study, and a more
modern overview, need to be narrated at some point. In several ways
Damodar Kosambi was like Rahul Sankrityayan another Marxist historianâ€“
both were genuine scholars whose intellectual breadth should be
appreciated. Both were however deluded simultaneously by the bauddha
heresy and the red-book of the bearded German. Thus, all their
scholarship took grotesque final shapes, though there is a lot of useful
primary data in their works. In this they differ from the empty pots
like Thapar and the other allied communist historians, including the
degraded brahmin Subrahmanyan.
