+++
title = "Some notes on Shahji and Sambhaji the brother ofxa0Shivaji-II"

+++
Randulla Khan’s invasion of the South  
Muhammad who succeeded Ibrahim, as the Adil Shahi Sultan was a fanatic
Jihadi who wanted to put the Hindus in their place and bring the whole
of South India under the cresent banner. Muhammad gathered under his ace
commander Randulla Khan several vigorous green holy warriors of the
cresent who shared his vision – Mustafa Khan, Afzal Khan and Asad Khan
were the chief of these. There was also the African warrior Siddi Jawhar
fighting on their side. The Adil Shah ordered Randulla Khan to lead
these forces into the Vijayanagaran territory and systematically attack
Darwar, Lakshmeshvar, Penukonda, Vellore, Chandragiri, Shira, Ikkeri and
Jinji and plunder the cities and destroy Hindu temples situated there.
The renegade brahmin Murar Jagdev tried to negotiate with regards to the
Hindus with the Sultan. He was murdered by Pathans sent by Mustafa Khan
at night. Shahji who was forced to surrender after being starved in the
siege of Mahuli, was asked to accompany the invasionary force with his
surviving troops. The Moslem plan was simple but the utter strategic
failure of the Vijayanagaran Nayakas and their armies allowed the Army
of Islam to execute it. Every invasion they would leave immediately
after monsoons and return just before the next monsoons to Bijapur.

In the first invasion (1637 CE) the ghazis of Randulla Khan stormed into
Dharwar and Lakshmeshvar destroying and plundering the cities. They then
attacked Ikkeri and besieged it. Virabhadra Nayaka exhausted his
supplies in the Ikkeri fort in 2 months and was forced to surrender. He
ran for life and hid in Bednur, while the Moslems devasted the city. It
is claimed that they collected a staggering wealth of 1.8 million gold
pieces from the plunder of Ikkeri. The houses of all Hindus were
demolished and the males killed and women taken by the Moslems. In the
next invasion Randulla Khan sent his deputy Afzal Khan a giant ghazi who
was reputed to bend iron bars with his bare hands to destroy
Kasturiranga, the prince of Shira. Kasturiranga put up a brave fight but
soon ran out resources and men in face of the streaming Islamic attacks
from Bijapur. Afzal Khan promised to reach a settlement and asked
Kasturiranga to meet him in private for the negotiations. When the
prince came to meet the Khan, the latter stabbed him to death in course
of the meeting. This incident left a profound impression on Shahji who
kept as far as away as he could from the Adil Shahi general. Shahji got
his chance to grab some land when he saw that Kempe Gauda the fort
keeper of Bangalore was offguard. He promptly seized Bangalore and then
forced the Wodeyar of Shrirangapattanam to vassalage. In Bangalore he
ruled like an independent ruler paying only an occassional tribute to
the Adil Shah and sending official messages pledging to be his vassal.

Ranadulla Khan then savaged Basavapattanam after killing Kenge Nayaka
and then seized Tumkur, Balapur and Vellore. The Sultan was elated at
these successes and had profitted over 40 million coins, with which he
embellished Bijapur by erecting several specimens of Saracenic
architecture. Shahji was a decent ruler of Bangalore and its surrounding
regions–importantly he saved the Hindus in his territory by establishing
a Hindu rule with Brahmin ministers rather than subjecting them to the
Islamic courts and soon added Balapur without rousing Adil Shahi
suspicion to his territory. His son Sambhaji in his late teens proved
his worth in this affair by slyly annexing Balapur to Shahji’s territory
without arousing the Moslems’ suspicions. But the Adilshah noted the
when Shriranga III came to the Vijayanagaran throne Shahji had opened
contacts with him. Simultaneously, Shriranga started organizing a major
counter-attack on the Moslems at Vellore and Shivappa Nayaka organizing
a force in Bednur seized back Ikkeri from the Moslems.

Adilshah becoming suspicious asked Shahji to come over to Bijapur with
his entire family and stay there for several months. Ranadulla Khan, who
was generally lenient towards Shahji died around that time (1643), and
his replacement Mustafa Khan asked the Sultan to take action on Shahji.
Shahji ever aware of self-preservation agreed to toe the Moslem line.
However, his young sons Sambhaji and Shivaji noticed this and were
filled with the urge of independence. In the Peshve bakhar they are
mentioned as explicitly saying that the devas were displeased with
Shahji working with the Moslems who were uprooting Hindus and converting
the whole country. Whatever the case, either due his young sons’
independent thoughts or his own sub-current loyalty to his religion, he
was seen by the Moslems as possibly involved secretly siding with the
rebellions in Karnataka. So the Adil Shah severely reprimanded him in
1644, and sent Mustafa Khan to deal with the Hindus in the South.

[Go to
part-III](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/06/some-notes-on-shahji-and-sambhaji-the-brother-of-shivaji-iii/)
