+++
title = "Some notes on Shahji and Sambhaji the brother ofxa0Shivaji-IV"

+++
Sambhaji and Shivaji break free  
Following Shahji’s arrest his sons Sambhaji in Banglore and Shivaji in
Pune started asserting their independence against the Moslems. With the
help of the Brahmin advisers they started acting as independent
\*Hindu\* rulers and did not remit any tributes to the Adil Shah. The
Sultan acted quickly and sent a force under Asad Khan from Jinji to take
Bangalore from Sambhaji. Sambhaji gave a notable display of his valor by
routing the Moslem force advancing towards Banglore by after
intercepting it on the way to the city. Shivaji was in the mean time
attacked in both Purandar and Kondana by two columns of the Sultan’s
army, but he too gave an ample taste of his valor by defeating both the
Moslem armies. The action by Shahji’s sons and their ability to punish
the Moslem armies both in North and South made the Sultan wary of any
action on Shahji. In the meantime the brothers tried an unusual
political move by contacting a representative of the Mogol emperor to
negotiate with the Sultan for their father’s safety and possible release
from captivity. Ahmad Khan the Moslem commandant agreed to negotiate his
safe release provided his sons surrendered Kondana and Banglore. Shahji
agreed to such a deal and was released. His sons on the surface agreed
to do so but secretly harbored plans to seize back their territory from
the Moslems.

Soon they had their chance when the two Moslem Sultans, the Sunni and
Shia started fighting amongst themselves over their territorial
possessions after the battle of Jinji. In course of this fight, Shahji
and Sambhaji secured Banglore and went on take Kanakagiri for
themselves. When Mir Jumla started driving the Adil Shahi troops, Shahji
and Sambhaji intervened with their forces. To the Hindus they were
protectors from Moslem depredations and for Adil Shah they were the only
hope to survive Mir Jumla. They caught Mir Jumla in an ambush between
their columns near Bangalore and defeated him soundly. They held him
ransom for 900,000 gold pieces and with this victory became the most
powerful force in South India. In Kanakagiri, Sambhaji saw the remnants
of the past Hindu glory and the idea of founding an independent Hindu
kingdom with this fort as a base came to his mind. Sambhaji accordingly
dispossessed local Moslem officials and appointed his Hindu ministers
instead. Abba Khan the local Moslem Adil Shahi warlord was furious over
these movements and raising a force of ghazis launched a fierce attack
on Sambhaji. Shahji tried a political move by representing to the Adil
Shah that he was holding the territory for the Sultan while Abba Khan
was revolting against him. Afzal Khan was sent to settle affairs, and he
long wanted to punish the Maharatta upstarts severely. He also had a
grudge against Sambhaji due the defeat at his hands in the Bangalore
encounter.

Afzal Khan laid a cunning plan. He sent a message to Sambhaji that he
would help him against Abba Khan and asked the former to storm the
defences of Abba. Sambhaji vigorously attacked and was in the thick of
battle when the detachment of Afzal Khan which had supposedly come to
help turned against him and surrounded him. He tried to cut his way out,
but received several shots and was killed. Thus at the age of 25,
Sambhaji, the poorly known brother of the future Maharatta Raja died in
front of Kanakagiri. His mother Jijabai bore a long-standing grudge
against Afzal Khan after this event, and finally had her satisfaction,
when Shivaji slew the Khan and restored the Hindu prestige.
