+++
title = "bhaTTa jayanta thexa0paippalAdin"

+++
I have always felt a close affinity to bhaTTa jayanta, the great scholar
from kashmIra. He lived in the 800-900s of CE and was associated with
the dictatorial king shankaravarman who kalhaNA describes as a corrupt
despot. kalhaNa informs us of his lack of education and culture by
stating that this king spoke only apabhramsha, a language fit for
drunkards (I told our Hindi teacher these very words, which she has not
forgotten since :-), I hear) . Some how I have felt a unity with
jayanta, though we are separated by space and time yet resonate. We have
some biographical information about him from his son’s notes and his own
personal allusions. He was of the clan of the bharadvAjas and his
ancestors were from the vanga country in the east. Then, from vanga they
migrated to kashmIra during the 600s. His clan followed the paippalAda
shAkha of the atharva veda and were ardent shrauta ritualists. The one
of his ancestor’s shakti-svAmin, a worshipper of kumAra, was appointed
as an officer in the court of the great lalitAditya. Hailing from this
long line of brahminical scholars, jayanta was not surprisingly a boy
genius. At the age of ten he composed a comentary on pANini, which was
so lucid that he acquired the title of nava vR^ittikAra even before he
had completed his education. He subsequently went on to master the
atharva veda and its rituals, various dharma shAstras, and various
tantras. His personal deity was rudra, but he was clearly a smArta
rather than sectarian. He soon became a great exponent of nyAya and came
up with the concept that every thing that is “knowable” should also be
formally definable. As the brahman is ultimately knowable it must be
formally definable, unlike the advaita view that is knowable but
indefinable. He then went on to build nyAya as the core philosophical
system, and believed that the whole system of shAstraic interpretation
should rest on nyAya rather than advaita. He developed the concept of
the atomic nature of sense perception. However, throughout he voiced his
firm support for the importance of vedic ritualism over sectarian
streams like shaiva and vaiShNava matas.

He ran a popular school with several students and composed 3 majors
works on nyAya, of which the nyAya ma\~Njari and nyAya kalikA survive.
He also wrote an interesting play for his students termed AgamaDambara,
which is a subtle satire on various darShanas and their proponents. He
is said to have composed his magnum opus nyAya ma\~Njari when he was
sent away from his home and school to serve in the khasa country which
was conquered by his king the despot shankaravarman.
