+++
title = "The death ofxa0reNukA"

+++
Our ancestress reNukA, the ikShvAku princess and wife of jamadagni, is
supposed to have had a checkered career. She is supposed to have been
adultrous having had an affair with a yadu prince of mArtikavata, which
led to our illustrious ancestor jamadagni’s wrath and the famous story
concerning rAma that needs no repetition now. jamadagni was accused by
some modern interlocutors as being unjust to her (but I realized their
knowledge did not go beyond the tale narrated in the Amar Chitra Katha
comics, where jamadagni merely say she had ‘sinned’ without any
reference to what the sin was. After all this was for kids). But from
the genuine versions of the tale we see this is entirely unjustified.
jamadagni was pretty dutiful to reNukA. The tale goes that the mighty
jamadagni was practising archery, when she used to go and collect the
arrows he used to shoot at the targets. She was distressed in course of
this activity by the sun’s heat, when jamadgni is supposed to have
threatened to hit the sun with his great astras. This had the gods give
reNukA shade to help her with the sun. But there is not much doubt
despite later day euphemisms that she did clearly have an affair with
the prince of mArtikavata, and adultery as per Hindu law warranted
punishment, ever since the day uddAlaka AruNi saw his mother commit it.
But many have asked me the question what happened to reNukA after her
son rAma restored her to jamadagni’s grace. The history states that she
indeed redeemed herself. The fierce vItahavyas, protected by the
Atreya’s prayogas, bent on revenge, breached the defenses of jamadagni
and attacked him while he was deep in meditation. While a once fiery
archer, the old bhR^igu was now in meditation and his valiant sons were
far away. reNukA boldly picked up jamadagni’s weapons and stood in the
path of the vItihotras, tAlajhanga and tuNDikeras who rushed in with
their bows upraised. They struck her their missiles and killed her. It
is said she received 21 wounds before falling dead. Then they struck
jamadagni with the dattAtreya missiles. jamadagni’s brahman power was
vaporized by the weapons charged with the atri’s brahman and he dropped
dead. With that the Atreya had got back the brahman power of the atris
that had been sucked out by our fiery ancestor aurva.
