+++
title = "On some convergences"

+++
R and me after long entered into what might almost be brahmodaya
contest. I won’t present any of that in the private brahmodaya style
though. One matter is are all large brains convergent? We had earlier
talked of brains of birds, whales and apes. While they are all
vertebrates the extensive development of their brains to exhibit what
might be termed intelligence is entirely convergent in evolutionary
terms. This convergence is striking for two reasons- 1) their sister
clades were either average or unimpressive in terms of intelligence
implying that the above animals indeed did develop the special
intelligence largely on their own. 2) yet there are some are some subtle
features in their intellectual convergence that are uncannily similar
across them. Some of this may actually have emerged convergently even in
mollusks — the octopuses. Amongst mollusks we see amongst the dullest
and brightest of the animal world. Take the slugs or the snails, or
still worse the bivalves- their primary cephalic ganglion can hardly be
dignified with the term brain. Their eye-sight nothing beyond the
vaguest recognition of light intensity and their behavior primitive even
by artificial intelligence standards. Yet their close cousins the
octopuses are amongst the animal world’s intellectual giants. True the
whole cephalopod lineage showed a major development of neural
capabilities but it appears to have reached a peak in the octopuses. So
many a time you can evolve good brains and eyes.

Yet when some authors a few years ago pronounced that gnathostomes may
have convergently evolved teeth twice, we were annoyed– it is far less
likely those teeth really evolved convergently. Lesson of this is that
products of convergence however complicated they might be are only
seeming similar, not really similar as the teeth.

This then led to territory much closer to ourselves. For long we knew
that Neanderthals had large brains, possibly on an average larger than
our own. These brains were certain larger than those of earliest archaic
Homo lineages closer to us than Neanderthals. We had long wondered what
that meant — did they convergently evolve large brains as we too later
did? Secondly, if they evolved larger brains than even us, and indeed
brains gave a major lead in survival, why did Neanderthals and not us
vanish? Some recent studies throw light on the matter but do not
entirely resolve the issue. The summary of these studies is thus: 1) The
haplogroup D of the positively selected MCPH1 gene swept through human
populations starting around 37,000 years to reach remarkably higly
frequencies of upto 70% of the population. 2) The interhaplogroup
divergence test showed that the divergence between this haplogroup and
the one originally dominant in the Homo sapiens happened around 1.1
million years ago. Thus, it is most likely that Homo sapiens got it
around 37,000 years from another archaic Homo species, for which a
reasonable candidate are the Neanderthals. If this were the case, it
answers the first question; it is most likely that the Neanderthals and
humans did not convergently evolve large brains. The same allele
possibly did the job in both. Then why did the Neanderthals go ? Not too
difficult to answer- Once we got this haplogroup from them, we grew way
better in terms of survival when it was placed in the context of our
other genes.

So in summary the sequence of events seems to be so: An initial lineage
of Homo that had moved our of Africa, possibly Neanderthals evolved a
series of changes including a particular haplotype of MCPH1. This
possibly resulted in larger brains. Then a new wave of migration out of
Africa brought the modern Homo sapiens into the sphere of this archaic
Homo lineage. Mating between them gave the incomers the Haplogroup D
version of MCPH1. It seems to have given a remarkable selective
advantage sweeping through the human population explosively. Most
possibly this occurred by conferring improvements to brain function that
were useful in Eurasia. This fits in with the observation that while
MCPH1 is prevalent in Eurasia it is very rare in sub-Saharan Africa.
Another gene to look out for in this context codes for the microtubule
binding protein tau with 4 or fewer copies of the tubulin binding domain
depending on the splice form combined with a N-terminal coiled coil
stretch. There is something about coiled coils and the brain, but that
is for another forum and another day.
