+++
title = "Jurapterxy- wrong inferences?"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/boersti.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/boersti.jpg)[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/boersti_skin.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/boersti_skin.jpg)

Finally the fossil nicknamed Boersti in German was published today. It
was officially named Juravenator starki. It is definitely an important
fossil that throws much light on the early evolution of coelurosaurs,
because Jurassic forms are generally scarce. But there are number of
questions raised by this find. Phylogenetic analysis, performed by the
authors clearly shows that it is a coelurosaur nested within the
coelurosaurs. It unites with Compsognathus, Huxiagnathus and
Sinosauropteryx in forming the composgnathid branch of the tree, which
is the next most basal lineage of coelurosaurs after the basal most
tyrannosaurs. It is from the Solnhofen formations that also yielded the
fossils of Compsognathus earlier. The authors distinguish it from
Compsognathus though they hardly offer any explanations for this
differentiation from Compsognathus. It is however from a slightly older
formation than Archaeopteryx or Compsognathus. They state that some
integument was preserved around the tail and hind limbs which apparently
showed no impressions what so ever of feathers which are seen other
coelurosaurs such as Sinosauropteryx, a close relative of Juravenator.
The authors interpret this as meaning that Juravenator lacked feathers
entirely and that the evolution of feathers in coelurosauria may have
been “more complex” than believed. The authors and the chInAchArya Xing
Xu go on to speculate that feathers may have evolved on multiple
occassions. There are other speculations that coelurosaurs may have had
feathers only seasonally.

I believe that these interpretations could possibly be flawed. Feathers
do not preserve well and it is only the chance events of the Liaoning
formation that really preserve feathers well. Even in Solnhofen the
feathers of Archaeopteryx have been preserved only in some of the
specimens and other specimens lacking the feather impressions where even
mistaken for Compsognathus. Also we should note that the enigmaitc
Italian compsognathid Scipionyx did not preserve any feathers even
though it preserved several internal organs well. This raises the
possibility that the Jurapteryx preservation is just bad in terms of
soft tissue and the absence of feathers is merely a preservational
event. In light of this the foolish speculations like those of Xu and
are just too far-fetched to believe and I really see no reason for a
more complex history for coelurosaur feathers.

The preserved skin shows scales on the tail quite clearly. on the
opposite side there are some fiber-like imprints. The authors believe
that they might be tendons, but their location suggests that they are in
probably outside of the scaly layer and probably feather-like fibers. So
the matter of Jurapteryx not having feathers is likely to be uncertain
at best. In any case we can be sure that dinosaurian integumentation is
far from completely understood. But sadly this will give the BANDITs
(The moronic Feduccia band) more fuel for their fantasies.
