+++
title = "Yinlong and the evolution of Marginocephalian dinosaurs"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/Yinlong.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/Yinlong.jpg)[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/ceratopsian_skulls.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/ceratopsian_skulls.gif)

Many years ago, when I was around 9 or 10 years old, I performed my
first phylogenetic study of the ornithopods. Not having access to the
actual specimens and having to rely on outdated description, the venture
can hardly be described a great success. Nevertheless, I was convinced
of the monophyly of the pachycephalosaurs and ceratopsians as a result
of this study. Other than theropod evolution, I was particularly
fascinated by ceratopsians and those mysterious early ornithischian
dinosaurs typified by Heterodontosaurus. Completely unbeknownst to me,
around the same time, over a span of 2 years, the Polish veterans
Osmolska and Maryanska, Paul Sereno and Norman had suggested
possibilities in this direction. However, ornithischian phylogeny
developed far more poorly than the well-funded maniraptoran phylogeny
which was fueled by the media interest in avian origins. However, some
recent finds and studies of older material have brought considerable
clarity on this matter. I have long wanted to write on this but only
today an exciting discussion with kalashayonI brought it back to the
forefront.

Most recent find of tremendous importance is Yinlong downsi, from the
Junggar basin of China from the Late Jurassic era. Phylogenetic analysis
suggests that it is the most basal of all ceratopsians, more basal than
even the previously known primitive ceratopsians such as Chaoyangsaurus
and Psittacosaurus. It is also the first confirmed Jurassic ceratopsian
and like Guanlong in the case of the tyrannosaurs, gives a glimpse of
the origins of the specializations that were to characterize the great
radiations of the Cretaceous period. It shares several features with the
pachycephalosaurs, thereby strengthening the case for the monophyly of
marginocephalia. More strikingly, it also shows several cranial features
in the temporal, antorbital and dental features that connect it with the
heterodontosaurs. The striking enlarged pre-maxillary teeth that were
once considered definitive of the heterodontosaurs are now seen in
Yinlong. These features suggest a monophyly of the heterodontosaurs and
marginocephalians within in ornithischia. The phylogenetic analysis also
tentatively suggested that the primitive ornithopod Agilisaurus may be a
sister clade of the Marginocephalia+heterodontosaur clade
(heterodontosauriforms). If there was any truth to this, then it might
mean that the heterodontosauriforms emerged from within the ornithopods
by acquiring a distinctive set of features by the earliest Jurassic. The
comparative studies also suggest that the poorly studied fragmentary
form, Stenopelix and Wannanosaurus need to be re-examined now as they
are likely to define similar basal members of the pachycephalosaur
clade. The other recent repor describing a new pachycephalosaur Dracorex
hogswarti, helps refine pachycephalosaur phylogeny and suggests that
domehead may have been secondarily lost in Dracorex. This emphasizes the
point that the ceratopsian and pachycephalosaur cranial ornamentation in
the Cretaceous was very plastic and rapidly diversifying under sexual
selection.

However, the distinct trajectories followed by ceratopsians and
pachycephalosaurs was set off even in Yinlong, with the former evolving
the highly distinctive neo-morphic bone at the tip of the upper
mandible, namely the rostral bone. This bone along with the triangular
enlarged head which is also seen in Yinlong gives the ceratopsians their
highly distinctive beak shaped face. The primitive features of the
Jurassic ceratopsian persisted to a degree in the Cretaceous forms like
Psittacosaurus, but starting with Liaoceratops and Archaeoceratops we
see the beginnings of the classical ceratopsian bodyplan. The first
radiation of the ceratopsians in the Cretaceous was typified by a clade
of small-bodied short-frilled forms like Leptoceratops, Udanoceratops
and Montanoceratops. This was followed by a second radiation, again a
small-bodied clade but with more prominent frills, including
Protoceratops, Bagaceratops and probably Graciliceratops. Finally, in
the late Cretaceous the horned, large frilled, large-bodied forms
exploded starting with the basal Zuniceratops. Then they bifurcated into
the Centrosaurine clade with the basal Avaceratops, followed by
Brachyceratops, Monoclonius, Centrosaurus, Styracosaurus and
Pachyrhinosaurus and the Chasmosaurine clade with the basal
Anchiceratops, followed by Chasmosaurus, Pentaceratops, Arrhinoceratops,
Torosaurus and Triceratops. These late Cretaceous ceratopsids have the
most spectacular, expensive and bewildering head ornamentation seen in
any vertebrate â€“ testimony to the force of sexual selection. One of the
best recently described examples of this is Centrosaurus brinkmanii with
a striking bunch of spikes and hooks on the frill.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/centrosaurus_brinkmani.png)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/centrosaurus_brinkmani.png)
