+++
title = "Tyrannosaurs and morphological evolution in coelurosaurs"

+++
The recent find of the tyrannosaur Guanlong going back to the late
Jurassic, around 156-161 Myr is of interest when placed in the context
of the oldest bird, Archaeopteryx, which from a slightly later Jurassic
layer dating to around 150 Myr. Guanlong also suggests that the other
primitive tyrannosaurs which were roughly coeval with Archaeopteryx,
like Stokesosaurus and Aviatyrannus were approximately in the same
morphological grade. The current phylogenetic analysis (by number of
researchers) supports a more basal position for the tyrannosaurs in the
coelurosaur clade, with several successive clades, namely the
ornithomimosaurs and the therizinosaur-oviraptorosaur clade forming the
sister-group of a crown assemblage comprising of
scansoriopterygids-deinonychosaurs (=troodontids+dromeosaurs)-birds.
This would mean that the major lineages of coelurosaurs had definitely
split up by the late Jurassic and probably occurred in the early
Jurassic. The lower jaw which forms the basis of the species
Eshanosaurus, a supposed therizinosaur from the early Jurassic of
Yunnan, if real, might suggest that this happened even earlier.

The upshot of all this, assuming that there are no major problems with
the current phylogeny, is that the coelurosaurian morphology evolved at
very different rates. The crown group of the
scansoriopterygid-deinonychosaur-bird appears to have reached their
basic specialized morphological condition rather early on. The
tyrannosaurs in contrast appear to have lingered on in a generalist
mophological state till the very late Cretaceous. This is sort of
consistent with the fact that even in the Cretaceous, perhaps until
quite late the tyrannosaurs retained their generalist ancestral
morphology as seen in Dilong, Eotyrannus and Dryptosaurus, only growing
a larger in size. The Archaeopteryx condition appears to be primitive
for the deinonychosaur-bird clade, with experiments seen in dromeosaurs
like Microraptor, that further developed the leg feathers to become the
“4-winged fliers”.
