+++
title = "jAtavedase… and shredhI vyavahAra"

+++
The hymn RV 1.99 is a peculiar hymn in many ways:

jātavedase sunavāma somam-arātīyato ni dahāti vedaḥ |   
sa naḥ parṣadati durgāṇi viśvā nāveva sindhuṃ duritātyaghniḥ ||

It is addressed to agni jAtavedas: We extract soma for jAtavedas; may he
the knower consume the wealth of the evil enemies. May agni tide us over
our troubles, through difficulties as in a boat across the river.

The hymn is the one sUktaM in the R^ig that comprises of a single R^ik.
It also re-appears in the tantras as the celebrated invocation of durgA.
It may be combined with other tantric incantations in the prayoga of
shUlinI. Likewise, in the triple prayoga combining sharabha, shUlinI and
pratya\~NgirA, it is in fact the joint attacking and protecting module
which forms the left wing, with the ugra-kR^ityA R^ik forming the
right-wing of the same prayoga with a principal role in back-hurling.
The stuhi shrutaM R^ik form the central destroying module.

However, both shaunaka’s bR^ihad-devata (3.130) and kAtyAyana’s
sarvAnukramaNI have a peculiar tradition regarding this hymn
jAtavedase…: It is supposed to be the only listed suktaM of a special
khila known as the kashyapa khila, which comprised of 1000 suktaM-s
composed to agni-jAtavedas and also known as the grand glorification of
agni. shaunaka then quotes shlokas of the ancient authority on vedic
particulars, shAkapUNi that the 1000 sUktaM-s followed an arithmetic
progression including the jAtavedase hymn of having 1 to 1000 R^iks in
them. Then shAkapUNi calculates the value of the series
1+2+3+…+1000=(1000\*1001)/2=500,500. Thus, the shadowy vedic sage
shAkapUNi was one of the earliest to provide the correct demonstration
of the formula for sum of an arithmetic series. This is clearly older
than Pythagoras by any stretch of imagination and at the lower bound the
same age as the Rhind Papyrus of Egypt.

It should be Hindus had a long-standing fascination with series (known
in sanskR^it as shredhI) of various types from the earliest vedic
period. In the taittirIya saMhita (7.2.11-20) there are numerous simple
arithmetic series associated with the “multiplicator”, ascending and
descending offerings. One of these is a power series of 10: 10^2, 10^3,
10^4, 10^5, 10^6, 10^7, 10^8, 10^9, 10^10,1 0^11, 10^12. This series
also occurs in the taittirIya brAhmaNa 3.8.16 and is repeated verbatim
in several hindu works like the rAmAyaNa to exaggerated size of the
rAkShasa or vAnara army (e.g. yuddha kANDa 3.24-28). The pa\~nchavimsha
brAhmaNa 18.3 gives the series: 12, 24, 48, 96, …196608, 393216 showing
that the early Hindus also worked on geometric series. pi\~Ngala in the
Chandas shAstra provides a formula for the sum of a geometric series.
pi\~Ngala also provides early accounts of the binomial expansion series.
This early fascination with the series for its own sake is unique to the
Hindus, beginning well before any Egyptian mention of it and developing
in an algebraic sense well beyond that of their peers. This suggests
that it was an original development of the Hindus. In the classical
period of Hindu mathematics, beginning with halAyuddha, passing through
the pinnacle of the illustrious AryabhaTa, this fascination for the
series was formalized, with the term shredhI meaning progression being
adopted. shredhi-phala or saMkalita is used for sum of series the
formulae for it and nth terms of the series were all obtained. The
formulae are also given form composite series of the form: tn=r\*tn-1+b
or r\*tn-1-b  
The binomial expansions were provided as meru-prasthas or what were
known in the West as Pascal’s triangles. Finally, the great Nambuthiri
mathematicians developed the trignometric series expansions and the
concept of series with limit n-\>infinity (kha-hara) to obtain definite
integrals.
