+++
title = "A note on the vaikhAnasa tradition"

+++
The vaikhAnasas appear to represent an archaic branch of vaiShNavas who
are distinct from the more popular and numerous pA\~ncharAtrins. The
vaikhAnasas however were and are still influential in few south Indian
temples including the world’s most famous shrine, venkaTAdri (Other
examples being the viShNu temple of vANamAmalai). The vaikhAnasas belong
to a kR^iShNa yajurvedic shAkhA founded by the descendent of the ancient
R^iShi of the A\~Ngirasa clan, vikhAnas. The vaikhAnasas seem to have
adopted a form of vaiShnavism early on, and are probably even amongst
the earliest of the vaiShNavas alluded to in the nArAyaNIya section of
the mahAbhArata. They possess many unique tantras of their own. Another
unique collection associated with them is the vaikhAnasa mantra pATha,
which in addition to the yajurvedic gR^ihya mantras (cf. Apastamba
mantrapATha) includes a striking collection of mantras used in the
private vaikhAnasa ritual, especially in connection to viShNu. Even
their gR^ihya sUtra includes a section on the iconic worship of viShNu.
Their main tantras pertaining to the installation and worship of idols
are the bhR^igu, atri, kAshyapa and marIchi saMhitAs. The bhR^igu work
mainly convers temple rituals. atri too covers these topics at great
depth including the design of temples. kAshyapa’s Agama is mainly in
sutraic form. Like many other great traditions of India we notice
medieval historical references to the vaikhAnasa Agamas from both the
extreme north of India- kAshmIra and the drAviDa and Andhra countries to
the south. It finds mention in both the literary works of Sanskrit
writers from drAviDa, like daNDin and jayanta bhaTTa of kAshmIra.

The vaikhAnasas describe five fold states of viShNu, which is parallel
to the pA\~ncharatric doctrine. 1) viShNu is the sarva vyApin, the
primary source, the eternal state from which all arise. 2) From him
differentiates the puruSha, which is a distinct entity or the property
of existence, termed consciousness. 3) From viShNu also emanates satya,
the which is the matter comprising the universe. 4) acyuta is the
time-invariant aspect of all matter. 5) aniruddha is the ultimate atomic
particle of all existence. These five states of viShNu are represented
by the vaikhAnasas as the 5 vedic fires: 1) gArhapatya, 2) AhavanIya, 3)
dakShiNAgni, 4) anvAhArya and 5) sabhya. While viShNu is their primary
deity, the vaikhAnasas, like the early pA\~ncharAtrins worship the rest
of the Hindu pantheon with a series of elaborate oblations and
tarpaNaMs.

The vaikhAnasa tantras usually dialate upon: 1) karShaNa- construction
of shrines 2) pratiShTha- installation of idols of gods and goddess 3)
pUjA- worship of the idols 4) snApana- the abhisheka or bathing of idols
5) utsava- festivals and processions 6) prAyashchitta- expiatory rites
relating to utsavas and errors in rituals. Interestingly for all these
rites the vaikhAnasa priests are organized as per the traditional vedic
division into hotA-s, udgAtA-s and adhvaryu-s and brahmA-s deploying the
4 vedic saMhitAs. All the rituals for the above procedures depend upon
oblations in the vedic fires.

The bhr^igu, marichI and atri saMhitAs in particular go into different
aspects of architecture of vaikhAnasa viShNu temples, while other
fragments cover chitra karma or painting of pictures of deities. The
basic plan of a temple is termed the vimAna. The atri saMhitA enumerates
96 different plans of vimAnas, which are described as belong to the
several basic classes termed brahmA, viShNu, rudra, indra, soma and
those of various brahmins. The paddhati of ishAnashiva mishra, the
siddhAnta tantric, also mentions 96 vimAnas for the construction of
shiva temples, many of which match the vaikhAnasa set implying that
basic hindu temple architectures had an early common ancestor in the
form of the proto-agAma. The old viShNu temples over South India
represent many of these 96 vimAna forms suggesting the wide use of the
vaikhAnasa tradition before their take over by the pA\~ncharatrins.

5 different idols are made for the vaikhAnasa temple. The dhruva idol is
the permanent idol of viShNu whom may be in standing (Tirupati),
sleeping (Shrirangam) or sitting (Urakam, Kanchi) poses and display vIra
(heroic), yoga (yogic) or bhoga (relaxing or amorous) disposition.
Stone, copper, clay or wood may be used for the dhruva idol. The next
idol is the kautuka idol, made of gems, stone, copper, silver, gold or
wood and it 1/3 to 5/9 the size of the dhruva. This idol is used for all
offerings. The snApaka idol is smaller than the kautuka and is used for
abhisheka and made similarly. The next idol is the utsava idol always
made of metal and is used in festival processions. The final idol is the
bali made of shiny metal and is daily taken around the central shrine
when offerings are made to indra and other devas, as well as jaya and
vijaya. For matsya and kUrma idols no kautuka is made and the oblations
are made into the gArhapatya. In case of various fiery and watery
varAha-s the offerings are made in the sabhya fire. vaikhAnasa-s make
only simple nR^isiMha images and install him with offerings in the
AhavanIya. trivikrama and bhArgava are installed with oblations in the
anvAhArya fire. For rAmachandra and balabhadra the dakShiNagni is used,
while for devakIputra and kalkI the paunDarIka fire is used. For garuDa
and viShvaksena the AhavanIya is used.
