+++
title = "The great battle of the ghR^itagaNa chaxa0dvyAmlaka"

+++
While we were still being relentless hammered by the shiva-yuvatI of
mahArudra, we decided to attend to the long-standing battle where the
young yoddha was faltering. It was the glorious quest of what was
code-named: “ghR^itagaNa cha dvyAmlaka”, a high prize that I had earned
for since my earliest days in the senAmukha, in the halcyon teens,
filled with youthful intemperance. Now as a veteran of many bloody wars
in which the devas had seen us through, I was still being rebuffed on
that front. But then I remembered that R had prophesized long back that
the path would not be easy. We called that most attractive jewel of the
strI-loka, Hayasthanika to aid us in the battle. While Hayasthanika in
all due fairness was not capable of wielding the heaviest of weapons in
the senAmukha, she definitely had a whole array of skills that like
those of susheNa of the vAnaras that could be useful in completion of
certain battles. We were hard-pressed by the rAkShasi that was
dispatched against us, and she was threatening us with a chakra. Our
young yoddha, however made a critical incision in the ranks with his
excellent fighting early in the day. We had only a few hours to settle
the battle and were simply not finding touch. Then we straightened our
arm and lifted the bow invoking the deva-s to guide our astra-s. We
fired a series of arrows into the enemy chinks, even as our young yoddha
strategically made use of Hayasthanika’s charms. I noticed however that
they were faltering late in the day under our shatru’s counter-attack
and felt they might not last long. Our yoddha was in disarray himself
seeing Hayasthanika on the retreat. It was at that point that we struck
with series of rapid thrusts into the enemy ranks. Suddenly, by
kArtikeya’s aid the shatru was exposed and we decapitated him. Our flag
flew over “ghR^itagaNa cha dvyAmlaka”. We beheld Hayasthanika in the
blaze of victory: her sight was verily like the nectar flowing from the
heavenly soma cup; her charms like the octet of mayura. The brief
respite it gave from the hammering of the adverse edge of the
downward-turning chakra of the kali age was like the single rain shower
in the Namibian desert.
