+++
title = "The Arimaspas, dinosaurs, griffins and sharabha."

+++
A persistant Indo-Iranian motif is that of the griffin, occuring in
India as the sharabha. The sharabha may be described as an imaginary
animal or as an incarnation of rudra in that form. The famous
sharbhAstra weapon and the sharabhAstra mantra invoke this form of
rudra. The form of viShNu known as the gaNDabherunda nR^isiMha is also
inspired by the same beast. The greek chroniclers recorded the griffins
as being associated with an Iranian tribe on the steppe known as the
Arimaspas. They were described as great horsemen, as their name suggests
and are supposed to have fought the griffins. The griffins are also
described as fighting the Amazons. The griffins are supposed to have
guarded gold in central Asia from the Arimaspas. The Pazyryk graves
which have been studied over the past century in detail have gold
articles, griffin depictions and contain the bodies of female steppe
warriors. This suggests that the tales of the Arimaspa and the Amazons
are confused Greek accounts for Indo-Iranian tribes of the far east,
from whose midst the reports of the griffins first started emerging.

A Greek account tells us that a certain Aristeas was possessed by Apollo
and as result had a flight to the land of the Arimaspas, beyond which he
declared was the land of the griffins. As per his account, and that of
Pausanias, the Sakas (Scythians) were to the North East of Asia,
followed by the Issedones, followed by the Arimaspas, beyond whom was
the land of the griffins, and beyond them were the Hyperboreans. This
suggests that the griffins were located per this account in the regions
of Central Asia closer to Mongolia. The Greek accounts also mention that
in the temple of Artemis in Alpheios in Elis, she was depicted as riding
a griffin. Philostratus declared that griffins were actually from India,
and that the Indian Sage Larkas had declared that they were worshipped
in India. In the budhnahis of the Iranians too the griffin is mentioned
as the largest of the birds.

Many, many years ago R and I were discussing the dinosaurian gods of
Hindus, when R came up with the idea that sharabha, the form of rudra is
the primary dinosaurian deity. She proposed the idea that the sharabha
and the griffin have a common origin inspired on dinosaurian skeletons
from Central Asia and India. In support of it she pointed that the
sharabha lin\~Nga-s worshipped in her regions were dinosaurian eggs
obtained from the Narmada region and pointed a bunch of paintings of
sharabha from temples and prints in her region where he is depicted in
an unmistakeably dinosaurian form. A couple of years later we noticed
that an author A. Mayor had reached a similar conclusion on the
possibility of griffins being inspired by the nests of Protoceratops in
central Asia which matched the location of the griffins in the Greek
accounts. We also concluded that the forms of rudra, ahirbudhnya (an
independent deity associated with rudra and the marut-s in the veda) and
tumburu are also dinosaurian deities.

What really struck me as remarkable about this fossil connection of the
griffins and sharabha is that the ancients, especially Hindus,
accurately reconstructed a bird-like animal from the skeletons and saw
it as either a bird or a close relation thereoff. However, the modern
scientists, despite the pioneering work of Thomas Huxley, failed to see
this obvious point, till the late John Ostrom showed through his studies
on Deinonychus that birds are dinosaurs.

This is one the prints from Râ€™s regions showing a sharabha in a pretty
dinosaurian form

[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/sharabha.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/sharabha.jpg)
