+++
title = "Theories for the bhArata conundrum"

+++
We earlier described the major problem termed the bhArata conundrum,
where we notice a silence regarding the pANDavas alone in the vedic
textual layers, but they are prominently mentioned in all the later
texts of Sanskrit and prakrit literature. The following plausible
theories may be cited in this regard:  
1\) The vedic authors were of the kaurava party and hence purposely
omitted references to the pANDus. The main problem with this theory is
why do they mention the descendents of the pANDava-s as per the great
epic in very positive light. In fact they do refer to dR^itarAShTra
vaichitravIrya in negative light, just as the surviving version of the
epic. They also refer to the pa\~nchalas like shikhaNDin in positive
light.

2\) Generational difference theory: The people with the same names as
the mahabhArata characters are in fact people of an earlier generation,
coincidentally having same names as the epic characters. While there is
some evidence for this from the paurANic genealogies, the patronymics
typically only match the characters of the great epic.

3\) Clearly in linguistic as well as historical terms the consolidation
of the vedic literature preceded the consolidation of the oral epic. So
is it indeed possible that the pANDavas were new comers superimposed on
to the older vedic history with the composition of the bhArata epic?
This theory implies that in the original sequence of events, the
characters of the mahAbhArata, who find mention in the vedic literature,
indeed comprise a real historical sequence as narrated earlier, but the
pANDavas were completely absent in it. The pANDavas or their real
descendents came later and captured power as a result of the bhArata
war, and then superimposed themselves on the existing Indo-Aryan
genealogies and historical epics by creating a new epic the mahAbhArata.
What are the suggestions supporting this unusual contention beyond the
silence of the vedic texts regarding the pANDavas: (i) The pANDavas are
a younger branch of the kuru clan in the epic and are not actually
pANDuâ€™s biological sons but claim divine origin from the principal
vedic gods. (ii) The pANDavas are associated with khANDava-prastha a
fringe zone of the kuru realm as per the late vedic descriptions of the
brAhmaNas. (iii) Most traditional Indo-Aryan rulers as well as brahmin
orthodoxy of the a\~ngirasas (kR^ipa and droNa) stand by the kauravas in
the war, whereas the major pANDava alliances are all through marriage.

Thus, it is possible in this theory that the pANDavas were never a part
of the vedic kuru-pA\~nchAla realm nor were they progenitors of its
prominent kings like parIkShita and janamejaya. They were actually
outsiders, who (or their descendent) became active just after the core
vedic period was over. They then seized power through marriage alliances
with prominent Indo-Aryan dynasties and ensuing the great bhArata war to
oust the original kurus. Thus, they established their own dynasty in
place of the original kurus. Then they tried to establish their
legitimacy by many means. Firstly, they created an epic where they
placed their founders, the original pANDavas, as ancestors to the last
of the pre-eminent kuru rulers known at that time who had great prestige
in the vedic circles. Secondly, they obscured their own origins by using
the device of divine origin and placing their ancestor pANDu within the
kuru dynasty as a younger branch. Thirdly, they incorporated old
astronomical observations to predate the bhArata war back to the hoary
vedic period.

What remains unclear is whether they were really a younger branch of
bhAratas or para-vedic outsiders. The latter is indeed very possible
given the issue of the divine origins of the actual pANDava-s and the
purely symbolic number 3+2, with two different mothers. That motif also
occurs in the foundational myth of the Indo-Aryan pa\~ncha jana (3= anu,
druhyu, pUru through sharmiShThA and turvasha, yadu through devayAnI).
This motif occurs outside India in the foundational myth of the
Chingisid mongols (3+2 with different fathers but a common mother in
this case, with the divine father being the wolf manifestation of the
deity Koko Tengri himself). The main problem with this overall theory is
that itihAsas, and the bhArata itself is mentioned in the vedic
literature in itself albeit somewhat late. The only way out is that the
pANDavas inserted themselves into a pre-existing bhArata epic itself,
while reducing the exploits of janamejaya and parIkShita to a sideshow
within it. If all this were true, perhaps we must look into the rise of
historical paNDava-s for the cultural changes in the Indo-Aryan realm in
post-vedic India.

An allied issue is the origin of the god subrahmaNya in the Indic
pantheon (a historical analysis for a later day).
