+++
title = "The mysteries in the radiation ofxa0feliformia"

+++
Asian Lisang

[![](https://i2.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/hello/133/1300/400/prionodon.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/hello/133/1300/640/prionodon.jpg)

There are several grey areas in the evolutionary history of feliformia.
The main problem appears to be that of repeated convergent evolution.
Certain carnivore body plans have repeatedly emerged in the mammalian
lineage, due to the basic constraints of mammal anatomy. After the
extinction of the dinosaurs, the niche left behind by the theropods was
up for grabs. There were many different contenders, which staked their
claims. There were the theropod survivors, which tried to recapture the
niches once held by their ancestors: the giant birds like the
Gastornithids and Phorusrachids. There were also the giant crocodiles,
the sebecosuchids and pristichampsids which became more terrestrial and
competed for the niche of top predator. In south America the marsupials
of the didelphomorph lineage, the Borhyaenids occupied a variety of
carnivorous niches ranging from small predators to large cat-like
predators such as Mayulestes, Thylacosmilus and Proborhyaena. In the
northern continents the basal ungulates, the mesonychids emerged as
carnivores of diverse sizes ranging from Arctocyon to the giant
Andrewsarchus. Early members of the suiform lineage such as the
enteledonts may have also been predators.

These were then replaced by the creodonts, the oldest radiation of the
carnivoran clade. Then then various carnivorans such as the nimravids
and allied barbourofelids, and finally the classical felids exploded on
the scene as major carnivores.

The clade feliformia in its extant form includes: felids proper and the
sister group of the felids the Asian Lisangs (Prionodon), the Genets and
their close sister group the African Lisang (Poiana), the civets, the
Asian Palm civets like Paguma, Chrotogale and Paradoxurus, the Fossas,
Mongooses and hyaenas, and finally the outgroup of all of them is the
African palm civet Nandinia. The molecular results suggest a separation
between Asian Lisangs and classical cats around 35 Myrs. This is around
the time the first felid Proailurus is seen. This raises the big
question as to whether the barbourofelids and Nimaravids were after all
convergently similar to the cats. This also raises the other big
question as to whether the barbourofelids and Nimravids are outside of
the extant feliformia clade. This is particular intriguing in light of
the repeated convergences to the cat-like saber-tooth architecture in
borhyaenids, creodonts, nimravids, barbourofelids and cats. In reality
this seems to be a continuation of the basic body plan experimented by
the pro-mammal predators starting from the Titanosuchids, through the
gorgonopsians, therocephalians and cynodonts. It looks as though the
mammals simply revived their old carnivorous model which had met an
interlude with the rise of the archosaurs and continued to refine it
down to the cats.
