+++
title = "Strange news from Newxa0Zealand"

+++
Geologists have held two views on New Zealand. Everyone more or less
agrees that New Zealand was connected to the Eastern Antarctic landmass
in the fragmenting Gondwanaland during the Early Cretaceous. After 82
million years it broke up from the Gondwana and moved away as an island.
Since the time of the extinction of the dinosaurs there is no evidence
that New Zealand was anywhere closer than 1000 Km to the nearest
continental landmasses. Beyond this point one group of geologists
believe that NZ always remained un-submerged till modern times, though
around 25-30 Myrs ago up to 80% of the islands is believed to have gone
under the ocean. Another group believes that in this period the entire
NZ was submerged and all land life became extinct only to recolonized by
the forms from neighboring landmasses, mainly Australia. The proponents
of the first view point out that the mysterious sphenodontian reptile,
the tuatara, the leiopelmatid frogs and onychophorans are remnants of
the lost world lingering on from the Mesozoic in New Zealand. The
proponents of the counter-view state that the NZ has been the land of
birds (Excellently visually documented in D. Attenburoughâ€™s Life of
Birds). There were no terrestrial mammals till the coming of the
Austronesians and their fellow travelers, and there are no crocodiles or
no snakes. The only mammals are 3 species of bats that seem to be of
Australian origin. Thus, they claim that all purely terrestrial forms
went extinct as the islands went under the ocean around 30 Myrs ago and
then it was recolonized by birds flying in.

Worthy and Molnar in the late 1990s pointed out that there was rich
vertebrate fossil assemblage from the Middle Miocene around 16-19 Myrs
ago from Central Otago, NZ. They claimed this age based on pollen data,
making it shaky until more accurate methods are used. In this bed they
claimed to find a fragmentary crocodylian fossil. This was really
exciting news but nobody seemed make a big deal. Studies by experts
suggested that it was a mekosuchine, a basal lineage of crocodyloidea
that was once widely distributed throughout the South Pacific islands
and underwent a great radiation in Australia. Many of these mekosuchines
were land crocodiles that probably occupied the role of the primary
terrestrial predator in these islands where there were few or no major
mammalian predators. So it was thought that the New Zealand crocodile
was probably another of these mekosuchines that underwent a long range
dispersal. Much less has been said of the apparently primitive snake
found in the same deposits from Central Otago. But all these gave
tantalizing hints that NZ may not have been completely submerged and may
have had reptilian lineages that were previous believed to be absent.

More recently there was a shocking report of a mammal from the same
horizon in NZ. The evidence comes from two mandible fragments and a
femur head. To me they look distinctly mammalian, and I am convinced.
The authors I believe rightly point out that it is not closely related
to any of the rich mammalian faunas of Australia or any other extant
mammals. However, the material is too fragmentary to suggest what kind
of mammal it was. The femur morphology shows no obvious links to bats or
any other flying mammals, but we have to be cautious with fragmentary
material. I am a bit puzzled such an earth-shattering paper was
published in PNAS rather than one of the three famous scientific
tabloids. I wonder why? Was it that the pollen-based dating resulted in
a rejection by the quirky tabloids? Was it that the authors wanted a
more detailed presentation. We would definitely benefit from better
dating, but I do feel the evidence is reasonable that there was some
mammalian lineage in NZ until relatively recently. The most likely
possibility is that this was a primitive mammalian lineage from the
Cretaceous that lingered on in the island. A similar scenario is now
possible for the Mekosuchines and snakes of NZ. On other Pacific Islands
like Vanuatu, New Caledonia and Fiji the mekosuchine crocodiles where
probably around till the Austronesian savages extirpated them much like
they have attempted on the Hindus of Fiji.

The NZ mammal indeed needs more vigorous investigation.
