+++
title = "Some wild geo-politicalxa0speculation."

+++
I heard that a learned American political theorist had pronounced a
political theory a brand of realism that is summed thus:  
“Given the difficulty of determining how much power is enough for today
and tomorrow, great powers recognize that the best way to ensure their
security is to achieve hegemony now, thus eliminating any possibility of
a challenge by another great power. Only a misguided state would pass up
an opportunity to become hegemon in the system because it thought it
already had sufficient power to survive.”

The theory in the least sounds logical enough without any obviously
visible contradictions. Now the question is how often have great powers
acted this way historically, both in the distant past and in more recent
memory. In the distant past I could name two well-known examples- the
Romans during the great emperors and the Chinese under the Tang were
consciously pursuing this policy of immediate hegemony within their
systems. In more recent times the Mogols in India also pursued this
policy. Of the European powers we note that England was definitely a
major proponent of this policy in its heydays. But now the question of
interest is what about India?  
My own belief is that Hindu kings in the past were imbrued with this
spirit, but mainly spent their energies in become hegemon over the
system termed India. At different points in classical history maurya-s,
lalitAditya of Kashmir and later chola-s in the south extended their
domains beyond the well-defined bhAratavarSha. After independence, I
believe, India has increasingly become a misguided state in the
offensive realist’s parlance. I feel this tendency is a common one in
Hindus — hence, you often hear Hindus say, we have survived for yuga-s
on end, so why should we fear the modern assaults of Isaists and
Mohammedans. I speculate that a common Hindu tendency, statistically
speaking, both at the individual level and the level of the country is
to falsely believe that they have enough power to survive. This is
exhibited at secular work (by otherwise brilliant Hindus), on the
cricket field (by talented or even gifted players), or in the country in
general.

Finally, executing this line of realist thinking does not necessarily
mean fighting wars that one should not fight. The US, while pursuing
this kind of realism actively, has begun showing signs of becoming
misguided by fighting useless wars. It has periodically tended to slide
in this direction, but never more seriously than now. The ultimate draw
in Korea and the defeat at Vietnam were examples of old misguided
policy. Yet, in large part the US prosecuted the Cold War successfully
by retain its hegemony in the world by preempting the triumph of the
Soviet Russians. After the Cold War the new challenger became China.
However, the recent events suggest that the US is increasingly veering
towards a misguided state. Hence, it appears that it is losing its
initiative as a hegemon by the day to China. China without indulging in
useless wars is probably wanting the US to run out of steam by its own
mistakes. This makes China increasingly dangerous for India, especially
given China’s territorial ambitions in Asia. In light of this, India
letting Nepal become a Maoist state from a Hindu monarchy, or letting
Bangladesh bloom into a Taliban-like poison-creeper or letting TSP of
the hook for terrorism are only going to give China more strings to keep
the Indian puppet dancing to its tune.
