+++
title = "Najash rionegrina and Yurlunggurxa0camfieldensis"

+++
During the flight with the yakShiNi we grew interested the origins of
the giant madstoiids of Australia. There have been several major recent
advances in snake phylogeny and evolution. In molecular terms the snakes
were shown to belong to a lizard clade termed Toxicofera with other
lizard lineages such as a clade formed by agamids, chameleonids and
iguanids and another clade formed by varanids, xenosaurids,
helodermatids and Anguids. It was clear that toxin production emerged in
the common ancestor of this clade and was elaborated further in
individual lineages. Within Toxicofera the varanids do not show any
particularly close relationship with snakes but instead group with the
other lizard clades mentioned above to the exclusion of the snakes. This
destroyed a long held view that varanids and snakes were sister groups
(the conventional view was actually contested by anatomist Mahendra a
while ago, but nobody bothered to read his works).

Mike Lee had proposed many outrageous theories on reptilian evolution
that were published in high places. These included the claim for a
connection between turtles and pareiasaurs and more recently the claim
that snakes and mosasaurs, which are extinct varanid lizards, are
related. However, the molecular phylogenies have falsified both of Lee’s
claims. But the Lee camp including Scanlon and Cadwell is still trying
to project a modified version of their theory in the form of the aquatic
origins of snakes. Rieppel has been a fierce critic of Lee and has
engaged in demolishing the latter’s claims in various directions.

Most recently Scanlon reported a remarkably complete skull of the snake
Yurlunggur camfieldensis of the madstoiid clade. They assumed enormous
sizes and appear to have ranged from .5 meters to 8 meters in length. I
am not certain of the madstoiid monophyly. But assuming that, they were
distributed throughout the Gondwanaland from the Cretaceous and were
also probably found in southern Europe. They appear to have peaked
between the late Cretaceous to early Eocene, evidently making it past
the K/T event unlike many other forms. In Australia alone they appear to
have lingered past the Eocene and became extinct only around 50,000
years suggesting a possible role for the coming of the first savages to
Australia. They clearly led a life similar to the boiids. Scanlon
claimed that his phylogenetic analysis showed Yurlunggur to be really
primitive and close to the base of snakes. But the South Americans
recently discovered a new snake Najash and claim that their phylogenetic
analysis shows that it is the most primitive snake. I suspect that
choosing between the position of the madstoiids between the Rieppel and
the Lee camps is harder. I do suspect that the latter may have point in
their claim that the most primitive snakes were large-mouthed. I also
feel the Scanlon phylogeny may be better on the matter of snakes
(leaving out the mosasaur claims).
