+++
title = "memories arising from the padmAvatIxa0stones"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/padmavati2.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/padmavati2.jpg)

As mentioned earlier in my explorations of the maharaTTa country with
shUdra-shreShTha, S and Mis-creant I came across several aniconic
padmAvatI stones painted orange with a lead paint. However, in the
exploration of Satmala we did see a couple of iconic padmavatI images.
One of them was still in worship and another was largely in neglect in a
dung-ridden area. This image was strange in having a nAstIka arihant
inscribed on her. A drAviDa nastIka savant brought to my attention that
they worshiped padmAvatI as a shasana devI, that is an agent of a
nAstIka tirthankara. He gave me a print of the jaina version of the
deity that resembled the weathered image in part. This suggests that
padmAvatI was worshiped by nAstIka-s as well as astIka-s and tribes in
that region. I wonder if the padmAvatI at Venkatadri is also a
syncretized version of the old padmAvatI widely worshiped throughout the
Deccan in the early medieaval period.

So what her origins? We get a clue for this in the archaic section of
the gobhila smR^iti (1.11-12) that mentions that 13 mothers are
worshiped:  
1\) gaurI (wife of rudra) 2) padmAvatI 3) shachI (wife of indra) 4) & 5)
medhA and sAvitrI (the sarasvatI derived “veda” goddesses) 6) & 7) jayA
and vijayA 8) devasenA (wife of skanda) 9) & 10) svAhA and svadhA (wives
of agni) 11) dhR^iti 12) tuShTi 13) puShTi (the last 3 may or at least
the last 2 may be lakShmI like manifestations)  
Thus there was a distinct padmavatI in an ancient list of goddesses.

\-0-0-0-0-

As I stood atop the massif of the nine nAthA-s in the Satmala the wind
was howling fiercely in the late evening hour. Various animals and birds
made loud howling noises. Then to my mind came the yajur-vedic mantra:  
ehy avakrAmann áshastI rudrásya gÁNapatyAn mayobhÚr éhi|  
urv àntárikSham ánv ihi svastí gavyUtir ábhayAni kR^iNván ||
