+++
title = "Some musings on xenarthran and mammalian evolution"

+++
The living xenarthrans (defined by their unique zygapophysis
articulations in the lumbar vertebrae) appear to be last representatives
of a great adaptive radiation of mammals of the South American land
mass. During the connection with North America, the xenarthrans were one
of the few animal groups that successfully made the transition from
South to North in hte fauna interchange. South America also saw the
radiations of the marsupials that it had acquired during their
connection with Australia via the Antartic landmass and the placentals
meridiungulates comprising of the four major lineages of Xenungulates,
Astrapotheres, Notoungulates and Litopterns. Todays xenartharans come in
two great clades: 1) Pilosa comprising of the sloths and the anteaters.
The sloths in turn comprise of the Bradypodids (the three toed tree
sloths) and the Megalonychids (the two toed tree sloths). 2) Cingulata
comprising of 3 lineages of armadillos. The fossil xenarthrans are
particularly fascinating — the pilosans included a number of giant
extinct sloth lineages– the megatheriids and the mylodontids. These
forms were largely land living herbivorous forms that in many ways
convergently evolved features of the herbivorous theropod dinosaurs of
the therizinosauroid lineage. One enigmatic megatheriids sloth from the
Pliocene of Peru had evolved into a marine form that converged to the
eco-morpho-space occupied by the dugongs and mantees.

The cingulatans underwent an extensive radiation in South American and
gave rise to Pampatheriids and Glyptodonts in addition to the
armadillos. There highly armored mammals were the analogs of the
ankylosaur clade of the dinosaurs. It is particularly fascinating to
note that these mammals mirrored many developments in the ankylosaurs–
the armadillo clade was more like some of the nodosaurids, where as
certain glyptodont like Doedicurus resembled the ankylosaurids with tail
clubs bearing spikes. The glyptodonts appear to have emerged in a poorly
understood basal radiation in the Eocene with the only reasonable
representative being Glyptatelus. Another basal form is
Pachyarmatherium, that appears to combine features of both the
armadillos and glyptodonts. The presence of a banded armor with hinges
in the primitive radiation of glyptodonts suggests that the armadillos
may retain the primitive condition of the Cingulatan clade (also seen in
the pampatheriids which seem closer to the armadillos) Subsequently the
heavily armored glyptodonts appear to have emerged in the form of the
following clearly defined lineages: the propalaeohoplophorids- primitive
glyptodonts with clearly banded armor closer to the armadillos and crown
group formed of the hoplophorines, doedicurines and classical
glyptodontines. The paucity of predators in South America resulted in an
ancient armadillo Macroeuphractus, acquiring caniniform teeth and
evolving into a medium-sized predator. These Cingulatans may have been
there till the Paleo-Americans invaded the Americans and wrought havoc
in the megafauna there.

The Meridiungulates were considered a sister group of the ungulates of
the northern continents in old phylogenies. Modern molecular studies
clearly mark 4 great mammalian radiations within placentals: 1) The
xenarthrans. 2) The Afrotheria including elephants, dugongs,
desmostylians, hyraxes, elephant shrews, aardvarks, golden moles and
tenrecs. 3) Laurasiatherians and 4) Euarchontoglires including primates,
rodents and the tree shrews. In this scheme continental drift appears to
have played a major role in the diversification of mammals. So it raises
the possibility that the meridiungulates were a sister group of the
xenarthrans. Investigation of this link and the solely south American
radiation is of considerable interest.
