+++
title = "The last flash of Sanskrit and the activities of the Indologists"

+++
When I was going through the erudite works of the illustrious scholar
and kaula tantrik from the Southern country, bhAskara-rAya makhIndra, it
struck me that he was clearly a lineal descendent of that great
tradition of encyclopaedic Sanskrit scholars and innovators. Just before
the principal Mohammedan deluge, came the great tradition of kShatriya
scholars such as rAjA bhoja deva and someshvara deva of mAnasollAsa
fame, and of course various brahmins like bhAskara the astronomer,
hemAdri the polymath. This period just before the Islamic ravages had
several other good scholars that certainly deserve detailed
consideration to understand Indian intellectual activity in that period.
For example, we have shArangadeva and the kShatriyas jagadekamalla and
harapAla, both chAlukyas, who wrote extensively on music and laid the
foundations for the modern phase of Indian classical music. The
kshatrIya jayasenApatI of the kAkatIya kingdom, wrote the
nR^itya-ratnAvalI on classical Hindu dance.

The kShatriyas faced the main blow of the Islamic rampage, and it is not
surprising that the kShatriya tradition declined greatly, though it did
not die out entirely. In the kShatriya tradition lingering after the
Islamic assault, we even have erudite Sanskrit poetry composed by
kShatriya women such as ga\~NgadevI, the wife of kumAra kampaNa the
heroic vijayanagaran prince and the daughter of pratAparudra gajapati of
Kalinga, the wife of kR^iShNadeva. We also have the Sanskrit scholarship
of the shUdra rulers in Andhra, such as kumAra-giri and kAtayavema reDDi
in this period. Though the fall of the kShatriyas after the initial
Islamic blow resulted in an overall decline in Sanskrit scholarship , we
observed that as the Hindu revival started occuring in many places all
over India there was a remarkable new productive phase of scholarly
literature in Sanskrit. This phenomenon appears to have also
independently caught the attention of American Indologists spear-headed
by Sheldon Pollock, however, it is clear that they want write about it
with the intention of creating an appropriate historical
fantasy-narrative that matches Leukospheric political ambitions
vis-a-vis India (to be discussed further).

The phenomenon of mideaval Sanskritic revival was clearly pan-Indian
though its intensity and focus differed across parts of India. The one
part of India that despite once being its most glorious intellectual
center never revived from the Islamic assault was Kashmira. Here
Sanskrit scholarship and productivity declined greatly and its results
are apparent in the modern tragedy of the Hindus of Kashmir. In North
India the revival was not as vigorous as the south but it was definitely
active in several places. It began in Rajasthan with rANA vIr hammira’s
reconquest of the Mewar from the invading Turks. This followed through
the reign of rANA kumbha. However, with the ravages of Akbar the
Rajasthan front declined. Ironically the coming of Akbar resulted in a
let up in vArANasi that started returning to its pre-eminent position as
one of India’s premier scholastic centers.

However, the south was clearly the base for the revival and this can be
traced back to the greatest Hindu revival against the Mohammedan tide in
the form of Vijayanagara. One of the first acts of the founding
Vijayanagaran rulers, harihara and bukka was the assembly of a scholarly
work-force under mAdhava vidyAraNya (later Acharya of the Shringeri
maTha) and his brother sAyaNa. It was the first time such a large-scale
complete commentarial work on the foundational texts of the Hindu
religion was produced. This event evidently spawned a tremendous amount
of scholarship throughout the Vijayanagaran kingdom and seeded
scholarship amongst the brahminical communities of the Andhra, Karnata
and Dravida countries. The foremost of these communities in scholarly
output were the vaidiki brahmins of Andhra and the smArtas of the
Dravida country (especially vaDadesha vaDama). appaya dIkShita, the
smArta scholar of the Dravida country may be easily considered one of
the prime moving forces of this effect. Representatives from the Andhra
country also journeyed North and seeded scholarship in those regions
extensively. For example the traitorous and fallen brahmin scholar
jagannAtha paNDita and his clansmen were located in the court of the
great Mogol of Dilli.

The ripple effect of Vijayanagara also spread to its north and initiated
vigorous scholarship amongst the brahmin communities of Maharashtra. The
deshasta brAhmaNas especially, and the koNkaNasthas to a lesser degree
produced a long line of scholars who played two important roles.
Firstly, they were the main force behind the revival of the vArANasi
school of Hindu scholarship that served as an integration center for
Hindu scholars throughout India. Secondly they provided the intellectual
background for the rise of shivAji bhosle’s hindavi svarAjya. The
insulation offered by Vijayanagara from the Moslems also allowed the
nambUthiris of the Chera country to develop another remarkable
effloresence of Sanskrit scholarship. Interestingly, in the far away
Vanga country there was the remarkable coeval explosion scholarship on
nyAya in the form of the nava-nyAya school of nava-dvIpa in the Vanga
country.

Many of the works of the period were original and pathbreaking, like the
mathematics and astronomy of the nambUthiris and the atomic theory of
the nyAya-vaisheShika synthesis of gadAdhara, the smArta scholar from
the Dravida country. In medicine too there was innovation shown by the
maharaTTa kings of Tanjavur.

This Sanskritic scholarship ended with the British conquest of India.
The American scholars of the Pollock school note this too, but they want
to shy away from any direct connection. Most importantly, they recognize
the important features of brahminical scholarship, but in their
political activities take anti-brahmin and more generally anti-hindu
stances. This suggests that they have recognized the true potential of
the brahmin/kShatriya elite of Hindu society to adapt to extrinsic
challenges and smoothly effect transitions without the need for
cataclysmic revolutions as seen in Europe. This is not in the interest
of their Leukospheric masters and they accordingly are taking steps to
counter the Hindu progress. The California books case, where these very
American scholars participated in anti-Hindu activities is a case in
point. We need take note of the fact they are also withholding Hindu
manuscripts and making their access difficult for Hindus themselves in
the guise of making them available to scholars only. Michael Witzel and
his henchmen are known to be notorious for this and have developed links
to a distinct group of indologists spearheaded by Pollock are anchored
to the very base of ekarAkShasatvam. Thus, on one hand the idea is to
keep Hindus themselves ignorant of their Sanskrit heritage, while using
it anthropological study material for their careers. On the other it is
the more sinister effort to further their larger geo-political ambitions
for or within the Abrahamistic world by spreading sufficient subversion
with their most potent surviving heathen enemy, the Hindus — for by
definition Abrahamism and the dharma are mutually exclusive.
