+++
title = "A brief history of shubhakaraxa0siMha"

+++
The mahA-chInAchArya, shubhakara siMha, a nAstIka of the second varNa,
was a remarkable, even if forgotten, figure in history largely forgotten
in his homeland India. He was a descendent of the ikShvAku chieftain
amR^itodana whose clan held a small kingdom in what is the border
between modern Madhya Pradesh and Orissa. They were overthrown by the
rAShTrakUTa army and as a consequence fled to oDDiyAna pITha in central
Asia. Here they established themselves as rulers of oDDiyAna. It was
here that shubhakara siMha was born. His father believed he saw the
signs of divine favor in him. Just then the brutal onslaught of the
terror called Islam was spreading into central Asia under the directives
of the Umayyad Kalifs. shubhakara siMha was put in command of his army
at the tender age of 10 years and led his troops to a great victory
against the marauding Moslems. The chIna records mention how the kingdom
of oDDiyAna repulsed the attack of the Moslems. At the age of 13 his
father died and he was declared rAjan of oDDiyAna. He was a popular
ruler, but this sparked an intercine conflict with his brothers in
course of which he was wounded on his head by the blow of a chakra and
an arrow. He however crushed his brothers and regained total control of
the kingdom. After this intercine war he is said to have lost interest
in the kingdom, and released his defeated brothers and handed the
kingdom to the eldest of them. He decided to take sannyAsa prematurely.
But his mother gave him an ancestral pearl, which the symbol of
inheritence of the oDDiyAna throne, before he left the palace. He
travelled south to saindhava, where he wandered on the shore studying
the nAstIka tantras of the bauddhamata. After rigorous japa and yoga he
became a great tantric. He found a ship of vaishyas setting forth on a
trading expedition around the coast of India to the far East. They
agreed to take him along on the journey, and on the ship he kept
performing various japa-s to 7 crore devatA-s.

It was said that a white light emanated from his mouth as he was
performing his secret yoga. Once when wind did not blow for 3 days he is
said to have allowed the ship to go a long way with his mantra
prayoga-s. Then the merchants were attacked by Moslem pirates. He
performed another prayoga and the deva-s sent another band of pirates
that destroyed the Arab pirates. The ship then found his way by sea to
Orissa, where he saw a rAjan who had married his sister. He discussed
various tantric issues with his brother-in-law, who then came to terms
with his renunciation. He then proceeded to Nalanda and studied the
highest of the bauddha tantras under the master of the dharaNis,
dharmagupta. shubakara siMha was initiated into the path of the great
yoga by which he could suddenly attain enlightenment. Having attained
enlightenment he wandered on kukkuTa-parvata where he saw mahAkAshyapa
in meditation. He cut his over grown hair and the lokeshvara placed his
hand on his head providing him highest bliss. He spent the monsoons in
gR^idhrakUTa where a lion lead him to a cave, where he saw a vision of
the shAkyamuni, the founder of the nAstIka mata.

In his ancestral land in Malva the people were suffering from a major
drought and called upon shubhakarasimha to help them. He performed a
great sahasrabhuja lokeshvara prayoga by invoking him in the sUrya
maNDala and apparently brought down rain to relieve the land. He then
engaged in debates with AstIkas and other nAstIkas like the jainas and
hInayAna bauddhas in different parts of jambudvIpa. He is said to have
spread the bauddhamata with great fervor in his debating spree.
