+++
title = "The blight of Monotheism"

+++
Moving out of the frustration from the futile discussion on the thermal
stability of acyl monophosphates I began filling Marc up on what I had
recently learnt from the two hours I had spent with a garrulous Spanish
gentleman. He yarned endlessly and voluntarily about trypanosomes,
Mexican warlords, the need for Spanish as a first language in the US and
the disappointing results of the Spanish-American conflicts. Suddenly
Marc brought up the issue of a book that is being widely discussed: God
Against the Gods: The History of the War Between Monotheism and
Polytheism by a Jewish author Jonathan Kirsch. I had the chance to
briefly read through it while waiting for a plane and could see how it
does have an important message for the West. Many in the West are slaves
and they do not even know it. They have been mentally **imprisoned by
the monotheistic dogma of the Abrahamisms. And it is very bold of Kirsch
to tell the story as it really is. Of course this is one of the few
clear attempts in the West to tell the some of the story of how the
Abrahamisms have brought imprisonment to their minds and death and
indescribable terror to millions of victims of the infected European
mind. Truely the Abrahamisms can be described memetic viruses that have
not only damaged millions of minds but also spilt over claiming more
lives than an epidemic of a genetic virus. Interestingly, this must also
be considered in light of Hermann Sommersâ€™ idea that many of the arch
prophets of Abrahamism, especially the last two, were victims of
psychiatric conditions. So may be the particularly virulent monotheisms,
Isaism and Mohammedanism emerged from biologically diseased prophetic
minds and then spread purely as a memetic infection.

However, these discussions were first brought out with tremendous
clarity by none other than the two vaishya chUDAmaNis- Ram Swarup and
Sitaram Goel. They had seen all the dimensions of the problem and with
their approach one can understand why the virulent sectarian forms of
vaiShNavism and li\~NgAyatism did not evolve into the explosive and
dangerous monotheisms that we encounter in the middle east. The evidence
for the difference is very much there for all to see. Especially when
one compares India to the the wastelands of the diseased mental
landscape such as the Terrorist State of Pakistan, Iran and the fetid
sewage called Saudi Arabia. **
