+++
title = "A Sanskrit history of the conquest of parNAla-parvata"

+++
“Brahmins do not have it in them to fight” was a common refrain I had
heard despite being brought up on the tales of the bhR^igu conquests of
yore- r^ichIka, jamadagni, rAma, agni aurva and all of them. I had
almost internalized it. But my conversations with PR got me thinking
about it from different angles till I discovered the truth. My learned
AchArya had a peculiar regard for PR: he would regularly come to recite
the R^ig veda when he taught it and would only talk with our AchArya in
Sanskrit. Otherwise, he spoke with none and had an air of mystery and
power about him. I had occasionally seen them converse about performing
a shrauta rite but, they would generally be secretive about it. He had
some kind of secular job, because I had noted him and pitAshrI talk on
some technical issues. That was only time he ever used the AnglIka
bhASha, else he spoke only either in Sanskrit, Maharatti or Tamil
tongues. He was well-versed in the aShTAdhyAyI and used to cite sutra-s
and demonstrate them with ease. Once my yajur vedic teacher asked me
approach him on learning about R^ig in practice with respect to the
mysterious nyU\~nkha and ninarda mode of recitation of mantra-s.

In course of this encounter PR narrated a bit of his history in addition
to introducing me to the mysteries of nyU\~nkha and ninarda recitations.
He descended from Kondaji Ravlekar, a brAhmaNa warrior who conquered the
Panhala fort for the Maharatta king Shivaji, from the Moslems. This tale
and the battles leading to it are described in a remarkable text
parNAla-parvata-grahaNAkhyAna by a certain Jayaram Kavi that was in his
possession (his ancestors had taken it with them to Tanjore). The
Moslems of Bijapur had taken Panhala from the Maharattas in 1660 CE
after the great battle of Pavankhind, where the deadly Black African
warrior Siddi Jawhar had pressed hard on Shivaji. Finally in 1672
Shivaji scored a string of victories against both the Mogols of Delhi
and the Adil Shahi Moslems, such as the great battle of Salher (This is
described in the PPG as the sAleri parvata yuddha, where another
brAhmaNa warrior of Shivaji, Moro Tryambak Pant lead the Maharatta army
to rout the Mogols in a spectacular assault. 30 principal Moslem
officers and several thousand troops of theirs were destroyed by the
attack of the Maharattas, in addition to serious injuries to Ikhlas Khan
the imperial commander of Awrangzeb). Realizing that the Moslems were on
the defensive Shivaji decided to strike hard early next year, assembled
a body of fierce Maharatta fighters near Rajapur and asked them to take
Panhala. He entrusted their leadership to Anaji Datto and the Rigvedi
brahmin warrior Kondaji Ravlekar. Kondaji first dressed as Moslem and
spied the fort. Then having obtained good intelligence, he chose a steep
un-guarded mountain cliff for the attack. On the pradoShaM day of March
6th 1673 in phAlguni, Kondaji secretly climbed the mountain cliff with
60 commandos and launched a surprise attack on the Moslems. He then
opened the fort doors and Anaji Datto rushed in with the main army and
attacked Baboo Khan the Islamic commander. In the intense fight that
followed Baboo Khan was beheaded and a traitorous brahmin who helped him
with accounts Nagoji Pandit was also killed. Thus Panhala was conquered.
