+++
title = "New wave"

+++
The jAnashruteya birds flew by and said: “The spider has run around the
web twice since that fateful night of the 3-front war. 2 bow-shots away
from your seat you saw the deadly one. It was the same place where your
then senAnI immersed in sorrow narrated his defeat against the vaiShNava
on the Northern plain. The kR^ityA-s were kept aside from reaching you
by the eye of mitra and varuNa. Now the kAla of vR^itra has begun. The
front called kosha could be weakened. You thought your defenses were
firm, but you are not seeing the agent of dhUmAvatI in your midst\!”

What was dispatched O birds ?

They said: “That kR^ityA, which does not retreat and the frightful
pishAchI. It will be an all out attack with many fronts being targetted.
In this regard we shall give you saMdhyA sandesha: kosha, hiraNya,
chatura\~Nga, tikShNAmlaka, kR^ita, nidra. There are mAraNa-s too\!”

The muni and Mn who was our main hopes was also attacked. The muni is
being subject to the same attacks, while Mn will turn become viparIta.

–o–o–

Since they watch we shall weave in a crooked path. The birds gave us the
signal and asked to us take stock: 4 bhAratas+ extenders of the virile
taittirIyin+fallen one+chitrakA are the capital. Of them 3 are odd. The
ukSha-daNDa has already been sent to you; so only 8 are left. Of the 3
odd ones 2 have already fallen and one will most probably fall in due
course. The jyeShTha-upabhrAtar has been neutralized though he is now
free from the grAhI. The kaniShTha has gone viparIta and he is writhing
in the grahaNa. But he has two advantages over you – he has conquered
the ratha and kosha. But, as you always knew it is best to forget him.
There 2 unknowns and they will remain unknowns in the foreseeable future
(but could be intangibly helpful). So let it be known, there is only one
who can take the throne if you perish in battle.

What has befallen him?

As we said when we flew by the last time he came under severe attack the
same time you did. They sent the ukSha-daNDa his way to. The muni has
escaped with the aid of his prayogas from that which chased him like
brahmahatyA chasing the bhairava. Remember real yuddha-s are not affairs
of few days so they rage on. The amAtya tried several prayoga-s on you
behalf. Most of them were broken by the bhrAtR^ivyas and have had
minimal success. The week after you spoke with the pretty ayonijA in the
mountains near the lake of rudra, when the PM was seized by a horrible
grAhI that was signaling the end of his life, two innocous visitors
arrived. You and the muni felt that they were probably a passing cloud
and the cell-phone at hand was the big issue. You did prayoga-s but they
were not directed at the correct address. The seemingly innocous
visitors saw that and deposited a packet on the morning of the fateful
day when you, the muni and the said kaniShTha were in an unlikely
alignment. The amAtya and shachIva were right there and could have seen
it, but in their characteristic foolishness were having a ball of time
with the said kaniShTha. But such is fate and it was never reported.
Also note friends are only for times of mirth, only clansmen for times
of destitution.

shUdra alone will escape the breaking of the fruits.
