+++
title = "Erketu and the titanosaurs"

+++
The titanosaurs were the last great radiation of the sauropods. Earlier
it was thought that the era of the sauropods was gone with the Jurassic.
But over the past two decades the finds of the titanosaurs, show that
this lineage sauropods attained considerable diversity and nearly
world-wide spread through the Cretaceous. We had long-necked forms
resembling the diplodocids of the Jurassic, like Rapetosaurus and
Nemegtosaurus. Then there were forms like Argentinosaurus and
Paralititan which were the largest land animals that have ever walked on
earth. There were reasonably shorter-necked forms like Isisaurus from
India and Mendozasaurus which appears to have been dominant in the
Andean zone. South America also had the enigmatic armored sauropods like
Saltasaurus, Laplatasaurus and perhaps Agustinia, which might have
provided it protection against the mighty predators of the land like
Giganotosaurus and the abelisaurs. There was one form Bonitasaura that
evolved a beak convergent to the ornithopods. In this background the
most recent titanosaurian addition is *Erketu ellisoni*, from Mongolia.
This dinosaur with extremely extended cervicals is supposed to have had
a estimated neck of around 8 meters. The sauropods for all their size
are extremely enigmatic products of bioengineering. We do not understand
much about how they got about life in the first place. The 8 meter neck
like a hose-pipe might have allowed it to clean up plants over a wide
area for certain, but how it managed with a neck nearly parallel to the
horizontal and this long is not easily imagined- yet these animals lived
and thrived at that.
