+++
title = "Meiolaniid turtles"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/320/meio_skeleton.jpg)](http://photos1.blogger.com/blogger/2010/410/1600/meio_skeleton.jpg)Meiolaniids
are amongst the most fascinating turtles. The first remains of them were
found by an Australian collector Bennett who correctly identified them
as turtles and sent them to the obnoxious anti-Darwinian anatomist
Richard Owen in England. Owen wrongly thought they were a lizard and
described them as such. It is clear that Owen had made a huge anatomical
blunder. However, the Darwinian anatomist, Thomas Huxley, showed that it
was a turtle of the cryptodiran clade. After him many puzzled over the
affinities of the meiolaniid turtles, but two decades of studies by the
great turtle expert Eugene Gaffney showed that Thomas Huxley was
essentially correct. The prolific South American fossil hunter
Florentino Ameghino, found a related turtle from the Eocene beds of
Argentina, suggesting that they might have once had a widespread.
Gaffney and Paul Sereno prospected for new skull material in Howe’s
Island near Australia and found several skulls of recent provenance from
the Pleistocene. These, with other Australian material give a reasonable
insight into the evolution of these great turtles.

The Meiolaniid turtles are characterized by the presence of an
impressive cranial ornamentation of horns and frills. They may be huge
cow-like horns in some species like a Queensland Meiolania, lateral
conical horns in Ninjemys, low rugosities in Warkalania and
ceratopsian-like frill, eye horns and nasal horn in Niolamia argentina.
The Meiolaniids where characterized by a long tail with a rather
dramatic spiked club in certain cases, like Ninjemys. They are generally
large land turtles over 6-8 ft in length, as in the case of Niolamia,
Ninjemys and the Queensland Meiolania. Thus, in essence, the Meiolaniids
where pretty close in a general structural sense to the glyptodonts
(extinct South American Xenarthrans) and the ankylosaurs. The
Meiolaniids are found from the Eocene of South America, the Oligocene
and Miocene of various Australian localities and Pleistocene of various
Australian mainland and Island sites, like Howe’ Island, Walpole Island
and New Caledonia. This has been taken to mean that the Meiolaniids
emerged in the Late Cretaceous when Australia and South America were
still connected via Antartica and got widely distributed over the
southern continents. They then appear to have moved from the main land
as chains of volcanic islands rose and sunk moving out into the sea. I
suspect that their growth in size may have happened even before the
extinction of at K/T to develop defenses against predatory dinosaurs,
like the ankylosaurs. Giant predatory birds that emerged in South
America and possibly even Australia (like Bullockornis the gigantic
predatory duck) may have kept them large. What is not clear is why they
suddenly became extinct in the recent past after lasting for almost a 65
Myrs. Gaffney’s work shows that they lie in the more basal radiations of
Cryptodira and form a clade with the Sinemyids and the crown group
Cryptodirans termed centrocryptodira. The big question is about their
Mesozoic past- would we ever know anything of it?
