+++
title = "Microraptor as a biplane"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RbhahS6_e2I/AAAAAAAAAB4/o4HN6ukTHBQ/s320/Microraptor_1.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RbhahS6_e2I/AAAAAAAAAB4/o4HN6ukTHBQ/s1600-h/Microraptor_1.jpg)[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RbhbKi6_e3I/AAAAAAAAACI/c8UnxQH4gaA/s320/Microraptor3.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RbhbKi6_e3I/AAAAAAAAACI/c8UnxQH4gaA/s1600-h/Microraptor3.jpg)  
When the chInAchArya Xu announced his dramatic find Microraptor gui in
the British tabloid something struck me as odd. One of the best
preserved skeletons, the holotype, was in a very typically bird-like
pose with the femur, tibia and tarso-metatarsus in Z-shaped disposition
much like eagles when they are zoning in on their prey. In spite of this
pose of the fossil, the chIna-s reconstructed Microraptor like
“tetrapteryx” of Beebe and Gerhard Heilmann who pictured the ancestor
of birds to be a 4-winged animal with splayed-out legs bearing wings. To
me this was patently un-anatomical. The femoral head of a typical
theropod dinosaur simply cannot splay out like that to get into the
“tetrapteryx” pose picture by Xu following the old Beebe. The funny
thing was that the chIna-s did this despite their fossil showing that it
was not the case. Then they piled on declaring Microraptor was strictly
arboreal and could not really walk on ground without damaging its
feathers. In a sense, Xu and his chIna-s cannot be entirely blamed for
their mistake, because reconstructing functional behavior from a
skeleton, especially one preserved in 2D, without an equivalent modern
analog can be difficult.

Now paleontologist Chatterjee and aeronaut Templin have claimed that
dinosaur indeed glided in a pose comparable to how it was fossilized
with the hind-limb feathers forming a lower aerofoil thus making it a
biplane, as opposed to the monoplane morphology of Archaeopteryx and the
modern birds. This is an unusual and interesting reconstruction – it is
definitely far more likely than Xu’s reconstruction, but who knows if it
was really so. I do think C and T are however correct when they state
that the tibial feathers, which are comparable to the “trouser” like leg
feathers of attacking eagles, help in streamlining the air flow around
the tibial shaft. Given the presence of similar feathers in an earlier
enigmatic deinonychosaur from China, Pedopenna one wonders if such a
strategy of gliding using hind-limb feathers was prevalent in the
earlier phase of dinosaurian flight. Of course this now needs to be
reconciled with Dial’s theory of wing-assisted incline running (WAIR) as
the precursor of dinosaurian flight, for which there is support from
living dinosaurs like the chukar partridge. WAIR is attractive because
it might explain the strategies of other terrestrial deinonychosaurs and
oviraptorsaurs with asymmetric feathers on their forelimbs alone.

Our complex speculation goes thus: In the ancestor of the coelurosaur
clade including the deinonychosaurs, scansoriopterygids, oviraptorosaurs
and therizinosaurs (in the least) WAIR was adopted as a strategy to help
running up inclines both for hunting prey or fleeing from predators up
into trees. But this did not lead to flight immediately. It only favored
the emergence of some arboreal theropods as a result of the tree niche
being opened up due to the ability to run into them as a result of WAIR.
Once in the trees the first phase appears to have involved gliding with
both hand and leg features (perhaps in the biplane mode). In this phase
the long tail with flight feathers was very important as a control of
flight or as a pitch damper in gliding. Then came the phase like
Archaeopteryx and Jinfengopteryx, where more efficient flight emerged
with loss of the leg feathers but retention of the long tail as a
control device. This was followed by loss of the long tail and the
pygostyle-borne tail feathers as seen in some early forms like
Confuciusornis.
