+++
title = "Intellectual cretinism of Hindus"

+++
Intellectual cretinism is a prevalent trend amongst the Hindu elite. The
sincere Hindus at the saMskR^ita sabha were showing me a video made by
Western gauDIya vaiShNava-s that they were hoping to use to educate the
modern hindu youth about the greatness of their culture and religion.
While I am happy that the saMskR^ita sabha is making efforts to educate
Hindus, I am appalled by the intellectual laziness of much of the Hindu
elite. Many of them are brAhmaNa-s who are not worth the thread slung on
their shoulders and hardly suited to take the place in the shiras of the
puruSha. The things that are particularly futile in this section of the
Hindu elite are the following: 1) The pursuit of flogging [dead Germans
and other assorted
Europeans](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/24/flogging-dead-germans/)
ad nauseum. Over and over again they talk of the evils of Mueller,
Oldenburg, Jolly and Gonda, as though they are relevant today, and work
themselves up on how they have insulted the vedas, hindus etc. The only
catch here is that these dead Europeans are firmly behind their graves
and Hindus have overthrown their white conquerors over 50 years ago. But
in these 50 odd years the Hindu elite did not pay attention to
reacquiring their traditions -vedic, tantric and secular. And in fact in
the mean time the successors of the old Indologists have developed into
more subtle subversionists (Note Sheldon Pollock’ work) unbeknownst to
the Hindu elite.  
2\) For all the talk the Hindu elite, especially the first two varNas,
has not shown any discipline to study the veda, or the smR^itis or the
tantras. In fact most who wax eloquent on such matters have little
knowledge of the veda in its original. If the first two varNas are so
blatantly derelict in their duty then who will teach and guide the
remaining Hindus? After all the one thing ancient Hindus did well was to
teach their lore. Have the modern Hindu elite collected these texts and
edited them? Have they studied the intricacies of vedic language before
saying “everything is in the veda”.  
3\) advaita, advaita advaita– they prattle as though Hindus had no other
intellectual tradition — they even name their sons “advaita”. They do
not realize that you study the pUrva-pakSha-s too like the great mAdhava
vidyAraNya had done in his famous work. As result they fail to see the
totality of Hindu thought and fail to appreciate the intellectual stars
like the atharvavedin bhaTTa jayanta.  
4\) Most fatally they have an alarming tendency to reject Indo-European
linguistics. “There is no PIE”, “IE linguistics is an Indological
subversionist tactic” they blather. It is this last point that exposes
this section of the Hindu elite as utter intellectual cretins. It must
be clearly said that a person who denies the monophyly of Indo-European
and the reality of PIE is an Idiot. If one fails to understand IE
linguistics one is seriously handicapped in understanding the
intricacies of the languages of Hindu thought. It is really tragic that
the successors of pANini and pata\~njali in this era are unable to grasp
key linguistic issues. Perhaps, they must stop using computers for these
were also invented by our European enemies or whoever.

In the field of vedic studies we have true intellectual cretins amongst
Hindus like Dandekar and sadly to a certain extant Madhava Deshpande
(though to give credit were due, he did produce a useful work on atharva
vedic vikR^iti pAThas). Dandekar scrapes the rock bottom in his studies
on Vedic devatA-s, and it is such stuff that is parroted back by other
Hindus. How many Hindus in the last 3o years (especially those with much
greater access to resources than many of us) did comparable work to the
greats like PV Kane, VRR Dikshitar, V. Raghavan, VS Agarwala, Sukhtankar
and the like? Our friend ekanetra asked me why did Hindu scholars not do
the job of Daniel Smith, Teun Goudriaan, Mark Dyczkowski, late Jan
Schroterman or Somadeva Vasudeva ? ekanetra himself felt greatly
indebted to the works of the above-named white scholars. Well, perhaps
those who did a comparable job were not well-known as the above because
they printed works in local Indian presses that gave them poor
circulation. But I do seem to get a feeling like him that the Hindu
elite simply did not do enough to support or widely spread the results
of their own scholars. The secular government might not have supported
us, but our elite should come forth and support scholarship privately.
