+++
title = "1998 redux"

+++
14th July 2007  
It looked as though the khANDavans have launched the biggest attack yet.
To put it simply it was devastating. The intelligence agents reported
that there were only two paths leading from the point of the original
encounter. The deficiencies on the kosha front would force a comparable
encounter irrespective of the path chosen, sooner or later. Before we
could rally our troops we saw the vile khANDavans attack every where.
They broke into our at two points treasury and were stealing our dhana.
They attacked 3 of our prime allies and prevented them from merging with
our forces. Then came the 1998 redux on the kosha front \! Truly the
decoration on the ghost from the past\! That more or less diverted our
most of our sena which was in fighting : we deployed “haridra” on that
front. That kR^ityA of the khANDavans moved on us like that
pratya\~ngirasa kR^ityA of rudra approached ushanas kAvya. She was most
horrid and terrifying — her very sight sucked out our valor like a
spider sucking out the juices of its victim. She caused us to lose our
mind, even as we watched it slowly desert us, fully aware of the
situation. She broke the power of our yoga like rudra utterly consuming
that of kAvya. Our powers became submerged and we were unable to command
our rudderless men. In the chaos of battle like the asura-s looking for
shukra they came to us. But with our luster lost like that of agni
before khANDava-dahana, we were unable to lead them against the surging
khANDavans. The khANDavans who kill the very people who help, hurled
flames at them in an attempt to extirpate them. The khANDavans stole our
money, bored into us like a malarial parasite making its way to the
victim’s liver and left us tossing like a ship heading towards wreckage
in a storm. Like the tubercular actinomycete or an infestation of
Entamoeba or a simply a persistant dog that never releases its bite they
refused to go away. We ran from pillar to post like madhurai nakIrar
trying to escape the wrath of the The god, but from every nook and
cranny emerged the hideous face of the khANDavan kR^ityA threatening to
swallow us like a krill entering a whale’s maw. Thus, routed by the
khANDavans with our kingdom and triple wealth in disarray, with no deva
or asura bearing us aid, we fled into the house of JC and SB to spend
the night.

…  
13th March 2007  
9th June 2007  
…  
We much terror we remembered the visitation that came upon Charlotte on
July 4th 1998. We had to go see Charlotte and return to our kShetra
within a matter of 1/2 hour, including a wait of 8 minutes at
Charlotte’s place. It was then that we were ambushed by that — never
was it more terrifying. We felt exactly like how dakSha would have felt
when when he saw vIrabhadra roaring into to his yAga shAla from the
skies accompanied by a hoard of pramatha-s and bhUta-s. I returned to my
kShetra and 4 minutes latter drove away on the ratha with ekanetra and
parshudADhika. 10 minutes later we rendezvoused with R. She who is like
urvashI and having the mana radiating like a Maori queen (OK now don’t
kill me – had to say it) had dismounted from her ratha and having
lowered her trademark sunshades was pensively fiddling with them. She
saw we uncouth ruffians dismount from our ratha and signaled to follow
her ratha. ekanetra became frantic asking for ST, when I pointed out
that she was there and seated next to R. I had forgotten about the
ambush and was in the the exultant company of my fellows. We stopped at
Hayasthanika’s residence and moved in. parshudADhika and piShTamukha, as
befitting their stations, started swilling liquors with Hayasthanika and
her boisterous friends. ekanetra and me were huddled in one corner in
making silent anthropological observations. R came up to us but she
avoided eye contact still wearing her dark shades in the dim lit room of
Hayasthanika. She asked to come out into the lawn and we did so. She
raised her shades in the dark evening and made a statement (in saMdhya
bhASha): “The seeker of the penguin and one who holds the skull of the
phorusrhacid will flank you.”  
I: “What a glorious moment that would be”.  
R: “It will be without dimensions and remember nightmares can come
true”.  
I: “Nightmares?”.  
R: “When we visited Charlotte’s den, we felt the presence”.  
I: “It will pass.”  
R: “You will be tested in battle, and these are not going to be the mock
battles we simulated lazing atop the vAnara parvata or the hill of
chaNDikA. This will be the real world”.  
I: “But, when did you learn of these battles of the real world?”  
R: “These years when we did not see each other?”  
I: “But you never spoke of this when we were on the long drive by the
Brazos”  
R: “Why spoil the mirth when we have the chance to experience it?”  
I: “When will the yuddha commence?”  
R: “It has begun today\!”

These last words missed my attention then.

ekanetra dropped me off near the upward slope and drove away on his
ratha. I walked away with my mind filled with pleasant anticipatory
thoughts for the night. But what we saw was a fearsome dream, so much so
that we really woke up in a sweat. A week and then a month passed we
knew the grAhi was upon us. We were being borne away by the ariShTas
that followed like one attempting cross the river of yama. What seemed
so close to us was now like on a different galaxy.

varuNa has brought us aid freed us from that deadly pasha.  
viShNu revealed the mystery of the haridra prayoga.
