+++
title = "A notable parallelism in Hindu inscriptions"

+++
After the whirlwind of Islam under the dreadful Alla-ad-din Khalji had
blown through India and flattened the Hindus, one of the first Hindu
fight-backs began under Prolaya Vema Reddi and the Kamma chiefs Kaapaya
Nayaka and Prolaya Nayaka in the Andhra country. In the North, in the
1400s a significant figure in rolling back the horrors of Islam was the
great Rana Kumbha of Mewar. He pounded the Moslem tyrants of Gujarat and
Malava. One thing that caught my attention was a striking parallelism in
the language of the two Hindu liberators in describing their victories
against the Moslems.

Prolaya Vema Reddi’s inscription of Kondavidu remarks: “I am indeed an
Agastya to the ocean which was made of the Muslim”. He uses the phrase
“mlechChAbdi (Moslem ocean) kumbhodbhava (the pot born)” referring to
the two mythological elements: 1) Along with manA and vasiShTha agastya
was born from a pot (=urvashI) into which was discharged the semen of
mitra and varuNa. 2) When the asura-s fleeing from indra and other
deva-s hid in the ocean, agastya drunk up the ocean to render the asuras
vulnerable to the deva attack.

The famed kirtistambha of Rana Kumbha was erected to commemorate his
victories over various Moslem rulers like those of Gujarat and Malava.
It contains a long inscription describing these victories. In verse 171
there is a play on kumbha’s name and describes him as the pot-born
agastya who drunk up the armies of the suratrANas (laTa evaM mAlava
suratrANAnAM senAh).

These parallels represent the remarkable cultural unity of Hindu
expression even in a period when the Islamic violence fragmented the
land.
