+++
title = "A local pantheon of mallaNNa"

+++
A train of thought culminated in me remembering the peculiar case of the
equestrian deity mallaNNa found in Ailoni. There is a smaller temple of
mallaNNa in that village. Here he is depicted with his two wives with
four arms hold a sword, trident, skull bowl and Damaru. His first wife
is mADaladevI who is supposed to be umA incarnated amongst the
lingAyata-s or gone kApu-s. She is depicted with a crown and two hands
with a sword and skull bowl. She is the Andhra ortholog of mhALsA. His
second wife is ketammA who is believed to be ga\~NgA incarnated as a
golla, and is the ortholog of bAnU. She is similarly armed as mADaladevI
but has an elaborate hair-do instead of a crown. Also shown are 3 heads
of Meccan demons or mlechCha-turuShka-s or yavana-kula daitya-s who
where beheaded by mallaNNa.

He has a peculiar entourage of deities around him. He has a herd of
sheep that he obtained from his wife ketammA. He has an army of 7 (or 7
times 100) dogs (vedic: shvabhya shvapatibhyashcha vo namaH; also
compare with 7 fold troops of maruts). His brother is bayaNNa (a fierce
bhairava; bhairoba in the mahArATTa country). There is a goddess
poshammA who may have many arms and is like shAkambharI. There is then
agni and vAyu. Then there is vAsukI or nAga-sarpaM. mallaNA is supposed
to make 13 cups of sheep milk for the 7 dogs, bayaNNa, poshammA, vAsukI,
agni, vAyu and himself. In the temple following this a ritual is
performed where the cups of leaf are made and milk offered the deities.
Here, as in some forms of the khaNDobA myth from mahArAShTra, mallaNNa
is said to have incarnated to slay Meccan demons or green-robed demons
who had seized the land in the age of kali and were tormenting the
Hindus. maNi and malla may be called suratrANa-s who ruled from Bidar
and some other place.
