+++
title = "shri bhadreshvara and the kings ofxa0champAvatI"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkdZhI9MdRI/AAAAAAAAAIs/JPg5O8CNiXE/s320/bhadra1.jpg)](http://bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkdZhI9MdRI/AAAAAAAAAIs/JPg5O8CNiXE/s1600-h/bhadra1.jpg)

The two li\~Nga-s in the ruins of the garbhA-gR^iha of the bhadreshvara
complex

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkdPEY9MdPI/AAAAAAAAAIc/eTXiJxYsE2Q/s320/bhadra2.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkdPEY9MdPI/AAAAAAAAAIc/eTXiJxYsE2Q/s1600-h/bhadra2.jpg)

The nandin and the bali pItha-s a another site on the bhadreshvara
complex

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkdPEY9MdQI/AAAAAAAAAIk/HZm25h4uFFc/s320/bhadra3.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RkdPEY9MdQI/AAAAAAAAAIk/HZm25h4uFFc/s1600-h/bhadra3.jpg)

The vidyeshvara-s on the massive walls of the bhadreshvara complex

We know little of the early history of the Hindu rulers of champAvatI
(modern Vietnam) of the dynasty of shrI-mAravarman. But it is important
to understand this to gain insight into the history of the mantra-mArga
and pAshupata shaiva matas. mAravarman appears to have reigned in the
2nd century CE as suggested by his Sanskrit inscription. There is
evidence that he led a naval attack on the chIna-s to seize the
chIna-held province of Tonkin. His much later successor had a border
dispute with the chIna-s over the Hoan Sonh mountains. When the
negotiations with the chIna-s broke down the champApati invaded Nhut Nam
and conquered it from the chIna-s. He was however wounded in this battle
and died shortly there after. During his sonâ€™s reign the chIna-s of the
Han organized a massive invasionary force by land and sea with several
new weapons like fire spears and the like and attacked champAvatI. The
Hindu ruler faced heavy losses and was forced to retreat from the
fertile Nhut Nam province. His son was the great rAja shrI bhadravarman.
He retaliated on large scale and inflicted a crushing defeat on the
chIna-s. He forced them give up Nhut Nam and continued the invasion into
the chIna-held lands to conquer Than Hoa from them.

bhadravarman reigned from 380CE to 413 CE and Sanskrit inscriptions from
his reign show that he had learned the recitation of the vedic saMhitA-s
and performed vedic rituals. He calls himself a devotee of rudra, and he
celebrated the grace of rudra in securing his victory over the chIna-s
by building the glorious temple for shiva termed shrI bhadreshvara. Now
we know that somewhat later in the far east the main lineage of the
mantra-mArga shaiva mata was that of the [vAma-srotas of the Cambodian
empire](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2007/02/greatest-temple-of-shiva.html)
with its depiction of tumburu. But the question arises as to what were
the affinities of the earlier shaiva-mata at champAvatI. An analysis of
the ruins of the bhadreshvara temple at MySon, Vietnam suggest that
siddhanta tantras of the Urdhva-srotas along with elements of the
pAshupata shaiva were in operation. The key elements of the Urdhvasrotas
or the pre-pentafurcation mantra-mArga include the worship of the
vidyeshvaras and the li\~Nga with a square yoni. Possible performance of
the jayAbhisheka as described in the kUrma purANa is an indication of
the pAshupata affinities, which was also coevally common in the gupta
empire in India. One of the images of an 8-armed shiva in nR^itya are
also highly reminiscent of similar depictions in the pAshupata temples
in India. Thus, it is clear that multiple waves of mantra-mArga
(+pAshupata) shaiva practice moved from India to the Indic civilizations
of the East. In this sense the developments there paralleled those on
the mainland where different dynasties were associated specifically with
different branches of mantra-mArga or pAshupatas.

\[It should be kept in mind that the original bhadreshvara complex was
renovated repeatedly by the later rulers of champAvatI like rudravarman
and shambhuvarman. But the complex today is in poor condition making it
difficult to separate the different layers. Further, the Americans with
their unsurprising Abrahamistic mindset destroyed a significant portion
of the temples in this complex during their invasion of modern Vietnam\]
