+++
title = "Battles raging on many fronts"

+++
On the front of jIva-sUtra parama padAratha we had faced a terrible
defeat due to the mechanisms of our current bhrAtR^ivya and old sudAnu.
However, our romAka allies gave us a chance to strike through the gap.
We ably aided by our best vIra-s on the battlefront broke through the
gap and won a victory that for years we had yearned for. We also took
the fortress of jIvasUtra kendra. Aided by our able senAdhyakSha we
broke through the defenses of the lohita-dhara and sharkara-dhara and
conquered them. But on yet another front we were pursued by the terrible
kR^ityA-s of dhUmAvatI and rakta-jyeShThA. We tried to flee to
gaja-laNDa-pura and from there to kAmasetu. Yet, the kR^ityA-s pursued
us like a malarial infestation persisting in a victim. Still gripped by
the kR^ityA, like the atri durvAsa being pursued by the chakra, we went
before the younger brother of indra, who strides triply to crush the
prahlAdIyas. The wielder of the chakra, who prowls like the dreaded lion
in the mountains, revealed to us the prayoga of the haridra-lepa. With
that we brought into control the attack of the kR^ityA powered by
rakta-jyeShThA. But the fury of the other one pursued us even into our
fortress– thus our last defense had been penetrated, like the vItahavya
horsemen and chariots raiding kAshI. For several hours she remained on
our path until we fled to the young yoddha-s fortification to evade the
kR^ityA.

\~\*\~

It almost appeared that Fourier functioned beneath his grave. Seeing
that the third hero had achieved extraordinary feats in battle and had
sacked piles of wealth, the partisans of the dead engineer of
maNgalagrAma decided to launch an attack on the un-guarded sachiva of
the 3rd hero. “The hammer of the crane” it is called or
trailokya-stambhinI — normally fatal. But our amAtya using a
dUra-dR^iShTi prayoga saw clearly that the terrifying vidyA was on its
way. Our amAtya selflessly tried to intercept and sent forth a peculiar
ulka-prayoga charged by the frightful vighna. As the texts say ” the
devadatta’s hands, legs and then speech depart from him when a
stambhinI-vidyA hits him” so it transpired. It looked as though he was
being borne to vaivasvata. But then the counter-prayoga brought him
back. Our sachiva and the amAtya of the third hero then combined to save
the victim from destruction. But for the dUra-dR^iShTi prayoga he could
have been history by now.
