+++
title = "Early Angiosperm evolution"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RfozNscE70I/AAAAAAAAAFQ/WC7toJQQHzc/s320/cabomba.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RfozNscE70I/AAAAAAAAAFQ/WC7toJQQHzc/s1600-h/cabomba.jpg)[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RfozNscE71I/AAAAAAAAAFY/RHjALntImbQ/s320/Nymphaea.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RfozNscE71I/AAAAAAAAAFY/RHjALntImbQ/s1600-h/Nymphaea.jpg)

[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RfozN8cE72I/AAAAAAAAAFg/ltcPJ_kzGM8/s320/Trithuria.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RfozN8cE72I/AAAAAAAAAFg/ltcPJ_kzGM8/s1600-h/Trithuria.jpg)

1\) Cabomba; 2) Waterlily; 3)Trithuria

Molecular methods have caused a cataclysmic shake up in angiosperm
phylogeny. Since Linnaeus the mainstream belief was that the angiosperms
were divided into Monocots and Dicots, with each clade being supported
by numerous characteristics, the chief amongst which were: Fibrous
roots, single cotyledon, parallel venation, and specific vascular
features for monocots, and tap roots, two cotyledons, reticulate
venation and their own vascular features for dicots.

But what the molecular phylogenies suggested was that the dicots were
not a natural group. Instead, a subset of dicot termed the “Eudicots”
were found to be a sister group of the Monocots forming the crown group
of the angiosperm tree. A sister group to this crown group was the
magnoliid-type clade which included the classic eumagnoliids and the
family chloranthacaeae. The fossils from the later Mesozoic generally
supported this picture of the magnoliids being a sister group of the
above crown angiosperms. In these phylogenies basal angiosperms outside
of the above clades were supposed to include: 1) the enigmatic
Amborella, a shrub from New Caledonia, described first by BGL Swami from
Bangalore, usually considered the basal-most angiosperm clade. 2) The
waterlilies and the Cabomba or the nymphaeales 3) The mainly woody
austrobaileyales.

Saarela et al have recently reported that the enigmatic family of
Hydatellaceae are actually a sister group of the Nymphaeales. They are
aquatic plants entirely submerged and growing in ponds and lakes.
Recognized only in the 1970s Trithuria and Hydatella were found only in
Australia, Tasmania and New Zealand. In 1994 two Indian botanists found
this plant in ponds in Maharashtra (Yadav, S.R. & M.K. Janarthanam,
Hydatellaceae: a new family to Indian flora with a new species. Rheedea
Vol. 4(1) 1994; 17-20). This distribution suggests that this plant might
be a remnant of the Mesozoic Gondwanaland. The fossil angiosperm
Archaefructus comes to mind– like the Hydatellaceae it has naked
unisexual flowers in inflorescences and both are aquatic. This raises
the possibility that the great angiosperms that were to take over as the
dominant plants in the Mesozoic made their advent as aquatic plants with
inconspicuous flowers. The rise of the waterlilies from such a ancestor
might represent one of the most ancient innovations of large flowers for
attracting pollinators. This find also suggests that the angiosperms
very rapidly exploded to colonize practically every niche available to a
seed plant undergoing numerous morphological adaptations — they probably
had something that other dominant plants of the era did not or were
given a chance by a mass extinction (?). So it might be useful to study
the molecular developmental aspects of these angiosperm lineages at
greater depth. In particular I would be interested in seeing the
differences in expansions of the AP2, VP1, WRKY MYB, MADS bZIP and bHLH
between these plants and the crown group angiosperms.
