+++
title = "Raised by bAlA and dattAtreya-I"

+++
In the hot plain to the north of the Wardha river, in the village of
Dhamangaon, a band of Moslems led by their Kazi were chasing a young
Hindu maid. Nothing unusual for the times, it was one more of the Moslem
women-skimming raids. She ran into a shop of the local tailor, but he
terrified by the charging Moslems with their upraised scimitars started
running as fast as he could towards the house of the local headman
Mankoji. All of a sudden the woman vanished and the Moslems, were unable
to find her. Mankoji, who had just emerged from his daily worship of
dattAtreya saw the tailor panting and telling him of the incident that
had just occurred. He asked the tailor to calmly return and call the
womenâ€™s clansmen to take her back. He did so and to his surprise he saw
the Moslem ruffians lying beaten up with limbs broken staggering back on
their horses and beating a hasty retreat. The Kazi was furious and
sought the help of the commandant of the Yeotmal garrison. A band of 120
Mohammedan horsemen came charging down on the hamlet of Dhamangaon
raising clouds of dust beneath the thundering hoofs of their horses. The
Hindus started fleeing in terror. The head man Mankoji asked them to
take cover behind the fortifications and he stood at the gate that lead
into the fortifications mounting his horse and taking up his spear,
sword and shield. He saw Moslem band charging fierce down the alley
leading the gate. He stood on their path and he felt dattAtreya appear
before him as he did to lead the hordes of kArtavIryArjuna to war. He
felt the trident of dattAtreya enter his spear, the sword of viShNu
enter his own and on his forehead he felt the presence of the one who
had single handed slaughtered the 30 sons of bhaNDa even as shachiveshI
and daNDanAthA had looked on. He fell upon the turuShkas, who had not
even noticed him. So great was his fury that day that the 120 turuShka-s
attained yamAlaya at the edge of his sword before a muhurta was over.
