+++
title = "shAstA in the drAviDaxa0country"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RnOEoE5tW-I/AAAAAAAAAK8/f3bbD4QEByM/s320/ayyanar1.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RnOEoE5tW-I/AAAAAAAAAK8/f3bbD4QEByM/s1600-h/ayyanar1.jpg)Unlike
khaNDobA, mallaNNa or mallAri of the upper peninsular India and
Maharashtra, in the drAviDa country the homologous equestrian deity does
not get identified with mArtANDa-bhairava. Instead he remains pretty
distinct and is known as shAstA (dramiDa: chAttAn) or Arya (dramiDA:
ayyan or ayyanAr). He has a tremendously popular cult atop the shabari
hill in the chera country (just like khaNDoba in Jejuri), but as it
exists this cult is far removed from his pristine form, more commonly
seen amongst the drAviDa-s of the modern TN. Some smArta-s ignorantly
call him a large peyy (dravidian word for bhUta or ghost), but my clan,
like any proper polytheist, have great regard for him as a major
parivAra-devata of kumAra. Several shrIvaiShNava-s also look down upon a
band of tenkalai vaiShNavas from Tirunelveli, who worship ayyan as their
primary deity and refer to him in disparaging terms.

Two common tales exist about ayyan: one which is widely known but
probably of later provenance is that he is harihara-putra born from
mohini and shiva. This is seen in some temples in both the drAviDa and
the chera desha-s. In this context, in some ayyan shrines rudra may be
depicted as a muni gazing at viShNu, depicted as a bewitching
mahAnagnikA, with a cobra covering her yoni. As per the other tale indra
generated a new god, or brought up sUrya-s son, who was ayyan. When the
villagers, often described as being of the kullAlar guild, asked indra
for a deity to protect their grAma-s he send ayyan along with two agents
respectively generated by rudra and viShNu: changali karrupu chuvami and
muttu karrupu chuvami. The deva-s also gave ayyan two wives: pUrNA and
puShakalA (just as with khaNDobA). In protecting the people ayyan along
with his host of warriors (see below) killed many demons. They also
thrashed errant villagers and maintained law and order.

There are several old shrines of ayyan in the tamil country and their
antiquity is supported by the mention of such shrines in the
shilappadhikAraM. One of the oldest shrines of shAstA is seen in a site
just outside the village of Karivalamvandanallur (32 kilometers
northwest of the village of Kazhugumalai). Here there is an ancient
grave yard of Dravidians buried in urns. Beside it is a stream and a
rocky hill suddenly rises next to it. On top of this hill is the archaic
shrine of kari-chAttAn (shAstA on the elephant) from the sangam period.
Outside it one can see numerous pitchers with ancient offerings to the
god and old votive horses of a bygone era. There Arya sits in silence
flanked by his two wives. There one feels the primal presence of shAstA
â€” none of the melodramatic outbursts of bhakti that the travelers to
shabari mention. It is also a different experience from Jejuri amidst
the throngs of rustic mahArATTa and dhangars. Here there is only
silence, but for the occasional bird, yet all around you feel the god
and his wives.

In later temples ayyan is typically accompanied by several other
sub-shrines usually to other deities, always counting to 21 though they
may differ from shrine to shrine. pUrNA and puShkalA may be located
inside the shrine of shAstA himself beside him or occasionally have
their own shrines. The commonly found ones are:  
piLLaiyAr (vinAyaka); murugan (kumAra); agni-virabhadran
(agni-vIrabhadra); different kinds of karrupu chuvami-s (e.g.
muttu-karrupu-chuvAmi, changali-karrupu-chuvAmi, kazhuvaDi karrupu);
karrupAyI amman (a sister or wife of the karrupu-s) mU-amman or
pEchI-amman (dhUmAvatI or rakta-jyeShTha, usually shown with a winnowing
basket); bhadrakALI amman (bhadra-kAlI); rAkkAyi-amman (rAkA); meyyANDI
amman; muniyANDI (a muni-formed deity); paitya irrulappan or suDalai
\[suDukAT\] madan; irulAyI amman (wife of paitya irulappan); nAgappan;
sonai chuvAmi (he is the deity associated with the urn burials. Some
drAviDa-s inform me that he is actually a variety of karrupu and might
be called sonai karrupu.); mAchi-chuvAmi (he rides a tiger like Arya in
the chera country); sapta-kanya-s (the deified Pleiades open cluster).
There is also a shrine for the first pUjArI of the shAstA cult (the
Adi-pUjArI) and, on occasions, a sannayAsI.
