+++
title = "Strike as expected"

+++
We had the dUradR^iShTi about the movements of the khANDavan vairi-s. We
knew precisely how they were going to strike. So we waited patiently and
as we knew that they had two prayogas against us and where the abhichAra
was going to be placed. We saw the first graha coming and were for a
while caught in its stambhana. Then the great rudra came to our aid when
we made the 8-fold oblations and neutralized it. Who verily escapes the
trishUla of The god? Then we moved forth and dug up the abhichAra and
retrieved the needful. However, to our dismay in the process a dreadful
kR^ityA escaped, much like the one which nearly sent us to the
buffalo-rider. The kR^ityA could not immediately hit us as we were
protected by the vajra of the thunderer, but it is around and could hit
anytime.

Further news in streamed in on the mischief. The MMM had heard the
howling of the wolf almost like in one of those perfect motif scenes
from one of the itihAsa and was terrified by it. MMM was overpowered by
their time tested strike of dhUmAvatI. One packet of dhUmAvatI was sent
our way with all its typical accouterments . That one who was consumed
earlier by the bagalAmukhI prayoga, however fought back fiercely, and
was saved the other amAtya’s and MMM-intersection’s guhya prayoga. But
now it was our pakSha’s time under the fire as they had turned our way
in the alternating attack. We also realized that the spasha-s had deeply
penetrated us. Then the news reached us the that the svAmAtya was taken
by another mystery hit. We received the message that as in the battle
where kabandha-mukha had been repulsed by are mantras to bR^ihaspati, we
needed bR^ihaspati’s aid again.

We saw the karNa-pishAchini might be used and moved with utmost caution
with the fiend-driving vajra of indra to cause the pishAchini to lose
track of us. As the bhR^igu-s of yore frustrated the pishAchini-s we too
frustrate them. May indra nullify the kR^ityA makers, may we not lose an
eye like bhaTTa kumArila.

…\*…\*…

The kR^ityA launched two attacks on the expected day. We panicked
briefly but were able to hold fort. This was a classical dhumAvatI
kR^ityA in every sense — the khANDavans were completely unaffected by it
even when back hurled. Instead it kept hovering around us constantly
making attempts to pierce our shield of skanda
