+++
title = "Our lessons from the subversion of Russia"

+++
Begins
[here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/04/14/the-subversion-of-russia/)  
This alliance of eka-svAmin-s is the very same one operating against the
deva-yajvan-s of bhArata. To begin to “see” this one must also ask
questions like:

  - Where did the Sikh terrorists who massacred Hindus get shelter and
    who gave them diplomatic support?
  - What passport did the Moslem terrorist mastermind released during
    the IC 814 hijacking carry?
  - When the “big cracker of Pokhran” and “Gujarat” happened who were
    the responders inside the desh receiving orders from the eka-svamin
    masters of navyarkapura or gaja-laNDapura? Who were tarred during
    these events?
  - Why do these responders within the desh bleed in their hearts for
    ekasvamin-s but are mute as vacuum when Hindus are killed?

Some of this was murky to us when we were in the desh but became clear
when we settled beside the Brazos river in krau\~ncha dvIpa, just like
our classmates, for the sake of artha. There the Avatsara and the
AmAvasava disrupted, most dramatically, the meeting of the turuShka-s.
In its aftermath we saw the open advertisements in the library
supporting the turuShka-s in their campaign to ravage kAshmIra, the land
our Agamas.

The whole campaign has run in parallel with respect to Russia and
bhArata. Our masses that rose up during the struggle against the then
leaders of the Anglosphere suddenly went quiet with freedom and a new
crop of history books appeared on the scene. Our maha-amAtya chachAji
had already been subverted to socialism and with him the whole
governance was subverted that way. An Islamic caliphate in the form of
the terrorist state of Pakistan was created to deliver the other pincer
grip.

The Hindu society always had a bicameral system of elites: brAhmaNa-s
and kShatriya-s. These elite were in part separated from economic
enterprise and wealth generation– the domain of the vaishya. The whole
edifice stood on the base of the generalist shUdra who could adapt to
provide what ever kind of manufacturing base that was required. When the
original kShatriya-s fell, the shUdra-s arose to provide a new
generation of honorary kShatriya-s. But the bicameral elite system was
maintained- brAhmaNa-s and the new shUdra elite. This bicameral system
was very important because it acted as an intrinsic system of checks and
balances. The separation of the elite from wealth generation also did
not concentrate all types of power in one center allowing Hindu society
to survive assaults from its enemies \[A digression on this point: When
Maharana Pratap rose to defend Hindus against the Moslem assault he was
funded by the independently rich vaishya Bahman Shah. In addition to
contributing an enormous wealth for the Hindu struggle Shah and his
brothers personally joined Pratap’s army and fought the Moslems. Thus,
eventhough Chittor was taken and looted by the Moslems (the kShatriya
wealth), the Hindus were able to sustain their struggle\]. The army was
secularized and made bereft of an ideology. No army can fight glorious
battles if the only ideology it has is career advancement or regimental
honor beyond a certain point. This nullified the kShatrIya dharma in the
whole national army. So strong are the secular traditions in the army
that people are afraid to think of it being ideologically indoctrinated
into a Hindu force.

On the other hand the demonizing of the brAhmaNa is only too well known
to dilate upon here. Thus, for the first time the Hindu system with all
its checks and balances has been breached: -The first step in this
subversion was socialism (used to discredit brAhmaNa-s especially and
denude the Hindu religion; cf. Russian socialist revolution).  
\-The parallel step was secularization of the army — thus as we
discussed before the India army’s record is not the best (cf. the
ideologically rudderless Russian army).  
\-Stabs via Sikh and Moslem terrorists (cf. Moslem terrorist action on
Russia).  
\-Discredit national politicians and foster economic dependency, or
economic despair.

The underlying theme in all this is the alignment of the eka-svamin
powers, despite their internal squabbles, on each of these issues. While
one may counter now Rus itself is an eka-svamin country, there are fine
points that are lost in this argument. Ultimately, no eka-svamin power
will come to terms with an independent bahu-svamin power center.
