+++
title = "Why has he attained eko mAnuSha Anandaxa0?"

+++
We finally had that chance for the wonderful meeting with ekanetra and
ST. ST said: “I think I have found one who has ekomAnuSha Ananda”. “Lead
us to that one” we said. ST lead us to her charming friend jAyadrathi,
who in someways reminded us of our friend R. ekanetra who knows the ways
of the strI-s declared to ST and me in saMdhyabhASha: “This jAyadrathi
has not attained eko mAnuSha Ananda.” But we knew that she could lead us
to that one who had attained eko mAnuSha Ananda. She took us across the
nadi of bhaya to the great palace in which lived the one graced by the
mother of the rAkSha-s who adorns the southwest. He was one who had
attained eko mAnuSha Ananda. On seeing him we knew this. We were awed by
his power and dazzled by the energy emanating from him. He was
surrounded by his several a\~Ngana-s, putras and bhR^itya-s all of coral
or shell-like complexion. The jAyadrathi said he is a mahApuruSha like
whom no one exists. We saw him in wonderment, made strongly aware of our
own fragile and powerless selves. His presence towered over ours like a
gigantic statue of the tathagata made by the nAstIka-s. He truly looked
like one for whom indra had given all. Then did ST ask that profound
question: “Why has this nirR^itti-priya attained eko mAnuSha Ananda ?”  
ekanetra said: “I believe he has been given all by indra. After all the
shrutI stated: yuvAsyAt sAdhu yuvAdhyAyakaH … sarvA vittasya
pUrNAsyAt”.  
I said: “O vaishvAmitra I do think that the vajrin girt by the maruts
and aided by the triple-striding viShNu has given us many things that he
has not given that mahApuruSha, but shatamanyu has yet given him eko
mAnuSha AnandaH.”  
ekanetra said: “That might be so, O bhArgava, but why has he attained it
while we have been consigned to our sthala-s”?  
ST: “But we all know that vR^itrahan places all good things apart.”

Then we went to hang out with the jAyadrathI and enjoy the pleasures
with which ST could inundate, the tongue, the nose, the eyes and the
belly. ST’s new inventions in sUpa-kala was like the soma drunk by
dashadyau in the realm of shatakratu or the food eaten in suvargo loka.
This was pleasing to the external senses. But the presence of jAyadrathI
caused within us an emptiness — a sense utter failure of our astra-s,
like the vAnara-s crumbling before kumbhakarNa’s last march. We then
moved away and went the regions of Hayastanika. As we have always
mentioned in the past Hayastanika emanates a tremendous revitalizing
energy. The very sight of Hayastanika, who was a like materialization of
a side glance of kAmeshvarI enlivened our spirits, like the trikadruka-s
refreshing maghavan. Hayastanika, who exceeds most in the combination of
physical might, beauty, and intelligence shone like a Venus in the
firmament of the senses. The inner senses were delighted, even as a
momentary glimpse of the mayUkha-s of kaulinI arouses the sadhaka to
supreme delight. Delighting in the company of she whose tresses are like
the prop roots of a nyagrodha tree we let some time pass.

…\*…

We had defeated the evil kR^isha-mukha in battle. It was glorious
victory, one of the biggest ever we had scored after the fierce battle
of saptadashAnta. It was similarly bloody. In other ways it was like the
great victory of dakShiNa nadi, but there our forces had total
superiority in every way. Our vairi-s, the mlechCha chiefs, trembled
before our forces to whom mahendra had given the signal in the form of
the eagle after we had performed the autumnal rite. With indra on our
side we totally dominated the battle from start to finish. On the way we
scattered some chIna-s who dared to challenge us. Here, kR^isha-mukha
a\~nkusha-nAsa, viT-mukha ANishiras and their allies formed a vyuha
against us. But several mlechCha-s from their side came over to ours as
we used diplomatic tactics to go hand-in-hand with the offensives. Thus,
we prevailed over them. It was one of our great victories but in a sense
empty — our mitra with whom we had gone to the center of the town in a
mirthful advance was not there to celebrate. In a sense, we felt like
king yuddhiShThira after that fateful clash of 18 days on the kuru
field:  
The four vIra-s were scattered; It was like the forgotten struggle of
the bundela-s against the Moslems; We were unable to enjoy the mirth our
brave vIra-s who faced the fury of the enemy arrows as the banners were
mixed and the dust rising to the heaven the great clash of men.

…\*…

On the other front despite this great victory the khANDavan-s remained
active. The unseen one who deployed that strike of the “crane” was also
active. It was the 3rd time the strike of the crane was being deployed,
one for each ardhasaMvatsara.
