+++
title = "The greatest temple ofxa0shiva"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RdQNa-8rbvI/AAAAAAAAAEA/c-oohFLsEEw/s320/elephanta_03_0001.jpg)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RdQNa-8rbvI/AAAAAAAAAEA/c-oohFLsEEw/s1600-h/elephanta_03_0001.jpg)

We converged on this issue via a peculiar way –We were blessed after
many years to enjoy the sUpa-kalA of ST. For our tongues, which are dead
as that of the prince of shrI-lanka in the Indian pleasure house, it was
a like water for a man in the desert (of course we were reminded of the
same simile in the R^ivedic mantra RV10.4.1). In course of enjoying her
superlative efforts, I was educating ST on the vagaries of Hindu
history, when she brought to my attention a verse by the great Octavio
Paz, the ex-ambassador of Mexico:

Down at the foot of the sublime sculptures,  
Disfigured by the Mohammedans and the Portuguese,  
The multitude has left its litter,  
Tiffin for the crows and the curs.  
I damn it to a thousand reincarnations,  
Each on a muck-heap  
While those others,  
Can be carved, in living flesh, for aeons,  
In the hell for defacers of statues.

\-Sunday on Elephanta

ST: “One of the greatest works of art of ours but when was it made and
who made it ?”

To me it was greatest temple of the terrible rudra. Unfortunately it
lies vandalized by Christian terrorists filled with brains rotting from
the Abrahamistic mental disease. Truly the words of the venerable Celsus
comes to mind: ‘…Christians are like a synod of worms on a dunghill,
croaking and squeaking, “For our sakes was the world created.”‘

In this regard an example of the stinking Christian intra-cranial decay
is vividly illustrated by the comment of the Portuguese vandal Antonio
Bocarro: “There is also a large and deep tank of water without which the
heathens of the East never build their pagodas; because among their
other abominations they believe that water purifies and cleanses them”
\[\!\]

To me the greatness of the temple of shrI-pUrI mainly lies in the fact
that it is one of the few temples that is literally a purANa in rock. It
helps us reconstruct the history of the pAshupatas, and predecessors of
the kAlAmukha-s of later days. To me on seeing the glory of shiva on
rock the words came to mind:

daMShTrA-karAlaM divi nR^ityamAnaM hutAsha-vaktraM jvalanArka-rUpaM |  
sahasra-pAdAkShi-shirobhi yuktaM bhavantam-ekaM praNamAmi rudraM ||  
namo.astu somAya sumadhyamAya namo.astu devAya hiraNyabAho |  
namo.agni-chandrArka-vilochanAya namo.ambikAyAH pataye mR^iDAya ||

From the evidence of the copper coins of kR^iShNa-rAja that appear to
have been used as a payment for the workers on the island of shrI-pUrI
it seems the cave-temple of shiva was excavated during the reign of the
early kalachuri-s a branch of the haihaya clan between 525 to 575 of CE.
The chief sponsors seem to have been the kings kR^iShNa-rAja and
sha\~Nkara-gaNa. The main idol other than the garbhAgR^iha which houses
the li\~Nga is 3-headed maheshvara mUrti. This triadic representation is
suggestive of the lAkulIsha pAshupatas because they clearly emphasize
the triadic nature of rudra: the pAshupata sUtras state that rudra
manifests as R^iShi, vipra and mahat. It also provides another triad as
which rudra manifests: vAmadeva, jyeShTha and rudra. vAmadeva generates
various kArya-s; jyeShTha is the supreme being or the sole existence;
rudra is one who unites the universe with destruction. It is precisely
this triad of the ancient para-vedic pAshupata sUtra-s that is
represented by the splendid mahesha-mUrti in the central southern niche
of shrI-pUri caves. The important point to note here is that even though
the pAshupatas use the pentadic mantras of sadyojAta etc their shiva is
essentially triadic. It is in the mantra-mArga that the pa\~ncha-brahma
is the central theme, especially as outlined in the siddhAnta thought.
This connection is further strengthened by the presence of an image of
the holy lakulIsha, the founder of the of the pAshupata lineage, in the
north-eastern-most niche of the temple. This shows that the early
kalachuris were patrons of the lAkulIsha lineage of pAshupata-s rather
than classical mantra mArga shaivas. It was only their late descendants
after the 800s who made the shift to the mantra-mArga of the
matta-mayUra branch of siddhAnta shaivas.

We have been able to piece together some of the history of the shrI-pUrI
\[Elephanta\] Island that has some bearing on the spread of the
pAshupata sect of the shaiva-s, their cultural contributions and the
parallel rise of the mantra-mArga shaivas, especially the
siddhAnta-shaivas.

The early kalachuri dynasty came to a dismal end in the first half of
the 600s of CE after they faced a dual attack from the rising chAlukya-s
and remnants of the old maurya-s that had established themselves in
Konkans (their descendant chandra-rao more of Javali in the Konkans was
killed by Shivaji to finally end the dynasty). The mauryan ruler in a
naval campaign took over the island of shrI-pUrI from from the
kalachuris during the reign of buddharAja, even as the chalukya general
ma\~Ngalesha invaded the northern realm of the kalachuri-s and conquered
it. However, the maurya-s could not hold on to the island as the next
chAlukya king, the mighty pulakeshi II defeated the maurya-s by griping
them from both sides via a naval and land attack. The Aihole inscription
poetically describes this \[translation from Epigraphica Indica vol 6
modified by me based on the original\]:  
“In the Konkanas the impetuous waves of the forces lead by \[pulakeshi\]
swiftly swept away the rising wavelets of pools- the mauryas. When
radiant like the destroyer of tripura he besieged pUrI, the shrI of the
western sea, with hundreds of ships in appearance like arrays of rutting
elephants, the sky, dark-blue as a young blue-water lily and covered
with rows of massive clouds, resembled the sea, and the sea was like the
sky.”

Before the mid-750s of CE the mauryas appeared to have reappeared to
control shrI-pUri and the surrounding Konkans perhaps as a nominal
feudatory of the chAlukya-s and then some what independently. Around the
mid-700s a large Moslem attacking fleet overwhelmed the maurya defenses
of the island of shrI pUrI and occupied it, but the chalukya king of
Gujarat, pulakeshirAja sent a naval expedition to destroy the Moslems.
This is alluded to in an allegorical form in the late book of the shiva
purANa termed the koTi-rudra saMhitA. Here a vaishya going to the island
of shrI pUrI was captured by the rAkShasas and imprisoned with other
worshipers of shiva. These rAkShasas are said to greatly harass the
people and the vaishya invokes shiva who comes and gives him the
pAshupatAstra. Using this he kills the rAkShasas. Then a king vIrasena
the son of mahAsena is said to liberate the island after receiving
weapons from shiva to kill the mlechChas in naval expedition.

The maurya-s appear to have held their ground in the island despite
these historical tremors albeit as subordinates of more powerful rulers
of the mainland. We have an inscription from 1069 CE that states that
govinda-rAja the maurya ruler was a vassal of the yAdava ruler
seunachandra II and probably administered the island for the yadava
overlord. It may have also been held by them for the Kalyani chAlukya-s
for a while there after. At some point after the conquest of Konkans by
Mahmud Gavan and Adil Shah from the Vijayanagara rulers it seems to have
been taken over by the Mohammedans who inflicted some damage to it.
Subsequently it was taken from them by the Christian vandals who fired
cannons on to the cave to demolish most sculptures. The early European
visitors record that the icons were vividly painted and that there were
several paintings in the caves like those at Ajantha. This suggest that
it had survived in reasonable condition till then.

The dispersal of the kalachuri-s seem to have taken the pAshupata-s in
two directions : 1) northwards to West-central India, where the
kalchuri-s appear to have survived for while till the great kalachuri
king kokalla revived them in the 800s of CE. Another northern branch
also established a strong hold in saryUpAra in Gorakhpur. In course of
their dispersal the pAshupata-s probably moved with them and found new
patrons in western India in the form of the guhilot rAjputs- the prince
bappa rAval (first half of the 700s of CE) was initially disciple of a
lAkulIsha guru of the harita lineage. He subsequently became a disciple
of the lineage of matsyendra and was initiated into the mantra-mArga.
This dispersal along with that of the maurya-s to valabhi appears to
have resulted in the spread of the pAshupatas throughout western India
where they established many famous centers of pashupata learning like
aNahilapAtaka in Gujarat. 2) A second branch of the kalachuri-s
dispersed to the south where they were initially vassals of the Kalyani
chAlukyas in Karnataka. They eventually overthrew the chAlukyas and
became rulers themselves and allowed the grand revival of the lAkulIsha
pAshupata sect in the form of the great kAlAmukhas. This revival was
further supported by further influx of fleeing pAshupata-s from the
north especially Kashmir and possibly aNahilapAtaka during the Islamic
depredations. The kalachuri reign in the south was eventually overthrown
due to a degraded shaiva movement in the form the vIrashaiva-s, whose
rise was in part favored by the general shaiva fervor cultivated by the
kAlAmukhas.

The mantramArga shaiva-s appear to have initially existed symbiotically
with the pAshupata lineages as suggested by the subscription to a
similar mythological base (tirumular’s mythology) and mUla mantra
collection (pa\~nchAkShari and pa\~ncha-brahma) as well as association
with shAkta temples (A pAshupata inscription from the gupta era, 374 CE,
shows that the pAshupatAcharya lokodadhi established a shakti temple in
madhya pradesh). However, the mantramArga-s developed their hallmark,
the elaborate mantra-prayoga, which they extensively used to aid royal
disciples in gaining power. This feature is also shared with the
pAshupatAcharya-s who deployed royal atharva vedic rites and performed a
similar role in Mewar. Examples of associations in the rise of major
dynasties are:  
pAshupata-s: guhadatta (guhilot) dynasty which gave rise to the
shishodia clan with luminaries like the mahArANa-s Bappa Raval, kumbha,
Sanga and Pratap. Even till recently the Chittor ruling family visited
the shiva temple with the image of lakulIsha and worships it every
Monday.  
mantra-mArga  
dakiShNa-srotas(bhairava tantras):A bhairavAchArya performed tantric
rites in a shmashAna explicitly for the establishment of the dynasty of
puShpabhUti that spawned the great king harshavardhana.  
[vAma-srotas (tumburu
tantras)](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2005/02/tumburu-manifestation-of-rudra.html):
The brAhmaNa hiraNyadAman performed the rites as per the vAma-srotas for
the rise of jayavarman-II the founder of the Angkor empire centered in
Cambodia.  
Urdhvasrotas (siddhAnta tantras): The various AchAryas of the
Urdhvasrotas performed major rites for the kings of the shilahara,
chola, rAShTrakUTa, chAlukya, paramAra and bhUpAla dynasties. Their
rites have been implicated the rise of the paramAra-s and the revival of
the kalachuri-s and their highly aggressive king gA\~Ngeya deva.
gA\~Ngeyadeva’s Acharya of the Urdhvasrotas performed rites for him to
liberate the temples of Kangra and retaliate against the Mohammedan
attack on Varanasi by Ahmed Niyaltegin, the general of Mahmud Ghaznavi.
When other Hindu kings were watching bewildered, gA\~Ngeyadeva and his
valiant son karNa single-handed attacked the Moslems in Kangra and drove
them out.  
pUrva-srotas (garuDa-tantras): prayoga-s performed by this were used by
the malla rulers in Nepal in their ascent. These prayogas are comparable
to those of pR^ithivi-nAryaNa of Nepal of a later era.

In cultural terms the spread of the pAshupata-s appears to have played
an important role in the preservation of classical Hindu theater- the
nATya of bharata and tANDya \[These two appear to be depicted in the
shrI-pUrI naTarAja panel\]. Looking at the depictions in the shrI-pUrI
caves we find the following : 1) lakulIsha 2) naTarAja, with umA,
vinAyaka, skanda, 3) andhakAsura vadha, 4) rAvaNa shaking kailAsa, 5)
the marriage of pArvatI and rudra, 6) sporting of sati and rudra on
kailAsa, 7) ardhanArIshvara, 8) the taming of ga\~NgA and 9) the
mahesha-mUrtI. There is also a separate set of icons of the 8 mAtR^ikA-s
with gaNapati and vIrabhadra flanking them. Other icons associated with
shiva include indra, viShNu, brahmA, bhR^i\~Ngin and nandin. These
depictions are all indicative of the post-kAlidAsa period (rise of
vinAyaka as major deity) and is consistent with the descriptions of the
core “story sections” of the shiva purANa (excluding the late book like
koTirudra saMhitA). It is likely that the core shiva purANa composed
during the gupta period was comprised of the story sections
corresponding to the rudra-saMhitA and the rudreshvara saMhitA-s of the
modern shiva purANA, which were probably combined with ritual material
on the pa\~nchAkSharI, li\~Nga-sthApana, bhasma-vidhi, rudrAkSha and
deva-yajana. Based on the comparative analysis with other purANas, the
mahAbhArata and and vedic brAhmaNas it is clear that there was an
earlier body of shaiva tales that consisted of:  
1\) defeat of the brAhmaNa-s of dArukavana 2) origin of li\~Nga 3)
shiva’s marriage with sati and destruction of dakSha’s sacrifice 4)
the marriage of shiva and pArvatI. 5) birth of kumAra 6) destruction of
tripura 7) killing of andhaka 8) killing of gajAsura 9) Drinking of the
hAlahala. Perhaps some additional material on jalandhara or
sha\~Nkhachuda was also present with this set. This set was probably
present during the shu\~Nga times which was the template for kAlidasa’s
work. It is not clear if they were a floating mass of stories
distributed amongst various then current purANas or already collected
into a saMhitA. In any case this body served as the base for the core
shiva-purANa of gupta times during which vinAyaka was inserted after the
ancient skanda tale.
