+++
title = "Worth coming back"

+++
[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RcGNNGQtsJI/AAAAAAAAACg/ng7ZELJO_KQ/s320/sahasrara.png)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RcGNNGQtsJI/AAAAAAAAACg/ng7ZELJO_KQ/s320/sahasrara.png)  
[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RcGPA2QtsLI/AAAAAAAAACw/pNHOltntt8A/s320/sahasrara_green.png)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RcGPA2QtsLI/AAAAAAAAACw/pNHOltntt8A/s320/sahasrara_green.png)

She said: “We return to that halcyon year and a half. When the son of
Brinda was toiling relentlessly, fueled by testosterone and goaded by
his crafty, parents we set out the seek the truth. Beyond the row of 3
shUdras were two: one a shUdra and one a brAhmaNa.”  
I said: “We return indeed to that time in our walk. We were free, like
never before and never after. We knew not fear like jaTAyu and sampAtI
reaching for the sun. It was then that I standing on the broken wall of
the larger kandUka prastha. I saw you strolling into to smaller kandUka
prastha and headed downwards to meet you. With you were 4 others so we
exchanged words in code as kApAlika-s do.”  
She said: “Yes indeed\! The vAta is blowing with pitiless fury. Sorrow
and joy are but two pans of the balance. The wielder of the thunderbolt
holds it aloft. Today into one pan he has cast a weight tomorrow in
another he shall.”

We mounted our gardabha-s and moved towards the base of the imposing
pinnacle of kaunDinya where the warm river washed the banks. With our
legs in the shallow water we looked at the blue skies. We felt that link
with bhArata, the land conquered by our ancestors, the waters, the sky,
the mountains. We thought of the melody “somyam maa..” “hi-indrA…” came
to the mind. We were talking of early archosauromorph cranial anatomy
and of pterosaurs — so much of what we knew was to change. We feared
that the unholy kIkaTa or the harmful dasyu would break into our
reverie. So we together drew that yantra with the feather and placing a
feather on it invoked kandhara, to repel rAkShasas. We also cast around
us the yakSha-s and yakShinI-s of dreadful kShudra vidyA-s like
virodhikA, R^ituhArikA and duHsaha, so that none may challenge us.

Thus, repelling the anindra-s we moved on experiencing the rasa-s that
break down when emerging as words. We came back by passing through the
senA-prastha, beside the vigha\~NgamIra, the dasyu-shAla and the cleft
in the mountain. We then enjoyed mahAbhoga of bhojana and having
refreshed ourselves we proceeded to perform our studies on the water. We
saw that yonder world before us. May we be conquerors of that world with
all its beings we wished…. We still wish. We spoke again through the
veil that separates us. We connected with guhyasomA and lost it again.
