+++
title = "The last Arya"

+++
Through the corrupt gramophone recording we heard the voice of Kareik,
the last devlole of the Kalash, reciting the ancient hymns of dishani,
bhagiShT, sutarem, imra and mahandeu. These were recorded by
Morgenstierne in 1929 and five years later the devalole was dead and
with that the oral tradition of the Kalash was lost. Several decades
earlier the Kalash had already faced the death blow from the Jihad of
Abd-ar-Rahman, the murderous Ghazi from Afghanistan. Per say there was
nothing new in the event — Islam and the cult of Jeshua ben Yusuf had
annihilated, and were to continue annihilating, numerous religions and
cultures of the world. Yet, there was something in this that struck a
chord in us. We heard some time back from both Sh and Hayasthanika that
the pArShu-s were reduced to a tribe and amongst them those maintaining
the oral Avestan tradition were on their way out. These people were our
Indo-Iranian sister groups, their religions and deities homologous of
ours. Despite bearing head on blow from Islam they had survived this
long due to the innate resilience that characterizes our ancestral
culture. But the effects of time could not be overcome and they were on
the path of extinction. We, last of this great superior tradition, were
the next in line and are seen sliding down that path. The vedic shAkhas
being denuded, simultaneously attacked by the two Abrahamisms, we seem
like a pretty Hindu girl surrounded by unwashed, bearded Meccan
ruffians.

Why have we reached this condition ? Some parasitoid wasps inject
polydnaviruses into their host and with that they lose their ability to
mount a immune response on the inserted wasp larva. This is what has
happened to Hindu society because the Hindu immune surveillance has just
failed to recognize the parasites. The prolix Balagandadhara of Ghent’s
researches provide data to visualize this problem.
