+++
title = "On the vedic sacrificial ritual and its Babylonianxa0parallels"

+++
The mlechCha orientalists Dumont and Albright pointed to certain
similarities between the Vedic sacrificial ritual and that found in
Babylon. We revisit this to investigate if flow of memes between
Eurasian civilizations can throw any light on the date and time of
cultural interactions. The great ashvamedha, the high point of vedic
ritual, definitely goes back to the early Indo-European past. In some
form or the other it seen amongst different branches of Indo-Europeans,
like the Celts, Romans, Germans Greeks, Iranians and Indo-Aryans. But as
every other Indo-European tradition its pristine version with all the
meaning-laden archaisms is found only in the vedic world and it
continued to remain the symbol of the victorious Hindu kings (like
pushyamitra shunga performing it after destroying the yavana-s in a
great battle on the sindhu or vIra hammira performing it after
destroying “1ooos of turuShkas”). The shukla-yajurvedic tradition quotes
two ancient vipra-s, bhAllaveya and sAtyayaj\~ni on the specifications
of the sacrificial horse. Both of whom, despite their different
opinions, state that the forehead of the ashvamedha horse should have
markings resembling the kR^ittka (the Pleiades) on it: “kR^ittikA\~njiH
purastAt” (SB 13.4.2.1-4). kAtyAyana the inheritor of this shukla
yajurvedic tradition describes the horse specifications in the kAtyAyana
shrauta sUtra 20.1.29.36, and he also states that the horse should have
a kR^ittikA mark (kR^ittikA\~njiM vA). Now, the shukla yajurvedic
mImAmsakas like karka, yAj\~nikadeva and vidyAdhara who analyze the
shrauta texts explain the sUtra of kAtyAyana “kR^ittikA\~njiM vA” as
shakaTa iva. This clearly shows they were meaning a mark like the
Pleiades because their can described as shaped like a cart.  
Coming to the Babylonian situation we find the mention of the horse
sacrifice in a fragmentary cuneiform tablet from Assur. Middle-Eastern
archaeologists generally believe that this tablet might approximately
belong to a period around 1600 BCE. However a more detailed version of
the Babylonian sacrificial ritual emerged from the tablets describing
the bull-sacrifice that come from Erech, Nineveh and Assur from 300-800
BCE. The former text mentions the deities Shamash, Adad and Marduk and
the latter Bal, Ningizzida, Lumha and twelve gods for whom offerings are
laid out. In these sacrificial ritual texts some parallels between the
Mesopotamian animal-sacrifices and the ashvamedha can be found. The
Babylonian ritual experts describe that the bull should not be injured
due to whipping or lashing and should be complete and whole and colored
black. It is examination is much like that of the horse in the
ashvamedha. Interestingly on its forehead its either recommended to have
or not have (depending on the interpretation offered by Dumont and
Albright) a mark like the Pleiades. The original recommendation was
likely to have been to have such a mark, because negation of such a
precise mark seems to be unusual, unless there was originally a
precedence for this. This is also supported by the tablet on the horse
sacrifice that describes a horse sacrifice and mentions the
Pleiades-like marking on the forehead of the sacrificial horse. The
commonality of the mark associated with the sacrificed animal is not the
only shared feature. There are few other elements that might be
considered similar:  
In the vedic ritual the following account is given: The adhvaryu starts
making 3 offerings of puroDAsha-s to savitar on 12 kapAlas each. While
these offerings are being made a brAhmaNa sits on the southern side of
the vedi and starts sing gAtha-s describing the dAna-s and yAga-s
performed by the rAjan. Then the dhR^iti oblations of 4 ladles of ghee
are made by the adhvaryu with the mantras beginning with”iha dhR^itir
svAhA…”. At his point a kShatriya sings gAtha-s describing the martial
victories of the rajan against his foes that have led him to the path of
the ashvamedha. The adhvaryu then mutters into the right ear of the
horse along with the yajamAna the mantra “vibhUr mAtrA…” :Strong by your
mother, powerful by your father, you are a horse, you are a steed, you
are a runner, you are a male, you are a strong horse, you are a racer,
you are powerful, you are a stallion, you are heroic; ‘goer’ is your
name; follow the course of the Aditya-s.

Then in the vedic setting the horse is purified by sprinkling water with
with the mantra “adbhyastva…” given oblations from the night sacrifice
to eat and given water to drink with the mantra “apAM peruH…”. Horse is
made to stand on a large piece of cloth and the agnIdhra goes around it
with a fire brand and finally it is smothered.

In the Mesopotamian ritual the following account is given (From the
Nineveh and Assur tablets):  
Twelve linen cloths are laid on 12 bricks for the 12 gods. On them are
offered meat of sacrificed sheep, libations of beer, wine and milk, and
grains are strewn. Then a brick is laid for the deity Lumha and on that
meat of sheep, beer, wine and milk libations are made. Then through a
reed pipe the priest whispers an incantation into the right ear of the
bull \[in the Nineveh and Erech tablets\] or the horse \[Assur\]: “O
great bull, who roams on the holy pasture, increasing fertility, who
tills the grain, who makes the field happy, with my pure hands I offer
and oblation before you”. A similar incantation is then recited into the
left ear in the Babylonian case: O bull are the offspring of Zuu, you
are you are for ritual and litany, you are for Ningizzida for ever, the
ordinance of heaven and earth are fixed, you go to Lumha, you go to Bal.
In the Assur tablet the statement is made to the horse to go to draw the
chariot of Marduk \[even in the vedic rite at one point the hotar
recites a mantra “yu\~njanti bradhnam aruSham…” which implies the horse
is assigned to the chariot of indra\].

In the Mesopotamian rite to the animal has a mouth washing rite with
water being given to it, it is sprinkled with scented water, with
incense and a fire they circle it, make it stand on a mat and then kill
it with an axe while the incantation “dilmun nigin-na…” is recited.

While the fine points are different, there are similarities in the broad
details of the sacrificial ritual: The marking of Pleiades on the
animal, the style of laying of offering to the gods, the fertility
element with respect to the sacrificed animal, the recitation in the ear
addressing the animal, the acts surrounding the ritual slaughter. These
elements suggest that they might indeed have developed due to contact or
at least inspired by observation of ritual. Now the horse sacrifice was
very early ancient amongst the Indo-Europeans and it is likely that it
came with the Indo-Iranians to the Middle East. The Pleiades mark has
great significance amongst Indo-Aryans of the yajur vedic period. When
the horse is said to have a Pleiades mark on the forehead and is said to
“AdityAnAm patvAnv ihi” (follow the path of the Aditya-s), it ties in
with the fact that in the yajur vedic period the nakShatra-cycle began
with kR^ittika-s. The horse roamed for an year, thus simulating the path
of the sun (the solar divinities Aditya-s) that is an year. Its head
bearing kR^ittika-s on it possible made it stand for the year, who is
also prajapati with which the sacrifice is identified, with the
kR^ittika-s at the head. Given that the old Babylonian calender also had
the kR^ittika-s, i.e their equivalent “harrAn Sin” as the first
constellation of their proto-Zodiac, it is not unlikely that in their
early days were able to appreciate the kR^ittikA mark on the sacrificial
animal.

This ritual similarity adds to the well-know similarity in terms of
[archaeological
motifs](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/11/22/indus-iconography-and-its-parallels/)
between coeval Indian and Mesopotamian sites, as well as evidence for
trade between India and Mesopotamia (The karpAsa word). While those are
Harappan links the above points to comparable Aryan links.
