+++
title = "The path of two arrows and the path of one arrow"

+++
We felt the arms of the golden-handed asura. We felt the presence of
that other wise asura all over. We walked along the path like a khaDga
in the grasslands of pragjyotisha. We joined with guhyasomA, the golden
kula girl of pretty locks and protean forms. We sat on that high seat
quaffing soma. Sound had ceased to be. She of bewitching thighs, the
mistress of yoga, said:  
“There are two paths that you see now. On one two arrows can travel, but
on the other only one arrow travels. So much even those who are like
avidvAn-s in the soma rite can see. But those who know the way of yoga
can shoot two arrows along the second path. And verily stand at the
midpoint from where the arrows are shot. This they say is the identity
with the triple-striding plunderer of forts, and also the point of his
3rd step. This pain from the seizure by asura prachetas, and that
pleasure from the coitus with the enticing women filled with aviveka do
not grab the independently joyous chit. Now behold through yoga that 4th
foot which pervades the parorajas – the subtlety that underlies the
light of savitA.“

OM bhUr-bhuvas-suvaH | tat-saviturvareNyaM | bhargo devasya dhImahi |
dhiyo yo naH prachodayAt | parorajase .asAvadoM || gR^iNhi-sUrya Adityo
na prabhAvAtyakSharaM | madhukSharanti tad rasaM | satyaM vai tad rasaM
Apo jyoti-raso .amR^itaM brahma bhUr-bhuvas-suvaroM || yata indra
bhayAmahi tato no abhyaM kR^dhi | maghava\~n Chagdhi tava tanna Utaye
vidviSho vimR^idho jahi ||

She of sweet smiles said: “Ere long one sees the R^ita of mitra and
varuNa. Those laws which are inviolable comprise the satya of mitra.
Those laws which get repeatedly transgressed but are eternally enforced
is the dharma of varuNa. These two types of laws satya and dharma govern
the universe and are collectively the R^ita. That is the reason we
things around us are the way they are.”
