+++
title = "The subversion ofxa0Russia"

+++
In school we were taught of the Russian revolution in history. It was
described in glowing terms how the revolutionaries under Lenin, Stalin,
Radek and Trotsky created a Utopian superpower by overthrowing the
oppressive Czar Nicholas II. The revolution was described as a triumph
of the people and universal equality of man. In our textbook it came
after chapter on socialism and communism, both of which were eulogized
in glowing terms. Even though our teachers and the examination system
tried to indoctrinate us with the charms of socialism, we were luckily
not fooled by it due to our parents. Many of our classmates were taken
in by its seductive charm and went red in their early youth and reviled
everything Hindu. But these very same classmates of ours would do
anything to reach the shores of krau\~ncha dvIpa, and soon did so. Once
there they had forgotten Lenin and Trotsky for good, and started serving
chAchA shAm very faithfully. They kept saying: “Russia bad, Russians
collapsed because they foolishly adopted communism instead of
capitalism.”

We felt something was really wrong in our impressionable classmates’
discourse. Even in our school days, despite all the misinformation
around us, we wondered if this Russian revolution was really what it was
made out to be. After some study, in the manner of the Hindu thinker SR
Goel, we soon realized that in reality it was the destruction of Russia
brought on it and not something that the “foolish” Russians brought on
themselves. After all socialism is not even remotely a Russian
construct. So we set out to study this history for ourselves for the
study of world history is important for any discerning Hindu in this
age. We unearthed some data that was explosive in its ramifications and
suddenly several aspects of history became clear. Not many can talk
about all these findings in the open. The key insights in this regard
came from that learned brAhmaNa from the va\~Nga country, who had
penetrated the mist of all this. Since our chief domains of historical
knowledge are non-overlapping we began a long afternoon of ceaseless
yarning over history, almost as if we needed to reconstruct everything
from the days following Manas’s victorious march on the Uighurs.

I was telling him of my investigations on the rise of the Turko-mongol
tribe of the Pechenegs and their connection with the Khanate of the Rus
under their pagan chiefs Oleg of Novgorod and Sviatoslav of Kiev. We
pointed to our va\~Nga compatriot the murky history of the wars waged by
the pagan Rus with the aid of the related Germanic pagans of the Viking
states on the Moslems. We also explained the political and historical
reasons for why the attack planned by the Rus Khans on Baghdad did not
materialize. The va\~Nga paNDita was quick to see the parallel in his
domain of history and explained to me the history of the Crimean war.
Just a few points are enough to note in this latter war, and a
discerning man will fill in the rest: 1) The Crimean war was sparked
over who was the legitimate Christian ruler of Palestine- the holy land
for the monotheists (This reason is widely known by generally passed but
in the sidelines). 2) The war itself was fought by England, France,
Sardinia (a precursor state of modern Italy) and the Moslem Caliphate
headed by the Osman Turks on one side against the Russian on the other.
The result was considerably damaging for Russia despite determined
action by Russian commanders. Russia received a breather even as the
Germans routed France in the Prussian war.

The va\~Nga paNDita clarified that the subsequent revolution in the
guise of bringing communism and the wars on Russia have actually
involved the elite behind the same players. Ultimately a thick,
dangerous and but barely visible skein passes through all of them and
actually goes back to the early historical events mentioned above,
involving Oleg and Sviatoslav’s aborted strike on Baghdad. Just as an
example, the stabs delivered on the underbelly of Russia through the
1980s-1990s via the neo-Islamic caliphate immediately reveal parallels
to the Crimean war \[As starting clues one may follow leads such as:

  - Funding for Khattab, the Caucasian terrorist came from the
    Neo-caliphate, which in turn was backed and built up by the
    Anglo-sphere explicitly with the aim of destroying the neo-Russian
    empire by drawing it into Afghanistan. The BBC ran a glowing
    obituary for Khattab when the Russians ingeniously eliminated him.
    Would they run a similar obituary for bin Laden?
  - The other terrorist Zakayev lives peacefully in England with a
    British passport.
  - Is the leased Karshi-Khanabad base only for monitoring the Al Qaeda?
    Especially, given that the Anglosphere has its foothold right inside
    Al Qaeda country– Afghanistan\].

The current events are not unrelated either. It is a part of a rather
time-tested strategy of the propaganda coup by which the nationalist
rulers are tarred constantly using the externally controlled media in
the name of “free-speech”, “democracy” and such other well-known catch
phrases. Discrediting the rulers is the an arm of the pincer grip
strategy, with the other arm being use of terror (nowadays typically
outsourced to Islamic attack dogs) and economic despair.

[…In search of the explanation for
this.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2004/09/07/the-weakness-of-russia/)

and leads to
[this](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/04/15/our-lessons-from-the-subversion-of-russia/).
