+++
title = "The song andxa0memory"

+++
R is a great believer of the view that for every mood there is a song
that matches and creates a resonance. Hence, R collects music by this
criterion and may play the same song over and over again when in a
certain mood, but will be simply unable to listen to it when not in that
mood — it is like enzyme specificity– you need the right enzyme for the
right reaction and enzymes can be exquisitely specific \! Mn was
similarly inclined, believing in the match between the mood and the
song. While I have little to no knowledge of any form of taurIya gANa,
it is clear that R’s collection spans an great diversity of taurIya
gaNa. I was mentioning to R how I was dreading the planned rendezvous
with ST and ekanetra, because the weather was threatening to be
terrible. Given their disposition ST and ekanetra have planned a stroll
in the evening in all the freeze and hima. R asked me to listen a song —
its effect was felt by me despite knowing nothing of its context. It
moved me back to a different time — I was lost in the old memories from
a certain point almost 13 years ago. A particular vision came to mind:  
The archer was alone in the vast grassy plain with a young vigorous
horse beside him. There was a target before him he was repeatedly
shooting arrows at it like my illustrious ancestor the R^iShi jamadagni.
He was disturbed by all manner of insects and birds, but he kept
shooting, perfecting the strike. Sometimes shooting from the ground,
sometimes shooting from his horse while in charge. He looked up and saw
a golden eagle in its flight.  
This was an “internal” vision.  
There was an “external” one too:  
It was 9.00 PM or so. I was a man of boundless energy. We readied to
light a bonfire. For some reason “R^iddhyAsma havyair… came to mind”.
Around a bonfire ekanetra, va\~Nga paNDita, vaishya jyotiSha, maithila,
kAca-netra, Igul the mahiShi of the 3rd varNa, kalashajA, ST and me
stood. It was a little off the path leading to the pinnacle of the fort
of Rajmachi. ekanetra, va\~Nga paNDita and me were sequestered together,
away from the rest of the folks. We were laying out an outline for a
world history ancient and more recent. An ulka flashed in the firmament
and we even heard a noise. Smiling to each other, we continued our
discourse on the theories of history. The rest of the folks were
creating a racket around the fire, playing precisely that song on the
cassette box till the battery died. ST then kindly beckoned us to eat
dinner — as ever a dinner by her was a memorable event. While biting
into a dainty edible, I thought of Khan Qabul.
