+++
title = "The recent great apes ofxa0Africa"

+++
Today 4 great apes still survive in Africa all of which share a more
recent common ancestor to the exclusion of the Asiatic Pongo and appear
to have diversified relatively recently from a common ancestor in
Africa. The 4 African great apes display the following indisputable
phylogenetic relationship:  
(((Homo(Pan paniscus, P.troglodytes))Gorilla)Pongo)  
Molecular studies strongly support a divergence of Homo from the Pan
lineage at best around 4.5 Million years ago. In contrast the fossil
hunters have been digging up an amazing array of fossil apes from Africa
that have only resulted in more questions than answers with respect to
affinities between various apes, their divergence times and their
biogeography. Let us look at these apes and some issues:

\-There are at least 3 representatives of genus Homo that nobody doubts
are closer to extant Homo sapiens than any other great ape: 1)
H.habilis, 2) H.erectus and archaic H.sapiens. There is the popular
belief that H.habilis spawned the later H.erectus, which in turn spawned
H.sapiens. Nevertheless, recent finds increasingly support the proposal
where the two species overlap : H.habilis and H.erectus seem to have
overlapped by around 500,000 years suggesting that they were sister
species. Further, these finds like those based on the skull cap KNM-ER
42700 raise the possibility that H.erectus could have shown major sexual
dimorphism, comparable to that seen in Gorilla. This is in contrast to
H.sapiens where the dimorphism is low. Hence, it is possible that
H.sapiens did not descend directly from H.erectus but archaic versions
of H.sapiens were representatives of a sister lineage to H.erectus.
Thus, we have the possibility that the divergence of these two Homo
species was related to differential niche colonization and life-style
divergence, rather than a linear model of one spawning the other.
Finally, with respect to archaic H.sapiens there is the question of what
is its relationship with modern early-branching African H.sapiens. None
the less, in the absence of further fossils that situation is far from
resolved.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RuK6vvXcXjI/AAAAAAAAANs/X9T9hNtVfNI/s320/herectus_skulls.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RuK6vvXcXjI/AAAAAAAAANs/X9T9hNtVfNI/s1600-h/herectus_skulls.jpg)  
Dramatic size variation in adult Homo erectus, with retention of
anatomical similarity

\-In addition to these problems, there is the issue of the relationship
between African H.erectus and H.habilis with the early Homo from
Dmanisi, Georgia. Some have taken these Eurasian specimens to imply a
possible origin for early Homo in Eurasia followed by back migration to
Africa.

–H.rudolfensis: Based on the absence of the characteristic supraorbital
torus seen in H.habilis specimens like KNM ER 1813 or OH24 and a much
large cranial capacity it was assumed that KNM ER 1470 is a different
species of Homo from H.habilis. This species was termed H.rudolfensis
and could potentially represent a precursor/sister group of H.sapiens,
whereas H.habilis is exclusively allied with H.erectus (for example KNM
ER 1813 might show an incipient transverse torus as seen in H.erectus).
However, in the absence of further remains we cannot be sure of whether
H.rudolfensis is indeed distinct or merely a part of the morphological
variation spectrum shown by Homo of that period.

\-The Australopithecines: The australopithecines clearly appear to be
closer to Homo than to Pan. 3 major forms of australopithecines are
recognized along with many other “controversial” forms. They are 1)
A.afarensis 2) A.africanus and 3) the robust australopithecines, which
are often given a separate genus Paranthropus and 3 “species” are
recognized within them: P.aethiopicus, P.boisei, and P.robustus. Their
robust flared skulls with enormous muscle attachment sites like the
striking sagittal crest suggest a highly specialized ecology in terms of
high fiber vegetable diet. More recently several other species have been
named:  
A.anamensis– this appears to be an form of the A.afarensis, currently
going back to 4.1 MYA. It has been recognized a different species mainly
due to its early age, but morphologically is within the observed
variability of A.afarensis and probably represents the earliest members
of that lineage. It is interesting to note that it is close to the
molecular dates for the human-chimp split suggesting that chimp-human
lineage inter-mating might have continued to about the time
“A.anamensis” i.e. the earliest representatives of A.afarensis
appeared.  
  
A.bahrelghazali: this is the western-most specimen of an
australopithecine ape, and all that is known of it is a single mandible
that appears to be very close to A.afarensis. However, on the basis of a
3-rooted premolar it was made a separate species. Most likely it
represents a poorly known western population of A.afarensis that might
have at best undergone regional diversification.

A.garhi: this ape appears to be a larger version of A.afarensis.
However, it was given a separate species status because of it is
unusually large premolars and molars. It is also reported as having a
crest, which is reminiscent of the robust australopithecines.
Post-crania from the same site suggest a long femur, like Homo for this
species. Its describers are fairly certain that it might represent a
transitional form between A.afarensis and Homo. Given the scrappy nature
of the finds it remains unclear if it might represent a distinct species
of Australopithecus or a variant of A.afarensis.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RuK5tvXcXiI/AAAAAAAAANk/hC6tJaLys5o/s320/primate_ramus_convergence.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RuK5tvXcXiI/AAAAAAAAANk/hC6tJaLys5o/s1600-h/primate_ramus_convergence.jpg)  
Convergence of ramal anatomy of australopithecines and Gorilla as
discovered by Rak et al.

The comparisons of jaw morphologies suggest that the well-established 3
australopithecine species share a derived jaw morphology, which appears
to be convergently very close that of the Gorilla. The Homo lineage in
contrast retains the primitive state. It has hence been proposed that
the well-established australopithecine lineages may hence be precluded
from human ancestry. In light of this, we need to see what the anatomy
of A.garhi is, if it ever becomes better known, and whether it might be
closer to Homo. But the take-home message is that convergence between
related apes can mess up phylogeny, especially when we are dealing with
such fragmentary remains.

–Kenyanthropus platyops: While described as a new ape contemporaneous
with A.afarensis there has been much debate about its validity due to
the poor preservation of the fossil. However, one should note that it
has a small external acoustic porus compared to other australopithecines
suggesting that it might indeed be a distinct lineage. Some have noted
similarities with H.rudolfensis, but these may indeed be superficial and
convergent. Yet again this is another case of a tantalizing fossil
without a proper phylogenetic home.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RuK7uvXcXkI/AAAAAAAAAN0/0VQDl-CObLA/s320/Ardipithecus_chimp.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RuK7uvXcXkI/AAAAAAAAAN0/0VQDl-CObLA/s1600-h/Ardipithecus_chimp.jpg)  
Dental similarity of Ardipithecus kadabba and P.troglodytes 

–Ardipithecus, Orrorin and Sahelanthropus: These 3 apes appear to be the
oldest of the apes belonging to the African great ape clade. All the 3
apes have been claimed to be in the human lineage to the exclusion of
Pan. All three have been claimed to be erect bipedal walkers. One group
has even gone as far as a to claim that all 3 are even the same genus of
ape. However, they are all quite enigmatic as yet, and all of the above
claims are definitely debatable and probably even incorrect.
Ardipithecus ramidus, which was identified first was claimed to be on
the human lineage, after its divergence from the chimps and the common
ancestor of the Australopithecines from which Homo is eventually
believed to have been derived. Subsequently a second species,
Ardipithecus kadabba was described. Ar.ramidus was dated to about 4.5
MYA, whereas Ar.kadabba was dated as being 5.4-5.8 MYA. By the molecular
criteria Ar.kadabba squarely falls in the period when the chimp and
human lineages were still mating and probably only barely separated.
Consistent with this Ar.kadabba is very chimp-like especially in its
dental features, like the upper-canine lower premolar occlusion. This
raises questions regarding whether the available features truly
distinguish whether Ardipithecus belongs to the chimp to human lineage.
Between Ar.kadabba and Ar.ramidus are we seeing gradual divergence or is
it merely an issue of sample size?

Orrorin is dated to around 6 MYA is again fragmentary and poorly
described. Sahelanthropus has recently been re-interpreted and
definitely seems to belong outside of the Homo lineage. Based on
molecular criteria both these apes seem to be members of common
ancestral lineage of Pan and Homo. They either represent the common
ancestor itself or radiations of that ancestral lineage. Most striking
is the biogeography of Sahelanthropus — like “A.bahrelghazali” it is
from central Africa suggesting that around 6 MYA the great apes of
Africa were already well distributed over the continent. It also shows
how little we know of the real spread of the African great ape clade.
This has considerable consequences for inferences regarding the
ancestral habitat of this clade, as well as the role of habitat, if any,
in the emergence of the human lineage.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RuK-IfXcXlI/AAAAAAAAAN8/zv4rv81Tj8A/s320/chororapithecus.jpg)](http://bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RuK-IfXcXlI/AAAAAAAAAN8/zv4rv81Tj8A/s1600-h/chororapithecus.jpg)  
Comparison of Chororapithecus and Gorilla 

–Chororapithecus abyssinicus: The latest of the African great apes to be
reported. It is a pathetic assemblage of a few gorilla-like teeth from a
10 MY old Chorora formation near Afar. The teeth surely look like a
gorilla in gross as well as a certain subtle features of enamel-dentine
ratios, but they are too little to say much, given the rampant
convergence of various dental and mandibular features amongst great
apes. All we can say is that there was a large gorilla-sized great ape
around 10-11 MYA in Africa. This definitely fills in the “ape gap” of
Africa and raises questions as to whether the African great apes are a
re-invasion from Eurasia (after the Sivapithecus-Pongo lineage migrated
there). After all this means African great apes could have emerged in
Africa itself from a Dryopithecus-like form and only the Pongo lineage
left to Eurasia.
