+++
title = "The extraordinary case of Comet Holmes"

+++
A dhuma-gola was sighted near the head of yayAti, when the
kR^iShNa-pakSha moon was passing through kR^ittikA  
[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RyQrs7xjPLI/AAAAAAAAAP0/7TALpsnNN4Y/s320/comet_holmes.png)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RyQrs7xjPLI/AAAAAAAAAP0/7TALpsnNN4Y/s1600-h/comet_holmes.png)

My friend the AghamarShaNa brought to my attention an extraordinary even
this evening: The comet Holmes was visible to naked eye. He mentioned
that it was so bright that it changed the shape of Perseus. This comet
has a long and colorful history since its discovery on November 6th of
1892 by Holmes using a 12.6 inch from London in the constellation of
Andromeda near the famed Galaxy of M31. It was seen by several observers
shortly there after and confirmed as a fuzzy naked eye object resembling
M31. The striking thing was that after its orbit was calculated it
proved to be way past it is perihelion, and it was a short period comet
with an orbit within that of Jupiter. It returned as predicted in 1899
and 1906 but was extraordinarily faint, recorded around the 16-17th
magnitude. The comet was then lost and never seen. Marsden in 1963 using
computational numerical integration managed to calculate its current
orbit and showed that since its last observation in 1906 and the
upcoming apparition of 1964, the orbital period had increased from 6.86
years to 7.35 years. With this it was recovered again during perihelion
at the magnitude of 18 — no where in the range of amateurs like us with
really small instruments.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RyQrs7xjPMI/AAAAAAAAAP8/S1-8e78Wlt8/s320/comet_holmes_orbit.png)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RyQrs7xjPMI/AAAAAAAAAP8/S1-8e78Wlt8/s1600-h/comet_holmes_orbit.png)

However, in 2007 October it gave a repeat performance, even more
spectacularly of the outburst at the time of discovery. Since July when
it was seen at mag 14.5 it was fading steadily reaching around the 17th
mag, when it began an extraordinary outburst on Oct 24th and had reached
the 7th mag. Within that day it climbed dramatically to reach 2.8. When
I saw it from behind my kShetra it was around 2.8. The skies are bad
here, and the prathama waning moon was up in kR^ittikA. When I began the
observations the moon was grazing the tail of the Pleiades. Yet even in
these bad skies the comet was visible as the 3rd brightest entity in
Perseus after Alpha and Beta Persei. Then seeing it with my binoculars
it looked like a sight I have never seen before- a bright circular
fuzzball forming a triangle with lambda and delta Persei. Extraordinary
was the only word I had for it. It was the first time I was seeing a
Jovian comet. The causes for this outburst are unclear but is something
that has happened more than once with this comet. Is it some combination
of heat build and destabilizing by Jupiter that causes it to puff out
dust?

kalashajA’s puruSha called to say that he too had sighted it and was in
loss of words to describe it — he said he would send pictures he was
taking of it.

Update 28,29/10/2007 : With the moon further away the nucleus of the
comet could be clearly distinguished through the binoculars.

Update 1/11/2007: Following the comet from 27/10/2007 one trend is very
clear — while the comet has remained at approximately the same
magnitude, it has grown more diffuse by the day. On 27/10 it was a dense
ball, on 1/11 it had grown in size by almost 65% but retained the same
brightness.
