+++
title = "Rajita’s account of shrIvidyA’s imprint on the topography ofxa0Himachal"

+++
R was telling us of how the holy configurations of shrIvidyA are
embedded in the geography of Himachal Pradesh. She mentioned that these
ancient footprints of shrIvidyA still are seen in the temples of the
land but are largely forgotten by the local people who continue to
worship the deities but not aware of the deep significance or the
mantra-shAstra in most instances. Instead for them the fairs (jatras)
and the social events assume a much greater significance. R gathered a
lot of interesting information during her last visit to those regions.
Of particular note was her account of the stations of the earthly
maNDala-s of some of the primary devatA-s of shrIvidyA. The earthly
shrIchakra of kAmeshvarI is located near the village of Mandi about 100
Km from Shimla. There is a wooden temple marking the spot of this
shrichakra, the form of the mistress of the kula path. The earthly
geyachakra of sachiveshI mantriNi is located in Shimla. This temple is
apparently near the mall in Shimla. The city itself gets it name from
her name shyAmalA, the dark mistress of the geyachakra. The earthly
kiri-maNDala is located at Devidhura at the border between Nainital and
Almora. Here there is an old temple of vArahI marking its spot. Thus,
the kulayoginI is worshiped flanked on either side by sa\~nketayoginI
and sa\~ngItayoginI.

As per the shrIvidyA practioners of the hAdi-mata and sAdi-mata who were
once prominent in the Himalayan regions sarva-stambhini bagalAmukhI is
worshiped in the night time rite. The earthly maNDala of bagalAmukhI in
Himachal is located in the form of the temple at the Guma near Mandi.
Her shrine is located in a close spatial cluster with that of
kAmeshvarI.

The two other devI-s of the inner triad are apparently located far from
each other: vajreshvarI is located at a temple in Nagarkot in Kangra.
This temple was ravaged by the Moslem vandal Mahmud Ghaznavi, but was
restored more recently. bhagamAlinI is located in the plains at the
jalandhara-pITha where abhinavagupta had studied under shambhunAtha. The
great bhairava himself is located in a remote temple in the great
heights of Kalpa in the Kinnaur district near the Kothi lake. Here the
bhairava stands apart like the bindu standing apart from the 5
shiva-yuvati-s and 4 shrikaNTha-s. Next to the temple of bhairava is an
ancient temple of chaNDikA.

R states that all these temples are all figuratively distilled together
in the 3-storied shrine of hAdividyA tripurasundarI located in the
village of Naggar, overlooking the Kulu valley. It is like the
kAmeshvarI temple of Mandi made of wood and apparently has yantra
outlines carved into it.
