+++
title = "Raised by bAlA andxa0dattAtreya-II"

+++
A great nAtha yogi who worshiped dattAtreya was eating curds and saw a
boy roaming on the field. He offered the boy the curds but he refused,
and it fell on his feet. He told him: “if you had eaten the curds you
would have lived long and become the king of the world but now in your
relatively short life where ever you set foot you will conquer. This
curds is imbued with the might of dattAtreya.” The boy’s parents
nara-bhUpAla and kaushalyavatI initiated him into the 3-syllabled bAlA
mantra and asked him perform its japa. His father had already attained
mantra siddhi of the hallowed ShoDaShI. For 24 years he performed its
japa and he finally attained siddhi of it. He was given the signal by
the ever youthful nityAShoDaShikA, the mistress of the 3-syllabled
mantra, that he was destined for greatness. Prior to that, as a young
man, he went to Bhaktapur, where he began his intense sAdhana after his
nine fold krama dIkSha. This led him to attain the grace of the queen of
kubjIshAna, the mistress of the the paschimAmnAya. Then he also attained
the grace of our goddess, the dreadful mother of the uttarAmnAya. The
devI worshiped in the kumArI gave him the prasAda instead of the rAjan.
It immediately became clear that pR^ithivI nArAyaNa shAha deva was to be
the rAjan. He traveled to vArANasI and there performed a rite to
uttarAmnAyeshvarI as siddha-lakShmI and pratya\~NgirA. As a result he
was able to mysteriously raise money and use to purchase first-class
modern weapons from India and also obtain first hand intelligence on the
designs of the East India Company and the subversive role of Catholic
missionaries. He then arranged a variety of alliances with the
neighboring Indian rulers and prepared on a large-scale for the
unification of Nepal.

\-In his first strike pR^ithivI nArAyaNa conquered Nuwankot and attacked
Kirtipur. In the battle with teja narasimha the king of Patan who
controlled the town he was almost killed. But his mantra prayoga came to
his aid and saw him through.  
\-After two failures to take Kirtipur he sacked Lamji in a fierce
battle, where the power of the war machine of pR^ithivI nArAyaNa became
first apparent.  
\-He then sacked Kirtipur after a six month siege and surged towards
Patan. But a British army attacked him from the rear.  
\-He cornered the Britons in the Tarai, where they were put to flight by
a sudden strike.  
\-King jayaprakasha malla of Kathmandu sought the help of captain
Kinloch who marched with the British army into Nepal. In the battle of
Sindhuli, pR^ithivI nArAyaNa smashed the Britons and beheaded the
captain.  
\-He then entered Kathmandu during the indra-dhvaja festival took the
throne of the rAjan. He received the prasAda from the devI invoked into
the kumArI, and was declared rAjan. The king of kAThmaNDu jayaprakAsha
malla fled in terror.  
\-Then he moved on Makawanpur, whose ruler digbandhan sena sought the
aid of the Jihadi adventurer Gurgin Khan to repulse pR^ithivI nArAyaNa.
However, Moslems were put to sword and Makawanpur was taken. In the
battle pR^ithivI nArAyaNa captured a rich haul of ammunition.  
\-He then conquered Bhadgaon from rAjA raNajit and Patan from teja
narasimha and put them to flight .  
\-By 1773 he overran the whole of Eastern Nepal driving and defeating
the Kiratas.  
\-Thus, did pR^ithivI nArAyaNa unify the kingdom of Nepal. Realizing the
danger of Christian subversionists he drove out all Jesuit missionaries
and British agents from his kingdom and upheld the Hindu dharma. He is
one Hindu ruler who deserves the highest praise for his foresight in
recognizing the need to ban Christian activity as the correct way of
preventing the undermining of a heathen state. In his court was a noted
tantric bhagavantanAtha, who was a master of haTha yoga, and performed
many notable tantric prayoga-s.

He initiated his eldest son pratApa siMha into the tantric lore. pratApa
siMha compiled all this knowledge into the great tantric digest the
purashcharyArNava.  
\~\*\~\*\~  
R1’s ancestor had associated with pR^ithivI nArAyaNa during his visit to
vArANasi and went to Nepal along with him. They thus obtained access to
an inner circle with the rAjan with a krama dIkSha of the derived form
uttarAmnAya worship . This krama involves the worship of : 1)
siddha-lakShmI 2) guhyakAlI 3) mahAbhIma-sarasvatI, 4) dhUmrA, 5)
kAmakalAkAlI, 6) mahAkAlI, 7) kapAlinI, 8) mahAsmashAnakAlI, 9)
kAlasaMkarShiNI, 10) pratya\~NgirA, 11) kAlarAtrI, 12) yogeshI, 13)
siddhabhairavI, 14) dakShiNA, 15) ChinnamastA, 16) rAjarAjeshvarI 17)
saptakoTeshvarI.
