+++
title = "Demographic fate of Hindus in thexa0US"

+++
A friend brought to attention some interesting statistics of ABCDs’
ethnicity-specific sexual preferences. This combined with other cultural
trends allows some estimates of the general future of the Indic
populations in mlechChadesha. The table below summarizes the results
from the most recent US census data.

Percentage of ABCD men marrying women of a given ethnicity:

> Hindu: 73.3  
> White: 18.5  
> Hispanic: 3.4  
> East Asians: 2.7  
> Others: 1.6  
> Blacks: 0.5

Percentage of ABCD women marrying men of a given ethnicity:

> Hindu: 77.9  
> White: 18.9  
> East Asians: 1.7  
> Hispanic: 1.4  
> Black: 1.4  
> Others: 0.9

At least 20-25% of ABCDs mate with people of other races (ethnicities).
More generally, ABCDs tend to show lower levels of admixtures with other
races than some other prominent neo-immigrant groups such Chinese,
Koreans and Japanese. Even if we normalize by the fact that Whites are a
majority in the US, the ABCDs are still preferentially mating with
Whites and avoiding mating with Blacks and Hispanics, if they mate
outside their ethnicity. With about 18-19% of the ABCDs mating with
Whites it is clear that nearly 1/5 of the Hindu population will acquire
a White identity and gradually merge with the ‘majority’ block of the
US. This majority block will generally retain the cultural memes of its
dominant White core. The Indic population being genetically closer to
White rather than East-Asian populations will merge relatively
seamlessly in phenotypic terms, at best darkening the skin color of the
mixed population a bit. However, the merger of the East Asians with the
Whites, which is also rampantly underway might stir the phenotypic pot
of the majority block a bit. The ABCDs who merge with the Whites will be
joined by the smaller number of Isaistic converts from India who will
naturally acquire a White memetic identity. The Indian converts to the
other Abrahamism will naturally merge with the larger pan-Islamic
identity.

The remaining endogamous ABCDs will form a distinct population which
will remain quintessentially ABCD – deracinated Hindus drawn towards all
kinds of memes wafting into their cranial recesses in the liberal
academic environments they live in. In a sense they will form a shadow
culture of the White-based majority block: aping all the cultural
elements of the majority block, while at the same time being
paradoxically obsessed with their independent racial identity (some may
call this “brown” to fit in the chromatic spectrum of racial identity
prevalent in the US and the more deracinated will call it “South
Asian”). Since, for the near future America will be dominated by
identity that is very race-centered, this “brown” group ABCDs population
will still retain a separate identity for several decades.

Since marrying White is a common route to enter to power structure of
the majority block, the pure ABCD population will have a constant drain
to the majority block if not reinforced by new FOBs from the desh.

Of course I will continue the remarkable tale of the kR^iShNa shUdra
next.
