+++
title = "The temporal sequence of texts and emergence of later Hinduxa0deities"

+++
The idea here is not trace the history of Hindu deities to their
proto-Indo-European past, but only to investigate their relative times
of emergence and the chronology of the texts referring to them. Further,
all Hindu texts including the vedic saMhitA-s are layered texts- that is
they have material from different chronological strata. Yet well defined
coherent chronological cores can be identified in them.

\-In the vedic period one major transition, which might be termed the
prajApati transition, is observed. The old vedic pantheon shared with
the Iranians gained the first major addition in the form of the
prajApati. There is no or hardly any mention of prajApati in any of the
family maNDala-s. He appears first in the maNDala 10 in the
hiraNyagarbha sUktaM. In the yajur veda he is again not prominent in the
old core of the soma and fire-kindling rites. However, he is prominent
in the canonized late shrauta ritual laid out in the YV and the
associated gAnaM-s composed in the sAman collection. Thus, prajApati
rises tremendously prominence through the canonization of the shrauta
ritual and becomes very prominent in the brAhmaNa-s. In the brAhmaNa
period we get the first hints of him challenging indra’s preeminent
position.

\-In the very late brAhmaNa period or late upaniShadic period we see
hints of the rise of the two great gods of sectarian Hindu dharma –
rudra and viShNu. This is observed in texts like the shvetAshvatara,
maitrAyaNi brAhmaNa upaniShat, atharvashiras and nArAyaNa-valli.

\-In the earliest post-vedic texts we see two new deities rise to
prominence: kumAra and brahmA. Of these the four-headed brahmA is
clearly a homolog of the vedic prajApati and shares numerous attributes
with him. While there are some allusions to brahmA in the vedic hymns
themselves, it is not immediately clear if in every context they imply
brahmA as in the deity or the power of mantras brahman. In the atharva
vedic tradition we find a mention of brahmA as “bhUtAnAm prathamaM”, in
a late hymn used in shaunakIya kANDa homa. This supports the beginnings
of prajApati as brahmA were in the late vedic world. He appears in the
itihAsa-s in his full-blown form. The late vedic prajApati assumes forms
like the fish and turtle which were later associated viShNu, but never
associated with brahmA.

\-kumAra appears in the late vedic texts: 1) nejameSha in the khila of
the RV in connection to a rite performed in pumsavana. 2) skanda
sanatkumAra the teacher of nArada in the chAndogya upaniShat. In both
the earliest post-vedic texts rAmAyaNa and mahAbhArata is he is a
prominent deity. The skanda-yaga of the atharva veda parishiShTha
appears to be coeval with the rise of skanda in the itihAsas.

\-Of the itihAsas the core of the rAmAyaNa appears clearly older (of
course leaving out the uttara-kANDa). The former is mentioned by the
bhArata not vice versa. Further, the prominence of indra is much greater
in the rAmAyaNa, with him probably standing slightly ahead of brahmA in
prominence. In the mahAbharata the decline of indra and the meteoric
rise of viShNu and shiva has set in full scale.

\-In both the itihAsa-s the trans-functional shakti as kAli or durga or
the 8 mothers have a very limited presence or are non-existent. The
first hints of this shakti in the classical form is seen in the
harivaMsha as ekAnaMsha who is also vindhyavAsini. The trans-functional
shakti-s precursors may be seen in the AsurI durgA of the atharvanic
tradition (AsurI kalpa) and pratya\~NgirA.

\-The later layers of the mahAbhArata and the harivaMsha mark the
beginnings of the rise of the proto-pA\~ncharAtric pantheon of viShNu as
kR^iShNa, balabhadra and associated manifestations of viShNu or
avatAra-s. However, the full-blown dashAvatAra concept is not in place.

\-The core bhAgavata purANa marks the emergence of rAmachandra as an
avatAra of viShNu.

\-The mArkaNDeya purANa marks the full-blow emergence of the
trans-functional shakti and the 8 mothers (Though this might belong to
the latest layer of the purANa).

\-One of the biggest anchor points is the emergence of one of latest
classical Hindu deities- the classical gaNesha. The texts containing the
classical vinAyaka and those which do not thus mark a major
chronological divide in the Hindu world. The itihAsa-s do not mention
the classical gaNesha. vinAyaka-s of the 4-fold form emerge in the
gR^ihya sUtra-s and the AV-parishiShTha, and allusion to these seizing
vinAyaka-s are seen scattered in the mahAbhArata but they are distinct
from the elephant-headed deity. The same seizing vinAyaka is mentioned
in the mArkaNDeya purANa as a raudra-vighnarAT-perhaps marking the
beginnings of his direct association with deva rudra. In the
yAj\~navalkya smArta prayoga-s the seizing vinAyaka-s are merged as one
and is mentioned as being installed by rudra as a vighna-rAja. Here
ambikA, the wife of rudra is also mentioned as his mother. This marks
the first emergence of the prototype of the deity, though not mention of
his elephant head is still made. But the classical gaNesha is clearly
missing in the core bhAgavata purANa, mArkaNDeya purANa and harivaMsha.
This suggests that the purANas as they survive today belong to two age
categories- the older group that does not mention vinAyaka and the newer
group where he is mentioned or is a prominent deity. kAlidAsa does not
mention vinAyaka and hence appears to belong in age closer to the
earlier group. In this period skanda was very prominent in northern
India especially in centers like Mathura. Thus, it is quite clear that
kAlidAsa did not live in the gupta (or worse paramAra court), but lived
much earlier, prior to the common era. Thus, even the extant Hindu
purANa-s represent a much longer tradition than commonly believed. Early
iconography of classical vinAyaka shows him in the company of the 8
mothers, and this is first mentioned in the gobhila smR^iti. This
suggests that that smR^iti is in the least coeval with these early
images of gaNesha. The vinAyaka shAnti of the baudhAyana gR^ihya sheSha
sUtra appears to belong to the period after the emergence of the
classical gaNapati. The mAnava gR^ihya sUtra, arthashAstra,
yAj\~navAlkya smR^iti in contrast belong to an earlier period with with
seizing vinAyaka graha-s.
