+++
title = "The code of the aShTAkSharIxa0vidyA"

+++
It is well-known that the atharva vedic tradition provides the vidhi for
one of the great rites of kumAra- the skanda yAga promulgated by
gopatha. But known only to a select few, who maintain the continuity
with the divyaugha via the mAnavaugha on the kaumAra path the AV
provides that most supreme rahasya of skanda – the mahA-mantra with
which the manifestation of deva attains completeness. This great mantra
is the aShTAkSharI vidyA of the atharvaveda. It is to deployed only by a
practitioner of the atharvaNa-shruti, who has been introduced to the
rahasya-s of the bhR^igu veda. One who has not sworn his allegiance to
the veda of the bhR^igu-a\~Ngiras should undergo a new upanayana and
study the AV. He then performs oblations to the atharva veda with the
two sUktaMs (AV-vulgate edition 19.22 and 19.23) as done by the atharva
vedI-s on the upAkarma day, before learning this mantra (AV 20-132.16).
This mantra belongs to the khila section found in kANDa 20 of the
vulgate text known as the kuntApa hymns that are deployed in the shrauta
context during the mahAvrata rituals. The kuntApa-s are all enigmatic
hymns that at the face of it make no sense. They are attributed to the
bhArgava aitaSha (the aitaSha pralApa), a descendant of aurva. The
mantra’s R^iShi is bhR^igu, the Chandas is eka-pada gayatrI and its
devatA is skanda.

[![](https://i0.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RlojOWWV1CI/AAAAAAAAAJU/3OQJcUttNwM/s320/av3.JPG)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RlojOWWV1CI/AAAAAAAAAJU/3OQJcUttNwM/s1600-h/av3.JPG)

He first performs japa of the mantra a 108 times in a silent voice, but
noting all the svara-s as ordained in atharva vedic recitation. Then he
shall light the fire on a sthaNDila as mentioned by gopatha in the
dhUrta-kalpa. Then he shall make oblations of ghee or white/wild sesame
seeds with the aShTAkSharI vidyA. During this he may combine it with the
atharvanic brahmashiras with the special atharvanic vyAhR^itis:
bhur-bhuvas-suvo-janad-vR^idhat-karat-ruhan-mahat-tac-Cham-OM. In the
end he utters the formulae: “mayi bhargaH; mayi mahaH; mayi yashaH mayi
sarvaM”. Then he shall perform upasthAnaM again as in the dhUrta kalpa
after reciting the formula “sadyojAtaM prapadyAmi…”

The key secret of the aShTAkSharI lies in the sampuTIkaraNa with the two
ShaDakSharI-s that result in the emanation of the two basic maNDala-s of
kArttikeya: the vajra-maNDala and the ghana-maNDala. When the
aShTAkSharI is combined with the ShaDakSharI (namaH kumArAya) then it
results in the expansion of the planar ShaTkoNa yantra defined by the
ShaDakSharI’ syllables occupying the vertices of the yantra into the 3D
octahedral vajra-maNDala. Now the 6 syllables of the ShaDakSharI occupy
the 6 vertices of the octahedron, while the 8 syllables of the
aShTAkSharI occupy the 8 faces of the maNDala.

vajra-maNDala

[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rlokc2WV1DI/AAAAAAAAAJc/3uv4WY_zPig/s320/av1.JPG)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rlokc2WV1DI/AAAAAAAAAJc/3uv4WY_zPig/s1600-h/av1.JPG)

When the aShTAkSharI is combined with a ShaDakSharI (vachadbhuve namaH)
then it results in the expansion of the planar ShaTkoNa yantra defined
by the ShaDakSharI’s syllables occupying the 6 equilateral compartments
of the yantra into the 3D cubic ghana-maNDala. Now the 6 syllables of
the ShaDakSharI occupy the 6 faces of the cube, while the 8 syllables of
the aShTAkSharI occupy the 8 vertices of the maNDala.

ghana-maNDala

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RlokdGWV1EI/AAAAAAAAAJk/JYXlp3uTbWs/s320/av2.JPG)](http://bp1.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RlokdGWV1EI/AAAAAAAAAJk/JYXlp3uTbWs/s1600-h/av2.JPG)

A praNava is located in the center of each of the two polyhedra. The
maNDala-s must be made solid ideally using a noble metal; other
substances might also be used, but require repeated reconsecration. They
can be made as separate polyhedra but ideally should be combined as an
octahedron mounted on a cube.

This symmetry in the saMpuTIkaraNa of the aShTAkSharI and the two
ShaDakSharI-s illustrates a geometric relationship of the two polyhedra
known as the dual. The dual of a polyhedron A is defined as polyhedron
B, which constructed by taking the centers of the faces of the A as the
vertices of B. The cube (ghana maNDala) and the octahedron
(vajra-maNDala) are duals of each other.
