+++
title = "The shUdra fromxa0parvatapAda"

+++
In the distant past we had little knowledge of the future that awaited
us. We were surrounded by fierce warriors contending for fame, like
dIrghadanta hrasvaroman, brindAputra, taskaraputra of evil nature,
kR^iShNa-shUdra, shveta-dadhna, bhR^ihatbhrU vaiShNavamata, the valiant
ekanetra from the regions of pAShaNDAdri, jayadratha, and also that
shUdra warrior known as dIrghashiras sUchIloman. There were also lowly
fighters like vidruma, kShudra-shUdra, ashvamukha, sUkaramukha, and
nAlikerAnana who contended for the great glory of victory in battle, but
were nowhere amongst the fiery yoddha-s. Then there were bewitching
strI-shiromaNi-s distinguished themselves from the collyrium heap of
durmukhi-s like the ornaments of the sharan-nishA . Amongst these were:
tIkShNa-tripathikA, kaunDinyakulA\~NganA, suchitrA trailokyasaMcharI,
vaishya-mahiShi, nAgakeshI durdanti, kamala-nayanA champakanasA,
guptasundarI minalochanI, tura\~NgA shyAmatvachI and kandUka-netrI ( :)
how many got into the composite ? ). Some puruSha-s bewitched by these
strI-s gave up their arms, and were lapped up in the great war by them
like kR^ityA-s sent by shiva. Having pierced that veil of time we found
ourselves back in that frame of time. There was the excitement of the
great yuddha where few stood alive at the end.

That valiant kR^iShNa-shUdra having taken a battering was fleeing from
the field. The amAtya asked us: why associate with such a poor shUdra,
when you have won riches in this great samarA\~NgaNa? Why not exult with
yonder yoddha-s of great wealth and status. But we did not leave our
companion like yuddhiShThira remaining with yama embodied as a dog.
kalashajA in the great exultation of that victory said who is this black
shUdra, let him be and let us move on to celebrate at the
nygrodha-prastha. The shUdra’s uncle told him : “O ANi-kesha I have a
way out for you. Sincerely follow my vidhi and you will be happy 8 years
from now. At that point many of these who laughed at you will be
trudging their way to the great a\~NgaNa of avimukta. Give up all your
attachments to women and pursue the path I have laid for you
relentlessly. I will financially support you throughout the yuddha.”

Retreating to paravatapAda, where he lived, much derided by his hecklers
he applied himself to his uncle’s plan.

Years later the wheel of fate had turned for many of the yoddha-s who
were victorious in this mahAyuddha of Aditya-s (saMdhya). One of them
whom indra had assigned a sthAna in nedIyas was ST. She remarked seeing
the mirthful life of the jAyadrathi: “Can anyone have a worse fate than
mine.”  
kalashajA said: “Surely it is better than that of the shUdra whose totem
was the khadira tree.”  
I said: Oh ST of sweet smiles, we have gone the whole way and can assure
you of that greater sorrows are wait if you chose that path you yearn
for. But you will be in suvargaM lokaM if you were to swap places with
the shUdra from parvatapAda.  
The two, who were like celestial jewels lighting the morbid darkness of
the shishira-nishA, said: “How could that ever be. Tell us what the real
fate of kR^iShNa-shUdra is?”

To tell them of the fate of kR^iShNa-shUdra we went out of our dream. We
thought of our ancient clansman, vipula the student of devasharman. Like
ushanA kAvya entering shiva we entered the mlechCha hero. We became a
sAkShi of the pleasures he was enjoying. We then exited him and entered
Manganese, the third Hero. We became of sAkShi of his extraordinary
insights for a while we experienced what it was to experience things our
brain had never fathomed. Then we passed into sujAtA and like a bee to
nectar she went straight to That One. Leaving her we entered That One.
From us emanated the first one that was the first of the mAnasikA-s.
Then came the second one of the mAnasikA. We let them loose so that they
may watch pass the information in case we go trapped. We then entered
ravIndra on the banks of the gomUtraka-mUlaka saMgama. Residing in him
we went to the temple of The god and saw his li\~Nga. Then we passed
being within ravIndra to the temple of the awful vinAyaka who was
sleeping in a grotto on the flank of the river bed. The terrible
vinAyaka refused to see ravIndra and we could not experience him. We
wandered hiding thus for a while until ravIndra was struck by the darts
of rudra (hence they say rudrasya hetir parivovR^iNaktu). Reeling under
them filled with disease and distress he stumbled along near the the
shrine of the vinAyaka. We tried to get out him but were trapped and
unable to come out. Strangely we saw a second copy of ourselves freely
moving along the banks of the mUtraka and then suddenly flying away into
the sky.

ravIndra was then seized by a pishAchI who stuck to him like leech to
its prey and refused to let go of him like a tiger its quarry. With this
dread pishAchI sucking from him he wandered along a dusty road beyond
the mUlaka river in a hazy state until he arrived at an old dharmashAla
that had been built by a notable maharaTTa prime minister. There, he lay
and dropped into a deep sleep until he awoke from dream where he felt he
was eating metal wires. I from within experienced this dream of his and
when he awoke from within him also experienced the rays of sunlight he
saw streaming into the room. He then awoke and stumbled along tormented
by the darts of The deva, like Apollo-shoot-afar showering his arrows on
the Niobids. Thus wandering he arrived at the desk of the shUdra whose
totem was the khadira tree and asked him to save.
