+++
title = "The kea – the foremost of thexa0dinosaurs"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RmTyiE5tW0I/AAAAAAAAAJs/8uAzXlH7Vo8/s320/kea.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RmTyiE5tW0I/AAAAAAAAAJs/8uAzXlH7Vo8/s1600-h/kea.jpg)

Once I asked the yakShiNI bhujaMga-mekhalA which was the greatest of the
dinosaurs. The wonderful yakShiNI answered that she felt that it was
parrot known as the kea (Nestor notabilis). The kea is one of the most
extraordinary birds. Its intelligence is legendary (see the movie
below). It is also one of the only known predatory parrot that can take
on mammalian prey. It is known to kill and feed on sheep, and for this
reason was nearly hunted to extinction by the European invaders of New
Zealand. This is pretty amazing for a crow-sized bird, but is not
surprising when one factors in its intelligence. It represents one of
the members of an distinctive lineage of parrots comprised of 3 New
Zealand species- the Kaka, Kea and slightly more distant Kakapo. The
remaining few parrots found in New Zealand are all parakeets, namely the
Kakarikis and the deep south Antipodean parakeet.

The evolution of parrots is a topic of considerable importance to the
more general issue of extant neornithine evolution. Prof. Feduccia, the
perpetrator of many falsehoods, had proposed that the major radiation of
the neornithes occurred after the great extinction at the K/T boundary.
But Cracraft’s analysis suggested that several the major lineages of
neornithes including both the paleognaths and neognaths had already
radiated by the late Mesozoic and made it past the K/T event. Their
basic dispersion was attributed to vicariance associated with the break
up and the movement of the fragments of the erstwhile landmass of
Gondwanaland. Following this initial dispersion they appear to have
radiated extensively during the Tertiary to spawn the modern avifaunas.

To support this theory, Cracraft used a systematic analysis of
neornithine radiations to show that the Galloanserae (fowl and
waterfowl), Gruiformes (the cranes and allies),
Caprimulgiformes+Apodiformes, Passeriformes amongst the neognaths and
the paleognaths show a predominantly “Trans-antarctic” distribution –
that is in the Cretaceous Gondwanan fragments (assuming that in the
Cretaceous there was a land connection between greater India and
Madagascar and that greater India was connected via the Kerguelan
Plateau to East Antarctica, which was in turn connected to South
America. This connection is supported by the biogeography of Abelisaur
dinosaurs). Again, in his study Cracraft proposed that the parrots might
have had a Gondwanan origin and that their extant distribution might
have been influenced by the break up of the Gondwanan landmass. He cited
the major radiation of the parrots in South America and Australia in
support of this idea. Subsequent molecular analysis of parrot evolution
by Miyaki et al and de Kloet et al suggested that indeed that parrots
seem to have radiated separately in the main major Gondwanan fragments-
Australia and South America, sort of following the same model as the
marsupials. These studies also suggested that one of the African
lineages of parrots are closer to the S. American forms suggesting that
they emerged from an early south American lineage and flew across the
much narrow paleo-Atlantic ocean to colonize Africa.

Interestingly, in both Miyaki et al and de Kloet et al studies the
Kea-Kaka-Kakapo lineage emerged as the basal-most lineage of all
parrots. If this phylogenetic position can be confirmed by further
studies, then these parrots of New Zealand possibly represent a remnant
of the old lineage of parrots that would have existed on Antarctica to
which New Zealand was attached till between 82-90 Myrs ago. One
implication of these proposals is that possibly fossil parrots will be
found in Antarctica, just as the Cretaceous fossil Galloanseran,
Vegavis, was recently described. Molecular studies on avian evolution
also strongly suggest that within the neoaves clade the parrots are
certainly not particularly closely related to passeriformes, but might
instead by closer to owls. So the evolution of high intelligence, over
and above the general increase seen in the Neoaves in general, was an
independent feature in parrots and passeriformes like the Corvids.

This might also mean that several lineages of intelligent neornithine
dinosaurs had probably begun emerging in the Cretaceous itself. This
would mean that time alone is not a major factor for high intelligence
and practical problem-solving ability to transform to “high-level
technological” intelligence as seen in humans — the dinosaurs seem to
have possibly arrived close to ape-like intelligence over 65 million
years ago but did make the transition the humans made. There are other
contingency factors. \[As an aside- this is something Carl Sagan
completely misses in his book titled Demon-haunted world or something
like that\]”
