+++
title = "Western generalizations of religiosity"

+++
The Anglospheric (Leukospheric) arrogance coming from their military
ascendancy in the past few centuries is point easily discerned by any
outsider. Yet, many outsiders note only the most obvious dimensions of
this — for example the military imposition of Leukospheric political
paradigms on the rest of the world. Far fewer outsiders notice the
cultural subversion and imperialism practiced by the Leukosphere. A
still smaller set of outsiders are able to even objectively observe and
anthropologize on the Leukosphere despite having been the subject of
Leukospheric anthropology for a few centuries now. Those outsiders who
do enter the leukospheric academia conduct anthropological
investigations as converts (brown Sahibs or Gungadins or Macaulaya
mAnasIka putra-s in Hindu parlance). A very small number of outsiders
discover that the divide of secular and religious is a unique feature of
the Leukosphere that is inapplicable to them as long as the remain
outsiders. Words somewhat along this line of thought may be encountered
in the prolix outpourings of S. Balagangadhara of Ghent.

While I have lived in the Leukosphere for almost a 3rd of my life I am
an outsider, and will probably attain dakShiNApati as one. As an
outsider, I study and anthropologize on the rich cultural diversity of
the Leukosphere and also its unifying elements namely the memes of
religion and its twin secularism. For us, the Hindu outsiders , or the
heathens in general, these are extremely dangerous memes because it
makes the Leukosphere inimical and potentially deadly for us. They are
similar in a basic sense to the dreaded meme of Mohammedanism that
spreads misery the world over, but the above Leukospheric memes in some
ways subtler and richer than the brutish manifestations of the Arabian
meme. Keeping this rambling preamble in mind, let us examine a work
published by Elaine Howard Ecklund from SUNY, Buffalo.

What Ecklund has done is to perform surveys via questionnaires and
statistically analyze the results to report trends in the religiosity of
American (living in USA) scientists. The survey was performed on
professors of science from what are considered (true by other objective
metrics like h-index) the most influential schools of American science
e.g. Harvard, Princeton and U of Chicago, U of Michigan and UC,
Berkeley. Some key findings of this author are:  
1\) Scientists are not very religious compared to the general public,
although a significant minority is religious. 2) Scientists are
interested in spirituality.

The author notes that 34% report being atheist (not believing in God)
and 30% as “agnostic” (meaning “I do not know if there is a God and
there is no way to find out”). In contrast 3% of Americans claim to be
atheists and about 5% are agnostic. About 52% of scientists claim to
have no affiliation to a particular religion, in comparison to only 14
percent of the larger American population. 2% of scientists call
themselves evangelist/fundamentalist, while 14% of general Americans do
so (So a Hindu must keep in mind that he has roughly 1 in 7 chance of
encountering a fundamentalist while interacting with Americans). 15% of
the scientists declare themselves as followers Judaism in comparison to
2% of general Americans, and constitute the single largest religious
affiliation amongst American scientists who declare having a religious
affinity. The over-representation of Judaists is unsurprising in one
dimension -much of recent Euro-American science has emerged from Jewish
intellectual activity that began in Europe and dispersed to USA due to
the German onslaught. Judaists have been at the foundation of sections
of modern science, mathematics and sociological models of the
Leukosphere. e.g. Krebs: Metabolic cycles, Michaelis: enzyme kinetics,
Einstein: quantum mechanics (i.e. PEE), theory of relativity and the
idea of unifying the 4 forces, Anfinsen: protein folding problem, Temin:
retroviruses, Boaz: anthropology, von Neumann: computer science,
Greenberg: linguisitics.

Ecklund suggests that this striking difference between scientists with
respect to the general American is predicated on their upbringing.
People from less religious families seem to be less religious as adults
and most scientists seem to come from atheistic or nominally religious
families. The subtle point about this observation that is missed by the
insider is that the two sister Abrahamisms are very different: Judaists,
unlike their Isaist neighbors, seem to have undergone evolution (perhaps
in the late 1800s when they started entering scientific studies in large
numbers) to accommodate scientific pursuits within their world view — a
drift towards an interpretive mode of religious practice as against
fundamentalism. In contrast, Isaism has not evolved in this way, being
rigidly fundamentalist, it had to be cleared to allow scientific thought
to emerge. Whereas the papacy might claim that it now accommodates the
science which it once opposed, what exists is actually an uneasy,
immiscible association between the two.

This leads to the most important point for us– this survey is
essentially assumes Isaism as the norm, and its general conclusion on
religious upbringing is only relevant to Isaists (and possibly
Mohammedans, who definitely comprise a minority of the respondents). The
Judaists due to their internal religious evolution have moved out of the
classical Abrahmistic mold. Hence, the question whether they believe in
God is relevant, but the generalization on upbringing is not. These
questions are fundamentally meaningless to a true educated Hindu — he
has neither God nor religion in the sense of the Abrahamists. So the
generalizations of this study do not apply to Hindus at all. However,
when a study such as this is internalized by an un-educated Hindu filled
with aviveka, and infected by Macaulayitis it leads to a disastrous
confusion in his mind.

Another interesting aspect of Ecklund’s work is that 66% of American
natural scientists are “spiritual”, including significant fractions of
the atheists and agnostics. This term “spiritual” is defined by them in
vague terms — but if you note their self-descriptions of spirituality
they suggest what might be termed a “deep connection with nature/the
universe”. It is such expressions that map with a Hindu’s and related
heathen’s approach to religion. As a result it is increasingly clear
that the science-religion conflict is not at all a general construct,
but something unique to the Christo-Islamic world (Note that certain
forms of doctrinally related Judaism have evolved to transcend this
issue. This situation in science is different from the geopolitical
objectives and alignments of the 3 primary Abrahamisms).

The final point of note that the author noticed was that the majority of
scientists in their interviews concluded that religion is not an
acceptable topic for discussion. Even outside of the classroom or in
informal discussions with students. This is an aspect of the
Leukospheric meme termed secularism– in the author’s word often couched
in the famous terminology of “separation of church and state”. This meme
is peculiar in many ways- it is antagonistic in its exterior to religion
as defined by Christo-Islamism, but is in its interior a twin of the
religion meme of Leukosphere and sustained by very similar doctrinal
constructs. Most importantly their system of ethics in secularism derive
directly from the core Abrahamistic meme. The scorn for heathens is also
inherited in a similar way as demonstrated by us earlier using the
examples such as the popular American scientist Diamond. As result a
large number of Leukospheric scientists, while openly irreligious, are
in reality following a covert form of the Abrahamistic meme. As a result
we see that a large fraction of the American scientists are in pitiable
state of delusion — truly the proverbial emperors without clothes. They
think they have come out of religion to this new state secularism, but
in reality are merely manifesting another form of the same meme.

To end:  
\-For the properly educated Hindu scientist the conflict of science and
religion is a meaningless issue. It is an object of anthropological
study on the Leukosphere.  
\-Secularism and separation of religion and state has no meaning for an
educated Hindu. Accordingly, a genuine Hindu state will not even comment
on the separation of religion from state or public life.  
\-Consequently in the scientific realm a Hindu scientist does not
recognize the need to deliberately keep religion out of acceptable
discourse.
