+++
title = "Where have wexa0come?"

+++
ekanetra brought to mind an old incident. duShTa-putraka, gola-mukha and
pIDAmukha were all exultant being at the brink of a great victory
against us in the patra-spardha. But ekanetra and me rallied our forces
and snatched victory from them. I mentioned that mantra of the ikShvAku
emperor trasadasyu invoking indra in that battle when purukutsa had been
bound. 17 years ago ekanetra, ST, R and me rode on our ashvas past the
palace of the founder of the Maharatta nation turned left and went a
long way. Having tied the ashva-s and laid a spell of ka\~nkAla bhairava
to ward off chora-s and taskara-s who might steal our ashva-s. We
engaged on an energetic climb. Having, taken the path below the prAsAda
of dhUrta-svamin we reached that clearance on the basaltic spur where
seated ourselves on the 4 rocks. Interestingly, we realized that we were
all descendants of agnichit-s, but something about us was more
reminiscent of the decline of the brahminical glory, rather than agni
fed by the brAhmaNas shooting to the skies. In some sense we felt a
melancholy identity with
[Kareik](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2007/04/last-arya.html) and
Baghashai, something I have often alluded to in these pages- that sense
of decline and demise.

It was not entirely a case of the cashing of the
[check](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2004/08/brahmin-brain-drain.html)
that we talked about before (though this was true to some degree of ST
and R. I must state in advance that R does not agree at all –be
pacified). But it was something else. Just then muNDaputra and
nAstIkaputra walked by. They told us what they were planning to do and
asked what we were up to. We exchanged notes. Both parties were utterly
perplexed as to why the other would want to do what it stated. So we
parted ways. ekanetra tore a piece darbha grass and asked me what do
they mean? In my idealism of youth I declared that it did not matter
because we will emerge winners due to our superior clarity of thought
and extensive theoretical framework. ekanetra agreed readily. But
subsequently I realized that clarity of thought and the framework were
fine but the tide had turned against us. This is the other cause of the
decline. I compare it to ecological change–when the climate suddenly
changes there is extinction. What were once highly successful species go
extinct rapidly.

Coming back to the present: ekanetra, ST and me were on the phone. They
asked what remains of that lost world ? I could not express myself
though they were all there embedded in memory as vague reflection on the
consciousness. For a moment it brought to fore the very question of the
nature of conscious. Then I gazed at Google Earth and recalled the
kShetra where all the play of youth had transpired, where the gods had
placed our foes in the jaws of the yama, where we used the vidveShaNa
mantra to defeat the dasyu. To our mind came the R^igvedic mantra: “aham
indro rodho vakSho atharvaNaH “. Suddenly fragments emerged: The three
pITha-s – 1) of delusion 2) of sorrow 3) of joy. Our encounter with
Mis-creant in all those 3 pITha-s came to mind. The root lay in the lair
of delusion, the door to knowledge in the station of sorrow (the long
yarn with her on dipterans, neutrally evolving sequences, GTPases and
GATA-type zinc fingers domains), and the ephemeral Ananda in the
causeway of joy. The sAmavedin, our teacher’s student, tried to grasp it
but was felled. Verily he was sunk like the eastern singers being united
with the vajra of the wrathful thunderer. “Think of those brahmins who
were annihilated by indra’s vajra”, I cried. ekanetra replied “think of
the taittirIyaka who fell prey to the agni shalya when the atreya’s
father-in-law sacrificed”. ST did not understand. But her intuition is
great. She said: “from beneath the cover in the realm of joy had slipped
away that thing which you continue to seek. Will it be that you chase it
even as Orion chases his quarry, with two nets and two dogs in the
welkin.”
