+++
title = "Problems in avian evolution"

+++
Since the Mesozoic, dinosaurs have become one of the most visible
components of the terrestrial ecosystems. Yet, the dinosaurs alive today
only represent a small sliver of their diversity during their heydays in
the Mesozoic. Nevertheless, these modern dinosaurs, the birds,
representing just one lineage of theropods now include about 8000-10000
species, which is more than the number of mammal species, which is
around 4500. It is the evolutionary history of these extant dinosaurs,
the Neornithes clade of birds, that presents interesting problems: 1)
When and where did the neornithes come into being and diversify to spawn
the extant lineages? 2) What are the higher-order relationships between
the extant lineages.

Since the discovery of Archaeopteryx fossil evidence has revealed a rich
history of birds in the Mesozoic. The current analysis of this evidence
points to some very basal lineages of birds that are morphologically
close to their deinonychosaur sister group and might even lie within it.
These include the forms like Rahonavis, Archaeopteryx,
Shenzhouraptor(=Jeholornis), and Sapeornis. The pygostylian clade of
birds includes those forms which are distinctly closer to the neornithes
than to the basal bird lineages. Within the pygostylian clade a basal
lineage is seen in the form of Confuciusornis, Changchengornis and
relatives. Then the pygostylians show two great lineages that include
most of the diversity of birds: the enantiornithines and euornithines.
Of these, the enantiornithines are the prominent birds in the Cretaceous
fossil record and span a notable diversity adapted to different
ecological niches.

The euornithines, the clade which includes all Mesozoic pygostylians
closer to crown group neornithes than the enantiornithines, also
underwent a remarkable radiation in the late Mesozoic giving rise to
several ecologically diverse lineages ([See early article for
details](http://manollasa.blogspot.com/2006/06/gansus-and-early-ornithuromorph.html)).
These included independent lines of shore birds- the Chaoyangids:
Chaoyangia and Hongshangornis and the Songlingornithids like Yanornis
and Yixianornis; desert birds like Apsaravis; flightless runners like
Patagopteryx; marine lineages – Gansus, the hesperornithids and
ichthyornithids among others. Both the enantiornithines and the above
basal lineages of euornithines went extinct at the great K/T event which
marked the end of the Mesozoic. It is only in the Tertiary that we start
seeing numerous fossils representing members of the extant lineages of
birds. Strikingly, representatives of most of these extant lineages of
birds, the neornithines show hardly any convincing presence in the
Cretaceous. This lead to the proposal that the neornithines represent a
Tertiary radiation from a single or limited number of survivor\[s\] of
the K/T event, with most major modern lineages emerging after the
extinction. In contrast, Cracraft’s biogeographic analysis of
neornithines and Sudhir Kumar’s molecular phylogenies first suggest that
many of the major higher order splits in neornithines had emerged in the
Cretaceous itself in the fragmenting Gondwanaland and and passed through
the K/T event as survivors. Their core biogeography was also interpreted
as product of vicariance of the Gondwanan fragments. The recently
re-described Vegavis from Antarctica was shown to be a definitive member
of the galloanseran clade, and possibly even a duck supporting cryptic
presence of neornithes in the Cretaceous and their extensive
diversification prior to the K/T event.

Though the higher-order phylogeny of the neornithines had earlier
confounded both molecular and morphological studies, now several branch
points in the tree are becoming much clearer with larger datasets. The
basal split in the neornithines separates the paleognaths from the
neognaths. The primitive paleognaths in turn are split up into the
volant tinamous one hand and the flightless ratites on the other. It is
in the evolution of the ratite branch that ancient DNA techniques have
brought new data. Several species of tinamous are found in South
America. Of the ratites the rhea is from south America, the ostrich in
Africa and greater India (till recently), the elephant birds in
Madagascar (extinct recently), the emu and cassowaries in Australia and
the moa and kiwi in New Zealand. This suggests that the common ancestor
of all ratites was flightless and that vicariance during Gondwanan
breakup might have had a major role in their distribution. The molecular
phylogenies suggest an interesting tree (see below): the rhea is the
most basal branch, the moa is the next branch, followed by the ostrich
and a crown of the cassowary+emu with the kiwi as a their sister group.
Thus, the two New Zealand ratites are not monophyletic suggesting
independent invasions of New Zealand. Based on limited sequence data the
elephant birds seem to belong to the clade: (ostrich
(kiwi(cassowary,emu))).

Assuming the Gondwanan vicariance theory we come with the following
scenario: The ancestral ratite split from the tinamous somewhere in
South America and spread over the rest of the southern landmass
(comprising of Antarctica+Australia+New Zealand and Indo-Madagascar
linked by the Kerguelen Plateau), probably just prior to 80 Myrs. As New
Zealand broke away from this mass the moa lineage separated and as
Indo-Madagascar broke away the the ostrich and the elephand birds
diverged respectively on greater India and Madagascar. In the Australian
mass were the common ancestor of the kiwi, the emu and the cassowaries.
The kiwi somehow seems to have reached New Zealand from here. Given that
the inference strongly supports a flightless ratite ancestor this second
invasion of New Zealand by ratites should have occurred by land
connection between New Zealand and Australia, or at least when the
connection to Australia was close enough to allow a float. This points
to the late Cretaceous when the Howe Rise and the Norfolk Ridge could
have formed a connection to New Zealand including New Caledonia. This
would also imply that the ostrich reached Africa from greater India when
it joined the Eurasian Landmass, consistent with proposed ostrich
fossils from central Asia.

However, there are some earlier fossil paleognaths that are somewhat
enigmatic. These are the volant lithornithids found in early Tertiary
deposits from Europe and North America. Analysis of the anatomy of the
best preserved specimens of the lithornithids suggest a relationship
with the tinamous (In the very least like the tinamous it lies outside
the ratite clade amongst the paleognaths). They appear to have flown
from the Gondwanan continents to colonize the northern landmasses at
some point prior to 55 Mya and eventually became extinct. The
similarities between the tinamous and the lithornithids suggests the
ancestor of the paleognaths was in general morphology a flighted bird
similar to these. They seem to have eventually led to the flightless
ratites, perhaps via a tinamous like intermediate that spent a lot of
time on the ground.

Within the neognaths the fundamental split is between the galloanserans
(fowl and water fowl) on one hand, and the neoaves on the other
including all other extant birds. Within the neoaves an early distinct
branch separate from the rest appears to be the passeriformes. At least
two independent molecular analysis suggest that within neoaves the owls
and parrots might form a clade, perhaps including the hornbills. This
clade might either be an early branch of the remaining neoaves clade
after the passeriformes split off, or a sister group of all of other
neoaves.
