+++
title = "Organ and Edwards on dinosaur genomes"

+++
Scott Edwards has been doing some interesting research on amniote
genomes for sometime- of the type I was long back very interested in,
before moving on to ancient evolutionary events. He had earlier
presented the possibility that the decrease in genome size in avian
archosaurs might have preceded the origin of flight unlike the original
proposal of Hughes. Now with Organ and colleagues he has followed it up
with some new research that I find very interesting and very close to my
scientific proclivities as a teenager. It is a bit speculative and
ultimately heading into murky ground but one of the most impressive
pieces of research nonetheless.

The work mainly pioneered by Hughes suggested that bird genomes are
amongst the smallest seen in amniotes because they were streamlined by
natural selection for light bodies resulting in lower energetic costs
for flight. This was supported by the argument that flightless birds
have larger genomes and that bats amongst the generally large-genomes
mammals have small genome. However, it must be noted that there is no
correlation between body size and genome size or gene number. In terms
of genome size, mammals and reptiles of diverse shapes and sizes
typically have large genome sizes compared to birds of similar size. In
terms of gene number ciliates and early branching eukaryotes like
Trichomonas have more genes than most complex animals including
vertebrates. However, interestingly there is a reasonably good positive
correlation between blood cell size and genome size. What the Edwards
team showed is that there is a similar correlation between genome weight
and osteocyte size. They cleverly used this correlation to predict with
Bayesian statistics the genome sizes of several dinosaurs whose
osteocytes or lacunae they could observe in bone cross-sections. As a
result they found that estimated average extinct theropod genome weight
is 1.78 pg which is in the range observed of .97-2.16 pg of extant birds
(average=1.45 pg). This is significantly below that seen extant reptiles
and crocodiles (greater than 2.2 pg) and mammals are even higher.
Interestingly, the ornithischian dinosaurs are in the same range as
other reptiles.

Then the authors ingeniously established a positive correlation between
the transposons of the LINE-like retroposon family and the associated
non-coding RNA derived reverse transcripts (SINE-like elements) and used
this predict that these elements were in low numbers from early in
theropod or even early saurischian evolution (dependent on the phylogeny
of Herrerasaurus).  
Thus they provide reasonable evidence that the compression of genome
size began early in theropod evolution before they ever started flying.
Thus many features of modern birds– air sacs, feathers, sleeping posture
and egg-incubation posture emerged before in course of dinosaur
evolution, long before the birds emerged or took to wing. The authors
mention nesting and parental care in their paper- but these emerged even
earlier in archosaurs prior to the divergence of the crocodile and
dinosaurs lines. This suggests that there were many levels of
pre-adaptations leading to the avian flight. However, the exact reasons
for the differential action of the LINE-like retroposons in different
amniote lineages is puzzling – expansion in mammals and inactivation and
contraction in the dinosaurs. The authors propose that smaller blood
cells might have aided better oxygenation and higher metabolic rates
(mammals achieved this by possibly losing the erythrocyte nucleus).
There could be other more basic reasons for this– one possibility though
not well-supported by the data at hand is that endothermy coupled with
gigantism required genomes to compress to allow faster maturation. Again
this could be an effect rather than cause. What ever the cause it needs
more thought.
