+++
title = "The geopolitical observer"

+++
Sometimes one watches history form around you. You wish it would happen
differently but like an enormous phantasm it rolls along its own course.
There are many current geopolitical events that are of considerable
interest . Hindus by and large appear to be imbeciles — it is hard to
believe they once produced a viShNugupta and a viShNusharman. There are
no signs they using the opportunities, and probably will let them pass
by them.  
The points to note are:  
\*The sole superpower, the US, has been hijacked by a small powerful
group that wishes to use the American military might for its interests.
This group covertly collaborates with what is known to outsiders as
racial supermacism or Isaistic evangelism. This is apparent to any
discerning observer but the average American is not such. Like the
average Indian, the average American is very ordinary and can be easily
fooled, lulled into a sweet slumber or made to dig his own grave. He
hardly has a realistic view of the countries in which the interest group
controlling his government is primarily interested. Sadly, for the
Americans the interest group controlling their government uses the media
to its full advantage and keeps them busy with nonsense. Even more
frighteningly, this interest group is filled with a characteristic
arrogance over their strategic brilliance, and hardly bothers about
ground realities. On the other side the Americans are not the people who
are willing to take military losses on any large scale. As result the
Americans are really out of depth in Iraq, stuck in a futile situation.

\*Like in the African wild so also in geopolitics — Seeing the American
elephant stuck in the quagmire, the hyenas, the cats, the crocodiles and
vultures are going to make a bid for the meat. The foremost of these
hyenas is China, licking its lips and biding its time with those
bone-crusher jaws. Filled with civilizational consciousness and its
resurgent chauvinism, it would not stop short of re-enacting its Tang
glory. No one can match the Chinese in their arrogance regarding
territorial claims (feature going back to the Tang days), and they back
it up with a front-end of audacious propaganda (Like the African Nations
conference, the satellite blasting displays, the Beijing Olympics to
name a few). The US and the Leukosphere is in a delicate situation
vis-a-vis China. They know it is an existential threat, but cannot do
much because they are too entangled economically with China, and have a
large dependency on Chinese skilled labor in their science and
technology. The west has always tried to use Isaism as a subversionist
mechanism against China. However, the disastrous incident of the
“Chinese younger brother of Jesus” made the Leukosphere realize that
it may be unwise to play the Christian card too hard. The logic roughly
goes thus: the Leukosphere assumes that Isaism is its foundation and
weapon of subversion. There must be no other power which should become
the custodian of Isaism. There is a great chance the the Chinese convert
to Messianic Isaism and thus challenge the very foundations of the
Leukosphere by setting up an alternative Christian power center. Hence,
the US cannot deploy its Christian attack dogs to the maximum on China.
Further, US getting stuck in Iraq has reduced its ability to try other
options to subvert China. This has definitely put the Chinese in an
advantageous situation, giving them the chance to act with much greater
impunity now.

\*As we have discussed before the group that controls America from
within, the Protestant Isaists, the Catholic Isaists and even the
Moslems have an alignment of interests when it comes to the Russians.
They aligned and cooperated extensively to destroy the Russian empire in
the great Cold War by bleeding Russia through its weak underbelly.
Average Russians like many other nations, including Americans and
Indians are not particularly farsighted and can be easily beguiled by
propaganda. What is worse is that the Russian intelligentsia and elite
have lost faith in their nation due the effects of communists rule. So
much so that now they are serving American interests and economy (from
Google to the numerous science labs in the US), having emigrated in
droves to the US. Hence, Russia is largely bereft of its human
intellectual capital. But they have come under a relatively strong and
nationalistic leader Putin, who clearly understands the devastation the
Anglosphere and the its vassals have inflicted on Russia. He has been
much vilified by the Anglospheric press (a very common tactic), but
remains firmly in control. He also realizes how the anglosphere has
broken up any possibility of a pan-Slavic unity while all the time
building a Leukospheric front under the Anglospheric leadership. Seeing
the Americans in trouble has clearly sent the signal for Putin to act
bolder– he has rejected the old treaty with the Anglosphere and its
vassals. The Russians will definitely work towards destabilizing the
Americans, and Iraq+Afghanistan is an opportunity coming up for them. We
would predict that they would use Iran as a proxy to have revenge on the
Americans. In Afghanistan the Russian cards are not clear (Uzbeks?).

\*The most interesting twist in the current situation is that of the
Terrorist state of Pakistan. The marriage between USA and the Islamic
terrorist state has been a long and lasting one, transcending many a
dictator and prime minister. The hub of international terrorism and the
beloved girlfriend of Chacha Sham, the leader of the Anglosphere, was
the architect of their glorious victory against Russia, with the beards
plying the CIA’s Stinger missiles to the cheers of the Americans. The
same Stingers came back to be used against India in Kargil. Even 9/11
could not shake the dance of the lovers (after all they say all is fair
in love and war :) ). We have many times in the past explained why this
is so, and how much value TSP and Islamic terrorism in general has for
the Leukopshere in keeping India (and to some degree other states) in
check. Further, here the interests of Beijing and the Leukosphere,
though normally in conflict, align perfectly. But now the usual dynamics
of Islam are playing out– Islam is bloody within and without, and the
gore within is coming to fore in the past few days \! The Moslems
unsurprisingly are killing each other and the US is unable to do much
here. Any realist state will not pass such an opportunity such as this
to flatten the thorn placed by their rivals in its path. But India is
not realist state — the Leukosphere acts at many levels. It has nearly
made India a soft state or worse a whore state. Thus, we see history
passing around us unable to make much of it (I hope I am wrong). Realist
states like Israel have exploited similar gore within Islam pretty
effectively to emasculate its proximal Islamic threat (the recent
Fatah-Hamas conflict).

\*\~\*\~\*

A Moslem apologist in Akbar the Mogol tyrant’s court describes the
battle between Raja Mansingh (a Mogol commander) and Maharana
Pratapsingh in Haldighat. He mentions how the Moslem musketeers circled
around the clashing armies spraying bullets randomly. He exclaims in
delight how, it does not matter if the Moslem bullets hit one of
Mansingh’s men, because either way it is one Hindu less in the world.
Time for Schadenfreude ? Hey, Hindus believe in karma–so now let us
Hindus sit back and watch the fun — who care who wins? Either way one
more bearded ghazi gets to kiss his boys and girls in Jannat, or did
some Leukospheric fellow Abrahamistic apologist say it was just 72
raisins and 28 peaches?. They must be desperate if it is just the
latter.
