+++
title = "Are nAstika-s valid successors of the vedicxa0tradition"

+++
We had a discussion with ekanetra, the master of Asita-krIDa. ekanetra
and me were long-standing students of laukIka itihAsa, and
itihAsa-purANa and had spent endless hours talking to each other about
history and even enacting it when other youths like biDAlashmashru,
brindAputra, jyeShTha-danta hrashvaroman, duShTa-bAhu and sphigmukha
diligently applied themselves to their worldly ways. In battle there
none like ekanetra — a coethnic, a samAna, a sa-gotra, an intellectual
and an AdhAra when we were together. ekanetra and we were thus sporting
when he incurred the displeasure of the high deva-s; for many years did
he suffer and so did our acquaintance and co-ethnic ST. Now we have
burnt their misfortunes and taken the rest on ourselves, for we repay
well to our partisans. We were meeting after long and only the yoShA of
the vasiShThas, whom the two of us had backed in the battle kR^isha
grantha, was not with us to complete the pleasure derived from the
company of true friends — indra is said to keep the good things apart.
We also wished we had timed it so that ST would have been with us, but
it was not be so. ekanetra asked many things which congealed into the
below exposition:

—\*—

What is the original tradition of the Hindus?  
The vedic tradition.  
Which is the most important vedic doctrine?  
The doctrine of [knowing
indra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/12/19/knowing-indra/ "Knowing indra").  
Are bauddha nAstika-s true inheritors of the vedic tradition?  
We know that even in the late brAhmaNa period the position of indra was
being eroded with the rise of prajApati and to a certain extant rudra
and viShNu. Yet, the bauddha doctrines retain the high position of
indra, to the extant possible within the nAstika Weltanschauung \[to
clarify- the tathAgata is the highest object of veneration and power,
but shakra is definitely the most powerful of the beings in the world
structure\] Interestingly, the deities viShNu and rudra find a limited
mention in comparison to indra, who is repeatedly termed a boddhisattva
and the protector of the bauddha dharma in the early days of this
nAstika mata. In fact, some myths of indra, which have been lost in
brAhminical tradition are preserved in early bauddha tradition.

Some late upaniShadic traditions which profess connections with the veda
rebel against the veda. A clear case is the muNDaka upaniShat. While
claiming to be attached to the shaunaka atharvaveda it rebels against
vedic authority and claims a knowledge higher than the veda. A similar
position is hinted by the earliest yoga texts. The early bauddha texts
are not directly disrespectful towards the veda, but rebels against them
claiming a higher knowledge to attain the arihant status or buddhahood.
In essence, this higher knowledge is merely semantically and
descriptively different from the upaniShadic brahma-vidyA and yoga of
the yoga texts — phenomenologically these systems are similar.

Sectarian schools of the Astikas developing within the vedic fold like
shaiva, vaiShNava and prAjApatya-brahmavAda are also very distinct in
their spirit from the original shrauta religion in their displacement of
indra and formulation of distinct ritual systems. This in a way is not
very different from bauddha-s worshiping the buddha-s and boddhisatvas.

Both the sectarian schools of Astikas and the nAstika bauddha-mata are
products of brahma-kShatra activity associated with asceticism. The
early pAshupata-s, the early vaiShNava-s both vaikhAnasa and
pA\~ncharAtra are dominated by ascetic brAhmaNa-s. While buddha was a
kShatriya, his primary followers, the first arihants are the brahmins
shariputra and maudgalyAyana. Both the sectarian Astika-s and bauddha-s
position themselves as The true path. Thus, we might conclude that in
diverging from vedic, in conceptual terms, the sectarian Astika-s and
bauddha-s are not really all that different. Both may merely be seen as
a part of the same continuum of the post-vedic traditions that
drastically diverged at different points from vedic principles. Yet, a
careful comparison of these traditions raises chronological and
sociological issues that are critical for understanding early Hindu
history.

Let us observe some features of the early bauddha corpus in comparison
to the mainstream Astika texts:  
The devas: Both texts speak of a comparable set of gods. As mentioned
above in the bauddha system as in the veda indra stands at the head of
the pantheon and is the most frequently mentioned deity. brahma is the
other god who is prominently mentioned though much less than indra. In
the samyutta nikAya 11.5 (the subhAsita-jaya sUtta) presents a
brahmodaya contest between indra and the asura viprachitti in which
indra triumphs and in his brahmodaya recitation gives verses that
declare the bauddha doctrine. This motif of the triumphant indra winning
a brahmodaya on account of his elucidation of bauddha thought is very
parallel to the late kena upaniShad where indra attains supremacy of the
gods because he understands the vedantic brahma vAda. In the dIgha
nikaya 20 (mahA-samaya sUtta), the tathAgata introduces the sangha to
the devas, gandharva, yakShas etc. In the samyutta nikaya 11.3 (dhajagga
sUtta) the tathAgata again mentions several devas and tries to claim
that he is greater than them. In these early bauddha works we find the
mention of other gods mentioned include prajapati, varuNa, ashvins,
viShNu, ishAna (rudra), soma and yama. Thus, the bauddhas were
well-conversant with the classical vedic pantheon. In the
brahma-jAla-sUtta the buddha disparagingly talks of the worship of the
devI shrI. In the chula-niddessa which appears to be of the later layer
of the pAli canon we encounter the mention of vAsudeva and balabhadra
suggesting that the early pA\~ncharatric vaiShNAva sect was known to
exist coevally.

However, in addition the bauddha-s also mention certain deities that
appear to have been lost or largely forgotten in mainstream Astika
religion. These include the 4 divine world-kings: dhR^itarAShTra,
virUpAkSha, virUdhaka and kubera. Of these only kubera is prominently
retained as king of yakSha-s in Astika tradition. virUpAkSha is
remembered as a rAkShasa, whereas dhR^itarAShTra as a nAga. Then there
is the goddess manimekhalA, an assistant of indra, who appears to have
been popular among seafaring vaishyas as the guardian deity of the sea.
She appears in the eponymous tamil bauddha work as a prominent deity and
her worship survives to date in Cambodia. These examples illustrate the
diversity of Indic tradition outside of the vedic core and remind us
that the surviving traditions are only partially cover the original
diversity.

It also important to note that the bauddha-s appear to share with the
purANas the doctrine of multiple cycles of brahma and indra, which is
very alien to vedic thought.

dAnava-s: The early bauddha works know of several dAnava-s such as
viprachitti, prahlAda, bali, virochana, rAhu, namuchi, and the
kAlaka\~njas. Thus, in addition to the typical vedic demons they also
appear to record ones otherwise mentioned only in the purANas. An
important point to note is that the chief adversary of gautama buddha is
namuchi, he is often mentioned by his uniquely bauddha name mAra. Thus,
the tathAgata appears to have stolen the conquest of namuchi from indra,
just as the vaiShNava-s appear to do it more subtly in their sectarian
purANas.

Sects and doctrines: With the exception of the passing mention of
worshipers of vAsudeva and balabhadra we do not find a detailed debate
with the sectarian Astika-s amongst the early bauddha-s. There is some
evidence that a\~NgulimAla was a shaiva earlier, but this needs further
study. In contrast, in somewhat later bauddha works we find explicit
polemics against the worshipers of viShNu and shiva by nAgArjuna. In the
even later texts we find the mahAyAna bauddhas internalizing sectarian
Astika deties and trying to demonize the Astika versions. The main
doctrinal adversaries of the buddha are brAhmaNa vedic ritualists (see
below). While he disparages various brAhmaNa-s and ascetics performing
magical rites, he himself is not averse to showing his superiority in
magical rites to his brahmin adversaries (This is excellently
illustrated in the tale of the jaTila urubilva kAshyapa and his
followers whom the tathAgata converted by staying in their shrauta
sacrificial hall). In philosophical terms too he closely positions
himself to the brahminical philosophies and tries to overthrow them. He
appears to be aware of vaisheShika in the teachings of pakudha
kAtyAyana, and obviously of upaniShadic doctrines which he subverts.
Another important point is that he battles lokAyata-s who are described
as brAhmaNas. Thus, as seen from the internal evidence of bR^ihaspati
and jayarAshi bhaTTa, lokAyata-s were always brAhmANa, probably in core
associated with bhUtachaitanya vAda. The early bauddha works also known
of a great diversity in shramaNa or ascetic traditions and mention the
naked jain (nirgrantha nAthaputra) and AjIvikas of makkhali gosala.

Personalities: The early bauddha works are aware of upaniShadic teachers
as historical not contemporary figures and tries to claim them as
teachers of bauddha doctrines. These include kR^iShNa-dvaipAyana (a
bodhisattva), janaka the king of mithilA, uddAlaka AruNi, shvetaketu and
nArada. They also know of the rAmAyaNa with certain fine details, and
claim rAma as a bodhisattva. They know the harivaMsha/mahAbhArata, the
existence of the historical king yuddhiShThira in indraprastha. In line
with the paurANic genealogies they know of ajAshatru of the rising
magadhan imperialism as the contemporary of their hero,
shuddhodana-putra.

vedic terminology: One of the most important, but oft missed points, is
that the early bauddha works consciously adopt vedic terminology for all
their major doctrinal concepts: 1) Firstly the doctrine of the buddha is
termed dharma. jaimini begins the mImAmsa sUtra-s begin as “athAto
dharma-jij\~nAsa“. Thus vedic sacrificial ritual was seen as dharma. 2)
In the bauddha doctrine the bauddha religious intention is taken to mean
karma, again imitating the vedic ritual action which is termed karma. 3)
The central knowledge required for the bauddha is called the
trayi-vidyA: (i) knowledge of past incarnations of one-self (ii)
knowledge of past incarnations of others (iii) knowledge of the four
Arya truths. Thus, the vedic term of trayI-vidyA, which signifies the 3
kinds of mantra, R^iks, sAmans and yajuSh-es (not 3 vedas), is imitated.
4) The teaching emanating from the buddha is termed ArSha. Thus, the
buddha is being considered a R^iShi like the seers of the veda. 5) The
bauddha oral tradition is recorded in the form of recitations termed
sUtta-s. Here the term used is the same as the vedic oral recitation the
sUkta (sUtta does not mean sUtra as commonly mistaken by the unerudite,
but sUktaM), which fits in well with the tathAgata’s teaching being
ArSha. 6) The follower of the bauddha path is termed Arya, wherein the
vedic term for a dvija eligible for ya\~jna is taken up. 7) The aspirant
entering the bauddha 8-fold teaching is called snAtaka, imitating the
qualified vedic student. 8) Charity given for the support of the sangha
is termed dakShiNa in imitation of the vedic ritual fee given to the
brahmin.

Thus, the buddha and his early successors saw themselves as the correct
inheritors of the older tradition and that they were giving the true or
correct meanings of the terms in that tradition– they use the term
sad-dharma. Not surprisingly the buddha spends a lot of effort lecturing
on who is the true brahmin . Perhaps, this is also consistent with the
observation that in the dramiDa maNimekhalai the bauddha-s consider
themselves a “vedic” philosophy like sAmkhya and mImAmasa.

Reviewing these points an apparent conundrum emerges: The bauddha-s
appear to be linked in a direct sense to the vedic tradition as
successors. Whereas, within the Astika tradition we see the sectarian
vaiShNavism and shaivism as successors of vedic. These dominate the
epics to greater or lesser degrees and have precursors even in the late
vedic period. Yet, these find no or little mention amongst the bauddhas.
The typical white Indologists and their fellow travelers have
persistently tried to claim that the late vedic corpus (upaniShad and
mImAmsa sUtras) and itihAsa, and the early bauddha corpus overlapped.
However, if we carefully view the evidence we find that as usual the
conventional Indological ideas are flawed: The paurANic genealogies, the
mentions of the itihAsa-s by buddha but not vice versa, the mention of
upaniShadic teachers by buddha and not vice versa, the mention of
post-vedic paurANic deities and figures by the early bauddha works, the
mention of diverse pre-existing community of ascetics (already a common
feature in the itihAsas), the existence of vaisheShika, lokAyata and
mImAmsa thought as prior conditions, all suggest that the bauddha mata
was indeed later than all the above developments as traditionally
believed by Hindus. What this means is that even-though the sectarian
streams had prominence in the itihAsa-s they were not as widespread as
it might seem in the period of the buddha. Instead the vedic religion
was the dominant feature amongst the elite. Further, the folk beliefs
preserved by the tathAgata again had indra and the vedic pantheon, along
with many others rather than the sectarian pantheons. This shows that
the extant of permeation of vedic Indo-Aryan culture into the
grass-roots of Indian society and that the true rise of sectarianism at
the grass-root level was a later phenomenon.

In reality, like the bauddha-s, the sectarian streams too used the veda
as a base. Early sectarian works like harivaMsha use vedic material, but
for their own agenda. Thus, subversion was the model in both Astika and
nAstika traditions. Herein, Indo-Aryan India paralled the earlier Aryan
developments- namely subversion of the proto-Indo-Iranian religion (the
ancestor of vedic) by Zarathustra in founding the cult of Ahura-Mazda.
The huge departure of Zarathushtra was his tendency towards zealous
exclusivism or almost monotheism. Likewise, both the Astika
subversionists (shaiva-s and vaiShNava-s) showed some exclusivist
tendencies in their later but not early development. The radical
departure of the bauddha-s was in erecting blatant nara-stuti (at least
vAsudeva and balabhadra were merely emanations of viShNu) and more
importantly rejecting deva-bhAShA and Chandas. This linguistic departure
more than anything else was probably to set the bauddha-mata aside for
ever as a nAstika tradition. This came as we know from siddhArtha’s own
mouth as he forebade the brAhmaNas from composing his work into vedic
hymns.
