+++
title = "The big and small of theropods"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rn1Nv05tXAI/AAAAAAAAALM/rxvTZMzZ1Jo/s320/majungasaurus.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rn1Nv05tXAI/AAAAAAAAALM/rxvTZMzZ1Jo/s1600-h/majungasaurus.jpg)

The recent bonanza of theropod finds have brought to fore an old issue
that we and others have been thinking about for a while: the
evolutionary trends in body size in course of theropod evolution. Prior
to the application of evolutionary classification, the dominant form of
theropod classification was based on the non-empirical “super-carnivore”
assertion of the idiotic Henry Osborn \[As an aside, Henry Osborn’s son
also of the same name was an environmentalist who made the claim that
Indians had destroyed their own land and made it unsustainable for life.
However, what he does is to cover up the major role of the white
invaders during the British rAj in set this process rolling — not
surprising given the white supremacist world view of Osborb Sr.\].
Osborn saw the large theropods as carnosaurs and the small ones as
coelurosaurs, with each having an innate evolutionary drive culminating
in the greatest of the large and the small forms. The great German
dinosaurologist Friedrich von Huene had first suggested that this
typological classification of theropods is probably incorrect. However,
these advanced views did not take root in the English speaking world due
to the dead weight of Osborn projected as a consensus by the famous
American schools like Columbia and Princeton Universities. In our teens
we had figured the error in this model by using the data from von Huene.
Only much later, due to Thomas Holtz and others, did the real picture
return to the fore in the scientific world.

It became clear that the theropod phylogeny involved many radiations,
most of which we still incompletely understand, in part due to the
incompleteness of the Triassic and early to middle Jurassic record. Yet
there is increasing evidence that that there was probably no single
trend in terms of size in course of theropod evolution. Large and small
theropods repeatedly emerged in different lineages. The current
phylogenetic consensus suggests that the earliest branch of theropods
included the coelophysioids. This branch radiating in the Triassic and
persisting till the Lower Jurassic (Segisaurus) included several
small-bodied animals like Segisaurus, medium sized forms like
Coelophysis and moderately large forms like Dilophosaurus. The next
great theropod radiation was the Ceratosauroid clade including
Ceratosaurus from the Jurassic and the Cretaceous abelisauroids. These
included several large-bodied forms like Ceratosaurus itself and among
the abelisauroids the large abelisaurs from the Gondwanan continents
like Carnotaurus, Abelisaurus, Aucasaurus (all South America),
Majungasaurus (Madagascar), Rugops (Africa), Rajasaurus and Indosaurus
(India). Of these recent Majungasaurus, Rajasaurus and Indosaurus form
an Indo-Madagascar clade to the exclusion of other forms, while
Carnotaurus and Aucasaurus form a specialized south American clade with
tiny arms generically and convergently reminiscent of Tyrannosaurus.
Over the years several finds have suggested that the abelisauroids also
included several small-bodied forms with unusual adaptations. Among them
are Noasaurus, Ligabueino, Jubbulpuria (all very fragmentary) and
Masiakasaurus, which along with the medium-sized Elaphrosaurus represent
small and medium sized ceratosauroids. The peculiar dentition of
Masiakasaurus (probably for piscivory) and the long neck of
Elaphrosaurus (in a general sense like the ornithomimosaurs) hints the
wide ecological range occupied by these small forms.

The remaining theropods comprise the tetanuran radiation. Most
phylogenetic analysis have consistently recovered 3 major monophyletic
tetanuran clades: two basal clades namely spinosauroids and allosauroids
and a derived clade of coelurosaurs (including the only surviving
dinosaurs, the birds). In addition there are several other basal forms
tetanurans that do not appear to fall inside any of the above clades
have been found : Piatnitzkysaurus, Cryolophosaurus and Torvosaurus. The
spinosauroid clade is characterized by their long snouts and
superficially crocodile-like rostrum. The allosauroid clade includes
within it the sinraptorids and the carcharodontosaurids which are
amongst the largest of all theropods in addition to other extremely
large predatory dinosaurs like Allosaurus and Acrocanthosaurus. Until
recently both the basal-most clades as well as the spinosauroids and
allosauroids are all known to be large bodied forms leading to the idea
that the tetanurans began big and then decreased in size only in the
coelurosaur clade. However, the discovery of Condorraptor showed that
there were small-bodies tetanurans too.

In the coelurosaurs the trend has been exactly the reverse: With the
exception of the relatively basal tyrannosaurs most clades were
considered to be small-bodied – especially the derived clade leading to
the birds. In part this perception was due to popular ignorance of the
large-bodied forms like Therizinosaurus and Deinocheirus, which were
poorly preserved. But a re-analysis of numerous recently described bona
fide coelurosaurs shows that both large and small bodied forms occur in
various clades:  
Composognathids: Compsognathus (small); Sinocalliopteryx
(medium-large).  
Tyrannosaurs: Dilong (small); Eotyrannus, Guanlong (medium)
Tyrannosaurus (large)  
Ornithomimosaurs: Pelicanimimus (small); Gallimimus (medium);
Deinocheirus (large)  
Alvarezsaurids: Parvicursor (small); Rapator (large)  
Oviraptorosaurs: Ingenia (Small); “Triebold Caenagnathid” (Medium);
Gigantoraptor (large)  
Therizinosaurs:Beipaosaurus (Small); Therizinosaurus (Large)  
Deinonychosaurs : Microraptor (small); Unenlagia (medium); Utahraptor?,
Achillobator (large)  
Birds: Passer(small); Phorusrhacos(large)  
The interesting question that emerges from this observation is: Did each
clade independently radiate out to occupy different ecological niches
associated with different body size guilds rather than the whole clade
specializing in particular niches (except birds which are today largely
restricted to the air). OR Was it that body size did not play a major
role in deciding the ecological niche occupied — hence the same
ecological niche could be occupied at different body sizes?
