+++
title = "The tusk ofxa0svapna-sa~NketA"

+++
After the third vIra had broken forth the vairi-s turned their attention
towards the 4 other distant vIra-s. Two of them were protected by the
spells of the taittirIyaka, the bull amongst the kuNDinas. The rAhu
which seized us like a graha of kumAra or a vinAyaka seizing a victim
will be described when we emerge on the other side of the grahaNa. There
was a vague intelligence we received that the amAtya was the principal
target. It was not as clear as the dreaded kR^ityA that we saw last year
in the middle of our day like a shUrpanakha in the daNDakaâ€“ verily like
a pill of venom coated in honey. But it was like the mAraNa that took us
closest to vaivasvata, before we were literally hauled out of the raging
waters by the yakShiNI nIlalohitamekhalA of indescribable beauty with
the strength of 8000 elephants. We did not know when the amAtya would be
struck or even if the amAtya was really the target.

The kavi among the bhArgava-s however was aided most remarkably by the
highest prayoga of sUkarAnanA of the dreams. As a result he clearly saw
the dreaded chaturashra yantra with sAdhya curled under the mAyA bIja in
the middle, much like the vighna yantra of bhaNDAsura. With this clear
intelligence available, he saw that the amAtya was the target. He then
saw exactly what abhichAra had been deployed: the unexpected dinAstra
and it was advancing rapidly. Before he could do anything the amAtya was
struck. He almost simultaneous retaliated with the first
counter-prayoga. But he saw this being repulsed by the dinAstra, though
it gave enough time for the amAtya to hold on to life. Keeping his
presence of mind he retaliated almost immediately with the combination
of nabho-nilaya-bhairava and surA-devI and mahiShAruDha-vArAhI. This
destroyed the mAraNa prayoga and saved the amAtya-s life. Then the
oShadhi-s of atharvaNa-bhadrakAli were deployed to counter the lasting
effects of the abhichAra. The bhargava was able to pull this off beyond
all his expectations only because of the anugraha of the tusked one.
