+++
title = "Dinosauromorphs and the beginnings of dinosaurs"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RqGmYR_WxfI/AAAAAAAAAMs/HA5HBG9_pew/s320/dinosauromorphs.jpg)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/RqGmYR_WxfI/AAAAAAAAAMs/HA5HBG9_pew/s1600-h/dinosauromorphs.jpg)

The crocodilians and birds are the only the surviving representatives of
the two great lineages of archosaurs that diverged in the Triassic. The
“crocodile line” (depending on definition pseudosuchians or
crurotarsans) appear to have undergone the first great adaptive
radiation in the Triassic spawning an enormous diversity of predatory
and herbivorous forms that mimicked the dinosaurs and later
crocodylomorphs in many ways. By the Jurassic, the only survivors of the
crocodile line were the crocodylomorphs, which radiated throughout the
Mesozoic into a diverse array of forms — both terrestrial and aquatic
(freshwater and marine) predators and some herbivorous forms. On the
other hand was the “dinosaur-line” (typically defined as ornithodirans)
which included the pterosaurs, dinosauromorphs and dinosaurs. They too
arose in the Triassic but were marginal in their ecological role to
start with. But in course of of the Mesozoic, beginning from the
Jurassic saw the meteoric rise of dinosaurs replacing all the older
archosaurs and other amniotes as the dominant terrestrial vertebrates.
There are several unclear issues concerning this macro-evolutionary
phenomenon: 1) Are the pterosaurs really related to dinosaurs to
exclusion of other archosauromorphs? 2) How did the dinosaurs replace
the earlier dominant Triassic faunas? 3) What was the diversity of the
closest sister group of the dinosaurs– the dinosauromorphs ?

The dinosauromorphs are a fascinating group of archosaurs that are
critical to the understanding of the origin of dinosaurs. Colloquially
we are using the term here to include only non-dinosaurian
dinosauromorphs. The first bona fide dinosauromorph to be studied was
Lagerpeton from South America described by Alfred Romer. Subsequently
Sereno named Marasuchus. The earlier described Scleromochlus has also
been suspected to be a dinosauromorph, though Benton believed it might
be closer to the pterosaurs. Both Lagerpeton and Marasuchus had been
described as small predators with a generalized morphology from which
the more specialized dinosaurs emerged later. However, in the past few
years the diversity and spread of dinosauromorphs is better understood.
This is largely due to several new fossils: 1) The exquisite fossils of
Silesaurus from Poland. 2) Sacisaurus from Brazil. 3) Most recently
Dromomeron from New Mexico.

An analysis by Irmis et al of Dromomeron and several other forms from
the Late Triassic Chinle formation suggests the following: 1) There was
a wide spread and diversity of dinosauromorphs over the world.
Dromomeron was found to be closest to Lagerpeton and another form
unfortunately named Eucoelophysis to be a sister taxon on Silesaurus.
The later two are likely to have been herbivores similar to the
ornithischians 2) They coexisted with basal theropod dinosaurs like
Coelophysis and even more primitive basal saurischians like
Chindesaurus, a Herrerasaurid. 3) The appear to have persisted with
dinosaurs from the Carnian through the Norian epochs of the Late
Triassic period. A parallel analysis by Irmis, Nesbitt and co has shown
that the North American late Triassic was bereft of ornithischians,
though there were many pseudosuchians that imitated the former. In a
parallel analysis of Eocursor a very primitive ornithischian from the
Norian of South Africa, by Butler et al also suggested that the great
radiation of ornithischians was only after the Triassic. Based on this
it is proposed that the replacement of dinosauromorphs by dinosaurs was
gradual an asynchronous in different parts of the globe. It is also
implied that at least in North America that the dinosauromorphs like
Eucoelophysis and “crocodile-line” archosaurs like Revueltosaurus might
have occupied the niches related to herbivory in place of the
ornithischians.

However, there is a suggestion by Langer et al that the notch and
anterior structure of the dentary in the Silesaurus and Sachisaurus like
forms might be the precursor of the predentary, a synapomorphy of the
ornithischians. This raises the possibility that after all these forms
might represent very primitive ornithischians (?).
