+++
title = "Amniotes"

+++
[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rf4q8JLLu1I/AAAAAAAAAF4/o8dM87jHBIE/s320/amniotes.jpg)](http://bp3.blogger.com/_ZhvcTTaaD_4/Rf4q8JLLu1I/AAAAAAAAAF4/o8dM87jHBIE/s1600-h/amniotes.jpg)

The “anapsids” and their place in reptilian evolution have long puzzled
biologists. The first major advance in amniote phylogeny was because of
the brilliant, but largely forgotten English zoologist [Edwin
Goodrich](http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/pagerender.fcgi?artid=1272740&pageindex=1#page),
who showed that the basal division in the amniotes separated the
theropsids (now synapsids) and the sauropsids (the reptiles including
birds). DMS Watson also made several improvements to this original
proposal of E Goodrich, especially with respect to early branching
reptiles like the milleretids (millerosaurs) and procolophonids, but his
scheme was damaged by his dogmatic adherence to Linnaean taxonomy. While
these early attempts were actually capturing some real phylogenetic
signal in the amniotes, it was not appreciated by many scientists due to
the ascendancy of the Romer’s un-natural typological scheme outlined in
the classic work “Vertebrate Paleontology” (Despite its shortcomings I
have some respect for this volume. When I read this work during a
dIpAvalI vacation at the age of 6 1/2, it set the course for my future
pursuits in life). The popular scheme of Romer was based on the temporal
fenestra and artificially grouped all forms without fenestra together as
the basal anapsids.

As a result of Romer’s scheme, the idea that turtles were the only
surviving representatives of the great Paleozoic radiation of anapsids
was entertained till almost just a decade ago. As a result several
investigators sought turtle origins amongst other anapsids– Reisz
believed they were related to procolophonids while studying Owenetta;
Lee thought they were related to the parieasaurs; and others saw them as
generalized “anapsids”. However, this view was shaken by Rieppel’s
phylogenetic analysis that showed that turtles were diapsids. Modern
molecular phylogenies strongly suggest that turtles are not just
diapsids but belong to archosauromorpha and perhaps even archosauria
proper. My own suspicion is that turtles might have even been derived
from the basal archosauriforms. This put an end the Romerian fancies of
fenestral classifications. Fenestra can be easily lost or gained in the
amniote skull and are not such fool proof phylogenetic markers. In light
of this the recent phylogenetic studies by Reisz and his camp are
converging on a reasonably clear picture of early amniote evolution. The
sister group of the amniotes proper including Tseajaia, Limnoscelis and
the widespread diadectids appear to be plainly anapsid.

The amniotes proper split, as envisaged by Goodrich, into synapsids on
one side and reptiles on the other. In the synapsid clade right from the
beginning we observe a single temporal fenestra and are yet to find any
anapsid representatives. The reptilian clade splits up into parareptiles
and eureptiles. The eureptiles include a crown diapsid clade with the
archosauromorph and lepidosauromorph reptiles of today along with the
basal sister groups which includes araeoscelids, younginiforms and
perhaps forms like  Coelurosaurvus and Palaeagama. The two immediate
sister groups of the diapsids are the ancient Paleothyris and the
captorhinids, both of which are anapsid. The parareptiles include an
amazing diversity of forms like the aquatic mesosaurs with long
needle-like teeth, the milleretids, the lanthanosuchids, bolosaurs (with
the earliest bipedal animals like Eudibamus), procolophonids,
nyctiphruretids, nycteroleterids and the pareiasaurs (which were
large-bodied strongly armored herbivores). Many of these forms were
anapsid, though there are the notable exceptions, like the milleretids,
lanthanosuchids, Acleistorhinus some procolophonoids (Procolophon and
Candeleria), and at least one nyctiphruretid (Tokosaurus), all of which
might have had fenestra. This pattern would suggest that the temporal
fenestra probably convergently evolved on multiple occassions in the
amniote clades. Another possibility is that it was there in some form
even in the ancestral amniote and closed on mulitple occassions early in
amniote evolution and was strongly fixed only in the synapsids and later
in the diapsids. A molecular developmental study of skull fenestration
might go a long way in clarifying this problem — but I simply do not
have the resources to undertake it by myself.
