+++
title = "Jx evades axa0mAraNa"

+++
Whenever we have executed that loop by instinct, thus far, some vighna
has invariably come our way. This time again the mudgara-like blow of
the trailokya-stambhinI caused us new trouble. But we received a signal
to press on, undaunted. Jx who had been knocked out by the DAmarikA
strike after being routed by the chIna-s, scraped the rock-bottom of his
existence and fled further from bhAnu-kakSha to the township of
indra-jAla. Here, the spirit of bhR^igu and a\~Ngira ancestors faintly
possessed him. He suddenly recovered and performed a purascharaNa of 8
months. It was around the culmination of this period that the 3rd hero
had broken forth. At that point a 3-pointed mAraNa attack was deployed:
one prong of it seized the amAtya but the muni deploying nidra-vArtAli
countered its fatal effects, even as the amAtya got enough time to
deploy the oShadhi prayoga. The other one headed towards to him who was
dwelling in indra-jAla. With his purashcharaNa complete the anAhata
chakra was filled with the presence of hamseshvara and hamseshvarI
surrounded by the 54 deities of the vAyavya mayUkha-s. He was unable to
grasp the full significance of this manifestation, but the spontaneous
power of manifestation of the shikhin yugma became clear â€“ that fiery
manifestation of shiva-shivA in the circle surrounding the kaM bIja.
They verily say only one who has received the pUrNa-dIkSha can truly
withstand the force of the mistress of the kula path without being
confused. Past midnight the brahmAstra-vidyA crashed onto him with 4
successive strikes, but the power his own protective mantra was
unbelievable the prayoga which was so certain to effect mAraNa simply
rebounded off him.

\-\*-\*-\*-

That which had left Jx now pursued us in the form of the khANDavan to
compass our destruction. We had been expecting this any time. However,
we evaded it after a skirmish that resembled in many ways our first
encounter with the khANDavan-s.
