+++
title = "The Urdhvasrotas and medicalxa0tradition"

+++
The jaina mantravAdins in the karnATa country use a medical text termed
the hitopadesha. Its author is shrIkaNTha-shambhu or shrIkaNTha-shiva.
This work is a rather distinctive one (at least to me) when compared
with other standard tomes of Hindu medicine. In this work he appears as
a classical Ayurvedic physician rather than a magician, although he does
not really give any notable references to earlier medical authors or
follow their systems too closely. He overemphasizes the trihumoral
theory in a manner similar to several modern practitioners of Ayurveda.
But interestingly he cites his main authorities as the “shivamata (in
the section of urine analysis, samuddesha 1)” and “shambhudeva” (in the
section on insect bites, samuddesha 8). He is also well aware of fevers
caused by Tantric abhichAra prayogas. There is another obscure work by a
shrIkaNTha-shiva paNDita that is called the yogaratnAvalI. This work is
more tantric than medical in content. It has several recipes of rasAyana
like those attributed to the earlier authority nAgArjuna. It also
discusses fevers caused by the seizures by bhUta-s and shAkinI-s. It
also mentions garuDa tantra-s and formulations from their tradition to
counter viSha prayoga-s. While there is nothing available to connect the
two shrIkaNTha-s who are authors of the above works, such a link is
implied by the scholar Hymavathi from the Andhra country who has carried
out a deep study of Ayurvedic history. As per Hymavathi this shrIkaNTha
was a shaiva philosopher who was a teacher of mAdhava vidyAraNya,
sAyaNa, bhoganAtha and the physician nR^isiMha paNDita. This may be
based on material that I have no access to (one such could be the
Nellore inscription). Irrespective of the situation, features in both
these works and author’s name suggest that the shrIkaNTha (s) was
associated with the siddhAnta srotas, even though his medical tradition
was inherited by the followers of the nirgrantha.

Other lines of evidence also point to an interest in medical among the
saiddhAntika-s. For example, the prati-viSha prayoga-s are listed by the
late siddhAnta Tantric ishAna-shiva, some of which ultimately go back to
the traditions of the garuDa tantra-s. The memory of saiddhAntika
knowledge in a medical context also appears to linger on, long after the
saiddhAntika-s ceased to be major players in the Indian intellectual
sphere. This is seen in the bR^ihad-yoga-taraMgiNI, a voluminous work of
the prolific smArta brAhmaNa, trimalla bhaTTa (early 1600s of CE), from
south India settled in Kashi. This work adopts a considerably tantric
approach to medicine and he cites various tantra-s including the shiva
agama-s of the Urdhva-srotas, and tantras of the kubjikA tradition like
manthAna-bhairava and siddha-lakShmIshvara tantra. The transmission of
the tantric material from the siddhAnta tantra-s to trimalla bhaTTa
appears can be traced back to an obscure medical work the kAlaj\~nana
that potentially belongs to the saiddhAntika tradition.

This prompted us to look more deeply into whether there were other
associations to support the the link between the saiddhAntika-s and the
medical lore. One name which immediately came to mind was the great
medieval Hindu medical researcher shivadAsasena who wrote medical
treatises such as the tattva-chandrikA. We do not know much about his
life, but we known lived after bhoja-deva paramAra whom he cites
repeatedly and also DalhaNa. While he mainly cites various medical
authorities through out his works, we also note that he cites certain
achArya-s named aghorashivAcharya and maheshvara who are not cited by
authors of similar medical works. This observation, together within his
name hinted that he might also be saiddhAntika (perhaps a putraka) who
was active in medicine. To see if there might be more connections along
these lines we looked deeper into this Hindu medical tradition.
shivadAsasena in the opening of his tattva-chandrikA states that he is
building upon an earlier medical work named ratna-prabha by the famous
physician named nishchalakara from the va\~Nga country. nishchalakara,
while respectfully saluting his bauddha AchArya, is explicit in
profusely invoking shiva-mahAdeva in his ma\~Ngala. This suggests that
he was also a shaiva, but I could not find anything specific in his
ma\~Ngala to suggest that he was specifically a saiddhAntika. However,
he describes rasAyana procedures (shloka-s 167-190) in which he
explicitly cites multiple times the tantra-s (or Agama-s) of
shaiva-siddhAnta as his sources in this regard. He also mentions some
obscure shaivAcharya-s such as ishAna-deva, umApati and shambhu as
medical authorities whom he cites in different contexts. As
nishchalakara specifically mentions that his patients included AstIka as
well as nAstIka Tantrics, and he could well have been acquainted with
their lore even if he was not a practitioner himself.

nishchalakara’s own work is based on the even earlier illustrious
medical authority chakrapANi-datta from Meghalaya who composed several
medical treatises: Ayurveda-dIpikA,
chikitsA-saMgraha,vyagradaridra-shubhaMkara, bhAnumati and dravya-guNa.
nishchalakara lists the works which were referred to by chakra and
mentions shaiva-siddhAnta tantra as one of them. This prompted me to
look in to the chikitsa-saMgraha. From his ma\~Ngala and mention of the
vedic ritual system of the mImAmsaka-s it clear that chakrapANi was a
smArta, but definitely sympathetic and acquainted with the siddhAnta
tradition. In describing a recipe for a drug in pill form called the
shiva-guTikA, chakrapANi states that it was first taught by shiva to
vinAyaka, and that this procedure is derived from the shaiva siddhAnta
tantra-s. In fact, as far as I can see, these siddhAnta tantra-s are the
only tantric sources named as authorities consulted by both chakra and
nishchalakara. Most remaining texts cited by these authors are
specifically medical works, dietary, chemical or general works (e.g.
va\~nga-deshIya gandha-shAstra, i.e. the text on perfumes of Bengal).
Another possible sign of the saiddhAntika influence on the chakrapANi
and possibly even his predecessor, the learned physician bR^inda from
Varendra, is the prescription of two yantras in their work known as
ubhaya-trimshaka and ubhaya-pa\~nchadashaka, both of which are
encountered in identical form in the chidambaraM paddhati-s of
saiddhAntika-s from the drAviDa country. This suggests that even if
these authors were not saiddhAntika-s themselves they were definitely
influenced by the Urdhvasrotas and the saiddhAntika-s did support a
medical tradition within their system.

[![](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/ubhaya_yantras1.png?w=300&h=176)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/ubhaya_yantras1.png)

Examining some of the apparently earlier saMhitA-s of medicine does not
show any specific references to the siddhAnta tantra tradition even if
they might contain several allusions to the worship of shiva in a
general sense or from other srotas. For example: 1) The harita saMhitA
contains a ma\~Ngala to shiva and a reference to shiva dhyAna. 2) The
bhela saMhitA mentions the worship of vR^iSha-dhvaja but also
specifically mentions the use of the bhUta tantra-s (pashchima-srotas)
in countering the effects of graha-s. Thus, it appears plausible that
the saiddhAntika interaction with medicine began developing in the
post-gupta period which saw the rise of saiddhAntika advisers in many
Indian kingdoms. From the evidence it appears quite possible that some
saiddhAntika-s took to the study of medicine as a part of their
repertoire of “secular” services. At the same time they also appear to
have introduced some practices peculiar to the shaiva systems into the
medical system, such as the preparation of certain guTika-s and
rasAyana-s and also use of yantra-s. This was not particular surprising
given the matrix of earlier connections seen amongst the shaivas: 1)
Right from the veda rudra is the bearer of medicines (practically all
R^igvedic sUkta-s to rudra contain an allusion to his bheShaja-s). 2)
The vedic medical tradition develops in the atharva veda. The connection
of the early pAshupata-s with the atharvavedic tradition probably
resulted in them inheriting the medical systems of the AV. This was
probably transmitted to their successors the saiddhAntika-s and also
other major shaiva groups like that of the pashchima-srotas, garuDa
srotas and offshoots of the dakShINa-srotas.
