+++
title = "The origin of the uncinate process of diapsid ribs"

+++
In the long past days, in the dawn of my zoological studies, which were
to set the course of my future pursuits in life, I became intrigued by
the uncinate process. It was cited as a synapomorphy of the birds and
the dromaeosaurs. However, some of my textbooks, like that of Romer on
vertebrate osteology, which I had devoured in the 8th year of my life,
indicated that the crocodiles and the tuatara also had uncinate
processes. I was mystified by this because the skeletons of crocodiles
that I had seen never had any uncinates like those which were obvious on
the ribs of birds. But later in the city of gavalakuNDa that
non-jAmadagnya vatsa gave me a chance to study the mugger, and I
realized that the crocodilian uncinate process is entirely cartilaginous
unlike the hugely ossified processes of birds and other closely related
dinosaurs like *Oviraptor* or *Velociraptor*. At that point a vague idea
started forming in my mind that the uncinate process on the ribs perhaps
emerged much earlier in the ancestor of the archosaurs. Years later when
I crossed to the shores of mlechChadesha, a kind Australian naturalist
whose name I unfortunately forget, gave me the chance to examine the
post-crania of a tuatara and the uncinates were clearly there, very much
like in the birds. It was then that I started wondering if the uncinates
are after all an ancestral feature of the diapsids. Then it became
apparent that some even earlier tetrapods, the temnospondyls like
*Eryops* and *Dissorophus* and the stem amniote seymouriamorph
*Kotlassia* also have notable uncinate-like structures on their ribs.
But some of their close relatives lacked comparable uncinate-like
structures. This raised the specter of convergent evolution of the
uncinate.

An examination of tuatara’s muscle attachments to the uncinates with the
recent work by Codd et al on avian uncinate musculature suggests that
they are indeed very similar. In both cases the external oblique muscles
connect to the uncinate and operate it like a lever. Codd et al’s work
on the giant geese has shown that the action of the external obliques on
the uncinate processes moves the sternum dorsally and is central to the
avian in expiration process. In contrast, there is no evidence that this
respiratory mechanism involving muscles emanating from the gastral
basket and attaching to uncinate process was operating in the
temnospondyls and amniote-precursors like *Kotlassia*. Also their
uncinate-like structures progressively get more ventral in position
suggesting a different type of muscle attachment was involved in these
cases. However, several other basal tetrapods show distinctive
flange-like rib processes starting from the more primitive forms like
*Eucrita* and *Whatcheeria* and the more derived amniote-like
*Seymouria*. The presence of this diversity of rib-flanges in these
early tetrapods suggests that the uncinate-like structures seen in them
belong to this continuum. It is possible that these rib structures
represent an early wave of adaptations that also helped in improving
ventilation via a distinct set of muscular movements of thoracic ribs.
However, their absence in synapsids, early diapsids and basal amniotes
like *Coelostegus* and *Anthracodromeus* suggests that these adaptations
did not make it to the ancestor of the extant aminote clades.

Despite the notable resemblance of the tuatara uncinates to those of
birds, the possibility of convergence remained, especially because
comparable structures in the basal tetrapods could be quite reasonably
explained as convergence. However, several recent developments have
tilted the balance in the opposite direction: 1) A study by Codd et al
showed that the uncinate is present in majority of maniraptoran lineages
(oviraptorosaurs, birds, and deinonychosaurs) where relevant
post-cranial remains are available. Thus, it was a definitely primitive
for maniraptorans. 2) Further, Fernando Novas and other South American
paleontologists described two striking iguanodontian grade ornithopods,
*Talenkauen* and *Macrogryphosaurus*, both of which were shown to have
peculiar costal plates that at their anterior end was appressed to the
posterior margin of the rib and overlapped with the following rib on its
free end. Novas et al correctly noted that this is unlikely to be armor
but an equivalent of the uncinate process of the maniraptorans and play
a role in respiration. Such structures were also noted earlier in a
well-preserved specimen of the basal ornithopod *Thescelosaurus*. 3)
Butler et al in a recent re-analysis of *Hypsilophodon* established that
the plate-like structures associated with its ribs are actually
equivalents of the structures described by Novas et al and those found
in *Thescelosaurus*. They further went on to present evidence for such
structures in *Parksosaurs* and *Othnielosaurus*. In a phylogenetic
analysis of ornithopod Butler was able to show *Parksosaurs,
Othnielosaurus* and *Thescelosaurus* belong a basal paraphyletic grade
of ornithopods, suggesting that such uncinate equivalents were primitive
to the ornithopods. These observations strengthen the case that the
uncinate like structures might have emerged in the ancestor of crown
diapsids. I am very tempted to support this and believe that
developmental studies looking into the pathways linking the following
transcription factors for rib development namely Tbx6 (mutated in mouse
rib-vertebrae mutant), Uncx4.1, Pax1 and Pax9 might offer further
evidence: there is a PhD in the making for one who is cunning :-).

Another implication of the widespread presence of rib appendages in
tetrapods might be that innovation of improved breathing by the route of
altered costal musculature might have been a very prevalent phenomenon.
But as the metabolic approaches were rather different in different
lineages such features might have been frequently subject to loss after
their invention. Based on the tetrapod tree and morphology of such
structure I would imagine that there were at least 3 episodes of
innovation of rib appendages in tetrapods along with repeated losses in
each of the cases. In dinosaurs the emergence of air sac systems when
combined with the earlier diapsid costal innovation probably propelled
them to occupy “high energy” niches from the Mesozoic to this day. But
still the physiological basis for why a lepidosaur like the tuatara
retains uncinates where as the related lizards lost them remains unclear
to me. Many lizards are not very efficient breathers, but have innovated
the gular pump mechanism as was demonstrated in the monitors. So was
there a major physiological shift in early lizard evolution that we are
failing to note?
