+++
title = "The thought train of cephalopodxa0intelligence"

+++
[![octopi](https://i2.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3035/3017917925_44a58ed3c2.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3017917925/ "octopi by somasushma, on Flickr")

We had earlier remarked about the [convergent evolution of intelligence
in cephalopods, which lie in the middle of a clade of rather
unintelligent
animals](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/11/09/on-some-convergences/).  
I was reminded of these animals by rather interesting report on an
octopus in Germany on radio today. The octopus in question had been
trained to shoot water through its funnel at visitors. But it climbed to
the top of its tank and used this behavior to shoot water at the lamps
to shut them off by short-circuiting them. This behavior is not entirely
surprising because, Mather, the great advocate of cephalopod
intelligence, has reported that wild octopi use comparable behavior of
shooting water to drive away fish from their dens or cleaning their
dens. Octopi have also been reported to gather rocks to fortify their
den and highly flexible means of attacking their prey depending on the
situation. They have also been reported to have distinctive
personalities. Some years ago Hayasthanika was showing me the pet octopi
in her house and said that one of them was pretty friendly. Sure enough,
this fellow unlike his mate displayed a distinctive curious behavior of
extending his tentacle and “shaking hands” while apparently looking me
in the eye. In addition to the convergence in terms of large cerebral
ganglia and vertebrate-like large eyes, the octopi and other cephalopods
possess several distinctive abilities. One of these is the ability to
recognize the electric vector of light and there by possess polarized
light vision. Their chromatophores are distinctive neuromuscular organs
by means of which they can change color in an astonishing way and
camouflage themselves in the most unbelievable ways. The skin
musculature allows them to adopt very distinctive body textures which
also aid in camouflage and display. Their arms with numerous local
ganglia are tremendously versatile and serve a locomotory organs,
chemosensors, tactile receptors, sexual accessories and arms in the
anthropocentric sense.

The cephalopod clade including the octopi and squids began their career
towards the end of the Silurian close to around 400 Mya. One highly
successful form the ammonites, underwent multiple radiations through the
reminder of the Paleozoic and the Mesozoic until they met their end at
the K/T boundary. The belemnites, a cuttlefish-like form, also underwent
a major radiation in the Mesozoic before becoming extinct at the end of
the Cretaceous. We have no idea of the intelligence of these animals –
my suspicion is that they were probably intelligent animals that held
their own against the vertebrate brains of diverse forms through a
period of 335 million years. Packard proposed that the sharks, fishes
and cephalopods radiated around the same time and since then they have
been in competition with each other and also other returning marine
vertebrates like different reptilian groups and later mammals. He felt
that this competition eventual drove the shelled forms to extinction and
favored the non-shelled forms like the decapods and octopods. However,
this scenario is less likely due the long coexistence of these forms and
the discovery of early coeloids. However, Packard’s idea of a certain
functional convergence, including in terms of intelligence is worth
exploring.
