+++
title = "The pAshupata-brahmopaniShat (pAshupata brahma [brAhmaNo] upaniShad; PBU)"

+++
The pAshupata-brahmopaniShat (pAshupata brahma \[brAhmaNo\] upaniShad;
PBU)  
The PBU (known as pAshupata-brahmopaniShat or pAshupata
brAhmaNopaniShat) is a somewhat neglected upaniShad, which is usually
classified as a yoga upaniShad. As is usual of several later upaniShad-s
it is attributed to the brahma-veda. The only commentary in my
possession is the vivaraNa of upaniShad brahmayogin who mainly comments
from a post-sha\~Nkara advaita angle. Of course the use of the term
advaitaM in the uttara-kANDa of the upaniShad is taken to be congruent
with the sense used in the sha\~Nkara tradition. A systematic study of
the relative ages of the yoga upaniShad-s is a desideratum, and in this
regard one of the most obvious questions is the relative age of the PBU.
Other questions of interest which arise are: 1) Is there anything of
interest about its name? 2) Is the PBU a pure yoga upaniShad or does it
have relationship with the shaiva yoga? 3) Does it have any relationship
with the lineage of shaiva-s known as kApAlika-s? 4) Are the salient
features of the yoga doctrine related to any other well-characterized
yoga doctrines?

\-Basic structure and possible markers of relative age  
The text has two distinctive parts — the pUrva kANDa comprised of 32
verses whereas the uttara kANDa of 46 verses. On account of the
distinctness of the contents and the language of the two parts, they
appear to represent two different temporal layers in which the upaniShad
was composed. The first part is largely in prose that is reminiscent of
the brAhmaNa-s from which the classical upaniShad-s have been drawn.
However, it alludes to the classical trinity and identifies them with
the three guNa-s of sAMkhya-yoga, which suggests that the work is not of
core vedic provenance. Nevertheless, it could belong to the early
post-vedic period, when brAhmaNa-like works were still being composed.
The references to the trinity followed by indra is reminiscent of
another text, the nArAyana valli (also considered an upaniShat), of the
late taittirIya tradition, which also has early yoga concepts. Thus,
these two texts could belong to a similar temporal layer. The conscious
imitation of the brAhmaNa style is further consistent with subject
matter of the pUrva kANDa being modeled after the discussion of shrauta
rituals, with which it shows a clear familiarity. The pUrva-kANDa
homologizes yoga with the vedic rituals and presents them as internal
versions of the shrauta rites. Such homologization of shrauta rites with
other activities and events, for example war, is a key feature of the
core narrative of the mahAbhArata (see also the whole sabhA parvan of
the bhArata) this might suggest that the PBU pUrva kANDa might be coeval
with the composition of the core bhArata. Thus we could place these
texts as part of the early post-vedic-epic layer of compositions. Thus
at least the PBU pUrva-kANDa appears to be a good candidate for an early
yoga upaniShad that emerged within the usual mImAMsa context in which
the classical upaniShad arose. The uttara kANDa in contrast is dominated
by verses in the shloka anuShTubh meter. It is also disconnected from
the first part which is a lecture of brahmA svayaMbhU to the vAlakhilya.
The first part ends with a “sa evaM veda”. The uttara-kANDa also aligns
itself closer to classical vedAnta. This part hence appears to be a
later accretion.

\-The name and relationship to the atharva-veda.  
Given the brAhmaNa-like structure of the pUrva-kANDa and its tendency to
use shrauta ritual models it is possible that name brahma or brAhmaNa in
its name is an allusion to it being a brAhmaNa text \[an imitation of a
brAhmaNa text is also seen in another yoga upaniShad with a similar
name: the maNDala-brAhmaNopaniShad\]. It is also possible that the
brahma comes from the brahmA svayambhU who delivers the lecture
comprising the pUrvopaniShad. It might also come from the link to the
atharva, i.e. brahmaveda. The link to the atharvaveda in this case might
be more than the usual apocryphal allusion seen in late upaniShad-s.
Firstly, the gopatha brAhmaNa of the atharvaveda records the
internalization of the darsha-pUrNamAsa sacrifice in the brahmodya
contest of uddAlaka AruNi and svaidAyana shaunaka (pUrva brAhmaNa
3.6-10), which provides a model for the internalization of ritual.
Secondly, the PBU explicitly identifies the deity of the internal yAga
as rudra-pashupati even as indra is the deity of the external vAjapeya
ritual (PBU 1.11 and 1.29; “rudro yAga-devaH” and “devatA pashupatiH”).
One of the earliest ritual texts of the original pAshupata-s, which
specifies the archaic pAshupata vrata is linked to the atharvavedic
tradition and occurs as an AV parishiShTha. This connection to the AV is
also further strengthened by two other major shaiva upaniShad-s i.e.
nIlarudra (drawn from the AV paippalAda saMhitA) and the atharvashiras,
which are linked to the early pAshupata tradition. Thus, both the
template for the PBU and its pAshupata connection might be drawn from
the larger late AV tradition.

\-yoga or shaiva upaniShad and connections with the “vedic” pAshupata
tradition  
The classification of the PBU as a yoga upaniShad is reasonable because
the primary focus of the upaniShad is the prescription of a specialized
yogic practice termed haMsArka-praNava-dhyAnaM, which described using
shrauta rituals as a model. While yoga is its primary focus, both the
pUrva kANDa and the uttara KANDa explicitly declare rudra-pashupati to
be the deity of the internal yAga and the object of meditation, making
its shaiva affinities also apparent. This connection between the yoga of
haMsa and rudra appears to be a persistent one – it is alluded to in
some of the other yoga upaniShad-s such as the haMsopaniShad and the
brahmavidyopaniShad that cover related topics pertaining to haMsa. For
example, the brahmavidyopaniShad states:  
“haMsa eva paraM vAkyaM haMsa eva tu vaidikam |  
haMsa eva paro rudro haMsa eva parAtparam || BVU 61 ||”  
and  
“sarvadevasya madhyastho haMsa eva maheshvaraH | BVU 61a”  
The haMsopaniShad is presented as the knowledge emerging from a
conversation of shiva (pinAkin) and pArvati (HU 2). In the dhyAna of
haMsa too explicitly connects it to the form of rudra:  
agnIShomau pakShAv-oMkAraH shira ukAro bindus-tri-NetraM mukhaM  
rudro rudrANI charaNau dvividhaM kaNThataH kuryAd ity-unmanAH
ajapopasaMhAra ity-abhidhIyate || evaM haMsa-vashAnmano vichAryate || HU
14-15 ||  
\[Here upaniShad brahmyogin in his gloss states that interpretation is
“face is rudra and rudrANI and ga\~NgA (not in the text) are the two
feet (\!)”. It is more likely that rudra and rudrANI are the two feet
and the three eyed face is formed by the ukAra and bindu of the praNava.
In any case the haMsa is conceived in the form of the three-eyed
shiva\]. In the final verse of the hamsopaniShad the Atman(=brahman) is
again described as sadAshivaH shaktyAtmA, which the brahmayogin
interprets as the deity sadAshiva.

However, it is amply clear that the brahmavidyopaniShad are
hamsopaniShad much later than the PBU. They already show distinct
developments of the tantric mantra-mArga (the haM sauM mantra in HU 12)
and the post-matsyendra kaula and haTha yoga system (e.g. kuNDalini in
BVU 74 and the baddha-mudra and granthi bheda in BVU 68-71). These
features are absent in the PBU and conversely the BVU and HU do not
contain specific vedic ritual references of the PBU beyond generally
conforming to vedic norms or generally mentioning the vedic saMhitA-s.
Thus, we consider the PBU an earlier upaniShad of the yoga stream closer
to the vedic period and preceding the rise of the mantra-mArga, and
classical kaula and haTha-yoga practices.

This would put it in the general milieu of the non-mantra-mArga
shaiva-s, i.e. the pAshupata-s, who showed a strong affinity to yoga,
and along with their mantra-mArga saiddhAntika successors tended to
conform closely to the vedic norms (something seen across the 3 steps of
pAshupata development: early pAshupata-s\>lAkulIsha-s\>kAlAmukhas).
However, if we take the surviving texts of these classical pAshupata-s
we see no such close adherence to sacrificial terminology as in the PBU,
despite closely conforming to the veda (in fact, such divergence might
even be seen in the early pAshupata upaniShad the atharvashiras). This
leads us to another highly misunderstood lineage of pAshupata-s – the
kApAlika-s \[Most students of shaiva lore, including myself, have been
much confused by the actual status of the kApAlika-s, just as the
mlechCha historian Lorenzen and the A\~NgalIka mahApaNDita Sanderson
once were\]. The evidence of the sarva-siddhAnta viveka \[footnote 1\]
suggests that like the polemical accounts the kApAlika-s were indeed
skull-bearing graveyard rangers (note kShemendra’s account of kApAlika-s
“pitR^i-vana-vAso mAlA narAsthibhiH… pAtraM kapAlam…”). However, it
importantly points out that they were pAshupata-s just like the
kAlAmukhas (i.e. successors of the lAkulIsha-s) and not followers of
mantra-mArga (i.e. mAmsa- and mada-using bhairavAcharins and
bhUtAcharins, with whom they were often colloquially conflated). More
relevant to the current point, the SSV suggests that they actually
identified with the vedic rudra and recited the litanies used in shrauta
sacrifices as they wandered with the skull in their hand. They also
observed daily saMdhya rites like other pAshupata-s. This important
piece of evidence is consistent with their brAhmaNa origins and suggests
that they were indeed affiliated with the vedic ritual – probably
initially performing it externally and then internalizing it as a part
of their shaiva practice.

Another enigmatic group of late-surviving pAshupata-s from the drAviDa
country also shows specific associations with the vedic sacrificial
traditions. The only record of these pAshupata-s appears to be in the
connection of inscription 135 at the jambukeshvaraM temple related to a
locally powerful tevar and his lineage of brahminical teachers. The
pAshupata guru-s associated with this temple from the late Vijayanagaran
period (\~1584 CE– veNkaTa-I’s reign) were makhin-s performing soma
sacrifices and householders. While there is no explicitly stated
connection with kApAlika-s, the pattern of vedic sacrifices among these
pAshupata makhin-s of jambukeshvaraM resembles what is known for the
kApAlika-s. These observations suggest that within the generally
veda-conforming pAshupata-s there were groups, which actually performed
vedic rituals externally and also internalized. The divergence of the
kApAlika-s from the other pAshupata-s appears to have happened before
the 600s of CE as suggested by the Chattisgarh inscription and the
allusion in the akulavIra tantra. Hence, we suspect that the PBU
actually represent an early tradition amongst the vedic
ritual-performing pAshupata-s from who the kApAlikas and perhaps other
“shrauta” pAshupata-s emerged.

\-yoga of the PBU  
The general ideas of the PBU appear to be developments of those found in
earlier genuinely vedic upaniShad-s. Several of these ideas also
continue to exist in much later yoga upaniShad-s. Firstly, brahmA’s form
is stated to be universal- sun, moon, light, planets, stars and other
celestial objects. Then the OM-kAra with its 3-fold form is said to be
the devatA of brahmA. We also see the concept of the mAtR^ikA-s
comprising the universe – this is a concept much developed in the
tantra-s. The OM-kAra, which is the devatA of brahmA is thus the essence
of the mAtR^ika-s and the universe. We also observe in the PBU the
sAMkhya elements that tend to be associated with yoga from an early
period – The trinity and other deities are identified with sAMkhya
guNas: rudra=tamas; brahmA=rajas; viShNu=sattva; indra and the gods=
rajas+sattva.

The main principle the PBU expounds is that of haMsa and its meditation.
haMsa is an ancient holy bird with which several deva-s, namely indra,
ashvin-s, marut-s, uShA-s and bR^ihaspati are identified in the RV. But
even in the RV the principle of the haMsa as the pervader is stated in
the famous R^ik of vAmadeva gautama (RV 4.40.5). This R^ik is cited
again in the kaTha upaniShad 5.2 in a sense of haMsa as the pervading
prANa or Atman. This is also developed in the bR^ihadAraNyaka upaniShad
4.3.11-12 and extensively in the early shaiva upaniShad the
shvetAshvatara (SU 1.6, 3.18, 6.15). In the vedic soma sacrifice there
is an important shastra recitation of the hotar that is learned secretly
only by the erudite shrauta ritualists. This recitation has several
modifications with insertions of OM-kAras of the famous haMsa R^ik. In
it the haMsa is said to be in the light, pervading the atmosphere, the
hotar performing the rite in the vedi, the guests of the sadas (duroNa),
the men, the space (vyoman), the sky, the reality, the waters, the rocks
etc as the natural order (R^ita). The PBU internalizes this ancient
principle of haMsa by suggesting that haMsa is \[pervades\] the mind, is
the self (the Ajapa mantra: so.ahaM haMsaH) and the transformations
\[occuring\] in haMsa is jIva. This is described as a yAga, which is an
enquiry into the nAda.

Footnotes  
Footnote 1  
Though in general hindu parlance the term kApAlika is taken to mean a
kapAla-bearing shaiva sAdhaka belonging to the bhUta or bhairava streams
of mantra-mArga, in a strict sense the kApAlika-s are defined as a group
of a pAshupata-s adhering to a text/s termed the soma-siddhAnta. Some
inscriptional evidence supports the kApAlikas being veda-following
brAhmaNa-s with pure pAshupata rather than mantra-mArga affiliation.
Consistent with this we get further clues from a Tamil work, named
j\~nAnAvaraNa viLLakaM from the 1600s, uncovered by the reputed south
Indian archaeologist R. Nagaswamy. This work in turn cites an even
earlier Sanskrit treatise named the sarva-siddhAnta viveka (SSV) from
which it draws its material about different sects. We have a reliable
choLa inscription from 1175 CE recording a kApAlika AchArya vagIsha
bhaTTa from the Tamil country who followed the somasiddhAnta. Thus, the
SSV was close enough to the period when the kApAlika sect was still
alive to actually record its traditions.

continued…
