+++
title = "Watching the kaNTaka-s and AkrAnta-s"

+++
The pleonastic writings on geopolitics on these pages can be avoided
because all has been said before; but when our people continue tracing
their recursive patterns in historical space we are forced to follow
them. The evangelistic English orientalist Monier-Williams made the
following statement in course of his encounter with the subhAShita
literature: “The knowledge of human nature displayed by the \[Hindu\]
authors, the shrewd advice they often give, and the censure they pass on
human frailties – often in pointed, vigorous, and epigrammatic language
– attest to an amount of wisdom which, \*if\* it had been exhibited in
practice, would have raised the Hindus to a high position among the
nations of the earth.” Sadly the “if” in the statement is a big if
indeed, as we see the flotsam Hindus plunging deeper into geopolitical
abysses. After long we spoke to ekanetra and several points came up:  
The subversive activities of the Isaists reveal several notable
features. Their recent misdeeds in Orissa are a good case in point.
Orissa being a predominantly Hindu state does not have much footprint of
the Mohammedan predator. Such regions are excellent targets for the
Isaistic subversionist, also known as the evanjihadist, because he need
not fear a direct confrontation with the Islamists. Coming from the US
or Australia (to a smaller extant subverted Korea) in the guise of
tourists or “aid workers”, they first locate tribal regions and
infiltrate them to create a local pocket of Isaists. They then go on to
deploy these foot soldiers of the evanjihad to expand against the varNa
population and also their own native tribal culture. When the Hindus
call the bluff and put the evanjihadists in place, they resort to a
multi-layered strategy. Their foot soldiers on the ground are incited
into the even greater acts of violence, like the killing of the Hindu
saMnyAsin, while simultaneous crying wolf and falsely claiming to be
unjustly victimized. Right then their shveta-tvacha evanjihadist
masterminds from Australian and American churches activate their second
line of response in the form the Leukospheric press and the Macaulayite
drohATa-s in the Indian English press to start demonizing the Hindus,
especially the varNa population and the occupants of the head of the
puruSha. These responders would shrilly call for the ban of Hindu
activists protecting the people from evanjihadist assaults and try to
create a delusional sympathy for the marauder in the minds of the
English news-reading, convent-educated Indian social elite. The press
barrage against the Hindus is kept active even as it spreads from the
Australian and American press to the English press, which echoes back
the same nonsense. Then it reverberates in translation in the German and
other Isaistic continental presses. Then a further line of pressure is
applied via summons to Indian ambassadors by governments of certain
nations like Italy, with calls to act against the Hindus being subverted
by Isaists and to give the evanjihadists a free ride. Then the beacon of
“human rights” will beam statements about the deplorable condition of
human rights in various nations, including a notice on the uppity Hindus
calling the bluff of the evanjihadists. Assorted Hindu-haters,
Indologists and other riff-raff will respond next with paroxysms of
scholarly rants on the anthropology of the “Hindu fundamentalist”.

Nothing described above is new, but there are some points that need to
be reiterated and some new developments that need to be highlighted.
Firstly, a trial balloon was floated in the lost Hindu kingdom of Nepal.
Here, the wisdom of the great pR^ithivi-nArAyaNa siMha-deva, that crest
jewel of the 2nd varNa, had kept out the evanjihadists by banning them
outright. Yet, these social viruses successfully infected Nepal by
forming a covert alliance with the communists, who after all are the
secular version of the same totalitarian ideology. The same alliance
between evanjihadists and communists has surfaced in Orissa. Now there
are clearly indications that a massive covert anti-Hindu alliance of
these two forces is forming in several pockets of India mainly focusing
on subverting the avarNa-s in order to create a new vast army of foot
soldiers against the Hindu elite. It is interesting to note that the
same second line of responders is activated when the Islamists swing
into action in India.

We saw that most poignantly when Moslems slaughtered numerous Hindus in
Godhra, but more recently during the Islamic attacks on Hindus we saw
these responders call for restraint, communal harmony and such other
platitudes. But most strikingly we note that the mlechCha-s are actually
in war with our long-standing enemies, the Moslems of the terrorist
state to the North-West. Some hindus are excited by this and hope we can
form an alliance with the mlechCha-s. However, I believe they are sadly
mistaken. Rather, than give us a chance to regain the land of kashyapa
and gradually take back the sindhu, they would aggrandize it or create
new monsters for us to deal with. Remember the history of Goa- we lost
it for a while to the Isaists because we contracted the job of handling
the Islamists to them. The key here is how our natural sphere of
influence is diminishing even though the extrinsic political events may
not be working against us. For example TSP was a major danger with
Kargil and its aftermath, supported by the US and the west as a front
line ally. However, now it is imploding as a natural consequence of
Islam. The Hindus should have seen this coming and used it to expand
their sphere of influence in regions which were taken from them
beginning with the coming of the Arab vandal. Instead they find their
own home grown Allahistic predators grabbing victims with utter impunity
even as the moronic “government” thinks of new ways of protecting these
predators rather than the Hindus. This government with a “Constantina”
as its puppet-master is frightfully reminiscent of the situation during
the Isaistic subversion of the great Roman empire at the time of
Constantine. Thus, the Hindus are unable to even protect their own home
estate, leave alone projecting influence outwards.

More is happening: In the south the sthaviravAdin pAShaNDa-s are
strengthening their grip over the island of la\~NkA under their new
current ruler rAjapakSha like never before. When they were at a low the
Hindu rulers of mainland simply failed to read the situation and let it
wind on its own. So much so that the outsiders (including Norway\!) got
unprecedented access to the island weakening the Hindu sphere of
influence. More recently alarmed by these developments the Indian
government decided on a show of power by taking over the whole island of
la\~NkA for a brief period (of course in agreement with the
la\~NkApati-s). Unfortunately, such a show of power has hardly done
anything to advance the \*Hindu sphere of influence\* which is more
critical at this juncture. Importantly, it needs to target the
exclusivism of the sthaviravAdin-s. As yet the Hindus still seem
slumbering like the pitcher-eared giant of la\~NkA…
