+++
title = "More on sanskrit grammarians"

+++
The existence of aindra grammar which apparently declined in due course
due to pANini’s efforts has been discussed extensively in the past by
Burnell in his monograph on the topic. While things might have changed
in certain directions in our understanding of the evolution of formal
grammar of saMskR^ita, the existence of the aindra system as gleaned by
Burnell is not in much doubt. In our opinion there is also not much
doubt that the earliest Tamil grammar, the tolkAppiyaM was modeled after
the aindra vyAkaraNa of saMskR^ita. However, there have been a number of
related controversies on these issues that keep coming up: 1) Doubts on
the age of the tolkAppiyaM – most of its major commentaries are
medieval. Hence, some have declared that it is not at all an early text
but actually a late text closer to the medieval period. 2) Age of the
aindra grammar itself – here again there are claims that it is a post
pANinian innovation rather than predating him as Hindu tradition
generally holds.

As we mentioned earlier durgasiMha, learned commentator of the nirukta
was clearly aware of the aindra grammar and uses it in his analysis
which is generally consistent with sAyaNa’s own knowledge of it. Hindu
tradition also links the transmission of the aindri vAk to the god
kumAra (related to the famous tale in the
bR^ihat-kathA/kathA-sarit-sAgara). Apocryphal versions of this (still
not without value) are also offered by the learned Tibeto-Mongol Lama
tAranAtha in his history: He states that there was a brAhmaNa named
saptavarman, who a contemporary of nAgArjuna and kAlidAsa \[a typical
example of tAranAtha’s pseudo-history\]. He asked ShaNmukha to reveal
the aindra grammar to him, and upon skanda merely uttering the first
sutra of the grammar “siddhovarNasamAmnAyaH |” the rest of the grammar
of 25,000 verses was miraculously transmitted to him. He also mentions
that a brAhmaNa named indradhruva obtained the same from indra. The
enormous size mentioned by the Lama tAranAtha is also repeated by other
late Hindu writers like devabodha who compares the aindra to the sea
whereas pANini to the depression of left by the cow’s hoof in size.
tAranAtha is also conversant with the apocryphal belief common in India
that the pata\~njali of the mahAbhAShya was the avatAra of the snake
sheSha (likewise the eponymous author of the yoga sUtra is also
considered an incarnation of the same snake). Thus, on one hand we see a
lay belief, prevalent in greater India at the time, being transmitted by
the Tibetan Lama to Mongolia. On the other hand, little earlier than
tAranAtha, the great vedic commentator sAyaNa preserved the one crucial
piece of evidence that firmly places the origins of the aindra vyAkaraNa
in the brAhmaNa layer of the shruti. This lost brAhmaNa cited by sAyaNa
appears corrupt (at least in my copy) but is beyond doubt a brAhmaNa
passage of vedic provenance (especially given that the majority of
sAyaNa’s brAhmaNa citations are entirely verifiable): vAg vai
parAchy-avyAkR^itA .avadat te devA indraM abruvann imam no vAcham
vyAkurv iti | so .abravId varaM vR^iNe mahyaM chai .evai e.Sha vAyave
cha saha gR^ihyAtA iti tasmAd aindravAyavaH saha pragR^ihyate | tAm
indro madhyato .avakramya vyAkarot | tAsmAd iyaM vyAkR^itA vAg udyata
iti |

A good candidate is the lost brAhmaNa section of the charaka saMhitA of
the kR^iShNa yajurveda from which sAyaNa has made other citations. It
appears that even in the brAhmaNa period the general assumption was the
speech or language was originally not systematized via grammar. The deva
indra generated a grammar that allowed the analysis of speech. So the
idea of the aindra-vyAkaraNa existing is indeed pre-pANinian and present
in the shruti itself. Such a system might actually go back to an earlier
Indo-European model, which at least predates the split of
Greek+Balto-Slavic+Indo-Iranian and might be related to the earlier
Indo-European concept of the divine speech which survives in the Indic
world in the form of saMskR^ita being deva-bhAShA.
