+++
title = "Thanjavur-I"

+++
After worshiping rudra at mallikArjuna for 10 days shivAjI rapidly moved
via Nandyal, Kadappah, Tirupati and Kalahasti and approached the
vicinity of Jinji. He then sent 5000 troops to besiege the fort of Jinji
which was held by Nasir Mohammed Khan. After a short siege the Moslems
surrendered the fort to the marATha-s and paid a tribute of 50,000
rupees. In return they were allowed to continue living in the province
under the condition that they fought on the Hindu side. shivAjI rebuilt
massive fortifications at Jinji and having placed the whole region
commanded by the fort under a Hindu civilian and military administration
headed by his son-in-law quickly advanced towards Vellore. shivAjI
captured the two hills flanking Vellore and set a several artillery
posts on them to begin the bombardment on the ghazi Abdullah Khan who
was holed up in the fort. Having kept a strong marATha force to continue
the siege he advanced to Tiruvadi. Vellore fell to the maraTha force
after an year long siege. At Tiruvadi the marATha army attacked another
jihadi, Sher Khan, who was being assisted by European mercenaries from
France and Portugal. These mercenaries were put to sword by the marATha
army and the Moslem army was decimated. Sher Khan’s son was taken
hostage after which he surrendered and ceded all territory in his
control to shivAjI. He also paid a tribute of 20,000 gold coins to
secure his and his son’s release. Then shivAjI threatened the Hindu
chief chokkanAtha nayaDu of Madhurai to accept him as his overlord. The
mahAraTTi brAhmaNa raghunAtha paNDita (who composed a famous
administrative lexicon) counseled shivAjI that they take a non-military
course and was able to extort 600,000 gold coins from chokkanAtha while
allowing him to retain administrative control over Madhurai.

At that point shivAjI’s half brother, ekojI, came with the mahAraTTi
brAhmaNa jagannAtha paNDita serving as a mediator, to meet shivAjI.
While they spoke cordially in public and held a few private meetings
brokered by the brAhmaNa in a shiva temple on the banks of the Kollidam
River, they continued to have profound differences in terms of their
paternal inheritance. Feeling threatened by his half-brother’s strength
ekoji suddenly decamped to Thanjavur leaving his troops. Then shivAjI
promptly arrested jagannAtha paNDita, who commanded ekojI’s army. Taking
advantage of this shivAjI dispatched hambirrao to seize Jagaddevgad,
Chidambaram and Vriddhachalam and he advanced rapidly to besiege the
Kolar fort. Then shivAjI declared that he was claiming the rightful part
of his inheritance from their father shAhaji, released jagannAtha
paNDita and sent a letter to ekojI to meet him in person and settle the
territorial claims. In response ekojI sent a letter simply saying he
submitted to shivAjI’s commands, but added that he was loyal to the Adil
Shah and would act upon the orders of the Moslem ruler. Then ekoji sent
a letter to the Moslem sultan to aid him and also incited chokkanAtha
nAyaDu to join him against shivAjI by reminding him of the gold coins
extorted from him. However, shivAjI moved swiftly by taking the Kolar
fort and using it as base to capture Arni, Hoskote, Bangalore and
Balapur and placed garrisons there. With this his knew that the Adil
Shah’s entire southern base had been destroyed. He placed hambirrao
mohite and raghunAtha paNDita with a large force at Valigandapuram to
deal with his half-brother. When shivAjI moved back north, ekojI
attacked hambirrao but was routed by him. In course of the fight,
shAhaji’s illegitimate sons, pratApjI and bhivjI, via south Indian
concubines, were arrested by hambirrao and held hostage. With that ekoji
surrendered to shivAjI, who sent him a stern letter which begins with:
“The deva-s and devI-s have favored me and with their help I have been
able to crush the Moslems. With the help of these same Moslems you hope
to fight me and caused bloodshed like duryodhana. Surrender all your
territory and take up an estate in my domains or that of the Qutb Shah…”

Additionally, shivAjI realized that the Moslem officials at ekojI’s
court were controling his brother. So shivAjI secretly sent raghunAtha
paNDita to meet and negotiate with ekojI’s wife dIpAba.i ingLe. She was
convinced of the trouble from the Moslem officials, and after dismissing
them she appointed raghunAtha paNDita as his prime minister. The learned
brAhmaNa then drew up plans for an amicable settlement and extensively
negotiated with both sides to reach an acceptable settlement with 19
clauses. A noteworthy part of the settlement was that the Thanjavur
state would never appoint Moslem ministers, would ensure the protection
of Hindus in its domain and would never offer protection to any one who
is an enemy of Hindu dharma or a criminal. Interestingly, shivAjI
brought up a document ratified by shAhaji that claimed that neither
shivAjI nor ekojI would ever be servants of the Moslem sultan and
claimed violation of this by ekojI. shivAjI also returned a good part of
the territory captured by him to ekojI and separately gifted some
territory to dipAba.i as exclusively her possession over which ekojI
could not lay a claim. However, ekojI lost all interest in life as he
saw himself as being humiliated by his brother and stopped administering
his kingdom and wanted to renounce the world. Alarmed at this raghunAtha
paNDita wrote to shivAjI, who responded with a conciliatory letter and
asked ekojI to take up the responsibility of upholding his territory.
Shortly after sending this letter shivAjI died. Urged by dipAba.i, ekojI
took up the administration of his territory in right earnest and for
some more years ruled as benevolent monarch who did much good to his
people. He was able aided in this by raghunAtha and dipAba.i until his
death in 1685.

Those who have studied the Thanjavur efflorescence have debated
regarding the roles of raghunAtha paNDita, dIpAba.i and ekojI. Some
drAviDa-s have accused him of having suppressed classical Tamil while
furthering Sanskrit and Telugu. Some mahArAShTrI-s have accused him of
being a Machiavellian individual who induced shivAjI to go on the
southern campaign in order to impose himself in Thanjavur and gain
monetarily in the process. He has been represented by some as a typical
unscrupulous mahArAShTri brAhmaNa like those in the Deccan Sultanates
wanting to plunder the rich south. But on the whole even the smArta-s of
drAviDa desha had a positive opinion of him – he was seen as encouraging
Brahminical learning even amongst his coethnics’ rivals i.e. the local
smArta community, a just tax-reformer and an executer of public works.
This is in line with shivAjI-s own assessment of him: “I have endeavored
to rear up number of my officers and helpmates but you belong to a
different category. You served our father and like him possess power to
correct and guide us when we cannot see our way. No other person can
exercise such influence in our affairs. We look upon you fully in the
place of our revered father and cannot adequately praise your services
to us.” The first marATha king of Thanjavur, while usually cast in
negative light in mahArAShTra, actually did shield this fertile fragment
of the choLa heartland from any direct Islamic depredations. His wife
was an astute woman and was behind several public works that greatly
benefited my ancestral families. She was also the mother of 3 sons, the
first of whom was to spark off the great Thanjavur intellectual
efflorescence. A marAThi verse summarizes this:  
tIna puruShArtha tighe bhUpa | jiyeche putra kuladIpa | dIpAMbikA
yathArtha-rUpa | nAma mhaNauni shobhatase ||

\[An aside: My part time RV teacher’s ancestor, who was involved in the
reconquest of Panhala had moved to Thanjavur along with raghunAtha
paNDita. He had renovated a kumAra temple at Viramalai. Our teacher said
that his family deity has been kumAra and that it was so even before
their migration to the south. He mentions that there is a single
mahArAShTri brAhmaNa clan living still in mahArAShTra who also have a
kumAra as their kula-devatA. The origins of these clans would be of some
interest.\]
