+++
title = "Arthur Avalon"

+++
Early on we realized that a Hindu needs to return the gaze on the
Leukosphere and make it a topic of socio-anthropological studies. The
Malhotran theory of U-turns, as we have seen in the past, is a
frame-work that allows one to study this issue. The insightful but
narcissistic Malhotra had postulated that the terminal U-turn is the
most common path for every Indologist of the Leukosphere. Indologists
have been a very influential element of the Leukosphere as far as Hindus
go, making a careful study of them important. In the early era the
Indologists concentrated largely on the Veda and early classical kAvya,
and with a few exceptions ignored most other branches of Sanskrit
culture. Given that the Hindu elite followed the white indologists to
acquire their understanding of the texts they too tended to ignore these
areas of Sanskrit culture. It is precisely this early indological
influence that resulted in a few common ideas amongst the Hindu elite:
It is not uncommon to hear an English-educated Hindu saying that that he
keeps away from shady things like the tantra. It is not uncommon to hear
such individual use the word “God” in the context of late vedic texts
like upaniShad-s and rant against the ritualism of his culture while at
the same time praising the “lofty” R^igvedic poetry.

Against this background one indologist stood apart – John Woodroffe aka
Arthur Avalon. He is today ridiculed or ignored by the scholar western
Sanskritists and by some Hindus, as well, as being a non-scholar. But I
do feel the need to objectively examine him because he was one of the
first white Indologists to experience the tantra and did contribute
insightful pieces of thought. A detailed biography of Woodroffe has been
written and I do not wish to rehash that, but just consider a few
points:  
To start with it is said that Woodroffe was pretty unsympathetic to
Hindus. As a high court judge in Bengal he sided with the British
officialdom against pro-Hindu judges like Fletcher to harass Hindu
defendants who were arrested for conspiring to wage war on the Britons.
But around the same time he was seen dressed like a Hindu in the Konarak
temple. He also published the mahAnirvANa tantra shortly thereafter.
Some feel that his covert pro-Hindu leanings were known to the British
officialdom and just as Fletcher had faced pressure he was also under
pressure and wanted to prove himself to be a respectable representative
of the British system (as suggested by Hardinge congratulating him for
this anti-Hindu judgment). But as his power in the court grew he seems
to have grown more actively pro-Hindu. Strikingly in contrast to other
Britons he said: “India is not a mere geographical expression … India is
an Idea … a particular shakti, bhArata shakti”. His insight on some
issues are rather remarkable for that time: “India is not the mere
subject of academic talk, but is a living force. India is still feared
where she is not loved. Why again? Precisely because she lives. Because
she is potentially powerful to impose her ideas on the world”. In this
brief statement Woodroffe encapsulated points missed by the Macaulayized
Hindu elite after nearly a century.

This phase also saw him become more and more accommodating to Hindu
nationalism and realized that the Indianess was essentially Hindu
nationalism. In contradiction to his past stance he took a lenient
attitude towards Hindu nationalists. He is said to have had an encounter
with the female tantric ga\~NgA-bai mahAtapsvinI mAtA – we do not know
much of it but he definitely was a major patron of her school.
ga\~NgAbai was a R^igvedi smArta brAhmaNa woman from the karhATaka
region of Maharashtra, the daughter of a peshva official. She was
educated by her father in saMskR^ita (especially classical kAvya
literature) as well as the use of weapons. In the war of 1857, at the
age of 22, she led a unit of the Hindu army against the British in
support of her co-ethnic lakShmibai of Jhansi. She fought personally
against the division of the accursed Hugh Rose and upon destruction of
the Hindu army escaped the British dragnet and made it to Nepal. There,
in the jaya-vAgIshvarI shrine in the cave of the one of the greatest
early female tantric guru-s, guhyasomA, she obtained the sarvAmnAya
kramadIkSha. She then performed mantra-sAdhana for 32 years and came to
Calcutta to found a school for women, the mahAkAlI pAThashAla. She had
been considerably financially aided by the rAjA of Dharbhanga. The
school was where Woodroffe voiced his pro-Hindu thoughts. His
association with a smArta from the drAviDa country , who was a scholar
in the siddhAnta tantras also needs further investigation.

He also realized the importance of the varNAshrama dharma as the
foundation of the Hindu survival. Woodroffe defended the Hindus, in
series of writings against the attack of his own co-ethnics like
missionaries and William Archer who explained that the essence of India
was: “Barbarian, barbarism, barbarous…” It is important to note that
Woodroffe correctly diagnosed the danger to the Hindus both from
Christian missionaries as well as the so called secularists like Archer,
who like many modern indologists claimed to be a friend of India. He
also correctly avoided the term ‘Hinduism’ instead consistently using
the word bhArata-dharma.

Despite the gems in his writings and speeches we see that his colleagues
saw him as a split personality or a fake. On one side he behaved like a
prim-and-proper judge and scholarly indologist, and on the other side as
a Hindu, wearing Hindu dress to European parties and seeing through the
evils of Christian missionaries and secularists. Sunitikumar Chatterji
accused Woodroffe of being a total fake not understanding any saMskR^ita
and totally relying on his Bengali friends to help him with the
deva-bhAShA. Chatterji felt he could not even read the devanAgarI script
and that he was being taken for a ride by his Hindu informers. There is
no evidence that Avalon was such a dud from other testimonials, where he
was seen reading saMskR^ita texts in their original. His wife was
originally very supportive and probably even instrumental in his
inclination towards the Hindu world. But over time she found that they
were generally ostracized by the European community in Calcutta for his
strange ways (i.e. tantra sAdhana), wearing Hindu dress and inviting
Hindus to parties at his house to eat and drink with Europeans. So she
started making her Malhotran U-turn. She returned to England and kept
urging him to return, which he eventually did. There she converted to
the Catholic church and appears to have kept urging him to do likewise.
He finally did so a year before his death perhaps completing his own
Malhotran U-turn. So after all was Woodroffe just another Malhotran
U-turner? I take a more sympathetic view of him – was an intelligent and
insightful man, but definitely an easily influenced one, caught in
mental chaos of the divergent pulls. There is some evidence based on his
daughter’s testimony that his wife might have had mental problems, which
might explain her U-turns and he being influenced was just dragged
along. I am of the view that the period of lucidity in Woodroffe’s life
was actually a consequence of his sAdhana, which opened his mind to
clarity. But as he returned to England and the sAdhana declined he
degenerated and returned the delusions of his old creed – the bhArata
shakti had deserted him.
