+++
title = "Elements of sAMkhyan theories of atomism and consciousness in early Hindu thought"

+++
I was told by some pious modern Hindus attached to advaita thought that
I was either a strange case of a “Westernized Hindu” (\!) or an
“atheistic scientist (what ever that was)” to express such a
proclivity for bhUta-chaitanya-vAda (or at least qualified
bhUta-chaitanya-vAda) as I have done before. On being prodded by them I
had to point out that I accepted the shruti (in particular the brAhmaNa
portion) to have a diversity of thought, rather than being a monolithic
authority. Perhaps, on this very point I lost some of them. Keeping with
the spirit of this diversity of thought in the brahmavAda of the shruti,
I had to point to the rest that I definitely favored certain ideas over
others. This apart, I was questioned about whether there was any
evidence for ideas of atomic thought (of the sAMkhyan or vaisheShikan
kind) and bhUta-chaitanya vAda in the shruti itself. In this regard I
would like to point to my interpretation of particular teachings from
the shAnkhAyana AraNyaka 6.19 and 7.21, kaushItaki upaniShad 3.5 & 3.8
(\~=\>shAnkAyana AraNyaka 5.5 & 5.8) and KU 4.19 of the R^igvedic
tradition:

In SA6.19 and KU4.19 (both of which narrate the same tale) the kShatriya
teacher ajAtashatru the kAshi-rAja teaches the brAhmaNa scholar gArgya
bAlAki regarding the nature of the consciousness of a person.
ajAtashatru makes a striking statement about where the consciousness is
localized at the time of the deep sleep state: “The vessels named hitA
extend from the heart to the pericardium. \[Here\] they from a capillary
bed of 1000 slender hair-like branches. They contain molecules of
orange, white, black, yellow and red. In these \[molecules\] the
\[consciousness\] is localized when he has no dreams.”

In his teaching to the king of kAshi, pratardana daivodAsi, the god
indra presents an early version of the sAMkhya theory (KU 3.5 & 3.8
\~=\>SA 5.5 & 5.8). While these paragraphs are simply constructed, their
true purport is very difficult to grasp for the modern mind. In essence
the first paragraph delivers a sAMkhya model stating that an explanation
will be provided as to how every bhUta becomes one for the consciousness
(praj\~na). The paragraph describes 5 j\~nAnendriya-s, 5 karmendriya-s
and the manas as particular entities that feed information into
consciousness. Now the indriya-s and manas in turn receive their signals
from corresponding external particles they recognize \[The word used in
the shruti for these particles is bhUta-mAtra, a precursor of the more
widely known word tanmAtra used in saMkhyan atomism\]. In the subsequent
paragraph (i.e KU 3.8 or SA 5.8) it is stated that molecules
constituting the stimuli and the molecules corresponding to the
receptors (in the 5 j\~nAnendriya-s, 5 karmendriya-s) are
inter-connected in such a way that (the information exchange of) their
interaction/correspondence is necessary condition for conscious
experience.

Then there is the teaching of the great vAlishikhAyani (SA 7.21). He
states that all is made up of combinations of the 5 elements akAsha,
vayu, jyoti, ApaH and pR^ithivi. These elements in turn are made up from
the combinations of minute atoms.

Thus, we notice that various elements of atomic thought, especially of
the sAMkhya type, originate in the vedic brahmodaya. Most importantly
these early vedic presentations while supplying several of the major
elements of the full-blown sAMkhya seen in the Great Epic is distinct
from it. In it vedic version we sense a clear tendency towards an
“particular” or “atomic” explanation for consciousness. Unlike the
classical bhUta-chaitanya-vAda of the chArvAka-s, we do not exactly
encounter the claim that consciousness is directly the interactions
between the particles (molecules) –this argument faces the same problems
as the modern issue of the “hard problem” of consciousness (vide
Chalmers). However, the vedic expositors had a collection of views that
saw: 1) consciousness as being a distinctive entity, which, however, did
have direct association and interaction with particles (elementary
particles or molecules) 2) consciousness as appearing to intimately
depend on this interaction for the production what is termed the
conscious experience. 3) The interaction between sensory systems and the
stimuli as a purely “molecular” process which in itself was not the
consciousness (i.e. the conscious experience).

The imprint of the above-mentioned vedic ideas on classical sAMkhya and
its twin yoga is very apparent. yoga right from it vedic antecedents was
always linked in terms of “world-view” to sAMkhya, which was emerging as
the dominant theoretical frame to explain the origin of existence. One
striking example from the classical period of yoga was the expansive
work on the yoga-sUtra-s of pata\~njali – its original commentary the
vyAsa-bhAShya \[Footnote 1\]. The vyAsa bhAShya extensively uses the
sAMkhya framework in order to explain the sUtra-s of pata\~njali. In the
commentary to the sUtra 3.44 \[on the “subjugation” of matter by the
yogin\] the vyAsa-bhAShya provides an introduction to sAmkhyan atomism.

sthUla-svarUpa-sUkShma-anvaya-arthavattva saMyamAd bhUta jayaH ||
YS 3.44

The vyAsa bhAShya explains that sthUla is the bulk matter, which in turn
in made up of an assembly of molecules or atoms – denoted by the term
svarUpa in the sUtra. The VB does consider that bulk matter might be
made up of combinations of the same or different types of molecules or
atoms. But the molecule (or atom) is the smallest indivisible entity
bearing the attributes of the gross substance – hence, he says
pata\~njali terms it svarUpa \[ayuta-siddhAvayavaH saMghAtaH sharIraM
vR^ikShaH paramANuriti | ayuta siddhAvayava-bhedAnugataH samUho dravyaM
iti pata\~njaliH ||\] Beyond the molecules/atoms VB proposes that the
tanmAtra-s exist – these are sub-atomic particles that tend not to exist
on their own but tend to only exist as conjoined together to constitute
the atoms. VB states that this is what is implied by the term sUkShma of
the sUtra \[atha kimeshAM sUkShma rUpaM? tanmAtraM bhUta-kAraNaM |
tasyaiko .avyavaH paramANuH sAmAnya visheShAtmA .ayuta siddhAvayava
bhedAnu gataH samudAya ity-evaM sarva-tanmAtrANy-etat-tR^itIyam |\].
Further, the VB explains that the basis of all matter lies in the 3
guNa-s that are described as khyAti \[information\], kriyA \[energy\]
and stithishIlA \[mass\], which in the saMkhya theory are the primary
evolutes of prakR^iti \[evidently these 3 guNa-s are descriptive
physical terms for what are usually referred to as sattva, rajas and
tamas\]. This is what in the sUtra is denoted as anvaya. Finally, the
sUtra has the term arthavattva. This term, the VB explains, corresponds
to consciousness, which it says is inherently linked to the guNa-s. The
guNa-s are inseparable linked to the tanmAtra-s which form the
paramANu-s and their combinations that form all substance. Hence the
consciousness inherited by these evolutes of guNa-s.

It can be seen that vAlishikhAyana’s theory of atoms, the bhUta-mAtra-s
in indra’s teaching and their link to consciousness have all been
inherited and elaborated into the atomic model of classical sAMkhya
thought.

Another important idea that might derive from the vedic idea of the
division of time (kalA-muhUrtA-kAShTha etc.) is that, like matter, time
also exists as quanta. The vyAsa bhAShya explains this in the context of
the commentary to sUtra 3.52 of pata\~njali \[kShaNa tat kramayoH
samyamAd vivekajam j\~nAnam |\]. The VB states:  
yathA .apakarSha-paryantam dravyam paramANur evam
paramApakarSha-paryantaH kAlaH | kShaNo yAvatA vA samayena chalitah
paramANuh pUrva-desham jahyAd uttara-desham upa-sampadyeta sa kAlah
ksaNah ||  
Just as the “atomic particle=paramANu” is the irreducible unit of
matter, so also the kShaNa is the irreducible unit of time. Indeed, the
time taken by a moving paramANu to leave origin and reach the next unit
space in the coordinate system is defined as a kShaNa.

The advaita vedAnta darshana (despite constantly positioning itself as
the true successor of vedic thought), increasingly tended to view things
differently – especially so amongst the modern vedAntavAdin-s. Now, this
is a subtle act of internal doctrinal subversion without really breaking
with old allegiances in the ritual sense. sha\~Nkara began by the
process by taking up the yoga-sUtra-s for producing a commentary which
moved yoga in the direction of vedAnta away from its sAMkhya moorings.
The predecessor of sha\~Nkara, gauDapAda, wrote a commentary on the
sAmkhya kArika-s of Ishvara-kR^iShNa where he presents the concept of
the dyvANuka (“diad atom”), suggesting that lineage of sha\~Nkara might
have had sAMkhya affinities to start with. Of course a similar process
was at hand with respect to the core vedic material (i.e. the
upaniShad-s as also the domain of pUrva mImAmsa).  
\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~  
\[Footnote 1\]This is a detour from the above discussion and deals with
the issue of authorship of the vyAsa-bhAShya. The name vyAsa bhAShya has
been taken by many later authors to mean a bhAShya by vyAsa, the author
of the original mahAbhArata (or jaya) and the original purANa saMhitA.
vyAsa is also considered by the vedAntins to be the same as bAdarAyaNa,
the promulgator of their sUtra-s – the brahma sUtra-s. Vedic tradition
starting from the aruNa section of the taittirIya AraNyaka and the
subsequent lists of prior textual redactors in yajurvedic sUtra texts
(E.g. hiraNyakeshin gR^ihya 2.7.2) mention the original vyAsa kR^iShNa
dvaipAyana. Thus, he is of considerable antiquity. The earliest major
yoga texts are found in the mahAbhArata- they appear to belong to the
layer of the bhR^igu redaction of the Great Epic. The yoga systematized
by pata\~njali is a successor of this earlier yoga of the Mbh and the
vyAsa bhAShya follows it. Thus, the vyAsa of the VB was definitely not
the same as the original kR^iShNa dvaipAyana vyAsa, but someone else.
His thinking shows affinities to the sAMkhya and vaiSheshika thought
seen in the medical saMhitA-s like that of sushruta and charaka and he
was known to sha\~Nkara. More specifically he appears to have followed
the works of the great early sAMkhya-yoga AchArya vArShagaNya (possible
author of ShaShThI-tantra and the first proposer of the law of
conservation of matter (energy)), whose ideas he cites. This would make
vyAsa of the Vb one of the vArShagaNya school of sAMkhya mentioned by
the chInAchArya Kuei-chi and the Indian brAhmaNa paramArtha who was an
adviser to emperor Wu in Nanjing, China (Mid 500s of CE). As per their
accounts the members of the vArShagaNya school of sAMkhya had beaten the
AchArya-s of bauddha yogAchara in great debates in the city of Ayodhya
about 150 years ago. Now, the chIna authors were aware of the sAMkhya
kArika-s of Ishvara-kR^iShNa and they were translated into chIna-bhASha
by paramArtha by mid-500 CE. This meant that Ishvara-kR^iShNa was
definitely before 550 CE and given the history of debates with sAMkhyans
recorded by the bauddha-s was probably at least around 400 CE. The
vyAsa-bhAShya has no knowledge of Ishvara-kR^iShNa’s kArika-s while
mentioning various older authorities. Thus we can be sure that this
vyAsa was after pata\~njali but before ishvara-kR^iShNa (thus mostly
before 400 CE) Beyond this we have little specific information to
pinpoint vyAsa’s identity and the time of composition of this bhAShya.
