+++
title = "The kR^ityA is seenxa0again"

+++
We were in their midst – full of excitement and mirth. But even now we
were not alone – we were shadowed by that kR^ityA, like kapAlin shadowed
by the maid brahmahatyA. In the corner hero stood – it was his day of
victory; we moved up to him and gave us his benedictions. Then we moved
on surrounded by clansmen and friends, and absorbed everything into our
consciousness. Most took us to be a fool and yet others even took us to
be a corpse. One of them was the taittirIyaka. But he was a ghost of his
past self; he still perceived himself as great, but the xvarena departed
from him even as it forsakes an Iranian king in his decline. Left
literally in the dark he cast about and suddenly took notice of me and
tried to prove his might, which had once shaken our sachiva. But we saw
through all of that – he was sunk in mAyA as though bound by the
pashu-pAsha-s. But two men saw through our natural disguise and saw our
true self lodged within. They informed some others and they all started
to notice us. Realizing what we cast a cloak and continued our
anthropological investigations by casting the web of indra. They all
moved like puppets on strings except one who was above all those bound
by the nooses of mAyA. On seeing that one we realized our own fragility
as she could easily pierce our coat, so we cast an even thicker screen
and continued roving un seen by all. Moving in the passage of the
prAsAda, like the one of the rakSha of shrI-lankA, we took all of it in.
We realized then why our amAtya had been so terrified by the owner of
the prAsAda.

After roving thus we returned to the lair of the mighty yakShiNI
nIlalohita-mekhalA. We were lost in saundarya of her captivating ivory
thighs and enjoying her embraces, which was to the senses like the
sweetened soma engulfing the tongue. In that state we asked her to
prognosticate. She said: “In the ninth hour the kR^ityA will seize you
like the gandharva seizing yavakri as it did on the 26th of April 2008.
Deploy the bear’s fruit.”

Those AtatAyin-s who had long wished us nothing but harm tried many
attacks on us including the hacking of the earlier version of these
pages. In the continuing battle they launched several kR^ityA-s on us.
The one of 26th April 2008 was in several ways like the one of the March
of 2007. Against that former one we first deployed the mantra of varuNa,
which over came it after a nearly 25 days of heavy fighting. But after a
month or so that kR^ityA returned. This time we used our dUradR^iShTi
prayoga with the yakShiNI to see the upAya against this prayoga. The
deva who gave us the answer was nArAyaNa who sleeps on the coils of the
kAla-sarpa in the midst of the great ocean. We attacked the enemy with
the foot of viShNu. O viShNu you had sent the demons to pAtAla overcame
our attacker. Shortly after that in August of 2007 they sent a terrible
agent of bagalAmukhI, a shroNikA at us. But again that foot of viShNu
protected us. Then after a week of akShispanda we were attacked by that
frightful grAhin sent by AtatAyin-s on April 26th 2008. We first
deployed the astra of bagalAmukhI on that. First the astra seemed to
press against the grAhin, but to our enormous surprise the ari-s over
came it (was it a dakShiNakAlI prayoga?). Then from our mAtAshrI we
obtained a second brahmAstra of even greater strength and deployed it on
the grAhin. Even that did not completely neutralize the attack. Finally,
we invoked skanda to bear us aid and sent 48 shara-s one after the other
on the grAhin. As we went to the beautiful seashore we were relieved of
the grAhin by the deva. Then in the beginning of Aug 2008 they sent the
same shroNikA at us against. But again the aids of viShNu and skanda
repulsed this attack. Suddenly around midday of 22nd we were attacked
again by that deadly grAhin which had attacked us a few months ago. “The
bear’s fruit”.  
The yakShiNI said: “Beware of the scholar whose shadow seizes one like
an unmatta-graha when you are staying up late”

28th Aug, 9.00 AM: The mAraNa attack has been deployed. This definitely
exceeded the past mAraNa-s its intensity except perhaps the swift blow
that fell upon us during the journey to the northern realm. It seemed to
have been timed well because it was accompanied by the second attack
directed via the sachiva and amAtya. We were so overwhelmed by the
powerful shUla, like one hurled by kumbhakarNa, that we sought to use
the last brahmAstra we had. But we waited and ground out the suffering
from the attack. Then to control the situation we redeployed the shara-s
as earlier and the yakShiNI’s substance. We then we offered the
sacrifice to chatuShpatha-niketA and tried to prepare ourselves for even
vaivasvata.
