+++
title = "samaravyUha-1"

+++
In life as one wages various fierce yuddha-s the historical analogies
sometimes come up providing a vivid imagery in the mind’s eye. In course
of the great war we observed something interesting, even if shocking: we
lost track of the passage of time. There are whole years that we simply
fail to account for. It is not an amnesia; if we put in the effort we
remember the events and the individual battles of the great war that
took us no where. We also remember the few great victories we scored on
other fronts aided by some of our ablest warriors on the field. But the
collective narrative does not readily exist in our mind in fact the
existence of those years is something that we do not seem to readily
recall: was it one, two or three? As a result there is an ahistoricity –
this reminded us of the ahistoricity that came upon the Hindu masses
even as they went through the horror centuries of Mohammedan or Isaistic
assaults. There is something strangely paradoxical about it: sometimes
there is contraction of time because of lack of ready recall of the
years of war, on the other had there is a time dilation – some relative
small stretches of time appear to be a long duration. So we look on
beyond the veil and see the “good old days” beyond with greater temporal
clarity, but the old pleasures of then seem to have lost their edge or
in fact appear even unbelievable.

The ari-s pressed on to fight the big battles on their terms. The first
mAraNa which was sent our way on April 26th and was repulsed with great
help from the amAtya. The first brahmAstra of ours was broken by their
counter-attack. Then our amAtya provided a second brahmAstra, which in
combination with the rudhira shara-s helped us to repulse the attack
after a month of prayoga. The second identical mAraNa attack came upon
us on the 21st of August. We resisted with minor prayoga-s for 6 days
when around 9 AM we realized we might be on the southern road. The
attack was so severe that were shaking from it like a palm in a
hurricane. Then at 4.00 AM we performed the prayoga of the brahmAstra
given by gIrvANendra dIkShita’s clansman. This magical weapon like
bagalAmukhI herself saved us from the noose, but we could only use it
two times, and we had exhausted one shot of it. But we were not sure if
we had cheated the mAraNa entirely, as even after the astra we faced the
aftermath for a while. The ari-s taking advantage of this pressed home a
strong attack. Our sachiva intercepted and overthrew it. In the mean
time the sachiva was distracted on the front of the last hero, to whose
aid the 3rd hero and that hero who was struck by the ari-s in himahrada
also rushed. Our army was isolated at that point, and the ari-s decided
to advance on us with the main body of their army. They received a major
windfall as our biggest fort was imperiled by the dhumAvatI acting via
the mlechCha-s. This put us in the potential danger of encirclement.
