+++
title = "samarA~NgaNa patha"

+++
Our ari-s kept up the incessant attacks on us. Now the ari-s sent their
praNidhi-s to watch on us and intercepted some crucial intelligence as
we were checking some fortifications – same ones we tested during the
start of this drawn saga, whose history we would narrate if we survive
the last battle. But as we were distracted by the deployment of
praNidhi-s, the duShTa-s stole up and launched the kulu\~ncha operation
against us. Our prayoga-s were disrupted. But we sought the aid of the
great guha, who revealed the movements of duShTa-s by the end of the day
and we could launch patra-trAta to minimize our losses. Ever since the
defensive patra-trAta operation was staged the khANDavans had been
confounded and casting around. We knew they might do other things and
were on alert as yoddha-s are supposed to be. They tried to make our
vasas into a naraka by means of the ati-daghda strike. But, like
rAmachandra braving the forest, we concentrating on shiva remained
unfazed. They tried to surprise us by sending an arm of the senA against
MPa. In the past the same senA had taken advantage of our MPa’s naiveté
and managed to break through their defenses completely. As a result we
also suffered a long invasion from the twin senA-s of the ari-dala. We
held a long kuriltai with our janAH and warned them to be prepared as
they would also be targeted. We told them: “call rakShohA agni to your
aid, he who utterly burnt the dasyu-s. Be ready for both prayoga and
yuddha.” We then realized that a stambhana prayoga was being used on us
to incapacitate us. “The wall of the crane” we thought and sought the
sought the aid of uttarAmnAyeshvarI. As we were struggling through that
an extraordinary DAmArikA attack, far exceeding the previous ones, was
launched on us. For some time we simply were at loss as to what to do …
We then turned to the wielder of the spear again who showed us the path
out of it.

Subsequently, PMa were subject to further attacks by the khANDavans, who
tried to resort to all kinds of kUTa-yuddha vanishing like meghanAda in
the clouds and reappearing and showering arrows on us. Moving their senA
to attack \*both\* the kosha-s. We secured the fort on south and created
the path to it. We had to now defend that path against the direct
khANDavan assault as well as sabotage on the supply line.  
O skanda may the dear friends attain their gati: viparItArtha.
