+++
title = "Musings on some alternativexa0grammarians"

+++
durgasiMha the commentator on the nirukta of yAska states:  
“vyAkaraNaM aShTadhA |”.  
The physician and grammarian vopadeva from the medieval yadava court
expands on the same theme naming the eight forms of saMskR^ita
grammar:  
indrash-chandraH kAshakR^itsn.a-ApishalI shAkaTAyanaH |  
pANiny-amara-jainendrA jayantya aShTAdishAbdikAH || (in dhAtupATha
discussion)

Despite the tremendous productivity of saMskR^ita thinkers on grammar it
appears that the rest have not matched pANini’s success and have to
greater of lesser degrees been washed aside. somadeva, the author of
that great literary masterpiece the kathAsaritsAgara apocryphally but
colorfully narrates this process in his story on the debate of kAtyAyana
and pANini. Of course tale goes back to somadeva’s source material the
bhR^ihat-katha.

Of these, jinendra, despite his name, is a bauddha and the last in the
old line of grammarians. He is supposed to have lived in the va\~Nga
country and been a bodhisattva. He appears to have been patronized the
pAla kings around 725-750 CE. He is cited by the great vedic commentator
haradatta mishra from the drAviDa country and criticized by the much
latter bhaTTojI dIkShita from mahArAShTra who appears to have clearly
been aware of jinendra’s bauddha biases in interpreting the vaidika
aspect of pANini. In any case this is still illustrative of his
widespread influence as a major grammarian both in spatial and temporal
terms. jinendra himself cites kAshakR^itsna and Apishali and thereby
preserves fragments of their lost works. Another renowned nAstika
paNDita, chandragomin, is usually identified as the author of the
chandra grammar by tradition. bauddha tradition holds that the founder
of chandravyAkaraNa was a kShatriya from varendra in the va\~Nga
country, and probably lived roughly around the same time as jinendra. He
is supposed to have debated other tAthAgata-s like the nAstika
mahApaNDita chandrakIrti with the aid of his mantra prayoga-s to invoke
avalokiteshvara. He is reputed to have been a mantravAdin of great
siddhi-s, who journeyed from nAlandA to the Andhra country, where he was
locked in prayoga battles with Astika mantravAdin-s who deployed
saiddhAntika, bhairava and kubjikA mantra-s to counter him. He is said
to have composed several long stotra-s to ma\~njughoSha, avalokiteshvara
and the kula goddess sitAtapAtrA. While visiting gavalakuNDa, R1’s
father brought out an old file of handwritten papers and showed me a
prayoga stotra to pratya\~NgirA composed by chandragomin along with some
nAstika mantra-s to the same deity.

chandragomin identifies pratya\~NgirA with his chosen deity the
kula-mistress sitAtapAtrA, whom he calls the queen of chandradvIpa. A
tale is narrated where an irate ruler tries to drown chandragomin, but
he is carried by the devI to chandradvIpa and saved. This is of
considerable interest because chandradvIpa is also the primal kShetra of
kubjikA. kubjikA too is identified with pratya\~NgirA as ghora
rudrakubjikA-atharvaNa-bhadrakAlI in the tradition of the uttarAmnAya
and the kubjikA upaniShad. chandragomin begins his invocation to
pratya\~NgirA by using the compound name
uShNISha-sitAtapAtrA-pratya\~NgirA, which is parallel to another stotra
in which he identifies aparAjitA with sitAtapAtrA. Another text of
chandragomin (of course given as a dialog between shuddhodhana-putra and
his disciples) showed by R1’s father was the dhAraNI of
mahApratya\~NgirA, which had a picture of the devI with numerous arms
holding all kinds of weapons. Another text of chandragomin had a long
nAstika-pratya\~NgirA mAlA mantra which seeks protection against all
kinds of dangers.
