+++
title = "The yuddha resumes"

+++
dhumaketu: The amAtya and sachiva were also attacked but the spasha-s
say that they stood firm. The agent of the duShTa-s lured us for a
direct battle. This happened after the below events.

The sachiva and amAtya were unsure if anything was going to happen at
all. Indeed, they mentioned this triumphantly to the adhyakSha-s of the
3rd vIra. We obtained intelligence from that remaining vIra that MM had
foolishly turned traitorous. That vIra himself was bound by his own
problems and could do little. But we knew for sometime that in the field
of mantra prayoga as well as the laukIka yuddha, we could not depend on
others. We also knew that the final yuddha in all its a\~Nga-s will be
fought on the strength of our own arms. If we survive we will rule
again, if we fall in battle we would merged with the bhUta-s. So MM
becoming traitorous was of little consequence to us thought it did
distract us. We wanted to invade the new front of eka-shulbArIya hala.
But we faced a strange distraction and felt the effects of the prayoga
upon us that had triply broken our vinAyaka prayoga. It was the
netrAgni. We were laid low by it in a state of slumber. With the amAtya
and the sachiva separated from the main senAmukha we faced an unexpected
attack from the ari-s who since that fateful encounter of the autumn
evening were doggedly pursuing us. A big yuddha had opened – it
threatened to sap our existence when so many other things needed
attention.  
“The vAnara-s hurled their rocks on kumbhakarNa but he moved on
unaffected.”
