+++
title = "The Ara and thexa0Arbelos"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp1.blogger.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/R4AyVdBucsI/AAAAAAAAAA0/D0XmMUzLYF0/s320/Arbelos.jpg)](http://bp1.blogger.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/R4AyVdBucsI/AAAAAAAAAA0/D0XmMUzLYF0/s1600-h/Arbelos.jpg)

When I was young, I was fascinated by the blade held by the clobber and
the way in which he plied it in fixing shoes and slippers. This blade
(Ara in saMskR^ita) had a special shape and I realized a weapon like
that was held by some of our deva-s. There was an Indian arrow that had
a head much like this tool. Much later, I learnt of the great
yavanAchArya Archimedes having studied a curve derived of 3 circles that
he named the Arbelos or the clobber’s knife. Obviously he was meaning
the same object apparently still in use in leather-work. I wondered if
the proto-Indoeuropeans or at least the common ancestor of the Hindus
and Greeks had a common device like that (Arbelos and Ara) used in
leather work. The Arbelos fascinates mathematicians and laymen alike,
and I was no exception to it. I simply wished to relive my journey
through the Arbelos – perhaps relive a fantasy of the halcyon days of my
childhood. Many fascinating properties of the Arbelos are apparent even
at sight:

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp2.blogger.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/R4AydtBuctI/AAAAAAAAAA8/8JilBvDGrKI/s320/arabelos.png)](http://bp2.blogger.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/R4AydtBuctI/AAAAAAAAAA8/8JilBvDGrKI/s1600-h/arabelos.png)

The most obvious being that the perimeter of the upper boundary of the
curve = perimeter of the lower boundary because: d=d1+d2;
pi\*d/2=pi\*(d1+d2)/2;

The hemichord formed by the shared tangent of the two smaller
semi-circles is indicated by T. It is the geometric mean of their
respective diameters: T²=d1\*d2

Further, the area of the Arbelos (A) can be expressed independently of
the 3 radii of the semi-circles using just the value T: A=pi\*T²/4;
thus, the area of the Arbelos is the same as that of a circle with
diameter T. this is obvious from baudhAyana’s (Pythagoras) theorem and
that any angle inscribed in a semicircle is a right angle.

[![](https://i1.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/R4atitBuczI/AAAAAAAAABs/2zvDFUGwItI/s320/arabelos_exp2.png)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/R4atitBuczI/AAAAAAAAABs/2zvDFUGwItI/s1600-h/arabelos_exp2.png)

There are many other interesting properties of the arbelos that have
made it a fertile object of investigation in Euclidean geometry over the
ages. Even the great geometer Jakob Steiner worked on its properties,
like the issue of Pythagorean triplets in the chain of circles. Even in
the past 100 years it has been a source of rich new results. One of the
most famous features of the arbelos from ancient Greek mathematics
concerned the chain of circles inscribed within it. The first circle
(K1) in this chain is a tangent to all the 3 semicircles of the arbelos.
The next K2 is a tangent to K1 and two of the other semicircles. In this
chain of circles the height of the of the center of Kn from the base
line is equal to n\*dn, where dn is the diameter of Kn. The centers of
K1-Kn lie on an ellipse whose foci are the centers of the two
semicircles that bound the chain. If the ratio of the diameters of the
two smaller semicircles of the arbelos (d1/d2) is rational then the
following is observed:  
The right triangle formed by the center of Kn, the center of the largest
semicircle of the arbelos and the foot of the perpendicular dropped from
the center of Kn to the baseline has sides forming a Pythagorean
triplet. This chain of circles can be constructed using the method of
reflection of points on a circle. Here the reflecting circle is of
radius=d and it reflects the right line as the largest semicircle, the
left parallel line as the second largest semicircle and the first
semicircle bounded by these two lines as the 3rd semicircle of the
arbelos. All other inscribed tangential circles are reflected to form
the chain.

[![](https://i2.wp.com/bp0.blogger.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/R4AyeNBucvI/AAAAAAAAABM/JQMLHBqVcf8/s320/arabelos_exp5.png)](http://bp0.blogger.com/_hjuA1bE0hBw/R4AyeNBucvI/AAAAAAAAABM/JQMLHBqVcf8/s1600-h/arabelos_exp5.png)

The family of circles – Archimedean twin, the Bankoff circle and the
quadruplet are shown.

Finally there are the famous Archimedean twin circles of the arbelos,
which are the tangential to the largest semicircle, either one of the
two other semicircles and the segment T. Archimedes showed that these
two circles are congruent. Strikingly, numerous other congruent circles
come up all over the arbelos, and their discovery and properties has
formed a major area of modern studies on this figure. One of these
discovered by Bankoff, a rich dentist who was an amateur mathematician:
One takes the following 3 points- 1) & 2) the two touches by the first
circle of the chain of inscribed circles on the smaller two semicircles
of the arbelos. 3) the point where the two smaller semicircles of the
arbelos touch. Then one draws the circumcircle of these points. It is
congruent to the Archimedean twin circles.Another more recently
discovered quadruplet of the family is described thus: Take the
perpendiculars from the centers of the smaller semicircles of the
arbelos and let them intersect the semicircles at A and B. Draw the
lines from the center of the biggest semicircle of the arbelos to the A
and B. Then there are two circles passing through each of these points
which are tangential to each other and the lines from the former
sentence, which are also tangential to the biggest circle to the
arbelos. These two pairs of circles form a quadruplet which is congruent
to the Archimedean twin circles.
