+++
title = "The “paurANic” element of thexa0pashchimAmnAya"

+++
In the days after the fierce battle of dvAdashAnta, after we had
overthrown the kR^ityAstra that struck us, we were resting in the city
of the karnATa-s. There while meditating on the aghora mantra we
experienced that connection with samayA and kubjIshAna. That great
bhairava, who is navAtman, appeared in the li\~Nga briefly manifesting
that indescribable luster of the pashchimAmnAya. Through the utter
darkness we saw the path of the mantra vidyA.

\*\~\*\~\*

The atharvavedins developed a connection with the pashchimAnAya, as a
result of which they acquired certain practices related to their tantric
worship as well as laukIka worship and mythography. The quest for these
aspects of worship leads us to what may be termed the “paurANic” aspects
of the pashchimAmnAya. While the agni-purANa has assimilated a large
amount of pashchimAmnAya material it does not really preserve any of the
unique and distinctive paurANic material of this tradition. The paurANic
material of kubjikAmata represents a variant that is not found in any of
the surviving purANa-s I have acquainted myself with. Instead the source
of these materials is the kubjikAmata tantra (kulAlikAmnAya version),
where they are provide as a frame material for the tantric narrative as
well as 3 stotras that are used by the atharvavedins in laukIka stuti of
kubjikA. Below are some paurANic tales of the tradition briefly
summarized:

**The tale of the origin of the pITha-s**  
The mountain lord himavant lived in his great realm of santAnabhuvana.
The bhairava (navAtman) appeared in this realm and stood in silence for
a while. The coming of kubjIshAna terrified the denizens of
santAnabhuvana who appeared along with himavant to bow to him. himavant
praises the bhairava with a stotra (the kubjIshAna stotraM) and asks to
make himself comfortable as everything is the bhairava’s abode. He also
offers that his daughter kAlikA would attend to his needs. After kAlikA
spends a while with navAtman, he grants her a boon. She asks to become
his wife, which the bhairava grants. Then kuleshvarI asks him the
rahasyas, in reply to which bhairava reveals to her the siddhakrama,
which he says is their common possession. He asks her to establish the
tradition in bhAratavarsha by generating many successors. He asks
kuleshvarI to go to kaumAraparvata and then the bhairava vanishes.

Struck by his disappearance and to search for her husband kuleshvarI
proceeds to chandraparvata and ascends a beautiful rocky spur and
absorbs to whole of existence into a li\~Nga-like form called
udyAna-bhairava. Now navAtman is irritated by the absorption of the
universe and shouts that only chandraparvata is now left. So he goes
there and praises the li\~Nga, but she does not emanate. So, he praises
her with the kubjikA daNDakam and she emerges from the li\~Nga as samayA
or kubjikA. She is surprised as to who can stand looking, saying that it
is as difficult as facing a dreadful cobra. She then grants a boon to
the bhairava, who asks her to keep her word to go to kaumAraparvata and
generate the successors who would promulgate the pashchimAmnAya
throughout bhArata-varSha. While she refuses initially, the bhairava
eventually convinces her to do so.

Going to kaumAra parvata she creates a great forest with several
li\~Nga-s installed therein and with her toe she draws a line which
becomes a great river. The she wandered in trikUTa, kiShkindha and
himagahvara and founded the 4 pITha-s of oDDiyAna, jAlandhara, pUrNagiri
and kAmarUpa. She then created a fifth pITha of mAta\~nga (which is not
on earth as per some accounts, in Himachal as per others). Then she
returns to the bhairava after touring whole of bhArata-varSha. Then the
bhairava asks her to promulgate the pashchimAmnAya starting from
oDDiyAna in the extreme north-west of bhArata-varSha.

**The** **kumAra tale of the pashchimAmnAya**  
As samayA was wandering over bhArata-varSha a drop of her sweat fell on
the ground and generated the dreaded asura krau\~ncha who caused much
terror. The deva-s asked kAma to strike bhairava to induce him to dally
with kubjikA. While he burns kAma, he does dally with his shakti and as
result kumAra is born. Then the spear armed kumAra slays krau\~ncha.  
\[Note the emphasis on krau\~ncha as against tAraka or mahiSha of the
usual kaumAra tradition.\]

**The narrative of the bhairava or the core tantra of the kubjikA
tradition**  
The core elements of the kubjikA tradition are provided in the form of a
usual tantric narrative embedded within the paurANic frame, which
recedes into the background once the core issues are discussed. These
include:  
\-The aSTavimshati krama: the 12 shloka-s, the pa\~ncha ratna-s, the
tadgraha and the 6-formed nyAsa.  
\-The key mantra of practice of the samayA vidyA is the complex mantra
known as the umAmAheshvara-chakra KMT 5.1-33. The mantra itself has 3
sections. This is some ways like what the vyomavyApin mantra is for the
Urdhvasrotas saiddhAntika-s.  
\-In attacking abhichArika practice the follower of the pashchimAmnAya
uses the juShTachaNDAlI vidyA, which is one of the most effective
prayogas.  
\-In the defensive mode he uses the rudra-kubjikA prayoga. As per the
AVins associated with the kubjikA tradition rudra-kubjikA is the
manifestation of pratya\~NgirA.  
\-As we have mentioned before one of the highest sAdhana-s of the
pashchimAmnAya is the prayoga of the sampUrNa-maNDala in which the great
aghora aShTAkapAla is worshiped. Here every syllable of the mighty
aghora mantra expresses itself.
