+++
title = "hrada-kachCha"

+++
[![lake](https://i1.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3009/2681760996_19ee4ce31d.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/2681760996/ "lake by somasushma, on Flickr")

It was in the summer of 1995, just before I left the shores of
jambudvIpa for krau\~nchadvIpa. The boundless energy and false idealism
of youth filled us then. The brAhmaNa from the lATa country, who was
then my friend, and me were walking down the garden path in the city of
my birth discussing a scientific problem that was in the years to come
give one of the most profound insights into life –probably the high
point of my life. We ran into the naturalists mahAshmashrU, dhUmramukha
and the mlechCha-strI valgulI of sweet smiles from the “ugra-desha”.
They told us of their adventures and the journey the lake near the
abandoned devAlaya. We wished to go there too and conspired to achieve
it with ST who was then working in a lab near mine. Knowing that ST was
going, the above-mentioned lATajana was filled with the urge to come
along, to mill around in her company, probably not to enjoy the nature
(though his skills in ecology were not trivial). Since we planned it on
a civil holiday ekanetra also joined us.  
Many years later…  
I was in the house of ekanetra and ST. ST and ekanetra said with some
Schadenfreude: “O vAtsya you showered favors on her that is most
ill-mannered and showed so much courtesy to her who is a typical rascal
from sindhupattana”. I replied: “it is rAjanIti, friends, in the
vanguard of samIrA’s senA I will make her attack the long-coveted fort.
She alone has the astra-s to breach that fort: Odysseus and
Philoctetes”. Then ST opened a plastic wrap to show how she had
achieved her greatest success – the bhojya version of a yavana cheese
called manouri. It was like balancing on a knife-edge between molds and
bacteria. While savoring this delight worthy of the deva-s I showed them
the above photo taken by the first hero to ST and ekanetra. Their jaws
nearly dropped…

The reason: the hero of himahrada had chosen exactly the same view for
the photo as the view that captivated us on that journey to the lake. We
spent a while wandering about looking at rather interesting plants, many
of which were to vanish in that city the coming years due to the apathy
of our peoples. I used this session to identify some oShadhi-s mentioned
in the shAstra-s as befits an atharvaNa. Some weed and herbs of interest
that were worthy of future investigation that I never did were: 1) A
particular acrid agnigarbha *(Ammannia baccifera*) which caused burns on
rubbing on the skin. There were claims that it could counter fungal
infections in topical applications. 2) krimibandha (*Drosera burmanni*)
it is one of the fastest acting Droseras that was brought to our
attention by ST. It traps insects within a few seconds against others
that might take a while. Many claims have been made for it in countering
broncho-constriction and inflammation and the like. We do not know if
any of this is true. 3) nIloShTha (*Oxytropis*) is claimed by some to be
a component of the a concoction of our ancient ancestor chyavAna. It
might be a selenium source.4) agasti (*Sesbania grandiflora*) is claimed
by some to help in epilepsy. 5) shyonaka (*Oroxylum*) is supposed to
relieve pains of the body.
