+++
title = "Cerebrals or retroflexes inxa0Indo-Aryan"

+++
A question from R prompted me to look more closely at the formation of
cerebrals or retroflexes in Indo-Aryan (i.e. T, Th, D, Dh, N, L, Sh).
This is an important problem that Hindus should have studied but have
tended to ignore. This is particularly compounded by the boorishness of
several dim-witted modern Hindus who deny the Indo-Aryan incursion into
jambudvIpa or, still worse, deny the Indo-European monophyly. Hence, the
pioneering studies in this regard were conducted by the mlechCha
linguists J.Wackernagel (who authored the great work Altindische
Grammatik), T. Burrow and H.W. Bailey. Wackernagel correctly recognized
several such cases like:  
Ati \> ATi (Ati is the vedic form for ‘duck’ as seen in the taittirIya
saMhitA)  
atati \> aTati (wander, atati in R^igveda)  
udumbara \> uDumbara (a type of fig, former attested in vedic texs)  
pattana \> paTTana (a city, former attested in mahAbhArata)  
In each of these cases the word has a long history inside Indo-Aryan and
there is no evidence that it was borrowed from Austro-Asiatic or
Dravidian in the retroflex/cerebral form. Rather the original dentals
appear to have become cerebrals within the history of Indo-Aryan. The
more archaic form (usually vedic) is always dental with the late
Sanskrit forms acquiring cerebrals. In a case like pattana we see this
transition apparently happening between Epic Sanskrit and later
classical Sanskrit. Wackernagel and Burrow also correctly noticed that
in some cases this phenomenon also happened even earlier during the
divergence of vedic from its other Indo-European sisters. For example:  
monile (Latin) =\> maNi (Skt) : jewel  
stUnA (Avestan) =\> sthuNA (Skt) : pillar

Such cases are also noted within the evolution of Indo-Aryan as Prakrit
and Pali diverged from Old-Indo-Aryan. In the vulgar Pali we observe the
following cases:  
udAra \> uLAra (great/liberal)  
budbuda \> bubbubLa (bubble)  
AshAtika \> AsATikA (insect larva; further AsADI in Maharatti).

While there are numerous examples of this phenomenon that span the
entire evolution of Indo-Aryan, right from its origin, it is clear that
it is sporadic and not at all uniform. This differentiates it from other
regular sound changes typical of other linguistic evolutionary events.
Its distribution throughout the evolution of Indo-Aryan strongly argues
against Prakritization of Sanskrit- a point correctly noted by Burrow.
The dental archaisms are most prevalent in the RV suggesting an
acceleration in this phenomenon during the transition from vedic to
classical Sanskrit.

Once this phenomenon is recognized, it becomes clear that many of the
words claimed to be loans from Dravidian and Austro-Asiatic into
Sanskrit are actually endogenous developments via bifurcation of
original dentals into a mixture that retained the old dental or became
cerebrals. It also strengthens certain etymologies that were rejected
before by Indo-Europeanists. Of the former the most important ones
are:  
paNDita- The old linguists believed that it is a loan word derived from
the Dravidian root paND- to mature. In support of this it was pointed
out that Telugu had a word paNDa and Kannada a word paNDe both of which
meant ‘wisdom’. However, they missed the point that panda as ‘wisdom’
was already there in Sanskrit from which Telugu and Kannada appear to
have borrowed it because we do not find it in Tamil or other branches of
Dravidian. In contrast, the dental form pand meaning ‘wise counsel’ is
preserved in Persian. So it has retained meaning in Indo-Iranian rather
than in the case of the Dravidian paND root. So paNDita emerged in
Indo-Aryan from the paND root meaning wisdom/wise counsel; hence
paNDita.

khaNDa, kANDa, paTala, pATha: Certain Indologists have claimed that
these words, which are often first used in the indexing of vedic texts
are of non-Aryan origin and might have either come from the Dravidians
or the original Sindhu-Sarasvati peoples. But there are hardly any
satisfactory etymologies given in support of this. Instead the
cerebralization explains many of these. khad –‘to break into pieces’ is
a root found in Avestan. This is seen without the nasal infix in khaDga.
pANini and pata\~njali indicate the presence of the root in the perfect
form chakhAda. Thus, khaNDa is likely to come from an Indo-Iranian khad
root than Dravidian or Austro-Asiatic.

kANDa which is used to denote sections of texts also more generally
means node or joints (kANDa or dUrva grass in yajurveda; a\~Nguli-kANDa
for finger joint). Burrow noted the presence of the Greek ortholog
Kondoi meaning ‘knuckle’ suggesting that kANDa is a purely Indo-European
word developing internally within Sanskrit. Likewise, pATha and paTala
are likely to be internal developments in Sanskrit rather than loans
from Dravidian.  
Early Indologists had ridiculed the idea that the Sanskrit word kalevara
‘body’ had anything to do with the Latin word cadaver. But the vulgar
dialect of the Bauddha tantra-s records the word kaDevara (meaning both
body and corpse) and Pali has kaLevara which taken together support the
presence of the form kaDevara which is likely to have emerged from
\*kadevara through the cerebralization phenomenon noted by Burrow. So
Latin cadaver and Sanskrit kalevara are indeed orthologs rather than the
former being a “ka-ku-ki” type loan from the mystery old Indian
language.

An evolutionary speculation: R^igveda in particular and vedic in general
have fewer instances of cerebralization and often preserve the older
dental Indo-European condition. Many cerebrals that are found in later
layers of Sanskrit can be established as intrinsic developments mainly
through presence of Iranian counterparts but they are rarer or even
absent in the core vedic layers (e.g. paNDita, pANi, maNDala, khaDga).
We also note some other loans from Iranian into Indic like marIsa, dUsa
and soDha for milk (the later again cerebralized). This suggests that
the development of classical Sanskrit just prior to the epic layer was
marked by a massive rise in these cerebral forms. The Iranian connection
noted above suggests that a prominently cerebralizing dialect of
Sanskrit emerged in the boundary zone between the Iranians and Indians
and rapidly moved inwards influencing the Sanskrit of the
kuru-pA\~nchala heartland. We suspect this movement was linked to the
historical paNDava-s and perhaps were even precursors of the great
Megalithic movement through the sub-continent (thought this is less
certain). Further tests of this hypothesis might yield useful
understanding of early Indian history.
