+++
title = "15th August: Axa0journey"

+++
61 years ago the Hindus ended the mlechCha conquest of their land. Today
most of us feel the victory was incomplete and many others feel it might
have even been empty. Within the true Hindu elite (not the modern Indian
elite) there has been the following realization which I have articulated
many times on these pages: We were in the process of reversing the
earlier invasion i.e. that of the turuShka-s and were close to rolling
back Islam. The process had inflicted heavy damage on us, and we were
not in a position to take on a second invasion. It was then that
mlechCha-s fell upon and we shamefully succumbed to their assault, and
it took us another 140 years to revert that. But in the process the
turuShka-s got a new lease of life and seized our western and eastern
lands. The process cut deep into our identity because it removed the
sindhu from our consciousness, divided the land of the five rivers in
the midst of genocide, removed the land of pANini from our sight. It
also drove the final nail into the coffin of Kashmir, the land of some
of our greatest thinkers. To add to these physical disfigurations, we
remain in the state of mental colonization that ironically John
Woodroffe so eloquently diagnosed. To add to this, there was the third
invasion by a variant of the same meme as Mohammedanism or Isaism,
namely Marxism. This invasion recently claimed Nepal the land of many of
our Agama-s. These depredations were associated with the loss of
deva-bhASha the vehicle of our civilization and also the “light of Asia”
itself. Our inability to restore devabhASha and reacquire the spirit of
its traditions is manifest in the post-1947 depravity of the land and
the reigns of the taskara rAjan-s and dasyu-s that over took the land.

I had conversations in the past with my late grandfathers of the period
of mlechCha rule through which they had lived. For them it was a
tumultuous transition – verily a fulfillment of the paurANic prophesies.
A generation before them was one of great agnichit-s, the smoke of whose
sacrificial fires reached the skies, mahAmahopAdhyAya-s who had delved
into the intricacies of kAvya, mImAmsa and nyAya-vaisheShika and able
mantravAdin-s. But for them it was a grim struggle for survival.
Applying the abilities inherited from their ancestors to secular
pursuits they were mainly engaged in salvaging themselves – they had
reached the proverbial state of “does it matter if it is rAma or rAvaNa
who is reigning”. Thus, the very presence of the mlechCha-s was a thing
of the background. But in all this at least my maternal grandfather
briefly felt a surge of nationalism due to the words and actions of two
brAhmaNa warriors who hardly get any attention in the official histories
of the great saMgrAma – Vanchinathan and Varahaneri Venkatesa
Subrahmanya Iyer.

Vanchinathan letter was particularly a source of inspiration; an excerpt
from which run thus: “3000 youths of this brave country have taken an
oath before goddess kAlI to send King George to naraka once he sets his
foot on our motherland. I will kill Ashe, whose arrival here is to
celebrate the crowning of King George in this glorious land which was
once ruled by great saMraT-s. This I do to make them understand the fate
of those who cherish the thought of enslaving this sacred land.”

Upon the death of VVS Iyer the great patriot VD Savarkar wrote: “For
indeed he was a pillar of strength, a Hindu of Hindus, and in him our
Hindu race has lost one of the most exalted representatives and perfect
flower of our Hindu civilization – ripe in experience, and mellowed by
sufferings and devoted to the service of men and God, the cause of the
Hindu Sanghatan was sure to find in him one of its best and foremost
champions in Madras.”

\~\*\~

We had earlier narrated the tale of the predecessor who located the lost
temple of kumAra in Chebrolu and initiated that brAhmaNa, whose
descendent was to attain “eko mAnuSha AnandaH”, into the vidyA of
tripurA. He himself was initiated into the vidyA of tripurA by a great
mantra-vAdin from the outskirts of Madhurai. This mantravAdin it is
believed was in the line of the madhurAja-yogin and AdyanAtha, who
themselves were in the line of the great abhinavagupta. That
mantra-vAdin remarked to him that unless the first varNa was to assume
its natural role of leadership as the head of the puruSha from the
himaparvata-s to the mahodadhi the land would not recover from the
mlechCha-s. It is striking that Tilak was to use nearly the same
language some years down the line.
