+++
title = "A pAshupata inscription and some thoughts on the history of nyAya-vaisheShika"

+++
gotre .ananta samAhvaye bhava-dina-prakhyas-tapas-tejasA dR^iShTAdR^iSTa
vishuddha-karma-nirataH shrI-bhAvatejA guruH |  
AchAryodbhuta-kevalArtha-vachasA pA\~nchArthiko yaH sudhIH
kAma-krodhaja-varga-durga-vipina-ploShasya dAvAnalaH |  
shrutvA samastaagama-yogashAstraM vyAkhyAya cha nyAya-kaNAda-shAstraM
abhyasya yaH pAshupata cha yoga shivasya sAyojyam-avApa bodhAt |

TThe above verses in the shArdula-vikrIDita and upajAti meters are
contained in lines 5-8 of the Tewar stone inscription from the old city
of tripuri (13 Km from Jabalpur), which was inscribed on 17th June 1151
CE during the reign of the king gayAkarNa of the kalachuri (haihaya)
dynasty of the tripuri branch. The inscription begins like several
kalachuri inscriptions with the pa\~nchAkSharI mantra and then continues
in verse. It mentions a pAshupata AchArya named bhAvatejas of the ananta
gotra who is described specifically as a follower of the pA\~nchArthika
system (i.e. based on pAshupata sUtra-s). He said to have heard all the
teachings of the agama-s and yoga shAstra, expounded the nyAya and
vaisheShika (kaNAda) philosophies and practiced pAshupata yoga to attain
sAyujya with shiva. This point is of interest because it is clear cut
evidence that a northern/central Indian pAshupata AchArya was an
expounder of nyAya-vaisheShika. Around the same in the Andhra and
karNATa countries the relatives of these pAshupata, namely the
kAlAmukha-s of both the shakti and siMha pariShad-s mention being
exponents of the same philosophical systems. This suggests that the
common ancestor of the kAlAmukha-s of Southern India and the related
pAshupata-s of central and northern India were already both allied to
these darshana-s. Thus, the philosophical alliance with these darshana
occurred even before the diversification of the lAkulIsha pAshupata;
further, these might have even played a major role in the
nyAya-vaisheShika syncretism.

Another inscription of the kalachuri-s of the tripuri branch (the Gurgi
stone inscription) by the king kokalladeva-II describes the great
saiddhAntika AchArya name prashAnta-shiva patronized by this rAjan. The
Acharya is mentioned as installing shrines for umA, ardhanArIshvara,
skanda and images of vinAyaka and sarasvati near the gate of the shiva
shrine he was associated with. He is said to have mastered yogic Asana-s
in a secret place and interestingly having spent his time in the company
of those learned in the pa\~nchArthika texts. So, here we have the case
of a bona fide saiddhAntika shaiva who is explicitly described as being
associated with the pAshupata-s. This point is notable because from the
evidence of the niHshvAsa saMhitA we can see that the pAshupata-s were
evolutionary precursors of the saiddhAntika-s. This connection seems to
have been retained even later.

Now, the reason this is interesting is because of the famous
saiddhAntika commentator on the pAshupata sUtra-s vyoma-shiva who
composed the TIkA vyomavati after prashastapAda on the system of kaNAda.
He not only preserved those apparently lost words of kaNAda of great
purport “yad iha bhAvarUpaM tat sarvaM mayopasaMkhyAtavyam|” but also
developed the defense of vaisheShika against its earlier critics to
uphold the principle that every cognition has a counterpart in the
external world. Based on testimonia is quite likely that vyoma-shiva was
the student of sha\~Nkara the nyAyAyika and probably lived in the first
half of the 700s of the CE. This suggests that the saiddhAntika-s too
\[perhaps in part\] acquired the nyAya-vaisheShika system from their
pAshupata precursor or in course of their early interactions with the
pAshupata-s after their divergence. rAmakaNTha-II, a much later
saiddhAntika, makes a statement in the beginning of his commentary on
the mata\~ngaparameshvara that people have tried to interpret the
saiddhAntika shAstra-s using other philosophical systems like nyAya. But
he intends to give a purely saiddhAntika interpretation. When he says
this it is likely that he had in mind a group of nyAya-vaisheShika
theorists amongst the saiddhAntika-s, perhaps developing as an offshoot
of sha\~Nkara and vyoma-shiva’s endeavors. The extant of this connection
is hinted by the observation that authors external to the shaiva systems
often conflated them with nyAya and vaisheShika. The nAstIka guNaratna
in his ShaD-darshana-sammuchChaya equated nyAyAyika-s with pAshupata-s
and vaisheShika-s with saiddhAntika-s.

In 1013 CE the army of Islam led by Mahmud Ghaznavi entered Punjab; a
temple of shiva was destroyed in the place named Nardin by the Islamic
chroniclers. Then the accursed Sultan marched on Sthaneshvara (Thanesar)
in Haryana, a great center of pAshupata-s, and mAntrIka shaiva-s of both
the bhairava-srotas and Urdhva-srotas, and destroyed the temple. The
triumphant Moslems declare that the blood of Hindus flowed till the
stream turned red. Next in his path was Mathura, a center for Hindus of
various sects, and a major pAshupata center. The temples in the city
were flattened completely. Then Kanauj was attacked and a great temple
of umA-maheshvara was destroyed, and the Hindus slaughtered and
scattered in large numbers. Moving on to the great shaiva center of
Anahilapattana the Moslems devastated the city and burnt demolished the
temples. Finally, in the December of 1025 CE reached Somnath, the center
of the world of the pAshupata-s and saiddhAntika-s. It was destroyed
after a desperate struggle that left 50,000 Hindus dead. Mahmud’s
successor Muzaffar Ibrahim suddenly attacked the great jAlandhara pITha
(modern Jalandhar in Punjab) and savaged the city. In the words of his
chroniclers: “By the morning meal not one brAhmaNa was left alive or
free. Their heads were severed by our swordsmen. Their houses were
leveled to the ground with flaming fire”. This was just the beginning –
in the next 300 years all the major Hindu religious centers were already
attacked and most major Hindu kingdoms were completely destroyed (see
for example our earlier account on the destruction of the shaiva center
of rudramahAlaya). For another 350 years from that point on the army of
Islam repeatedly romped all over India, especially the north, destroying
Hindu temples systematically, where ever they were, and committing
genocide of Hindus. Despite these attacks the Hindus tenaciously hung
on, but the toll was severe.

As we have seen before, the rise of many medieval dynasties were closely
connected to pAshupata and saiddhAntika AchArya-s. This connection was
at its pinnacle when the whirlwind of Islam mangled North India. Despite
their ascetic leanings, these shaiva-s were metropolitan ascetics, with
most knowledge of the system concentrated in monastic scholars or
AchArya-s. With the destruction of the dynasties, systematic smashing of
the major holy centers and temples and targeted killing of AchArya-s by
the Moslems both saiddhAntika and pAshupata systems collapsed in North
India. Several retreated to the south and to fringe zones, but with
Khalji and Tughlaq’s invasions and then the horrors of the Bahmanids
even the south no longer offered steady royal patronage. These systems
were destroyed over much of India or survived in the fringes in a rather
diminished form. Then came the great Hindu struggle – the fight-back.
The one Rajasthan was spear-headed largely by the valor of Rajput kings
but they were unable, for a variety of reasons, to revive the past
systems to any level comparable to the past. In the south the revival
took place under new intellectual leadership with people like
vidyAraNya, vedAnta deshika and rAmadAsa who were inclined towards
vedAnta of different types or the newly dominant bhakti-mArga. In the
process what happened is very clear. nyAya and vaisheShika took a heavy
blow due to the fall of their primary proponents. This in my opinion
narrowed the focus of the philosophical development of India. We have
good evidence that vaisheShika was a major element for the development
of Indian medicine in its early phase. Its decline, I would go as far as
to state, actually affected the development of Indic medicine. In a
sense, the development of nava-nyAya moving away from the syncretic
nyAya-vaisheShika happened due to this break in tradition.

Finally, I must add that (in my opinion) the break in continuity did not
end Hindu creativity during the Moslem devastation as some Western and
Indic authors have felt – it continued rather vigorously in certain
parts of India. However, I do feel that the break did have a major
effect in reducing the intellectual community and, hence, the pool of
good ideas. It also set the clock back vis-à-vis new discussions. This
is clear when we look into the several new directions that did emerge in
the late medieval period. But two were of great significance – almost
trying to catch up for centuries of break in tradition – these were
works of vij\~nAna-bhikShu in the Northeast and of my co-ethnic, close
associate of my clan in ritual, and teacher of the illustrious tAntrIka
bhAskararAya in Thanjavur.
