+++
title = "Moonlight revelry, moonlight suffering and miTThu"

+++
My pitAshrI reminded that me that many moons ago on this particular full
moon we had lazed with our friends and clansmen on the terrace drinking
flavored milky hoping that shivAsha\~Nkarau would pass over head asking
if we were awake. Today, on this full moon night we were passing through
the dark alley, with the white disc above our head streaming the
nectarine beams. One corner of the mind was filled with suffering of the
grip of grahin, shadowed incessantly by the AtatAyin, and the terrifying
memory of the mAraNa prayoga that had rattled us before the AtatAyin
probed with a needle. The joys of the milk-drinking sessions on the
terrace seemed to be a distant, nay, a dream. We indeed wished for
somArudrA to bear us aid. Before leaving we read a couple of posts by
the learned scholar SDV on the work of miTThu (I felt a bit of a
coincidence here). Some time back, in response to a question by SRA and
also that jewel of the strI-varga I had looked up miTThu’s haMsavilAsa
for extracting a mantra-shloka to mahAdeva. R told me that they called a
shloka cited by miTThu to be the sadAshiva stuti and is recited to
worship him after the invocations with the prAsAda and/or chintAmaNi
mantra-s. This miTThu was an interesting character—he was a learned
sAmavedin smArta from the lATa country. As SDV is lucidly translating
[miTThu’s autobiographical verses](http://sarasvatam.blogspot.com/) on
his site, I will say no more on that (SDV feels there might be some
similarity between the nIlAmbaras mentioned by bhaTTa jayanta, the nyAya
philosopher, and miThThu’s system. Of course one should be very cautious
of any such relationship as the former are rather obscure, and linkage
of rather diverse courses such as smArta, saMgIta and kAma in miThThu’s
system was not out of character amongst the medieval tAntrika-s with a
smArta background. The rAsa part was perhaps more extreme and might
remind some of the nIlAmbara-s, but reading bhaTTatiri of the chera
country perhaps this was not unknown either).

I learned of him in a peculiar way. We had just a post or two ago
alluded to GK, who happened to be a successor of the famed tAntrika
lakShmaNa rANaDe, a coastal brAhmaNa of the maharATTa country. It was GK
who told us of a grotesque shrine owned by some Gujjus and asked us to
visit it during our journey to the godAvarI, kapAlIsha and tryambaka on
the day after dIpAvalI in 1990. We were then boarding in a Gujju rest
house of gargantuan proportions, attached to a peculiar mall-like temple
(the image of kumAra there was hidden behind an enclave so that women
might not see him even by mistake and there was a guard posted there to
ensure that their curiosity did not get better of them.). We were having
hell of time, also known as kAkakrIDA :-), with the riotous,
mirth-loving people of the lATa country for a good part of the day –
fire-works, ghee-dripping food and more. But mAtApitarau, detached from
such revelry of ours were seized by the pious instinct of needing to
visit some shrines. Our hosts were able to give directions to reach that
shrine mentioned by GK. It was a neo-tantric shrine and its sthApaka-s
were either successors or biological descendents of miTThu of
haMsavilAsa fame who practiced a syncretism of shrIvidyA with the
savitrI. Of course the lATa shrIkula tradition is of considerable
importance from a parochial viewpoint because of its transmission
amongst a stream of my coethnics. In the drAviDa country there are many
different traditions of shrIvidyA surviving and generally secret. One of
the highly influential lineages is that of the illustrious bhAskararAya
makhIndra or bhAsurAnandanAtha. He acquired his pUrNa-dIkSha in ShoDaShI
and beyond from shivadatta shukla of the lATa country. He was also known
for his emphasis of the sAvitrI-pa\~nchadashI syncretism and was also
called a vAmAcharin by those more oriented towards the traditions
preserved by the sha\~Nkara maTha. The hamsavilAsa’s author miTThu
appears to belong to a similar tradition.

At an earlier time we were experiencing the bhoga of the kAmikA, we
hence turned to those verses cited by miTThu like:  
* bhagasya maithune devi yat sukhaM mama jAyate |  
na tat sukhaM japair homair na dAnais-tapasA.pi vA ||*(of course it is
much longer prashaMsa of maithuna that might not be appreciated by a
prudish modern Ayatollah)

But now we looked at the sky – there was neither the milky beverage in
our hand nor the dUtI in our embrace; only the pain of the grAhin’s
grip. The pains of naraka seemed closer than the pleasure of 9 types of
chumbana or 8 types of Ali\~Ngana. We had become a renunciate. Will the
last 6 arrows be needed to save us?
