+++
title = "Mhasvad: The lost western chAlukya-s and the exploits of kAla-bhairava"

+++
In the halcyon days, when our knowledge of chAlukyan history was still
sketchy, we were seated on the parapet at the foot of the vAnara hillock
and yarning away after having cut a monotonous zoology lecture. It is
for these pleasures of life I am still thankful to the much maligned
Indian education system (imagine if this could ever have been done in
the structured and over-bearing American education system). With us were
shANDilya and shUdra-shreShTha to whom I was expressing my idea of
finding an old chAlukyan outpost in the hamlet of Mhasvad (pronounced
mhAsvAD). S and SS had taught me an important lesson in life- enjoy
pleasures when you can for who knows when they might go away and you
fall head-long like nahuSha or yayAti. S and SS immediately suggested
that we should make a trip to Mhasvad and check things out. SS who knew
precisely how to manage such adventures suggested that rather than
taking a direct bus we should couple it with a visit Satara and then
proceed to Mhasvad (all part of the ancient chAlukyan kingdom). As per
SS’s plans we set out precisely timing our dinner at Satara and then
catching sleep and proceeding the next morning to Mhasvad in an eastward
flourish on the Satara-Pandharpur road. The hamlet is located on the
banks of a shallow river the mANga\~NgA, which empties into the bhIma.

The large temple of Mhasvad is a historian’s delight. It was built
during the rule of Shahu by funds provided by the Maratha ruler to a
certain bALoji dubaL a local chieftain. It is clearly built atop an
older larger temple complex. Ruins of a temple from this older complex
are seen immediately in front of the current temple. In front of these
ruins we noticed a slab with a nearly 1000 year old image of shiva
riding a horse and battling an asura. Even in the current temple the
image of bhairava is one where he rides a horse with a huge sword. We
were reminded of the opening mantra of the shUlagava ritual to rudra,
where rudra is invoked charging on a white horse. In the current
temple’s AvarNa we noticed a slab with an inscription in Kannada
script. Epigraphic Indica provided a translation of the same: In 1138 CE
the kalachUri king bijjala from Mangalvedha who was a vassal of the
chAlukya king jagadekamalla of Kalyani gave a brahmadeya grant of to a
brAhmaNa of the kapi gotra (pravara R^iShi-s named) to provide daily
naivedyam and upachAra for the li\~Nga of siddheshvara which was housed
in the original temple \[The belief is that the current li\~Nga is the
same as that of the original siddeshvara. Even today numerous local
people, including tribals and nomadic herders still remember and
fervently worship the shiva of this shrine as shidoba\]. The place is
described as a mahiSha-vADA or a buffalo pen in the inscription,
mentioning that it was surrounded by 12 smaller herder settlements. The
modern temple had certain shUdra priests who perform services for most
of the visitors to the shrine.

There a small shop sold a certain “sthala-mAhAtmyaM” which was printed
in a vulgar Maharatti. The mAhAtmyaM had some interesting stories not
found in any canonical purANa:  
“Originally the place was in the uninhabited daNDakAraNya. There a
terrible demon name mahiShAsura lived. He was killed here by mahAlakShmI
in the famous battle (devI mAhAtmyaM) and the place came to be known as
mahiSha-vADA. Then in the vicinity a new asura succeeded mahiSha. He was
shoNita-daitya, grew uncontrollably in size and caused great terror.
From shiva emerged a terrifying being — his name was kAla-bhAirava he
first descended in kAshI on the banks of the real ga\~NgA and he then
traveled as a nAtha mendicant to appear in the buffalo hamlet on the
banks of the mAN-ga\~NgA. He held a trident and a Damaru. Here rudra
told him that he would not be able to kill the demon unless he lived the
life of a householder and followed the norms of life. He agreed and
asked where he could find a wife. rudra told him that in pAtAla lived
the venomous serpentiform viShNu—shesha-nArAyaNa, whose daughter
siddha-yogeshvarI would be a suitable wife.

So kAla-bhairava set off to pAtAla in the quest of his bride. The road
to pAtAla was supposed to be a journey on land to Andhra followed by a
descent through a hole there to pAtAla. As he was journeying to Andhra
he came across two fierce goddesses – mArI (mArI-AI in the vernacular)
and jagadambA (yelamma-AI in the vulgar Maharatti). They said this young
fellow needs help. So mArI gave the bhairava a stone and asked him to
throw it at his enemies and jagadambA gave him a kerchief to wipe his
face if he ever felt he was dying. Taking these he went to pAtAla. There
he was confronted with the ajagara hordes of shesha-nArAyaNa. After a
fierce fight with them he was hard pressed when he threw the stone of
mArI at them. They were all scattered by it and ran away from
sheshanArAyaNa’s abode. The kAla-bhairava declared to shesha that he
wanted shesha’s daughter, yogeshvarI (jogu-bAi in the vernacular).
shesha first asked him to first sit down and eat. shesha bit into the
food before serving kAla-bhairava. Upon eating the food kAla-bhairava
felt dizzy and thought he might die, but he remembered jagadaMbA’s
kerchief and wiped his face with it. On doing so the poison of shesha
was countered and he was fine again and asked for yogeshvarI.
sheshanArAyaNa said he could get her if he could enter a rocky chamber,
with no doors, inside which she lived. Hurling his trident and
shattering the rock he got in and was dazzled by the appearance of
siddha-yogeshvarI. He asked her to reduce brilliance and when she did so
he married her. Now that he was married he could pursue the job of
killing the daitya.

This frightful bhairava arrived on a horse and attacked shoNita-daitya.
After a fierce fight the asura was pierced in the chest by a trident of
kAla-bhairava. The wrathful bhairava then struck his head off with his
sword. Hence, they worshiped the terrifying bhairava there as
siddheshvara, holding the asura’s head. The bhairava asked for a reward
from the deva-s for his service. The deva-s and the great goddess
Adi-mAyA-shakti promised that they would institute a kalasha to worship
kAla-bhairava from the pratipad to the dvAdashi of the kArttika shukla
pakSha.”

The mAhAtmyam added that the bALoji who built the current temple was a
descendant of the chAlukyas from brahmApurI (Karhad) further south. He
used to come to Mhasvad repeatedly to worship the bhairava there. He
decided to build a temple for the image in the ruins of the old shrine.
The temple was finally completed by his son. Near the temple there was
an old vIra-kal showing a daNDanAyaka who was killed in the defense of
young ladies who were being abducted by the marauding tribes. We
wandered further up and found another little river coming in to join
mANga\~NgA. We could not find its name. On its bank were a cluster of
shrines. There was one to sheshanArAyaNa (locally called nAgoba), one to
kAla-bhairava (with a sword, trident, a shield and a skull-bowl,
accompanied by a dog) and uniconic rocks to yelammA-AI and marI-AI.
There we saw another large stone slab with a remarkable relief of
kAla-bhairava and siddha-yogeshvarI, both wielding bows and hunting a
boar and antelope with a pack of dogs.

The original bhairava worship under the kalachUris and chAlukyas was
during the height of the royal patronage to other mantra-mArga shaiva-s
in addition to the siddhAnta shaiva-s. After the decline of the
chAlukya-s there was a period of cattle raids before the yAdava-s
restored a semblance of order. The destruction of the yAdava-s by the
Islamic assault was followed by a brief revival under the Kalyani
chAlukyas who bravely resisted the army of Islam. But the terrible Jihad
of the Bahmanid’s in 1469 under Khwaja Mahmud Gawan devastated the
chAlukya-s and destroyed their strongholds and temples, returning most
of the Mhasvad region to forest. But, strikingly the memory of their old
shrine seems to have remained in the descendants of the chAlukya-s in
maharAShTra who rebuilt this temple after Islam was rolled back from the
region. That is the origin of the modern temple. East of Pune there is
another place Sonari, where shoNIta-daitya is also said to have been
killed, where an aShTa-bhairava temple is seen. Again it was rebuilt in
the Peshva period after an older chAlukya shrine was destroyed by the
Moslems. It retains the 8 fold symmetry of the old temple and there are
different bhairava-s like asitA\~Nga and ruru in the niches, but the
local devotees or priests know nothing about the 8 bhairava-s of
mantra-mArga. While the old deities survive, the bhairava of
mantra-mArga seems to have passed from the rahasya-s of mantra-mArga
shaiva shAsana to the folk religion of the local shepherds and goatherds
who replaced the original buffalo breeders of the region.
