+++
title = "The karnATa-s in Tirabhukti andxa0Nepal"

+++
Sometimes an exploration of the evolution of the mantra-shAstra leads to
a historical digression. So it was when we were trying to trace the
history of the navadurgA class of texts in north-eastern India. We were
urged to record a note in regard to the activities of the chAlukya
revival that spread out of Kalyani. After the fall of the original
chAlukya empire, which had carved a place for itself in history with the
activities of pulakeshin-II, it was revived again under taila-II. From
then on, till the beginning of their decline due to the crushing defeats
at the hands of the kAkatIya chiefs of the Telugu country, the
chAlukya-s where one of the greatest powers of India. Sadly, due to
geography and possibly confused thinking of Hindu rulers the might of
the chAlukya-s was rarely directed against Moslem threat that was
beginning to make its presence felt. Rather, the chAlukya-s waged
spectacular wars against other powerful Hindu rulers and advanced their
might. Right from their revival the chAlukya-s started expanding in both
north and south. taila-II beginning around 975 CE invade the seized
territories from the choLa uttama in the Tamil country, in the West took
the Konkans from the shilahara-s and in the north invaded Gujarat, Malwa
and Chedi seizing territories from them, and killed the paramAra king
mu\~nja. His successor satyAshraya defeated the great rAjarAja of the
Tamil country in the battles of Kurnool and Guntur. His son jayasiMha-II
defeated the combined attack of two of the greatest Indian kings, rAja
bhojadeva paramAra and rAjendra choLa, from North and South. His elder
sister akkadevI was one of the few female warriors who actually led the
chAlukya armies in battle on the southern front. Then came the great
chAlukya-choLa struggle in which the choLa brothers rAjAdhirAja and
rAjendradeva ground the chAlukya-s to dust (though the former was killed
on the field). rAjendradeva’s son vIrarAjendra also smashed the
chAlukya-s repeatedly and almost destroyed their kingdom when he
ironically gave them a second life. He married his daughter to
vikramAditya-VI, one of the young sons of his chAlukya enemy
someshvara-deva-I. vikramAditya-VI with his father-in-law’s help took
over the chAlukya throne after defeating his elder brother who occupied
the throne (1076-1126 CE). There he ruled for 50 years studded with
numerous campaigns in an attempt to unify the whole of India under the
karnATa empire. He sent his armies to invade Gujarat, Rajasthan, Sindh,
the Moslem occupied territories of the Punjab, Vidarbha, Bihar, Bengal
and Nepal. He also sent a navy to invade Shrilanka. Several of
inscriptions describe him as conquering these regions, and ever since
till the end of these chAlukya-s we notice the kings mentioning such a
list. However, modern historians have doubted these as bombastic claims.

Nevertheless, I realized that the solitary but long reign of chAlukya
vikramAditya-VI was indeed the last attempt at the unification of the
whole of greater India by a Hindu ruler before the Islamic interlude
(his son was someshvara-deva-III of mAnasollAsa fame). There are several
points in support of this contention:  
1\) bilhaNa, the Kashmirian poet joined the court of vikrama, and
describes him as the foremost Hindu ruler of the era. His coming from
Kashmir to the South Indian court at this time was largely due to the
opportunities being available rather than invasions of the Mohammedans
as in later times. He composed the biographical vikramA\~nka-charita on
vikrama.  
2\) We see an interlude in the eloquence of the historians of the
Islamic jihad and a surprising loss of the Islamic foothold in certain
regions of the Southwestern Punjab. We posit that this and the delay in
any further Islamic incursions into India corresponds to the chAlukyan
offensive on the turuShka-s recorded in their inscriptions and the
narrative of bilhaNa.  
3\) The sena dynasty in Bengal and the karnATa dynasty in Tirabhukti and
Nepal were founded by kShatriya commanders from Karnataka.  
4\) There is a coeval rise of navadurga worship in the karnATa and Nepal
regions in this period and a sudden influence of chAlukyan Hindu
iconography in Mithila, Nepal and Bengal.  
5\) The widespread popularity of mitAkShara as a system of Hindu law –
it was composed by vij\~nAneshvara in vikrama’s court.

In the early 1090s chAlukya vikramAditya-VI appears to have dispatched a
large army under his young general nAnyadeva to invade the North East.
Upon reaching Bihar the brilliant karnATa general conquered Tirabhukti
and made it is his administrative and military outpost. From there he
launched a remarkable campaign in Nepal, first taking Patan, then
Katmandu and Bhatgaon and unified the whole of Nepal under his control
in 1094 CE. With the conquest of Nepal, nAnyadeva expunged once and for
all any kind political control that Tibet attempted to exercise over
Nepal and brought it firmly within the Hindu sphere. nAnyadeva was a
scholar on Hindu theatrics and composed a commentary on the nATyashAstra
known as the bharata-bhAShya. It contains one of the only surviving
records of some of the older rAga-s before divergence of Northern and
Southern classical styles in Indian music and musical compositions known
as pANikA. nAnyadeva’s successors who eventually went on to rule a
separate kingdom in Tirabhukti where also maternal ancestors of the
malla kings who eventually came to be the main rulers of Nepal in the
medieval period.

Another karnATa army under a general of the sena family invaded Bengal
from the north and planted themselves firmly in modern W.Bengal. One of
their young warriors, vijayasena, then conquered Bengal to found the
sena dynasty there. Thus, the generals of vikarmAditya-VI were founders
of future dynasties of northern India. The possible role of the
unification under vikramAditya-VI in transmitting the paippalAda shAkha
of AV to these regions needs to be considered. This is especially so in
light of the comment in the prapa\~ncha-hR^idaya that the paippalAda
shAkha was found in southern India.
