+++
title = "Retrospections on the curtain-raiser to the long past Great Warxa01"

+++
It was a year before the great abhichAra of dashAnta had struck us. We
noticed that our forgettable acquaintance satya-druha who had been
cursed by the deva-s was caught by something, much like bhIma by the
serpentine nahuSha. We soon came across that tantalizing elixir of
atibala, drinking which we were committed to the long journey that
finally ended in shadows of raurava. Immediately after we had drunk that
elixir we experienced that very night the highs of mahollAsa, but on the
other hand we were also seized by the dreadful ugra-dADhika. Due to his
leonine roars, the geometric intuitions which we had acquired till then
deserted us, much like head of the makha leaving the deva-s. We were
spiraling towards a pit of ignorance, surrounded by fiendish companions
like palita-tvacha, bR^ihat-sphik, sphig-shiras and pANDu-kR^isha. Then,
the primary inspirations filtered in like first rays of dawn banishing
the last dark hour:  
1\) We began to enter the minds of our ancestors the mantra dR^iShTa-s
of yore for the first time. The deva-s started unveiling themselves: the
upward blaze of agni in the three stations, the power of vAyu, the
all-encompassing indra, the natural conservations of mitra, the natural
laws whose violations are punished by varuNa, the exhilaration of
knowing the natural law in aryaman, the swift transmission of the
maruts, the dissolution of natural bonds through their father, the
archer rudra, the light of savitA, the warmth of puShA, distribution of
energies through bhaga, the flow of time in viShNu, the Milky way and
the earthly flows of sarasvatI, the chemistry of the ashvins, the clear
reflection by bR^ihaspati, the revolutions and the cycles of the
observable cosmos in soma and tvaShTa with the R^ibhus, the world axis
and its precessions in Aja-ekapAd and ahir-budhnya, the origins in aditi
and then the mysterious prajApati called ka, and national identity in
the 3 goddess ilA, sarasvatI and bhAratI

2\) Then the exploits of the great pinAkin-mahAdeva came to us. Having
escaped from the worldly pursuit of riches for which our amAtya had much
hope, we found ourselves in the dark defile between the two stacks where
the wondrous deeds of rudra were to reveal themselves from the rudra
saMhitA – the original core of the shiva purANa. The power of rudra was
felt by us. We caught a glimpse of the greatness of kumara then, but we
had to wait some more time till the great skanda vidyA manifested in all
glory to us.

3)We began a ceaseless exploration of the secrets of life –
relationships between numerous single-celled eukaryotes, a primitive
form of the animal-fungus hypothesis, lateral gene transfer from
bacteria to eukaryotes, relationship of various DNA viral lineages. A
full realization of these was to come only later, some of them as
recently as a few months ago and others if we survive in the future.

4\) We continued our exploration of the heavens – the observation of SS
Cygni crossing into the 8th magnitude through our 3 inch refractor was
our first true encounter with a cataclysmic variable- a dwarf nova. It
was a heroic struggle, unaided by our companion the vaishya shreShTha,
from Rho Cygni we advanced to 75 Cygni. Then we marked the 3 faint stars
forming the comparison for SS Cygni – they were at the limit of our
scope – barely visible. It was in their midst that SS Cygni flared up.

Then we went daily to the place where the greatest patriot in the
struggle against the Britons, Tilak, had taken the first steps towards
national education. Our purpose was to practice arms for the impending
war. We wandered friendless for some time until we ran into two mundane
but kindly souls, lambaka and vidruma. Both asked me about that
mysterious whirlpool which had sucked in satya-druha. We decided to lead
them to it and soon found ourselves in the path leading to the temple of
The god. We saw the gleaming trident rising from its spire and the horns
of shailAdi at its base. There we overtook the whirlpool. Due to our
vrata-s we stood firm, but lambaka saw the very face of the black son of
vivasvAn, while vidruma was brushed by the broomstick of jyeShThA. We
stood still for a moment wondering whether to proceed on or try to
salvage our companions. Within us our decision-making process showed us
the image of kAla, with lambaka and vidruma rushing into, even as arjuna
saw the sUta-putra, droNa and other rushing into its mouth. We left them
to be and moved on. We heard a voice from the abyss that our turn would
come too.

We rode our swift ashva and moved rapidly in the vigor of our youth. As
we stuck to our vrata, we were able to quell the dangers of the
whirlpool. Then the period at Tilak’s buildings came to an end. We were
told that the lines for the real war were being drawn – we saw our foes
headed by sphig-shiras and pANDu-kR^isha raring for battle. Just then we
were seized by a terrible abhichAra. For 30 days we were assailed by it.
We realized that all our prowess and brahman power had seeped out of us
even as the xvarena departing from an ancient Iranian king. We were in
utter fear and even unable to lift our bow, leave alone marching to the
battle field. Hence we humbly approached out first AchArya. He lead us
to the mantra of that mistress of the kula path – we felt the flow of
prakR^iti. The resplendent mayUkha-s emanating from the vidyA filled us
with utter amazement — we could glimpse but a fraction of the full glory
of the kula path experienced by the adepts, but that was enough for us
to appreciate its greatness. Very gradually, and only after sAdhana, and
acquisition of higher and higher states of knowledge did we see the
unfolding of some of the mayUkha-s: uDDIshvarI, who shines in the
oDDIyAna pITha, the dazzling beauty of jaleshvarI who shine in
jalandhara, the full satisfaction of pUrNeshvarI who blazes in
pUrNagiri, kAmeshvarI with upwelling of the shR^ingAra-rasa, the all
encompassing gaganA with the great knowledge in the sky, svarasA with
that knowledge which led us on the higher quests and mati. It was then
we also had a glimpse of the rahasya-s of chanDogra-kAlI, the great
shUlinI, mahA-nIlA with her fierce hordes and the terrifying shivadUtI.
