+++
title = "Some issues ofxa0tradition"

+++
In discussions with R and some others a few topics have repeatedly come
up. While I am tempted to delve into them in depth, I feel my study of
the data on these matters is inadequate to present as definitive a view
as I would like. But I still cannot hold back the temptation to place
few points here, despite my incomplete study. The main topics in
question are:  
1\) What is the origin of shrIvidyA and what were the original forms of
the shrIvidyA mantra-s? The pa\~nchadashI and its derivative were
definitely not the earliest forms, and we have briefly discussed
pre-pa\~nchadashI shrIvidyA and bAlA which were earlier. In a sense the
initiation pattern starting with bAlA and going to higher pa\~nchadashI
derivatives actually mirrors history. The now declined tripura-bhairavI
form of shrIvidyA with 9 nityA-s (e.g. as in shArada-tilaka) was an
intermediate element in historical development. This is true of many
tantric traditions where ritual and initiation patterns follow
historical development (as in biology we observe ontology following
evolution). abhinavagupta in developing anuttara-trika from the existing
trika systems actually consciously follows this pattern. The roots of
shrIvidyA lie in the early kula texts, which also spawned other kula
traditions like kAli-kula, samayA-kula and the poorly studied tvaritA.  
2\) Is prapa\~nchasAra’s shrIvidyA the pa\~nchadashI? While the
commentarial tradition might hint the tripura-bhairavI form, the root
tantra itself seems to primarily follow the bAlA mantra.  
3\) Was mokSha the original goal of shrIvidyA? It was just one of the
many goals generally acknowledged by kaula systems.  
4\) Was advaita vedAnta connected to shrIvidyA from its inception? Is
the mahApaduka mantra a “genuine” aspect of shrIvidyA? Are sha\~Nkara
and gauDapAda really connected to shrIvidyA?  
advaita vedAnta has its origins in one set of the diverse ideas
presented by philosophers from the vedic period. Its subsequent
development stood on the great philosophical exegesis of sha\~Nkara’s
school. Tradition also connects sha\~Nkara’s school with a certain form
of shrIvidyA, which tends to ignore or remove the kula doctrines and
this is certainly the form of shrIvidyA practiced by modern initiates
affiliated with sha\~Nkara’s tradition. But there are some issues
amongst these initiates: 1) Many of the modern initiates while very
knowledgeable about their paddhati-s and mantra prayoga-s have a
relatively poor understanding of the root sources: the diverse kula
texts including the root tantra-s of shrIvidyA. 2) Many aspirants as
well as lay devotees actively practice texts like lalitA-sahasranAmaM
and saundaryalaharI but do not recognize or in some cases deny the kula
doctrine at their core. 3) They pay tremendous importance to the
mahApaduka mantra which incorporates upaniShadic mahAvAkya-s \[\*1\].
There is no evidence that the mahApaduka mantra was central to any kula
teaching. But it does resemble the ene-mene-dapphe-daDapphe \[\*2\] of
bauddha-s being incorporated as a mantra.

From early times the brAhmaNa-s migrated out of their smArta baseline to
develop new systems of philosophy or knowledge. In some cases they
converted entirely to these systems, like the nAstIka-matas, or in other
cases created versions that spanned a spectrum from purely smArta to
something which might contradict smArta norms\[\*3\]. Likewise, in
shrIvidyA’s development from early on there were forms in line with
smArta norms (e.g. prapa\~nchasAra and shAradA-tilaka) as well as those
transgressing smArta norms (e.g. parashurAma kalpa sUtra-s; though from
the very adoption of a mImAMsaka style is indicative of the brahminical
origins of the PKS), both systematized by Brahmins of ultimately smArta
origin. The pa\~ncha-makara might not necessarily be adopted by those
who remain smArta because their norms are violated by the 5 ma-s, but
the principle of kAmakala worship and the ShaT-chakra-s, both of which
are drawn plainly from the original kula doctrine, are retained at the
heart of shrIvidyopAsana by even these smArta-s. But nowhere in any of
their early sources do we find the mahApaduka and upaniShadic
statements. Now the smArta-s appear to have created another set of
Agama-s much closer to their own pattern of worship – the shubhAgama
pa\~nchaka. But interestingly these hardly have any popularity compared
to the root tantra-s which follow the unadulterated kula doctrine. Now I
have only seen fragments of these and these are clearly later in
provenance than the early kula texts.

advaita of the early kaula-s of matsyendra’s successors does not mean
the same as the vedantic advaita. There a-dvaitam appears (at least to
me) to be interpreted as the lack of duality in worship – thereby
allowing the more kaula elements (the pure-impure distinction breaks
down). So the vedantic advaita does not in anyway appear to be inherent
to the kula doctrine.

So, in conclusion, I believe the evidence favors the advaitins of the
sha\~Nkara tradition have only secondarily adopted shrIvidyA and are
behind the creation of the mahApAduka mantra. They have even gone to the
extent of claiming that one can get the guru-status or a higher level
mantrAdhikAra only with this mahApAduka dIkSha. My personal opinion is
that every one is entitled to their own tradition. So, if some one is
affiliated with a sha\~Nkara maTha they may follow their maThAdhipati
and Acharya-s, but the claims regarding mahApaduka are not binding on
all tAntrIka-s.

\[\*1\] praj\~nAnaM brahma; tat-tvam-asi; ayaM AtmA; brahma aham
brahmAsmi; .  
\[\*2\] dharmatrAta rendering the words of the tathAgata in devabhASha
states in the udAnavarga: ene mene tathA dapphe daDapphe cheti |
sarvasmAd viratiH pApAd duHkhasyAnto niruchyate || 26.18  
\[\*3\] Thus we see Brahmins of originally smArta origin diversifying in
their practice into, for example, non-mantra mArga pa\~nchAyatana
shivopAsana with otherwise purely smArta norms, smArta mantra-mArga
shivopAsana (as in prapa\~ncha-sAra), lAkula-s (and their kAlAmukha
successors) who observed smArta norms but additional unique forms of
shivopAsana, saiddhAntika-s who followed shivadharma in addition to all
the smArta norms (though considering shivadharma primary) and
bhairavAchAra mantra-mArgin-s who transgressed smArta norms. Thus, in
these diverse movements the scholastic tradition emerged from the smArta
ranks.
