+++
title = "j~nAnavajra"

+++
![Zanabazar
(j\~nAnavajra)](https://i1.wp.com/farm3.static.flickr.com/2268/2478022493_24b13bd8d4_o.jpg)

j\~nAnavajra (Mongolian: oender-gegen zanabazar), descendent of Chingiz
Kha’Khan via Tusheet Khan and Kandjamts Khatun was undoubtedly one of
the greatest figures in Central Asia after his illustrious ancestors.
j\~nAnavajra saw himself as the merger of two lineages of the tradition
of the bauddha kaula tradition. The first of these is traced to the
brahminical nAstika kaula tantric vAgIshvarakIrti from vikramashIla in
the 800s of CE, who composed several stotra-s to tArA and founded the
mR^ityu-hAraka tArA prayoga. From him the tradition eventually passed to
the kShatriya tantric dIpA\~Nkara-shrIj\~nAna, who transmitted it to the
upachIna-s of Tibet. He composed the famed ekavimshati tArA stotra, one
of the sublime stotra-s to the devI. From his Tibetan successors it
passed to the Mongol j\~nAnavajra, who was aged 14 at the time of his
dIkSha. His kula-dUti was dorjiinnal-jirmaa. j\~nAnavajra also believed
that he received a second transmission of the kaula doctrine innately
because he felt he was a reincarnation of the Tibetan Lama tAranAtha,
who himself traced his lineage from dIpA\~Nkara-shrIj\~nAna. tAranAtha
had written the famous work on the origin of the tArA tantra-s. Beyond
being one of the greatest of the Mongolian tantrics, j\~nAnavajra’s role
was profound in spreading Sanskrit scholarship in Mongolia, composing
several new stotra-s in Sanskrit, contributions to Mongolian music,
discursions on tantric texts and the invention of a new Mongolian
script, Soyombo, to allow accurate accommodation of Sanskrit phonetics
in the Mongolian context. j\~nAnavajra also transmitted a peculiar
tantric text termed the guhyAgnichakra that is now lost in India in its
original. This text preserves material from the now lost ancient kaumAra
tantra-s. He often visited the Burkhan Khaldun Mountain, where his
ancestor Chingiz Kha’Khan often journeyed to seek the aid of the
original Mongol deity Koeke Moengke Tengri.

The real significance of j\~nAnavajra was his art – it was one of the
last of the great examples of the artistic expression of the
mantra-shAstra. This was something lost in part in even in the Hindu
world outside of Nepal. j\~nAnavajra’s remarkably prefect productions of
images of devatA-s following the dhyAna shlokha-s of their sAdhana-s
literally help the dhyAna come alive. A key to the practice of the
mantra at one level is the dhyAna or dhAraNI producing a persistent
image of the devatA for the sAdhaka. A sAdhana mUrti made per the
specifications can produce this effect directly to the practicing
deshika and can raise the sAdhAna towards perfection by its very
presence. It may be considered a direct expression of the mantra and is
a tremendous – only a few master artists can produce such sAdhana
mUrti-s that can produce the effect of the mantra on their own.
j\~nAnavajra’s work it the epitome of such productions – being a great
tantric himself, he was able to achieve this perfection that is one of
its kind. His greatest pieces were of course the 21 forms of tArA as
invoked in the ekavimshati tArA stotra (including that identified with
karNamoTini), chakrasaMvara conjoined with vajravArAhI and vajradhara.

Of these the image of chakrasaMvara conjoined with vajravArAhI is of
great importance to the Astika deshika, because of the closeness of the
early laghushamvara tantra, the chakrasaMvara tantra, and the later
chakrasaMvarodaya tantra followed by j\~nAnavajra’s and his predecessors
to the early yoginI tantra-s of the kula path and the shaiva bhairava
tantra-s. A study of these tantra-s reveals their derivation from the
bhairava tantra-s that were collected in the mantra pITha alluded to by
abhinavagupta. It becomes clear that the depiction of chakrasaMvara and
vajravArAhI is the cognate svachChandabhairava conjoined with
aghoreshvarI from the svachChanda-bhairava tantra. Their maNDala of
yoginI-s is drawn from the siddhayogeshvarI-mata. The prayoga-s of
vajravArAhI and her depictions closely follow those of the glorious
kaula tantra the yoginI-jAla-shaMbara. In this context it is interesting
to note that the name of the composer of the primary prayoga paddhati of
chakrasaMvara conjoined with vajravArAhI (i.e. vajravArAhI sAdhana) is
umApatideva. The perfect sAdhana-mUrti-s of svachChanda-bhairava in the
form conjoined with aghoreshvarI have become exceptionally rare or
extinct in India – but in j\~nAnavajra’s chakrasaMvara we have a
template to conceive the iconography of this devatA if form quite close
to the original.

[Mongolian recitation of the karaNDavyUha and avalokiteshvara
shaDakSharI
sampuTikaraNa](https://app.box.com/s/vqap31malovx4pws83rtdqidbewewrkm)
