+++
title = "Some thoughts on medieval Sanskrit authors amongst ourxa0co-ethnics"

+++
Our co-ethnics represent one of the last great waves of brahminical
settlers to the Southern country – a rather continuous process happening
over 2500 years. Among them were many students of the shAstra-s,
creators of sAhitya-s, vedic ritualists and more secretly transmitters
of tantric lore. They were at the heart of what might be called one of
the final waves of Sanskrit creativity before the transition to the
“modern” era. Their Sanskrit creativity partially overlaps in temporal
terms with that of their more westerly neighbors the Nambuthiri-s, whose
efflorescence spawned one of the greatest endogenous scientific and
mathematical developments in Hindu thought. Their activities also
partially overlapped in temporal terms with the Sanskrit creativity in
the va\~Nga country resulting in the evolution of nyAya thought in a
peculiar new direction – the navadvIpa school. There are several names
among our medieval co-ethnics, whose productivity spans a wide range of
topics. Some of these represent interesting and unusual mental feats.
One such is the form of poetry known of viloma-kAvya – i.e. a poem which
makes sense when read in both forward and reverse direction.  
For example:  
Forward (describes rAmachandra):  
taM bhUsUtA-muktiM udAra-hAsaM vande yato bhavya-bhavaM dayA-shrIH |  
Reverse (describes kR^iShNa):  
shrIyAdavaM bhavya-bha-toya-devaM saMhAra-dA-muktim utAsubhUtAM ||

Two such works shabdArthachintAmaNi by chidambara kavi of Thanjavur (and
in it from our same ancestral agrahAra) and yAdava-rAghavIya of
veNkaTAdhvarin (notable vedic ritualist who performed soma rites in
addition) from Kanchi were produced in the 1600s.

One of the greatest names among these was appayya dIkShita – the center
of many an apocryphal tale, to which we will add. \[This is not
apocryphal\] His grandfather nR^isiMha \[acchan\] dIkShita was an
adviser of the emperor kR^iShNadeva rAya of vijayanagara. kR^iShNadeva
was a man of many women, including scholarly ones among them who could
write decent Sanskrit poetry. With one such wife he had gone to see the
image of viShNu in the temple of varadarAja at Kanchipuram. acchan saw
the beauty of kR^iShNadeva’s wife and composed verse. In this he stated
that having seen kR^iShNadeva’s wife viShNu looked for a moment at the
kaustubha to make sure that shrI had not left him to stand by
kR^iShNadeva. So kR^iShNadeva named him vakShasthAlAcharya after the
vakShasthala where the kausthubha rests. He composed Sanskrit lyrics on
viShNu at varadarAja which were apparently used in the spring festival
at Kanchi. He was an advanced vedic ritualist and performed multiple
soma sacrifices. His second wife was a shrIvaiShNava woman of the family
of shrIvaikuNThAchArya, which included devote vaiShNava-s and some
expert pA\~ncharAtra tantrics. Through her he had 8 sons who were
learned brAhmaNa-s and founded agrahAra-s.

His 5th son, rangarAja-adhvarin was a great soma sacrificer and
extraordinary student of the shAstra-s. He adopted an interesting
philosophical position which accommodated vaiSheshika, nyAya, mImAmsa
and advaita with the last as the overarching structure. He attacked
bauddha philosophies and also was quite strong in his criticism of
sAMkhya. He modified yoga in his own way to accommodate it within his
philosophical framework. He performed the most grand vishvajit soma
sacrifice.

His elder son was vinAyaka-subrahmaNya, who became famous as appayya. He
overlapped with the reign of veNkaTapati of Penukonda who was in the
midst of a life and death struggle against the Islamic Jihad that we
have discussed in length before. veNkaTapati had patronized appayya and
honored him at his court. This in no small measure illustrates the
importance of the post-Talikota struggle of the last Vijayanagaran
rulers in providing a safe haven for Hindu intellectual activity. His
grand-nephew was the illustrious Sanskrit writer and minister nIlakaNTha
dIkShita. One of his sons was gIrvaNendra who was imparted a kaumAra
rahasya by my ancestor. gIirvaNendra wrote a kaumAra sAhitya known as
kArttikeya-vijayaM.
