+++
title = "gulikAkrIDA: la~NkAvijaya"

+++
The sunlit shores of la\~NkA, just like the beaches of Southern Saxony
where the peerless pirates of emperor Ponting roam like fork-tongued
monitors, have been a charnel ground for the Hindu armies over the ages.
They have been thrashed over and over again by the great island pirates
led by the likes of the corpulent heroes, dulIpa mendisa and
raNatu\~nga, and the mauler from Matara, jayasUrya. Just as in history
the armies and navies of kulottu\~Nga and kumAra kaMpaNa faltered at the
island frontier, so also modern nausenA-s in the AngalIka gulikAkrIDA
had sunk like the efforts of kha’khan Kublai before the kamikazes of
Nippon. In the recent past the Hindu armies have been involved in
uncertain encounters in the extended battles under their veteran field
gunner of the karnATa country. In course of these encounters the four
great warriors of the yesteryears, the rAjA of Mumbai, the rAjA of
Bengaluru, the va\~Nga king and the Andhra chieftain declined due to
injury and age and were unable to hold their own in the extended battles
of gulikAkrIDA. The young warriors like the bald sugrIva and the
swaggering yuvarAja also failed to live up entire to their potential as
they were undermined by the Australian mole chappal. It was in these
trying times that the young rAjanya mahendra siMha of Jharkhand came to
the fore. He first showed his abilities as a leader of men in the great
raid in South Africa where he lead the Hindu army to a glorious victory
against the green banner of Islam. Then when the Anglo-Saxon pirates
pressed hard on the Hindus from their Southern outpost, which they had
secured after annihilating the aborigines, mahendra siMha led the senA
to an incredible victory against the arrogant shvetavarNa-s.

In the most recent invasion of la\~NkA the extended battles under the
leadership of the old field gun of Bengaluru had failed with the forces
of sthaviravAda fanaticism led by great lords like jayavardhana, kumAra
sa\~NgakAra and anjantha, and hindu mercenaries like muttiah running
amok amongst the Hindu senA-s. Then rAjA mahendra siMha was called to
lead a series of short attacks to reverse the humiliation we had just
faced. In the first such attack mahendra siMha’s men were put to sword
by the fury of the la\~nkApati-s. Then he regrouped his armies and led
the Hindu-s to conquest of the final frontier. In the last of these
battles fought at koyumbu the sthaviravAdin-s attacked fiercely with
their three front line cannonries under tushara, chamiNDa and
kulashekhara. The Hindus wilted under their bombardment with their
warriors like gambhIra, the chief of dillika and virAT, the kohli chief
being slain after an initial thrust. Things turned worse as chamiNDa
knocked down the arrogant rAjpUt charger yuvarAja of pa\~nchanada. With
defeat staring on their face king mahendra siMha and suresha a chief
from the pa\~nchala realm came together to battle the surging islanders.
The islanders sought to destroy the Hindu king by sending their ace
gunners ajantha and the Hindu mercenary muttiah. But the Hindus, after
evading cautiously for a while, counter-attacked – mahendra luring the
la\~NkApuri-s to an ambush and suresha slaughtering them with his
repeated cavalry charges. Then the Hindus sent forth the assorted
turuShka-s mercenaries under Munafa and Khan to attack the islanders. As
their ranks wavered under the heavy shelling of the turuShka-s, the
ground started giving way under the fading light. Undaunted the great
la\~nkA chief jayasUrya counter-attacked and took the battle right back
to the Hindus wreaking havoc like narAntaka on the vAnara army. At this
point the Hindus deployed the foul-mouthed sniper haribhajana from
pa\~nchanada who broke up the la\~Nkan ranks with his well aimed shots
at their leaders including the king jayavardhana. At this point yuvarAja
rose back to consciousness and had his revenge by putting to sword the
rest of the la\~NkA army. With that the saffron flag fluttered on the
trikUTa hill for the first time.

Other narratives of struggles in gulikAkrIDA: before you get too hot
remember it is just a game:-)

\* [Frontline warriors](../2003/09/06/frontline-warriors/)  
\* [The mother of all
battles](../2003/12/16/the-mother-of-all-battles/)  
\* [The Trojan horse?](../2005/11/12/the-trojan-horse/)  
\* [The sub-continental
stirrings](../2005/12/18/the-sub-continental-stirrings/)  
\* [The clash of Saxons](../2005/08/28/the-clash-of-saxons/)  
\* [sugrIva and the prince of
B’lore](../2006/06/11/surgriva-and-the-prince-of-blore/)  
\* [The victory of the prince of the
Bangalore](../2006/07/10/the-victory-of-the-prince-of-the-bangalore/)
