+++
title = "The other vIraxa0appears"

+++
All the vIra-s had been attacked by the prayoga-s of the ari-s as
implied in their cryptic message on the phala-s of the nR^I trees. The
jyeShTha vIra had then been tied down by a kAmini sent by the
ari-prayoga. The third vIra despite his bhIma-like battle fury had been
tied down by the dasyu-s, while the other vIra-s faced their own
downward fates. As we were floundering in the battle with the mlechCha-s
the thundering indra took us to victory. But then came the second round
when we were bound in chains by the ari-s and placed in internment in
ArAma and rAjakShetra. The great vIra was then beaten twice in battle,
once at shishira-grAma due to the kAmini, and then when he reached
sUrya-sthAna by another ari prayoga. Having lost his troops and kingdom,
he was slipping into oblivion, when his guru’s prati-prayoga saved him
the jaws of destruction. Then there was the other vIra who alone briefly
understood the code which we conveyed: “If Doldrum is dead Dildrum is
the king of the cats”. This vIra had taken a severe hammering from the
prayoga-s, and smashed to bits, even as we were deep in the yuddha of
mlechCha-varSha. The other vIra appeared in incognito briefly and
conveyed to R that which lay under the code Jaimal and Patta. R relayed
that to us, but it was too late, and we were capture by the ari-s and
taken to ArAma. The third vIra who even deployed dUra-dR^iShTi on us
then broke forth and became a conqueror. But we remained nervous that
until the other vIra broke the prayoga of the ari-s our larger fate was
sealed, especially if we fell fighting in battle. With that becoming
more of a possibility we were concerned if there might ever be a
“pratardana daivodAsi” to raise us like the kAshi rAjas.

But finally that vIra (‘inum’ nAma yoddhA) took to battle – it was a
fierce encounter with the ari-s who smashed his first two prayoga-s. He
was pushed back by some distance like the bold sAtyakI being pressed
back by the vicious bhUrishravas. He had many mantra-s in his possession
but had forgotten them like rAdheya at kurukShetra. But on the day of
the deva-s he deployed that mighty mantra of his ancestors from the
atharvA\~ngirasa shruti, which due to our negligence we had failed to
deploy. We sent the amAtya and the sachiva to aid him in war. They were
intercepted by the ari-s and took a heavy shelling. Bereft of mantra-s
and unable to call the deva-s to their aid and were crumbling on the
raNA\~NgaNa. Then they saw a cloud of dust appearing on the eastern
horizon. It was the senA of the other vIra. Out of nowhere he appeared
with the spirit of the bhR^igu spells were manifest in him. His prayoga
was like a charm laid by R^ichIka or apnavAna himself or like an
unstoppable mantra of chyavAna or syUmarashmI. The amAtya and the
sachiva merged forces, and the ari-s were defeated and scattered by the
other vIra not far away from maNGala-grAma. But we sent the signal:
“king aryaman still needs his bhAga”.
