+++
title = "Early temples and iconicxa0worship"

+++
It is nearly inconceivable for the average modern Hindu to imagine his
religion as being aniconic. Worship at temples is an average Hindu’s
major or only of religious activity, and it is not uncommon for
practically every Hindu to keep some household images or pictures of
deities. Yet, there is hardly any sign of temples or worship in temples
in the vedic saMhitA-s, which are dominated by fire and soma rituals.
Even in the itihAsa-s, while temples are mentioned several times, their
description is not given much prominence. For example, in the rAmAyana
(5.43.1-5) hanumAn is mentioned as breaking a large and lofty temple in
lankA, but no other specific details of it are provided. The temple in
the nikumbhilA grove in lankA is mentioned as a spot where meghanAda was
to perform a fire rite for invincibility, but again hardly any details
of this temple are mentioned. In the great bhArata too temples are
mentioned, but are hardly prominent in its enormous bulk that otherwise
covers an extraordinary diversity of topics. In itihAsas as a whole,
references to temples, typically termed chaitya, are an incidental
element in the context of describing holy tIrtha-s or urban centers (see
below). The earliest available works in the dravidian languages, the
tamiL puranAnuru and akanAnuru also do not display any notable dilation
on temples, despite having several religious themes in them. The mAnava
dharma shAstra and other early dharma works too are either silent or
limited in their allusions to temples. In fact, the MDS recommends
against brAhmaNa-s who earn their living as temple priests from being
employed as a sacrificial invitees (3.152) or as recipients of
brahminical donations (3.180).

Thus, it would appear that the foundational texts of the Hindu dharma,
had few if any references to temples, and these played a relatively
minor role in the early phase of the dharma. This is in striking
contrast with the extant purANas and the modern Hindu culture where
temples, temple construction, iconography and iconic installations play
a prominent role. Thus, it almost appears that there was a major memetic
shift in the Hindu worldview at some point in history which marked the
transition to this more “modern” form of temple-centric worship.

Such a view is not inconsistent with archaeology: Even the highly
urbanized Indus civilization and associated chalcolithic cultures of
India (leaving aside the dispute of whether or not they had Aryan
components), with a whole range of constructions and technologies, show
little evidence of prominent temples comparable to those seen in
medieval India or contemporary Egypt or Mesopotamia. Again, after the
collapse of the urban Indus civilization, we find large classical
temples emerging relatively late in course of the second urbanization of
India. So what are the origins of temples in India? Related to this
question is the parallel question: What were the origins of iconic
worship in India?

Many branches of the Indo-European tree show signs for veneration of
icons: Greeks, the syncretic Neoplatonic religion, Romans, Germanics,
Balts and Slavs, Iranians and Indians. But not all Indo-European groups
show evidence for large-scale temple construction right from inception:
we find little evidence (as we saw above) amongst early Indians, early
Balts or even Iranians. So it is not impossible that iconic worship of
some kind was always there amongst Indo-Europeans from the ancestral
period, but construction of public temples was potentially a convergent
trait. We do hear zarathuShTra the founder of the Iranian cult of
mAzdhayasna ranting and raving against icons:  
“kadA azem mUrthem ahya maghahya yA Angraya Karpanao urupayeinti”  
rendered in Sanskrit would be:  
“kadA aham mUrtim asya maghasya yA A\~Ngirasa karpaNA ropayanti”  
When \[ahurA-mAzdhA\] can I uproot the idol from this assembly, that set
up by the angra-s and the karpaNas?  
That such icon-worship possibly persisted in conflict with the
zarathuShTrian cult in the Iranian sphere is suggested in the boast of
the Iranian emperor Xerxes (a follower of zarathuShTra’s cult): “I
destroyed this temple of daevas”. As an aside it possible that the
marriage and political relationships of these Iranians transmitted such
iconoclastic memes to Afro-Asiatic cultures lying further west in the
Middle East, which then formed a basic tenet of the Abrahamisms. In any
case these observations would also support the contention that icon
worship, even if not in temples, but in congregations or assemblies,
like those mentioned by zarathuShTra as being set up by the
a\~Ngirasa-s, did exist among the early Indo-Iranians.

With this in mind we shall next seek traces of such icon worship and
connections to the origin of Hindu temples if any.

chaitya: The earliest word used for temple in the Hindu world is
chaitya. This word is encountered in the gR^ihya sUtra-s, AV
parishiShTha-s, and itihAsa-s. Its etymology is simple: piled up, from
the root chit to piling. Now, in the vedic language chit is often used
in a specific sense, i.e. piling up of the fire altar or agni-chiti (as
in agni-chayana) from bricks. This suggests that the word chaitya
similar implied a piling up bricks to form a shrine. This is consistent
with the observation that earliest temples of India are relatively
simple piled brick structures. We also encounter the word chaitya
vR^iksha to describe 4 species of large fig trees in the late vedic
texts and itihAsa-s. From the earliest depictions to modern times we
find these figs (most often ashvattha or audumbara) being shown with a
platform of bricks piled around their base. This hints the form of the
earliest public shrines in India: piled brick structures, perhaps even
at the base of large fig species. Consistent with this, the sparseness
of the description of chaitya-s in the itihAsa-s, makes it likely that
the early chaitya-s were rather low-key structures rather than the grand
temples of the purANa-s. In the MBh 3.125 (critical) it is mentioned by
lomAsha to yudhiShThira that the tirtha on the Archika hill is a place
where there are numerous (100s) chaitya-s for the 33 gods. Again in MBh
3.121 lomAsha mentions the chaityas on the banks of the narmada to be
visited by the pANDu-s. Both the bhArata and the rAmAyana mention the
presence of chaitya-s in graveyard using a very similar cliché as a part
of a simile to describe something terrible.  
MBh: shmashAna-chaitya-drumavad bhUShito.api bhaya\~NkaraH |  
Ram: shmashAna-chaitya pratimo bhUShito.api bhaya\~NkaraH |  
Even today graveyards often have temples of rudra. Another point of note
is that in the MBh the term chaitya is often combined with yUpa: and the
earth or a place is described as decorated by chaitya-s and yUpa-s
(“chaityayUpA\~NkitA bhUmi”). yUpa-s from shrauta rites were often
left behind at the end of a yAga as a mark of their performance. Their
linkage suggests that chaitya-s were possibly small shrines that might
have been likewise associated with holy spots were rites were performed.

chaitya yAga: The gR^ihya-sUtra-s appear to be the earliest texts
mentioning the term chaitya. An interesting instance is the mention of
the rite termed the chaitya yAga in the AshvalAyana (1.12.1) and
pAraskAra (3.11.10) gR^ihya sUtras. From what we can glean from these
sUtra-s, the chaitya yAga involved making of fire oblations to the deity
of the chaitya in the house of the worshiper. Then, before the final
expiatory sviShTakR^it oblations, the worshiper offers food as bali to
the deity of the chaitya. If the chaitya is far away the votary is
advised to wrap two aliquots of the bali offering in a leaf and send it
via an emissary to the chaitya. It specifically instructs that the
votary gives the messenger food/payment, and if necessary a boat (that
is if a river-crossing is involved) and weapons (if dangers are
expected). At the face of it, the nikumbhilA rite of meghanAda in the
rAmAyaNa might have been some form of a chaitya yAga. As we have
discussed earlier the vaikhAnasa gR^ihya sUtra also mentions a rite at a
shrine of kumAra in connection to a rite of travel for a young child.
Hence, at least by the latter layers of the gR^ihya sUtra-s, there were
public shrines that might be distant from where the votary is located.
An enshrined deity may be worshiped using the standard vedic technique
and the offerings (bali) from the rite may be carried to that deity in a
specific shrine.

Early mentions of chaitya-s in nAstIka texts: To gain a perspective from
outside of the AstIka stream within the dharma, we could turn to the two
major nAstIka streams, whose origin was coeval with the latest layer of
the vedic period. Their earliest texts, as well as the early biographies
of their founders, the nirgrantha and shuddhodana-putra, mention several
chaitya-s as being already present and worshiped by people. Both bauddha
and jaina sources typically call them yakSha-chaitya, because of their
wish to downgrade the ancestral Hindu deities relative to the founders
of their cults. Yet it is clear that many of these were shrines of
typical Hindus deities, whereas others of real yakSha-s. For example
both bauddha and jaina sources mention a shrine of devI ShaShThI, the
wife of kumAra being present at vishAla at the time of two nAstIka
founders. The jaina sources also recall a chaitya of skanda at srAvastI
in the days of mahAvIra and chaityas to gods like shUlapANI (rudra) and
a large one of the yakSha pUrNabhadra (worshiped even today by jainas).
The latter chaitya and that of ShaShThI were even visited by mahAvIra in
his peregrinations. The graveyard chaitya might have also been behind
the use of the term chetiya (a prAkR^ita form of chaitya) for the
funerary relic shrines of the tathAgata and his successors worshiped by
the bauddhas.

Thus, by the period of 600-450 BC already several chaitya-s to deities
were in place throughout the urbanizing northern Gangetic belt. The
available descriptions of such chaitya-s suggest that they were small to
medium-sized constructions (usually brick) usually surrounded by groves
of or under trees (typically figs). By the mauryan period described in
the arthashAstra forts and cities had chaitya-s for a number of deva-s
and devI-s like indra, ashvin-s, kumara, rudra, kubera, madirA and
aparAjitA. A description of the chaitya of kaumArI suggests that it had
multiple AvaraNa one inside the other and a circular arch. So we can see
that between the time of the founders of the nAstIka-mata-s to the
mauryan era the chaitya-s appear to have steadily increased in
importance, becoming integral aspects of city life. However, there is
still no hint that they were large structures like the classical Hindu
temples.

**Iconic worship of the late gR^ihya period and the rise of temple
worship:** Clues regarding the early forms of image worship come from
specific references in what may be termed the late gR^ihya literature.
These can be assigned to the later layer of gR^ihya sUtra literature
because they do not appear to be conserved across all gR^ihya sUtra-s
and are often found in what are called parishiShTa or sheSha sUtra-s.
The most prominent examples of these are:  
bodhAyana sheSha sUtra 2.13-15, viShNu-pratiShTha kalpa: gives the rite
for the installation of an image of viShNu, its daily worship and its
bathing.  
vaikhAnasa smArta sUtra 4.10-12, viShNvarchana vidhi: gives a similar
rite of installation and routine worship of an idol of viShNu.  
bodhAyana sheSha sUtra 2.16-18, rudra-pratiShTha: kalpa gives the rite
for the installation of an image of rudra, its daily worship and
ablutions.  
bodhAyana sheSha sUtra 4.2, dhUrta bali: mentions installation of an
idol of kumAra in a maNTapa decorated with leaves.  
atharva-veda parishiShTa, skanda yAga: mentions a very similar
installation of a kumAra icon in a platform with leaf and mirror
decorations.  
The shAnti kalpa of the atharva-veda: mentions making images of the
nava-graha-s their installation and detailed procedures of worship.  
Key features of the majority of these installation rituals include: 1)
The rites do not use prANa-pratiShTha mantras typical of the Agamic
procedures 2) They might use an “eye-opening” rite using a golden needle
with vedic mantra-s. 3) They do not use any classical tantric mantra-s
of the Agama-s for the worship of the deity, instead using vedic and
some new specific mantra-s specified by these gR^ihya texts.4) They
always involve a vedic-styled homa with oblations made to the deity
being installed.

This process epitomized by the vaikhAnasa viShNvarchana vidhi for the
installation and worship of a small pratima of viShNu (6 a\~Ngula-s in
height), has been expanded by the later vaikhAnasa Agama-s for the
installation of the viShNu idols in huge temples. Thus, we see a link
between the gR^ihya image worship and the origins of the larger image
worship in temples. However, in most streams except the vaikhAnasa-s,
this shift to the large temples was closely linked to the rise of a new
class of texts and rituals in place of the vedic ones – the Agamic
texts. Thus, one might state with confidence the origin of the classical
Agama-s as well as extant paurANic narratives are closely linked to the
emergence of the large temples. It is not without reason that
town-planning, civil constructions and the arts occupy the interest of
early Agamas like devyAmata and purANa-s like viShNudharmottara.
