+++
title = "The story of the nAstIka attack onxa0rAmeshvaraM"

+++
An exchange with my acquaintance SRA on apotropaic rites related to
temples prompted me to record this brief note. The light of the
theravAda bauddha-s, the mighty king parAkrama-bAhu the Great (i.e.
parAkrama-bAhu-I), came to power in Shri Lanka around 1153 CE. Few years
after he came to the throne, he sent emissaries to other theravAda
bauddha kings in Asia to announce his devote support for the sangha.
narAthu, the king of Myanmar scorned the Lankan messengers and tortured
them. He also imposed economic sanctions on Lanka. In the meanwhile
parAkrama-bAhu was busy in local wars in course of which he conquered
the whole of shrI-lankA and unified it under a single bauddha banner. In
1164 CE parAkrama-bAhu decided avenge the insult of the Lankans and
launched a massive attack on Myanmar with a formidable fleet equipped
with an year’s supply of grain for his large navy, an amphibious landing
force of war-elephants and uniquely crafted long-range poisoned arrows.
Despite cyclones and loss of multiple ships parAkrama-bahu’s fleet under
admiral nagara-girI and chera mercenaries established a bridgehead at
Kusumiya and captured the city with the amphibious landing force. Then
the Lankan sea-borne army invaded Myanmar and penetrated as far as the
capital Arimardhanapura. The Burmans resisted with much fury but
parAkrama-bAhu ordered his navy and army to keep pressing on till they
destroyed the killed the king of Myanmar. The ports were blockaded by
the Lankans and their army finally stormed Arimardhanapura and killed
narAthu.

This successful adventure tempted parAkrama-bAhu to invade and conquer
south India. He found a great excuse for this program in the form of the
internal struggle between two pANDya contenders for the throne and the
choLa allies of one them (kulashekhara). He claimed to act in support of
the other party (vIrapANDya) against choLa-s and kulashekhara.
parAkrama-bahu dispatched his powerful admiral lankApura to deal with
the Tamil kingdoms. lankApura conquered Ramanathapuram near the setu and
built a heavily fortified camp named parAkramapura after his king. From
here lankApura brought in a large lankan land army and sent it towards
Madhurai, where he besieged and defeated kulashekhara. Then the Lankan
army placed vIrapANDya as puppet in Madhurai and controlled it from a
fortified camp they built named paNDuvijaya. They used this fort in
tandem with parAkramapura and continued the war on the choLa-s,
inflicted many blows on them, and even sent Tamils captured in India to
build monuments in Lanka. Around 1171 CE parakarama-bAhu probably filled
with bauddha zeal ordered the conquest of rAmeshvaraM. The lankan navy
blockaded the temple city and an amphibious landing force with elephants
launched a direct attack on the temple. They first uprooted the huge
temple doors and carried it away. Then finding their way to the temple
treasury they seized all its treasures and took control of the shrine
and prevented the worship of shiva.

The choLa king rAjadhirAja-II was shaken by the desecration of the
temple and called upon a learned tAntrIka of the Urdhva-srotras,
j\~nAnashiva to perform abhichAra rites to destroy the lankans who had
desecrated the jyotir-li\~Nga. j\~nAnashiva began an elaborate abhichAra
prayoga invoking the terrifying 5-headed, 18 handed form of shiva, who
wears a garland of 108 skulls. An image of shiva in this form is also
found in the chandella fort near Kajuraho where they routinely invoked
him before doing battle with the turuShka-s. j\~nAnashiva performed the
rite unfazed for 28 days. The choLa army had been hammered by the
lankans in multiple battles till that point, but is said that the fury
of mahAdeva entered them. rAjAdhirAja-II’s army fell upon the
desecrating bauddha-s in rAmeshvaraM and smashed them in a quick
assault. The lankan admiral lankApura himself was leading the
desecration and was struck by an arrow. The choLa-s beheaded him and
nailed his severed head on the gates of the pANDuvijaya camp as a
befitting offering to mahAdeva.

The details of this event are recorded in the ArpAkkaM inscription 18 Km
from Kanchi.
