+++
title = "The mysterious kuchumAra"

+++
A modern Hindu might be deeply offended to learn about kuchumAra. He is
a mysterious fellow mentioned in the kAmasUtra by vAtsyAyana as a
teacher of the aupaniShadika section (i.e. the 7th division of the
kAmashAstra) of the version of the kAmashAstra composed by bAbhravya
pA\~nchAla. Some say that this actually meant that he was the
promulgator of the secret sexual teachings – on aphrodisiacs
(vAjikaraNa) and seduction (vashIkaraNa). Others suspect that it may be
teaching like that found in the kAmashAstra section of the
bR^ihadAraNyaka upaniShad. But did this authority ever remain in the
memory of Hindu tradition beyond the kAmashAstra? The answer to this
lies in a text termed the kuchimAra-tantra (kuchumAra-tantra) that has
remained unpublished. We had the opportunity to quickly study the
contents of this tantra which was in the possession of the village
school teacher – we unfortunately have no idea what its current fate is.

The work has 8 paTala-s, some of which show a few vulgar prakR^it
(deshI) nouns while describing certain recipes. The main focus of the
initial section is on increasing the size and firmness of li\~Nga-s in
puruSha-s (termed indrivardhana) and the kucha-s and shroNi-s in strI-s.
Some preparations might incidentally also increase size hands and ears
(?). Then there is description of lubricants to increase pleasure for
strI and puman while engaged in maithuna. Then strI-vashIkaraNa is
described using mantra-s combined with chUrNa-s, which are slyly dusted
on the target, and rasa-s. Interestingly, the mantra-s are drawn both
from the pA\~ncharAtra tradition as well as that of kapAlIsha bhairava
of the brahma-yAmala. Then recipes for vAjikaraNa reminiscent of those
in charaka’s work are seen. Then there are descriptions of preparations
for delaying the emission of retas during maithuna and stimulating the
strI. Then there is a description of preparations and vidhi-s for the
tightening of the yoni in strI-s. Then the text describes contraceptives
and preparations to cause quick abortion. Finally, there is section on
fertility and birthing. It may be noted that the ancient Hindu might
have preferred the absence of loman in the upastha because multiple
preparations are given for loma-nAshana or loma-shAtana in strI-s. In my
quick survey I did not find the *Mylabris* beetle in the
kuchumAra-tAntra (which is mentioned by the KS as being used by the
drAviDa-s; the cantharidin producing beetle which in my youth was still
abundantly seen in the karNATa country), but it shares the *Vernonia*
species with the KS.

It is possible that it preserves an old tradition of kuchumAra with an
overlay of tantric material drawn eclectically from different Agamic
streams.
