+++
title = "Iranian miscellany"

+++
\[disclaimer: I tend to use Indic-style spellings in most cases\]  
One of the questions often pondered upon is the state of the Iranian
religion before the ascendancy of the cult of zarathuShTra in greater
Iran. There are multiple facets to this question, some of which include:
1) The state in the “heartland” where zarathuShTra and his band came
into being. 2) The state of the religion of the early Aryan occupants
Iran, i.e. the of the pre-Achaemenid Medians and Persians. 3) The nature
of religion among the non-Persian Iranians like the shAka haumavarga,
shAka tigrakhauda, shAka taradArya and kushAnas. 4) The history of
iconic worship amongst Iranians.

The answers are largely murky, but some facets are clear. The cult of
zarathuShTra clearly came from within a pan-Indo-Iranian system that was
quite close to the ancestral version of the shrauta system of the Aryans
of India. It is also clear that zarathuShTra-s elevation of the asura
varuNa prototype in his system was not a pure innovation. Even in the
Vedic system we observe that asura varuNa held an exalted position often
combined with the great indra in the devatA dvandva indrAvaruNa of
tremendous power. We also notice that within the Vedic system certain
vipra-s mention a personal connection with the great asura varuNa, like
vasiShTha and bhR^igu-s/atharvan-s. From the fragments of the
pre-Achaemenid Medians and Persians, and also to certain extant the
later Parthians and shAkas we observe that the system based on the
worship of the Aditya-s (though they are never called that) was the
dominant one. From names we discern the prominent worship of mithra:
mithra is seen in personal names like mithrapAta, mithrabarzana or
dAtamithra or mithradAta. A “shrine” of mithra is mentioned as being
maintained by the Iranians in Fayum, Egypt at the time of Alexander’s
invasion, and a certain mithradAta is mentioned in its connection. There
was the feast of mithra celebrated through the Achaemenid times, the
mithrakAna festival. The term ahura just by itself or as mAzdAdAta or
mAzdAfarnah (in Aramaic) or the term mAzdAyazna are all encountered.
However, strikingly, bhaga is also prominently mentioned, and perhaps
most frequent in pre-Achaemenid names. There is the holy place named
bhagasthAna, i.e. modern Behistun. Another place name with bhaga is
bhagadAta, i.e Baghdad. There is a month named bhAgayAdi. There are
dvandva constructions like bhaga-mithra and bhaga-mazda and also forms
like mithra-bhaga and mithra-ahurA-mAzdA. We notice that unlike other
vipra families that have long pre-R^igveda pedigrees in the Vedic world,
the brothers vasiShTha, agastya and the lesser known mana suddenly
appear claiming divine origin from mitra and varuNa and the patronymic
maitravaruNi. Of them, vasiShTha is one of the most prolific composers
and has several hymns to varuNa or mitrAvaruNa and also interestingly
supplies the longest solo hymn of bhaga in the entire shruti. It is
quite possible that these maitravaruNi-s came into the Indic realm from
the borderland with Iranians where the Aditya-based system was already
rising in dominance.

The worship of indra was always around in the midst of the Iranians and
persisted under the specific name of verethraghna after zarathuShTra’s
demonization of the name andra. It is possible that it was prominent in
the non-Persian Iranian groups like the shAka haumavarga as suggested by
the fragmentary third party accounts of their worshiping a certain
“war-god” who in all likelihood was the indra archetype. However, in
much of the Iranian zone, unlike in the early Indic zone the worship of
indra-archetype was probably secondary to the mitra-varuNa archetypes.
Likewise, the mighty vAyu, even after zarathuShTra’s heterodox sweep,
remained the first receiver of the haoma in the Iranian ritual. From the
Kushana evidence we note that vAyu was extremely prominent and perhaps
the preeminent deity in the eastern Iranian frontier (also note an echo
of this in the vedic soma offering and the animal of vAyu – vAyavyam
pashu, where vAyu receives the primary offering). Even after
zarathuShTra demonized the ashvin-archetype under the name nanghaitya
(Vedic: nAsatyA), he recycled them as the twin amesha-spentas: haurvatAt
and amR^itAt. We have earlier alluded to the possibility that the
pANDava-s of the mahAbhArata were actually from the Iranian borderlands.
In fact their origin mythology retains this Iranian ordering:
yuddhiShThira: dharma (the archetype of mitra and varuNa, the upholders
of dharma; ahura mAzdha and mithra, upholders of the Asha=R^ita); bhIma
(vAyu); arjuna (indra, verethraghna, Herakles in the Greek world);
nakula-sahadeva (the ashvin-s, haurvatAt and amR^itAt). Note indra is
only third in the system as in the Iranian system.

This issue of the marginalization of certain deities to the central
Aditya, the varuNa-archetype, is also reflected in the emergence of
public iconic worship amongst the Iranians. As we have discussed before
the Iranians, like their Indic counterparts, were largely un-iconic in
public ritual to start with, probably using icons only in small private
shrines. In fact the cult of zarathuShTra was a vigorously iconoclastic
one which appears to have been imbibed by the Judaistic stream of the
Semitic world. But on the other hand other Middle Eastern Semites and
Elamites appear to have influenced the Iranians towards iconic worship.
However, the most prominent forms of public iconic worship emerged via
the Greek-Iranian contact. The famous edifice at Nemrud Dagi built by
Antiochus son of Mithridates claiming descent from both Alexander and
Darius is a splendid example of this. The gigantic images of deities
depicted there were: ahura mAzdha equated with Zeus; mithra equated with
Apollon; and verethraghna with Herakles or Ares. Thus even though we
know that Zeus is actually the indra-archetype, here he has been equated
ahura mAzdha who has eaten into indra’s preeminent position. Instead the
actual ortholog of indra, verethraghna has been reduced to an equation
to the “junior Zeus” Herakles or just the “war-god” Ares.

On the eastern front things were dramatically different, with Iranians
receiving iconographic inputs not just from the Greeks but also Indians.
For example vAyu of the Kushanas inherits his iconography from rudra in
India. This was further strengthened by the homophony of their names:
vAyush\>oesho and Isha. Just as Zeus was equated with ahura mAzdha we
find that among the Kushanas ahura mAzdha was depicted as indra riding
airAvata. Again the Kushana verethraghna gets depicted as similar to
kumAra just as he was equated with Ares in the Nemrud Dagi images. The
goddess aredvI sUrA anAhitA, the sarasvatI ortholog, was one of the
Iranian deities to receive an iconic representation from very early on.
It appears that even Artaxerxes-II, who had a special devotion to this
goddess, might have founded iconic temples of hers at Hamadan, Babylon
and Damascus. In the early period her iconography was influenced by
Semitic goddesses such as Ishtar. But in the eastern zone of the Iranian
territory her iconography was clearly influenced by chaNdikA or durgA.
Like sarasvatI (also perhaps even the prototype of Pallas Athena,
sarasvatI and anAhitA), she had a warrior aspect. Both Sassan and Babak
appear to have been priests of a temple of anAhitA at Istakhr before the
latter went on to found a new Iranian empire. She was routinely invoked
by his successor Ardeshir for victory in battle. Thus, it is not
surprising that in the eastern region her depictions came to closely
resemble the Indian warrior goddesses.

Several interesting iconographic developments that remain poorly
understood because of the disaster of Afghanistan has happened at the
Indo-Iranian border zone. For example there is deity named “mana-bhaga”
who appears to have been depicted like a hybrid of saMkarShaNa and
vAsudeva with a chakra and a halAyudha. The exact nature of this
“Iranian pA\~charAtra” remains entirely unclear. But somewhat later
pA\~ncharAtra icons of nArAyaNa with an Indo-Iranian syncretism are also
known from Afghanistan. For example, a smuggled image from 427 CE, sold
to private collector in the US, has the inscription that was translated
by Doris Srinivasan as: “In the year three, in the month of aShaDha, on
the fifth day, on this day the image of nArAyaNa was installed at
bhImAsthana in gharaTTamaTTha of the shrI-vaihlika-s. It is a donation
of… shrI varisha.” The image is a typical vaiShNava of the chaturmukha
viShNu type, though only 3 faces are actually visible, flanked by the
images of sudarshana and gadA-devI. The side heads are the usual
nR^isiMha and varAha heads, but the central head is quite distinctive.
This head has a clearly Iranian crown and mustache. Thus an Iranian
strain of syncretic vaiShnava imagery appears to have been reasonably
prevalent in gandhara and bAhlika. Interestingly, the earliest
proto-types of the trishirobhairava or later dattAtreya imagery appear
to have also come up at least by the 200s of CE in the same region – the
three-headed form with the signs of shiva, viShNu and brahmA.
