+++
title = "A molecular phylogeny ofxa0birds"

+++
While much progress has been made with respect to the paleontological
studies on the origin of birds within Dinosauria, comparable progress
was lacking with respect to understanding the relationships between
extant birds (neornithes). We had discussed this briefly in an early
note on these pages:  
[Problems in avian
evolution](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/06/10/problems-in-avian-evolution/)  
The Early Bird project conducted by a large group of investigators
primarily addressed this issue. As result we have the first notable
publication of this project \[Science 320(5884):1763-8. A phylogenomic
study of birds reveals their evolutionary history. By Shannon Hackett,
Rebecca Kimball, Sushma Reddy et al.\]. The results are shocking to
state the least are summarized by the below tree. The only higher-order
nodes consistently recovered by all studies to date that are supported
here are: 1) the paleognathae and neognathae as a basic split within
neornithes and 2) Galloanserae as the basal split in neognathae. The
rest of their tree has many surprises and is shown below.

[![Figure 1](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/bird_phylogeny.jpg?w=223&h=300)](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/bird_phylogeny.jpg)

Figure 1

For a more visual version see this: [Visual Avian
Phylogeny](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2010/02/08/a-visual-guide-to-avian-phylogeny/)  
The main features of the tree are:  
\-After the separation of the galloanserae, the remaining neognathae
(neoaves) underwent several major radiations spawning big clades. These
include: 1) A basal clade of grebes and flamingoes. 2) the
caprimulgiformes including the swifts and humming birds. As proposed by
Gerald Mayr in his morphological studies of these birds (see his
landmark paper: Osteological evidence for paraphyly of the avian order
Caprimulgiformes (nightjars and allies). Journal für Ornithologie
143(1): 82–97) the owlet-nightjars are more closely related to the
swifts and humming birds. The remaining Caprimulgiformes, the
frogmouths, nightjars, oilbirds and potoos form successive sister groups
to the above clade. 3) A clade of rails, cranes+limpkins+trumpeters,
cuckoos and bustards. This clade is weak and suspect. 4) A great clade
of water birds unifying several lineages such as, loons,
albatrosses+shearwaters+petrels, penguins, storks,
gannets+cormorants+frigatebirds, ibises, herons, pelicans, shoebills and
hammerkops. 5) A clade of amphibious birds including
sandpipers+plovers+oystercatchers, gulls, button-quails, turnstones,
jacanas+painted snipes, seedsnipes+plains-wanderers. This Charadriiform
clade is very poorly supported. 6) A great land-bird clade comprised of:
New World vultures, hawks+eagles+secretary birds, mousebirds,
owls,cuckoo-rollers, trogons, hoopoes, hornbills,
kingfishers+bee-eaters+rollers, barbets+honeyguides+woodpeckers,
puffbirds+jacamars, seriemas, falcons, parrots and the great passerine
radiation.  
\-The pigeons+doves, hoatzin, sandgrouse remain distinct basal clades
within neoaves radiation.  
\-Interestingly, though the Falconiformes are split into two non-sister
clades comprising of falcons on one side and the rest including the New
World Vultures in another.  
\-The owls are no longer anywhere near the caprimulgiformes.  
\-The parrots becoming the closest sister group of the passerines is
also quite surprising. Coraciiformes are expanded to include Piciformes
inside them.  
\-The seriemas being nested close to the falcons, parrots and passerines
rather than group with cranes is also much unexpected.  
\-Shockingly amongst the Paleognathae, in contrast to all previous
studies, tinamous are nested deep inside the paleognath clade between
rheas and the cassowary+emu clade.

Several new speculative scenarios can be laid out based on this
phylogeny: The ancestor of the paleognaths was possibly still capable of
limited flight rather than being flightless when they started diverging.
Their flight was possibly in the form of short infrequent powerful
uncontrolled bursts as seen in the tinamous. As gigantism evolved
independently in different lineages (or due to absence of predators on
islands) they shed this ability to fly entirely on multiple occasions
(at least 3) as per this phylogeny. This might throw light on the
enigmatic lithornithids that appear to be models for these ancestral
paleognaths with flight ability. Now, Houde’s claim that the ancient
lithornithid paleognath *Palaeotis weigelti* is related to the ostrich
also becomes more believable. This phylogeny also raises questions
regarding the importance of vicariance that appeared to be still
supported based on the molecular phylogenies using mitochondrial genome
sequence. Here, the ostrich emerges as the basal-most clade, followed by
the rheas, then the tinamous and finally the ratites of Australia and
New Zealand. This suggests that the ostriches after all might have
evolved from a form like *Palaeotis weigelti* capable of flight in Asia
rather than in Africa fragmenting from the Gondwanan supercontinent.
Rhea and tinamous likewise will be derivatives of a flighted South
American ratite founder, some descendents of which might have made their
way via the Antarctic connection to the Australian and New Zealand
landmasses (possibly connected via New Caledonia and the Howe Rise
land-bridges). This would suggest that the enigmatic *Diogenornis
fragilis* is not necessarily in the rhea lineage but could merely be an
early representative of the South American ratite radiation that spawned
both the tinamous and rhea. The branch lengths in this tree also suggest
that the basal splits in remaining palaeognathae after the ostrich
branch split away happened rapidly followed by accelerated evolution –
this might correspond to the lineage dispersing through the austral
fragments of Gondwanaland. Of course, the big caveat in all this is the
long branch on which the tinamous sit — this could have screwed-up the
tree as is common in molecular phylogenetics.

The Hackett, Kimball and Reddy et al tree suggests that the radiation of
the neoaves happened in multiple “big-bangs”. One of the early bangs was
the radiation of the nocturnal birds which only late in its evolution
re-evolved a diurnal lifestyle (swifts and humming birds). Then there
was a great invasion of the water followed by specialization to all
kinds of aquatic habitats ranging from the totally aquatic penguins to
the strong over-sea fliers like the albatrosses. Finally, there was the
explosive colonization of diverse land habitats by the great clade
including the passerines, falconiforms, owls and the like. The early
branching exclusively nocturnal clade gives the impression that possibly
in the era of the dinosaurs some of the neognaths specialized in a
nocturnal lifestyle even as the enantiornithines and other more basal
euornithine radiations dominated the diurnal niches. Only after the K/T
extinction some members of this clade might have re-emerged as day
birds.

Strikingly, all the basal branch-lengths in this tree, especially within
the neoaves, are very short and subsequent terminal branches are very
long. This pattern suggests that the neoaves evolved through a very
rapid basal cladogenesis. This picture is consistent with a massive
adaptive radiation corresponding to occupation of a wide range of
ecological niches. At the face of it, the one big geological event that
would be consistent with such a major radiation would be the K/T
extinction, which knocked out the dominant enantiornithines and earlier
euornithines. Thus, we would place the band running through the tree
where there is rapid cladogenesis across neoaves to be shortly after 65
Myrs. Recently, *Waimanu*, an ancient penguin was discovered in New
Zealand that dates to around 60-62 Myrs. The parrots are placed as a
deep internal branch within the great land bird radiation as a sister
group of the passerines. The earliest reliable parrots were recently
recovered in Denmark (see Waterhouse et al in Palaeontology, 51(3),
575-582) from around 54 Mya and had already diversified considerably.
Another member of this radiation are the seriemas, are the only
surviving representatives of the extraordinary American radiation of
Cenozoic birds – the phorusrhacids. The earliest representative of this
clade is the Brazilian *Paleopsilopterus* from around 60 Mya. I also
tend to believe that the *Sophiornis* from the Paleocene of Europe is a
member of the owl lineage. This to me indicates that the relatively
small time window in the beginning of the Paleocene (i.e. 65-60 Myrs)
was when the rapid cladogenesis all the way to the internal branches of
the major clades of the neoaves occurred – no doubt we have difficulties
in recovering higher order avian relationships today. However, the
radiations within the passerines and parrots resulting in the extant
diversity might have happened much later.

However, this tree also raises some problematic questions: Are the
falconiformes really split up into the two convergent clades? This is
one occasion I am not sure the molecular phylogenies can be entirely
trusted. I wonder if the long branches of the falcons have something to
do with this.
