+++
title = "So many things to talkxa0about"

+++
The chat with Sharada encompassed a wide gallimaufry of items, even as
the one long chat with her sister after the expedition to the
trishUla-sthala, or the many conversations with her niece over the
years. I remarked to her that in the past I would have spent a whole day
or two in the pleasant “afterglow” of such a conversation. But now I am
unable to do so due the grahaNa. She remarked your state seem to
vindicate the tathAgata’s words that desire is the root cause of sorrow.
You know well the only way to transcend it to use the “visarga
mantra-s”. And I tried again to remain in that afterglow. But even as
write this note I was relentlessly pursued by the grahaNa, much like the
agents of kaushika haunting harishchandra. We spoke about many things.
The ma\~Ngala of vAchaspati-mishra for the tattva kaumudi and the 3rd
kArikA:  
*mUla-prakR^itir-avikR^itir-mahad-AdyAH prakR^iti-vikR^itayaH sapta |  
ShoDashakastu vikAro na prakR^itir-na vikR^itiH puruShaH ||*  
For our private purposes we needed to know what were the 7 which were
both produced and producers: mahat (as mentioned in the text itself),
ahaMkAra and the pa\~ncha-tanmAtra-s. We remarked that the shrIkula
system’s philosophical orientation was originally based on sAMkhya
rather than advaita vedAnta for after all the holder of the five arrows
is known as pa\~ncha-tanmAtra-sAyakA.

Though Sharada belongs the generation, which in India we used to refer
to as “aunts”, like her niece was in her days as the mis-creant, she is
extraordinarily adventurous. I was left wondering why I lack that
ability. So I was delighted to hear some tales from her wanderings. The
root close to daNDin, i.e. bhram-, has always appealed to me too, but
only in an ideal sense. The one story with many branches pertains to
pigs (and also the sUkara-yakShiNI\!), which are very interesting
animals in many ways. Long ago before settling in krau\~ncha-dvIpa,
Sharada and R’s father with some others made an expedition to the
Siwaliks from Delhi. They uncovered a bunch of mammalian fossils which
are of great interest. At least three of their fossils were fragments of
extinct pigs that even then they realized were extraordinary. The first
was a mandible fragment with shiny well-polished teeth, the second was a
large tusk and the third was fragment of the orbital region of a
gigantic pig. They wondered if these might be the mahAvarAha. R
correctly identified the teeth as belonging to a Sanitheriid Suoid.
Sharada felt the skull fragment and the tusk belong to the gigantic pig
Hippopotamodon. But more recently R having reexamined them during her
visit to the desh felt that it might actually be a kubanochoerid suoid.
I am also tempted to go with this striking proposal because the skull
fragment appears to have the base of a horn-like pre-eminence just above
the orbital outline. Most of their fossils seem to be from a Mid-Miocene
section of the Siwaliks again favoring that what they have is a
sanitheriid and a kubanochoerid. Sanitherium is a relatively small pig
with prominent tusks and a peculiar dentition quite different from the
regular pigs with complex wrinkled and crested enamel. They also appear
to have been faster runners. The paleontologist Pickford has suggested
that these pigs were runners with a certain proclivity for carnivory.
They could have probably scavenging or stealing prey from other
predators. The kubanochoerids are the most distinctive of all pigs,
which R calls the “Triceratops-pigs” – males had a large frontal bone
horn and smaller horns above their eyes. They had long legs and strong
curved tusks, suggesting that they might have been amongst the most
formidable mammals, reminiscent of the older, primitive, potential
sister group of the pigs, the entelodonts. In all likelihood
Kubanochoerus and Megalochoerus occupied the same niche as the
entelodonts, though it is unclear if they actually hunted smaller
mammals occasionally, as has been claimed for entelodonts. However,
going by modern boars this is not out of place. I have heard reliable
accounts of predatory boars suddenly rushing into a poorly fenced
cowshed in the drAviDa country and killing and eating up calves with
very little trace – chomping down everything from skin to bone. On
another occasion the hog killed a dog which was attacking it. The owner
was unable to recover the dog out of fear being attacked by the pig.
However, by the next day the pig had made a meal of much of the dog.

Now Sharada was completely unaware of the existence of the
kubanochoerids several years back, though she was aware of the other
giant pig Hippotamodon, which is closer to modern hogs than the
kubanochoerids. She narrated a strange tale that greatly captivates her.
After completing their internship, she and CT were making an expedition
in the states of Nevada and California, when they stayed with a friend
from med-school who kept as a pet a medium-sized black sUkara with a
good hair coat. After a long trek in the mountains they were getting by
rest with S sleeping on a couch. There she said of dreaming vividly of a
gigantic long-legged three-horned pig, with horns on the frontal and
above the orbits, just as seen in the kubanochoerids\! She woke up due
to the startling apparition in the dream and to her utter surprise she
found the pet pig was sniffing her face. While, of course, all of this
can be easily rationalized, she felt it was a sign from the great
mistress of the kiri-chakra, sUkarAnanA. Accordingly for 24 pa\~nchami-s
after that date she performed the pUja of potriNi. Then on visiting the
temple of vArAhI at Devidhura, which was apparently under the rAjA-s of
Kathgodam (If they were indeed the TAkarAja-s their range was quite a
bit) with which this story began she united the mantra (I am not
permitted to say more). Then I told her my tale of the encounter with
the sUkara-yakShiNI. Dealing with yakShiNI-s can have its rewards (what
is known by the concealed name manovistAra) but there also are some
dangerous turns it can take (concealed by the name gaulyavistAra). One
yakShiNI that can take you down the latter path is the sUkara-yakShiNI,
from whose grip it can be very difficult to escape.
