+++
title = "Some musing onxa0wars"

+++
I had never been a good student of recent military history. ekanetra or
va\~Nga paNDita could always fill in the gaping lacunae in my knowledge
if required. In our youth ekanetra gave me such a gripping account of
the battle of Stalingrad, fought between the Germans and the Russians,
that I listened with rapt attention, filled with romaharshaNa a military
narrative brings. ekanetra had then pointed out that many western
observers felt it was one of the bloodiest of battles, and wondered if
any of our battles had been bloodier (with the due normalization for
time and age). ekanetra also wondered what the underlying basis for such
fiercely fought wars… Germanics and Slavs have skirmished for centuries
but I am not very sure if the two \*peoples\* themselves had a
deep-rooted hate for each other. But in WW2, we know well that both were
ideologically heavily charged under two dictators who matched each other
in brutality and stupidity. But the great struggle definitely brought
out some of the hallmark features of the core of the Germanic and Slavic
people. Both were primarily land powers (unlike England whose might lay
in the waters and the US whose power was in both waters and in the
skies). So in a sense it was one of those last great conventional land
wars at it is core.

The Germans were characterized by superior technological thinking (after
all even the American space program depended on a German they captured
in the war), a drive for perfection and an extremely methodical and
pedantic approach to everything. The Russians were characterized by
extraordinary tenacity, ability to take a lot of pain, and improvise
with tremendous audacity. If one encounters epitomes from these two
countries, even today, one still sees those qualities in them. The
styles of work of these two peoples, even in matters like science,
reflect these qualities they brought to battle. Historians debate about
whether Russians were planning a preemptive strike on Germany under
Zhukov’s plan or whether the Germans struck first. As this is not at all
my forte I do not know what the reality was. But it does appear that the
Russians were really not ready to meet a ferocious invasive force as
that of the Germans – conducted with utter precision and technological
superiority. But the Russian tenacity was the first step, holding on
against all odds – something which appears to have been purely inspired
by that sense of patriotic defense of ones land. The next step was where
the Russian improvisation and audacity came into play. Out of limited
resources and technological know-how they managed to raise a military
force and deploy it around Stalingrad in a manner that can only compared
to how Chingiz Khan strike on Bukhara. The important lesson again is
that the prosecution of war depends a lot on the people and the kinds of
leaders that come up within their systems.
