+++
title = "Strange memories of German poems"

+++
R was pretty excited at having procured the kapphiNa-abhyudaya for only
$5 and stated her plan to work through it over the next several months
as a part of her program to stave of mental aging and keep her
astronomical IQ intact. Her mention of this suddenly reminded me of our
Acharya’s free-form commentary on the same. Commenting on the famous
battle scene he described it as an example of the supposed AgneyAstra
prayoga by the tathAgata in defense of the ikShvAku-s against the
invading kapphiNa. He actually saw it as a reason to believe that
indra-jAla and astra prayoga were an intrinsic aspect of the tathAgata’s
ways to spread his dharma. At least going by the kapphiNa-abhyudaya this
seemed likely. I heard R say something to Marc in German. I was reminded
of something she told me shortly after dashAnta, may be a few days after
the cracker box yakShinI story: How I was studying the language of these
awful mlechCha-s, while she was laboring over deva-bhASha, claiming to
understand the wonderful shloka-s that mahADambara was composing to
entertain us :-). With some glee I conveyed it to Marc, much to his
amusement. But later we compared notes on respective courses of study:
she was able pursue her sAdhana more deeply due to her laboring on
deva-bhASha. But what did we get from our laboring on the
mlechCha-bhASha – well, we gained some understanding of the evolutionary
trends in Indo-European. But in the process some poems stuck in our
intra-cranial landscape for unknown reasons and we were reminded of them
due to a quotation by Marc. Both the muni and I, for inexplicable
reasons, were enormously impressed by Heinrich Heine, in particular by
“Die Grenadiere”. For some reason “Babylonische Sorgen” which we found
in pitAshrI’s German text book was also hovering in our head. It has a
weird reference to vinAyaka: “Wie Gott Ganesa in Hindostan…”
