+++
title = "The mystery ofxa0marsupials"

+++
[![marsupial\_skulls](https://i0.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3075/2888697485_c670521c0a_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/2888697485/ "marsupial_skulls by somasushma, on Flickr")

Since I was introduced to marsupials by mAtA-shrI when I was a year or
so old I was mystified by them because I never got to see them. After
all, most of the forms in the book were from faraway and Down under. I
spent a while reading about their morphology in the 9th year of my life
from the texts books of Colbert and Young. But they remained alien and
confusing. The Australian forms were fascinating because they mirrored
the placental morphospace occupancy elsewhere in the world – my first
lesson in convergent evolution. But their prehistory lay elsewhere and
this was what allured me in those long past days and urged me to look
deeper into these mammals. But there was no way of doing that while I
was in bhArata. During my last year in bhAratavarSha, R was visiting
from abroad, and gave me a fascinating account of her great journey down
under and her study of marsupial anatomy. I was green with envy and
wondered if my chance might ever come. In my second year in mlechCha
desha, I was walking home from work one blustery autumn night when I had
my first encounter with the opossum, Didelphis on a shrub. This gave me
the signal to study the history of marsupials deeper. I spent some time
examining the dental anatomy of *Herpetotherium* – this gave me a clear
idea of the distinctiveness of the metatherian teeth in their primitive
state.

The upper molar as shown here has a paracone and metacone placed right
in the middle of the tooth with the protocone placed well apart below
and the prominent stylar shelf with several cusps. These distinctive
features immediately help one to spot the metatherian nature of basal
forms like *Kokopellia* and the primitive *Asiatherium*.

[![marsupial\_upperM](https://i1.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3017/2894612052_803905c2f7_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/2894612052/ "marsupial_upperM by somasushma, on Flickr")

The lower molar as shown here (divided into two elements the trigonid
and the talonid) have a paraconid on lingual side in the trigonid and
most characteristically a “twinning” of the entoconid and hypconulid
cusps on the side opposite to the hypoconid.

[![marsupial\_lowerM](https://i2.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3021/2895770250_3d4d443d98_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/2895770250/ "marsupial_lowerM by somasushma, on Flickr")

Until recently the affinities and the biogeographical patterns of
marsupials remained pretty poorly understood. The 1990s and 2000s saw
major developments that appear to clarify many previously confounding
issues. For example, the great Australian radiation of diprotodonts
(including he most recognizable kangaroo, koala and the wombat) shared
with the South American caenolestids (paucituberculata; the Andean shrew
opossums) the diprotodont condition, where the first pair of incisors
are greatly expanded to form a shovel-like surface for food-processing.
Some thought that the diprotodont condition was a synapomorphy uniting
these groups. However, within the Australian forms, the diprotodonts
shared with marsupial bandicoots (peramelemorphia) the condition of
syndactyly – the bundling of the skeleton of the 2nd and 3rd foot digits
into a single connective tissue sheath, which is absent in any American
form. Further, the great mammal anatomist Szalay showed a striking
similarity in the articular surface in the calcaneum of the ankle – the
“continuous lower ankle joint pattern” – between the Australian forms
and a single South American form, the mysterious mouse-like Dromiciops.
These conflicting links resulted in multiple phylogenetic models and
biogeographic schemes, though most workers eventually accepted the
monophyly of all Australian forms and Dromiciops to form the clade
australodelphia. The first support for this came from the primitive
molecular phylogeny using serological techniques. However, a recent
comprehensive molecular and combined molecular and morphological studied
by Meredith et al and Beck et al appears to provided several interesting
clues regarding the emergence and affinities of extant marsupials. The
tree emerging from the efforts of these workers is shown below.

[![marsupial](https://i1.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3205/2897348663_41f1d47140_b.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/2897348663/ "marsupial by somasushma, on Flickr")

Based on the tree it is amply clear that the extant American forms are
paraphyletic with respect to the australodelphian radiation. The
simplest explanation from this tree would be that the Australian forms
were derived from a single introduction of a basal Dromiciops-like form
to Australia from South America via the Antarctica. There are potential
barriers to migration from South American to Australia via Antarctica in
the Cenozoic: 1) The Trans-Antarctic mountain range was in place and 2)
Between 64-52 Mya the connection between Australia and East Antarctica
was getting increasingly tenuous with the Southern Ocean opening up. All
indications from molecular clocks are that the marsupial radiation of
Australia was a post-Mesozoic one, probably beginning earliest in the
Early Eocene (\~54.5 Mya). Hence, the introduction of the Australian
forms occurred earlier than that, probably in the middle-late Paleocene
(59-55 Mya). Given the above barriers to migration in this age, the tree
is consistent with a single rare invasion of a South American founder
form to Australia.

Now does this match the fossil record? Well perhaps it is in the eye of
the beholder :-). We have a great radiation of South American marsupials
already in place between the KT-boundary to around 58.7 Mya in Bolivian
and Brazilian Paleocene deposits – more than 15 different taxa are
recognized from these sites. There is no evidence that any of these
early Cenozoic marsupials have any Australian counterparts. This is
consistent the above phylogenetic picture of the original Cenozoic
marsupial radiation occurring in South America, which was mostly
independent of the Australian radiation. While many of these Paleocene
S. American forms resemble generalized opossums and shrew opossums they
are too fragmentary to be certain of a specific affinity of
didelphomorphia or paucituberculata. In terms of the Dromiciops-like
forms the situation is extremely tentative: Two Paleocene forms from
these deposits, namely Khasia and Mirandatherium, are considered early
representatives of the microbiotherian radiation to which Dromiciops
belongs. However, they are too fragmentary to be certain of their
affinities. Likewise there are supposed microbiotheres from Antarctica
which are from around \~44 Mya, but these too are too fragmentary to be
certain. The first confirmed Dromiciops-like form is Microbiotherium
from around 16.5 Mya. Thus, objectively speaking, there is indeed a huge
lacuna in the fossil record of the australodelphians of South America,
even thought there is reasonable evidence for a major early radiation of
marsupials there. The first bona fide australodelphian from Australia is
Djarthia from the famous Tingamarra formation from 54-55 Mya. The recent
report of the ankle bones of Djarthia confirm beyond doubt its primitive
australodelphian nature, and make it the oldest confirmed member of this
clade. But it is already in Australia and in the company of some really
enigmatic mammals like Tingamarra and Thylacotinga, and a primitive
fragmentary bat. There have been doubts about Tingamarra being even a
marsupial. Based on these results Godthelp and Beck have tried to claim
that the australodelpians actually emerged in Australia and were
back-transferred to South America. While not implausible, we find this
an utterly unnecessary proposal, especially given their reliance on
absence of evidence (dangerous given the fragmentary nature of the small
mammalian fossils\!). It is possible that the mysterious forms
accompanying Djarthia were other mammalian (marsupial) immigrants via
Antarctica that flourished only briefly before going extinct. Thus,
Australia was entirely left open for the great radiation of
australodelphians from a Djarthia-like lineage. From elephantine
diprotodonts, to extraordinary carnivores emerging from within the
herbivorous diprotodontia such as the marsupial lion Thylacoleo and the
carnivorous kangaroo Ekaltadeta the australodelphians diversified to
occupy every possible terrestrial niche.

But the major part of the marsupial story is the part that unfolded
outside of Australia beginning in the Mesozoic. Till the end of the
Mesozoic there are no genuine South American, Antarctic or Australian
marsupials. Relatively recent exciting fossil evidence has shown that
the most primitive stem marsupial appears in Asia in the famous Chinese
Yixian formation along side one of the most primitive stem placentals
Eomaia. This primitive 125 Mya form is in many ways rather like the
Didelphis opossum of today – a small tree-climbing form. From such a
precursor an initial seeding of North America appears to have occurred.
In the North American Cretaceous a major stem marsupial radiation
appears to have taken place; they appear to have been the dominant
mammalian fauna in this period largely exceeding the placentals in
number of taxa. These included opossum-like forms such Alphadon, the
pediomyids, the larger carnivorous forms like deltatheroidans
(Atokatherium) and stagodontids like Didelphodon, and mysterious
herbivores like Galsbius. In the latest phase of the Cretaceous before
the K/T extinction they appear to have crossed over from North America
to Europe as a low diversity lineage. In Asia, on the contrary they
appear to have been largely dominated in numbers by the placentals, and
mainly lingered on as low diversity primitive clades like Sulestes,
Marsasia and Asiatherium. One stem marsupial radiation, the carnivorous
deltatheroidans, also appears to have been fairly prevalent in the late
Cretaceous of Asia. The reason for this complementary distribution of
marsupials and placentals is largely mysterious. Then K/T extinction
appears to have battered the stem marsupials severely – they were nearly
wiped out in North America, the deltatheroidans and other sporadic
Asiatic lineages also appear to have largely vanished. Thus the end of
the age of the dinosaurs was in a sense the end of the age of the first
great marsupial radiation.

Nearly immediately after the extinction event the new radiation began in
South America, where till then no marsupials were apparently present.The
very first marsupials from S. Am. are from the Peruvian Laguna Umayo
deposits just a little after the K/T boundary and are extremely
fragmentary. Though people have temptingly tried to connect the dental
remains in these deposits with the latest North American Cretaceous
forms like Peradectes and Pediomys we cannot be sure of their
phylogenetic affinities. But in the least they suggest that marsupials
probably reached S. Am. just before the K/T extinction and probably
exploded immediately after it, perhaps due to the ecological opening
created by the extinction. In the next 5 million years a great diversity
of marsupials emerge in these regions; many of them appear to resemble
the modern didelphids, but given that the opossums retain so much of the
primitive marsupial condition it is hard to be certain if these forms
are specifically sister-groups to the modern didelphids. Some of these
forms like Szalinia are really primitive in dental morphology, whereas
others like Andinodelphys and Pucadelphys resemble the modern forms more
closely in dental features, but have other cranial features that are
more primitive than any modern opossum. Thus, Szalinia may be close the
ancestral founder of the S. Am. radiation, whereas the forms like
Andinodelphys and Pucadelphys are the stem members of a great radiation
of South American carnivorous marsupials, the Borhyaenoids
(sparassodontia) as suggested by the great French anatomist Muizon. In
my own opinion genuine didelphids appear only later and a Miocene
Argentine form, Sparassocynus, with an extraordinary ear structure is
actually much closer to the modern didelphid opossums. It appears to
represent an interesting branch of the otherwise generalist didelphid
lineage that was the second hyper-carnivorous marsupial lineage in S.
Am. The first hyper-carnivorous lineage was that of the borhyaenoids,
which was extremely successful. It began in the Paleocene in the form of
the tree-climbing carnivore Mayulestes from Bolivia and the related
Allqokirus. Towards the middle-late Paleocene more advanced forms like
Patene emerge in Brazilian deposits. From the Eocene the borhyaenoids
started growing enormously in size in the form of the proborhyaenid
radiation – large bear-like forms such as Callistoe, Arminiheringia and
Proborhyaena which was larger than a grizzly bear are seen. By the
Miocene they reached their highpoint occupying a range of carnivore
niches: otter-like Cladosictis, a marten-like Prothylacinus, a peculiar
long-snouted ambush predator Lycopsis, mongoose-like hathlyacynids,
leopard-like Borhyaena, saber-toothed Thylacosmilus resembling the
saber-toothed cats and the probably bear-like Pharsophorus. By the
Pliocene the Borhyaenoids decline precipitously and became extinct for
unknown reasons.

In addition to these carnivores, the S. American marsupials also
radiated into other niches and also widely populated western Antarctica
before it was frozen over by the circum-polar currents. These included
the sister groups of the extant shrew opossums, like Epidolops and the
later Abderites which evolved unusual shearing dentition to deal with a
range of hard plant-derived foods. Another radiation of this clade
spawned the rodent- and lagomorph- like Argyrolagus, which probably also
hopped on its long hindlegs and Groeberia and Klohnia with enormous
incisors. After occupying South America for almost 60 Mya the marsupials
largely collapsed around the end of the Pliocene and only a few small,
mainly generalized (excluding the specialized aquatic opossums of S.
Am.) lineages remain alive. The reasons for this, at least to me, are
not clear. Through the Cenozoic marsupials also appear in North America,
Europe, Africa and Asia in low densities but eventually became extinct.
These forms resemble the generalist opossums but are only known from
fragmentary remains and we know little of most of them. Their origins
are also bit murky. The North American early Cenozoic forms are the
typified by the well-known Herpetotherium that appears to be a primitive
generalized opossum-like form. They appear to be survivors of the K/T
extinction that later became extinct rather than being related to modern
North American opossums which were later immigrants from South America.
The African forms from the Oligocene of Egypt are clearly close to those
from Europe and both have been placed in the same genus, Peratherium. In
the latest Cretaceous of we have Herpetotherium-like forms reaching
Europe from N. Am. It is possible that these European and African forms
are descendents of those survivors of the K/T event. In contrast the
Asian forms like Sinoperadectes are apparently not very close to these
Euro-African forms. So they might be survivors of a Cretaceous fauna of
Asian marsupials also related to North American forms like Peradectes.
Of course most of these forms being too fragmentary are a mystery to
most of us.
