+++
title = "The tradition of vAgbhaTa in the drAviDa and Andhraxa0countries"

+++
We had earlier briefly alluded to the living tradition of vAgbhaTa in
the chera country, which is practiced by the aShTavaidya-s. We currently
believe this might be an early transmission of the great physician’s
tradition to the south of the subcontinent that got fixed there (given
that the evidence suggests that vAgbhaTa himself lived in the sindhu
region, i.e. modern Sindh). We wondered if such a tradition was also
transmitted to the Tamil country during the original transmission to the
chera country. While we found no direct evidence for this, we learnt of
another medical tradition derived from that of vAgbhaTa to have
flourished in the Tamil and Telugu countries. We must mention that our
investigations cannot be regarded as complete as we have insufficiently
examined the relevant texts. The principal text in concern is the
parahita-saMhitA (PS) of shrInAtha paNDita. The one printed in the Tamil
country has the Sanskrit in the Telugu script with a Telugu translation,
so were unable to do anything with this. The one printed in Andhra is
only partial, and seems quite full of printing errors which made it
quite hard to follow. Then there are several Vijayanagaran inscriptions
that are quite enlightening which connected to this story in course of
an investigation on the medical traditions amongst my medieval
co-ethnics.

The primary transmission of vAgbhaTa’s tradition to the Telugu and Tamil
countries appears to have been redacted and recompiled into a
comprehensive work known as the parahita-saMhitA. This work was done by
a learned brAhmaNa named shrInAtha-paNDita apparently of the Andhra
country. The PS has three kANDa-s called the sAdhAraNa, aShTA\~Nga and
rasa. The rasakANDa is an innovation of shrInAtha-paNDita, but was
unavailable the version I examined – hence it is unclear if it actually
includes material that was derived from a specialized derivative the
kaula tAntrika tradition – the rasAyana. While stressing the fact that
we have not systematically studied the text, it appeared to me that the
treatment of burns (dagdha chikitsa) and tendonitis were some novel
features of this text (of course they could be derived from any of the
earlier texts in the vAgbhaTa tradition that we have not examined).

We believe that shrInAtha-paNDita was the founder of the tradition
followed by two unrelated but connected families of physicians mentioned
in the Andhra inscriptions. The first of these were of an older layer of
Telugu smArta-s of the Atreya gotra. The first Atreya inscription
mentions the parahita Atreya as being the prANAcharya or court physician
of the kamma chieftain si\~NgayanAyaka of korukoNDa who was one of the
warlords in the alliance that repulsed the army of Islam during the
southern thrust of the Tughlaqs. The next inscription of this clan was
of parahita Atreya son of kAlanAtha bhaTTa. He was the court physician
of the reDDi princess of Rajahmundry, anatalli, the sister of
kumAragiri, who gave him the village mentioned in the inscription. The
second family of physicians was vaDama smArta-s of the drAviDa country
belonging to the kAshyapa gotra. They appear to have settled in the
Andhra country in Ponnupalli and their lineage is given as: periyavilla
parahita-\>bhAskarArya-\>villanArya-\>si\~NganArya. We have inscriptions
of bhAskarArya and si\~NganArya. Both families mention the founder of
the parahita tradition, which is shrInAtha-paNDita, to have been a
snake-doctor. He successful treated a snake with a blockage in its
alimentary canal and was given the title sarpavyAdhichikitsaka.
