+++
title = "upAsana of the 11/12xa0vilAsinI-s"

+++
One of the (apparently) extinct and distinct branches of the kula system
is the kula of the vilAsinI devI-s. Few modern upAsaka-s appear to be
aware of it; in part this might be due to the extreme secrecy observed
in the kula circles in imparting this system. It is closely allied with
shrI-kula: kaula bAlA upAsana in some ways and regular kameshvarI in
others (note the mention in the LSS). Once it might have had a
pan-Indian (or at least widespread distribution) distribution with
centers in Kashmir-Himalayan zone, Bengal and the drAviDa country. The
vilAsinI kula was also transmitted to the nAstIka-s whole-scale and
incorporated with little change (retaining the description of the devI-s
and also the consort bhairava without even an attempt at altering the
shaiva iconography).

The first lineage of vilAsinI upAsana is that of virUpa. She is invoked
in the middle of her chakra either as: 1) two-handed holding a kulisha
and a lotus 2) two handed with a kapAla and a vajra. She is red in color
like that of dawn and has three eyes, two of which are half-closed
expressing the supreme bliss of the shR^ingAra rasa and bordered by
pretty eyelashes and brows. Her midriff is lean and well-proportioned
with three pretty folds (trivaliH). Her form is that of a passionate
maid the prime of her youth. She may also be worshiped in conjunction
with aghora-bhairava, whom she embraces by entwining her arms around
him, even as he, the knower of her bewitching thighs, hugs her ample
breasts. She turns away from the crescent moon on his head. Her secret
mantra incorporates the vagbhava, mAyA and manmatha bIja-s.

She is surrounded by the band of 10 vilAsinI-s associated with the 5
mahAbhUta bIja-s:  
pR^ithivi bIja: 1) pAtanI – chakra and kapAla; 2) lochanA – kartari and
khaTvA\~Nga; both are yellow in color.  
jala bIja: 3)mAraNI- kulisha and kapAla; 4)mAmakI – kartari and
khaTvA\~Nga; both are black in color  
agni bIja: 5) AkarshaNI – lotus and kapAla; 6)pANDAravAsinI – kartari
and khaTvA\~Nga; both are red in color, but the later wears white
clothing.  
vAyu bIja: 7) narteshvarI – khaDga and kapAla; 8) tArA – kartari and
khaTvA\~Nga; both are green in color.  
AkAsha bIja: 9) padmajvAlinI – 4 hands, a\~Nkusha, brahmA’s head, kapAla
and daNdAyudha, grey in color; trimukhI- 3 heads, kartari and pAsha,
grey, red and white color.

The second lineage of vilAsinI is that of the siddha shabhara
vidyAnandanatha from the cave near shrIshailaM. This is the
mahAshri\~NgAra-vilAsinI or guhyavilAsinI. He himself was initiated into
this kaula practice by the siddha karuNAnandanAtha.
mahAshri\~NgAra-vilAsinI is always invoked in conjunction with her
bhairava consort narteshvara, who is two armed holding the pinAka and
the pAshupata missile and bright red in color. He is conceived as
eternally young and the epitome of male handsomeness, wearing a bright
pearl necklace. His eyes are half-closed in the bliss of chidAnanda
arising from maithuna with his kulA\~NganA. guhyavilAsinI is invoked in
a highly erotic form with two arms holding a kartari and a pAsha,
wearing a pearl necklace and a\~NganA-priya flowers as decoration. She
is in a tight embrace with her husband and trembling in the intoxication
of shR^i\~NgAra-bhoga with her face lit up by bewitching smiles. They
are thus conceived as residing on the pinnacle of the beautiful mountain
of chittavishrAma. She is invoked by the secret mantra of 5 syllables
which are like the pa\~ncha-tanmAtra sAyaka of kameshvarI. One who
performs her sAdhana and attains siddhi of her mantra is able to perform
ShaTkarma-s and also attains a\~njana-siddhi, guTikAsiddhi and
strI-vashikaraNaM. It is also the sure-shot path to the experience of
samAdhi with which the object and subject distinction dissolves into a
condition of bliss. vilAsinI and narteshvara are surrounded in their
maNdala by two AvaraNa. In the first of them resides the highly erotic
vidyAdharI. She has 3 heads and carries a kapAla from which she drinks
wine and a khaTvA\~Nga. She is brilliant red in color and clothed in
only a garland of nAgakesha flowers and bears long thick flowing untied
tresses, with her youthful body excited with erotic pleasure. Her secret
mantra is similar to that of Chinnamasta. In the next AvaraNa are
invoked the 10 vilAsinI-s as in the first vidhi of vilAsinI.

The deshika performing the mahAshri\~NgAra-vilAsinI prayoga chooses a
beautiful secluded house, garden or mountain and retires there with his
initiated kulA\~NganA on an aShTamI night. After having a bath and
perfuming themselves they invoke rambhA and tilottamA to confer dIkSha
for the sAdhana on them. Then, he and his dUtI invoke the devatA-s of
the AvaraNa and prepare themselves for maithuna by performing the
navapuShpI. Then the kulA\~NganA unifies her identity with vilAsinI and
the deshika with narteshvara. Having done so, they both invoke the mUla
mantra and see the blazing mayukha-s emanating from the mantra and
melting the whole universe into a uniform sea of blood in the middle of
which the deshika and his kulA\~NganA are unified with the bhairava and
the devI. Then they begin the special cyclic japa of the vilAsinI mUla
mantra: the 5 blazing bIja-s of the mantra are conceived as emerging
from the yoni of the dUtI and entering the li\~Nga of the deshika and
passing through his body they emanate through his nose. Then they are
taken in by the dUtI through her nostrils and passing through her body
again emerge from her yoni. This cyclical japa is continued for 500
times, followed by the reciprocal deployment of the vajroli mudra by
both the dUtI and the deshika. At the conclusion of this they experience
the merger of their selves and experience the universe whirling around
them and melting into a liquid gold. The unified dUtI and deshika
experience total oneness of the universe and see it dissolve into the
vyoman. The vyoman itself dissolves into the pure chit and there only
the experience of samAdhi.
