+++
title = "On umAsvAti the jainaxa0scholar"

+++
Though the nAstIka mata-s in their reactionary fervor chose to keep away
from deva-bhASha, its lure could not be avoided. The precision and
abilities of deva-bhAShA, as well as the need to keep up with the
shAstra-s and disputations of their AstIka rivals, made them eventually
accept devabhAShA. This was facilitated to a great extant as the AstIka
brain drain into these heterodoxies gained momentum with brAhmaNa and
kShatriya scholars converting to these mata-s. Thus, deva-bhASha become
the language of the educated from gandhara to pANDuraNga in Champa
(central Vietnam) suvarNadvIpa in the sea (Java). But in the larger
nAstIka sphere the anti-Sanskrit undercurrent linked closely to the
anti-AstIka sentiment was never fully lost. This attitude was stronger
among the jaina nAstIka-s, and persisted much longer than in their
bauddha counterparts – they tended to use the deshI medium much more,
with Sanskrit works becoming prevalent only somewhat later. This is also
corroborated by the jaina story of the Acharya siddhasena who wanted to
render their deshI and Prakrit works into devavANI, but was made braShTa
for that suggestion, until he performed prAyashchitta. Yet, due to the
brAhmaNa brain drain even the jaina-s adopted saMskR^itAnusAra quite
early for the purposes of philosophical discourse around the first 2
centuries of the CE. One of the first to do this was the great jaina
philosopher umAsvAti (umAsvAmI according to the digambara-s). vAchaka
umAsvAti’s work the tattvArthAdhigama sUtra-s (=tattvArtha sUtra-s; TAS)
is one of the important hallmarks in the history of Indian thought that
is comparable to the AstIka darshana sUtra-s. Its role as the primary
pillar of the jaina mata is clear from the fact that it has been studied
across sectarian lines among them and studied and commented by several
notable jainAcharya-s – siddhasena, haribhadra sUrI, devagupta,
akala\~Nka bhaTTa among others. Among the AstIka-s, even the medieval
period, TAS was studied as a pUrvapakSha and cited by vidyAraNya in his
sarvadarshana saMgraha.

Of vAchaka umAsvAti we know not much and whatever accounts exist are
confused and conflicting. At least one jaina account mentions that he
belonged to the brahminical harita gotra but another contradicts this
and mentions his gotra as kaubhiShaNa (or unknown origin). There is some
agreement that he was a teacher in the jaina school of pATalIputra. A
study of the TAS reveals certain key points about umAsvAti-s origins:  
1\) The main stay of the early jaina mata were the vaishya-s and their
royal kShatriya patrons. This is clearly supported by the fact that the
vaishya occupations are considered the best options for a jaina.
Secondly, this is also consistent with the use of the deshI medium which
was indeed the prevalent speech of the vaishya-s and possibly also some
the earlier kShatriya dynasties like maurya and nanda. In contrast to
this trend, the TAS is the first recorded instance of a jaina author
composing a text in Sanskrit – few other jaina texts were composed in
Sanskrit for a while after the TAS.  
2\) umAsvAti uses the sUtra style closely mirroring that used in the
AstIka systems authored by brAhmaNa philosophers. Thus, the TAS also
represents the first time the jaina-s used the style of sUtra-s similar
that prevalent from the vedic period among the AstIka-s. In its
organization the TAS consciously mirrors the foundational sUtra-s of
various AstIka darshana-s like those of kaNAda, akShapAda, pata\~njali
and bAdarAyaNa. The TAS has a closely linked commentary (by umAsvAti
himself according to shvetAmbara tradition) that resembles the yoga
sUtra-s and their integrally linked bhAShya, the vyAsa bhAShya.  
3\) The contents and philosophy of the TAS are clearly jaina, yet they
have several elements that definitely reflect AstIka thought. The TAS
positions itself as a shAstra for mokSha-dharma – this is same as what
vedAnta does (although their ideas of mokSha might differ). It presents
restraints and control of the senses (e.g. 7th adhyAya) which resemble
those of AstIka ascetic practices enjoined by the yoga tradition (e.g.
ahimsa, satya, asteya, brahmacharya, aparigraha etc.). Importantly, the
TAS mirror nyAya and vaisheShika thought in its analysis of substance
and the atomic theory (adhyAya 5).  
Thus, it appears quite likely that umAsvAti was a brAhmaNa convert to
the jaina mata, who brought in the Sanskritic sUtra tradition as well as
a certain philosophical elements (this will definitely offend hardline
jainas who want to separate themselves from the rest of Hindu
tradition). In the process he ended up writing what were probably the
first sUtra-s of the jaina-mata, equivalent to those of the AstIka
darshana-s, and thereby set the jaina darshana on level ground with the
astIka for the battles to ensue.

umAsvAti’s sUtra-s includes a feature that is not common in the
principal AstIka darshana-s, namely the sUtra-s that describe
geography/cosmography and types of deva-s (adhyAya-s 3 and 4). The
description of the types of deva-s including multiple indra-s and their
vimAna-s (“spaceships”) is primarily to establish an alternative system
that purposely differs from that of the AstIka-s from whom they branched
off (we have noted before examples of how the bauddha-s as well as
jaina-s did this on these pages). In contrast, the principal AstIka
darshana-s affiliated with the veda did not need to include such
sections because their versions were the standard versions which were
already provided by their shruti and original itihAsa-purANa. By
creating such parallel versions the jaina-s (and other nAstIka-s) could
now set up cosmographies and theographies that could claim a
hierarchical superiority over the standard model. For example by
creating a system of multiple serial indra-s they could trivialize the
foremost deva of the vedic AstIka-s. However, the nAstIka-s were not
unique (and possibly not original) in this regard – the sectarian
astIka-s too set up such systems to supersede earlier systems in their
cosmographic/theographic hierarchy. For example, among the shaiva-s, the
lAkula-s who succeeded the veda-affiliated original pAshupata-s (who
have no cosmographic sutra-s) added a new system of shiva-s (e.g.
vidyeshvara-s) to supersede the original rudra-s of their predecessors.
This process continued with the siddhAnta tantras with new shiva-s being
added on top of the lAkula system till sadAshiva is reached. Finally,
the trika and shrIvidyA systems even place preta-s of sadAshiva and
others in the throne of their respective devI-s.

However, the most important intellectual contribution of vAchaka
umAsvAti was his analysis of life forms and matter. It is in this he
preserves some of the early aspects of Indian scientific thought. We had
earlier discussed on these pages the zoology of umAsvAti and his
classification of animals based on various anatomical and reproductive
characters (adhyAya 2). In adhyAya 5 of the TAS we find the early
exposition of jaina atomism:  
nANoH || 5.11  
There are no further divisions in the ultimate atom of matter.  
aNavaH skandhAsh-cha || 5.25  
Matter may exist in the form of either pure atoms or clusters there off
(skandhAH – molecules). The jaina authorities in elaborating on this
sUtra mention niyama-sAra 6 which declares the paramANu to be that
particle which cannot be divided further, and is itself the beginning,
the middle and the end of the particle. The associated bhAShya of the
TAS also cites an ancient unattributed verse which is reminiscent of
mammaTa’s opening of the kAvyaprakAsha which declares the paramANu to be
the ultimate cause, minute and indestructible.  
A remarkable feature of umAsvAti’s atomic theory is the postulation of
two forces to mediate the interactions between the ANu-s:  
snigdha-rUkShatvAd bandhaH || 5.32  
“snigdha” and “rUkSha” are the two properties that mediate atomic
combinations.  
He then formulates a system of rules involving these forces that mediate
atomic combinations.  
na jaghanya-guNAnAM | gunasAmye sadR^ishAnAM | dvyAdhikAdiguNAnAM tu |
bandhe samAdhikau pAriNAmikau || 5.33-5.35  
aNu-s possessing the minimum one degree of snigdha or rUkSha cannot
combine; aNU-s which have the same degree of snigdha or the same degree
of rUkSha cannot combine; two snigdha aNu-s or two rUkSha aNu-s can
combine if the snigdha or rUkSha of one is two or more degrees higher
than the other; during combination the aNu with equal or higher degree
of rukSha or snigdha transforms the property of the dissimilar aNu to
its own. Thus, umAsvAti postulates the existence of charge-like
properties to explain atomic combinations.
