+++
title = "A geopolitical round up"

+++
An elderly white American Hindu activist was going to a temple. On the
way she had an “accident” that nearly killed her. Was it in accident?
Some people know the real answer. va\~Nga paNDita smiled and said there
are certain things in geopolitics that cannot be said in public – they
are too dangerous. In my early days in the capital of the mlechCha
desha, when there was a much freer environment there, I discovered
certain things that are pretty obvious, but most observers simply fail
to notice. My lost friend, the non-jAmadagnya vatsa, from the southern
realms of mlechCha-desha had also, interestingly, discovered some of
these things. va\~Nga-paNDita cautioned him of the extreme danger in
publicly discussing some of those issues, but he did not desist and
promptly faced the consequences. va\~Nga paNDita had long predicted
certain geopolitical events with a time line. Hence, I could not help
thinking of him when the Caucasian flare up occurred over the past week.
In our long discussion, he had correctly predicted certain geopolitical
alignments and predicted how a certain alliance will begin the second
push against the Khaganate of the Rus. va\~NgIsha and me watched with
childish excitement that shocked the other adults around us a
documentary on the battle of Stalingrad where the Khaganate of the Rus
finally destroyed the Germans, signaling the end of their empire. At the
end of it va\~NgIsha remarked: “The Rus will be pressed hard again. The
Americans would send troops to hold a joint military exercise with the
Georgians and this would trigger the Khaganate to respond in an
unprecedented way. The Russian air force and navy might have weakened
but their land army has always been their strength –that is the lesson
of Stalingrad. Georgia and such places are the best options for a show
of strength to the Americans because it will be the land army operating
in their backyard. After all the bases where the Georgians are letting
in the Americans were built by the Russians. This will be pay back time
for Kosovo…” Not surprisingly, the Americans sent 1000 men to
participate in a joint exercise with the Georgians. Buoyed by this
vacuous display (remember, one of the American soldiers in this exercise
said in his interview that he did not know where Georgia was on the map
of the world – he only knew of an American state with that name\!) very
provocatively named “Exercise Immediate Response 2008” the Georgians
decided to put their lessons to immediate practice by attacking Russian
citizens in adjacent ethnically distinct enclaves. We are now watching
the results unfold.

Why would the Americans impel their allies to display such brinkmanship?
When va\~NgIsha and me exchanged notes we found had the answer for this.

In the meantime in the desh we are witnessing several events in need of
some attention. The worshipers of the big black stone launched two
attacks: one in the city of my birth, and another in the lATa country.
There was no real response, instead the dasyu rulers of the land want to
equate the SIMI with RSS. After all king yudhiShThira had said that
people might see the son of vivasvAn visit others houses but will think
they are safe till the moment he arrives, noose in hand, at their own.
The other event concerns the rebellion of amareshvara – Hindus cannot
even control their own temples in their own land. Here again we see that
the taskara-rAjya is siding with the turuShka-s – it is amazing how the
tail wags the dog\! The world hardly gets to learn the reality of these
atrocious events in jambupura – only the Hindi language press has been
reporting the shocking reality – the napuMsaka Indian army and police
are harassing and killing Hindus. The Anglophone Hindu elite will be
jolted out of their complacence if they go and see the Hindi newspapers
for graphic pictures of these atrocities. Truly jonarAja’s view that
this is all an outgrowth of the sapling of harSharAjA seems right seeing
the Indian army and law enforcement acting like in an Islamic state.
Will these events incite the Hindu martial ardor to erupt? Unlikely, but
I will happy to be proven wrong. It is striking to note how the Hindus
used the “democratic process” to bring upon themselves a government of
taskara-s and kulu\~ncha-s who are veshyAputra-s.

“*dugdhAbdhi dhavalaM tena saro dUra-girau kR^itaM |  
amareshvara yAtrAyaM janair adyApi dR^ishyate ||*”  
kalhaNa’s rAjataraMgiNi 1.267
