+++
title = "The case of AchAryaxa0vArShagaNya"

+++
It is extremely common for ancient Indian AchArya-s to remain mere
names, with little if anything else known about them. As a result their
dates and biographies are subject to wild speculations and debates. Such
debates, often spearheaded by White indologists and their oriental
imitators, show a general tendency to mistrust Hindu sources, obfuscate
matters and apply an ad hoc system of decisions to decide whether
someone is early or late. It would seem that their general their rule of
the thumb is to provide as late dates as possible for most Hindu
sources, and try to make it appear that most philosophical development
happened after the Buddhists or the contact with the Greeks.

One Acharya of considerable interest in the development of Hindu thought
is vArShagaNya, the great proponent of the sAMkhya-yoga school. He could
perhaps be credited with being the first to formulate a version of the
law of conservation of mass (energy) and thus becomes an important
individual in the history of Hindu science. He is cited as an ancient
authority in the vyAsa-bhAShya on the sUtra-s of pata\~njali. vAchaspati
miShra suggests that he as the author an ancient sAMkhya text termed the
ShaShThI-tantra from which the vyAsa-bhAshya draws its citations. In the
least it is certain that in discussing sUtra-s of pata\~njali the
commentator vyAsa had access to a text by vArShagaNya. He is also
mentioned in a commentary named yuktidIpikA on Ishvara-kR^iShNa’s
kArika-s as a prior authority of sAMkhya.

Multiple Chinese sources also describe vArShagaNya as an authority of
the sAMkhya school. One of these is the Indian Acharya paramArtha who
settled in Nanjing, China (around 550 CE) and composed a biographical
work on the philosopher vasubandhu of the kaushika gotra from school of
puShpapura (modern Peshawar in the Islamic Terrorist state). In this
work he states that the great sage of the sAMkhya school was vArShagaNya
who was king of the nAga-s living at the base of the Vindhya mountains.
His student vindhyavAsa reworked and revised the sAMkhya doctrine and
composed a collection of shloka-s containing this revised version of
sAMkhya. He participated in a philosophical debate with the bauddha
AchArya buddhamitra in Ayodhya, presided over by the king vikramAditya.
vindhyavAsa routed buddhamitra in this debate and as result won a great
reward from king vikramAditya and thus brought the ascendancy of
sAMkhya. It was in order to counter vindhyavAsa that the bauddha-s
rallied under vasubandhu to compose the polemical work
paramArtha-saptati against sAMkhya.

The chInAchArya Hsuen-Tsang’s student Kuei-chi considered the positions
of the sAMkhya theorists as the pUrva-pakSha in defending the bauddha
mata. Here, he mentions that the chief sAMkhya teacher was a certain
ba-li-sha in chIna-bhAShA, which meant “rain” in deva-bhAShA. His
followers were known as the “rain-host” (which would be a Chinese
translation of varSha=rain; gaNa=host). Their chief work is supposed to
have been some thing called the hiraNya-saptati, which was used in
debating against Indian bauddha Acharya-s who were the teachers of the
chIna-s.

Thus, the available Chinese and Hindu material clearly indicate that
vArShagaNya was a major sAMkhya teacher who had influenced the course of
its development.

paramArtha mentions that buddhamitra was vasubandhu’s teacher. Now the
White Indologists and their fellow travelers concluded that since
vArShagaNya was a teacher of vindhyavAsa, vArShagaNya should have in
turn been a senior contemporary of vasubandhu and place him at around
350 CE. This claim has since accepted and used over and over again to
date vyAsa bhAShya, the yoga-sUtra etc. However, this claim when
examined closely has problematic issues and arises from the indological
habit of accepting certain traditional presentations as facts over
others, to suit the late dates typically favored by White Indologists.  
1\) The Chinese work of paramArtha is clearly mythologizing vArShagaNya-
it calls him the king of the nAga-s. 2) It calls buddhamitra as the
teacher of vasubandhu during vikramAditya’s reign. But this is
contradicted by the accounts of Hsuen-Tsang and Kuei-chi who state that
vasubandhu was brAhmaNa manoratha’s student and do not establish a
direct connection between the bauddha Acharya defeated by the sAMkhya-s
and vasubandhu. 3) paramArtha skips from vikramAditya to bAlAditya in
his narrative (around 470 CE) suggesting his account of gupta chronology
was contrived. 4) The Chinese sources also conflate the hiraNya-saptati
with the kArika of Ishvara-kR^iShNa – something for which we have no
evidence from any Indian source. In conclusion we see 1) the general
sketchiness of paramArtha’s narrative from the historical viewpoint, 2)
its variance from other chIna sources, and 3) the tendency of both
paramArtha and Kuei-chi to mythologize vArShagaNya, though to different
degrees. Thus they can hardly be used to conclusively anchor the date of
vArShagaNya to the exclusion of evidence from all other Indian textual
sources.

In the Hindu sources vArShagaNya is associated with the tradition of the
sAmaveda. There was a major sAmavedic redactor of that name who is
mentioned in the jaiminIya gR^ihya sUtra, and there might have even been
a shAkha of the sAmaveda (or sub-school of jaiminIya) by that name. The
vaMsha brAhmaNa of the sAmavedic tradition provides his full name as
sushravas vArShagaNya and places him as a student of prAtarAhna kauhala.
A certain vArShagaNya is also referred to in bharata’s nATya shAstra as
the founder of a technique of discharging a weapon. The most important
mention of vArShagaNya is in the mahAbharata (vulgate/Ganguli edition
12\[shAnti parvan\].319). The specific context of his mention is
notable: Chapters 12.302-12.316 (vulgate) contain an elaboration of
different forms of sAMkhya thought – including some of the high points
of Hindu thought, namely early formulations of the evolutionary theory
of life. This is followed by chapters 12.317-13.320 that delve into
yoga. The yoga presented here (12.317), while brief, is definitely
related to the presentation in pata\~njali’s sUtra-s. It mentions the
prANAyama, the eight limbs of yoga, the attainment of siddhi-s and the
state of samAdhi. However, it is important to note that there is no
mention what so ever of pata\~njali. Instead in the subsequent chapter
(12.319) in a brahmodaya between yAj\~navalkya and the gandharva
vishvAvasu we are given a list of yoga-sAMkhya teachers, which includes
the name vArShagaNya, along with other sAMkhya teachers like kapila,
jaigishavya and pa\~nchashikha but not pata\~njali. This, together with
the general indication of the epic sAMkhya preceding the classical
sAMkhya, suggests that pata\~njali, unlike kapila, was a later figure
and was systematizing in his sUtra-s the yoga already presented in the
epic. It also shows that vArShagaNya was an early pre-pata\~njali
teacher of the sAMkhya-yoga school rather than a senior contemporary of
vasubandhu of the abhidharma.

In all likelihood given vArShagaNya’s mention in the Mbh, he was a
pre-bauddha teacher of an atomic sAMkhya theory. Perhaps this also
explains why the vyAsa bhAShya is termed so. It was probably based on a
sAMkhya text of vArShagaNya associated with the mahAbhArata and thereby
vyAsa. Hence, it could have inherited that name, although it is entirely
possible that the author was simply named vyAsa and conflated with the
Epic author (e.g. vAchaspati in his commentary calls the yoga-bhAShya’s
author veda-vyAsa). Ultimately, in all accounts it was the followers of
his school who revised the original teachings of vArShagaNya that the
bauddha-s debated, rather than vArShagaNya, consistent with him being
earlier than the dates of those debates.

We may reconstruct the following from the prior discussions the
following relative temporal series:  
vedic brAhmaNa authors-\>(yAj\~navalkya and his school)-\> kapila-\>
pa\~nchashikha-\> jaigishavya and vArShagaNya-\> pata\~njali-\> vyAsa of
bhAShya + other members who follow vArShagaNya school-\>
Ishvara-kR^iShNa (classical sAMkhya)-\> gauDapAda-\> sha\~Nkara-\>
vAchaspati mishra

The four following the vedic brAhmaNa authors, along with the parallel
tradition of the bhR^igu smR^iti, constitute the saMkhya of the
mahAbhArata. We would place all AchArya-s prior to Ishvara-kR^iShNa as
being before 400 CE.
