+++
title = "The guNa-s of sAMkhya as physicalxa0concepts"

+++
See also:  
[Elements of sAMkhyan theories of atomism and consciousness in early
Hindu
thought](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/01/20/elements-of-samkhyan-theories-of-atomism-and-consciousness-in-early-hindu-thought/ "Permanent Link to Elements of sAMkhyan theories of atomism and consciousness in early Hindu thought")  
[The case of AchArya
vArShagaNya](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/01/21/the-case-of-acharya-varshaganya/ "Permanent Link to The case of AchArya vArShagaNya")

A pervasive element of Hindu thought is the concept of the tri-guNa-s.
Their use is common in colloquial discussion: food might be classified
in terms of guNa-s or even people might be categorized based on their
dominant guNa. The same tri-guNa terminology might also be used to
describe other abstract entities such as organismal behavior, moral
qualities of a person or properties of material. The concept of
tri-guNa-s while intuitively grasped by a Hindu is a very fluid in terms
precise definition. Despite its pervasiveness in modern Hindu discourse
its origins lie in the late- and post- vedic developments leading to
sAMkhya thought. Because of the imprecise and intuitive understanding of
guNa-s in general usage there has been much confusion amongst many
modern students of Hindu thought when the guNa-s are used in the context
of technical ancient literature. In course of my study of the
sAMkhya-yoga system, I became increasingly aware of this issue.

Amongst modern Hindus one of the first to correctly grasp the technical
meanings of the guNa terminology was the scholar from va\~Nga,
Brajendranath Seal. He correctly saw that the early sAMkhya thinkers
considered guNa-s to be not just “qualities” but real physical concepts.
That this was the original understand becomes clear from the
vyAsa-bhAShya. In explaining the sUtra 3.44 of pata\~njali the VB
clearly explains each term of the sUtra as an increasingly basic
description of matter – evolute of the original prakR^iti. The VB
telling uses atypical descriptors for the 3 guNa-s, namely khyAti, kriyA
and stithishIlA. These terms along with the context clearly imply that
guNa-s of sAMkhya were physical concepts. The sattva (=khyAti) in the
most mysterious in modern terms by a distinctive feature of sAMkhya – it
might be taken to mean “information” or that aspect of matter that
responds to/interacts with the puruSha (of sAMkhya) or consciousness.
rajas (=kriyA) is energy and tamas (=stithishIlA) is mass. That these
were viewed as physical entities becomes assumes great significance in
the context of a sAMkhyan conservation principle guNa-s. In its
formulation this principle resembles the modern physical conservation
principle of mass/energy. This is provided by the vyAsa bhAShya in the
commentary on sUtra 2.19 of pata\~njali:  
visheSha-avisheSha li\~Nga mAtra-ali\~NgAni guNa-parvan ||  
VB: guNAstu sarva dharmAnupAtino na pratyastam ayante na+upajAyante |
vyaktibhir eva-atIta-anAgatavyaya-AgamavatIbhir guNa-anvayinIbhir
upajananaapAyadharmakA iva pratyavabhAsante |  
“Though guNa-s go through all kinds of transformations/evolution
(\*anupAt) they are neither destroyed nor created. They appear to as if
they had properties that come into being and disappear on account of the
various forms of matter formed by the guNas past and yet to come (i.e.
the forms of matter) those come and go out of existence.”

As mentioned above the vyAsa- bhAShya in describing the guNa-s clearly
conceives them as the basis of matter. When we take that with above
explanation in the context of sutra 2.19 it becomes apparent that the
vyAsa-bhAShya is implying the physical conservation of guNa-s. Some
points of note are: 1) The word dharma here is used in conjunction with
the word “anupatinaH”. In technical Sanskrit this word is used to imply
arithmetic progression or a series. So what is meant by dharma are the
states of matter that form via the sAMkhyan transformation or
evolutionary process from the guNa-s of prakR^iti to the paramANu-s of
the bhUta-s. 2) In this light the word vyakti in the next sentence
implies the various manifestations or forms of matter/energy. Thus, the
sAMkhyan statement of the principle of conservation parallels the modern
physical principle: “Matter+energy is neither created nor destroyed; it
is only transformed from one form to another”. Is this explanation
provided the bhAShya and its physical interpretation as presented above
compatible with the original content of the sUtra of pata\~njalI? It
strongly appears this is the case because the vyAsa bhAShya does
consistently show a close understanding of the sUtra text. While the
sUtra text is hard to render in a modern language, it does seem the
bhAShya is very much in the right context. We can with some trepidation
render 2.19 thus: “The evolutes of the guNa-s \[which are the basis of
matter\] are particular and unparticular, which are differentiated and
undifferentiated \[matter\].”

As far as I know the saMkhya statement is the most sophisticated
statement of the conservation principle in the ancient world. Amongst
the Greek equivalents of the Hindus Thales had a conservation principle
but it was much less sophisticated as far as I can see.
