+++
title = "shrI sUkta of thexa0R^igveda"

+++
The celebrated shrI sUkta has spread widely beyond its original role in
the vedic gR^ihya liturgy and prayoga-s of the vedic vidhAna-s. Its
earliest occurrences are seen in the khila of the R^igveda and the
bodhAyana and vaikhAnasa mantra pATha-s of the kR^iShNa yajur veda. It
is also related to the ShaShThI sUkta of the mAnava gR^ihya sUtra. The
tantric literature also mentions it—the most prominent mention is in the
lakShmI tantra (LT 36.121-140 and LT 50.1-237). LT50.1-2367 gives a
detailed account of the pA\~ncharatric prayoga of the shrI sUkta in
worshiping lakShmI. The lakShmI-ratna kosha is another text providing
its deployment in the worship of shrI. In the kAdividyA stream of
shrI-kula tradition a saMpuTikaraNa of the sUkta and the pa\~nchadashI
(and other bIja-s like mAya, shrI, kAma, vANI and tripurashekharAnta) is
a favored mode of deployment. The shrI sUkta has even been retained by
the bauddha nAstika-s and this tradition was until recently alive in
Nepal and Bhutan. The pure vedic form of both the yajurvedic and
R^igvedic traditions are no longer commonly practiced, especially in
South India. Instead, what one has is a vulgate that is widely used in
the drAviDa, Andhra and karnATa countries. It may be recited in a
pseudo-yajurvedic form without following the rules of yajurvedic
phonetics (e.g. hirANyavarNAM harinIM suvarNa … instead of the correct
yajuSh form: hirANyavarNA{\\m+} harinI{\\m+} suvarNa … as is specified,
for example, in the bodhAyana mantra pATha) or in a form typical of
R^igvedic recitation. Original R^ivedic version is often termed the
kAshmIra-pATha because it appears to have been retained in those
regions. The learned shrI Ravlekar gave me this original R^igvedic form.
Based on his oral tradition and the kashmIra-paTha of the khila text we
have restored this text of the shrI sUkta:

[shrI sUkta as
PDF](https://manasataramgini.files.wordpress.com/2008/04/shri_suktam_kp.pdf "shrI sUktraM")

The oral tradition used in the restoration is also provided as a
recording:  
[shrI sUkta as a
MP3.](https://app.box.com/s/v0t0cpotlh00mv5kek5ecrbdjb2hezj4)
