+++
title = "Story of siddha-haima"

+++
In 1100s in the chAlukya court of jayasiMha siddharAja was a nAstika (a
worshiper of the nirgrantha) genius named hemachandra sUrI of the third
varNa. His father was a shaiva and his mother a jaina. The vaishya-s saw
in him a kulachUDamaNi, a rival to the brAhmaNa-s, of whose intelligence
they were perpetually jealous. So, they trained him under jaina scholars
so that he might challenge brAhmaNa-s in scholarship. The chAlukya
monarch jayasiMha invaded the paramAra capital of dhAra and carried home
the entire library of the great bhoja-shAlA to lATa. Having, added the
books to his own library he was one day piqued by the sight of a
scholarly treatise on language written by the rival of the chAlukya-s
bhoja-deva-paramAra (it was probably the sarasvatI-kaNThAbharaNa though
the story does not mention its name). He asked his court vidvAn-s if
anybody could produce a rival to it. The only one who stood up to the
challenge was the young hemachandra-sUrI. But he declared that he needed
books on the 8 traditional grammars of saMskR^ita from the shAradA pITha
in Kashmir. So siddharAja sent his emissaries with utsAhapaNDita to
pravarapura in the Himalayan lands for an inter-library loan. There they
worshiped shAradA with stotra-s. The devI then uttered the statement
that she was manifest in hemachandra and hence the books should be
provided to him. The king was informed by utsAhapaNDita that shAradA was
deeply pleased with hemachandra. Then the jainAcharya composed his own
text after consulting these works called the siddha-haima. It not only
covered Sanskrit but also Prakrits and apabhramsha. It has a lengthy
prashaMsa of the chAlukya kings and this pleased the king who allotted a
sum of 3\*10^5 coins for is propagation. Copies with explanations were
sent to libraries all over India. I only name some places mentioned in
the story text to give an impression of its spread: a\~Nga, va\~Nga,
kali\~Nga, gauDa and kAmarUpa in the east; jAlandhara, pArasIka,
kashmIra (20 copies were given to their library for their help), nepAla
and kAshi in the north; choLa, shrIlanka and karNATa in the south.
