+++
title = "shmashAnAbdhi"

+++
[![](https://i2.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3154/2681760758_fe455fff47_o.jpg)](http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3154/2681760758_fe455fff47_o.jpg)

We sought to experience the might of the great aghora, the god of the
gods, the great bhairava. kubjIshAna is coupled with the great devI
samayA, who as kAmeshvarI manifests as the ShoDashI vidyA and who as
vakreshvarI shines in the midst of the samvartAmaNDalA. His bIja
appearing as the bIja of the 9 tattva-s in the niHshvAsa-tattva saMhitA
of the Urdhva-srotas, manifesting as a bIja in the circle of the
frightful kapAlIsha bhairava conjoined with rakta-chAmuNDA of the brahma
yAmala from the vidyA-pITha, as a bIja of the circle of svachChanda
bhairava in the svachChanda tantra from the mantra-pITha, a bIja of
Ananda-bhairava in the shrIkula tradition and as the bIja of the
splendid aghora in the pashchimAmnAya.

aghora’s whole form, a manifestation of power, is apparent in the
glorious mantra: hskShmlvryUM. Hence he is called navAtman. The great
bhairavI as his counterpart is seen in the mantra: hskShmlvryIM.
vakreshvarI manifesting as the mistress of chandrapura manifests as the
vAg-bhava. Hence her second mantra is aIM. Manifesting as chi\~nchinI
she is seen as the great mantra hskhphreM. Hence by saMpuTIkaraNa we get
her magnificent tri-crested mantra aIM hskhphreM hskShmlvryIM.

To experience aghora conjoined with vakreshvarI we headed from the great
flat plateau in the sahyAdri with our companions to that great row of
cliffs filled with the chi\~ncha trees beneath which rests the great
devI samvartA. Then we arrived at the above pitR^ivana, where one can
clearly see the calcinated bones whitening the banks of the lake. At its
edge is situated a grove of chi\~ncha trees and beneath one such tree we
took our station, surrounded by osseous fragments and ash. Then
performing purashcharaNa and dhyAna on the secret yantra hidden in the
saMvartAmaNDala sUtra-s we attained the state of yoga and sAyujya with
the yAmala. We saw in the li\~nga under the chi\~ncha tree
udyAna-bhairava, the sight of whom is the temporary condition of
all-knowledge. In a state of inspiration we uttered the daNDakaM of
chandrapura:  
“pAdArgalais te .api tvan-nAma-sa\~NkIrtanAd devi mu\~nchanti  
ghorair mahA-vyAdhibhiH saMsmR^itya pAdAravinda-dvayaM te  
mahA-kAli kAlAgni-tejaHprabhe skanda-govinda-brahmendra-chandrArka-  
puShpAyudhair mauli-mAlA-lasat-padma-ki\~njalkasat-pi\~njaraiH sevyase  
sarva-vIrAmbike bhairavI bhairavas te sharaNyAgato .ahaM”
