+++
title = "Wanderings in the realm of lolimbarAja"

+++
A relatively minor affliction of the upper-respiratory tract had seized
me in the long past days. Mis-creant recommended that I try a guTikA
made by local traditional physician. I had known of Mis-creant’s disdain
for traditional physicians in those days –not surprising given the
peculiar tri-humoral obsessions of her former companions who had the
misfortune of only “getting” Ayurveda, unlike her victorious self. So I
was a bit surprised and decided it to give it a try. The pills came in a
peculiar tubular guTikA-valgulikA on the label of which it was written
that the authority for the preparation was a certain kavi lolimbarAja.
As Mis-creant had mentioned the guTikA miraculously banished the
affliction in a day, when normally such things lasted a week \[I, the
muni and mAtAshrI have since been empirically able to verify its
abilities on other occasions\]. This raised my curiosity about this
peculiarly named kavi – I guessed his name meant a king of the bees – a
biologically inappropriate name\! The AchArya enlightened me that
lolimbarAja was the author of an enormously popular work titled
vaidya-jIvana, but told me that it was not really something to be read
by kids like us. How could this be\! I thought to myself –this forbidden
stuff must really be something like rAjan shambAjI’s poems. So I looked
into his concoctions and first found that the guTikA which had cured me
was indeed found in its exactness in 3.7 of lolimbarAja’s vaidya-jIvana.
Around the same time kR^iShNa-shUdra’s cousin ANi-kesha was afflicted by
a strange illness. I mentioned this to Mis-creant – she had utter
disdain for kR^iShNa-shUdra and ANi-kesha, but from my description of
his symptoms diagnosed him as being kR^imi-grasta. Strangely again
rather than recommending something from modern medicine she suggested
that Ani-kesha go to the same traditional vaidya and obtain a particular
concoction termed kR^imighna. Ani-kesha followed this advice and
declared that to his utter relief he had been cured of this kR^imi-s. As
this was an ancient issue that my atharvanic ancestors had dabbled in, I
asked for the container of ANi-kesha’s bheShaja. Again it cited
lolimbarAja as its authority and I found the recipe in 4.6 of this
vaidya-jIvana. After this I paid a little more attention to his work and
found that it was indeed a most unusual medical work. In its brevity it
stood in sharp contrast to the prolixity that largely dominates medical
works to date. But even more striking was its utterly singular structure
for a medical treatise – it is in the form of a sexually charged
conversation with his wife, where his wife asks medical questions and he
goes on to answer them. In a sense it resembles a tantra with shiva and
umA in conversation. I was struck, but felt I should be focusing on
other things rather than being distracted by such verse and moved on.

It was then, that with my clansmen I made a visit to that remarkable
shrine atop hill of seven crests besides the godAvarI. There after
beholding the 18-handed ugrachaNDA in the great cave we beheld an
itinerant tAntrIka arrive and perform a fire ritual. With the smoke from
his fire forming a haze I beheld the hill of mArkaNDeya in the yonder
horizon, and suddenly fragments of a verse of lolimbarAja came to mind:

ratnaM vAma-dR^ishAM dR^ishAM sukha-karaM shrI-saptashR^i\~NgAs-padaM  
spaShTAshTA-dasha-bAhu tad bhagavato bhargasya bhAgyaM bhaje  
yad-bhaktena mayA ghaTa-stani ghaTImadhye samutpAdyate  
padyAnAM shataM a\~NganAdhara-sudhAsparddhAvidhAnoddharam ||

I must confess that in those long past days this striking verse of
lolimbarAja took me a while to understand, though I was immediately
captivated by his poetry. He begins with a praise of the 18-handed
ugrachaNDA (whose prAsAda we had just visited) and moves to boast to his
wife (who is a ghaTa-stanI) that due to that goddess he can compose 100
verses within half an hour that rival the honey of a beautiful woman’s
lower lip. lolimbarAja’s medical works are not uncommonly intertwined
with such exquisite poetry describing (sometime quite explicitly) the
pleasures of the company of good-looking and intelligent woman. In any
case I spent some time learning about this remarkable intellectual and
realized that he lived only 90 km away from the city of my youth. So
with vaishya-jyotiSha, Igul, R and the feral brAhmaNa, we decided to
make an expedition to this place. There were of course other attractions
there like the birth place of the founder of the marATha nation and two
famous medieval temples of vinAyaka. Originally, Mis-creant said we
could go by her ratha on the sly, but we decided not to risk it because
even the feral brAhmaNa was unsure of the way and we could waylaid by
adhvesha-s. R then wanted to back out suddenly complaining that the
buses were too dirty and that she could single-handed drive the ratha
both ways without much fear. Finally, we all did go by bus having a
raucous conversation all along the way. Based on the information given
by my mahAraTTa acquaintances we located the place of his birth or the
house where he lived for while with his wife ratnakalA. Other than some
rubble and refuse there is really nothing much there to mark the site of
this most popular physician of medieval India – who had apparently
eclipsed all with his slim and quirky volumes. I stood for a moment in
silence, taking in the experience of the memory of the great man amidst
the nothingness – vaishya-jyotiSha and Igul sported indulgently resigned
looks, R did not even bother to come near and the feral brAhmaNa looked
quizzically at me.

Then we proceeded to visit the mountain fastness where the founder of
the mahArATTa nation was born, and even before that naganikA, the wife
of sAtakarNI, had ruled. The feral brAhmaNa asked me to narrate the
story of lolimbarAja. We do not know the exact date of lolimbarAja – we
can only say that he lived after the occupation of the Pune district by
the army of Islam (\~1350 CE) and before the late 1500s of CE when he
was cited by the physician trimalla-bhaTTa. The little scraps we know of
his life suggest that it was an interesting one befitting the author of
such racy verse. He was the son of a certain dIvAkara paNDita, born in
Junnar, and studied the mAdhyamdina shAkha of the shukla yajurveda. As
noted above, he attributes his poetic skills to the worship of the
18-handed ugrachaNDA who rests atop the 7-crested hill. He also claims
to have been an expert in music, reminding one shAr\~Ngadeva.
Interestingly, he acquired as his wife a Turkic woman named murAzA, the
daughter of the Jihadi garrison commander of Fort Shivaneri. He
converted her to the Hindu fold naming her ratnakalA, who then appeared
as the famous interlocutor in several of his poems. They appear to have
moved to northern mahArAShTra to the court of an unknown king named
harihara. His uxoriousness found expression in a drug which he named
ratnakalA-chUrNa and a whole poem he composed on her in vulgar marAThI –
the ratnakalA-charitA, which gives me nightmares :-). When ratnakalA
died and he gave up his medical practice and become a saMnyAsI singing
songs to the gods. Finally, he composed the harivilAsa on the deeds of
kR^iShNa, culminating in the killing of kaMsa. This harihara in whose
court he lived was, in my opinion, unlikely to be a vijayanagaran ruler.
Instead, I suspect he was a minor rAjpUt ruler of Baglana. This is
supported by the fact that the lolimbarAja’s poetic style influenced the
mahAkAvya of rudrakavi named rAShTrauDha-vaMsha-mahAkAvya (1596 CE) on
the rAShTrakUTa-s of Baglana.

The company and the age prevented me from saying more about the content
of lolimbarAja’s medical poetry then. But I wondered then whether it was
his medical accomplishment or the raciness of his works that made him so
popular. As he himself confesses:  
yeShAM na cheto lalanAsulagnaM magnaM na sAhitya-sudhA-samudre |  
j\~nAsyanti te kiM mama hA \! prayAsAn andhA yathA vAra-vadhU-vilAsAn
||  
It would have been nice if this could be rendered equally poetically in
translation, but crudely it means: “Those who are not conscious of the
attractions of alluring women, who are not immersed in the nectar sea of
literature, how can they understand me? like the efforts of the blind to
experience the charms of a courtesan.” In an earlier phase of my
existence I might have been roused by it, but now I look at more
Platonically :-). But every time I read a verse of lolimbarAja I was
struck by it superb poetic quality.
