+++
title = "mahAsamara"

+++
Update 4 (27-28th Dec): In course of our expedition, unexpectedly the
prati-prayoga again destroyed our “shield of kArtavIrya”, but this time
comprehensively. We then went into the hands of sleep, the dark maid. We
awoke at the end of a strange dream: We had biked down a long road that
was vaguely familiar. At the end of the road we were given the choice by
someone who looked like a traffic warden of returning and taking another
route or crossing a bridge across an arm of the sea to get to our
destination. We saw a bunch of guys who looked vaguely familiar. We
thought they might be the guys from the past whom we thought had been
washed away by the force of karma, but we could not identify them by
name. But now they were back, at least in the dream. They all told me
its alright to cross via the bridge as it was much faster. So we all
told the traffic warden our intention to cross the bridge. He gave us
each a “pass” and opened the door for entering the bridge. The first
part of the bridge was an excellent closed tunnel and we all rapidly
rode our bikes through. At that point one of the fellow riders mentioned
that some friend of his had crossed this part of the bridge but just
before completing the journey was washed away into the sea never to be
seen again. We asked: “How could that be? This passage seems
well-protected from the sea.” Just then the bridge came to an end and we
descended two flights of steps down and a door opened onto a wooden pier
facing the raging sea with a mangrove forest in the yonder shore. Below
the pier a flimsy set of wooden planks, partially submerged and
constantly agitated by the waves, constituted the only path to the other
side. Two of our fellow riders deftly lifting their bikes made it to the
other side timing their entry on the planks to avoid the crashing waves.
The rest of us were wondering if we could survive this passage. With the
planks wildly bobbing I feared I could not and decide to return all the
way back. Some of my fellow riders told me that it might not be possible
because the door to the bridge opened only one way. I still felt I
should take a chance. They said may be we should wait till the tide
changes. Just then a strange man came down the stairs. He was vaguely
familiar – I thought he was a long deceased paleontologist who worked on
synapsids. He looked at me and said: “you might still be able to reach
the other shore”, and walking around my bike opened a new door that
directly lead to a short concrete pathway reaching the other side. At
that moment I awoke and realized I had been seized by the frightful
grAhin. We were utterly frustrated that our human means had failed – the
fears of a long journey to avimukta lay before us. Was there a signal we
were missing?

Update 3 (24-25th Dec): After the 9th hour our astra-s seemed to be
repulsed by the ari-saMkalpa. We felt the lasso of vaivasvata might
prematurely tighten on us. We deployed a new type of astra as suggested
by the amAtya of the 3rd hero. We did not know if we had shaken off the
noose or not as our armor was pierced around 1.5h after the middle hour.
So it appeared the danger had not passed and we were rather curtailed.
Was our fate to live and conquer or fade into oblivion remained unknown.

Update 2 (21 Dec): For a while our astra-s kept failing but we kept
fighting in the midst of the senA with little respite. While we were
performing a rite to rudra, the pR^itana came against the sachiva with
full force but he firmly stood his ground and kept the battle going
though confused by the distractionary moves of the ari. We then returned
to the battlefield with the firm resolve that we will either feed the
dogs of rudra or fall in the fight ourselves. We joined forces with the
sachiva to keep the fight on. The battle hung in balance we as we moved
to the shortest night when the powers of the nishAchara-s is exalted.  
…  
Update 1 (19-20 Dec): We performed an unusual prayoga in which we first
invoked tryambaka to break the “inverse of kArtavIrya”. Then we deployed
kArtavIrya again and met with remarkable success. While the aghAyu-s
raged we successfully defended against them in large part with our
revived astra-s. We had brought the situation under reasonable control
until about 2.5 hrs past the midnight hour a kR^ityA deployed on us. We
initial thought our astra-s should cover the kR^ityA and indeed for two
hours we were relatively safe. But then this terrible kR^ityA broke
through the defenses and attacked us fiercely. We were unable to figure
out how this kR^ityA broke through and that remains the weak link.  
…  
Dec(18th):  
“yaM krandasI saMyatI vihvayete pare.avara ubhayA amitrAH |  
samAnaM chid ratham AtasthivAMsA nAnA havete sa janAsa indraH ||”

It was literally like Conan Doyle’s legendary encounter staged at the
Reichenbach falls. It was like the sUta-putra and the 3rd kaunteya on
their last encounter in kurukShetra. The brahmAstra was blocked, the
other shara-s of old were blown to pieces and the power of the mantra-s
were all silenced even as the shamitar silences the pashu at the
offering of vAyu. The varMan was pierced and the sapatna-s advanced like
meghanAda in the defense of la\~NkA. The “inverse of kArtavIryAruja”
deployed against us and it completely rattled us. Till the 7th hour
after the meridian we kept fighting on the field even as another great
astra was sent at us. This astra could completely sink the greatest of
our defenses, though it could still not kill us. But they were fully
aware and backed it with another deadly astra that could actually take
us along to vaivasvata even as the pAshupata of arjuna took out
jayadratha and vR^iddhakShatra at the same time. It was clear they were
going for the kill. The muni could not be informed that he needed to
take our place if we were killed and the others did not matter any more.
We had with us only one long-standing yoddha, more important than all
the other vIra-s we have mentioned. Due to his aid we obtained the
indra-shakti and pAshupatAstra for the final battle. The indrashakti was
deployed but it was like the sUtapUtra striking ghaTotkacha. All is
decided by the flow of kAla and it shall make its decision.
