+++
title = "Primate evolution roundup"

+++
[![primate\_phylogeny](https://i0.wp.com/farm3.static.flickr.com/2521/3889930477_a34b47f012.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3889930477/ "primate_phylogeny by somasushma, on Flickr")

Apart from its parochial aspect, the early evolution and ecological
diversification of primates are of considerable intrinsic interest to a
biologist. There are several still murky issues all along the tree (at
least to me), to name a few: 1) the position of the plesiadpiformes in
euarchontoglires. 2) The date of the origin of the primates. 3) The
ecological diversity and causes for the eventual extinction of the great
strepsirrhine radiation of adapiformes. 4) The phylogenetic position of
Rooneyia. 5) The monophyly of the omomyid radiation and their
extinction. 6) Origin of anthropoid primates and the earliest
anthropoids. 7) Position of the amphipithecine radiation in Asia. 8) The
Paleogene primate diversity in India.

The weight of the data for more than a century has suggested a rather
simple phylogenetic hypothesis for extant primates: The lemurs of
Madagascar, lorises and bushbabies form the strepsirrhine clade. The
tarsiers along with the anthropoids form the haplorhine clade. Within
haplorhines the basic split among the extant forms separates the South
American monkeys or the platyrrhines from the catarrhines of the Old
world. The catarrhines further split up into the cercopithecoid monkeys
and the apes or the hominoids. The cercopithecoid monkeys in turn split
up into the colobine monkeys like the langur and the cercopithecine
monkeys like the green monkey, the macaque and the baboon. The hominoids
split up into the lesser apes like the gibbon and the great apes like
Pongo and Homo. The main issue at hand is how the fossils forms are
accommodated within this tree. Early primate evolution is a field with a
limited set of specialists, including some with dogmatic ideas – e.g.
Gingerich and Simons have held some rather stiff positions that have
gotten more attention than they really deserved. This is more a
reflection of the warlike manner in which Euro-American science is
conducted, where the vague concept of “scientific prestige” frequently
trumps any sense of fairness or the quest for knowledge. The latest
example is the affair concerning the adapiform primate Darwinius which
was erroneous claimed to be at the base of the haplorhine radiation.
Primate evolution is also plagued by more direct issues: Most fossil
forms are woefully incomplete and morphological cladistics fare rather
poorly in determining detailed phylogenetic relationships among
vertebrates (as suggested by its numerous failures in the past 2 decades
when compared to molecular trees). Amidst the noise surrounding the
origin and evolution of primates, the first objective and systematic
attempt to address the origin of anthropoids and their relationship to
other primates was carried more than 12 years ago by the pioneering
primate evolutionist Richard Kay and his colleagues. This paper
“Anthropoid Origins” is still useful for a beginner to consult.

Among the fossil primates in the Eocene (55-34 mya) there was a great
side-by-side radiation of two distinctive types of primates had been
recognized – the adapiformes and the omomyids. After expanding through
the Eocene, these forms became extinct by the end of the early
Oligocene. Kay et al’s phylogeny strongly suggested that the adapiformes
were closer to the lemurs, bush babies and lorises, whereas omomyids
were closer to the extant haplorhines. There had been considerable
debate about the classical anthropoids and their origins. For a long
time the best known early anthropoids were the monkeys from the Fayum
beds of Egypt which were excavated by Simons’ expeditions over nearly
half a century. These anthropoids came in two major lineages the
oligopithecids like Oligopithecus and Catopithecus and the parapithecids
like Apidium and Parapithecus. But these were from the later part of the
Eocene or the early Oligocene, which led to ideas suggesting the origin
of the anthropoids from either the adapiformes or the omomyids. Further,
while the consensus was moving towards omomyids as basal haplorhines
there was still debate about whether they were closer to tarsiers or
anthropoids or outside of the two. The richness of the anthropoid faunas
of the Fayum beds and them being the only source of information on early
anthropoids for long led to a belief that the anthropoids originated in
Africa, from where they floated, early on, to South America. But there
was something which did not go too well with the emerging phylogenetic
scenario of mammals. The molecular phylogenies suggested that the
afrotherians were the original mammals of Africa and that the
euarchontoglires clearly lay outside afrotheria. Amongst these the
“center of gravity” in evolutionary terms was in Asia. The sister
groups of the extent primate lineages like the flying lemur and the
tree-shrew were exclusively Asiatic. The ancient sister group of the
primates – the plesiadapiformes were Laurasian and likewise the two
great Eocene radiations of primates the adapiformes and omomyids were
also centered in Laurasia. Finally the closest extant sister group of
the anthropoids, the tarsiers, are located only in Asia. This suggested
that the split between the tarsiers and the anthropoids occurred early
on in Asia and then early anthropoids migrated to Africa where they
proliferated and eventually colonized the New World.

In the past 15 years an extraordinary series of fossil described by
Beard and others had resulted in a veritable revolution of our
understanding of anthropoid origins and the Asiatic radiations of
anthropoids. The discovery of Eosimias from the middle Eocene of China
showed that the Asian landmass had the earliest of the anthropoids.
Further it showed that the anthropoids were already distinct in the
Eocene and were unlikely to have been derived from the omomyids or
adapiformes as they were already present beside them. This was doubted
by the old fashioned experts like Gingerich and Simons, but Kay et al’s
“Anthropoid Origins” paper strongly suggested that the eosimiids were
1) closer to anthropoids than the tarsiers and 2) a sister group to all
other anthropoids including the two early African lineages of
oligopithecids and parapithecids. Further Kay et al’s tree showed that
the omomyids formed a branch of their own distinct from the tarsiers and
were a sister group to all other haplorhines. Within the anthropoids it
showed that the oligopithecids and parapithecids were a sister group to
both platyrrhines and catarrhines. Along with these lineages in Fayum
was also found the earliest catarrhine – Aegyptopithecus. These
observations suggested that while the anthropoids originated in Asia the
Platyrrhine-catarrhine split probably occurred within the great
radiation of African primates.

[![eosimias](https://i2.wp.com/farm4.static.flickr.com/3446/3889900149_96a75759fb_o.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3889900149/ "eosimias by somasushma, on Flickr")  
Eosimias

But the fossils emerging in the past few years were to indicate a more
complex picture and even bigger role for Asia in the evolution of
anthropoids. The first of these stories goes back to find in Burma by
the famous paleontologist of the older era EH Colbert – the early
monkey, the amphipithecid, Pondaungia. Phylogeny of this primate was for
long debated. It was alternately considered an anthropoid or adapiformes
and repeatedly denied to have anything to do with the evolution of
anthropoids. Starting around 2003 anatomical studies and phylogenetic
analysis by Kay provided hints that amphipithecids were indeed closer to
the anthropoid clade than the adapiformes. About a month ago Beard
reported the discovery of fragmentary remains of a new amphipithecid,
Ganlea from Burma. The inclusion of this large-canined form in a
phylogenetic analysis suggested that: 1) The amphipithecids, namely
Myanmarpithecus, Ganlea, Pondaungia, Amphipithecus and Siamopithecus
form a monophyletic amphipithecid clade. 2) The Burman monkeys (first
four of the above) form a clade to the exclusion of Siamopithecus. 3)
The amphithecids are clearly more derived than eosimiids, oligopithecids
and parapithecids forming a monophyletic clade with the platyrrhines and
catarrhines. Thus, the origin of the ancestral crown group anthropoids
could have taken place in Asia.

The Asian situation is further complicated by the discovery of the
earliest India primates from the rich Vastan coal mines in Gujarat. In
the past few years Bajpai, Tiwari and others have been recovering a
remarkable fauna from the Vastan mines which appear to date to the
Sparnacian age of the Eocene (54-55 mya). They announced their first
major finds in a less than satisfactory paper in an obscure journal
(2005): Journal of the Palaeontological Society of India. Though much of
the material is highly fragmentary and poorly studied it appears that
the extraordinary fauna included a mix of primitive metatherians,
eutherians and also precursors of several modern mammalian lineages.
These include primitive eutherians such as: 1) palaeoryctids; 2)
cimolestids; 3) aptemyids which appear to be basal euarchontoglires (in
my opinion) with an aye-aye like morphology; basal representatives of
modern lineages such as: 4) primitive bats predating the split of
yangochiroptera and yinpterochiropterans; 5) the enigmatic cambaytheres.
Bajpai et al thought they were primitive perissodactyls but as Kumar
suggested they might be very primitive elephants related to
Anthracobune; 6) the primitive artiodactyl Gujaratia; additionally there
are also the first Indian marsupials, the opossum-like Indodelphis and
Jaegeria (?), agamid lizards and a primitive bird Vastanavis. In this
fauna three distinct primates have been recovered: Marcgodinotius,
Vastanomys and Anthrasimias.

The phylogenetic analysis by Kay in the Bajpai et al study of these
three primates indicated that they respectively fall amongst the
adapiformes, omomyids and eosimiids. Thus, we had Anthrasimias as an
eosimiid predating Eosimias from Asia by almost 10 mya. This clearly
indicated that the by 55 mya already the 4 great primate branches were
distinct: the strepsirrhines (adapiformes), and the 3 haplorhine
lineages namely omomyids, tarsiids and anthropoids. This phylogeny of
Kay presented some other interesting features: 1) it reiterated that the
tarsiids and anthropoids formed a clade to the exclusion of omomyids.
This strongly suggested that the ancestral haplorhine was probably a
tarsier-like form (given that the better preserved omomyids show large
eye sockets like tarsiers) with a nocturnal habit. 2) More surprisingly
it suggested that not only the Asian Xanthorhysis was a tarsier but also
the African Afrotarsius (that too with decent bootstrap). This implied
that tarsiers were not restricted to Asia but were once widely spread.
3) Most surprisingly it suggested that the enigmatic North African genus
Altiatlasius was an eosimiid that was nested within a large eosimiid
radiation spread over Asia, India and Africa including forms such as
Bahinia from Burma, Phenacopithecus and Eosimias from China and
Anthrasimias and Phileosimias from the subcontinent. 4) This phylogeny
again reiterated that the amphipithecines formed a clade with the
platyrrhines and catarrhines to the exclusion of the African
oligopithecids and parapithecids. 5) As an aside their tree suggests
that Rooneyia is an adapiformes.

[![eocene\_world](https://i2.wp.com/farm3.static.flickr.com/2427/3889900357_6719683eea.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/24766652@N05/3889900357/ "eocene_world by somasushma, on Flickr")  
Eocene world

When placed in a biogeographical context of these observations had
extraordinary significance: Molecular phylogenies favored a Laurasian
origin for the primates, but now some of the earliest primate lineages
were seen in India, an ex-Gondwanan fragment and eosimiids and tarsiids
were now being found in another ex-Gondwanan fragment Africa in the
Eocene itself. In the early Eocene India was and island straddling the
equator and moving towards Asia. Similarly Africa was also separated
from Asia by the Tethys sea. This raises two possibilities: 1) As Krause
and others had suggested some mammals were actually introduced to Asia
from the ex-Gondwanan fragment of India. 2) These mammals indeed did
emerge in Laurasia, but in the Early Eocene there was an extensive
exchange with India across the shrinking Tethys sea. There was probably
an island chain that linked Asia with India as the Tethys shrunk and
this might have facilitated arrival of various forms in to India from
Laurasia by floating. This might have indeed been followed by
considerable diversification within the Eocene India, which then served
as a staging ground for mammals to float over to Africa and Madagascar.
Indeed, we suspect that the primates had already radiated in the late
Cretaceous or immediately after the K/T extinction. Basal
representatives of all the primate lineages had arrived in India by
55mya and most of them further floated on towards Africa from India. One
lineage of adapiformes alone we suspect floated to Madagascar to seed
the island with the ancestor of the lemurs. There, in isolation they
underwent an explosive radiation to spawn over 100 species until their
recent destruction by Austronesians. Such dispersals from Laurasia into
India followed by a rapid radiation is also favored the detection of
high diversity of early bat in the Early Eocene of India. In particular
the sister-group relationship between elephants and sirenians, and the
evidence for early elephants being aquatic in habit (e.g.
Phosphatherium, Daouitherium, Numidotherium, Moeritherium and
Barytherium, the early elephant lineages in Africa) suggests that they
might have been more capable of crossing the incipient Arabian sea among
the large mammals and thus reached the subcontinent. The interpretation
of cambaytheres from the Vastan mines as very primitive elephants might
imply that afrotherians floated along to India from Africa. However, if
they are indeed stem perissodactyls as alternatively proposed, they
might indeed present a case for the Indian origin of this clade.
Likewise, in light of the phylogenetic position of the amphipithecids it
appears that there were multiple early dispersals of primates from Asia
to Africa. In the case of the post-amphipithecid dispersal it is not yet
clear if it again involved an Indian intermediate or else there was a
direct dispersal via West Asia into Africa to found the common ancestor
of the platyrrhines and the catarrhines. Indeed Asia-Africa primate
exchanges appear to have been repeated throughout their evolution with
possible additional exchanges occurring during the emergence of apes.
