+++
title = "The rise and fall of the Uighur Empire"

+++
With the Uighurs in the news some people asked me about them. I decided
to salvage one of my writings on their history, which I suspect is one
of the more complete ones which I compiled from some obscure sources
that very hard to even lay hands on these days.  
…  
Uighurs were the most powerful members of the Turkic Oghuz
confederation, which included other clans such as the Khaljis. The
yabghu of the Uighurs, Etmish Qutlugh Bilge, was a vassal of the Blue
Turks when they were at the height of their glory under Kul Tegin and
Bilge Kha’Khan. The pretender Özmish Khan seized the Blue Turk throne,
three Altaic tribes, namely the Basmils from the region around modern
Kucheng, the Uighurs from the region between the Kobdo and Selenga, and
the Qarluqs from Eastern end of the Balkash Lake, tried to seize the
empire of Mongolia. The Basmil made the first attempt by marching on
Özmish Khan in 744 CE; they killed him in the battle and his capital
Ötuegen was captured. They sold his severed head to the Chinese Emperor
Hsuan Tsung hoping to obtain patronage from China. Confident of Chinese
aid the lord of the Basmil Turks declared himself Kha’khan and the
supreme ruler of all Mongolia. However, the Chinese governor Shuo Fang
betrayed him when the yabghus of the Uighurs and Qarluqs made common
cause with each other. This huge Uighur-Qarluq horde marched on Basmils
in late 744. The Basmil army was beaten thoroughly by this coalition and
its Kha’Khan was beheaded. The survivors were distributed as naukers
amidst the victors or sold to the Chinese, and Basmil tribe was erased
off the slate of Mongolian history. The Uighurs seized Mongolia and
allowed the 3 Qarluq tribes to keep the western reaches of the original
Blue Turk empire. The lord of the Uighurs crowned himself as Etmish
Qutlugh Bilge Köl Kha’Khan, the supreme ruler of all Altaic tribes. He
founded his capital, Ordu Baligh, some distance away from Ötuegen, and
close to the original capital of the first Hun Kha’Khan, Motun Tegin.
The lord of Qarluqs was asked to retain the junior title, Yabghu, in
deference to the dominance of the Uighurs. Soon after this, Qutlugh
Bilge ratified a treaty of peace and cooperation with the Chinese
Emperor. Soon after this he died (747) and the empire passed to his
youngest son, Kul Mayanchur Kha’Khan.

Mayanchur set up trading outposts with the Chinese where a large number
of goods such as horses, yaks, camels, reindeer, fur, wool, silk, jade,
metals, medicines and diamonds were traded. The Uighurs used their wider
network of subject tribes to become a nexus point for goods. The gains
made from this trade enabled Mayanchur to embellish their capital Ordu
Baligh and build a second city in their original homeland, upstream of
the Selenga River. Ordu Baligh was supposed to have a duodecagonal plan
with 12 iron gates allowing an entry into the walled city. Inside the
city there was vast area where the elite core of the Uighur army camped
in gers (tents) in the classic Turko-Mongol style. There were also
numerous more permanent stalls that constituted a huge flourishing
bazaar. In the center of the city there was raised mound with a huge
tent topped with gold in which the kha’khan of the Uighurs held court.
The descriptions from the Chinese embassy in Ordu Baligh state that the
Kha’Khan wore a ceremonial saffron robe and a rimmed hat with fur ear
flaps. He was surrounded by a heavily armed squadron of bodyguards,
which included of some of most elite warriors in his army, and held
discussions regular with his administrators and army staff. There were
embassies from various Turkic tribes, Chinese, Tibetans, Indians and
Arabs that called upon the Kha’Khan to negotiate trading deals. This
point clearly illustrates the power the Uighurs gained by taking control
of the Central Asian trading hubs. They also set up a courier service
throughout Mongolia and other conquered domains. These developments
allowed the Uighur reap the best of their nomadic steppe world as well
as those of the settled civilizations.

In 751 CE the Chinese armies faced huge defeats in Talas at the hands of
the Qarluqs led by yabghu Tun Bilge and the Moslem Arabs, and in the
South at hands of the Thais. At this point An Lu-shan, a general whose
father was an Iranian from Sogdhiana and his mother a Mongol from the
tribe of the Khitans, gathered a large army of Mongols and Chinese
adventurers and marched on the Tang capitals of Loyang and Changan. The
Chinese emperor sent a mighty army under his Altaic general Qoshu Khan
to save his throne. However, Lu-shan routed the Tang army, captured
Qoshu Khan and subsequently executed him. By 755 CE he had captured the
two Chinese capitals and crowned himself emperor. The imperialist
Chinese emperor, Hsuan Tsung’s empire lay in shambles: within his
lifetime had raised China to its greatest heights and now he was beaten
and fled for his life to Szechwan. He died there in despair and was
succeeded by his son Su-tsung. He humbly sought the aid of the Uighur
Kha’Khan to relieve him from the march of An Lu-shan. Mayanchur seeing
an opportunity to meddle in Chinese affairs offered to help. He came
down with his Uighur cavalry and besieged Changan and forced An Lu-shan
to relinquish the city. Then he attacked Loyang before Lu-shan could act
and occupied it. However, after having taken the city Mayanchur refused
to move out and started seizing property within the city. The Chinese
emperor paid him a fine of gold and 20000 rolls of pure silk before he
agreed to relinquish the city. He also took the Chinese princess as a
wife and returned to Mongolia after receiving the promise that the
Chinese would annually send him the same amount of silk and gold
thenceforth. In the following year the Uighurs decided to restore the
full extant of the unified Turkic empire, as under the Blue Turks, and
attacked the Kirghiz to the north. The Kirghiz apparently were trying to
contact the Chinese, Arabs and Tibetans for trade relationships. The
Uighurs rightly saw this as a potential threat to both their military
and economic dominance of central Asia. Mayanchur Kha’Khan led a great
Uighur army of about 70,000 horsemen against the Kirghiz. He first
raided and destroyed all the trading outposts of the Arabs and Tibetans
set up in connivance with the Kirghiz. Then the Kirghiz were chased by
the Uighur army in the direction of Siberia, where a fierce encounter
took place between them. The Kirghiz army of 50,000 slaughtered
completely by the Uighurs, their Khan was killed and replaced by a
pliant chief who assumed a junior title as a servant of the Uighurs. In
759 CE Mayanchur died after heavy drinking at some celebration. He was
succeeded by his son Tengri Bögü, who decided to inaugurate his reign
with an invasion of China. He was asked by both An Lu-shan and Su-Tsung
to come to aid them. However, he decided to act as per his own agenda.
On November 20th 762 CE, Tengri Bögü’s cavalry force of invaded China
and having captured the city of Loyang, went on to massacre its
population. Several people fled into two gigantic Taoist temples in the
city for shelter. The Uighurs surrounded them and burnt them down and
killed the fugitives by showering arrows on them. They then devastated
the countryside, gathered all that they could carry, and sent off trains
of booty to Mongolia. They are said to have extracted 20 cattle, 200
sheep and 300 Kgs of rice each day from the Chinese population,
resulting in famine. Finally the Uighur Kha’Khan decided to leave China
after forcing on the Chinese ruler an agreement where by the Chinese
would trade any goods the Uighurs wanted at a price set by them. Any
Chinese trader passing through Central Asia also had to pay a hefty fine
to Uighurs.

During his stay in China, the Kha’Khan met several Manichaeists who had
fled from the from the ex-Iranian lands of Soghdiana under the onslaught
of the Islamic Jihad. Their syncretic religion easily accommodated his
Turko-Mongol pantheon, as is, and impressed him with their cosmology and
astrology. The Kha’Khan became a convert to Manichaeism and made it his
state religion. He underwent a profound change like ashoka and gave up
eating meat, drinking alcohol and even banned diary products. His
peaceful ways and enlightened reign brought great prosperity to Central
Asia, but at home in Mongolia the ban on alcohol was not all well
received. There were several complaints from the shocked pastoral
peoples, unused to a life without the traditional Kümiss. The Kha’Khan’s
cousin, Tun Baga Tarkhan, gained confidence of the disgruntled chiefs of
the Uighur army who were disturbed by the injunction to lay down their
arms. In 779 CE as the Kha’Khan was raptly hearing a lecture on
Manichaeism in his pavilion, Tun Baga Tarkhan led a large force of
rebels who beheaded the Kha’Khan, his relatives and close followers.
However, the transition was not smooth; Tun Baga faced several
rebellions throughout his reign. He tried to divert the Uighur attention
outwards through an invasion of Pei-ting where the Chinese general Yang
Hsi-Ku was killed, and subsequently they seized Kucha. They also raided
the West and grabbed the territory of the Qarluqs. Then a Uighur army
led by their general El Ugesi invaded their feudatories, the
White-clothed Turks (survivors of the Blue Turk tribe) and tried to
annex their territory. At this point the White-clothed Turks took the
help of the Tibetans and formed a firm front against the charging Uighur
cavalry. The Uighurs simultaneously faced with rebellion in Mongolia and
a counter-attack by the Qarluqs on their Western flank. This resulted in
a massive victory for the Tibetans who advanced unstopped to take the
city of Khotan. Tun Baga died in 789 leaving the Uighurs shaken on all
fronts. They elected the royal Bulmish Qülug Bilge as the grand Kha’Khan
and his valiant son Qut Bulmish Alp Bilge as the commander of the army.
He restored order in the Uighur realm by restoring Manichaeism and
adapting it to fit the tastes of the Mongolian population. He also
advocated tolerance of other religious streams. The Indian ambassadors
to his court obtained sanctions to construct temples in the vicinity of
Khotan that had a large number of Indian vaishyas. A temple of rudra was
constructed in Dandan-uliq and temples to indra and the tathAgata
vairochana in Balawaste. Wooden slabs from the former with images of
rudra and umA survive to this date. He, however, strengthened the army
and advocated the return of a very aggressive military policy. He first
pounded the Qarluq Turks and drove them away from his western flank.

Then in autumn of 791 CE he sent his son to conquer the Tibetans. Seeing
the massive Tibetan army of around 150,000 marching into central Asia,
the Uighur prince first decided to draw them into an ambush. The
Tibetans formed an alliance with the Qarluq and attacked the western
Chinese city of Ling Chow. The Uighurs clamped down on them after they
entered the city and slaughtered their army and took away their cattle
(mainly Yaks). The Tibetan survivors were sold in the Chinese markets.
The Uighur Tegin then went on to attack Pei Ting in December 791 and
captured the Tibetan commander Rgyal Sum. In 792 CE, prince Qut Bulmish
led an Uighur cavalry of 50,000 to invade Tibet. The Tibetans sought the
aid of the Qarluqs again, but they were beaten badly. Tens of thousands
of Tibetans and Qarluqs were encircled by the Uighur archers and were
nearly entirely exterminated. Then the Uighurs invaded the Tibetan-held
city of Qocho and captured it easily defeating the Tibetans yet again.
The Tibetans did not give up and tried to counter-attack by sending an
invasive force against Kucha, but the Uighur Kha’Khan led his archers to
spectacular win against them. The Tibetans tried to flee to the fort of
Aqsu but here the Uighur Tegin ambushed them and the Tibetan army was
massacred to man in the battle that ensued. With that the Tibetan
aspirations in central Asia were smothered. Bulmish Qülug Bilge died in
795 CE and was succeeded till 808 CE by a series of his brothers. In 808
CE his son, the commander of the Uighur army and the hero of many
battles, ascended the throne under the full dynastic name Ai Tengrida
Qut Bulmish Alp Bilge Kha’Khan. He was hailed as the “celestial
Kha’Khan” and led the Uighurs to their military successes. His deeds
were celebrated in the stone inscriptions on the west bank of the Orkhon
River in central Mongolia in Old Altaic, Middle Iranian and Chinese. He
inaugurated his reign with a plundering invasion of Tibet and followed
it up with the seizure of the cities of Kan Chow and Liang Chow west of
the Yellow River of China. The Kha’Khan also made the Chinese Emperor
build Manichaeist temples in China and threatened action in the event of
their persecution under Chinese Legalism. The Kha’Khan had the Iranian
script formalized for the Uighur dialect and introduced the printing
press in his domains. Thus, the once illiterate nomadic Altaic tribesmen
made great strides in producing a range of documents on various
religious and secular topics. Amidst these, a text of particular
interest is an illustrated one for the worship of the Hindu deities,
brahmA, viShnu, shiva, kumAra and gaNapati within a Manichaeist
framework. There are also a number of illustrated texts with the nAstika
jAtaka tales.

In 813 CE the Kha’Khan led several conquering expeditions south of the
Gobi Desert and across the west to TokMak near the Issyk Kul Lake. It
was at this point that the news reached the Kha’Khan the Arabs were
savagely persecuting the Manichaeist, and killing or converting them
forcibly to Islam. At the same time he also noted that subjugated Qarluq
and Tibetans were trying to make common cause. So in 820 CE Qut Bulmish
decided to conduct a massive campaign to simultaneously destroy the
Qarluqs and the Arabs. Moslems were executed in the Uighur realm in
retaliation, and the horses were fattened over autumn in Mongolia in
preparation for the great westward thrust. An Uighur cavalry of several
tens of thousands set out from Ordu Balig in a vast crescent-shaped
formation sweeping across the steppes. The Uighurs first crossed the
longitude of the Issykul through a southern route and fell upon the
Qarluq army and their Tibetan auxiliaries. The Qarluqs tried to pin the
Uighurs down against a tributary of the Syr Darya, but the Uighurs
dallied and resorted to a diversionary tactic by sending a smaller force
to draw the Qarluq Turks away. The Qarluqs and a Tibetan cavalry of
about 50,000 made some crucial tactical errors and found themselves
encircled by the Uighurs. Seeing the Qarluq center being stretched, Qut
Bulmish pressed with a cavalry charge armed with maces, spears and
sabers. Using lassoes they dragged down the Qarluqs and slaughtered them
by attacking them at close quarters. The Tibetans were brought down by
the Uighur archers and the survivors fled in all directions. The Uighurs
then dallied to distract the Arab holy warriors in Ferghana and
Ushrusana. In spring of 821 CE, the Uighur Kha’Khan forded the Syr Darya
and attacked the first Arab army led by Ahmed ibn Assad. The Arabs fell
prey to the usual feigned retreat trick and were annihilated by the
Uighurs. The Uighurs restored the property of the Manichaeists and
looted the Arab treasuries. Then the Uighur army appeared to move
further west but suddenly turned north to cross the Sughda River and
seized Ushrusana. Here, the Ghazis under Yahya ibn Assad declared a
Jihad on the Uighurs but were crushed by the latter and retreated in
total chaos. Having raided the Arab cities thoroughly the Uighur
Kha’Khan returned to Mongolia, rich in booty. After having raised the
Uighurs to the greatest glory Qut Bulmish, the celestial Kha’Khan died.
He was succeeded by Kün Ulugh Bilge Kha’Khan who consolidated his
father’s gains by strengthening frontiers and signing a peace pact
with the Chinese through marriage alliance and keeping up the
hostilities with the Arabs.

During the reign of his successor Alp Külug Kha’Khan in 839 CE there was
heavy snow and famine triggering popular discontent in the Uighur
regime. The Kirghiz who had been subjugated by the Uighurs were the
worst affected. The Uighurs stoked the flames with their savage handling
of the Kirghiz rebellion. The Kirghiz lord declared himself a Kha’Khan.
After a sacrifice and a feast he took an oath to exterminate the Uighurs
as revenge for their great Kirghiz campaign of 758 CE in which a Kirghiz
army of approximately 50000 had been crushed. The Kirghiz started
assembling a large army between the Ob and the Yennesei, when a
disgruntled Uighur general defected to the Kirghiz and provided crucial
information for an invasion of the Uighur heartland. In 840 CE the great
Kirghiz army of several tens of thousand horsemen invaded Ordu Baligh,
and it is remarkable the powerful Uighur war-machine collapsed so
completely against it. It was overwhelmed by the Kirghiz and is said to
have “drowned in blood”. Alp Külug Kha’Khan fought relentlessly till the
very end and after his horse was killed he was captured and beheaded.
His grand golden tent was looted and ripped apart, and Ordu Baligh was
razed to ground. The Kirghiz then seized all other Uighur cities in
Mongolia and burnt them down completely. A Chinese observer noted: “The
Uighurs were blown away all over the barbarian land”. Some fled towards
the Qarluq lands they had captured, but were killed by the Qarluqs.
Others fled to Tibet, where the Tibetans long seeking revenge captured
them and handed back to the Kirghiz. The 13 elite clans fled to China
and were arrested or driven back. All the Manichaeist temples in China
were demolished and the priests executed. Other groups fled to Agni,
Kucha and Qocho and some of them were overwhelmed and assimilated by the
Moslems. The surviving Uighurs finally rallied back and established 3
Uighur principalities: 1) The Kanchow Uighur kingdom 2) Qara Khanid
kingdom 3) the Qara Khoja Kingdom. The first of these was destroyed by
the Tibetan tribes of Tangut and Xia-Xia during their expansion into
central Asia in the 1100s of CE. The Qara Khanids were a mixed group
that included the Qarluq Turks and was converted to Islam in the 10th
century. They were involved in an epic struggle with the Ghaznavid Turks
under the savage Mahmud Ghaznavi. The Mongols of the Qara Kitai Empire
destroyed the Qara Khanid kingdom during their great conflict with the
Islamic west. The last of these the Qara Khoja went on to found a
tantric bauddha state under the model that was exported from India and
continued the cultural renaissance of the Uighurs, producing several
works of arts and medicine. They became vassals of Chingiz Kha’Khan and
his successors and were important officials of the Mongol empire and
gave them their first script. Finally, in 1397 CE, Khizr Khawaja and
Timur-I-lang declared a Jihad on them, extirpated the Qara Khoja Uighur
kingdom and converted the survivors to Mohammedanism.

In terms of cultural achievements the Uighurs were the most advanced of
the peoples of Mongolia. Their unique urban-nomadic civilization, in
many ways resembled the early Indo-Iranian states, that were founded
millennia earlier, and they were again poised like the Blue Turks to
take Turkic civilization to new levels. But they fell to the
vicissitudes of the steppes and the Kirghiz promptly returned Mongolia
to its old nomadic pastoralism. However, the survivors, of this last
great group of literate of Altaic peoples of the early Middle Ages,
lived on and passed their script and skills in government to Mongolic
tribes of the Khitan and those of Chingiz Kha’Khan, and contributed to
their spectacular success. Today they are warriors of the Dar ul Islam,
which had ironically smothered their bauddha tAntric state.
