+++
title = "More on the tragic failure of thexa0brahma"

+++
Wandering like an incorporeal observer in the midst of the mlechCha-s,
chIna-s and other peoples, in the northern regions of madhyama
mlechChadesha, I was reading the biographies of two of my renowned
coethnics S. Chandrasekhar and GN Ramachandran (being a hybrid between
earlier and later brahminical migrant streams from the north I can
comfortably claim coethnicity with these who belong to the earlier
migrant stream to the drAviDa country). Both their stories are
fascinating but at the same time depressing to me. Their scientific
explorations and experiences with the “other” (i.e. the mlechChAdi) is
something I can identify with. Yet their dismal decadence in other
directions is reflective of the tragic failure of our people, which is
ironically highlighted by the contrast to what others see as their
triumph.

While both SC and GNR’s existence have several commonalities, they are
not the same and represent points at different parts of the spectrum. To
get more points in the spectrum one could take the case of the poorly
known paNDita Kameshwara Aiyar, the forgotten coethnic who translated
Shakespeare into saMskR^itA in a devabhASha magazine he published early
1900s and the other notable scientist CV Raman. One may also more
generally compare their lives with those of intellectuals from other
parts of the country and other varNa-s: for example, one could take the
case of the kShatriya from the Punjab, S. Chowla, a good friend of SC or
the va\~Nga kAyastha intellectual Jagadishchandra Bose or the shUdra
scientist Gopinath Kartha from the chera country. Before exploring this
spectrum we will look at some paradoxes in the existence of the former
two.  
GNR had not entirely lost his link to the foundations of his
intellectual tradition; he cited the following verse:  
purANam ity eva na sAdhu sarvaM |  
na chApi kAvyaM navam ity avidyaM ||  
The words of the poet often regarded as the greatest of the classical
period. Our man took the lesson from the verse to be that of a struggle
against established order and vindication of new ideas – a common
conflict in science. He was also correct (in my opinion) in noting the
multivalue logical nature of the syAdvAda of the nagna nAstika-s and the
presence of an apparent precursor in the kena upaniShad. Yet, GNR was
remarkably disconnected from his tradition in other ways – he was a
patita-sAvitra and strongly repudiated performance of saMskAra-s for
himself or his descendents.

SC was even more degenerate – even though he had learnt saMskR^ita he
identified with the culture of the mlechCha-s (especially the English)
rather than his own in various aspects of his life. His literary
interests are the prime example of this – he appears to have fully
soaked in the literature of English authors or other Europeans in
translation, while at the same time rescinding that of his own after
passing his college saMskR^ita exams \[footnote 1\]. His links to his
substratum was a foundationless pastiche – he had considerable
affinities for south Indian classical music. One may call that the pAsha
of saMgIta yoginI – how else could someone so divorced from tAntrika
underpinnings of the lyrics of a luminary of the system like muthusvAmI
dIkShita still appreciate that saMgIta. But a remark made by him
captures the essence of his situation (in some ways this might even be
true even for many others among the bhArata-s who wander in the
mlechChadesha-s): “I have not accepted fully the American way of life,
the Americans have not fully accepted me or my way of life. However, I
felt that I would be a greater misfit in India than I would be in the
US.”

One might ask: So what was the issue with these great men? Why do I rant
about their links to their culture? The point that struck me as tragic
was their inability to make a difference in the larger scheme of things.
For this we might look at history and how some of these men saw history.
The western narrative has been that the secularized Abrahamistic
principles allowed the emergence of an intellectual efflorescence which
was sustained by their generally high IQ since the Middle Ages. In the
process they appropriated the ancient thought of the Greeks and Romans,
as though it was their own legacy, and incorporated it under an external
façade of Abrahamism. Even this ancient classical thought did not come
to them entirely directly – they acquired much of it from the world of
their rival sister Abrahamism i.e. Mohammedanism which had swallowed it
earlier from the Neo-Platonic heathens of Harran. Glancing through
English or German fare from the late 1300s and early 1400s of CE we find
that they were rather primitive in their thought – certainly not on par
with the best of the coeval Hindu thinkers (for example one could look
at intelligent men like Occam and Wycliff). I further postulate that it
was not just reacquisition of classical thought via Islam that
contributed to the education of the west, but also that its historic
contact with Hindustan infused extraordinary new ideas, which caused an
efflorescence of western thought in many ways. These possibilities of
transmission are not entirely forgotten by the mlechCha-s. They accept
the Islamic role albeit somewhat grudgingly. But accepting the heathen
Hindu role is dangerous to their Abrahamistic scaffold. Hence, there is
a general vector to deny this angle. In its more gross forms it takes
the form of works like that of Murray that try to claim under the façade
of objective research that all intellectual achievements of note were
due to the mlechCha-s. There are more subtle attempts by indologists.
Starting from Neugebauer, through Pingree and down to Pollock and
Minkowski and their gaNa-s there is a movement to analyze Hindu
knowledge systems that tries to show that (albeit very politely): 1)
Hindus are idiots with the only things they came up on their own were
flat earths floating on mahodadhi-s or balancing gracefully on the
hasti-skandha-s. 2) They needed Greeks, Chinese, Moslems and finally the
West to deliver the most important ideas of their knowledge systems.
What are normally thought to be uniquely Hindu elements, be it the
valueless shUNya or the most obtruse viloma kAvya, they were all
inspired by outsiders, be they Chinese or benevolent Meccan demons. 3)
The tradition of Sanskrit (or for that matter its vulgar successors) is
a dead one deserving a sympathetic post-mortem at the hands of these
indologists. If it shows any signs of life it is surely a vetAla
animating it i.e., the much feared “Hindu fundamentalist” or even worse
the “racist Brahmin”.

This issue, which I have ventilated before on these pages, is central to
understanding the general failure of the brahma power that we were led
to by the biographies of our coethnics. In historical terms the
catastrophic military failure of the Hindus against the mlechCha-s in
1857 CE marked the beginning of the enforcement of the western
narrative; to date a general awareness of its debilitating effects on
the Hindu intellectual sphere is largely lacking \[Footnote 2\]. This is
what lies at the heart of the failure of the brahma – the insolvency of
the counter-attack in this fierce doxomachia that we as the natural
leaders of Hindu society should be directing. While there are many
aspects to the overall Hindu failure, such as the failure of kShatra or
the military failure, the fragmentation of Hindu thought by regionalism
and issues of more biological origin, I believe that in a doxomachia the
brahma power being upheld is critical. One aspect I have been able to
study closely is linked directly to the sociology of science or
knowledge systems in general – something that our people rather
completely failed to grasp and remain haunted by these deficiencies.
This is where the biographies of the earlier mentioned coethnics shine
light.

The creation of an ecosystem conducive to the generation and
transmission of knowledge systems is essential for the intellectual
growth of a group. After the collapse of traditional power centers
following 1857 war the Hindu intellectuals, especially the brAhmaNa-s
and to some degree other castes headed by the kAyastha-s, were without
any support. However, due to their intellectual competence they entered
the “world market” to compete in the apparently open field. As this
happened, there were a succession of inspiring successes in the field of
science – Ramanujan, Raman, the two Boses, Samarendranath Maulik,
Chandrasekhar, Pancharatnam etc. But these pioneers were in a sense
working in isolation:  
1\) they were cut off from the rest of the intellectual sphere inside
their own cultural hemisphere; i.e. even though they were in the world
market in science they had hardly any links to the corresponding Indic
intellectual sphere of other intellectual endeavors. In contrast, the
Britons or other Europeans had a complete intellectual package inside
which their science was embedded. Some creators of this European system
were great polymaths of their culture e.g. JW von Goethe, who was an
intellectual precursor to Darwin, was also one of the greatest German
poets of all times. The Europeans (and their American descendents)
presented their intellectual system as a complete one with educational
opportunities not restricted to science but other cultural,
philosophical and artistic structures that closely interacted with
science, even if some times antagonistically. Even though, as we have
pointed out that Indic thought influenced major European intellectuals
greatly ( to name a few, Goethe, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Mueller and
even the antagonistic English intellectuals like Lyell), it was
thoroughly assimilated within their own scaffold. In contrast, the
Indian scientists like those named above had no intellectual
super-structure to turn to and felt the pressure to merge whole scale
into the European one. In this context, we see SC taking a dip into the
European system, whereas GNR tried to find his own Indic scaffold, but
having been partially subverted by the Western narrative could not
complete the circle.  
2\) Most importantly the lack of the Hindu ecosystem for modern
intellectual development was accompanied by the dispersion of the Hindu
scientists working in the western academic framework. SC was given
tenure later than less accomplished colleagues and paid lesser than them
and this was not unique to him. Many of us know from first hand
experience that even though we might have intellectual accomplishments
that are easily measurable we get less for it than less-accomplished
mlechCha-s. The mlechCha-s have their own networks and we are at best at
the periphery of those – this enables them to control publications, flow
of money for research and define “newsworthiness” of scientific
discoveries. But very few Hindu scientists saw through any of this. They
for a long time they foolishly thought that the mlechCha-s are fair, or
else they are happy to at least get something because the situation in
their own country is worse, given the shocking failure of the brahma.
The brAhmaNa scientists failed to first unite amongst themselves to
create their own networks and then take over the natural mantle of the
intellectual leadership of Hindu society. Thus, all we have become are
slaves of the mlechCha-s or the slaves of the dasyu-s of bhArata.

Having created no natural ecosystem to reside in, Hindu intellectuals as
group have failed to produce a system that can \*independently\* create
and sustain knowledge at the highest and most competitive levels.
Instead Hindu intellectuals are cannon fodder for mlechCha intellectuals
erecting their towering pyramids. Like Tim’s dog Ram they wag their tail
and yelp when a biscuit chucked by Tim lands beside their kennels and
declare that they are not a cur but the great collyrium-hued South Asian
intellectual. In my pessimistic view if this is not understood, India is
not destined for greatness but decline.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  
Footnote 1: On this point I was reminded of kalashajA stating when we
were in college: “I do not know why I took this saMskR^ita. I fear I may
even pull the plug in it and it is so strange – it appears as though
Hindus cannot write a racy plot and instead spend all their effort in
telling the most simple stories in such cloy and florid constructs.”
Years later she has come around with a vengeance. Recently I passed over
to her the kuvalayAnanda (a work of a famous coethnic of mine) – now she
says that she finds reading it enjoyable- dwelling on the beauty (not
syrupiness) of every word. SC had no such U-turn.

Footnote 2: There have been a few exceptions like the great Lokamanya
Tilak (not surprisingly much vilified by the Indologists), the vaishya
thinkers Swarup and Goel, and the arrogant but occasionally insightful
Rajiv Malhotra.
