+++
title = "A note on govinda, a medieval chemist and physician from Southxa0India"

+++
Years ago while examining the sarva-darshana-saMgraha it became clear
that the rasa cult probably had a notable following in the Vijayanagaran
territory. A visitor from the chera country had shown me a text titled
the Ayurveda-prakAsha-TIkA composed by the medieval physician somadeva,
which quoted from a text termed the rasasAra. The more recent vaidya
named yadava-jI trikam-jI also quotes from the rasasAra in his
exposition on rasa-vidyA. A few features of this text revealed some
interesting details about the author of this rasasAra, who also seems to
have composed another text the saMnipAta-ma\~njarI on fevers. He was a
brAhmaNa, the son of surAditya and the grandson of sahadeva. He is
supposed to have been a student of dhIradeva, the son of abhayapAla from
the region of antarvedI. He also states that abhayapAla was a sArasvata
brAhmaNa probably settled in that town. He calls himself a moda j\~nAti,
a mantra-siddha and a sarva-shAstrovid. The first term is unclear – a
rather speculative inference could be that is he was a follower of the
moda shAkha of the atharvaveda. Alternatively, it can be emended to the
term moDhaj\~nAti, which is also not entirely clear in meaning. It
appears to refer to a guild of brahminical teachers in northern India
and is encountered in texts from Gujarat, Varanasi and Rajasthan. The
place of his studies, antarvedI is also defined by kalhaNa as the land
between the Ganga and the Yamuna with the capital of the vaishvAmitra-s,
kAnyakubja as its central city. This is consistent with his teacher
being a sArasvata brAhmaNa as they had a major epicenter in the city of
kAnyakubja. This is confirmed by the use of the term antarvedI in
inscriptions of rAShTrakUTa and chandrAtreya (chandella) chiefs ruling
the kAnyakubja region. Another important place in this region was the
great shaiva center of voDAmayUtA which had a famous maTha of the
saiddhAntika-s. He also mentions the li\~Nga of kirAteshvara in Varanasi
as his personal deity. These observations suggest that govinda was
active in northern India in the Gangetic Doab probably in kAnyakubja or
kAshi. However, interestingly an examination of his text reveals the use
of certain Tamil or Dravidian words which suggest that govinda was
likely to have been from southern India. He also indicates that after
studying Ayurveda and rasAyana from dhIradeva he journeyed to Tibet
(bhoTadesha) to learn a mercurial technique termed ra\~NgAkR^iShTi from
the Lamas by which amalgams are given various colors. This is described
in the 9th chapter of the rasasAra and it interestingly mentions the use
of oShAdhi-s such as kAkAhvA, kAkamAchI and kAkatuNDI in the “killing”
of mercury. This link to the kAkachandishvara-mata suggests that there
was an earlier transmission of ra\~NgAkR^iShTi to Tibet during the
absorption of shaiva tantric material by the bauddha-s. But this
material was lost in India and regained by brAhmaNa visitors such as
govinda. We have no clear idea of when he lived but he was cited by
toDaramalla’s panel of scholars, who were contemporaneous with the Mogol
tyrant Akbar, and hence definitely prior to him. The somadeva who cites
him was could have been before Akbar too.

One striking feature of govinda’s work is the description of
tetrodotoxins produced by four fishes \[tetraodontiforms\] from the
Indian ocean (Chapter 17, verses 36-38). These toxins are termed
ahiphena-s by govinda and should not be confused with opium in the later
texts. This to my knowledge is the earliest Hindu awareness of
tetrodotoxins.

Following the classical tradition of rasAyana, govinda expounds that the
practice of rasAyana is taken up along with a female partner (the kAkinI
in other texts). The rasayogin and the rasA\~NganA set up the laboratory
where they would conduct their experiments in the form a maNDala of
rasabhairava, an emanation of aghora. The rasabhairava or rasesha and
his wife rasA\~NkushI are installed in the center. There are several
surrounding AvaraNa-s, which in order are:  
1\) Square: nandin, mahAkAla, the demon kumbhakarNa and the monkey
sugrIva with the skeletal bhR^igin probably in the middle holding the
foot of shiva.  
2\) Octagon in E-S-W-N orientation: shukra, skanda, rudra, vayu,
sadashiva, agni, umA, and space (vyApaka)  
3\) Ten rasa-dUti-s or rasa-yoginI-s: lepikA, kShepikA, kShArikA,
ra\~njikA, lohaTI, bandhakArI, bhUcharI, mR^ityunAshinI, vibhUti and
khecharI. These are placed as an octagon with the last two on top and
bottom.  
4\) Octagonal lotus in E-S-W-N orientation containing: mAkSika, vimala,
shaila, chapala, rasaka, sasyaka, and two gandhatAla-s. These are the 8
vidyeshvara rudra-s, each of a different color with 5 heads with 3 eyes
on each. They are blue-throated, with cresent moon ornaments and
eighteen hands and bull-banners.  
5\) In the pericarp of this lotus are situated their shakti-s: mAlinI,
hemashakti, parA, balA, aparA, vajrashakti, kAnti and parAparA.

In the middle of these circuits is situated the great rasa-bhairava: He
is like pure quartz, with five heads, three eyes each, with flames
shooting from them, a blazing tongue, locks and eye brows like flames,
and difficult to look at. He stands on a corpse with a cresent moon on
his head gear, wearing a tiger skin, a snake upavIta, holding a
bull-banner and has 18 arms with several weapons and a slight smile on
his faces. He is invoked with the glorious mantra:  
* OM hrIM krIM raseshvarAya mahAkAlAya mahAbalAyAghorabhairavAya
vajravIra krodha-ka\~NkAla kShlauH kShlaH ||*  
The part after raseshvarAya and ending with the two rasa bIja-s is the
core rasesha mantra of 32 syllables. The whole mantra is said to
correspond syllable for syllable to the aghora mantra and represent the
emanation of rasabhairava from aghora:  
*aghorebhyo .atha ghorebhyo ghora ghoratarebhyaH | sarvebhyas
sarva-sharvebhyo namaste astu rudra-rUpebhyaH ||*

His shakti rasA\~NkushI is conceived thus:  
She is well decked with jeweled ornaments, with a crescent moon on her
headgear, is kindly faced, with three eyes and a blue throat. She shines
like pure gold and is draped in yellow garments in the midst of white
flywhisks and a pearl decked parasol. In her two right hands she holds a
hook and rosary and a lasso and the abhaya mudra in her left hands. She
is invoked by the glorious mantra:  
*aIM hrIM shrIM klIM sauH ||*

Of the yantra-s actually used in the laboratory described by govinda
most are obscure. Some of these are clarified in modern rasAyana works
such as bhUdeva devasharman’s bilingual manual but there is no guarantee
that these modern interpretations are what govinda meant. Among them
some are simple tools to process ores and metals, tongs, mortal and
pestle and the like. Others appear to be more complex. A centrifuge-like
device appears to be described as the chakra yantra; however, it is not
clear if sufficiently high speeds could be achieved for being useful.
The jalakUrma and the sthalakUrma appear to be distillation devices and
crucible heaters. The heating of a collyrium like black mercurial in one
such device is supposed to yield the red rasasindhUra. Another
mysterious yantra is the agnIsomAkhyAya yantra which is used to heat a
mixture of two salts to obtain an amalgam at the end. While rasAyana is
full of strange things to the modern mind, one unusual feature is the
making of extracts from particular earthworms (bhUnAga). The earthworms
living near gold, silver or iron mines are used to extract what are
known as sattva’s of various metals.
