+++
title = "Our intellectual tradition: non-existent, decadent, or congenitallyxa0dilute?"

+++
Perhaps the greatest mind of all times was Karl Gauss. Among the men of
genius he stands at the pinnacle of existence, perhaps with Chingiz
Kha’khan. I keep a 10 DM note with the portrait of Gauss in my office
to remind myself of that absolute standard in the mental sphere. Like
the vajra of vR^itrahan quells the pride of dAnu’s brood, the sight of
this towering massif in the mental sphere keeps any pride over
intellectual achievements in check. Hence, we almost place Gauss in a
“maNDala” with our fathers of the vatsa clan and pANini who was one of
its greatest scions. The intellectual capacity of Gauss was certainly
the result of an extraordinary genetic event that we do not currently
understand. This is clear from the fact that his son inherited some of
his enormous ability to perform mental calculations. Reflecting upon
this I was dwelled upon conversations with 4 friends, 3 distant and one
nearby, which all revolved round the same basic question – one which
shall endeavor to consider here. We all concluded that though the
Gaussian brilliance was a matter of genetics, it alone was not
sufficient to explain the occurrence of a Gauss in history. We acutely
recognized the fact that he came as a part of a system or tradition that
was unfolding the lands of the mlechCha-s in that period – there were
peers of nearly comparable stature who could resonate with Gauss and
successors who could carry on his legacy.

When we compare this situation with the desh we find that probably there
was at least one intellectual who had a brain comparable to Gauss but in
our opinion never attained his full potential. This was shrInivAsa
rAmAnuja – like Gauss he emerged from an economically depressed
background. However, unlike Gauss, in whose case there was no evidence
for a prior intellectual tradition, rAmAnuja belonged to a long-standing
tradition that was founded by the eponymous author of the shrIbhAShya.
Understanding this text written in extremely difficult saMskR^ita is not
a trivial task, though its contents might not compare with scientific or
mathematical material. Yet, what emerges is that rAmAnuja was only
mildly appreciated in bhArata at that time, and he had to go to the
mlechCha-desha and participate in the sat-sa\~Nga with mlechCha
paNDita-s. Even now his direct legacy is mainly continued by
gaNitaj\~na-s of krau\~nchadvIpa rather than bhAratavarSha. This
situation is illustrated in areas of pure science more starkly than in
mathematics. Many years ago I was studying the works of a certain
mahAdeva subrahmaNya maNi, one of the greatest entomologists from
bhAratavarSha, as part of my education on parasitoid wasps. Like a
brAhmaNa ought to be, he was a saMskR^ita paNDita (and also of numerous
of other languages) in addition to being an extraordinary scientist. But
today he is nearly entirely forgotten and despite the entomofauna of
India he has hardly left behind a true scientific legacy in his own
land. More commonly the fate of such paNDita-s was to be isolated in
their own environs and at best receive some recognition from mlechCha
paNDita-s who were working in the field. But being culturally and
ethnically isolated from the mlechCha-s they hung like the legendary
trisha\~Nku, with their vachana-s as poorly understood by their own
people as those of trisha\~Nku himself. A similar fate met
jagadIshchandra and satyendranAtha, the two paNDita-s from the va\~Nga
country. Even worse things could happen though – such fates are
encapsulated by the lives of kosambi and rAhula sA\~NkR^ityAyana, who
hanging in limbo, internalized perverse mlechCha ideologies and turned
against the ethos of their own people. Armed with this mlechCha ideology
of the rudhira dhvaja they spawned dreadful mAnasa-putra-s like a horde
of andhaka-s unleashed on the vidvat-sabha-s of modern bhArata. Thus, it
appeared to me that the paNDita from bhArata has the choice of being an
“ekavIra” amidst his own people, or sell himself and merge with the
mlechCha-s (e.g. another great Indian entomologist samarendranAtha
maulik or the physicist subrahmaNya chandrashekhara) or bring home
mlechCha ideas to create a cocoon and pervert his own people. The option
of having an intellectual samAja based on his own tradition among his
own people was simply not an option available to him.

At first I thought that the above view was merely a vision filtering
through the lens of my own construction of the world, with hardly any
general truth to it. But the more I interacted with my mlechCha
professional colleagues, it became apparent that this was indeed closer
to reality. We shared a deep similarity in our professional activities
and interests, but our larger intellectual and social environments were
worlds that literally lay apart: Theirs were the similes and metaphors
of a literature different from mine – I could easily appreciate some of
it because of the universals in art and desire, but the expressions were
simply not those of my people and tradition. The games with which they
gained entertainment and their heroes and historical trajectories were
different from mine. They had something called morals based on the
Abrahmistic substratum of their world; this was far removed from the
dharma which formed the substratum of our world. Their culture of
academics over and above all was different from our own – they believe
that intellectual discussion is best carried out in a maNDapa while
imbibing surA, which is certainly rather removed from the vidvat-saMsad
of our own system. This conclusion was reinforced by the discussion with
my friends. What was more startling was the conclusion that not just the
mlechCha-s, but most of the academically minded bhArata-s themselves
were nearly as alien to us, i.e. they had become entirely mlechCha in
their sensibilities. Hence, we concluded that perhaps it is true that
extant bhArata-s lack their own genuine intellectual system.

This conclusion is amply supported by experience from the days of our
youth in school and college in India. When we entered college, we were
supposed to be part of the academic elite who were drawn from the top 3
percent of our state. This group, almost without an exception, took what
was called the science stream – amongst them it was fashionable to state
that the study of subjects such as history, literature and textual
studies or linguistics was a sign of mental insufficiency. Indeed, only
the less fortunate, who could not make the cut in their pre-college exam
were relegated to the study of these subjects. Proper expression even in
the language of instruction, English, was considered an unnecessary
aside – bad grammar and style was a hallmark of the lecturers. Even the
mention of saMskR^ita was derisively dismissed with statements such as:
“Hey who wants to be a purohita man\! Come on yaar, be modern.” Now
this elite group was supposed to be in the science stream, but with
exceptions who numbered less than a fist, they were not interested in
science but to attain the padavI of a doctor or an engineer. It was not
uncommon to hear: “Who cares yaar, as long as I get Madical (sic) or
Inji(sic) sit(sic).” “Either DaakTar or engineer is fine, even dentist
is OK.” Seldom did one encounter an interest amongst them to decipher or
understand the principles of science or mathematics, leave alone
philosophy. Only two people from my class of supposedly elite students
took to pure science after their pre-university college. When I dropped
out of med-school after a week to take pure science, a deeply concerned
“mAmI”, a friend of my mAtAshrI asked if I had pulled the plug to land
up in a pure science course. Long ago the great patriot and intellectual
bAlaga\~NgAdhara tilak had mentioned that most Indians are deprived of
access to reading material. Almost exactly a century after he wrote
statement it remained true in my passage through college. Our college
library actively prevented students from accessing books or journals. To
add to that, poor quality textbooks were used for the courses and the
majority of lecturers discouraged any kind inquiry or acquisition of
additional knowledge on any subject. R remarked recently: “It appears
only you and me were revolting. The rest of the class seemed to enjoy
the constraints imposed by the lecturers and were utterly puzzled by our
objections”.

This lack of an academic intellectual tradition reflects on the fate of
the Hindu students who then stream out of their colleges to flock to the
rich lands of the mlechCha-s. Most of them not having acquired a
fundamental understanding of the sciences or the arts (in a sense they
are like people with mantra-s but lacking their rahasya-s) simply serve
as cannon fodder for the empire-building ambitions of mlechCha
professors. They faithfully serve as sepoys in the raging battles of
mlechCha academia as their professors fiercely joust with each other to
gain priority in publishing in hot journals and raking up new grants. In
these battles many are slaughtered, dying along side with peoples of
other nations like the chIna-s and other prAchya-s. The few who do
survive are awarded small fiefdoms by their mlechCha overlords for their
faithful services – they may continue ruling those territories as long
as they remain niShAda-s i.e. seated in their allotted spot without
upsetting the “world order”. Hence, when the rewards of their toils
ultimately give them the space to acquire a wider perspective all they
acquire are the mlechCha tastes and ways. But they can hardly become a
genuine mlechCha-s and wander about in the interstitial zone like the
vetAla-animated preta-s wander between realm of the living and the dead.
From this flotsam mass of drifting bhArata-s arise the rare genuine
vidvAn-s who shine with the brilliance of their own intellectual
tradition, like punarvasu Atreya or kumArashiras bhAradvAja of the days
of yore. But they are so few and far between that they may not know each
other’s existence and thus are unable to coalesce into a true
intellectual tradition of the bhArata-s.

The lack of a wider perspective on knowledge and the spirit of pursuing
knowledge for knowledge’s sake are strongly reflected in extreme
anisotropy of the distribution of Hindus in the sciences. Hardly any of
them pursue certain disciplines that require one to be purely interested
in knowledge. Instead, they concentrate in areas which for some reason
have been defined as “hot” or allow them to become rich. Thus, you
hardly find them in paleontology or morphology and they are lesser than
expected in pure astronomy and archaeology. But even worse than these is
their participation in philosophy and the arts and letters – you hardly
find them in the study of saMskR^ita and its relatives, the languages of
their own culture. In fact, much to their own detriment this field is
dominated by unfriendly mlechCha-s. Philology and linguistics are
typically derided rather than studied by them. In the philosophical
domain, beyond advaita vedAnta in which there are still some deep
scholars, you find hardly any interested Hindus. In particular, modern
aspects of philosophy, such as the application of the evolutionary
theory and neurobiology to the study of art, music, and thought
constructs are largely ignored by the academic Hindu. Thus, one might
conclude that the system of knowledge of the Hindus today is incomplete
and rather shallow.

Now why is this so? Several explanations have been offered. Some
mlechCha indologists have implicitly proffered the possibility that
Hindus were after all idiots incapable of much originality. As a Harvard
indologist simply put it: “India is a cul-de-sac”. After all, when
confronted with modern astronomy all they did was to write virodha-s
defending the idea that it was turtles or elephants all the way down
below the world. They inform us subtly that Hindu science was a poor
imitation of that of the Greeks or the Moslems in the past, so what
surprise is it, if, today they imitate their new teachers the
mlechCha-s. Very sympathetically they organize symposia to discuss Hindu
science and arts, but with the implicit idea of showing its derivative
nature vis-à-vis Islamic or Middle Eastern sources. This idea, however,
is in sharp contrast to the evidence that the Hindus were exemplary
discoverers and teachers of their discoveries in the past. Several
Hindus themselves have suggested the possibility that the great Hindu
intellectual tradition of the past was destroyed by the catastrophic
passage of Islam and Isaism through the sub-continent. While there is no
doubt regarding the damage caused to us by the religions of peace and
love, we should note that even after these assaults many aspects of our
intellectual tradition continued unabated, and in some areas even
flowered. Some others have suggested that the reasons were more
sociological, though they have presented a wide spectrum of sociological
explanations to choose from. While more than one cause could have
interacted, I feel trying to answer the question objectively is
important for us.
