+++
title = "The madman, the seeker of knowledge and the sociology of science"

+++
I read parts of an engagingly written book by a Russian authoress Masha
Gessen on the mathematician Perelman. There after while walking through
the cold autumn stillness some waves lashed the cranial shores of my
mind-sea. Some of the most difficult problems in mathematics are proofs
for very easy to understand conjectures. For example, take the Goldbach
conjecture of evens being sum of two primes or Fermat’s last theorem.
The Poincare conjecture is one such. It was proposed by one of the
greatest minds of all times after Karl Gauss, the French intellectual
Poincare. The era of great men seems to have passed — we do not see such
around us today. “A 3-dimensional manifold which is compact, has no
boundary and is simply connected must be homeomorphic to a 3-dimensional
sphere.” Of course this is in the jargon of topology where the circle is
a two-dimension object but a one dimensional sphere for its surface is
just one dimension. The sphere in 3 dimensions is a two dimensional
sphere and the one in 4 dimensions i.e. one whose surface is like a
volume is the 3D sphere implied in this conjecture. Deceptively simple
as this conjecture appears, it took the outer edge of human intelligence
in the form of Perelman to prove it. Before him a whole gamut of
mathematical eminences had failed. The book of Gessen covers the
sociological aspect of this triumph in mathematics and its chief
protagonist is the rather interesting Perelman. The guy probably suffers
from Asperger’s syndrome as the Gessen seems to have correctly inferred.
The Soviet system provided a “safe haven” for such people and brought
them together in environments where they could pursue their science or
mathematics unaffected by mundane hindrances. I have long been a fan of
such a support system where genuine intellectuals are provided a haven
to carry out their researches in a concentrated manner without needing
to be bothered by annoying social conventions. Ironically, the American
system while providing far greater resources for intellectual endeavor
than the Russian one applies a subtle pressure on individuals to
conform. Thus, in the American system the standard mode is reinforced —
living as part of a monogamous nuclear family ensconced in a separate
house that is often much larger than what people really need, with
attention being focused on this nuclear family rather than it being
merely an element in the larger body of interactions with relatives and
friends, with only formal social interaction (nobody just walks into
somebody else’s house for a long chat), with gas-guzzling long commutes
to the work place in vehicles that are a mental distraction in
themselves, with vacations and overblown travel. If intellectuals are to
be bound by such norms then they cannot really prosper. Hence, the
intellectuals who are selected by the American system are streamlined to
be relatively “boring” or as free of eccentricities as possible. This is
consistent with my anecdotal observations on how the atypical
intellectuals have had difficulties surviving the mainstream American
system — ironically socialism’s greatest refugium is the American
academia where many like to believe that all people are the same or can
be molded like putty. It is somewhat ironic that the Russians managed to
sustain the more atypical intellectuals under the socialist system whose
basic premise is that all people should be the same.

After the collapse of the Soviets the system set up by them could not
sustain itself too well and they were exposed to the real world which
the intellectuals selected through the American system were better
positioned to survive. The story of Perelman narrated by Gessen appears
to be one of a remarkable clash of the “ideal world” constructed by the
Aperger’s brain and the real world — the end result being Perelman’s
frustration and retreat from mathematics. Even though Perelman’s
constructed world may be an ideal one, I do feel that many clashes of
his with the real world are also experienced by lesser minds
(neurotypicals if you may) in science. What happens is that the
neurotypicals learn that the real system is distinct from the ideal one
and try to play the game accordingly — i.e. we stop being idealists.
These clashes illustrate some prevalent issues in the sociology of
science/mathematics) that are generally not admitted (it is interesting
that such issues exist in mathematics, despite it being a smaller and
far more open community than say biology; in the latter the clashes are
far more pronounced and regular):  
1\) The unwillingness to acknowledge to important discoveries of others
and to try to appropriate them as you own. From my personal experience I
can say that this is happens — for example, there has been a discovery
of mine on the sensing of two critical signaling molecules that was a
major advance in the field. Starting more than one year after we had
published this, there were a series of publications, which either
completely failed or improperly acknowledged our work and tried to
appropriate it as their own. This was despite the fact that our original
paper was so complete that it left little else to be said on the core
issue other than confirmatory studies. Yet, they aggressively tried to
appropriate our discovery using their position e.g. in the national
academy of the USA or their old boys network (and this is merely one
example). I could not but help seeing a striking parallel in the
behavior of the powerful mathematician Yau in the Perelman story. This,
situation is usually emerges when others have been working on the same
problem but have not had a solution. However, if you make a discovery
that starts a new field then you get much more acknowledgement — to be
fair I have also had this happen to me with respect to a certain
well-known unicellular eukaryote, where whole labs turned to further
exploring our discovery. Thus, if you provide new employment for
scientists, where none existed before, then you get more recognition —
this will continue till your finding becomes textbook knowledge and you
are forgotten. On the other hand if your discovery is perceived by the
many others striving in the field as closing a particularly hot quest
then they are less likely to acknowledge you because your finding is
perceived as ending their potentially profitable quests. Hence, the
strategy they adopt is to deny and appropriate your finding. This issue
of giving birth to a field or interring the bones of famous problem
under the shmashAna-vedI is part reality and part perception of the
workers, but it is certainly a major vector in scientific recognition.
In fact one of the workers in the field declared that Perelman’s proof
would result in smart people moving away from the field.

2\) Appropriation of others work, while claiming all the while that they
acknowledge the one who has originally done it, is another issue seen in
Perelman’s story. Two Chinese mathematicians claimed that they had
proved Poincare’s conjecture by simply reworking and publishing Perelman
and others work on the proof. This claim of theirs was further promoted
by the powerful Yau who tried to underplay Perelman by stating that what
he had done had fatal flaws. These Chinese workers claimed that they
were great admirers of Perelman’s work but went on to attempt to
appropriate his discovery as their own. We have interestingly had the
same issue in our life with Chinese, and also ironically Hindu
compatriots, who effusively cited our published work and claimed that
they had found something novel building on it. But the point was there
was absolutely nothing new in their work beyond what we had said — so in
effect it was just plagiarism.

3\) In the Perelman story the reaction of the guy who was working on the
Ricci flows for years without a breakthrough is also frequently
encountered. Now, it can be indeed devastating, if you have been scooped
when you had the same solution as the guy who published before you. This
has happened to many people, and given the competitiveness in modern
science, it is good to adopt a ruthless approach towards your
bhrAtR^ivya-s who have no sense of fairness. But if you have simply
failed to make a breach for several years and someone provides a
solution, especially based on your earlier work, then one would think
that you would show some grace in hailing the breakthrough. Now the
Ricci flow guy (Hamilton) was, it would seem, less than gracious, though
he eventually came around to accept the matter. Now, it also seems that
his name is being adduced to the proof as the Hamilton-Perelman proof of
the conjecture (the appropriation effect again). Now, we see this all
the time where the stalled workers are more jealous than gracious when a
breakthrough is provided.

After for all, despite the beauty and structure (much like real art) in
the results of science, the scientific endeavor itself is still a social
activity influenced by the pulls of the behavior of the anthropoid ape.
Most individuals in science are attracted by this beauty — but they
might be separated from the primate within, either due to simple lack of
education, or memetic diseases (e.g. socialism) or due to atypical
neural wiring (e.g. Asperger’s).
