+++
title = "kumAra trishatI: commentary"

+++
The
[kumAra-trishatI](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/09/15/kumara-trishati/),
also known as the shatruMjaya trishatI, the rahasya trishatI, the guhya
ShaNmukha-nAma-saMgIti or the skanda-nAma-sAgara had recently been only
orally transmitted. In this sense it is reminiscent of the vinAyaka
rahasya sahasranAma that was taught by bhAskararAya makhIndra or that
secret collection which completes the sAdhana of vArAhI. In past from
the paramapITha of rohitaka it had been transmitted to the pashchiMaugha
in the two achala-s (in the modern Punjab and Rajasthan), to the
pUrvaugha in deep va\~Nga country and to the dakShiNaugha in the
sahyAdri-s (the modern Konkan). From there it was transmitted to the
glorious massif of kumAra-parvata (modern Kukke-Subramanya) and the
shores of the dakShiNa sAgara (Tiruchendur of the drAviDa poet
nakkIranAr). The dakShiNaugha and pashchimaugha were lost over time. The
kaumArAcharya-s of the va\~Nga retreating from the demonic
shashidhvaja-s came to Bellary in the karnATa country and established a
tapovana near the might rock of mahAmukha (a granite prominence still
seen in Bellary). Here the learned tAntrika rAmAnuja deshika acquired
the stotra and transmitted it.  
…  
Long ago we wended our way up to the hilly spur in the city of our youth
on which the peshvA bAlAjI nAnAsAheb had resided. Atop it among several
other temples was a shrine of skanda which was installed by
raghunAtha-rav after his conquest of Attock — the farthest north the
mahArATTa-s reached. But the installation of kumAra was repeatedly
botched up by the mahArAShTrI brAhmaNa-s who had little knowledge of the
kaumAra lore\*.  
1\) The idol was broken by Moslems during the invasion of the Nizam of
Hyderabad.  
2\) nAnA phaDnavis made a new idol an installed it next and it broke up
on its own an year later.  
3\) A new idol was again made by phaDnavis and installed and
insufficient rites were done at its installation. Several years later a
lightning strike brought down the temple, so a new idol was made.  
4\) After the British conquest of India the temple was taken away from
the peshvA-s and given to a local trust. In the late 1800s the metal
crown made for the idol by mAdhava-rav fell down and broke the idol’s
hand. So a new idol was made for the 4th time, this time funded by some
vaishya.  
5\) In the 1980s the right eye of one of the faces of the idol fell out
and was lost.  
This was when the muni and I arrived at the top of the hill spur on the
ShaShTI after the dIpAvalI. The prashnaka had informed me that the idol
was botched up and needed a mahAshAntI, but the complete ritual system
was not available to the purohita at hand. We lent him what ever aid we
could, but went away a bit dissatisfied and not having the complete
thing ourselves. The great student of our Acharya finally set things
right through a secret prayoga. We went back to hill and stood silent in
the afternoon quiet. It was then that we started receiving the secret
instructions in the trishatI to perform the lengthy purashcharaNa to be
able to understand the secret mantra embedded in it. Refraining from
kAma-bhoga we performed it for a while. The mantra flashed briefly like
lightning but we were unable to see anything more — in fact it looked
like skanda vara given the brAhmaNa-s in quest of vyAkaraNa. Then the
mantra revealed itself in stages. We saw the most basic level when it
revealed its power to us, even as we were attacked by madaghUrNita and
simultaneously by rasagola and darsha in the fifth year after
dvAdashAnta. We then saw a vaiShNava who had attained a kShudra siddhi
during a climb to the kumAra-gR^iha and were way laid for a while trying
to attain the same.

After years of trying to force attain the kShudra siddhi and reaching
nowhere we witnessed two apparitions of the deva. They were followed by
dismal troughs in course of which we said to ourselves: “surely this
mantrashAstra is hocus-pocus and we should move on in life”. But unlike
shabara we did yet throw away our rosary into the commode. Then finally
the veil of ignorance was pierced, at least partially, and beyond that
is something a man does not speak about.

\* I am aware of perhaps 3 exceptions including the one in the lineage
of lakShmaNa rANADe who raised on objection to this statement :-).
