+++
title = "Hindu setbacks in confronting the mlechChaxa0va~nchaka-s"

+++
The news reached us through certain channels that the Hindu-s had met a
defeat in their attempt to correct biases against them in the textbooks
of the state of California. While our own life hangs in uncertainty and
the karNa-yakSiNI in whose embrace we lay has been bound, we still felt
it was in order to write a note around this matter, rather than
precisely about it. We will begin by stating that Hindu-s have to be
uncompromising on the following: 1) Rejection of that most reprehensible
term South Asian and the geographical description “South Asia”. This is
a blatant attempt by the mlechCha-s by the mlechCha-s to destroy Hindu
identity and deny ownership over their geography. Not without out reason
do the detractors and revilers of Hindus delight in using “South Asian”
and South Asia. Any Hindu organization should reject it and use
jambudvIpa and bhAratavarSha. They may in following mlechChAnusAra use
Indian subcontinent, Greater India. 2) Hindus should not waste effort in
emphasizing their racial distinctness as the basis their identity. At
the same time there is no reason to deny their racial background or
obstruct or stonewall studies pertaining to their genetic origins.
Hindus should be willing to accommodate mlechCha-s in their midst who
come over to the dharma after completely rescinding their affiliation to
the kIlitapreta-mata or other rAkShasamata-s . 3) Hindus should not
claim to be monotheistic and should instead proudly proclaim their
polytheism and educate their people in performing khaNDana of the
ekasvAmitva of the duShTa-s of the kIlitapreta-mata and other
rAkShasAcharin-s.

The setbacks of Hindu-s in this effort, as in the past, stem from their
lack of understanding of the mlechCha-s and their systems. To understand
the mlechCha-s the Hindu-s need to figure out the different currents in
the mlechCha world. In this effort the biggest problem was seeing
through “secular” face of the mlechCha-s. The pretAcharin-s in the
mlechCha-desha can be made out relatively easily, but the Hindus
generally failed to see through the nature of the secular variants. They
tried in a futile attempt to link the secular subversionists like the
Harvard indologist and his band of 50 va\~nchaka-s with the
pretAcharin-s. What they did not realize is that the mlechCha system by
design maintains two versions of its foundational dogma, the secular and
the overtly pretAchArin variety to befuddle and trap their rivals. Not
having seen through this trap the Hindu-s fell into right into it and
were taken apart by the mlechCha-s.
